The power of prayer.

A SERMON PREACHED in the Cathedral Church of Exeter in August. 1596.

By THOMAS PLAYFERE Professor of Divinity for the Lady Margaret in Cambridge.



PRINTED BY JOHN LEGATE, PRINter to the University of Cambridge. 1603.

And are to be sold in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Crown by Simon
Waterson.

To the Queens most excellent Majesty.
REligion, Gloriosa in deum pietas honoribus regiis immobile est fundamentum.
Cyrillus ad Theodos. de recta fide.
dread and dear Sovereign, is an immovable foundation of highest authority
and honor. O then how blessed are all we? how sure and immovable is our
peace and joy? God having blessed us with a king, who in religion and learning
excels all alive, and his Majesty with a Queen in due proportion
answerable to himself. Wherefore as it is our duty to join both in our daily
prayers: so neither would I separate you in my humble endeauours. For the
present felicity and glory of this realm rests wholly in his Majesty, but
the future hope to have these infinite blessings continued upon us and all our
posterity, even unto the worlds end, arises from you both, in respect of that
most happy royal issue you have had already, and which if it please God you
may have hereafter. Which as it will be our greatest security and comfort: so
that it may be no danger to your Majesty's health, especially that which your
Highness now goes withal, we shall continually and importunately pray and
beseech at Gods hands. And what the power of prayer is, this short sermon which
I presume to offer unto your sacred Majesty, does in some sort show.

Your Majesty's most devoted and obedient subject, Thomas Playfere.

THE POWER of prayer. THE TEXT.
Ask, and it shall be given you: seek, and you shall find: knock, and it
shall be opened unto you.

Matthew. 7.7.
BEfore I come to the particular entreaty of this text, it will not be amiss,
as I take it, generally to observe some few things. Our Savior, says not
here, as to one, Ask thou, seek thou, knock thou: but as to many, Ask,
seek, knock. For it is, Our Father; though it be, I believe. A spark of fire
in the fire, keeps fire; by it self, of it self goes out. A drop of water
in the sea, is safe; being alone, is soon dried up. Even so, in private
prayer, that small spark of zeal which is in us, may quickly be put out, and
that little drop of devotion which is in us may quickly be dried up: but in
public prayer, it is not so. Whereupon Daniel 2.17.
requesteth his companions, Sidrach, Misach, and Abednago, to pray with him.
Yea, Joel 1.14.
advises them, to gather a solemn assembly, and to call the elders, and all
the inhabitants of the land, into the house of the Lord, to offer up prayers
unto God. A threefold cord, is not easily broken Eccles. 4.12.
. Now what is prayer else, but a cord, wherewith we bind Gods hands, when he is
ready to smite us for our sins? Even as Esaias complaining to god, says, 64.7.
There is none that calls upon thy name, none that rises up to take hold of
thee, to hold thy hands, and bind them fast with the cord of prayer. But if a
twofold cord, or a threefold cord, cannot easily be broken, whenas two or three
of Daniels companions are gathered together in the name of Christ: then much
more a hundredfold cord, or a thousand-fold cord, cannot easily be broken,
whenas not only two or three of us, have agreed upon a petition in earth, but
even Ioels solemn assembly, such a solemn assembly as here is, many hundreds,
yea many thousands of the faithful, are gathered together in the house of the
lord, to offer up prayer unto God. Such a strong cord of prayer, as this is, so
well twisted by so many, must needs most forcibly draw down from heaven,
infinite graces for us. And therefore our Savior says here, not as to one, but
as to many, Ask, seek, knock. So likewise it is not said here, as in the
time present, that by and by we obtain the thing we pray for; but as in the
time to come, And it shall be given you, and you shall find, and it shall be
opened unto you. For as Laban kept Jacob a long while from his youngest
daughter, whom he loved best, that his love might be more increased
continually: so God oftentimes holds us a while in suspense, that he may the
more sharpen our appetite, and inflame our Vt accenditur desideria. Martial.
Epist. ad Tolos.
desire. Because, says Gregory, The more earnestly he is desired of us, the
more sweetly he is delighted in Quo a nobis evidius desideratur, eo de nobis
suavius laetatur.
us. Wherefore, as a merchant, being about to put money into a bag, and
perceiving the bag will scarce hold all the money, first stretches out the
bag, before he put in the money: after the same sort, in this case, deals
God with us. God knowing that those blessings, wherewith upon our prayers he
purposes to enrich us, are so great, that our hearts as yet are not capable of
them, stays a while, till afterward when our hearts are more enlarged, and
stretched out like a wide bag, we may the^ receive them, when we are fitter
for them. Whereupon the princely prophet says, Lord, I cry unto thee in the
day time, and thou hear not, also in the night time, and yet this is not to
be thought folly in Psalm. 22.2. (...). Septuagint.
me. Some perhaps would think it a great point of folly, for a man to call and
cry unto him, who stoppes his cares, and seems not to hear. Nevertheless,
this folly of the faithful, is wiser then all the wisdom of the world. For
we know well enough, that howsoever God seem at the first not to hear, yet,
The Lord is a sure refuge, in due time, in Psalm. 9.9.
affliction. First, in due time: then in affliction. Because, for the most
part, in helping us, God rather respects the due time, then the affliction. So
that although, as soon as we pray, he do not always presently free us from
affliction, yet if we can be content to wait a while, and tarry the Lords
leisure, in his due time, he will surely relieve us. And therefore it is said
here, not as in the time present, but as in the time to come, And it shall be
given you, and you shall find, and it shall be opened unto you.

Now then in this whole sentence, two principle parts would be considered. The
first, what we in our prayer must perform to god. The second what God for our
prayer will perform to us. What we in our prayer must perform to God, is in
these words, Ask, seek, knock. Ask with the mouth, seek with the heart,
knock with the hand. What God for our prayer will perform to us, is in these
words, And it shall be given you, and you shall find, and it shall be opened unto
you. And it shall be given you, that is for temporal things: and you shall
find, that is for spiritual things: and it shall be opened unto you, that is for
eternal things. Ask, seek, knock, and it shall be given you, and you shall
find, and it shall be opened unto you. First we must ask with the mouth.
Ioakim the virgin Mary's father, going to the wilderness to pray, said thus,
Prayer shall be my meat and (...).
drink. Whereby it is evident, that as meat and drink, the natural food of
the body, must go in at the mouth: so on the other side, prayer, the
spiritual food of the soul, must go out of the mouth. Which is the reason,
why Pythagoras willed his scholars to pray aloud (...).
. Not that he thought that God could not otherwise hear, but to teach us, as
Clemens notes Stro. l. 4.
, that as our dealing with men must be as in the sight of God: so our prayer to
God, must be as in the hearing of men. Ezechias king of the Jews, witnesses
of himself, that praying in his sickness, he chattered like a young swallowe
Esa. 38.14.
. Now we know by that proverb, which forbids to keep swallows under the
same roof (...).
where we keep our selves, that no bird is so troublesome for chattering, as
the swallow is. His meaning then was this: that as a young swallow opens her
mouth, and never leaves yawning unto the damme, till she she be satisfied: so
he opened his mouth, and as the Prophet Esaias says 62 6.
, kept no silence, never left asking, gave the lord no rest, until he had mercy
upon him. Balack, king of the Moabites, speaks thus Number. 22.4.
, Shall this multitude lick up all that are round about us, as a calfe licketh
up the grass of the field? Now we know that a calfe licketh up the grass of
the field with his mouth. The thing then which he feared, was this: least the
Israelites should lick up, that is, overcome and destroy him, and all his,
with the asking of their mouths, with their prayers to God, which are called
Ose. 14.2.
the calves of the lips, even as a calfe licketh up the grass of the field.
The Church wishes the southern wind would blow, that her spices might slow
forth Cant. 4.16.
. The southern wind, is the mild and comfortable spirit of God. The spices,
are the prayers, the sweet odours of the Saints. So that we wish the southern
wind would blow upon us that our spices might flow forth, when as we wish
the holy Ghost would work upon us, that our prayers might flow forth. That as
God breaths in his spirit into us, by the inspiration of grace: so we might
breath out our spirit unto God, by the respiration of prayer. According to that
of the prophet, Psalm. 119.131.
I opened my mouth and drew in breath. I drew in breath, there is inspiration.
I opened my mouth, there is respiration So that they which never open their
mouths to ask, are dumb fishes, which have lives, and breath not; or else
dead idols, which have mouths, and speak not. Whereas in truth, every one
that has an ear to hear, ought to hear; and so every one that has a mouth
to speak, ought to speak. Speak unto the rock, says God to Moses Number. 20.8.
, when the children of Israel wanted water in the wilderness. And after the
same manner, when we want the water of comfort, in the wilderness of this
world, we must ask it of God, we must speak for it unto the rock Christ
Jesus. For it was his only request he made to his spouse; when he took his
very last farewell of her upon earth, Let me hear thy voice Can. 8.13.
. As if Christ should say thus to his Church, My dearest, now I am ready to
ascend up unto my father. Howbeit, in the mean while, I will not leave you
comfortless. But though I shall be absent from you in body, yet I will be
present with you in spirit; always beholding your order of service, and
hearing your prayer unto me. Therefore, let us not hereafter be strange to one
another, but let tokens of loving kindness pass continually betwixt us. I
will send down to you my spirit, like tongues of fire. Send you up to me your
prayer, like pillars of smoke. And in case you want any thing at any time, do
no more, but let me hear your voice; let me by a prayer, as by a letter from
you understand it, and you shall have it. Ask, and it shall be given you.

Yet it is not enough for us, to ask with the mouth: we must also seek with
the heart. For seeking with the heart, has oftentimes prevailed, without the
asking of the mouth. But asking with the mouth, could never yet obtain any
thing of God, without the seeking of the heart. Therefore Hierom finds
himself greatly grieved, that now and then in prayer time, his mouth and his
mind went not both together. My mind, says he, Aut per porticus deambulo, aut
de faenore cogito in dialog. aduersus Lucifer: Ipso in tempore quo eleuare
mentem paramus insertis manibus, cogitationibus ad terrena plerumque denicimur.
Ambr. de Fuga sicuti c. 1 citante August. contra Iul. l. 2.
is wandering or walking in this or that gallery: or else telling or counting
this or that sum of money: or diverse other ways misled and seduced. This is
satan's subtilty, to be then most busy in tempting of us, when we are most
busy in praying to God. As when two go to law with one another, the plaintiff
will do what he can, to hinder the defendant, that the judge may not hear
what he is able to say in his own cause: in like sort the devil, the common
plaintiff, the common accuser of all mankind, when he sees us upon our knees,
pleading for our selves by prayer, and seeking favor and pity of God, the
judge of all, then does he most interrupt and disturb us. And even as the
furies, are described to have snakes and serpents upon their heads, in stead
of hair: so satan distracts our minds, and makes us like furies, putting
pestilent and noisome cogitations into our heads, in stead of devout and holy
affections. Which is the cause why Job, Job. 1.20.
before he fell down upon the ground to pray, did shave his head, did shave
and cut off all idle and earthly thoughts, which are nothing else, but snakes
and serpents, suggested by that old serpent the devil. For blessed Job knew
right well, it was impossible God should hear him, if he heard not himself.
No no, says God, I will never hear such a people, because this people draws
near to me with their mouths, and honor me with their lips, but their
hearts are far from Esa. 29.13.
me. What then says the Apostle? I will pray with my breath, or with my mouth:
yea and I will pray also with my understanding, or with my 1. Cor. 14.15.
heart. Seeing indeed five words, though they were no more, coming from a
well disposed and a faithful heart, are a thousand times better, the^ ten
thousand words, which are never at all uttered, but muttered only and mumbled
up in the mouth. Gods promise to his people is this, You Deuteronomy. 4.29.
shall seek me, and you shall find me, because you shall seek me with your
whole heart. Gods performance of his promise is this, Ierem. 29.13.
You have sought me, and you have found me, because you have sought me with
your whole heart. Therefore when thou seek, seek with thy heart; when thou
praiest enter into thy chamber. Thy lips are but the chamber door. So that,
when thou have opened the door of thy lips, then thou must enter into the very
chamber of thine heart. That thy prayer may not be an empty or a windy
prayer, puffed or blown from the lungs, or from the lips: but a hearty and a
pithie prayer, a sacrifice which has marrow and Medullatum sacrificium. Psalm.
66.15.
fatnes. Such a sacrifice as David offered, whenas having first said, My heart
has failed 4. Psalm.
me, I have lost my heart: anon after he says, I have now, O Lord, found my
heart again to pray unto thee Inueni cor meum. 1. Sam. 7.27.
. Solomon decked and garnished his temple, before he prayed in it: and so before
thou praiest, prepare thy Ecclesiasticus 18.22.
heart. Be sure thou find and furnish thy heart, which is the true temple of
him, who is greater then Solomon. And as that woman that sought her groat,
swept over all the whole house; so when thou seek any thing of God, sweep
over the whole house of thy Psalm. 11.1.
heart: say with Manasses, O Lord, I bow unto thee, the knees of my heart:
seeing thou have said, Seek ye my face, thy face, O Lord, do I seek: yea I
do seek thee with my whole heart: seeing thou have said, Seek, and you
shall find.

Yet it is not enough for us to seek with the heart: we must also knock with
the hand. For he that was borne blind, could notwithstanding both see and say,
that God hears not sinners; but that every one which calls upon the name of
the Lord, must depart from iniquity. So that it is to little purpose, for a man
to seek, though with never so faithful a heart, except also he knock with a
righteous hand The heretics called Euchitae, professed to do nothing else but
pray. Because the Apostle exhorts us to pray continually. But they did not
consider, that to pray always, is to serve God always. And that a godly life
knocks aloude, and is a perpetual prayer to God. So that professing to pray,
and to do nothing else, in effect they did nothing less. Seeing as Theodoret
reports of them, They did (...).
nothing for the most part, but sleep. Whereas in Basils judgment, a prayer
should be filled, (...).
not with syllables, or good words, so much, as with good works. Which none
can do, who either with these heretics, do nothing at all, or else no good
thing at all, but only that which is ill with others. When you shall multiply
your prayers unto me, says God Esa. 1.15.
, I will not hear you, because your hands are full of blood. If a subject
should offer up a supplication, having his hands imbrued in the blood of the
kings son, tell me, I pray you, what think you? how would the king take it?
would he grant him his request, trow you? or rather would he not be most
wrathfully incensed, and enraged against him? And even so does God take it at
our hands when we knock with bloody and unclean hands, presuming still to
pray, and yet continually crucifying the son of God by our sins. Therefore
say the godly, Let us lift up our hearts with our hands Lam. 3.41.
. They say not, Let us lift up our hearts alone: but let us lift up our hearts
with our hands. Let us not only seek with our hearts, but also knock with our
hands: yea even with innocent hands. And another: Psalm 241.3.
Let my prayer be directed unto thee as incense: and let the lifting up of my
hands, be an evening sacrifice unto thee. And yet another: I will that men pray
every where, lifting up pure hands 1. Tim. 2.8.
. For as the precious stone diacletes, though it have very many excellent
soueraignties in it, yet it loses the^ al, if it be put in a dead man's mouth:
so prayer, which is the only pearl and jewel of a Christian, though it have
very many rare virtues in it, yet it loses them every one, if it be put into
a man's mouth, or into a man's heart either, that is dead in sin, and does not
knock with a pure hand. Hence it is, that the Church is said to be perfumed
with frankincense and myrr. Cant. 3.6.
By frankincense is meant, a burning feruencie of affection, whenas an enflamed
heart seeks. By myrr is meant, mortification and dying unto sin, when as an
undefiled hand knocks. As when the Church says, Cant. 5.5.
My hands drop down myrr, and my fingers pure myrr, upon the handles of the
bar. This is that holy perfume of the tabernacle, which god appointed to be
made of pure myrr and frankincense of each like weight. ^
Note that, Of each (...) weight. But we for the most (...) it in the making.
For we put into this perfume of prayer whole pounds of frankincense, but not a
dram, nay scarce so much as one grain of mirr. We put into it much
frankincense, much pretense of faith, much show of seeking with the heart; but
little myrr, little true mortification, little holiness of life, little sound
knocking with the hand. Nay, that which is most lamentable, or rather most
detestable of all, some are not ashamed, in stead of this pure myrrh, to put
in the very drugges, and the dregs of their vile sins. Which is the cause
why many a man's prayer, is so loathsome, and so odious to God. Whereas if we
would make this perfume, as it should be made, according to Gods prescription,
and put in as much of the myrrh, as of the frankincense, of each like weight,
then I assure you, no pomander which is made of amber and musk, would be so
pleasant in the nostrils of God, as this perfume of prayer, wherewith the
Church is perfumed, which is made of frankincense and myrrh. Of frankincense,
in a heart that seeks; and myrrh, in a hand that knocks. When Moses prayed
in mount Oreb, Exodus 17.5.
his hands were holden up by Vr and Aaron. Yea they did not only hold up his
hands, but also they held his rod in his hands. Now the rod of Moses was a
figure of the cross of Christ. Whereby we are taught, that we must not knock
with our own hands, but with Moses rod in our hands, not trusting to be heard
for the works of our own hands, for our own merits, but for Christ's mercies.
For this rod of Moses is the cross of Christ, the key of David, the key
wherewith Elias Iam. 5.17.
knocked; or rather indeed he stood not without, knocking like a stranger, but
with this key of prayer, he locked and un locked heaven at his pleasure. Among
them that have been borne of women, there has not risen up a greater then
John Baptist. Not a greater. True. Only the first John Baptist Elias was as
great, as the second Elias John Baptist. For both of them came in one and the
self same spirit, in one and the self same power. No marvel then though
Elias, being such a holy man, one while by turning the key one way, did lock
up the whole heaven, another while by turning the same key of prayer as much
another way, in the turning of a hand, did unlock all the doors and windows
of heaven, and set them wide open. Why do ye marvel at this? Even we, we our
selves, I say, shall be able to do as much as ever Elias did, if we come in
the spirit and power of Elias, as John Baptist did. If we have such a spirit in
our heart to seek, and such a power in our hand to knock, it shall likewise
be opened unto us. For Christ has said here, Knock, and it shall be opened
unto you. Thus much for the first part, what we in our prayer must perform to
God, in these words, Ask, seek, knock.

The second part follows, what God for our prayer will perform to us, And it
shall be given you. That Is for temporal things. In another place it is said,
Give, and it shall be given you. Here, Ask, and it shall be given you. So that
it is all one with God. We may get as much of him by asking, as by giving. By
asking that which we have not, as by giving that which we have. Yet S. James
says, 4.3.
You ask, and it is not given you. But the reason follows, Because you ask
amiss. Because you ask not with your mouth. For you ask temporal things, to
consume them upon your lusts. Now though this be the end which thou intendest,
yet thou dare not confess so much with thy mouth. Therefore then perhaps,
thou may ask and miss, whenas thou do ask amiss. Whenas, says Barnard,
Aut praeter verbum peris, (...) propter ven^um non ^^tis.
either thou do ask from the written word, or else thou do not ask for the
begotten word. Seeing every thing which we ask, as it must be assured and
warranted to us by the Scripture, which is the written word; so it must be
count'nanced and commended to God by Christ, which is the begotten word. Now
both these words, written and begotten, presuppose a mouth. Which if they be
in thy mouth, then Gods promise is plain, Open thy mouth, and I will fill it.
Ask of me, and I will give thee, the heathen for thine inheritance. For the
eyes of the Lord, are upon the righteous, and his ears are in their Aures eius
in precious eprum. Ps. 34.16.
prayers. He says not, their prayers are in his ears, but, his ears are in
their prayers. To signify, that though our prayers be so weak, that they
cannot pierce through the clouds, and much less enter into the ears of the
Lord of Hosts, yet that he will bow down, and incline his ears unto our
prayers. So that though our prayers cannot be in his ears, yet his ears shall
be in our prayers. A captain of the host of Israel being cut off by the time,
before he could cut off all his enemies, spoke to the sun, saying, Sun,
stand thou still. This was a temporal thing, even time it self which he
prayed for. But there was never seen such a day, neither before nor since,
wherein the Lord obeyed the voice of a man Joshua. 10.14.
. His prayers were not in the ears of the Lord. They went up to the sun, and
no further. Yet the ears of the Lord, were in his prayers. For the scripture
says not, that the sun obeyed, but that the Lord obeyed the voice of a man.
To signify, that not only God, himself, will yield unto us, but also if the
sun, or any other of his creatures, should refuse to give us our asking, yet
that he will command and compel them also, with himself to serve us. And what
man then will not obey the voice of the Lord, seeing the Lord will obey the
voice of a man? Pharaoh, being plagued with frogs, got the man of God to pray
for him. And the Lord did according to the word of Moses Exodus 8.13.
. And the Lord obeyed the voice of a man. Moses did according to the word of
the Lord. That Is plain. The Lord did according to the word of Moses. That Is
strange. Yet thus it is. And this it shows; that if Moses will do according
to the word of the lord, the lord will do according to the word of Moses. If
we will keep his precepts, he will fulfill our prayers. He will fulfill the
desire of them that fear him, he also will hear their cry, and will help
them. I have cried, says the Psalmist, because thou have heard me Psalm. 17.6.
. One would think he should have said contrariwise, Thou have heard me,
because I have cried. Yet he says, I have cried, because thou have heard me.
To show, that crying, does not always go before hearing, with god, as it
does with us: but that God will not only hear our cry, but also hear us
before we cry, and will help us. And that which is most admirable of all,
though it were a thing which once he purposed never to give us, yet if we ask
it, he will reuerse and repeal his own sentence to pleasure us. God once
repented him, that he had made man, and said, I will destroy man whom I have
made, from the face of the earth. Yet when Noah had built an altar and prayed
to God Genesis 8.21.
, The lord smells a savor of rest, and said in his heart, I will not
henceforth curse the earth any more for man's cause. God once was so displeased
with his people, that he said flatly, Non add^m (...) vt (...) vos.
I tell you truly, I will deliver you no more. Yet when when they asked a
deliverer of him, his very soul was grieved within him, for the misery of
Israel, and he gave them Iepthe to deliver them from their enemies Judge. 10.16.
. God once sent Nathan with this message to David, As the Lord lives, the man
that has done this thing shall surely die. Yet when David had ask't
forgiveness, and said, Have mercy upon me O lord, after thy great goodness,
and according to the multitude of thy mercies, do away mine offenses; God sent
the same prophet with a contrary message 2. Sam 12.13.
, The lord has taken away thy sin, and thou shall not die. God once sent
Esaias with this message to Ezechias, Set thy house in order, for thou shall die
and not live. Yet when Ezechias had turned him toward the wall, and wept, and
prayed, and said, O Lord remember how I have walked before thee in truth, and
with a perfect heart; God sent the same prophet with a contrary message, 2.
Reg. 10.6.
. Thus says the lord, I have heard thy prayers and thy tears, and now behold
thou shall live and not die. Then did the king rejoice in thy strength O lord,
exceeding glad was he of thy salvation. For thou did grant him his own
desire, and did not deny him the request of his lips. He asked life of thee,
and thou gave him a longer life, even fifteen years longer. As also here
thou do promise us, both for this life, and for all temporal things
concerning this life, yea though it be a thing, which once thou had purposed
never to give us, Ask, and it shall be given you.

Yea not only God will give you temporal things, but also you shall find
spiritual things. Yet the Church says, Cant. 3.1.
I sought him whom my soul loved, I sought him, and I found him not. But the
reason goes before, because she sought him in her bed: she sought him not with
her heart. My soul loves him, says she, yet at that time her heart loved her
bed better. Therefore says Augustine, Quaeite quod quaeritis, sed non vbi
quaeritis.
Seek what you seek, but seek not where you seek. Seek Christ: that is a good
what. Seek what you seek. But seek him not in bed. That Is an ill where. But
seek not where you seek. Moses found Christ, not in a soft bed, but in a
bramble bush. So that the bed is no fit place to find him in, who had not where
to rest himself. But go into the garden among the bramble bushes, and there
you shall find him, not sleeping, but sweating dropps of blood for your
redemption, and calling you to him, Math. 11.29.
Come unto me all you that labor, (not you that lie a bed and are secure, but
you that labor) and are heavy laden, and I will refresh you. Take my yoke
upon you, and you shall find rest for your souls. If you seek rest with you
hearts, with your souls, you shall find rest for your souls; and that rest
also, which is not to be found in the bed of pleasure, but in the yoke of
Christ. If thou seek for this spiritual rest, as for silver, and search for
it, as for treasures, Prou. 2.5.
then shall thou understand the fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of
God. Therefore seek the Lord, not in the bed of sensuality, but where he may be
found. And seek the lord while he may be found Esaias 55.6.
. Or rather indeed, though not in what place soever, yet at what time so ever
we sinners seek, we shall be sure to find him, that says, I am found of them
that sought me Esaias 65.1.
not. So that no man, seeking God, shall return with a Non est inventu^; but
we that have erred and straied like lost sheep, shall find him, or rather we
shall be found of him, before we seek him. And that which is most wonderful
of all, we shall not only find oftentimes before we seek, but also we shall
find much more then we seek. That good Centurion Math. 8.8.
sought only one word, Dic verbum, says he, but he found more. Christ uttered
not only one word, whereby his servant was healed, but also very many words,
wherein he gave himself a most singular praise and commendation for his faith.
Dymas, the theife on the right hand, Luke 23.42.
sought only to be remembered, when Christ should come into his kingdom, but he
found more. What talkest thou of being remembered, says Christ, as though thou
should be far from me out of my sight? Tush man, I will do more for thee
then so? Thou shall not only be remembered, but thou shall be with me. And why
say thou, When I come into my kingdom? as though it would be a long while
first? This very day shall thou be with me in my kingdom; this day shall thou
be with me in paradise. That needy man in the Gospel, Luke 11.9.
sought only to borrow three loaves, but he found more. God his good friend,
bad him welcome at midnight, and did not only lend him, but frankly and
freely give him, not only three loaves, but as many as he needed, He gave him
as many as he needed. Solomon, 2. Chron. 1.1(...)
sought only wisdom, but he found more. Seeing he sought first the kingdom
of God and the righteousness thereof, all other things besides, were added unto
him. Wherefore if any man want wisdom, or any such spiritual thing, let him
with Solomon seek it of God, and he shall find it. Yea we shall find
infinitely above measure, more then we seek, or can devise to seek, of him
that says, Seek, and you shall find.

Yea not only you shall find spiritual things, but also it shall be opened
unto you: that is for eternal things. Yet we read that some began to knock,
saying, Luke (...).
Lord, Lord, open unto us, and it was not opened unto them. But the reason is
evident elsewhere. Because they did not knock with their hands. They had, I
grant lamps in their hands, but they had not oil in their la^ps. So that all
their knocking, was but as a sounding brass, or as a tinckling cimball.
Whereas if we would knock to purpose indeed, the way were, as Christ teaches
us elsewhere, not to cry Lord, Lord, but by setting to our hands, to do and
work the will of our heavenly father. Lo ye, says Chrysologus, En quam
negare nollet, qui sibi etiam neganti, qualiter extorqueretur, ostendit.
how loath our good Lord is to deny us any thing, seeing though he were never
so much disposed to keep us out, yet here he teaches us a way, how we may
break open the doors, and press in upon him, and get the kingdom of heaven
whether he will or no, by the violence and force of faith, from him. For there is
a great difference between Dives and God, though there be a great agreement
between Lazarus and us. Lazarus Luke 16.20.
was a beggar full of sores: so are we all by nature beggars, standing without,
and knocking at the door. Yea, his body was not so full of sores, as our soul
is of sins. Lazarus desired to be relieved with the crummes of bread, which
fell from the rich man's board: so have we all need, God wot, to be refreshed
with the crumbs of mercy, which fall from our masters table. Yet in one
respect, we are better then Lazarus. In that it was his hard hap, to knock
at the door of a cruel, a wretched, a miserable caitiffe, who could see no
time to open unto him. But we knock at the door of a most kind, a most
liberal, a most merciful father, who as soon as he hears us rapping with a
lively faith, which works by charity, has no power to keep us out any
longer, but presently he opens unto us. And even as S. Peter, Act. 3.2.
when he saw that lame cripple lying upon the ground, craving an alms, at the
beautiful gate of the temple, said unto him, Silver and gold have I none, but
such as I have, health, and recovery I give thee: so Christ, when he sees us
lying prostrate, groueling on the ground before him, and knocking for an alms
at the beautiful gate of his holy temple, by and by opens unto us, and gives
us not silver or gold, or any such corruptible thing, but health and salvation
to our souls, and all the inestimable riches of his glory, and all the
eternal treasures of his kingdom. O that some of you would a little try,
whether this be true which I say or no! that you would bounce as hard as ever
you can, at this beautiful gate, and say with the Psalmist, Psalm. 44.23.
Arise, arise, O Lord, why sleep thou? I warrant you, you should hear him
answer you in another Psalm, Psalm. 12.5.
Now for the pitiful complaint of the poor, I will arise, says the Lord; I
will sleep no longer, I will arise and open unto them. So it was opened to the
poor Luke 18.13.
Publican. He went up to the temple to pray, and when he came thither, he
knocked his breast and said, Lord, be merciful unto me a sinner. Therefore the
door of mercy was opened unto him, and he went home, even into heaven his long
home, more justified in the sight of God, then that other which justified
himself. So was it opened to S. Steven Act. 7.56.
. He was brought out to be stoned. But when he came forth, the very stones
could not knock him so hard, as his prayer knocked heaven gate, when as he
said, Lord Jesus let me in, Lord Jesus receive my spirit. Therefore the gate
was opened unto him. He saw the heaven opened, and Jesus standing at the right
hand of God, where he within a while after, should sit himself. So was it
opened to king Psalm. 118.19.
David. He knocked very imperiously, not like a petitioner, but like a
commander. Lift up your heads, O ye gates, and be ye lift up ye everlasting
doors, that the King of glory may come in. Open unto me the gate of the
righteous, that I may enter in and praise the Lord. And when the gate was
opened, as he was entering in, he pointed to it and said, This is the gate of
the righteous, the just shall enter into it. So was it opened to S. Paul. Act.
16 26.
He was cast down into the very lowest dungeon. All the chains of darkness,
and even hell it self, could not have held him faster, then that dungeon did.
Yet at midnight, when he prayed and knocked, suddenly all the prison doors flew
open, yea all the doors of heaven likewise stood open, and that which is most
marvelous of all, they stood so wide open, that not only S. Paul himself went
in, but also Stephanas the iayler, and his whole household, whom he at that
time converted and baptized, did enter in with him. So that all, all eternal
things are ours, and nothing, nothing can prevail against us, if we knock as
we ought. Not the brazen gates of hell, to shut us in, nor the golden gates of
heaven, to shut us out. For Christ has said here, Knock, and it shall be
opened unto you. Thus much for the second part, what God for our prayer will
perform to us in these words, And it shall be given you, and you shall find,
and it shall be opened unto you.

Now then my dear brethren, give me leave, I beseech you, to speak unto you,
me I say, that am the servant of God, and your servant for God, as Naman the
Syrians servants said unto him. Father, say they, if the prophet had commanded
thee a great thing, would thou not have done it? how much more then, when he
says unto thee, Wash, and be clean? Brethren, say, I, if he that is more
then a prophet, had commanded you a great thing, would you not have done it?
how much more then when he says unto you. Wash, and be clean, Ask, and it
shall be given you? He desires to be desired. And he has not his own will,
except we have ours. But we may have what we will for asking. God does ask no
more of us, but only that we would vouchsafe to ask him. Do no more, says
he, but ask, and have: Do no more, but seek, and find: Do no more, but
knock, and enter in. O how easily, and yet how powerfully does prayer work!
It overcomes all beasts. The Leuiathan, the strength of all Gods creatures,
was so subdued by prayer, that whereas otherwise he might have been a gulf to
swallowe up Jonas quick, and for ever to devour him, he became a ship to
save him. It overcomes all men* Jacob gives Joseph one portion above his
brethren, which he got of the Amorites, by his sword and by his bow. But the
Chaldee Paraphrast, translates it, By my prayer, and by my supplication. Which
translation proves, that prayer is the sword, and supplication is the bow of
a Christian, wherewith he subdueth all his enemies. It overcomes the devil
himself. Prayer and fasting, are the chiefest means to cast him out. If we
resist him by prayer, he will fly from us. Yea the most silly beast in all the
forest, is not so much affrighted and amazed, when a lion roareth, as this
cowardly beast the devil is daunted and terrified, when a Christian prays.
What shall I say more? It overcomes him that cannot be overcome, making the
virgins son stoop down, and condescend unto us. I pray thee let me go, says
he, to one that wrestled with him all the night long by prayer. If thou will be
a suter to God, God will be a suter to thee. If thou will pray unto God, God
will pray unto thee. I pray thee, says he, let me go. But what does Israel
answer? I will not let thee go, except thou bless me. No will? It is not
belike now as God will, but as man will. God is taken captive by prayer, and
become a prisoner to man, and stands at his courtesy, who says, I will not let
thee go, except thou bless me. And that which is more then all this, if more
may be, prayer overcomes God, not only being well pleased, as he was with
Israel, when any child may deal with him, but also being displeased, as he
was with the Israelites, when no man may come near him; when his wrath burns
as fire; when he thunders from heaven; and tears the clouds in pieces; and
cleaues the rocks asunder; and shakes sand and sea together; and makes the
whole earth in a trembling fit of fear, fly away from him. Yet if some
Moses do but stand up in the gap and pray, all this omnipotent power, shall
come to nothing; god shall not be able, though he be never so angry, to enter
upon the breach, but prayer shall have the victory, and get the conquest of
him. Wherefore beloved, once again I say, let us always entrench our selves
within this invincible bulwark of prayer. Our whole life alas, as we have made
it by sin, is most miserable. There is no man alive, if he had known before
he was borne, what miseries would have befallen him in this life, but would
have wished, I warrant you, with all his heart, that that which was the womb
of his birth, had bin the tomb for his burial. But in all the calamities of
this life, our only comfort is prayer. In all the afflictions of this life,
our only fortress is prayer. Prayer, whereby we are oftentimes in spirit with
the Apostle, rapt up into the third heaven, where we, that are otherwise but
worms, walk with the angels, and even continually talk with God. Hence it is
that holy men and women in former time, could never have enough of this
exercise. Nazianzen in his Epitaph for his sister Gorgonia writes, that she
was so given to prayer, (...).
that her knees seemed to cleave to the earth, and to grow to the very ground,
by reason of continuance in prayer. Gregory in his Dialogues writes, that his
aunt Trasilla being dead, was found to have her elbowes as hard as horn. Which
hardness she got by leaning to a deske, at which she used to pray. Eusebius in
his history writes that James the brother of our Lord, had knees as hard as
cammells knees, benumbed and bereiued of all sense and feeling, by reason of
continual kneeling in prayer. Hierom in the life of Paul the Eremite, writes,
that he was found dead, kneeling upon his knees, holding up his hands, lifting
up his eyes Etiam cadaver mortui officioso gestu precabatur.
. So that the very dead corpse seemed yet to live and by a kind of religious
gesture to pray still unto God. O how happy and how blessed, was that soul
without the body, when as that body without the soul was so devout! O that we
may be, that we may be likewise, so happy and so blessed as this holy man was,
that we may depart hence, in such sort as he did, that is in such sort as
Christ did, who died in prayer, saying Father into thy hands I commend my
spirit, that our lord when he comes, may find us so doing, that when we shall
lie upon our death bed, gasping for breath, ready to give up the ghost, then
the precious soul of every one of us, redeemed with the precious blood of
Christ, may pass away in a prayer, in a secret and sweet prayer, may pass I
say, out of Adam's body, into Abram's bosom; Through the tender mercies of
Jesus Christ, to whom with the father and the holy ghost, be all honor and
glory, power and praise, dignity and dominion, now and evermore. Amen.

Finis.

