Hearts delight. A SERMON PREACHED at Paul's cross in London in Easter term.
1593. By THOMAS PLAYFERE Professor of Divinity for the Lady Margaret in
Cambridge.

HINC LVCEM ET SACRA POCVLA

ALMA MATTER CANTABRIGIA



PRINTED BY JOHN LEGATE, PRINter to the University of Cambridge: 1603.

And are to be sold in Paul's Churchyard at t^^ ^igne of the Crown by Simon
Waterson.

To the most victorious, virtuous, and puissant Prince, King JAMES the first,
King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, defendour of the faith, all
earthly and heavenly happiness.
GLorious, gracious; It is our crown and the highest toy of our heart, that
the crown of this kingdom is to be set up on your royal head. Otherwise,
nothing in the world could have co^n^eruail'd th'excessiue sorrow, that her
late Majesty departing hence left behind her, but the incomparable joy and
triumph which your expectation sent before you, and now your princely presence
brings with you. When Solomon, 1. Reg. 1. 40.
after his father David, was anointed king, they blew the trumpet, and all the
people said, God save king Solomon, and rejoiced with great joy, so that the
earth rang with the sound of them. We have thought, no trumpets, no
proclamations, no bonefires, no bells sufficient; neither have we heard the
earth only ring-out, but also the heavens redouble and ^ccho-backe again the
acclamations and applauses of all men, which hau^ showted and said, God save
King James. Now also, when your Highness approaches nearer, the straight charge
which has bin publicly given to the contrary, cannot restrain your people,
but that out of all countries and shires, they run and flock together, to
behold and attend your Majesty, as some bright and beautiful star, Tanqua^
claru^ ac beneficum ^ydus. Sen. de Clemen. l. ^. c. 3.
which by his diuine-sweete influence works a general prosperity and peace.
For what loy all subject does not bless God, and bless himself that he lives
to see this happy time, which was feared would prove full of great disorder
and trouble, so wisely and wonderfully carried (God as it were from heaven
stretching out his holy hand, and holding the minds of all men in a^e and
obedience) as that in it the peaceable uniting of two mighty kingdoms, makes
us invincible against all our enemies, and all our enemies contemptible to us?
Wherefore at this time, when all your liege people strive to show the gladness
of their hearts, by tendering such services, as are suitable to their
possibility and performance, I also among the rest have taken occasion humbly
to dedicate unto your Majesty such a poor present as I had in a readiness.
Nulli ita deo familiares sun^, sicut boni reges. Emissenus. Dom. 21. post
^en^ecost.
Assuring my self, that as none are more familiar with God then godly Kings:
so no treatises can be more welcome to godly kings, then such as may draw them
into greatest familiarity with God. And I doubt not but that your Highness
having hitherto had your heart's desires given you, because you have delighted
in the Lord, will here after, if it be possible, much more delight in the Lord,
that he may yet give you more desires of your heart. Nay I am so far from
doubting of this, that I dare be hold to conclude with the Psalmist.

The King shall rejoice in thy strength, Psalm. 21. 1.
O Lord: exceeding glad shall he be of thy salvation.

Thou have given him his hearts desire: and have not denied him the request of
his lips.

For thou shall prevent him with the blessings of goodness: and shall set a
crown of pure gold upon his head.

His honor is great in thy salvation: glory and great worship shall thou lay
upon him.

For thou shall give him everlasting felicity: and make him glad with the joy
of thy countenance.

And why? Because the King puts his trust in the Lord: and in the mercy of
the most High he shall not miscarie.

Your Majesty's most devoted, and obedient subject, THOMAS PLAYFERE.

THE TEXT.
Delight thy self in the Lord, and he shall give thee the desires of thy
heart. Psalm. 37. 4.
SAint John says in one place, Love not the world, nor the things of this
world; if any man love the world, the love of God is not in him. So may I say,
delight not in the world, nor in the things of this world: if any man delight
himself in the world, he cannot delight himself in the Lord. Therefore says
Martial an ancient Bishop, Quid ad no^ delectatio msidi? ^pist. ad Tolo^. cap.
(...).
What have we to do with the delight of the world? You may call it as you
will; pleasure, if you will; pastime, if you will; mirth, if you will; gladness,
if you will; joy, if you will: but in Gods dictionarie it has no such name. In
the holy Scripture, it is otherwise called. It is called, Adams goodly apple,
which being eaten, deprived him of Paradise; Esaus red broth, which being supt
up, bereaved him of his birthright; Ionathans sweet honie-combe, which being
but tasted, was like to cost him his life; the whore of Babylons golden cup,
which filled her full of all abominations; the traitor Judas sugared sop,
which made a way for the devil to enter into him; the prodigal childs wash
or draffe, which he most miserably swilled up with the swine. Thus is all the
delight of the world called in Gods dictionarie, which is the holy Scripture.
It is called Adams apple, Esaus broth, Ionathans comb, Babylons cup, Judas
soppe, the prodigal child's swill. So that all this delight is no delight. Or
suppose it were: yet certainly it shall not give thee the desires of thy heart.
Nay it shall be so far from breeding thee those joys, which thy heart most
desires, that it shall bring thee those torments which thy heart most
abhors. It may, says Chrysostom, (...).
delight thee perhaps for a while, but sure it shall torment thee for ever. As
any sollide body, though it have never so fair a color (as crimson, or
carnation, or purple, or skarlet, or violet, or such like) yet always the
shadow of it is black: so any earthly thing, though it have never so fair a
show, yet al ways the shadow of it is black, and the delight thou take in
it, shall prove to be grievous in the end. Therefore Philo calls it a sweet
bitter (...)
thing. As that little book in the Revelation, was sweet in the mouth, but
bitter in the belly: so all worldly delight, is a sweet bitter thing, sweet
in the beginning, but bitter in the ending. Which they of Jerusalem had
experience of. For being given to transitory pleasure, they are Lamen. 3. 15.
said to be made drunken with wormwood. Now we know that drunkenness is
sweet, but wormwood is bitter. And such a sweet bitter thing, such a
dru^kennes of wormwood, is all the drunken delight of the world. So that as one
said, (...)
Call me not Naomie, but call (...) Mara, call me not sweet, but call me
bitter: so must we call worldly delight, not Naomie, but Mara, because it is
nothing so much Naomie, sweet and pleasant at the first, as it is Mara and
Amara, bitter and loathsome at the last. Like to a song of the Sirens, which
are mentioned in the prophecy chap. 13. v. 22.
of Esaias. A Siren is a monster of the sea, the head whereof resembles a
virgin, but the feet a fish. And such a monster is all worldly delight, the
head whereof, the beginning, allureth us as an amiable virgin, but the feet,
the end, deuoureth us as a ravenous fish. Therefore as Ulysses stopped his ears
and bound himself to the mast of the ship, that he might not hea^e the Sirens
song: so must we stop our ears, and refuse to hear the voice of these
charming Sirens, charm they and sing they never so sweetly; yea we must bind
our selves to the mast of the ship, that is, to the cross of Christ, Si de
Vlys^e illo refert fabula quod (...) arbo^^^s religatio de pe^icul^ liberavit,
qua^to magis cruci^ arb^? etc. Ambr. sermon. 55
every one of us saying with our heavenly Ulysses, God forbid that I should
delight in any thing, but in the cross of Christ, by which the world is
crucified unto me, and I unto the world. For the world and all worldly delight,
is likened to a hedgehogge. Esa. 14. 23.
A hedgehogge seems to be but a poor silly creature, not likely to do any
great harm, yet indeed it is full of bristles or prickles, whereby it may
annoy a man very shrewdly. So worldly delight seems to be little or nothing
dangerous at the first, yet afterward as with bristles or pricks, it pearceth
through the very conscience with intolerable pains. Therefore we must deal
with this delight, as a man would handle a hedgehogge. The safest way to handle
a hedgehogge is to take him by the heel. So must we deal with this delight.
As Jacob took Esau that rough hedgehogge by the heel: in like sort we must
take worldly delight not by the head, but by the heel, considering not the
beginning, but the ending of it, that so we may never be deceived by it. For
though it have a fair show at the first, yet it has a black shadow at the
last: though it be sweet at the first, yet it is bitter at the last: though it
be drunk^nnes at the first, yet it is wormwood at the last^ though it be
Naomie at the first, yet it is Mara at the last: though it be a song at the
first, yet it is a Siren at the last: though it be a silly hedgehogge at the
first, yet it is a sharp prickle at the last. Wherefore delight not thy self
in the world, for it shall not give thee the desires of thy heart: but Delight
thy self in the Lord, and he shall give thee the desires of thy heart.

Here is a precept: here is a promise. A precept in these words, Delight thy
self in the Lord. First delight, then thy self, lastly in the Lord. A promise
in these words, And he shall give thee the desires of thy heart, First, and he
shall give thee, then, the desires, lastly, of thy heart. Delight thy self in
the Lord, and he shall give thee the desires of thy heart.

First, Delight. Well says Synesius, (...).
The spirit of God, as it is a cheereful thing it self, so it makes all them
cheerful which are partakers of it. Indeed the wicked continually mourn and
lament. There was a great cry in Egypt, because in every house among them,
there was some one or other of their first borne dead. But the voice of joy and
gladness is in the tabernacles of the righteous. Psalm. 118. 15.
They evermore delight in the Lord. I read Aelianus in varia histo. l. ^. cap.
14.
of one Leonides a captain, who perceining his soldiers left their watch,
upon the city walls, and did nothing all the day long but quaffe and tipple
in alehouses near adjoining, commanded that the al^houses should be removed
from the place where they stood, and set up close by the walls. That seeing
the soldiers would never keep out of them, at the least wise they might watch
as well as drink in them. So, because pleasure we must needs have, and we
cannot be kept from it, god has appointed that we should take Delight enough,
and yet serve him never a whit the less. For it is no part of Gods meaning,
when thou enterest into his sweet service, that thou should abandon all
delight, but only that thou should change the cause of thy delight. That
whereas before thou did delight in the service of sin, now thou should
delight as much, or rather indeed a thousand times more, in the service of the
Lord. It was not Gods will that I^aak should be sacrificed, but only the
ram. And so God would have us sacrifice only the ram, that is, all rammish
and rank delight of the world. But as for Isaac, he must be preserved still,
and kept alive: Isaac, in whom Abraham did see the day of Christ and
rejoiced: Isaac, that is all spiritual laughter, all ghostly joy, all
heavenly delight. For as no man might come into the court of Ashuerus, which
was clothed in sackcloath: Ester. 4. 2.
so no man may come into the court of our king, which is clothed in sackcl^ath,
and has not on the wedding garment of joy and delight in the Lord. Which is
the cause why Christ calls the assemblies of the faithful, Quires of Camps
Ch^ros castrorum. Can. 6. 12.
. A quire s^ges; a Camp fights. How then may these two agree together? Very
well in the godly. For the godly, when they fight most stoutly against the
enemy, then they sing most merrily unto the lord. Whereupon Gregory says,
David sal^ant^m plus stupeo qu^m pugnantem. Moral. l. 27. cap. 27.
I admire king David a great deal more, when I see him in the quire, then when
I see him in the camp: when I see him singing as the sweet singer of Israel,
then when I see him fighting as the worthy warrior of Israel. For fighting
with others, he did overcome all others, but singing, and delighting himself,
he did overcome himself. Eue^ as his son Solomon says for him, speaking to
Christ. Turn away thine eyes from me, for they do overcome me, they wound my
heart: they make me sick for love (...). 4. 6.
. When David fought with others, he overcame others; he wounded others; he made
others sick; but when he daunced before the Arc, and delighted himself, he
was overcome himself, he was wounded himself, he was sick himself. But
fear you nothing. I warrant you this sickness will do him no harm. I will
play still (says he) that others may still play upon me Ludam, inquit, vt
illudar. Bonus ludu^, quo Michol i^ascitur, and d^us delect^tur. ^reg. Mag.
. For it is good sport when God is delighted, though Michol be displeased. So
that of David's sickness we may say, as Christ said of Lazarus sickness. This
sickness is not unto death, but for the glory of God Ioh. 11. 4.
. And therefore it is for the glory of God, because it is for the love of god.
For David is sick no otherwise for love of the son of God, then God is sick
himself, for love of the son of David. This is my beloved son (says he)
in wh^me I am delighted Math. 17. 5.
. This is my beloved son: there he is in love. In whom I am delighted: there
he is sick for love. Which is the cause why he commands us also to be
delighted in his love Prou. 5. 19.
. For as a double desire is love: so a double love is delight. And therefore he
says not simply, love him; but, he delighted in his love. Delight thy self in
the Lord, and he shall give thee the desires of thy heart. Delight.

Then, Thy self. I would hate mine own soul (says Bernard) if I found it
any where else then in the Lord and in his love (...)
. So that it is not enough for thee to delight, but thou must delight thy
self, that is, thy soul. Saying with the blessed Virgin, My soul does
magnify the Lord, and my spirit rejoices in God my Savior. Otherwise, as
Dives did see Lazarus a far off lying in Abraham's bosom, being himself all
the while tormented in hell, and having not so much as one drop of water to
cool his tongue: so, eue^ in laughing the soul may be sorrowful Pro^. 14. 13.
. The wretched soul of a sinner may see the face a far off laughing, and
lying (as I may say) in Abraham's bosom, being it self all the while
tormented (as it were) in hell* and having not so much as one drop of delight to
assuage the sorrows of it. And like as Sampsons lion had great store of honey
in him, but tasted no sweetness of it: even so if thou rejoice in the face,
and not in the heart, 2. Cor. 5. 12.
thou may well perhaps have great store of honey in thee to delight others;
but thou can never taste the sweetness of it to delight thy self. Therefore
says the princely prophet, O taste and see how sweet the Lord is. It is not
enough for thee, to see it a far off, and not have it, as Dives did; or, to
have it in thee, and not to taste it, as the lion did: but thou must as well
have it as see it, and as well taste it as have it. O taste and see (says he)
how sweet the Lord is. For so indeed Christ gives his Church, not only a
sight but also a taste of his sweet^nsse. A sight is where he says thus, Can.
7. 12.
We will rise up early, and go into the vineyard, and see whether the vine
have budded forth the small grapes, and whether the Pomegran^ets flourish.
There is a sight of the vine. A taste, is where he says thus, Can. 8. 2.
I will bring thee into the winseller, and cause thee to drink spiced wine,
and new wine of the Pomegranne^s. There is a taste of the wine. The Church,
not only goes into the vineyard, and sees the wine, but also goes into the
wineseller and tastes the wine. But yet thou must go further then this, before
thou can come to thy self. For there are diverse degrees of tastes. The
Egyptians in their Hyroglyphickes, Or^s Apollo.
when they would describe an imperfect taste, paint meat in the teeth, when a
more perfect taste, the beginning of the throat. Such an imperfect taste had
the Israelites of the sweetness of God. God was most sweet unto them, when he
gave them quails to eat. Yet while the meat was but in their teeth, the
wrath of God was kindled against them Nu^. 11. (...).
There is the meat in the teeth: an imperfect taste. But the spouse of Christ
has a more perfect taste of the sweetness of god. For likening him to an
apple tree, she says, I delight to sit under his shadow, and his fruit is
sweet unto my throat. Can. 2. 3.
There is the beginning of the throat: a more perfect taste. But notwithstanding
all this, thou art not yet come to thy self. Therefore this taste must not
content thee: because this taste cannot delight thee. For thy delight must not
stick in thy teeth, or in thy throat, Non ^st strepitus oris, sed ^^bilus
cordis, non ^onus labiorum, s^d motus gaudiorum, concordia voluntatum, non
con^onantia vocum.
but as a cordial thing, it must go down to thy very heart. That thou may
say with the Psalmist, My heart and my flesh (not my flesh only, but my heart
and my flesh) rejoice in the living God Psalm. 84. 3.
. And again, Praise the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me, praise
his holy name Psalm. 103. 1.
. Now thou art come to thy self. For that which is within thee, is thy self;
and all that is within thee, is all thy self. So that thy self, and all thy
self, is delighted in the Lord, when as that which is within thee, and all
that is within thee, praise his holy name. O how happy art thou, when thou
know this Iubile, this ioyfulnesse Cum scis iubilationem. Psalm. 89. 15.
: when thou have a secret sense, and an inward feeling of it: when every motion
of thy mind, is an influence of Gods spirit: when thy will and his word play
together, as Isaac and Rebecka did. For then surely thou do build to thy
self desolate places Greg. Moral. Job. 3. 14.
. Desolate places, I say, that all other things may be silent to thy soul: nay
that thy very soul may be silent to it self: yea that there may be a silence
in heaven Reu. 8. 1.
answerable to the silence of thy soul, when thou do delight thy self in
the Lord. Delight thy self in the Lord, and he shall give thee the desires of
thy heart. Thy self.

Lastly, In the Lord. Gregory says thus, Gust^ incircumscripti luminis anima
pa^citur, and supra se elata ad seipsam re ^abi dedignatur.
The mind of man is fed with the infinite light and love of God, and so being
lifted up far above it self, does now disdain to stoop down so low as
^o it self. And therefore does not delight it self in it self, but delights
it self in the Lord. Hereupon a father says, O lord, grant that I may know
Nouerim me, nouerim te.
my self, and know thee. That knowing my self and thee, I may loath my self
in my self, and delight my self only in thee. Truth indeed, O man, so thou
oughtst to do, says God. For if thou did know thy self and me, then thou
would displease thy self, and please me. But because thou know neither
thy self, nor me, therefore thou do please thy self, and displease me. But
the time shall come, when thou shall neither please thy self, nor me. Not me,
because thou have sinned: not thy self, because thou shall be burned. So that
then thou shall please none, but the devil: both because thou have sinned, as
he did in heaven, and also because thou shall be burned as he is in hell.
Therefore he that delights himself in himself, delights not himself, but
only the devil in himself. Whereas on the other side, he only delights
himself, which not only delights himself, but adds also, In the Lord; and
so delights himself in virtue, delights himself in godliness, delights
himself in God himself. This Christ ^ignifieth, when speaking of his spouse,
he says, (...)
Who is she, which c^mmeth out of the wilderness, abounding in delights,
leaning upon her ^^^belo^ed? He that leanes upon himself, can never abound in
delights: but he alone abounds in delights, which leans upon his
well-beloved. So did S. Paul: I have labored more then they all, says he. There
he abound^th in delights. Yet not I, but the grace of God which is in me. There
he leans upon his well-beloved. And again, I can do al things, says he. There
he abounds in delights. In him that strengthens me. There he leans upon
his well-beloved. In one word, when as he says, He that would rejoice and
glory, let him* rejoice and glory in the Lord: it is all one, as if he should
have said, He that would abound in delights, let him lean upon his well-beloved.
Let him delight himself in the Lord. Let the Saints In letitia letentur. psalm.
68. 3.
rejoice in joy, let them delight in delight. He that delights in an earthly
thing, delights in vanity, he delights not in delight. But he only delights
in delight, which makes God only the ground of his delight. According to that
of Prosper, Aeterna exultatio est, qn^^ bono (...) ^terno.
That alone is eternal delight, which is grounded upon the eternal good. Upon
him that is only good, and says to Moses, Exodus 33. 19.
I will in my self show thee all good. Every thing that is honest, every thing
that is profitable, every thing that is pleasant, is only to be found Qu^re
(...) bonum in quo sunt omni^ bona and sufficit. Aug. Med.
in the Lord. As that Manna Sapi. 16. 20.
had all manner of good tastes in it: so the Lord only, has all manner of good
things, all manner of true delights in him. Therefore the Church, having first
bestowed the greatest part of Salomons song, altogether in commendation of the
beauty and comelines of Christ, at length concludes thus; Thy mouth is as
sweet things, and thou art wholly delectable: how fair art thou, and how
pleasant art thou, O my love, in pleasures? So that when I seek my love, my
Lord, then I seek a delight, and a light, that passes all lights, which no
eye has seen: I seek a sound and an harmony, that passes all harmonies,
which no ear has heard: I seek a sent and a savor, that passes all
savors, which no sense has smelt: I seek a relish and a taste, that passes
all tastes, which no tongue has tasted: I seek a contentment and a pleasure,
that passes all pleasures, which no body has felt. Nay, I cannot hold my
heart, for my joy; yea, I cannot hold my joy, for my heart, to think that he
which is my Lord, is now become my father, and so that he which was offended
with me, for my sins sake, is now reconciled to me, for his sons sake. To
think, that the high Majesty of God, will one day rai^e me out of the dust,
and so that I, which am now a poor worm upon earth, shall hereafter be a
glorious Saint in heaven. This, this makes me delight my self in the Lord;
saying, O thou that art the delight of my delight; the life of my life; the
soul of my soul; I delight my self in thee, I live only for thee, I offer
my self unto thee, wholly to thee wholly: one to thee one: only to thee Totum
toti ^ vnum vni: vnicum vnico.
only. For sup pose now, as S. John speaks, the whole world were full of
books: and all the creatures in the world were writers: and all the grass
piles upon the earth were pens: and all the water^ in the sea were ynke: yet,
I assure you faithfully, all these books, all these writers, all these pens,
all this ynke, would not be sufficient to describe the very least part, either
of the goodness of the Lord in himself, or of the loving kindness of the Lord,
toward thee. Wherefore, Delight thy self in the Lord, and he shall give thee
the desires of thy heart. Thus much for the precept, in these words, Delight
thy self in the Lord.

The promise follows. First, And he shall give thee. Well says Leo, Love is
the greatest reward of love, that either can be, or can be desired
Dilectionis^ulla mayor expetenda est ^enumeratio, (...) ipsa di^ectio. Ser. 7.
de ^^eiu.
. So that though there were no other reward, promised thee, for delighting in
the Lord, but only the delight it self, it were sufficient. For the benefit
is not Gods, but wholly thine. God is never a whit the better, for thy
delighting thy self in him. If thou be righteous, what do thou give him, or
what does he receive at thy hands Job. 35. 7.
? Thy delight may perhaps reach to the saints, which are in the earth, but it
can never reach to ^he Saints which are in heaven: and much less, can it reach
to God, which is the Lord of heaven Psalm. 16. 2.
. Nay, I will say more. If thou should gi^e God whole rivers full of oil,
and whole houses full of gold, for never so little a drop of this delight, it
would be nothing. Thy gift would be nothing, to his gift: thy oil and gold,
would be nothing to his oil of gladness. Yet behold the bountifulness, and
liberality of the lord. He hires thee, and gives thee wages, not to do
himself good, but to do thy self good. And here he promises to reward his
own mercies, as if they were thine own merits. And as though the benefit were
not thine, but wholly his: so he changes the words, and for, Thou shall give
him, says, He shall give thee. But this he does, as Augustine testifies, Non
(...) a more, sed (...) mo^ is ^ror^. Deciuit. (...). li^^. (...). cap. 6.
Not by the love of error, but by the error of love. For the love of error,
is man's Rhetoric, it is a figure, which man often uses, Humanum est errare
It is man's properti^ to err.
. But the error of love, is Gods Rhetoric, it is a figure, which God often
uses, Di^inum est amare It is Gods property to lou^.
. Especially it is a divine thing, to love so dearly, as God loves us. Who,
though he do not love to err, yet he does err for love. Counting and
calling, that which is only our commodity, his own commodity. So, Christ is
said Can. 2. 16.
to be fed amongst the lylies. The lylies of the fields, are the millions of
the angels Lilia agro rum, millia angelorum.
or of all those which lead a pure, and an angelical life. These indeed
Christ feeds. He feeds them in the green pastures, and leads them forth,
by the waters of comfort. Yea, not only he feeds them, but also by this
figure, the error of love, he is said to be fed with them. Because though he
for his part, have little need, I wis, to ^e fed, yet it is as great a
pleasure to him, to feed the^, as if he were fed himself among them (...)
uerso pascere sit ei pa^ci. Bernard. Cant. se^m. 7^.
. So likewise he says, If any man open the door, I will suppe with him, and
he with me Reu. 3. 20.
. We indeed sup with Christ. Generally, whenever he gives us grace to feel
in our affections, the rauishing joys of the spirit. As when he says, I have
eaten my honey comb, with my honey, I have drunken my wine, with my milk: eat
you also, O my friends, drink and make you merry, O my well-beloved. But more
especially we suppe with Christ, when he calls us to the holy Communion, and
biddes us to the Lords supper. For then he stays us with flaggons, and
comforts us with Cant. (...)
apples: with apples and flaggons: with bread and wine: with his own dear
body, and his own precious blood. Thus do we suppe with Christ. But how does
Christ suppe with us? Is it possible? possible, that he which shall never
hunger, or thirst any more? possible, that he, which is fulness it self, in
whom, all the fulness of the Godhead bodily dwells? Is it possible (I say)
that he should stand without, knocking at the door, as a beggar, to get a
meals meat of us? Yea sure: doubt you not. It is possible enough. By a
certain figure, (I ween you call it the error of love: that's it: by this
figure, the error of love) it is a very possible thing: nay, it is a very
easy thing to do: yea it is a very great pleasure to him to do it. Behold
(says he) I stand at the door and kn^cke: if any man hear my voice, and open
the d^re, I will come in unto him, and will suppe with him, and he with me.
Well then, how does Christ suppe with us? Christ suppe^ with us, when we
entertain him, as Marie did, with the salt tears of repentance and grief:
and as Lot did, with the sweet bread of sincerity, and truth. For the salt
tears of our repentance, are the only drink, which Christ will drink with
us. And the sweet bread of our sincerity, is the only bread, which Christ
will eat with us. But what meat has he to his bread? I have a meat (says
he) which you know not of. My meat is to do the will of him that sent me. In
the volume of thy book it is written of me, that I should do thy will, O my
God, it is my delight, it is meat and drink to me, to do it. And as it is
meat to him, to do it himself: so is it meat to him, to see vas do it.
Then does he suppe with us. And this is the first service. But what has he for
a second course? A dish of apples, gathered of the tree of life. For toward the
latter end of the supper, when they come to their fruit, a Christian says to
Christ, Can. 7. 13. Omnia pom^ vetera and nova. Vulgata trans.
O my well-beloved, I have kept for thee, all manner of apples, both old and ne^.
Contrition, humiliation, denying of thy self, mortificatio^ of the old man:
these are old apples. Sobriety, innocence, holiness of life, vivification of
the new man: these are new apples. And when a Christian feasts, and feeds
Christ with such diverse and dainty fruits of righteousness, then he says to
him, O my well-beloved, I have kept for thee all manner of apples, both old and
new. But what music has ^e now? We must needs have some music. Christ
cannot suppe without music. Drink, and bread, and meat, and apples, will
make him but a slender supper, except we mend it all the better with music.
This must be the very best part of the supper. For a c^^^ort of musicians at a
banquet, is as a signet of Carbuncle, set in gold; and as the signet of an
Emrod, well trimmed with gold: so is the melody of music, in a pleasant
Ecclesiasticus cap. 32. verse. 5.
banquet. Therefore when Christ supps with us, we must be sure he have music.
We must welcome him, and cheer him up, with psal^es, and hymns, and
spiritual songs, singing with a grace, and making melody in our hearts to
God. Col. ^. 16.
Thus does Christ sup with us. But now to return to the maine point again,
from which we have a little digressed, As else where, by the error of love,
Christ is said, to be fed among the lylies, whereas indeed only he feeds
the lylies; and to suppe with us, whereas indeed only we suppe with him: so
here, by the same figure, he is said to reap commodity by thy delight, whereas
indeed only the commodity is thine, all the commodity, all the benefit, is
only thine. Yet (to see the admirable love of God) he says not, Thou shall
give him, but, He shall give thee. Delight thy self in the Lord, and he shall
give thee the desires of thy heart. And he shall give thee.

Then, The desires. He that loves to desire God, Qui amat desiderare, desideret
amare De amore dei cap. 3. vid.
(says Bernard) must also desire to love God. Then he shall have neither
sacietie, nor yet anxietie. Neither sacietie, because he loves to desire:
Gregorium Moral. ^. 18. c. 28.
Nor yet anxietie, because he desires to love. Thus does the Church. Let him
kiss me (says she) Cant. ^. (...)
with the kisses of his mouth. Let him not smite me, but kiss me: not once,
but often: not with the kisses of his feet, but of his mouth: not of any of
his prophets mouths, but of his own mouth; Let him kiss me with the kisses
of his mouth. Here are many desires. Here indeed she loves to desire Psalm.
119. 20* Concupiui^ desiderare.
. But it follows, For thy love, ^sal. 119. 20
is better then wine. The person is suddenly changed. Before, it was more
str^ungely in the third person, Let him, and, his mouth. Now, it is more
familiarly, in the second person, For thy love. for thy love is better then
wine. Here is but one love. Here only she desires to love. For as the
curtains of the tabern^cle, were coupled and tied together with ^aches and
strings, so that one curtain did draw another, and all the curtains did draw
together, to cover nothing else, but the tabernacle (...)
: after the same sort, the desires of the godly, are coupled and tied together,
so that one desire draws another, and all their desires draw together, to make
them covet nothing else, but God. And even as lacob, when he held the angel in
his arms, stood upon one foot: and halted upon the other foot: G^n. 32. 31.
so he that embraces God, can do nothing with that halting foot, which
before carried him to the desire of the world, but stands only upon that
sound foot, which now carries him wholely to the desire of God. And like as
all the streets of Jerusalem fing Hallel^ia: Tobi^s 13. 18.
so all the desires of them that are delighted in God, are referred to God.
There are many ^^reates in Jerusalem; yet there is but one Halleluia, which is
sung in all those ^^reates. In like sort, there are many desires in a godly
man; yet there is but one thing, God only, which is desired in all these
desires. For, these desires, as the kisses of Christ, come all from one love:
these desires, as the curtains of the tabernacle, are all ty^d together with
one string: these desires, as the goings of Jacob, stand all upon one foot^:
these desires, as the streets of Jerusalem, sing all one Halleluia. So that if
thou look into his desires, that delights in the Lord, thou shall see no
in^quitie, no contradiction in them. But if thou look in to his desires, that
delights in sin, thou shall say with the Psalmist, Psalm. 55. (...).
I see iniquity, and contradiction in the city. For as Manasses was against
Ephraim, and Ephraim against Manasses, and both of them against (...)
luda: so the desires of the wicked, are contrary to God, and to themselves.
All their desires, are contrary to all gods desires. Manasses and Ephraim, are
both against Judah. There Is iniquity. Some of their desires, are contrary to
othersome of their desires. Manasses is against Ephraim, and Ephraim is against
Manasses. There Is contradiction. Therefore the desires of the wicked, being so
contrary to God, and to themselves, their desires are not given to them, but
they are given to their desires (...) 1. 24.
Because, though they love to desire God, yet they do not desire to love god.
Though they care not how much God do for them: yet they care not how little
they do for God. But as for the godly, they are not given to their desires,
but their desires are given to them. Because not only, they love to desire
God, but also, they desire to love God. And so all their desires, being as it
were, but one desire, al agreeing in one God, when they have god, they have al^
their desires given them in God Domine, an^e te omne deside^ium me^ ^sal. 38. 10
. So the three children, ^am v^ima perfectio ipsius animz deus est, and centrum
locusque natu^alis omnium desideriotum ^ius.
being men of desires, Viri desideriorum Dan. 9. 23
had their desires given them. They desired to be delivered from the furnace.
This desire was given them, when as God walked with them in the fiery furnace
Daniel. 3. 25.
. So Moses, being a man of God, had his ^^sires given him. He desired to see
Gods fac^. This desire was given him, when as Christ talked with him, face to
face Mark. 9 4.
So John, being a friend of God, had his desires given him. He desired to see
Christ's glory. This desire was given him, when as Christ said, He (...) loves
me, shall be loved of me, and I will (...) show mine own self ^nt^ him Ioh.
14. 21.
. So Lazarus, being Gods little beggar Mendicus dei. Greg.
, (as I may say) had his desires given him. He desired to be relieved, not so
much with the meat of that earthly Di^es, as with the mercy of that heavenly
Di^es, which is so rich in me^cie. This desire was given him, when as the
Patriarch speaking of him to the glutto^ said, Now is he comforted, and thou
art tormented Luke 16. 25.
And so, whosoever thou art: if thou be a man of desires, as the three children
were: if thou be a man of God, as Moses was: if thou be a friend of God, as
John was: if thou be a beggar of God, as Lazarus was: he shall give thee all
that thou can beg, or desire. For, to speak no more of those three
children, these three men, which I named last unto you; Moses, the man of God:
John the friend of God: Lazarus, the beggar of God; did lie in three bosoms.
In Moses bosom: in Christ's bosom: in Abraham's bosom. Moses hand, did lie in
Moses bosom (...)
: S. John did lie in Christ's bosom: Lazarus, did lie in Abraham's bosom. Moses
bosom, is law: Christ's bosom, is Gospel: Abraham's bosom is glory.
Therefore, fear must drive thee out of Moses bosom: faith must keep thee in
Christ's bosom: felicity must bring thee to Abraham's bosom. For first, thou
must with Moses, put thy hand into Moses bosom, and there seeing how full of
leprosy thy hand is, and how wicked all thine own handy works are, thou
must abhor thy self, in thy self. Afterward, thou must with John, conu^ie
not thy had only, but thy whole body, and thy soul also, into Christ's
bosom, and there seeing how thou art* cleansed from the leprosy of thy sin,
and freely justified by faith in Christ, thou must delight thy self in the
Lord. Then, thou must be carried into Abraham's bosom, and there, both loving
to desire God, and desiring to love God, he shall give thee thy desires. First,
I say, lie in Moses bosom, and abhor horre thy self in thy self:
afterward, lie in Christ's bosom, and delight thy self in the Lord: then, thou
shall lie in Abraham's bosom, (O blessed bosom! O sweet bosom!) And he shall
give thee, thy desires. Delight thy self in the Lord, and he shall give thee
the desires of thy heart. The desires.

Lastly, Of thy heart. Thy heart here, is all one with thy self before. As if
the words had stood thus, Delight thy self in the Lord, and he shall give thee
the desires of thy self: or else thus, Delight thy heart in the Lord, and he
shall give thee the desires of thy heart. To the point then. Augustine says
thus, Fecisti nos domine ad te, and ideo inqui^^um ^st cor (...).
O Lord, thou have made us for thine own self, and therefore our heart is ever
unquiet, while it is from thee, never at quiet, until it come to thee. A bull
which is baited at the ring, as soon as ever he gets any little breathing,
turns him straitwaies toward that place, by which he was brought in,
imagining, that by how much the more, he is nearer to the stall, by so much the
more, he shall be further from the stake. In like manner, a faithful heart,
being bayted and towzed in this world with many dogs Psalm. 22. 16.
which come about it, always has an eye to that place, from which it came,
and is never quiet till it return to him, from whom it was fet at the Querula
p^nitus and (...) abunda est. donec ad ^um, a quo ori^inaliter exiit,
triumphali virtute reuertatur.
first. He that lets down a bucket to draw water out of a well, as long as the
bucket is under the water, though it be never so full, he may get it up easily;
but when he begins to draw the bucket clear out of the water, then with all
his strength he can scarce get it up; yea many times the bucket when it is at
the very highest, breaks the iron chain, and violently falls back again.
After the same sort, a Christian heart, so long as it is in him who is a well
of life, is filled with delight, and with great joy drinks in the water of
comfort, out of the fountain of (...). 12. 3.
salvation; but being once haled and pulled from God, it draws back, and as
much as it can possibly resists, and is never quiet, till it be in him
again, who is the center of the Vi amoris in deum tanquam in centrum propriu^
mouetur, vt in ipso sum delectetur.
soul. For as the needles point in the mariners compass, never stands still,
til it come right against the north pole: so the heart of the wise men, never
stood still, till they came right against the star, which appeared in the
Math. 2. 9.
East; and the very star it self, never stood still, till it came right
against the other star, which shined more brightly in the manger, then the
sun did in heaven. Wherefore our hearts do always err, they are Plane^s
(...). ude 13.
and wandering stars, before they come to Christ: but then only they are
stars of the firmament, the true seed of Abraham, when they are firmly
Psalm. 57. 8.
fixed, and settled in God. The Prophet Jonas, all the while he fled from God,
in what a case was he one while he was turmoiled in the storms of the tempest:
another while, he was sowsed in the waves of the sea: another while, he was
boiled in the bowels of the whale. But as soon as he returned to God, by and
by he was cast up safe upon the sea shore: and then he said to his soul, My
soul return unto thy rest, because the Lord has restored thy self unto thee
Quia dominu^ reddidit te ^ibi. Psalm. 116. 7.
Because, whereas before, thou had lost thy self: lost thy self in the
tempest: lost thy self in the sea: lost thy self in the whale: now the Lord
has restored thy self unto thee. Wherefore the heart of man has lost all
rest; nay it has lost it self, before it be cast upon the sea shore; before
it be cast upon God: but when once it delights in the Lord, when once it
finds God, then it finds it self, the^ it returns unto rest. Nicaula
queen of Saba, could never be quiet in her own country, till she came to
Solomon: but when she saw his glory, and heard his wisdom, then her heart
failed her, she had enough, she could desire to see and heart no more. And so
the heart of a Christian, can never be quiet in the strange country of this
world, till it come to Christ, which is the true Solomon, the prince of peace;
when it comes once to Christ then it says thus to God, Lord now let thou
thy servant depart in peace, because mine eyes have seen the prince, because
mine eyes have seen thy salvation. Even as one good heart says for all, O
Lord, how amiable are thy dwellings? Solomon had goodly buildings, but they
were nothing to thy dwellings. My soul faints, and fails for them
Concupisci^ and deficie. ^sal. (...). 2.
. It faints before I see them: and it fails when I have seen them; then I
am quiet enough, then I can desire to see no more. For like, as Noah's dove
could find no rest for the sole of her foot, all the while she was flickering
over the flond, till she returned to the arc, with an olive branch in her
mouht: so the heart: of a christian, which is the turtle dove of Christ, can
find no rest all the while it is houering over the waters of this world, till
it have silver wings as a dove, and with the olive branch of faith, fly to the
true Noah, which signifies rest, till Jesus Christ put forth his holy hand out
of the arc, and taking this heart into his hand, receive it to himself. Even
as one good heart says for all, I will not climb up into my bed, nor suffer
mine eyes to sleep, nor mine eielidds to slumber, nor the temples of my head
to take their rest, until I find a tabernacle for the Lord, an habitation for
the mighty God of Psalm. 132. 4.
Jacob. Until I find, that my heart is not in mine own hand, but in Gods
hand: until I find, that God dwells in me, and I in him: until I find, that
my soul is a tabernacle for the Lord, and my heart is an habitation for the
mighty God of Jacob, I cannot rest, says he. But when I find this once: when I
come to Noah in the arc: when I delight my self in the Lord; then I will
climb up into my bed, and suffer mine eyes to sleep, and mine eieliddes to
slumber, and the temples of my head to take their rest. But what is the reason of
all this? I am somewhat bold to ask, because I would be glad to know: what is
the reason I say, that the bull, can never be quiet, till he come to the
staule; that the bucket, can never be quiet, till it come to the water; that
the needle, can never be quiet, till it come to the north poole; that Jonas,
can never be quiet, till he come to the sea shore; that Nicaula, can never be
quiet, till she come to Solomon; that Noah's dove, can never be quiet, till it
come to the arc; that man's heart, can never be quiet, till it come to God? The
reason of it is this. When God created heaven and earth, he rested not in the
heaven, or in any heavenly thing, not in the earth, or in any earthly thing,
but only in man, which is both. A heavenly thing for his soul, and an earthly
thing for his body. As soon as he had made man, he kept a sabbath, and
rested. Even so the heart of man, rests not in the earth, or in any earthly
thing, not in the heaven, or in any heavenly thing, but only in God, which is
lord of both. Lord of heaven and earth: Lord of soul and body. As soon as it
comes to God, and delights in him, it keeps holy day, and rests. Gods
heart never rests, till it come to man: man's heart never rests till it come
to God. For as god says to man, My son give me thy heart Prou. 2^. 26.
: so man says to God, my lord give me thy self. For even as the heart desires
the water-brookes: so longs my heart, my soul, after thee, o God. Therefore,
o God, give me thy self. Show me thy self, and it suffices Job. 14. 8.
me. For thou only, O Lord, art indeed, as thou art called in Hebre^ Sh^ddai,
all-sufficient, yea more then sufficient. Thy very grace, is sufficient for 2.
Cor. 12. 9.
me. But thou, O Lord do give both grace and ^sal. ^4 ^2.
glory. Therefore, whom have I in heaven, but thee? and whom have I in
earth, but Psalm. 73. 25.
thee? Thou only give grace in earth: so that I have none in earth but thee.
And thou only give glory in heaven: so that I have none in heaven but thee.
O what a sweet friend is this? What a sweet friend is God our good friend,
which only feeds and fills the (...). (...).
heart? He only feeds it in earth, and fills it in heaven: feeds it with
grace, and fills it with (...) Psalm. 17. 16.
glory. For every thing has a kind of food proper unto it. Offer a lion
grass, he will never eat it: offer him flesh, he will eater it. Why so?
Because that is unnatural, this is natural to him. So, offer the heart of a
Christian, which is courageous and bold as a (...) 28. 1.
lion, offer it all the glory of the world, which is as the flower of Esa. 40.
6.
grass, it is never a whit the better Offer it Christ, who says, My flesh is
meat indeed, then it is satisfied. Therefore one says, The lions want, and
suffer hunger, but they that fear the Lord, want no manner of thing that is
good. The lions: such lions, as have no grace, but grass only to feed upon,
they want and suffer hunger. Hungry and thirsty their soul faints in Psalm.
107. 5.
them. But they that fear the Lord: such lions, as by faith feed upon the
flesh of Christ, delight in the Lord, feed upon God, they are fat, and well
liking, they want no manner of thing that is good. For as the people sitting
upon the grass, and feeding upon the bread, were all Mark. 6. 39.
satisfied: so these lions are all satisfied, because sitting upon the grass
of the world, yea not only sitting upon it, but also treading upon it, and
trampling it under their feet, they feed only upon the bread of life. For
these lions can easily conceive, that if at that time, five loaves being
blessed by our Lord, did satisfy five thousand, then much more our blessed
Lord himself, can satisfy every heart, which hungreth and thirsts for him.
Therefore these lions, save the very fragments of this feast, and keep them in
their hearts, as in baskets, knowing that all the grass of the world, cannot
do them half so much good, as the very least crumme of Christ's comfort. For
so one lion says among the rest, My soul refuses comfort. But when I
remember God, I am (...)
delighted. As if he should say, I have a lions heart in me; my soul refuses
to feed upon the grass of the world: it goes against my stomach: I cannot
brook it; I cannot digest it: that's but a cold comfort: My soul refuses all
such comfort: But when I remember God, I am delighted. Though I cannot see God
presently before me; yet if I do but remember him; if do but meditate of him;
if I do but think of him; if I do but dream of him; I am (...).
delighted. Though I cannot have a whole loaf, yet if I can get but a fragme^t:
if I can get but a shieue: if I can get but a morsel: if I can but any little
crumme of comfort, that falls from the table of the Lord; my heart is
sufficiently refreshed and fed. But as God only feeds the heart: so God
only fills the heart. For the heart of man, as for the manner of diet, it is
like the heart of a lion: so for the bigness of it, it is like the heart of
the Ibis. Orus Apollo writes, that the Egyptians, when they would describe the
heart, paint that bird, which they call the Ibis. Because they think that no
creature, for proportion of the body, has so great a heart, as the Ibis has.
But me thinks, they might better paint a man. Because no creature, no not the
Ibis it self, has so great a heart, as a man has. Eccles. 1. 8.
For the eye is never filled with seeing, nor the ear with hearing, and much
less, the heart with desiring. But even as the Poets feign, that the fifty
daughters of king Danaus killing their husbands, are enjoined for their
punishment in hell, to fill a tun with water, that is bored full of holes,
which though they labor never so much about it, yet they can never bring to
pass^ (...)
: semblably, he that would go about to fill his heart, with worldly delights,
were as good pour water into a five, as we say, for any pleasure he shall
have, after all his labor and pains. Solomon, having had a long time, trial
of all transitory pleasures, at length frankly confessed, that they were so
far from being a contentation to his heart, that they were a very great
vexation to his spirit. Nay Alexander* though he had conquered the whole world,
yet still he said with the king of Spain, Non sufficit arbi^ All the whole
world (...)
: yea in the end, he grew to be very malecontent, and found himself greatly
greiued, because there were not forsooth, many more worlds for him to conquer.
By which example of Solomon and Alexander, (though otherwise a heathen,) it
does plainly appear, that if it had pleased God, to have created as many
worlds, as there are creatures in this one world, (which he might have done
with the least word of his mouth,) yet this infinite number of worlds, which
should have been created, could not have filled the very least heart, of any
one man, without the creator himself. This Orontius an excellent
Mathematitian shows, who describing the whole world in the form of an heart,
leaves many void spaces in his heart which he cannot fill up with the world.
For as a circle, can never fill a triangle, but always there will be three
empty corners in the triangle vnfilled, if there be nothing else to fill it, but
the circle: so the round world, which is a circle, can never fill the heart of
man, which is a triangle, made according to the image of the Trinity, but
always there will be some empty corners, in the triangle of the heart
vnfilled, if there be nothing else to fill it, but the circle of the world.
Only the glorious trinity, fills the triangle of the heart, and fills
every corner of it, and fills every corner of it fuller, then it can possibly
(...)
hold. For, suppose almighty God should now work a miracle, and give some one
man a heart, as large, and as huge, not only as all the hearts of all the men,
that ever were, are, or shall be, but also as all the affections of all the
angels, and heavenly powers above; yea I will say that, which shall be yet much
more marvelous, if this one heart were so great, that it could at one instant,
actually contain in it, more corporal and spiritual things, then are in all
the deepes beneath, in the valleys, in the mountains, and in all the heavens
above: yet as true as God is in heaven, this so large, and so huge a heart,
could not be able to hold the very least part, of the perfection of God; but if
one drop of his deity and glory, were powered into it, by and by it would
burst in a hundredth pieces, and fly a sunder, as an old vessel, filled with
new Behold the heavens and the heavens of heavens are not able to contain
thee. 1. Reg. 8. 27.
wine. O what a wonderful strange thing is this? what shall we devise to say
of it? Ten thousand worlds, cannot fill one heart: and yet ten thousand hearts,
cannot hold one God. Therefore, as much as one heart, is too good and too
great, for ten thousand worlds: so much is one God, too good and too great, for
ten thousand De^s mayor est cor de nostro. 1. Ioh. 3. 20
hearts. So fully does the Lord, and nothing but the Lord, feed, and fill thy
soul, and give thee all, nay more then all, thy heart can desire. Wherefore,
Delight thy self in the Lord, and he shall give thee the desires of thy heart.
Thus much for the promise, in these words, And he shall give thee the desires
of thy heart.

Now then, dear brother, Delight: and not delight only; but Thy self, also:
and not thy self only; but In the Lord, also: Delight thy self in the Lord:
and again I say, Delight: and again I say, Thy self: and again I say, In
the Lord. Delight thy self in the Lord. O remember, for the love of God,
remember this worthy sentence of an ancient father, (...)
Let all creatures seems vile unto thee, says he, that only thy creat our may
seem sweet unto thee. Armenia, a noble lady, being bidden to king Cyrus
wedding, went thither with her husband. At night, when they were returned home,
her husband asked her, how she liked the bridegroo^e, whither she thought him
to be a fair and beautiful prince, or no? Truth, says she, I know not. For
all the while I was forth, I cast mine eyes upon none other, but upon thy
self. So basely did this noble lady esteem of king Cyrus beauty, who was
the Monarch of the world, in respect of that entire good will and affection,
she bare to her husband, which was so great, that her eyes could never be from
him. And so must we, set God always before our eyes, and not once look aside,
or be enamoured with any gaud of worldly glory, but despise every blaze of
beauty whatsoever, that may draw us from beholding our heavenly husband, and
delighting only in him, which is fairer then the children of men. S. Paul
being rapt up to the third heaven, knows not, whither it were with the body,
or without the body. And because we should mark it well once, he sets it
down twice. That he was rapt up to the third heaven, he is sure; that he heard
words which no man can utter, he is sure; that he was exceedingly delighted in
the Lord, he is sure. But whither his body were with him or no, he knows not.
So much did he forget and neglect, even his own body, which is so near, and
so dear a thing, in comparison parison of that incomparable delight, which
then he took in the Lord. S. Peter, seeing but a glimps of Christ's glory,
upon mount Tabor, stood so astonished and amazed with it, that he was in a sort
beside himself, when he was at that time beside Christ. Master, says he, it
is good for us to be here. As if he should have said, Now farewell Galilie,
and all my goods: farewell fellow Disciples, and all my friends: farewell wife,
and all the world: so I may enjoy this heavenly sight, and be continually thus
delighted in the Lord. Holy Ignatius, going to his martyrdom, was so strangely
ravished with this delight, that he burst out into these words, Nay, come
fires; come beasts: come breaking of all my bones: come racking of my whole
body: come all the torments of the devil together upon me: come what can
come, in the whole earth, or in hell either (...).
, so that I may enjoy Jesus Christ, and may be continually delighted in the
Lord. And so must thou (dear brother) insult over all creatures, and exsult
only in thy creator. Thou must contemn all beauty, as Armenia did: yea thine
own body, as Paul did: yea all the world as Peter did: yea thy very life, as
Ignatius did: and be content to do any thing, though it were to be torn and
pulled in a thousand pieces: or for a time, if it were possible, to suffer all the pains which the fiends and furies of hell can inflict upon thee, so as in
the end, thou may delight, either the Lord in thy self, or thy self in the
Lord. Then, then He shall give thee: and not, He shall give thee only, but The
desires, also: and not The desires only, but Of thy heart, also. Then he shall
give thee the desires of thy heart. And again I say, He shall give thee: and
again I say, The desires: and again I say, Of thy heart. Then he shall give
thee the desires of thy heart. Then, though thou have a long time played the
unthrift, and wasted all thy goods in the world: yet, if with the lost child,
thou return home again, to thy fathers house, he shall grant thee thy hearts
desire, and receive thee with minstrelsie and dancing, and all manner of
festival joy, and that plenty of bread, which nourishes every hired servant
in his house, shall much more feed thee, which art his loving child, unto
everlasting life. Then, though all the leekes and onyons of Egypt, which is the
world, have failed thee: yet, if with Israel, thou depend only upon God, he
shall distill the dew of his grace, into thy heart, and lay aside a chosen
rain for thee, and cause thee to drink of the sweet crystal streams of his
pleasure, and give thee to eat of that hidden and heavenly Manna, which no man
knows, but he that receives it. Then, though all the clothes and couerings
in the world, cannot keep thee warm; yet, if with David, thou be a man
according to Gods own heart, he shall send thee that mystical Abishag, which
shall comfort thy heart, and make thee hot and fervent in spirit, which shall
renew thy strength and make thee young again, and lusty as an Eagle. Then,
though thou have a long time lost thy labor, in serving Laban, which is the
world: yet, if with Jacob thou return home again to thy fathers house, god
shall meet thee by the way, and, as the Prophet Osey speaks, he shall allure
thee as thy paramour, and lead thee into the wilderness, and there speak
according to thine own heart, friendly, and lovingly unto thee. And, even as
lovers, are oftentimes disposed for the nonce, to take a fall of one another,
the stronger of the weaker: so God shall wrestle a fall with thee, as he did
with Jacob, and yield so much in love to thee, as that he shall suffer thee to
give him the fall, and to prevail against him. Jesus: what exceeding love is
this? why are we not even now, in the name of God, inflamed with the love of
God: and wholly ravished with delight in the Lord? At least wise I marvel,
what a mischeife many base minded worldlings mean, that they had rather feed
upon the husks of hogs, then the bread of man? that they had rather eat,
the any ons of Egypt, then the manna of heaven? that they had rather lie acold,
frozen and shiuering in sin, then be revived and cherished by Abishag? that
they had rather take unsupportable pain, to serve Laban, then take
unspeakable pleasure, to serve God? Fie upon it: what a vile folly is this?
what a stark madness is this? what is this else, but to be even bodily
tormented, whereas they might be most spiritually delighted? what is this else,
but to go out of one hell, into another hell, where as they might go out of
one heaven into another heaven? For, why do you (beloved) why do you tell me
so much, of I know not what: of a worm, that never dies? of a fire, that
never is quenched? of a lake, that burns with brimstone? of weeping, and
gnashing of teeth? Thus I tell you (good christians) and I tell you truly, and
God in heaven hears what I say, though you hear me not; I tell you as loud as
ever I can; that, to serve sin so slauishly: to please the devil so
wretchedly: to delight in the word so brutishly, as many men do: this is worse
then all worms: worse then all fires: worse then all lakes: worse then all
weeping: worse then hell it self. Whereas, on the other side, to serve God, to
please God* to delight in God, to rejoice and solace thy soul in the Lord,
which has always given thee, and will always give thee, the desires of thy
heart; this is better then all treasures: better then all crowns: better then
all kingdoms: better then all immortality: better then heaven it self. This,
this it is, which shall bring thee, out of one paradise, into another paradise.


