Christian meditations upon eight Psalms of the Prophet David. Made and newly
set forth by Theodore Beza.

Translated out of French, for the common benefit, into the vulgar tongue by
I. S.

Imprinted at London in Bacon house, by Christopher Barker, printer to the
Queens most excellent Majesty.

To every Christian Reader, and namely to the Lady Anne Bacon, now wife to Sir
Nicolas Bacon Knight.
I Trust (Madame) the alone names of David and Beza, which is the honorable
title of this little book, will not alone procure it a reverend welcome into
your hands, but withal against all men will both warrant and defend the
translators price to be worth his labor, as that which will recompense his
few spent hours, with the much profit and pleasure of many. For, besides the
common help it brings to all, for more clear understanding and expounding
those eight psalms: it is singularly medicinable to wounded and cast down
consciences, who after their labor some combat with sin, and profitable
humiliation there through, nay again by these sweet Meditations ^rise with
joy, finding happy issue of their troubles. And this, as it was my simple
judgment upon first reading, even so is it my comfortable experience upon
reading and reading again. Which was one thing that made me, among others, to
think of you, good Madame, as to whose tender conscience it might be welcomly
applied. But what need that holy Prophet, and this reverend Pastor, this my
word of poor credit? It is as if the least Pleiade would afford some poor
help of light to Sun and Moon: I must learn therefore to come down, and
know mine own place, acknowledging my self to borrowe or beg both light and
credit from them, if I may be vouchsafed but the favor of a stammering
trucheman to so worthy an Hebrew, and to such a Frenchman. Upon both whose
warrantise (as it were) a double voucher, I wholly rely and rest secure for
sufficient approofe of the matter of my translation. Now a word or two for
this dedication, wherein my choice was not so much to content my self, but to
go rather as near as possible to the continuance of the Authors own very
meaning. He first purposed it to a Lady, prevented by her death, gave it yet
to a Lady, and that to a Lady Anne Bacon, wife to that Lord late of great
honor, and for ever of Christian fame, Sir Nicholas Bacon Knight, father to
Sir Nicholas Bacon Knight, husband to this Lady Anne Bacon. Being therefore by
this means still continued in the self same ^^ne of the Lady Anne Bacon,
wife also to Sir Nicholas Bacon, and that in the same house, so near, as from
fathers wife to sons wife: I half presume upon, and yet humbly crane leave
of that learned Lady Anne Bacon, to whom the Author did first appropriate it,
that as she was once one with the father, and by him has dear pledges: So
she will not think this any impropriation, but in her good affection to all
that house, suffer them to receive by her the honor of some particular
interest with her in so sweet a labor of the Author: who in his Epistle
makes most honorable memory of her husband, and gives testimony of good
reputation to her son. Although therefore, I confess my self of very duty
to love all that good Brotherhoode, first for their love to the truth, with
other agreeable virtues of wisdom and true honesty, and then for that love
which it pleases every one of the^ (I wot not how without my merit) kindly
to bear me: yet in giving this to their eldest brothers wife, and so to them
all, I neither give them nor pay them ought, but yield them their own, and
which I might not have given to any other, unless beyond the right of a
translator, I would have taken upon me to translate that into a strange
family, which seems as a very heirloome properly belonging to Bacon house.

So wishing you (good Madame) most happy going forward in a simple hearted
profession of Gods Eospell to the good ensample of your own household, and a
shining light among your neighbors: I the least of them, beseech the Lord
Jesus to bless you and Sir Nicholas, together with his mease of religious
brethren, so as growing in faith and love, they may be a fast holding bundle of
brethren in Christ, who keep you all ever his, and one another. From Th. 31.
May. 1582.

Yours very faithful to command, I. S. S.

To my lady, the lady Anne Bacon, widow of the deceased Sir Nicolas Bacon
Knight, Lord Keeper of the great seal of England.
MAdame, among other books of holy scripture, that of the Psalms well
deserves to be singularly recommended to us. It is now some time, since
having bestowed some pain in translating and expounding the same, I gave my
self also to take some more liberty of dealing with them by way of meditating
upon that subject, choosing (as it were for an assaye) the seven Psalms called
some time Penitential, because they were appointed to such as after having
satisfied open and canonical penance, were reunited to the body of the Church:
wholly doing it for my particular instruction and consolation. After this,
being required by a great and virtuous princess, to frame for her some form
of prayers: I took them afresh into my hands, polishing them over, and that
with hope of publishing them: which being let by the sudden decease of that
Lady, I reserved them among my papers as things of no great price: where they
had lain still, had not been the coming of master Anthony Bacon your son,
into these parts: whom when I saw to take pleasure in this little piece of
work, and again knowing by the latin letters wherewith it has liked you to
honor me, the great and singular, yea extraordinary graces wherewith God has
indewed you, and whereof I acknowledge a very pattern in your said son: I
persuaded my self that it should not be displeasing to you, if this small
volume carrying your name upon the browe, were offered to you, in testimony of
the honor and reverence I bear to the virtue of you and yours: hoping withal
that this estate of widowehode whereunto it has pleased God to call you by
decease of that right virtuous and of right renowned Lord, my Lord Nicolas
Bacon your husband, and most worthy Keeper of the seal of England, you might
perhaps therein find some consolation, after the reading of those great and
holy doctors Greek and Latin so familiar to you, for your better confirming
in the meditation of spiritual things, and in this constancy and Christian
patience wherewith God has so beautified you, that in you is verily
acknowledged that Christianly high minded courage which I saw in these parts
shining in the deceased, of very happy memory, Sir Anthony Cook Knight,
during those great calamities public to the realm, and particular to him and
his whole family. See the ground of my purpose, which if it may please you to
take in good part, which I very humbly crave, it may be perhaps an occasion of
proceeding in this business, our Lord ayding, whom I beseech, Madame, that
increasing in you his greatest graces, he will preserve you and all your very
noble family, long in all holy and perfect prosperity. From Geneua this first
of November. Anno. 1581.

Yours very humble and serviceable to command, Theodore Besze.

A Meditation upon the first Psalm of David.
1 Blessed is the man yt does not walk in ye counsel of the wicked,
ALas poor wretch and most caytife creature, which art never more reasonles
then when thine own blind reason carries thee, and when thine own too too
unruly will does drive thee. What way will thou choose in this maze of
manifold paths, wherein thou were borne, and through which thou have wandered
vagabondlike till now? Thy first path of infancy, what better name can I give
it then brutish simplicity, which fools call Innocence, a way full of foul
uncleanness, and an heap of miseryes, among which this is one of the greatest,
that the infant can neither foresee miseries coming, nor thoroughly conceive
them being present. From this path whither entredst thou oh unhappy? Ahlas,
into that wild desert of youth, a desert I say, well tracked and thoroughly
beaten every way, in which nevertheless there was neither right way nor path,
and yet notably haunted with most mischievous witches. There found I vanity
that old sorceresse, and she would needs be my guide, offering me at our first
acquaintance a thousand co^tentations in appara^ce, but more vain the^ wind
in effect. There did those two wild beasts, Ouerweening and Ambition, make
themselves so tame and familiar with me, as I was by and by at their beck, so
far forth as to follow them into a sea that had neither bottom nor shore,
where they did their best to make me dwell still remediless, and all (quoth
they) to bring me to the true felicity: in stead whereof I was betrayed into
the haudes of pleasure, that nice and decked strumpet, and withal the most
stinking and dangerous that ever was in the world, enticing and interteining
infinite ways all them which do but look at her, and which more is, she
bewitcheth the^ in such sort with her cup, that suddenly their conscience
becomes lulled a sleep, all judgment lost, yea very sense it self
astonished, and then love we our woe, and loathe our weal, what is most
foul, seems most fair, what is most hurtful, seems most profitable, and
that which is most sour, seems most sweet, yea oftentimes it brings to
foul death and shame, and a thousand woes and weal away: and this is all the
felicity to be hoped for. Oh most happy man which balkest this straight, and
singlest thy self far from such and so unhappy feloweship. But woe is me, nor
stand in the way of sinners,
I have done yet worse then all this, for, going forth of the wilderness, I am
entered into an other country peopled with far worse folk then the former:
for hitherto I have rather been deceived then a deceiuer, and that I erred,
proceeded not so much of malice, as of ignorance. But from thencefoorth in
stead of having learned by mine own harm I now gave my self over to do
much worse, applying my self to covetousness, envy, deceit, and at once, to
every kind of vice, persuading my self that this was the true and nearest way
to happiness. And when sometimes my conscience reproved me, I sought by all
means to make my self believe yt vice was virtue, covetousness was nothing but
good husbandry to provide for my self and my meany, envy was nothing with
me, but a desire to have of things about me as other me^ had, al deceit was
fair cunning and good skill: at a word, I concluded that being in this world, I
must do after the facions of other men, unto whose example I framed my self
throughout. But poor wanderer, what have thou found in the end of this so
ill a way? verily all the contrary to thy weening. Now then how blessed is
that person which busieth not himself to follow such a way of folk given up to
all vice, bringing toil to our body, torment to our conscience, and final
destruction both of body and soul! For whither does such a custom of ill
doing thrust us by little and little? Nor sit in the seat of the scornful.
Certainly even to this point, that we lose all feeling of God, all remorse of
conscience, of ignorant we become wicked, of wicked we become mischievous to
the uttermost, and finally we become scorners of God and of every good thing.
Oh most great God, is it possible that dust and ashes being now become so
infirm a creature, so changeable, so very nothing worth, yea worse then
naught, should so doat in presumption, as not only not to quake at the least
advertisement of his own conscience, being awakened of it self or by any the
least mean in the world: but also to set him self against thee, to shut his
ear against the voice of thy threatenings, to pluck out his own eyes, that he
might not perceive thy horrible judgments, to harden his heart against thine
almighty puissaunce? Oh most good God, and patience it self, thou lover of
men, in so much as thou did not spare for their sake thine only son
equal to thee, yea one self God with thee, can it come to pass, that this
creature, despising thy goodness in calling him when he flees, thy patience in
bearing with him when he rebelleth, thy liberality in making him a partner of
thy so great and incomprehensible bliss everlasting, when he gave himself to
most vain vanity, should so far forget himself, as to reject thy goodness, to
make a mock at thy patience, to trample under his feet such a treasure? Yea
Lord, alack, all this is but too true: and which is more, those which be
guyltie of these crimes, be such as thou have advanced highest. But O my God,
retire my feet from those crooked ways wherein I have gone too far already:
and since thou have put in me the desire of blessedness, show me also the
ready address thereunto, give me a will to follow it, and strength to pursue
it, even till I may attain it to thine honor and glory.

2 But his delight is in the law of the Lord, and in his law does he meditate
day and night.
2 Now then poor creature, abused by thy self, and mislead by others, hearken
at the last what the Lord will teach thee, Blessed is that man which takes
pleasure in the Lords law, and which meditateth thereof daily and nightly:
what say I, Thy law Lord? why, that is it which astonisheth me, which
condemns me, which kills me, as wherein there is never a commandment which
carries not my death sentence withal. For, how many creatures have I set in
thy place? oh gold and silver, thou have occupied a great part of my heart and
of mine hope: ye honors and worldly pleasures, have been the god which I have
adored: oh abused heart, thou have been the altar whereon have been set up so
many idols as thou have passionate affections, whereunto thou have thralled
thy self. The whole course of my inordinate life has been a continual
dishonor of thy precious name. How many times have I sworn untruly and been
disloyal? Who can reckon the leasings which make me faulty even before my
neighbors? When have I ceased from mine own works to do thine? Thy word
(Lord) what deaf ear have I given it, and how have I practiced it? Holy
Baptism wherewith thou have vouchsafed to honor me, has it not been a
thousand times by me dishonored, polluted, and villanously abused? O how
unworthily have I presented my self to thy holy board! How often have I lied
unto thee! And can I boast of any obedience toward them where I owe it, since
I have so little feared to disobey thee? If in thy sight, O just Judge, he be
a murderer which says to his brother Racha, if he be an adulterer which
castes a look at his brothers wife with a lusting eye, then how can I cxempt
my self from either of these crimes? And yet nevertheless according to thy
most just law, there is no atonement for blood among men: how then shall I
compound for so many murders toward thee, O thou judge of the very thoughts?
If lust alone without any further act do make me an adulterer, and if no
adulterer have any part in the kingdom of heaven, poor creature that thou
art, what shall become of thee? If it be not only simple thieuerie, but, which
more is, flat sacrilege, to withholde goods consecrated to thy glory,
(according as thou have committed them unto us from above to be thy stewards of
them) how may I be dispensed withal, having shut mine ears least I should
hear the poor, closed mine eyes that I might not see him, locked up my bowels
that they might not be touched with compassion toward so many my poor
brethren? What say I, my brethren? Nay rather toward thee thy self, O Lord,
hungring, thirsting, and being naked in their person. Thee I say, oh thou great
and eternal son of God, which have made thy self of no reputation, that
thou might advance man so high with thee, which vouchsafedst to be come
poor to the end to enrich him with eternal treasures, which did subject thy
self to all our weaknesses, that thou might make us invincible: at once,
(oh depth of bounty) thou disdaynedst not to hang naked on the cross, and to
enter into the house of death, to the end to cloth me again with glory, and
to bring me into the true paradise of everlasting life. To be short, who is it
but man that holds thy truth in unrighteousness, that is a lier, and a
falsifier, and that is borne with lust: And would thou, Lord, that I should
search life in thy law, which is the very soliciter, witness, judge, and
executioner of the deadly sentence against me? All this notwithstanding (oh
Lord) there will I seek life, since that so is thine ordinance, and there
shall I find it, since thou have spoken it. Thy law is good because it is given
by him that is only good: it is holy, for it is made by the holy of holies.
From that which is good cannot proceed that which is ill: death comes not
properly by the law, but through sin: sin comes of the sinner, and not
from thee, who do hate and forbid that which is naught. If a sick man would
freat himself to death against the Physitio^, whose were the fault? The law
then judges me because it finds me guilty: O good Lord, clear me again,
and make me guiltles by thy law of faith, that the law of works (which
amaseth me, condemns me, and slaieth me in my self) may assure me, absolve
me, and quicke^ me by him that has fulfilled it for me, and became even curse
it self for my sake: For, Lord, it is thou which strikest and curest, which
leadest to grave and bring back again: Grant me through him the spirit of
sanctification, which may fit me unto thy service, create in me the will and
the power to do, pearce mine ears that in hearing I may hear, give me eyes
to see, grant me feet to walk in thy ways: Then Lord, being wholly changed,
I shall not hear thy word for facions sake, but I shall therein take all my
pleasure, I shall eat I say with a good appetite of this quickening food, for
I shall find a good smacke in it: I shall digest it, and never think my self
satisfied with it: Day and night I shall not cease to apply all mine
understanding thereunto, that more and more I may be nourished and sustained in
the full enjoying of that true, absolute, and eternal felicity.

For he shall be like a tree planted by the rivers of waters, that will bring
forth her fruit in due season:
3 In mean while, O Lord my God, shall I be idle, and find leisure to do
nothing, but only to occupy my thoughts in contemplation? Not so: for though
he be nothing less then idle which exercises that part of him self received
from thee, to know thee and consider thee in thy word and in thy works, and
that no man's actions can be conducted but by the good discourse and resolution
of the spirit: yet forasmuch as man was created at the beginning, and since
that time again made a new creature by thee the second time, to be a singular
instrument in thine hand, it is necessary that his soul being taught by
thee, should imploye it self, and that instrument which thou have given it,
in such actions as are agreeable to thy will, and in that vocation, for which
thou have created it. If then the idle body be guyltie in thy sight, as by good
right the workman may find fault with that tool, which will not abide to be
handled, yea he may mar it and break it: what shall be thought of that tool,
that will occupy it self as it lists, and when the workman would use it, it
will not be stirred? and when you would handle it of one side, it will turn
it self quite awke? Be this far from me my God, since thou have facioned
and framed me. For rather will I be not an instrument of a dead matter, but I
shall have a natural and lively strength in me, Whose leaf shall not fade:
which I find already to come upon me. To be short, I shall be as a fair fruit
bearing tree, planted by thine hand in thy house, grafted upon that right and
kindly O live, shooting up to heauenward, my fresh green branches garnished
with fruits proceeding from thy grace, So what soever he shall do, shall
prosper.
which will always water me at the root, and will preserve from frostes,
heates, winds and other tempests, so as from them I shall rather gather fresh
forces to yield plenteous fruit: whereas finners shall be dry at the root.
The wicked are not so, but as the chafe, which the wind drives away
And if they make any gay show for a while, yet in the turning of an hand
they come down either by themselves, or stricken by thy fury, and shall be
rooted out, so as no man shall perceive their place, neither shall they be good
for ought, but to be burned and brought to naught: And yet do I some wrong to
compare the^ to trees, rather are they thorns, briars and brambles, which thou
do faggot up together in their time, to be thrust in the fire: yea rather yet
shall they be as dust and small chafe, which shall go into the wind, when
thou shall fan thy floor, and shall lock up the good grain in thy garners.

Therefore the wicked shall not standin the judgment, nor sinners in the
assembly of the righteous.
5 And albeit this difference be not manifest through the co^fusions of this
world, but contrariwise the wicked men seem surest planted, highest promoted,
and most flourishing, yet shall not this vain show be durable, but the true
judgment of their estate shall show it self, so soon as thy justice
appears to set in order all that is disordered: and it shall then he clearly
discovered in deed what they are, when that great day shall come, so dreadful
to the wicked, which shall not know whither to turn them, and so longed for by
thy poor servants, to whom being gathered together from all coasts, thou
shall do justice and reason of so many wrongs and violences received, wiping
away their tears, and granting them that felicity which they so much desire.

For the Lord knows the way of the righteous, and the way of the wicked shall
perish*
6 Now then my soul, since the francke bounty of thy God has drawn thee
forth of these straying paths of destruction, to the end to lead thee in the
true and only way of blessedness: take good heed not to forsake it, but
follow on thy course lively, suffer not thy self to be mislead by any
inticements, nor to be dismayed by any threatenings, holding fast always this
conclusion in thine heart, as well against flatteries as against terrifyings,
to wit, that howsoever the matter fall out, since that God is God and Judge of
the world, they which go straight cannot miss to be blessed, standing always
in the good grace and favor of God: and the wicked contrariwise must needs
perish.

The sixth Psalm meditated.
O Lord rebuke me not in thine anger, neither chastise me in thy wrath.
AH, woe is me more then miserable wretch, assailed, pressed, outraged on all
sides, wounded mortally by my conscience, pierced through and through by the
touch of infinite trespasses, and now at brincke of that deep dungeon of
despair, in my body euerwhelmed with evils, plunged in sorrows, in which
torment nothing more can be found that may add to my torment: what shall I
do, what shall I say, whither shall I go? what may I find in my self but
the subject of suffering, and the cause of that I suffer, and who shall succor
me from else where? If I look into heaven, I see there my judge: The sun,
that great eye of the world, which has seen me so often to offend his maker
and mine, does summon me, and seems to give light to the world for none other
purpose but to behold me whilst I endure these my merited pains. The night
which seems to cover all things else with her darkness, alas, what does she
witness against me? Forsooth me seems, she has doubled her darkness in a
loathsome detestation of that which in glimpse of her accustomed obscurity
she has been forced to perceive in me: It yrketh the earth to bear so
unhappy a creature, and already she opens yt great throat of her gulf to
swallow me in, and to redemau^d my self to her self, as having too much
abused that earthly matter which she ministered to my maker when he facioned
me. All that norishment which I receive from other creatures, is given me only
to entertain me in this extreme torment. Death it self recules fro me, lest
she might give at ye least some senselesnes of dolor to this miserable body, by
dispatching it at once out of ye way. As for me^, they be either mine enemies,
or else such friends as have no might to give me remedy: whither shall I go
the^? what shall I say? what shall I do? I will even go straight to thee, O
eternal: For what good shall it do me to run away from him that is every
where? Who ca^ hide me from before him, which sees even that that is not? and
what creature, though it could, yet durst undertake my quarrel with thee? and if
it should undertake, what would ensue, but their ruin and mine? And my disease
being incurable to all others save to thee, to whom should I have recourse but
to thee? Now then, eternal God, more great then greatness it selft, behold him
that is less then nothing, unless the greatest ill be something. O creator
of man, behold thy creature quite disfigured: O lover of man, behold him that
has conspired with thine enemy against thee: O perfectly good, behold him
that is conceived and borne in vice: behold the dry wood to the consuming
fireward, and shall it yet be so hardy as to speak? His misery constrayneth
him to seek remedy: thy goodness declared in thy promises, and verified by so
many experiences, does open his mouth to cry before thee, Reprove me not in
thy wrath, correct me not in thine anger. O God, which have said, that the
way not to be judged, is to judge our self, behold this unhappy man, that
acknowledges before thee and thine Angels, before beauen and earth, that my
least fault of a thousand is worthy of thy wrath so dreadful, that none can
bear it, because there is none thy match.

2 Have mercy upon me, O lord, for I am weak: O Lord heal me, for my bones
are vexed.
2 And what emboldeneth me then after this sort: Thy goodness, thy pity, thy
compassion, which is so much the greater as it stretches it self upon the
unworthy, and there most abounds, where there is most sin. O Lord, suffer
me, though dust and ashes, to be, not bold in my self, but assured in thee.
O everliving God, I have learned in thine house by thee, and in my self by thy
grace, how thou have an anger of a most gentle father, and a wrath of a most
severe Judge. I am worthte of this, but I be seeche thee turn it from me, for
it destroys: I refuse not the other, because it buyldeth up: for thou
chastisest whom thou love. Now then Lord, smite, but keep in the violence
of the blow. And to speak in a word, O eternal God, have pity on me. For
who has need of grace, but the guyltie one? Who beggeth comfort, but the
afflicted: or physic, but the sick?

3 My soul is also sore troubled: but Lord how long will thou delay:
3 And again, who can raise the poor man overwhelmed under the burden of
sin, beaten down flat under thy puissant hand, crushed bones and all, cast
away in his own conscience, but thou, O great God, who by thine only word
give being to all that is: Confirm then that which remaynes of thy nature
and being in me, or rather work a new, that which otherwise goes away and is
undone. And how long, O my God, will thou suffer me thus to languish: How
long shall I cry without being relieved: How long shall I wait for thy
mercy? Suffer, O Lord, that the vehemency of dolor may use this laguage,
submitting it self yet wholly to thine only good and thrice good pleasure.

4 Return, O Lord: deliver my soul: save me for thy mercies sake.
4 O eternal God, I say, turn again to me that countenance, which with one
look can revive the dead: Lay forth that great compassion to heal my saynting
soul: for upon thine only grace it is that I ground my request.

5 For in death there is no remembrance of thee: in the grave who shall praise
thee?
5 O God, thou know what a desire I have to be an instrument of thy glory,
and to employ whatsoever it may please thee to make me to publish thy praises.
Alas, Lord, my sins thus sending me to death, shall they be able to hinder
this my purpose that comes of thee? For, being dead and lying in the dust, lo
all my purpose broken off, my memory shall forthwith be taken quite away, my
tongue shall speak no more of thee, my mouth shall cease to have any being: To
be short, this poor corpse being fordone, wherein shall it serve either thee,
or my neighbors? Moreover Lord, if I do not only dye, according as is thine
ordinance for all men to dye once, but also that I dye as one smitten in thine
ire, Oh my God, my God, how can I remember thee in that last necessity? How
can I call upon thee at my greatest need? To speak at once, what shall become
of me woeful creature, going to a Judge that condemns me, yea even already
executes his sentence upon me? Oh God, preserve me from this woe of woes,
and giving me again for this time life to this poor body, assure my poor
soul by witnessing unto it, that thine anger is ceased, to the end that
death when it shall come, be not a messenger of terror, but rather may bring
tidings of felicity forthwith to be enjoyed.

6 I faynted in my mouruing:
6 Alas Lord, as thou have now had an eye, and straightly marked our sins,
which thou do now make me thoroughly to feel: so consider this poor
creature now changed, condemning that which he has too long approved, yea
judging himself, which is the very mean not to be judged of thee: for so it
pleases thee, since thou have testified it both by thy word and by effect. I
have long slept in so many unhappy pleasures, I cause my bed every night to
swim, and water my couch with my tears.
now can I sleep no more by reason of sighing. O ye nights, heretofore
witnesses of a thousand thoughts wickedly imagined, and of the unhappy sequel
of those thoughts, be ye now witnesses of my waylings. And thou my bed, a bed
earewhile of rest very ill employed, be thou thoroughly moystened now, and
swim thou with my tears.

7 Mine eye is dunined for despite, and sunk in because of all mine enemies.
7 Oh thou sun, whose light I have heretofore so much offended, (and how
could I fear to offend thee, being so desperately bold as to despise thy maker
and mine, looking into the depth of hearts, and to assay to put out his light
in me?) O thou Sun, I say, whose brightness I am unworthy to behold: mine
eyes being justly punished, can no more see thee, being soaked out and drawn
dry by the tears that they have shead: they be, I say, quite worn with
yrkesomnes and heaviness, whereof they been witnesses that vex me. But what,
shall I perish then? Is there no more hope? Am I quite without recovery? No,
no, my God: For whence comes this bewayling of my sins? This hatred of my
self? This confidence to call upon thee? this desire to amend? From whence
springs it, that I speak yet, and can call thee my God? Certainly it is thy
grace: For whence comes any good, but fro thee? O mighty God, how be thy
ways incomprehensible! May it be thine ire which should quiet me, or mine
heaviness that might cheer me? Or can my death be the occasion of my life?
No, no, my God, this benefit proceeds no whitte of any work of mine, but
Lord, in working again him that as much as in him lay, has undone himself,
thou show thy self to be the same that made all things of nothing, and
can pull light out of darkness. Grance then comes from thee unto me, to
drive my self out of my self, that so again I may find my self and all my
weal in thee.

8 Away from me al ye workers of iniquity: for ye Lord has heard the voice of
my weeping.
8 You then mine enemies, which weened to have cast me flat and quite to the
ground, shall you dare now to show your faces any more? Thou malicious
Satan, the first author of all ill, what gaynest thou to have thrown me low,
unless it be that thereby my victory against thee is more notable? For, thou
seeest, maugre thy malice, that God will triumph upon thee by my feebleness.
Oh, and out upon my self the most dangerous enemy to my self, yield thy
self to him, against whom the more thou have resisted, the more near thou
came to thy destruction. You cursed men, whose trade is to do ill, and you
which have so persecuted me, I stand no longer in fear of you.

9 The Lord has beard my petition: the Lord will receive my prayer.
9 For the eternal God, which seemed to have cast me off, and to deliver me
into your hands as one utterly rejected, has heard my deep sighs
accompanied with tears: 10 Al mine enemies shall be confounded and sore vexed:
they shall be turned back, and put to shame suddenly.
The everliving God has heard my prayers, the eternal will persevere to hear
my supplications.

10 And consequently all mine enemies which have been so presumptuous, go
their ways with shame: I see them already quite forlorn, they shall be feign to
leave their ungracious enterprise to their reproach, a change so much the more
wonderful, as it comes to pass suddenly and beyond all expectation.

The 32. Psalm meditated.
Blessed
OH my God, where shall that true felicity be found, which ungracious men
ween to find? Certainly man finds it not within him self. For who is he
that can say, he is without sin in his soul? And where there is sin,
doubtless there is malediction also. And for the body, what man is so brutish,
that can persuade himself, the most sovereign good should fall into a lump
subject to so many evils and miseries within and without, bringing it at length
also to death? This felicity then is out of our selves, and we must beg it
from otherwhere. And from whence? To seek it among beasts were more then
beastlike, and consequently much less will it be found in the senseless
creatures. O gold and silver, so highly valued with men of no value for wit,
how ca^ you make a man happy, since your best service to a man stands in
leaving him, and to pass to another, and that tarying with him, you bring him
nothing but care to keep you, fear to lose you, and an insatiable desire to
hoarde you? Thou food, whose taste holds not the space of half a foot in
all man's body, and cannot be felt, but while it is in loosing, which can not
nourish but with thine own corruption, which art most commonly the instrument
of maladies, and finally of death, can thou bring bliss to a man? You
celestial circles turning about endlesly, is it true that man's happy or
unhappy state hanges upon your influences? How senseless were he yt so would
think, since you your selves must suffer change? And being such as you are, you
send us to ye knowledge of one far greater, upon whom you your selves
depend. You spiritual creatures so excellent, shall it be you yt shall furnish
us of this goodly felicity? You be happy in deed and very puissaunt
creatures, and yet but creatures, and therefore also unable to repair ye image
of God in me, (without which I must remain unhappy) as to say truth, it is
not your work, but for God alone: neither were you created to bestow on me yt
which you have not your selves received, but by ye free goodness of him that is
greater then you, and then all things else. And if I find none elsewhere,
neither above, nor below, yt can give me in part or in whole, that which I
seek, should I be so deuoyd of understanding, as to think yt I can give it
to my self? Shall I find blessedness in corruption, justice in unrighteousness,
life in death? For what am I Lord in my self but corruption, but
unrighteousness, but death? Alas then, shall I perish? For out of al doubt, death
is ye wages of sin. But ye case so stands, O God, that no evil is incurable
to the Almighty. He which has drawn all things out from nothing, can he be
hindered to make again his own work? He that caused light to come out of
darkness, shall not he bring again from death to life? Yes certainly,
otherwise death being ye stronger, might thrust God out of his seat. Now
then, Lord, my disease being past cure of all creatures, I come to thee, who
can do all that thou will: and who have showed yet more excellent testimony
of thy goodwil in saving man, then thou did of thy might in creating him.
Thy might surely was witnessed by a mean well becoming thee, when thou made
all of nothing, framing man to thine image and likeness: and this same
infinite power appears clearly in the conservation of all thy creatures. But
what is all this in comparison of that work, man's Redemption? is he, whose
wickedness is forgiven, and whose sin is covered.
Blessed then is he, not simply whom thou have created, (for man turned this
blessing of creation into an assured curse by ill using it but rather is he
blessed, whom thou have ransommed through such a great goodness of thine, as
every way excels. For less unworthy of thy gracious bou^tie is he, which yet
has no being, then is the sinner: And thou contentedst not thy self (O great
deapth of goodness) to restore to sinful man that bliss which he had
lost, but thou gave him a far better: For having created him such a one, as
by sweruing from his perfection (as in deed he did) might fall also into
sin, death, and curse, thou finally make him such a one by redemption, as
he can neither sin nor dye, but is blessed for ever. O strange thing, O
great and chief master work of God! Al wretchedness comes by sin, and yet
none comes to happiness, but having passed first and foremost by sin: not that
bliss comes out of sin, but because mercy presupposes misery, pardon a
fault, and quickening a former death. But whence comes this pardon? From thy
self, O Lord, and from thy pure bounty.

Blessed is the man, unto who^ the Lord imputes not iniquity,
2 And how? even by quitting me my transgressions, by covering my sins, and
by not reckoning vy mine iniquities: yet must thy judgment be satisfied even
wholly and to the uttermost. Here behold again a depth of wisdom and
goodness: For how great is that secret, now manifested by effect, where
pardoning all, thou yet punishest all, and we having paid nothing, yet find
our selves to have wholly satisfied thee? Judgment is become mercy to us: out
of malediction thou drewest blessing, and death has brought forth life. All
this was thy doing, O God, infinitely great and even so good: for who also
could have done it, but thou? thou have done it, because it pleased thee, for,
who knew thee, who loved thee, who gave unto thee first? That Emmanuel
conceived by the holy Ghost, has fully repaired in himself this poor nature
conceived in iniquity. This righteous pledge has accomplished all
righteousness for us. The suertic that ought nothing, has paid for our
discharge. Wherefore then troublest thou thy self poor conscience? That
corruption wherein thou art, is blotted out in the holy of holyes, conceived
and borne for thee. The obedience of the acceptable one, with the fullness of
his obedience, has filled even til it ouerflow again, this want of
righteousness, which thy Creator requires of thee. The sufferings of the just
of al iustes are thine acquittance. Behold thy life and thy felicity: there
is none elsewhere, there is, I say, none other Jesus, that one and only name
of salvation. What remaynes then, but that cheerfully without gloss, and
unfeignedly acknowledging thy self to be in death, thou receive this life by a
lively faith, lively, I say, whose effects may show themselves. And in whose
spirit there is no guyle.
For besides that God can not be deceived, he is no savior of deceyuers. The
God of truth hates all falsehood: and who does wash himself, to the end to
return to ye filth? Is pardon given that we should sin more hardily? Does
light bring us into darkness? And as no fitter example of all this may be,
then my self: even so will I publish it, 3 When I held my tongue, my bones
consumed, or when I roared all the day.
to the end that I may serve for a mirror and pattern to others. Alas, in
what pain was I? Were not all my bones dried with heaviness? Was there ever
summer drought more partching, then this heat, which has utterly marred me?
How often have I been overwhelmed with anguish, not able to utter one word? How
often on the other side, 4 For thine hand is heavy upon me, day and night: and
my moisture is turned into the drought of summer.
have I cried and howled all the day long?

4 And not without cause, my God, for day and night I felt the terrible
weighing strokes of thine hand, a burden intolerable for any creature. But
howsoever I tossed and tormented my self, where found I remedy at length?
Hearken hereto every one, and thou my soul forget it never.

5 Then I acknowledged my sin unto thee, neither hid I mine iniquity: for I
thought, I will confess against my self my wickedness unto the Lord, and thou
forgauest the punishment of my sin.
5 So long as I sought to excuse my self, and cover my faults in all or any
part: So long as I went about to counterbalance my faults with my pain, so
long as I spurned against the spur, my mischief grew still: I have
therefore learned a far other way. I come to thee, O eternal God, my Judge
and my adverse party, I have confessed all, I have suppressed nothing in
silence, nor disguised any of mine iniquity: and according as I did purpose it
in my self, even so have I done: condemning my self I found absolution, and
summoning my self I was dismissed.

6 Therefore shall every one, that is godly, make his prayer unto thee in a
time, when thou may be found: surely in the flood of great waters they shall
not come near him.
6 Now then, all ye not hautie and high looking ones, but whom God has
vouchsafed grace to taste his goodness in afflictions, above all in the
combats of conscience, search for this only and most assured remedy. Have
recourse to him which smites you: the mean to find him is prayer. Let not
your unworthiness hinder you, but rather let it drive you so much the nearer
him. With God he is counted worthy, which confesses himself unworthy. If
sin displease thee because it is sin, and that thou desire his grace,
know that already thou art half heard: For, true sorrow to have offended,
desire to come before him, and an affection to cry him mercy, be so many
messengers whereby he inuiteth thee first, and so many testimonies that he will
be found to thee. Come then and enter, but with an heart stricken down, with
an head bowed low, and thou shall feel all thy torment vanish away, all thine
anguishes flee as far from thee as ever they were nigh thee: that flood of
evils which had covered and swallowed thee, shall void it self.

7 Thou art my secret place: thou preseruest me from trouble: thou compassest
me about with joyful deliverance.
7 Shortly, in stead of this misery thou shall receive the true peace which
the world can neither give, nor take away, and the true repose of conscience,
even the very anchre and earnest penny of that durable blessedness to follow.
Certainly my God, this is true, for, I know it by experience, and shall
learn it more and more, having thee for my Protector, giving me every day new
arguments to praise thee, by continual assistance of thy favor, O my
deliverer, 8 I will instruct thee, and teach thee in the way, that thou shall
go, and I will guide thee with mine eye.
as again on my part thou only art, and shall be my refuge and recourse.

8 Learn this lesson hardily of me, thou, whosoever desire to know the
right way, and be content to take me thy guide in this behalf.

9 Be ye not like an horse, or like a mule which understand not: whose mouths
thou do bind with bit and bridle least they come near thee.
9 Beware you take not the bit in your teeth, nor kick like mule and horse:
for so do beasts void of understanding, and thou see them gain nothing by
so doing, save that they are bitted so much the more roughly, and spurred more
sharply, till they come to some order: 10 Many sorrows shall come to the
wicked: but he, ye trusts in ye Lord, mercy shall compass him.
Even so will it befall him which will not profit by such chastisements from
God, waxing obstinately opinionate in his evil, which shall bring sorrow upon
sorrow: whereas on the contrary, who so will have recourse to God, bowing under
his puissaunt hand, shall be compassed with his goodness.

11 Be glad ye righteous, and rejoice in the Lord, and be joyful all ye, that
are upright in heart.
11 O you lovers of righteousness, you which by Gods grace give your selves to
vprightnes, up, cheer up your selves with me to honor God eternal, and
witness ye by your sonnets of praise, that the issue of afflictions, on their
behalf which can make profit by them, is joy and consolation to the glory of
that great God, which chastises his own for their good, and punishes the
hard hearted with all rigor after their demerits.

A meditation upon the 38. Psalm.
1 O Lord, rebuke me not in thine anger, neither chastise me in thy wrath.
O Eternal (for to who^ shall I address my self but to thee who art as
puissaunt to heal as to smite) give me leave to bewray my complaint: not to
plain me of thee, who do nothing but well, and whose ire, I confess I have
pulled upon me, for my trespasses: but to beseech thee, that according to thy
promises thou will not use against me that judgment which thou reseruest for
such as thy fury and most fearful indignation will quite destroy: But rather
thy fatherly manner of chastising how rough and sharp soever it may seem to
this flesh. 2 For thine arrows have light upon me, and thine hand lies upon
me.


2 And thou wotest well Lord, that I cry not as do those delicate ones, which
make much of a little, and cry loud for a small grief: For it is even deep
to the quick that the keen heads of thine arrows shot off at me, have
pierced: It is in very great earnest, that thy mighty hand is (as it were)
settled upon me.

3 There is nothing sound in my flesh, because of thine anger: neither is there
rest in my bones because of my sin.
3 Regard, Lord, this poor body which has no whole part: Respect these poor
grynded bones: for in deed how might they stand, or have any being before
thine angry face? And all, Lord, nevertheless most justly, since the whole
cause thereof is in me who have so much offended thee: 4 For mine iniquities
are gone over mine head, and as a weighty burden they are too heavy for me.
I confess and auow that it is so, and lo, the spring of all sorrows and
torments wherein I am sowsed over head and ears, and utterly overwhelmed under
this load, a load far to heavy and altogether together insupportable, if
thou do not sustain and stay me.

5 My wounds are putrified, and corrupt because of my foolishnes.
5 Those killing blows which thou gave me, have bred corrupt matter, such
as putrifyeth my poor carkase, which even smelles of the fruits and hyre of
my folly, poor senseles man that I was, when I thus rebelled against thy will.
6 I am bowed, and crooked very sore: I go mourning all the day.


6 But, behold O my God, I will not stiffen my neck, I bow both body and
heart under thy strong hand, 7 For my remes are full of burning, and there is
nothing sound in my flesh.
drawing my legs after me, parched and broyled as I am through heaviness and
languishing. Alas, my reins how they burn, To be short, O my God, what shall
I say? 8 I am weakened and sore broken: I roar for the very grief of mine
heart.
I am altogether made up into sorrow, I am brayed as in a mortar, I am ground
as it were in a myl, so as I can not hold, but cry, or roar rather.

9 Lord, I power my whole desire before thee, and my sighing is not hid from
thee.
9 But O my Lord, (for I know thou allowest me for thy servant though never
so miserable) for all this thou art my retraicte, my longing is after thee
alone, without searching succor elsewhere. 10 Mine heart pants: my strength
saileth me, and the light of mine eyes, even they are not mine own.
My gronings direct themselves to thee, albeit thorough mighty grief my seely
forlorn heart had with it self a thousand wandering discourses, and my force
so far forth failed me, as I lost my sight.

11 My lovers and my friends stand aside from my plague, and my kinsmen stand
a far off.
11 And yet a greater grief, when as my wretched plight should rather have
moved the very stones to compassion. They which in former times had called them
selves my friends, and whose part I thought it to partake my calamities, they
stand stone still in stead of running unto me: yea my next of kind most
unkindly with much a do vouchsafe to look at me, while others, 12 They
also, that seek after my life, lay snares, and they that go about to do me
evil, talk wicked things and imagine deceit continually.
to whose wish I cannot dye soon enough, lay snares for me, desiring nothing
but my death, not ceasing in mean while to slander me, and to assay al means
of trapping me.

13 All this notwithstanding, thou know, Lord, that I have not skirmished
again with them, rendering evil for evil either in deed or word, 13 But I as
a deaf man heard not, and as a dumme man, which opens not his mouth.
but have passed over all this gear as if I had been deaf not hearing a whit
of it, neither have I replied no more to them then a dumb man which had never
use of tongue: I answered nothing, 14 Thus am I as a man, that hears not and
in whose mouth are no reproves.
but apposed only silence to al wrongs: not that I had not just defenses
ynowe, but I had rather refer all to thee, O protector of Innocents, and
revenger of the oppressed: knowing full well, that silence and patience please
thee woonderfully well.

15 For on thee, O Lord, do I wait: thou will hear me, my Lord, my God.
15 Now then, O eternal, God, it is thou alone on whom. I wholly wait. O
Lord, thou art my God, and therefore wilt not, I know, leave me unanswered:
For, 16 For I said, Hear me, least they rejoice over me: for when my foot
slippeth, they extol themselves against me.
(quoth I to my self) is it possible for thee to endure that these mischievous
ones which assay to hinder the effect of thy promises, that these unkind men
which assail thee in setting thus upon my person, should have matter to glad
them against me?

17 Surely I am ready to halt, and my sorrow is ever before me.
17 Make speed then to me my God, otherwise I go in danger never to be
restored, being overwhelmed with dolours, which accompany me day and night.

18 When I declare my pain, and am sorry for my sin,
18 For my part, I am always ready to acknowledge my trespasses, the pain
whereof I carry with me, tormented in body, and frighted in spirit.

19 Then mine enemies are alive and are mighty, and they that hate me
wrongfully are many.
19 Mine enemies quite contrary, enemies, I say, without all color of cause,
strengthen themselves, and bear their heads higher and higher, fiercely and
bravely against me, who, alack, did never ought to them but well, 20 They
also, that reward evil for good, are mine adversaries, because I follow
goodness.
and against whom they thus band themselves for none other cause, but for that
I do not as they do, but rather I love that which is good, howsoever
otherwise I be a sinner.

21 And therefore, I eternal God, forsake me not, 21 Forsake me not, O
Lord: be not thou far from me, my God.
but keep thy self near this poor creature, which calls upon thee, O
Lord, from whom alone I wait for deliverance, 22 Haste thee to help me, O
my Lord, my salvation.
make speed to aid me in the extremity of my necessity. Amen.

A meditation upon the 51. Psalm.
O God, which have set before us in one and self same person of David, a very
maruaylous example of sin and repentance, and of thy compassions: give me
understanding and good consideration of his waylings, well to apply them to
mine own use and thy glory. What is it then, that David says, being wakened
by the voice of thy Prophet Nathan?

O God, O God? And dare thou name this most sacred name, thou mischievous
mouth of so mischievous a man? having polluted thy self with so many adulterous
kisses, foul mouth, undertake thou to name it thou enemy of al uncleanness?
Thou traiterous tongue against thy faithful servant Vriah, can thou
pronounce this word, GOD, who is most true? Ye hands embrued with many
murders, presume you so far as to follow that bold tongue, heauing up your
selves toward him, whom you have so shamefully profaned? Thou heart, guilty
of the whole law broken at one blow, art thou so hardy as to address thee
to him, who has already judged thee? O king, so many ways perjured against
him, that of a poor shepheardly boy, promoted thee above the throne of all
this worlds monarchs: Thou hypocrite toward him, who has performed formed
thee infinitely more then ever he promised thee: wretched man, which have
trampled under feet the covenant of eternal life, to make an adulteress of a
chaste wife: unhappy man, who have laid that most precious name open to the
blasphemies of infidel nations: O thou ingrate, which have rendered to thy
loyal servant death for his wages: O thou unworthy one, that, where thou
owedst to thy people all justice, have showed them the way to all mischief:
live thou yet, speak thou yet? dare thou call upon thy God yet? Yea, my
God, so great is thy patience, that it gives me heart again, not to name thee
by way of complaynt against mine enemies, as in some other Psalms I have
done: but even my self to be mine own accuser and judge against my self. In
sum, what can he, or what will he say, who was once thy dear David by thy
more then most liberal bounty, but now is nothing like David, through his
own more then most detestable ingratitude? In sum, I say, he says, 1 Have
mercy upon me, O God, according to thy loving kindness: according to the
multitude of thy compassions put away mine miquities.
Have pity on me, O God of mercy: and what manner of pity? True it is, Lord,
that thy mercy is always infinite in it self, but such is the multitude of my
trespasses, that surely me thinks one only mercy would not be enough for
me: wherefore I beseech thee, unfold here all the store of thy compassions,
that I may feel them.

2 Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin.
2 Alas, I have not now to treat for the wiping out of some petie blot, or
prancke of youth: but my foul filthinesses and pollutions be so vile, so
stinking, so far cankered within me, even to the very soul of my soul,
that, although with one word thou can al things, yet do I persuade my self,
that as I may say, it is not with once fairly touching that this my blotte
will away, so great is my rebellion, but I must be rubbed and rubbed again,
washed and rynsed, before I can be cleansed from so great and festered a
pollution.

3 For I know mine iniquities, and my shine is ever before me.
3 I dissemble not, I set no gloss on the matter: I acknowledge mine
iniquities, even such as they are: my wickedness continually presents it self
before my poor spirit: me thinks I do even still see with mine eyes that
poor woman bayning her self: me thinks I see David troubled in spirit, and
while he resists his conscience, to receive thine enemy and his own into
his bosom, yielding himself his willing captive: me thinks I yet see those,
whom I did use in that business, alack, too too obedient servants were they
to so evil a commandment: I see, woe is me, the filed and defiled bed
whereat once I embraced both sin and death: I see thee thou disloyal and
murderous heart, and thou traiterous hand whereby those two murderous letters,
and that at several times were written, not with ynke, but with the blood of
that poor guyltlesse servant: I see the poor people, for whom thou ought
to have laid forth thy life, now like a forlorn heap thrust forth to the
enemies sword: I see thee, O my loyal servant, overthrown on the ground,
hathing thee in thy blood shed in his service, that betrayed thee to death: I
hear (as it were) a peale in mine ears of the horrible blasphemies coming
from infidel mouths, which I my self have opened: I see that gaye marriage,
under veil whereof I weened to veil my adultery, discovering it yet in mean
while even by that very mean before thee, O Lord, and before men. Ahlas, what
can I perceive in the least of these foul crimes, but thy wrath, thy
judgment, 4 Against thee, against thee only have I sinned, and done evil in
thy sight, that thou in apest be just when thou speak, and pure when thou
iudgest.
death, and the nethermost hell.

4 For what get I hereby, that being the King, men dare arraygne or judge me
according to the tenor of the law against blasphemers, adulterers, and
murderers? It is thou, and none other, with whom I have to do: for it is thou
properly that I have offended, before whose eyes and tribunal seat that is
come to light, which I so carefully cloaked before men: neither is to be
feared, least I being thrust down to hell by thee, any man might rightfully
say, Thou have unspoken thy promises made to me, or that thy word were not
assured: for, it is I that have falsed my faith, and made my self most
unworthy of thy grace: yea verily, and for my condemnation, and thy
justification, what need it come to reckoning up of those faults?

5 Behold, I was borne in iniquity, and in sin has my mother conceived me.
5 From the moment, my God, of this poor creatures conception, even already
had coruption catched hold: from that time, I say, that my mother having
conceived me, did give me living heat in her womb, vice was come within me,
as the root which sithence has brought forth those sour and venomous
fruits, 6 Behold, thou love truth in ye inward affections: therefore have
thou taught me wisdom in ye secret of mine heart.
in stead of that synceritie and purity which thou requirest not only
outward, but to be resident in the hidden spirit and heart: and yet there was
no want in thee, O most good and gentle God, that this untowardness was not
corrected, since thou taughtest me thy wisdom, and that not after a common
customarie facion, but learning me apart, and making my spirit capable of thy
most rare and exquisite mysteries, such as thou reuealest not to every one.
Now then Lord, 7 Purge me with hyssope, and I shall be cleame: wash me, and I
shall be whiter the^ snow.
what is to be done?

7 Behold on the one side a thousand maledictions, which I have notably
deserved: on the other part an infinite deapth of thy mercies, whereof thou
have given me sure pledges in thy law sacrifices. For it is not in vain, nor
by man's invention, that in solemn sacrifices, blood is sprinkled with hysope.
I have been wet therewith, O Lord, by chy commandment, but returning to my
foul uncleanness, I am verily become leprous within: And therefore Lord, take
that very hysope, which is the sacrament of the lively power and force of that
sacrifice so long looked for, and wash me with the true blood of Christ, which
shall be shed in the ordained time, for cleansing of all iniquity. Wash me,
sprinckle me, and rub me on all sides with this hysope and this blood, the
alone very mean to do away the loathsome and leprous blotte of sin: so
shall I become neat and white as snow, whereas now I am thus vile and
stinking before thee and the world.

8 Make me to hear joy and gladness, that the bones, which thou have broken,
may rejoice.
8 Alack, you so many delights and heavenly contentments, which were wont to
rejoice my conscience, causing me to find rest in the midst of all dolours,
where are you now? O Lord, restore them to me, making me to hear thy voice of
absolution for my sins, comforting my poor conscience mortally wounded, and
soundly setting together and knitting my bones, which are broken all to shiuers.

9 Hide thy face from my sins, and put away all mine iniquities.
9 My God, turn away that eye and look which is so terrible and
insupportable, when thou will consider sins, and chiefly my sins so great
and so many: Rather wipe them away Lord, let not one of them remain, so as
they may never come in account before thee.

10 Create in me a clean heart, O God, and
10 Lord, thou had once by thy singular bounty changed me and renewed me
by the great and only grace of thy spirit, having framed mine understanding
to know thee, my judgment to approve thee, my will to love thee, and to take
pleasure in thy commandments so pure and holy: At once, thou had made me
a new creature. But into what darkness have I turned this light? I have
marred all, I have destroyed and ouerturned all, and therefore, O God, begin
again as it were anewe thy work: be the creator of this inward man now the
second time, renew a right spirit within me.
spreading forth thy force such as may pearce to the bottom of me, that thou
may form in me (as it were) a new soul, detesting all sin, given to
whatsoever is good and right.

11 Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thine holy Spirit from me.
11 I wot well, I am altogether unworthy that thou should lay any hand
again to me: but, my God, reject me not, neither deprive me of all that
feeling which thou had once given me, and whereof thou did never as yet
wholly bereave me. For I know and believe my self to be of the number of those
whom thou will not loose, though I have deserved to be quite cut off.

12 Restore to me the joy of thy salvation, and stablish me with thy free Spirit
12 Rather my God, in stead of taking quite from me all that residue which
thy goodness has yet left me, restore me that again, whereof my sins
have spoiled me, and settle me once more in the assurance of my salvation,
that most unspeakable pleasure and joy which thou bestowest upon thy children.

13 Then shall I teach thy wapes unto the wicked,
13 Now for so much as thou have laid on my shoulders this so weighty, and
withal so honorable a charge of governing thy people, may it please thee
henceforth to impart me of thy strength, and those special graces necessary to
such a calling, wherein is requisite that I have wisdom, skill, high courage
and constancy, and generally every other virtue, not alone for mine own use,
but also for the conduct of this folk committed to me. and sinners shall be
conuerred unto thee. 14 Deliver me from blood, O god, which art ye God of my
sa'nation, and my tongue shall sing iofyully of thy righteousness.
Then in stead of such lewd examples I have given, I shall not spare to show
forth both in deed and word the right way to others, and shall be thine
instrument to fetch home to thee those that run riote the furthest out.

14 O God, O God, who only can and wilt deliver out of the bonds of sin
and death, have pity on this murderer embrued with innocent blood, and guyltie
of a thousand deaths, and vouchsafe this mouth the grace to sing how true thou
art in thy promises.

15 Open thou my lips, O Lord, and my mouth shall show forth thy praise.
15 Oh, that thy mercy, Lord, would open this mouth which my sins have shut
upon me: for what have sinners to do to speak of thee? But remove this
stop, and then not having any other mean to recognize so great a benefit,
but such as can add nothing to thee, who art in thy self absolutely perfect,
to wit, the sacrifice of thanksgiving, 16 For thou desire no sacrifice,
though I would give it: thou delitest not in burnt offering.
I shall praise thee with full mouth, according as thou have given me
maruailous great occasion.

16 For as to those sacrifices which smoke upon thine altar, Lord, it is not in
them, where thou will have us stay: There must be another manner of oblation to
appease thine ire, and a price of better value for my ransom, yea these my
faults being not of the number of those, for which thou have ordained those
ordinary sacrifices. It is thou, Lord, which must provide that price in thy
good season, whereunto alone I hold me confidently, offering thee yet in mean
while that self same thing, 17 The sacrifices of God are a contrite spirit: a
co^trite and a broken heart, O God, thou will not despise.
which thou have given me, and the which I know thou of thy grace do not
reject, but do rather receive it in so good part, as without it all outward
service displeases thee, to wit, a spirit thoroughly humbled by sense of
sin, an heart contrite, brayed, and ground with apprehension of thy just
judgments.

18 Be sauourable unto Zion for thy good pleasure: build the walls of
Jerusalem.
18 What more my God? will thou for this indignation which thou have conceived
against my misdeedes, that this work which I have begun by thine ordinance,
should remain unfinished? Shall thine own mountain of Sion, thy holy
dwelling Jerusalem be left thus imperfect, because David made himself
unworthy to lay to his so foul hands? No, Lord, thy good pleasure can not
be of that mind. This buylding was ordained of thee, because thou so
would: 19 Then shall thou accept the sacrifices of righteousness, even the
burnt offering and oblation: then shall they offer talues upon thine altar.
also Lord, thou shall finishe it, as in truth it is thy work, and not of men.

19 Then both I, who have thus grossly failed, and my people whom thou have
chastised by taking thy Spirit from their king, shall all see the effect of
thy mercy, that is to say, thy service well and rightly set up, the oblations
made as appertains, the altars smoking according to the rule by thee
ordained, even a most certain testimony of that favor which thou shall have
showed to thy poor servant David, and to thy people. Amen.

Beza upon the A meditation upon the 102 Psalm.
1 O Lord, hear my prayer, and let my cry come unto thee.
O Eternal God, it is now high time for thee to hear the prayer of thy poor
desolate Church, whose distresses sith they force her not to speak, but to
cry with a full voice, let not her cry vanish in the air, but come to thee,
who art every where to hear such as call to thee.

2 Hide not thy face from me in the time of my trouble: incline thine ears
unto me: when I call, make haste to hear me.
2 The dark day of affliction is come: alas, cast upon me thy look of
compassion, that may scatter this most thick darkness. Pardon, O my God, my
rude unmannerliness, and bear with me that in this pressing need I once
more pray the bending of thine ear, and thy speed to make me feel how thou
have heard me, answering me by the experience of thy bounty and mercy.

3 For my days are consumed like smoke, and my bones are burnt like an herth.
3 Alas, time was when I was fair and flourishing under thy favorable
gentleness, now am I not so, my good days are past, as a smoking vapor: I
have been mighty and in flower of my strength against all aslaultes within and
without, abiding still fast by means of thine underpropping and stay: now my
bones are cracked and wear into dust, as if they had been seared and burned
like lime in a kilne.

4 Mine heart is smitten and withers like grass, because I forgate to eat
my bread.
4 That wonted courage so stout against Satan and his accomplices, is now
withered as hay, and dried like grass cut down by the mower. I had, alas, so
good an appetite and fed my self hungerly with that so nourishing, so
sweet, and so delicate viande wherewith thou did furnish us from above, and
I drank in so great draughtes of that so precious and well relised liquor of
thy quickening water: Now find I a dearth of this bread, and the small
remain that I have thereof, goes down with me against the stomach, so low
am I brought, and have lost my taste.

5 For the voice of any groaning my bones do cleave to my skin.
5 The air was wont to resounde from East to West, those sonnets of gladness,
whereof thou did minister to me both the matter and the making. Now the
heavens and the earth do ring of my lamentable cries, woe begone that I am
lying on the ground, 6 I am like a pelicane of the wilderness: I am like an owl
of the deserts.
and languishing like her that has nothing left, but the skin bound to the
bones.

6 There was no quarter of the world where I was not lodged in palaces most
beautiful and princely, which thou had so well founded, builded, and
trimmed for me: in which I took pleasure to see thee in thy great beauty,
and to be recreated with thy most clear and cheerful voice, (in deed a
heavenly happiness:) Now nothing is to be seen but ruins, in which hardly
can I discrye some appearance of that which has been: every where are horrible
deserts, hydeous caves, wherein nothing is heard but the howlings of shricke
owls, night ravens, and such like doleful and unlucky black night birds.

7 I watch and am as a sparowe alone upon the house top.
7 And I poor soul, wandering through thickest of this desert, having no rest
day nor night, I dwell all alone, hatching my griefs at a venture under covert
of such small retraict as I may light upon. Alack, I hurt no body, yea I render
good for evil: 8 Mine enemies
yet in stead that my desolation should cleave the heart of the most
hardened, and move the fellest of them, if not to relieve me, at least not to
persecute me further. I see nothing but enemies round about me, and what
manner enemies: First, that great devouring Lion, which has spoiled, torn, and
swallowed so many of my poor children from the beginning of the world: Then
those Inchanters which by their colored words and reasons, in very deed
unreasonable, set together by their bibble habble, have suborned very many of
my children, yea, some of the best wits of my company. Those snares of
conscience, wolves masking like pastors, paunches belching out sacriledges,
devouring, O God, thy people as bread, smallowing up the poor widows and
orphans under shadow of prayer. What shall I say, Lord, of them that are yet
worse, to wit, these cursed ones, which gnawe me within my bowels, these
heretics, murderers, rending in pieces the members from the body, whereof
thou art head? Very soul quellers, coniured enemies against thy truth,
turners vpside down of thy right ways, mouths for the father of lies, folk
without shame or conscience, rasers under the name of buylders: to be short,
the most pernicious enemies that I have. Alas, this is not all, there is no
crime which they lay not to my charge, revile me daily,
no rage which exercises not it self against me: I am the daughter of peace,
and yet charge they me as mother and nource of al hurliburlies that toss and
tomble the world. Patience is my mark, and yet I am accused as a stirrer of
all sedition: I keep a school of all truth, yet am I condemned as a liar,
and the fountain of leasings: I pray for my very enemies, yet will they
needs make me vengeable and irreconcilable. O my blessed children, whose
souls by the cruelty of my desperate enemies have been thrust into heaven
through all sorts of torments, and of whom the world was not worthy, join
your testimonies before the eternal God, unto the complaints of your poor
widow mother languishing yet in earth. O earth drunken with the blood of mine
innocent children: ye waters, whose streams have been often stopped, and their
hue changed by the poor murdered bodies: O air, which have received so many
of their groans and sighs: ye flames which have consumed so many martyrs to
the truth: ye smordes, which have wounded, hewn, and chopped off so many of my
members, are ye not sufficient witnesses to me, that I complain not without
most just cause? And yet my God, it is not of thee that I thus plain me: for,
if I look upon the faults of my children, I confess, that what rigor soever
they have felt, that yet thy mercy surmountes thy judgment: And considering
on the other side, that the wicked do not hate and persecute me but for thy
name, and that thereby I am made like unto my dear and alone spouse, thy
well-beloved Son. Oh father, so far am I from complaining, that contrariwise
this cross is to me a most certain and precious testimony, that thou
chastisest me as a father, and love me with the same love, wherewith thou
love my spouse, with whom being crucified, I am likewise sure to raygne. To
be short, wherein can I deem my self honorable, but in thy cross? for, to
be hated of the world for thy sake, is a goodly testimony, that a man is not
of the world: and to drink in the cup of his Lord, is one of the greatest
honors that the servant can receive. But alas, I see and confess, that what
the wicked do unjustly, thou do it justly for the iniquity of most part of
my riotous children, it being a thing right reasonable, that the bringing into
order begin at thine own house, and that they which have least excuse, be
with the first most rigorously chastised. Moreover, my God, what cause have I
to put on all my wayling weed, Surely I have eaten ashes as bread, and mingled
my drink with weeping, 10 Because of thine indignation and thy wrath: for thou
have heaued me up, and cast me down. 11 My days are like a shadow that
fades, and I am withered like, grass.
seeing thy holy name so blasphemed, thine house profaned, robbed, ruined, and
brought into ashes, thy glory given into the hands of enemies?

9 Lo why I lie on the earth, living on the dust in stead of meat, and tears
for drink, through the deep conceyuing of this most horrible indignation, and
this so just displeasure against me, whom thou have thus overthrown, from a
state wherein thou hadest superexalted me, in so much as I go fading away,
and lost as a shadow at Sun fall, and am there as cut down grass without
force or liveliness.

But thou, O Lord, do remain for ever, and thy remembrance from generation
to generation.
12 But what? yet am I not out of heart, O mighty and eternal God, when I
consider that thou art for ever the same, and that it can not be otherwise, but
the memory of thy renoume must be ever durable. For, this presupposed, albeit
thou art not underpropped but of thy self, Thou will arise and have mercy upon
Zion: for ye time to have mercy thereon, for the appointed time is come.
and that nothing may be put too, or taken from thee: Yet, since it has liked
thee to chose from out of the unworthiest creature, to wit, man, a certain
number, which is thy Church, there to make thine infinite glory for ever to
shine: I conclude with my self, that of necessity (howsoever it seems
sometimes otherwise) as thou have been cast down in thy Church, now lying on
the ground, so will thou raise again thy self, in vprearing her, and all for
thy great pity and compassion sake. In deed, Lord, thou have so promised, and
many a time effected it. For, into what streights was thy Church brought during
that horrible slavery of Egypt, their pilgrimage in the wilderness, their
calamities befalling them under the Judges, the captivity of thine Arc, the
renting of Judah and Israel, the dreadful destruction by Babel, when there
remained not one stone upon another: thine holy Temple was made an heap of
dust, the sacred vessels were sacrilegiously rauined, carried away, and
profanely abused: thy sacrificers murdered, the crown of David tombled to the
ground, all the land dyed with blood, without regard of age, sex, or
degree: the small residue dragged into bondage among all the nations of the
world, under so many calamities, among the Syrians and Egyptians: and above
al, when thy temple being reedified, thou departedst out of it, and gave
room as it were to Idols in thine own palaces: and when thy law, I say,
thy most sacred law was so villanously interdicted, torn, and burnt, and as
it were, quite abrogated by consent of most part of thy people justly abandoned
of thee? Now after this horrible and dreadful destruction of mine ancient
children thus cut off, and when thou gave me a new generation, alas, of
what rages and cruelties had I experiment for the space of three hundreds of
years one after another?

For thy servants delight in the stones thereof, and have pity on the dust
thereof.
14 Yet ever at mine extremest need thou did send me Champions, and
made me to find force in feebleness, calm in tempest, felicity in misery,
life in death: Thou did, I say, evermore cause me to see what difference
there is between that fatherly rod wherewith thou correctest thy children to
salvation, and that iron bar wherewith thou dashest thine enemies past all
recovery. Egypt, Niniue, Babel, and this lofty image of the monarchies teared
by my ruins, and cymented with my childrens blood, are now come down, while
yet thy poor Sion stands and speaks. Thou, O God, evermore most like thy
self, now that thou see me more streyghted then ever, show that thou have
set bounds to my miseries, as thou did in old time to those captiuities of
Egypt and Babylon. Raise up some Iosuahs, and Esdras, some Nehemiahs and
Constantines, which may rear again thy rased palaces, taking pity on our
ruins and sackinges. Above all, Lord, send us some Aarons and some Esdras,
having thy spirit in their heart, and thy word in their mouth, as true
instruments of thy power, to raise again this thy spiritual buylding which is
thrown to the ground, and so disfigured, as with much a do can a man tracke
out so much as the very ancient foundation: And bless, Lord, Then ye heathen
shall fear the Name of ye Lord, and all the kings of ye earth thy glory.
the hand and the labors of thy faithful workmen, so as in stead of so
many peoples at this day revolted from thee, some forced by Mahomet, others
seduced by false pastors, profaning the chair of truth by their coined and
counterfaited doctriues, When ye Lord shall build up Zion, and shall appear
in his glory,
all may be brought back again to thee, in such wise, that thy glory may
shine more then ever, And shall turn unto the prayer of the desolate, and not
despise their prayer
and thy heavenly Sion, that workmanship of thine own very hand, may be
lifted up again to her former brightness.

17 Hear, O mighty God, the prayer of thy poor desolate daughter, This shall
be written for the generation to come: and the people, which shall be created,
shall praise the Lord.
yet so much cherished of thee.

18 Give me matter to couche in my records this most excellent deliverance, to
the end that the memory may dure without end, and that this people being
thoroughly renewed, For he has looked down from the height of his sanctuary:
out of the heaven did the Lord behold the earth.
may have occasion to magnify thy praise from father to son.

19 Bring again that golden world, wherein one may say with better speed
then ever, that thou, O eternal God, being set in thy high throne, advanced
above the heyghtes of heavens, have cast thy cheerful and gracious eye upon
the earth, 20 That he might hear the mourning of the prisoner, and deliver the
children of death:
giving ear to the groans of thy languishing captive Church, and of thy poor
children looking for nothing but the slaughter.

21 That they may declare the name of ye Lord in Lion, and his praise in
Jerusalem.
21 Gather again together, Lord, the sheep wildly straying and scattered
through the wilderness, full of hungerbitten and stark wood Lions and Tigers.

22 When the people shall be gathered together, and the kingdoms to serve the
Lord.
22 Unite again to thee the realms which Satan has withdrawn, since thou
art King of kings, to whom all glory, puissaunce, and magnificence belongs.
Let thy name be called on, and thy praise proclaimed in Jerusalem in sight and
knowledge of all the world.

23 He abated my strength in the way, and shortened my days.
23 Well then, I have been afflicted a thousand and a thousand sorts, my
course has been cut in two, my days have been, as it were shortened: 24 And
I said, O my God, take me not away in the mids of my days: thy years endure
from generation to generation
I have been constrained to beseech my God, that he would not pluck me away
with such violence, and that he would suffer me to finish my rare: But
considering the eternity of my God, for ever himself, this change does no
longer amaze me, knowing that my foundations are laid far more surely, then
if they were buttrised by the heaven or by the earth: 25 Thou have aforetime
laid the fou^dadion of the earth, and the heavens are ye work of thine hands.
For, though the earth be substantially settled by the maruailous power of him
that laid the foundation, and that this heavenly frame, the very
workemanshippe of the eternal God, has never yet swerued among so many, so
violent, and continual reuolutions, yet al within measure and compass so
exquisite, ^6 They ^al perish, ^^t thou ^alt en^^re: even ^^ey al shall ^axe
old (...) does a ^^rment: (...) a vesture ^^lt thou ^^nge ^^m, and ^^y shall be
^^nged. But ^^^u art ye ^^^e, and thy ^^^es shall (...) fail. The (...)dren of
(...) servants ^^^l con^^^e, and (...) seed (...) stand in thy (...).
as none can amend: Nevertheless must all this gear pass away one day, it
being so determined: and this goodly show shall vanish as we see a garment by
little and little wax old and wear away. But thou, O mighty God, absolute in
thy self, have neither end nor beginning, but exempting thy self from all
change, thou declarest thy power in the variety of thy works.

28 And for so much as I am stayed upon this thy permanent power, and
unchangeable good will, assured, I say, upon that throne, whereof thy Son my
redeemer has taken possession, to make me his coheire through the mercy,
integrity, obedience, satisfaction and merit wherewith he purchased me the
celestial kingdom: I am certainly resolved, that this stayednesse will
uphold me, and that through all the tempests, by which it pleases thee to
lead me, for the manifestation of thy bounty and power in conservation of
thine, I shall yet arrive in that eternal haven, wherein all we, whom thou
allowest for thy servants, though never so unprofitable, being borne age after
age, and whom thou shall acknowledge for true children of Abraham, Isaak, and
Jacob, with whom thou contractedst the covenant of eternal life, shall have our
dwelling world without end, Amen.

A meditation upon the 130 Psalm.
1 Out of the deep places.
O My poor soul, fall not flat down, vex not thy self out of measure: the
burden of thy sins presses thee sore in deed, but be not for all that,
quite overwhelmed: thou art thrust down so low into ye deepest deepes, yt thou
hadest need cry loud for to be heard of him, which dwells in the highest
heights: And the ever burning hell fire is not far from that lake, whither
thine iniquities have plunged thee, so as thou may, as it were, perceive the
Echo of their cries and desperate howlings, which be there caft without al hope
of ever coming forth. But the Lord which bringes even to the borders of hell
his best beloved, when they forget themselves, knows also how well to bring
them back again. Go no further then downward, but lift up thine heart
together with thy cry, and say not in thy self, God has rejected me from
before him, for, such language God likes not. Thou cryest unto God, and
wherefore, but only because he has awakened thee? For lo, what he cries in
thine ears: My people, what have I done to thee? or wherein have I grieved or
yrked thee? have I called unto thee, O Lord.
O my God, what shall I answer thee hereto? He which receives the offense,
goes first about to excuse him: The Judge falls a beseeching of the guyltie
party: and what can I say, my God, but that I can not comprehend that which
thou do for me, who could not so much as have any being, hadest not thou
made me? And after thou hadest made me, either I forgot all that thou hadest
done for me, or else the remembrance thereof representing unto me mine
unthankfulness, astonisheth my sense, and stops my mouth. Rather thou thy
self Lord, declare unto me what thou have done for me, so as I may neure
forget it. Thou made me of nothing in the person of my first father, and is
it not somewhat to be made somewhat of nothing? Thou have facioned me in my
mothers womb, thou have taken me from thence, as it were by thine own proper
hands: thou have suckled, nourished and brought me up, by raising up unto me
such as did it according to that will and ability, which thou gave them.
Throughout this infancy, from how many harms did thou defend me? In so
much as I owe thee even so many lives, as I have passed days and hours,
minutes and moments: and yet during all that age, I neither could know my
self, whereby to know how much I ought thee, nor yet thee, whereby to thank
thee for it. What other thing then did stir thee to do well by me, but only
thy goodness? Passing further on in years, mine unworthiness grew on
together with mine age, and thy largess on the other side grew so much the
more, having bestowed abundantly on me not only wit, health, and so many
other gifts of use in this life, which also thou bestowest liberally sometime
on thy greatest enemies: but thou have imparted to me the knowledge of thy
saving health by thy dear Son our Lord Jesus Christ: Thou comfortedst me in
a thousand afflictions, thou have borne with me in ten thousand sins,
thou have vpholden me in innumerable temptations: shortly, thou never ceasedst
by thy bounty to fight against my malice, and against my rebellion by thy
patience. Lo, what thou have done to me, Lord: Now what is it that I have
done again? Alas, my God, 2 Lord, hear my voice: let thine ears attend to
ye voice of my prayers.
if I enter into this deapth of ripping up mine iniquities, whereof any one
suffices to make me guilty of eternal death, surely I am quite undone.

3 If thou, O Lord, straightly markest iniquities, O Lord, who shall stand?
2 I can then do nothing else, but beseech thee to hear my cries: and thou will do it, Lord. For, O Lord God, who could ever have abiden before thee,
if thou, hadest taken the law on his sins?

4 But mercy is with thee, that thou may be feared.
4 Take heart again, my soul, for thy Judge is the fountain of compassion,
otherwise there were none order to serve and beseech him, but all in vain. It
is true, thou have lauished out his riches, but thy God is as rich, and as
far from nigardlinesse as ever: Thou have thralled thy self to sin and
death, but thy God has redeemed thee with a more then sufficient ransom: Say
rather with that poor unthrift, 5 I have waited on the Lord: my soul has
waited, and I have trusted in his word.
I go to my father: he will receive thee without casting thee in the teeth,
yea rather he will rejoice of thy return, he wayteth to embrace thee with his
mercy. Do not as did Adam, who ran away from his face whom he had
offended: Should the sick man flee the Physician? Whither should a poor body
go, but to him that will and can help him? He has given his Son for thee,
and will he now reject thee? Weenest thou that Jesus Christ, who has bought
thee so dear, 6 My soul waits on the Lord more then the morning watch
watches for the morning.
will now lose thee? Wait for his grace rather, and if he be slow to reach
his hand, consider that thou slackest much more thy turning to him. Doubt not
of his will, since both in his word, and in his dealing toward thee, thou have
yet more clear and evident testimonies thereof, then thou have of his might.
Be rather in thy ward, watching always, without being weary or slumbering, 7
Let Israel wait on Lord: for yt with the Lord is mercy, and with him is
great redemption.
until he appear as the dawning of the day, chasing away the darkness
wherein thou art plunged.

7 And you whosoever, overthrown like me, follow mine example and advise,
go we all my brethren to that great eternal God, joining together with the
acknowledgement of our faults, hope, which never disappoynteth them that have
it, being settled upon his infallible truth. If our sins be innumerable, his
mercy is infinite toward the repenting, believing, hoping, and praying.

8 And he shall redeem Israel from all his iniquities.
8 Will we have any other proof hereof, then that incomprehensible love,
wherethrough this good father was moved, even not to spare his son? Then
this infinite love of this great shepherd, which made himself of none
account, to enriche us? Who has charged himself with all our sins, not one
except? Who was obedient for his poor Israel, that is to say, his elect, even
to that death of the cross? I embrace thee with both mine arms, O Jesus
Christ, which have reconciled me to the Father, assuring me by thy Spirit, of
the comfort of my salvation in thee, and so fast embracing thee, I receive the
pledges of life and everlasting bliss. Amen.

A meditation upon the 143 Psalm.
1 Hear my prayer, O Lord, and hearken unto my supplication: answer me in
thy truth and in thy righteousness.
O Eternal God, listen to my prayer, hearken to my request, hear me, for
thine assured trustines byndeth thee to hold that which thy goodness has
promised: And what can I allege herein, but thine own self? for not I
alone, 2 (And enter not into judgment with thy servant: for in thy sight shall
none that lives be justified)
poor and woe begone sinner that I am, but no man alive going about to debate
his cause with thee, as though he had right on his side, shall be found
righteous. Wherefore, in stead of pleading I condemn and judge my self: I
bring thee nothing of mine own but iniquity, and I crave that which is thine,
to wit, grace and mercy.

3 For the enemy has persecuted my soul: he has smitten my life down to
the earth: he has laid me in the darkness, as they that have been dead long
ago:
3 O my God, thou see, alas, my piteous estate: mine enemies and thine pursue
me for life, which already lies as is were in the dust, at their mercy: I am
even now in the darkness of death, yea I am as a Carrion long since dead and
stinking.

4 Alas, my spirit is so perplexed, that it cannot resolve nor wind it self
out. 4 And my spirit was in perplexity in me, and mine heart within me was
amassed.
Both understanding and heart are quite lost within me: whereupon I bethought me
of so many ancient testimonies and experiments which I have had of thy
benignity and favor from mine infancy, and I stayde my self upon
consideration of the high works of thy hands, even true evidences of thine
infinite wisdom and bounty together, toward the very least of thy
creatures: and namely I beheld in my spirit thine high acts on behalf of thy
well-beloved, 6 I stretch forth mine hands unto thee: my soul desires after
thee, as the thirsty la^d.
things verily passing all wonder.

6 This encouraged me, my God, to stretche forth mine hands to thee: this I
say, 7 Hear me speedily, O Lord, for my spirit fails: hide not thy face
from me, else I shall be like unto them that go down into the pit
strengthened my poor conscience to address it self to thee, yea with more
burning desire, then ever the most parched ground gaped for the moisture of thy
rain.

7 But what is to be done? Even forthwith haste thee, answer me O eternal God,
8 Let me hear thy loving kindness in the morning, for in thee is my trust:
show me the way, yt I should walk in, for I lift up my soul unto thee.
for I ca^ endure no longer: Behold me dead, lying in the dust of the grave,
unless thou show forth that cheerful eye which with one only look can
revive the dead: without the sound of thy most gentle voice, I am cast away:
make it then to sound and sound again in mine ears, and in mine heart, for I
am of ye number of those to who^ thou have bound thy self, no whit, alas, for
any merit of mine, but thine only free mercy. I am, I say, one of those by thy
grace, to wit, of those which hope for yt which thou have promised, and given
them grace to believe: without this I wot not where to become, nor which way to
turn me. And therefore, O high God, I prepare my self to thee, that thou
might teach me which way to hold: 9 Deliver me, O Lord, from mine enemies:
for I hid me with thee.
thou see how mine enemies hemme me in: deliver me, O eternal, who alone
can and wilt do it, for so much as I have no refuge but under thy covert.
Alas, I weened with my self to have seen many trim starting holes: and again
I am tempted to assay infinite means. But, God forbid, I should herein
follow that which this blind and froward nature would suggest. Hence from me,
thou unwise wit, foolish wisdom, unreasonable reason, and all ye passions
which can do naught but carry me headlong on mine own head. It is thou, O
Lord, that I will hold, and hold fast for my God: consequently, 10 Teach me
to do thy will, for thou art my God: let thy good Spirit lead me unto the land
of righteousness.
nothing will I will, save that thou willest. And because I can neither
understand this will, nor take pleasure to follow it when I have understood
it, teach it me, O Lord, and lead me in it, not alone to know it, but also to
practice it, Let thy good spirit be my loads man in the right way, 11 Quicken
me, O Lord for thy Names take, and for thy righteousness bring my soul out of
trouble.
and not that tempting spirit, nor yet flesh and blood.

11 Up now then my poor spirit hitherunto desolate: comfort thy self, for
the eternal will draw comfort forth of him self to revive she, because it
has pleased him that his name should be called upon in thee, and according to
his infinite bounty will deliver thee out of all anguishes.

12 And for thy mercy stay mine enemies, and destroy all them that oppress my
soul: for I am thy servant.
12 Does Satan amase thee? he has vanquished him for thee. Does the
corruption of thy nature astonish thee? the son of God making him self man
has fully sanctified it for thee. Do thy sins affright thee which be fruits
of this corruption? He has borne them all upon the tree, and has paid for thy
discharge: which more is, his righteousness is thine, since he himself is
thine. Art thou afraid of men, since God is for thee? Does death affray thee?
it is vanquished and turned into an entry of life. Behold then all thine
enemies scattered, behold quite under foot, all such as afflicted thee within
and without, because the Lord allows thee for one of his servants and
household. Amen.

Imprinted at London in Bacon house by Christopher Barker, Printer to the
Queens most excellent Majesty. 1582.


