Three moral Treatises, no less pleasant than necessary for all men to
read, whereof the one is called the Learned Prince, the other the Fruits of
Foes, the third the Port of rest.

Imprynted at London by Wyllyam Seres, dwelling at the west end of Poules at
the sign of the Hedghogge.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

To the Queens highness
OF all the books that ever Plutarke wrote,
More mete is none, when they have time and space,
For Princes all to read and well to note:
Then this, which hear I offer to your grace.
For like as he, the good does justly praise,
The evil their faults, so, plainlye does he tell,
And whilst he does consider both their ways:
He shows wherein a Prince ought most texcell.
That is to say in learning, wit, and skill,
To tame affectes, and follow reasons lore,
Whose steps do flethe ways of froward will:
And treades the paths of justice evermore.
And though this Book, your highness often has read,
In Grekyshe prose as Plutarke did it wright:
My rural muse, for that, yeat, had no dredde
In Englysh verse, again the same tendight.
Presuminge of the favor which she fownde,
When that she sange, what fruits of foes might rys^
And that your grace, gave ear unto the sownde
Of such rude ryme, as she did then deuyse.
Wherefore now hark my liege and souraigne Queen
What Plutarke says of Princes good and badde
Who if he were alive to Judge: I wene,
Of all the Qu^nes in honor to be had,
Your learning, and your virtues pondred well,
He would your grace, should only bear the bell.
Your majesty's most humble Subject Thomas Blondeuille.

The learned Prince.
THe Cyrens once made great request,
That Plato would vouchsafe to wright
such laws, as he for the thought best,
Their state thereby, to rule upright.
But Plato tho, did clean refuse,
So hard a thing to take in hand,
Who knew, they would good laws abuse
Which had such wealth within their land.
For nothing is more hard tentreate,
More proud, ne worse to deal wythall,
Than is that man, in wealthye state
Which thinks to stand, and fearth no fall.
Wherefore it is to hard for such
As others rule, and bear the swaye,
To suffer laws to rule to much,
Lest than, their power should sone decay.
For reason as their Cheffe to take,
They do abhor: lest Princely might,
They should then forced be to make
A slave: to Justice truth and right.
As men alas which do not know,
What ^^eop^mp the Spartan duke
Said to his wife with voice full low,
When she objected this rebuke.
For whereas he did first of all
To royal power, Tribunos add:
She said thou bryngst thy Son, in thrall,
To leave less power, then thou have had.
No rather yet, then aunswerde he
I shall him leave so much the more
For now his power shall stronger be
Then ever mine was heretofore.
And though this Prince himself depryud
Of that which he to give thought good:
As though small brooks he had deryud
Out of a goulffe, or flowinge flood:
Remyttynge yet the riguor great
Of royal power which none can bear
He did avoid all enuyouse hate:
And leadde his life clean out of fear.
If reason got by wysedomes lore
Assist the Prince: she gardes his health,
For ryddynge thill away before
She leaves the good tencrease his wealth.
But many Kings that folyshe are
To masters rude that karue in stone
And have no art, I may compare
So little diffrence is or none.
For they their Images do Judge
Then best to make: when that they shape
them arms and thighs with legs most hudge
and ougly mouths full wide to gape.
Vnprudent kings even so I say
By frowning lokes, big voice, disdain,
and keeping closse in, all the day,
Great majesty do think tattaine.
Like Images in outward show
Which do pretend some goodly one
Yeat inwardlye if you will know
they only are but earth or stone.
In one thing yeat they disagree.
For Images through that their weight
and heavy poyse, fast stablisht be:
Ne do they move but stand up straight.
Where foolish kings untaught I say
For that within they are not sound
Ne truly waide they swerve and swaye
and oftimes fall unto the ground.
For why unless to place thou wylt
In suer wise, thy Principal:
What ever shall thereon be buylt:
In breffe must needs to ruin fall.
But as the Craftsman should forsee
His rule be right and truly made
Without all fault before that he
In any work do further wade:
A Prince likewise ought first to kno
Himself to rule and rightlye guide
And then to frame his subjects so
As in good rule they may abide.
For why it is a thing unmeet
A feeble man to take in hand
to set up others on their fete
When he himself can scantly stand.
Ne likewise can it decente be
That he should teach which has no skill
Or order men in each degree
In whom does reign disorder still.
Ne should that man command of right
Which reasons rule does not obaye
Though fools him count of greatest might
Which subject is no kind of way.
The king of Perce, did all men take
To be his slaves and live in thrall
His wife except whom he should make
His will tobaye, above them all.
But some perhaps would now demand


Both Gods and men, as Poets sing.
I mean not that which is expressed,
In books of paper, wodde, or stone,
But reason graft within his breast,
To guide his doings euerychone.
The King of Pearce was wont to have
A chamberlane whom day by day
Wha^ morning came he straight charg gave
That he to him these words should say.
Arise thou King and sleep no more
But careful be to do right sone
Such needful things as heretofore
Mesoromasdes would have done.
But Kings that wise and learned are
Have always one within their mind
More prompt to tell them of their care
Then any man that they can find,
Polemon said that Cupyde was
A servant to the Gods above
From place to place with speed to pass
To seek what did young laddes behoue.
But one more rightly yet might say
Gods ministers that Princes be
To take the charge of men always
And eke their wealth to well forsee.
That like as God do let them have
Those godly gifts which they enjoy
Some part even so they still should save
And wiselye ought the rest temploye.
We see the ample heaven how he,
With liquid arms do thearth embrace:
Who first sent down the seeds which she
With fruit bringes forth in every place.
Some grow by rain, and some by wind,
By glittringe stars some norissht are
And some the Moon with moystures kind
To foster up, has only care.
And finallye the louelye Son
Whose shyning beams adorneth all
His friendly course does daily run
And shows like love to great and small.
These godly gifts yeat can we not
Ne rightlye use ne well enjoy
Onles also it be our lot
To have a Prince Justice and Joy.
For Justice is of law the end
And law the Princes work I say
The Prince gods lykenes does portende
Who over all must bear the swaye.
And neadith not the skillful hand
Of Phidias, or Policlette,
Of Miron eke or such like band
Of those that Carue and colors set.
For he himself by virtue can
Himself to God most like descrye
An Image pleasinge eurye manne
And noble to behold with eye.
And like as God in heaven above
The shyninge Son and Moon does place
In goodliest wise as best behoue
To show his shape and lyuelye grace:
Such is that Prince within his land
Which fearinge God, maintayneth right,
And reasons rule does understand,
VVherin consistes his port and might.
And not in Scepter, or in Crown,
In thunder bolt, or glyttringe sword,
whereby some think tobteyne renown
Since than, they should be greatly ferde.
Whereas in deed, for that they seem
That none to them may have access:
They are envied, and wise men deny
Such port to be great foolishness.
For God offended is with those
His thundringe power that imitates:
But he delights in such as chose
In clemency to be his mates.
And does promote them more and more
And of his own benignytye:
Does make them partners of his lore
Of justice, truth, and equitye.
Which things in deed are more deuyne
Than fyar, light, or phoebus course,
Than stars that rise or down declyne
Ye endless life it self, is worse.
For why long life is not the cause
That God most happy counted is
But prince of virtue is the clause
Whereon depends all his blis.
When Alexander sorye was
For Clytos death whom he had slain:
Then Anaxarke, such woeful cas
To mittigate: to him began said.
To Clito hapt but Justice tho,
Which does assiste the gods always
That what soever Princes do,
Should rightful seem without denaye.
Which saying was ne right, ne good,
For where the king bewaild his crime:
This semd to egg him in like mood,
To do like act an other time.
But if for men it lawful were
Such things texamyne as them list:
Full quickly then, it would appear
That Justice does not Jove assiste.
For Justice even it self to be,
Almightye Jove we ought to take:
A law of most antiquitye
Which never did the truth forsake.
The old men also plainlye say
It passes Jove his pour and might
When lady Justice is away:
A kingdom for to rule upright.
Who as Hesyode has us tought
A virgyn is immaculate,
A shamefast maid, which never wrought
But modestlye with eurye state.
And hereof kings surnamed are
Right reverent, and dredefull aye:
For those in whom does dwell least fear,
Ought to be feared most I say.
But it behoues much more a king
To fear to do, then suffer ille,
For of the one the other spring,
So do so have is Justice will.
This Princely fear a Prince likewise
Should always have: Unawares that lest
To him, for lack of careful eyes:
With wrongs his subjects be oppressed.
For so the dogs that watch the fold
When they the cruel wolf do hear:
Not for themselves which are full bold,
But for their charge have only fear.
Epamynond the Theban knight
His subjects tendinge feasts and play
Would all alone both day and night
Keep watch and ward and oftymes say.
That he did aye live soberlye
And watchful was to that intent
That others might more quyetlye
Be drunk, and sleep, as they were bente.
When Cezar had at vtique town,
to Cato yeuen the ouerthro:
the rest vnslayne, then Cato down
Did call: unto the sea to go.
And having seen them safelye shipte
and wysht them well to pass the sea:
as one with fewer cares beclipte,
Returned home himself to slay.
By which ensample Cato hear,
Does teach all Princes that be wise,
Of what, they should have greatest fear,
And what again, they should despise.
But on the other part behold
Clearchus cruel king of Ponte,
How like a Serpente laid in fold
In chest closse shut to sleep was wont.
Full like Taristodeme therefore
Who in his dyninge chamber had
A closette with a falling door
And eke with beddynge fynelye cladde.
VVherin his concupyne and he
Were wont all night to take their rest,
And to thintente that none should se
Ne come to vex them in their nest:
The mother of the damsel should
The stayer clean from thence remove
And set it, theare against they would
come down next morning from above.
How much think you would this man flee
A Palace, Court, or Feastynge place
Which of his chamber as you see
A prison made to keep his grace.
Thus true kings have no fear in deed
But aye for those, on whom they reign:
But Tyrants for them selves have dread
Lest for their vice they should be slain.
The greater power, the greater fear,
The more to rule, that they obtain:
The more as foes to them appear,
VVherby they grow in more disdain.
With matter apt all shapes to take
And subject aye to sundry change
Of god some would a mixture make
and hyde him theare which is full strange.
But Plato sayith God dwelles above
And there fast fixed in holy sawes:
From truth he never does remove
Ne swarues from natures steadfast laws.
And as in heaven like to a glass
The son his shape does represente:
In earth, the light of Justice was
By him ordeynd: for like intent.
Which shape all wise and happy men
To counterfete employe their pain
Full busuly with wysdomes pen
The chefeste blis thereby tattaine.
But nothing can this habit bread
In us so sone, as reasons lore
Got out of wysdoms schole in deed:
To guide our doings ever more
When Alexander had well tryde
The prompt wit of Diogenes
And seen his stoutnes great beside:
He marueyled, and said, doutles:
If I not Alexander were,
I would become diogenes,
As one that virtue would feign leare:
But princely power did him oppress.
Which would not grant him time tapply:
The thing so much esteemed aye
For lack whereof he did envy?
The Cinickes scrippe, and pore array.
Wherewith he saw the Cinicke made
At all assayes more strong and stouts
Than he himself when to invade
Of horse and men had greatest route.
Thus in desiar and good will
Diogenes the king might be
And yeat in deed remaining still
In princelye state and high degree.
Yea, he, more need had in this cas
To be diogenes aryght:
In that he Alexander was
An emprour great of power and might.
Who had in fortunes seas to strive
With cruel storms and rocks beside
Whereon his ship might easlye drive
Onles he had the better guide.
For private men of low degree
That others can offend no way
Though they taffectes often subject be
Their greues yeat are but dreams I say.
But whereas power is joined unto
Evil ordered life, thear think it true
That such affectes will cause also
Great grefe in deed for to ensewe.
The chefest fruit that Dionise
Did of his empire take: it was,
(He said) what he did than devise,
With speed to have it brought to pass.
A thing most peryllouse therefore
It is, indecent things to will:
When he that wylleth, evermore
Has power, the same for to fulfill.
For power does malice quickly move,
With evil affectes the mind to streke
As envy, wrath, aduowtry, love,
Men's goods also, and lives to seek.
And then the word nys sooner said,
But woe to him that is suspect
Toffende in that to him is laid,
For sentence there, must take effect.
Of nature, such as searchers be:
Do hold that after thunder clapp
The lyghtnyng coms, yeat do we se
The same before we hear the rapp.
The bludd likewise before the wound
To us most commonly appears:
For sight does mete the light; wheare sound
Is feign to come euin to our ears.
In kyngdoms so, some men we find
Taue suffered ear, thaccused were
And sentence yeuen to wrath inclynde
Before due proof of crime appear.
For wrath naught hable is twithstand
The power of malice when she list,
As is the anchor firt in sand
Which can the cruel sea resist.
Onles that reason with her wayght
Press down such power, and kings abide
To mark the son, in greatest hayght
How he himself does wysly guide.
For when he mownted is aloft
To Cancers ryng, he semes to stay,
In that he goes so fair and soft
Whereby he does assure his way.
But this by daily proof we know
Where power and malice do abide:
There, malice needs, her self must show,
And can her face no long time hyde.
If those that have the falling ill
At any time take cold I say,
They can not stand but stagger still
Which plainly does their grefe bewray.
(...) But only wysshe and daily crave
Of god to grant, that over us
Long time of reign her bygones have
Which is so good and gracious.
Finis.
The fruytes of Foes. Newly corrected and cleansed of many faults escaped in
the former printing.

Anno domini. M.D.LXI.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

Roger Ascham Secretory to the Queens majesty, for the latin tongue, in
praise of the book.
OF English books, as I could find,
I have perused many one:
Yet so well done unto my mind,
As this is, yet have I found none
The words of matter here do rise,
So fitly and so naturally,
As heart can wish or wit devise
In my conceit and fantasy.
The words well chosen and well set,
Do bring such light unto the sense:
As if I lackt I would not let,
To bye this book for forty pense.
To the Queens highness
SVch Newyeres gifts as most me^ do prepare
To give your grace, it passes far my power.
For gold ne pearl, ne such like costly ware,
Can I possess: since fortune still does lowre.
As she on me has hereto ever done,
Which had me brought at length to great distress
But that the hope, which in your grace alone
I always fixed: my griefs did often redress.
Which hope I say, even now does make me bold
Your royal state, with this so small a queyre
For to present: yea more, that hope me told,
From this day forth, I should no more dispeire.
For lo, (says she) the golden world at hand,
And Justice reigns again within this land.
Your majesty's most humble servant. Thomas Blundeuille.

The fruits of Foes.
BY Plutarks lore of mortal foes,
Learn ye yt list some fruit to take,
For fruits enough, he does disclees
Whereof I will, you partners make
In old time past, me^ only sought,
The hurtful beasts, their foes to kill,
Of other spoil, they nothing thought,
But so to save themselves from ill.
But others came then afterward,
Whose slight was such, those beasts to slay:
As they thereto had small regard,
Except they might obtain some pray.
Their flesh to eat, they used therefore,
And with their wolle, themselves to cladde,
Their milk and galle they kept in store:
To heal such griefs, as sick men had.
And of their hydes, they harnes made,
Themselves to arm, on every side:
That they might aye in safety wade
Against all force, that might betyde.
Lo thus by foes, no hurt to take,
It did not them at all suffice,
Except they might such great gain make:
As they themselves could best devise.
If thou therefore, without some hate,
Here cannot live in quiet rest:
Invent some way of such debate,
To leave the worst, and take the best.
No tylman can by art devise,
Each tree to spoil, of nature wild:
Nor huntsman eke, be he right wise,
Can tame each beast, that roons in fyelde.
Wherefore they have right wisely found,
The mean tapply such beast and tree,
To other use, which does redounde,
Unto their great commoditee.
The water of the sea, we see,
Is salt, and has vpleasante taste:
Yet chiefly thence, I say have we,
The fish, our food, which we do waste.
Yea, more then that, things of great price,
The ships by sea to us do bring,
Both pleasant silk, and wholesome spice,
And many other needful thing.
The brightness of the flaminge fire,
Appearing in the Satirs sight:
Straight ways, so kindled his desire.
That it timbrace, he took delight.
Prometheus, then loud can cry,
Beware he said embrace none such,
For that it has the property:
To burn all those, that does it tuche.
It was not made to colle, and kiss,
But heat, and light, always to yield:
The very mean also it is:
Whereby crafts men, their arts do welde.
Hereby therefore, we may perceive,
That of our foe right perilous,
In this our life we may receive,
Such fruits as be commodious.
For though some things be very ill,
To those, to whom they appertain,
Yet used they may be, with such skyll:
As loss shall easily turn to gain.
As lo for proof, some sickly corse
For easementes sake, sekes quiet rest.
Where some again, to win their force,
To travel often, do think it best.
Diogenes and Crates chance,
Do well declare, how banishmentes
And loss of goods, do some auaunce
To knowledge great, which them contents.
When Zeno heard, that tempests great,
In raginge sea, his ship had lost:
He mourned not ne yet did fret,
But made as though it little cost
And thus began say, to fortune tho,
How dearly do thou me entreat:
Me thus to force, again to go,
In wysedoms school, to find a seat.
Some beasts we see, such stomakes have
As serpents cause full soon disgeast,
Both wood and stone, they also crave
Such kind of food, them hurts least.
But some again, so deinty been
That they often loath, the finest bredde,
And purest wine, that can be seen:
VVherwith they might be always fed.
Even so fares fools, that friendship joys,
Do aye destroy, but to the wise:
Of hateful strife and spightfull toys,
Great wealth, and gain, does often arise.
Wherefore, me thinks, where in thy foe
Does seem to give the greatest grief:
Thou may thereof, receive also
Much greater gain to thy relief.
And if thou ask, how that may be,
I say to thee, consider then,
What care he has, thy works to se,
With whom, to whom, what, where, and when.
With Linx his eyes, he does behold,
Thy life, thy friend, and servant aye,
Thy deeds, and thoughts right manifold,
Thy name to harm, if that he may.
This profyt eke, by foes we have
Our friends often times, we do not mind,
They may be sick, and laid in grave,
Unawares to us, like men unkind.
But of our foe, both day and night
We think and dream, such is our choice,
His grief, or bane, to have in sight:
Which only does, our minds rejoice.
If thou be sick, or much in det,
Fallen out with wife, with maid, or man,
Yea, no mishap can thee beset:
But, it, thy foes, eft sone know can.
Like ravening birds, that putryd flesh,
And not the sound, far of can smell,
So they thy illes, to spy be fresh,
And all thy griefs, with eye full fell.
What greater gain may be than this,
Hereby to learn, in such a sort
Our life to lead, as none there is:
That ill thereof may once report.
For as sick men that wary be,
In meats and drinks, that may offend:
In words and deeds, even so do we
Take heed that they the best pretend.
Whereby we come in schole to dwell,
Of customs good, and excellent,
For reason rules thaffections fell:
Whereto our minds be alwales bent.
Yea, through long time, and exercise,
It bredes in us, such stedfastnes:
That learn we can none other guise,
But aye to live in holiness.
The towns that long have been beset,
With enmies stout on every side:
Have derely learnde, by losses great,
To keep good watch in every ride.
And eke their laws and ordinance,
To execute with justice aye
The humble sort for to advance:
The proud to chaste, that nyll obey.
Even so fare those that forced be,
Through spightfull foes, both negligence,
And slouthfulnes always to flee
Whereby they live without offense.
For custom shall them bring with speed,
To such a trade of doing well,
That if they go as reason led:
In error none, they can long dwell.
When minstrels of one suit and band
In open place do music make:
Without all fear, and care they stand,
And to their play, no head do take.
But when their skyll, they do compare
With strangers, that profess like art:
They sharp their wits, and have great care,
That every one may do his part.
Of instruments, and eke of stringes,
They seek where they may have best choice,
And often do prove, how with such things
May best agree, both hand and voice.
Even so it fares with him, whose life
And honor both, much spighted is
By those that sekes, with hateful strife
His things to blame that be amiss.
Full ware is he in business,
And eke foresees thereof the end,
For when we err: malitiousnes
Regardes the foe, more than the friend.
When Carthage was all torn and rent,
And Greece subdude, the Romans thought
Themselves full safe, their foes thus shent,
They were all glad, and feared naught.
But Scipio did then repreue,
In peril most be we (quoth he)
When no foe is, that may us grieve,
Whose fear should make us sloth to fle,
One asked once Diogenes
How he might best revenged be
Of all his ^oes, both more and les,
That from all care he might be free.
Diogenes right wisely tho
To him began say, no dent of knife
Can grieve so much thy cruel fo:
As for to see thy perfect life.
What grudge, what grief, the common sort
Conceiues to see, the go odly horse
And coursing dogs, which but for sport,
To keep: their ^^es do little force.
What playntes, what sighthes, and dolfull sownds
Their spightfull breasts to heaven do yield,
To see their pleasant garden growndes,
Or store of corn to grow in field.
How much more then, would they lament,
To s^e their foe to be full just?
In word and deed, to virtue bent,
Of sober life, and free from lust.
And eke to budde out of his breast,
That fraighted is, with holiness
Such domes, and councels, as are best,
To ease each heart in heauynes.
The tongues of them, that conquerde be,
Are bound from speech, says Pindarus:
And yet these words, as you shall see,
To all be not approbrious.
But only do such men reprove,
As needs must yield, unto their foes,
In all those virtues, that behoue,
A perfect man for to disclose.
For such things faith Dimosthenes
Do bind the tongue in torment aye,
And stoppes the mouth of them doutles
That thinks more ill, then they dare say.
Enforce to show thy self therefore,
Since in thy power it does consist:
Thy life to guide by virtues lore,
Their wicked tongues for to resist.
And when thou would feign put thy foe,
In great despair, take not the way
By heinous words, as others do,
His name to persecute I say.
Ne beastly man, ne filthy fool
Do thou him call, but rather seek,
In such a sort thy self to school,
That none thy doings may misleke.
Be true thy self, in word and deed
Be modest still, and chaste also
Show curtesy in time of need
To such as have with thee to do.
And if it should so come to pass,
That needs, thy foe thou must reprove
For any fault: yet in that case,
See first thy self thou do well prove.
Examine eke with diligence,
Thine inward parts if they be free,
From all such vire and negligence:
as in thy foe, thou semste to see.
For else perhaps thou may give cause,
To some ill tongue, that stands thee by:
With voice full soft, to say this clause,
Recited in a Tragedy.
Behold I say this foolish man,
That takes in hand the wounds to cure
Of other men: and yet naught can
His own redress, I you assure.
But if he call thee ignorant,
Learn wisdom then by industry
Thy faynty heart, if he do taunt
Let stoutnes show thou will not fly.
If he thee check for lechery,
Avoid each spark of filthiness,
Out of thy breast full spedilie,
and learn to live in holiness.
More foul or grievous nothing is
Then for a man such faults to check
As all the shame thereof ywis
Again shall turn upon his neck.
For as rebounde of glittering light,
The feeble sight does most offend:
Even so most grievous is the spite,
Which truth beats back, from whence it wend.
The mistie clouds unto the wind,
that blows Northeast, do aye resort,
The wicked life even so we find
To her does draw all ill report.
If any man in Platoes sight
Had vilye done, straight thence would he,
And softly say, may any wight,
Such one as he, me force to be?
But when thou haste with words of ire
Thy foe yprict, for his offense:
Behold thy self, and eke desire
Thy life tamende, with diligence.
Of spightfull words so shall thou draw
Much fruit, to thy great wealth and gain
Though some it think, ne right ne law,
To use such words, of great disdain.
The common sort, do laughe, and smyle,
When any balde or crooked man,
Do others taunt, and often reuyle,
For such defectes, as themselves han.
What greater scorn, then would it be,
If thou such faults should reprehende:
As one with worse, might answer thee
Which thou in no wise could defend.
As once, did Leo Bizantine,
When one that had a crooked back,
Him cast in teeth his bleared eyne
alas (quoth he) this is no lack.
A human thing this is, I say,
But why alas can not espy:
How on thy back thou bear always,
That goddess fell, dame Nemesye? Nemesis Godd^sse r^uenge.

Aduouterer, see none thou call
Whilst fouler lust in thee does reign:
Ne yet reprove the prodigal,
If avarice thy life does stain.
Alemeon when he did revile,
Adrastus, king: of kin thou art
(Quoth he) unto that woman vile:
Which carft with knife, her husbands heart.
Adrastus then, him aunswerd lo,
With that which did him touch at quick
Such beastly wrath in thee did floe
Thy dame to slay ere she were sick.
When Dyonise did Crassus skorne,
For that he wailde, his Lampreys cas,
By crewell death, then all forlorn,
Which in his ponde, long fostred was.
Then Crassus said, rebuke not me
Since that from thee no tears did fall
The death to see, of thy wives three
Nor felst no grief, thereby at all.
Who so delights to check or taunt,
No rybalde, knave, or fool must be:
With bragging words, himself to vaunt,
But rather should from vice be free.
Wherefore, none semes more bound tobay,
Apollos word (thine own self know:)
Then those that are most prompt always
To rail, to jest, to mock, and mow.
For hap, it may, says Sophocles,
That whilst they taunt, as them likes best:
To them again, is said doubtless:
That which to hear, they covet lest.
In tauntyng thus our foes, we find
No little fruit, but more we gain,
When they likewise, with words unkind,
Our faults to taunt, do not refrain.
Anthistines said well therefore,
That life, in safety to encloes
Man ought to have always in store:
Right perfect friends, or bitter foes.
For faithful friends will us reform
When that we err: our foes again
Will so much rail, and out of form,
That needs from vice, we must abstain.
But sith that now true friendship is
Of free speech spoylde, and flattry bent
To chatte, and prate of things amysse
Good counsels eke must needs all stent.
And therefore nothing now remains
For us to do: but to abide,
The truth to hear, to our great pains,
By spightfull foes, that naught will hyde.
When Telephus his festred wound
Could no wise heal: with thenmies spear
Which first him hurt louelyfe, him bound,
To lance the same without all fear.
Even so must they of force agree
To bide reprofe of spightful foes:
Where wants friends their faults to see,
And frankly will the same disclose.
Nor in this case, we should behold
Our foes intent, when they so rail,
But if such things as they have told,
Be true in us, or else do fail.
Prothemeus of Thessalie
A grievous sore had in his breast:
Which one that was his enemy,
Did cure by chance against his heast.
For when he thought to have him slain,
By dent of sword he brake the sore,
Which festred was to his great pain,
And so him held for evermore.
Even so full often it comes to pass,
That words yspoke for ill intent,
Do greatly help, some one that was
His fault tamend: full negligent.
But most men when they are reuilde
Have no regard, if with such vice,
As is them told, they be defilde:
But sekes revenge, by like advice.
Where reason would that such as are
By foes rebukte, for their offense:
Should afterward thereof beware,
And seek redress with diligence.
Yea, more then that, without desert,
Though they us check, for any thing:
To seek yet then, it is our part,
The cause whereof the same did spring.
And eke to fear lest ear we thought,
We have the same or such like don
For one suspect, has many brought
To shame, and great derision.
As thargiue king sir Lacydes,
Because he was so nice of gate
And eke his here would finely dress
With finger aye, was poynted ate.
And called a man effeminat,
The like to Pompey did befall,
For that he used his hedde to scrat:
When he no hurt, did think at all.
For none did more then he, despise
Such wanton lust and tenderness,
Who aye was bent to enterprise:
Things great of weight and hardines.
So Crassus eke to tell you plain,
Suspected was through such like tale,
For that he did as some men feign,
Frequent full often, a maid vestale.
And yet in deed his connyng nas,
For any hurt or ill intent:
But cer^ain land to hye, in cas,
He could obtain her free concent,
Posthumia through mirth and play,
And hauntyng often without respect
Men's company, her name I say
With infamy did sore infect.
For which she cited was tappere,
As one that had in lechery:
Abusde her self, with kinsfolks nere:
And yet she did no villainy.
Whom though that Spurius, which hight
Manutius, then bishop hye,
Of that ill fame, did clean acquight,
He warnde her yet thus fatherly.
Posthumia, since that thou haste,
In holy works, thy life aye led,
Lest wanton talk, thy name may waste
I counsel thee have likewise dredde.
Themistocles, none ill had wrought,
When he so often letters sent:
To Pawsanye, yet some folks thought
To traye the realm, was his intent.
If any man thee charge therefore,
With things untrue in every part,
Be negligent no whit the more,
Nor lightly let them from thee start.
But take good head, lest thou or thine,
Has given some cause, of such ill fame,
Which once found out, thy self enclyne,
To learn, thencefoorth to flee the same.
For such ill happes as comes unawares
Do often times teach, what is for us,
Most mete to do, in such like cares,
As Merop says in writing thus.
When fortune did me clean deprive
Of that, which I esteemed most:
To much more wit I did arrive
Albeit full dear it did me cost.
By masters then of cheaper price
Which be our foes, why should we steke
In things unknown to take aduyce,
Which with such cost we sometime seek.
For they in us do know and see
A thousand things, which friends reject,
Because by love they blinded be,
Where foes are full of great respect.
When Hierons foe did him reprove,
For that his breath did sauer ill:
Then to his wife, and best beloue,
With speed went he to chide his fill.
And said to her, why have thou not,
To me declarde this fault of mine?
Because (quoth she) I thought god wot,
That all men's brethes had been as thine.
Thus may you see, that friends most dear
Our faults naught can, so soon out find
As foes that aye, both far and near:
Fayles not to keep such things in mind.
One virtue more, and that full good
By foes also we may obtain:
Which is, our tongues in angry mood,
By reasons bytte for to refrain.
For virtues such will not be had,
Except we learn in time to tame,
Our fierce affectes, and rageing mad,
VVherby oftimes, we come to shame.
As lo, behold, the wrathful man,
For lack of wit and temperaunce,
His foolish words, to stay naught can:
Whereof does spring much variaunce.
This fault therefore, as Plato says,
Both god and man, does chaste doubtless:
For that the rest at all assayes,
It does excede in peuishnes.
But silence is, without all harm,
And tongues to hear, that lewdly rave
With stoutnes such, it self does arm:
As Socrates was wont to have.
Yea rather more as Hercules
For as they say, no words of spite,
Could once offend his hardines:
But as a fly them wayde so light.
What thing therefore more grave may be,
Then still to be, whilst foes do rail,
As when we would take heed to fle:
Some fearful rock, whereby we sail
Besides all this, thou shall thus leare,
Thy brawling wife, and chydinge friend
Thy brothers faults with ease to bear,
How much soever they offend.
I only speak of these, I say,
Because I do my self assure,
Thy parents words and stripes always,
Without all grudge thou will endure.
For what intent did Socrates
His froward wife, Zantip by name
At home retain, but patientnes
To learn: abroad to use the same.
Much better were such patience
To learn by suffryng aye thy foe:
Whose spightfull words with ill pretense
Do count as wind, and let them go.
In enmity, thus you may see,
That patience mylde has greatest grace
But friendship sekes simplicitee
And friendly deeds does most embrace
Nor it deserves so great a praise
Thy faithful friend to gratefie:
As it is foul when need assayes
Of friendly help, him to deny.
Our foes offense if we set light,
When just revenge in us does lie:
It demed is in each man's sight
A deed, which does our virtue try.
But most renown to him is due,
Who, as his own, his foes disgrace
With woeful heart does wayle and rue,
And him to help does have a pace.
And eke his prompt to do no less
When that he sees his wife or child,
His man or maid in great distress
And praying aid with words full mylde.
For stony hearts have they ywis
That would not praise so great a grace:
And think him worthy all men's bliss,
That mercy such will than embrace.
When Caesar made the Pictures fair,
Of Pompey to be set again,
That down were cast out of their chair,
Much praise thereby he did than gain.
For Tully said, O worthy wight,
By tendering thus, thy foes renown
Thou haste thine own, so well yplight:
As never power shall throw it down.
Wherefore I say thy mortal foe
Which does deserve to have great land
Deprive thou not unjustly tho:
By spyghtfull means, or wicked fraud.
Sithe that the more thou do him praise,
The greater praise thou shall obtain,
Besides belief, when to dyspraise
Thou shall disposed be again.
For no man than, will judge or deem,
That thou do hate his personage:
But rather as does best beseme,
Do hate his vice, and ill usage.
The best yet is, that by this way
Non envy shall in us remain:
Ne shall we grudge to hear men say
Our friend to be full just and plain.
Or all men else texcell and pass,
In this or that good qualite,
Whereat the spightfull heart alas,
Would freat, and right sore moved be.
What virtue than more profitable
Or goodly, may our minds retain
Than this, whereby, we be made hable:
To purge the venom of disdain.
In commonweals, some ill decrees,
Ill custom does so well approve
That though thereby some lose their fees:
Yet none with ease may them remove.
In enmite likewise we see
Be many faults, as hateful spite,
Of others grieves right glad to be
Besides suspect both day and night.
The calling eke of wrongs to mind,
And many other hurtful vice,
As frawde, and guyle, and means to find,
To traitors traynes our foe tentyce.
Which things full often to use with foes
We take it as none ill doutles:
And whilst our minds we so dispose,
Our faults remain without redress.
For if we never use tabstaine,
Against our foes such parts to play:
Ill custom shall us eke constrayne,
Our friends to dress in like array.
Pithagoras did men deny,
To hunt, to hawke, or bird to slay
And fish in net would often bye,
To cast again into the sea.
No bruit beast eke, of gentle race
Would he have slain in any wise
Lest fierce affectes we should embrace
Through such a cruel exercise.
More goodly, yet it were to flee
Such evil affectes through sufferaunce
And showing often our selves to be
Right just to foes in variaunce.
So shall we use no kind of guyle
Ne fraud with friends in their affares
But shall be plain and think it vile
One word unkind, to speak unawares.
When Scaurus at the law did sewe,
Domitius his mortal foe:
Domitius a slave untrue,
Had then with him that fled him fro.
Which slave forthwith to Scaurus went,
His masters secrets, to disclose,
But Scaurus seeing his intent:
His ears full fast, did stop and close.
And naught would hear against his foe,
By such a wretch, as would him tray,
Yea, more he bound him fast also:
And home again him sent straight way.
When Cato likewise matter sought
Against Muren to fortefie
Thaccusement late before him brought,
He nothing did maliciously.
For such as after him did go,
(As was the wont) to hear and see:
If that self day, did ask him tho,
The matter should discussed be:
To whom when he had once said nay,
They by and by did all depart,
And thought it true which he did say,
Such faith of him was in their heart.
But Simond says, as every lark,
Of force must have his coppid creast:
So natures gift, if ye well mark,
Some spite does bread, in each man's breast.
For which amongst light friends, it were
Right good, as Pyndar does suppose:
Of ill affectes, our minds to clear
by pouring them into our foes.
And as a sink our foes temploy
Our filthy faults to keep in store,
The stenche whereof might else annoy
Our faithful friends, and grieve them sore.
In Syo sprang one time such strife
That all the town in factions twain
Divided was: then was in life,
Onomadem, a man full plain.
And courteous eke to every wight,
Who chanced on that side to be
That wan the field by force of fight,
To whom he gave this counsel free.
Expel not all (quoth he) your deed
That did resist: but some retain,
Lest lack of foes, may hatred bread,
Emongst our selves, unto our pain.
Hesiode says, whereas like art
Nigh neighbored, or kyndred is
The good success of either part,
Each one tenuye it were amiss.
But if you can none other way
From spite abstain, accustom than
The welthy state and good array
Of those your foes, to curse and ban.
For like as gardeners good of skyll,
The garlyke strong: by rosis soote
Do use to set, all sauors ill,
From them to draw, even from the root.
Our foes even so that do receive
Our froward faults, our minds full fell
Do rid of grief, which we conceive,
To se our friends to prospere well.
With foes therefore we should than strive,
For honor, rule, and true got gain,
And not to freat when that they thryue,
Or more than we, do chance tattaine.
Ye rather more we should observe
Their doings all in every case,
And how they did such things deserve,
That learn we might them how to pass.
Themistocles was wont to tell
He could not sleep for thinking on
The victory, that whylome fell
Milthiad to, in Marathon.
It is a slothful grudge and hate,
The virtues of thy foes to spite:
And none of them to imitate
Because thou think they pass thy might.
But where as hate thy judgment clear
Corrupts not his diligence:
And industry does then appear,
Which drives away thy negligence.
But if he seem in Princes hall,
Or common weal, right high estate
To have him got by service thrall
Or flattring means, rejoice thereat.
And think thy self an happy wight,
For that thou may thy honest life:
Compare with his in all men's sight
And win great praise withouten strife.
For Plato says, no gold on earth
Or under earth, ne precious ston:
One spark of virtue can be worth,
Which passes all comparison.
Ne Solon eke, would change his state
In virtue fixed for vain renown
Ne did he care to be check mate
With noble men in every town.
He stemed not the peoples praise
Whose wandryng wits are like the wind
Now hear now there at all assayse
Their yea, with nay, full sone tonbynde.
No worthy state that semes to be,
Can worthy be, in very deed
Except the means thereto perdee
Of worthy acts did first proceed.
But like as love, does lovers blind
Even so we spy, the faults of foes
Much farther of, than we can find
The faults of friends before our noes
Rejoice not than with joy in vain
Because thy foe does chance toffende,
Ne take no grief without some gain,
To se what good his works pretend.
But ponder well these cases twain,
His vice and virtues both I say
And first his vice from vice tabstaine
And therein pass him far away.
His virtues than thou shall do well
To imitate in their degree:
And though thou can not him excel
Yet see thou be not worse than he.
Finis.
Imprinted at London by Wyllyam Seres, dwelling at the west end of Poules, at
the Sign of the Hedgehogge. Anno. 1561.

The port of rest.

Like as the mighty Oak whose roots,
In thearth are fixed fast:
Is hable to withstand each wind,
That blows most boystrous blast.
Even so each froward Fortunes hap
That ever may betyde:
The constant mind with virtue fraught
is hable to abide.
To the true lovers of wisdom John Asteley, master of the Queens Maiestyes
Jewel house, and John Harington Esquier Thomas Blundeuille, greeting.
WHilst plutarks works, I gave my self to read
So pleasant fruit me thought, I could none fid
As is in yt which rightly shows in deed
The way tappease, and still thunquiete mind.
For whereas since false flattring hope with who^
I trauelde had, long time full painfully,
Of comfort void, alone me leaft to rome
The barrein cost of wretched miserye:
In stead of helping me the seas to pass
Of worldly joys, amongst the happy sort,
In ship full fraught with fortunes gifts: as was
Her vow when first to me she did resort:
The restles muse had made my feeble brayn
The forge of care, and therein daily wroughte
Such dulfull domps and d^eadful dreams as clean
From mirth my mind unto despair had brought.
That book did yield such glistring beams Isay.
Of comfort great and joyful quietness:
As drove those dumpes and sorrows all away
My heavy heart which held in great distres.
So as in deed from that time forth me thought
I could not choose but needs contented rest
And though before vain hope much grief had wrought
Yet now to think yt al was for the best.
Which comfort though it grateful was to me
In my conceyt yet did it not suffice:
Unless that you my faithful friends might be
Eke partners of the same some kind of wise.
For as the grief of one friend does decreace
His other friends, when they thereof partake
His joy even so he shall the more encreace
If of the same, he does them partners make.
Into our tunge therefore this little quaire
I turned have, and termd the port of rest
And wish each wight, thereto for to repair
with troubled sprite that feels himself oppressed.
For as the mariner, in sea whose bote
With cruel storms and tempests has been beat
And drieue^ twixt whaues and fearful rocks to flote
Though all that while despair his mind did freat:
Yet when ye winds their boistrous blowing ceace
And he to haven is safely come at last
He than rejoices with himself in peace
And clean forgeates al those his dangers past:
Even so each man within this little port
That shall vouchesafe at times more ydley spente
To harborough a while: himself to sport
When he perceiues his mind to sorrow bent:
To warrant him I dare be bold I say
That though he be in passing heaviness
Yet he thereby shall quickly learn the way
To rid his mind of all unquietness.
Ne shall he fear the loss in time to come
Of friends, of goods, of life, or like distres
But live and dye, by help of reasons dome
In such assured hold of quietness:
As neither froward fortunes sharp assaults,
Nor death himself, for all his dreadful name
Ne malice eke with all her forged faults
Shall be of power to overthrow the same.
To you therefore to whom I am much bound
And tall the rest, lo here now for your sake
Of this my pain such fruit as has redounde
In friendly wise I do a present make.
Whose relles though it be not half so sweet
Ne has such sap of eloquence in deed
As those things have whereon (as meats most mete
For deintie mouths) you wonted are to feed.
Yet doubt I not but that vouchesafe you will,
To take it well in worth, and specially
Sith Budes words in all this treatise still
I folowd have in deed most faithfullye.
Whose style I found to be more grave then gaye
And hard to turn into our vulguer speech,
Yet as it is refuse not when you may
To taste thereof I humbly you beseech.
For though it hap not deintye mouths to please
Weak stomakes yet thereby may find much ease.
PLVTARKE TO HIS friend Paccius.
THy letters mine own good Paccius wherein thou didste exhort me to write
sumwhat unto thee, so well touching the quyetnes of the mind, as also
concerning those points in Plato his book called Timeo: (which to thy seming
neded a more exquisite and plainer declaration:) Came very late unto my hands.
For even as our friend Erotes was ready to take ship for to sail toward
Rome they were delivered to me in haste, by that good man Fundanus. Whereby I
not having time sufficient to write unto thee according to my wont and
custom of such things as thou did requyer: nor yet being hable to suffer
such a messenger to depart from me with emptye hand: briefly gathered
certain things entreatinge of the tranquillity of the mind out of such
Commentaries as I had written in times paste concerning the same. Trusting
that in such kind of wrytinges thou wylt not look for fine terms and
elloquent speech: But only have regard to the good doctrine thereof, which
may help to instruct and order man's life. And I think it already brought to
some good pass. Because that although thou art knyt in frendshyp (and that
not after the common sort) with great men and worthy Princes, and have also
such knowledge and experience in matters of law, as thou geuist place to no
man therein: yet for all that thou art not like the tragycall Meroppes puffed
up with vain glory, or foolyshlye amassed at the reioycynge of the people,
which has thee in great admiration, extolling thee with infynite praises.
Neither do thou forget to have hard oftimes how that the shoe be it never
so gay, can not heal the gowtye foot, nor the gold ring the disease in the
finger, nor yet that the rich Crown of gold and stone can once ease the
pain of the head. For to whom may riches, honor, glory, or pre-eminence in
Court, serve to put away grief of the mind, or to lead a quiet life? But to
such, as when they have these things, ca^ rightly use them, and when they
lack them, pacie^tly suffer the lack thereof. But how can that be done? but
only by reason premeditate, and accustomed immediatlye to reprehende the
passyble, and unreasonable part of the soul, so often as it brusteth out, and
not to suffer it to rau^ge any further abroad, and so to be turned out of the
right way, by the urgent provocation of vnbrydiled affection. And therefore as
Zenophon wylled all men in their prosperity to have most remenbrance of the
Gods, and then, most earnestlye and devoutly to worship them, to thentent
that the gods being thereby already reconcyled and rendered more favorable
toward them, they might afterward when occasion should serve, the boldlyer
make petition, and crave the thing that should behoue the^: Even so al sayings
and wrytinges as be most apt to appease the troubles of the mind, ought
amongst men that have reason to be first hid and fyxed in the mind, to the
intent that such things being prepared of a long time before, when need
should requier might serve them to most advantage. For as chourlyshe
mastyffes be moved with every noise: and yet quieted by one known voice
whereunto they be commonly used: Even so it is very hard for man to quiet the
outrageous and bestial affectes of the mind, except he has some famylyer and
accustomed precepts and lessons redye at hand to still the fervent rage
thereof. But such as think that to lead a quiet life, it behooves not to do
many things, nor to be much occupied either in private or publyque affairs:
those would make us to bye the tranquillity of the life full dear. Sith that
then, it could not be gotten but by sloth and ydlenes, exhorting every man
thereunto as though he were sick, by that tragycall verse, which says in
this wise.

Abide thou seely wretch, and move not from thy bed,
Wherein thou may lie warm, and eke full well befedde.
For if preuye slouthe be to the body a hurtful Medicine: than sluggishnes,
delicatenes, and fayntnes of courage which causes a man to forsake both
kyffe, kynne, and country, is like wise as evil a physician to heal the
sycknes and trouble of the mind. Moreover it is repugnau^t to truth, to say
yt those men which do least labor and seldomist travel abroad, do lead most
quiet life. For then women should live much more quietly then men. Because
that women for the most part do tarry at home doing little, and what they do,
they do it sitting on their stools. And yet as Hesiodus says, though the
cold Northene wind cannot by violence break in, to blow upon the young and
tender Damoyselles: yet grieffes, troubles, sorrows, and evil disposicions of
the mind through Ielousy, supersticion, vain glory, and such like
innumerable vices do find the means secretlye to creape into their preuye
dorters. It is said also that Laertes forsook his Country, his house, and the
Court it self, and lived.xx. years in a little Cottage all alone by him self,
having none other compaignie, but a sely old woman which served him of meat
and drink. And yet for all that he had both sorowfulnesse of heart, and
heaviness in countenance, to be his compaignions mawgre his head. Yea what
will you say if this doing of nothing, has often times disturbed many men's
wits and senses: as you may read in Homer speakinge of Achilles in this sort.

Here sittes in ship, Achilles swift whom Jove begot
To fury bente, refusing firmly now to fight
Of all the Lords and commons eke, esteming not
The counsels wise: which cause man's fame to shine full bright
He faintes in heart, and yet furthwith to fight oothe cry
And moves himself, the feats of cruel Mars to try.
And therefore he being sore grieved to se himself so lost with idleness: in a
great rage reproved him self, saying in this wise.

Lo here I sit, full like a heavy lump of clay,
This Nauewe great, to keep in ydlenes always.
Wherefore Epicurus himself the fautour and mainteynor of all pleasure and
voluptuousness would not have those that by nature are ambicious and desirous
of glory to give themselves to idleness: but rather to follow nature as their
guide, and to seek to bear rule and office in a common wealth. For such
men as be naturally enclyned to be doing: cannot quietlye suffer to be
deprived of ye thing wherein they most delyghte. Notwithstanding he is unwise
that will chose such men into a common wealth, as cannot moderate themselves
and forbear ye rule thereof: rather then those that be hable, both to rule
themselves and the common wealth also. Thus then you see it is not meet, to
measure the quietness and carfulness of the mind by multitude or fewness of
affairs. For it is no less trouble and grief to leave undone that which is
good and honest, then to do that which is naught and vile. But there be some
which will prescribe and appoint themselves before, to follow one certain
kind of life, which they take to be void of all care and trouble, as to be
husbandemenne, or to live unmarried, or else to be Princes and rulers: which
sort of men how much they be deceived, Menander does playnelye declare, by
these words here following.

I think, O Phania that rytche men which have no need to borowe upon vsurye
to pay their creditors, do not lie tumblyng and tossyng in their beds,
lamentyng in the night season by them selves, and cryinge out full often woo is
me: but do sleep swetelye and quietlye. But proceading a little further, he
found the rich to be no less troubled then the poor. For life (says he)
and trouble ben as it were of one kind, and borne both at one birth. For
trouble is compaignyon to the voluptuous and delicate life, and waxes old
with the poor and miserable life. But as those that be fearful, of a weak
stomach, and not hable to brook the Seas: when they sail on the Seas, will
remove many times out of a little Bote into a great ship and from thence
into a galey, thinckynge thereby to be immediately easid of their grief, until
such time they feel that they profit nothing in so doing, because that
wheresoever they go, they carry with them that Chooler and fearefulnes which is
within the^: Even so the often change of so^dry kinds of life cannot deliver
the mind from such grieffes and troubles as these be. That is to say
Ignorance, and lack of Experience, foolish rashness, lack of knowledge and
power to use things present in their due kind. For these be the things that
v^xe both rich and poor, and trouble so well the married as the unmarried. Nor
none other cause then this does make such as have forsaken the city for to
dwell in the Country: to be wearye again of the Country, and to return
eftsoon into the City. These things also cause many men which by great
help and importunate suit, have placed themselves in kings Courts: anon
after, to repent their labor so bestowed. A sick man as Ion says is a
very unpleasant thing, for he cannot abide his wife, he blames his
Physician and is angry with his bed. If his friend comes to vysite him he
does but trouble him. And if he depart from him, he does again offend him.
But after that his disease begins to assuage and to be somewhat more
temperate: Then comes health by little and little, making all things
delectable and pleasant. In such sort that whereas the day before he did
loathe new laid Eggs, deintye Brothes, and the fyneste bread that might be
gotten: The next day after, can hungerlye eat a piece of common bread, with
a few cresses. Of such importance is a good discorse in all chaunges of the
life, thonely force whereof procures the happy life. It is said that when
Alexander heard the Philosopher Anaxharcus, affirmynge in disputation, that
there were innumerable worlds: he weapte for sorrow. And being demanded by
his friends what just cause he had to weep: he aunswerid. Have we not just
cause (quod he) to weep: sithe there be so many worlds and we be not as yet
lords of one? But Crates the porely clad Philosopher, contrariwise consumed
all his life to the last day in sport and laughter as though they were all
festival days. Agamemnon likewise king of the Micens was not a little
troubled, for that he had the rule of so many men. Of whom Homer talking
says thus.

Thou know right well Atreus son.
That clepid, is Agamemnon
Whom most of all with Labors great
Jove's pleasure is, to vex and freat.
When Diogenes the Philosopher was in the markette amongst others to be sold,
and was commanded by the Crier which should sell him to rise up: He would
not so do, but ieasted with the Crier demanding of him, if he brought a fish
to sell whither he would bydde it rise up or not? So little he esteemed his
mysserable state. Did not Socrates likewise being in prison fast cheined and
fettred, stoodye wisdom and dyspute of phylosophye amongst his disciples and
Scholars? But look again on the other side how Phaeton clymyng up into the
heavens, with weeping tears complained, because that no man would give him the
government of his fathers horse and chariot. As the shoe is wont to be
wriethed and turned to serve a crooked foot, and not contrariwise the foot to
fit a crooked shoe: Even so the state and disposition of the mind, must
make every kind of life that is offered, semblable and agreyng to her self.
Nor it is not custom as some men affirm, which makes pleasant the life
that they have chosen as best for themselves: But rather wisdom makes the same
life best, and most pleasant. Therefore let us first labor to pourge, to
purify, and to make so clean as is possible, the flowyng fountain of the
tranquillity of the mind, which is within us, to the intent that we may make
all outward things coming unto us by chance: plyant, and apt to serve the
purpose, through our patient sufferance. For though things do not succeed
well according to our desire: yet it behooves not us to be angry therewith,
sith anger thereto naught appertains. Yea, he is to be praised that by art
and pollecy can soonest redress such evil success. And therefore Plato
compared man's life to the dice play, in the which although the player ought
to desire every best cast: yet how so ever it chances, he must take
skillful heed to dispose each cast in the best wise that he can, according
as the chance will bear it. Of which two things, the one, that is the
chance of the dye, consists not in our power. But the other lies in us to
perform. That is to say if we be wise, to take patiently whatsoever
chaunseth, and tappoynte every one his right place, in such sort that
whatsoever chaunseth well, may be applied to most advantage, and that which
happens otherwise to least damage. But foolish men and vnexperte, in
knowing how to live: be like unto a diseased body which can neither suffer
heat nor cold. For in prosperity they be fresh and gaye, and look
pleasauntlye. But in adversity they bend the brows and look all frowardlye.
And therefore both states do trouble them, yea rather in them both they
trouble themselves. And no less also be they troubled in those things which
of them selves are thought to be good. Theodorus which surnamed is Atheus,
was wont oftetimes to say, that he reached forth his words with the right
hand, but they received them with the left, even so fares thignorant sort,
which when fortune many times would come unto them on the right side: they
most vndecentlye turnyng themselves away, do place her on the left. But
much better do the wisemen, which like as bees do make honey, which is of
all things most sweet, of Thyme the driest herb and of most bitter Juice:
So they of most harmefull things do choose out many times, some thing that
is to them both meet and profitable. Which thing is most chiefly to be
studied and with much exercise of the mind to be labored. For as he that
when he had thrown a stone at a snarlyng bitche, and missing her, vnwillynglye
by chance hit his stepdame: said unto himself that his throw was not
altogether evil bestowed: eue^ so when chance chances not according to our
desire, we may amend it, and apply it to some other use. Diogenes was
banished out of his country, and yet this had none evil success, for the
same banishemente gave him first occasion to study Philosophy. Zenon Citicus
being become of a Philosopher, a notable rich merchaunt by misfortune lost
all that he had save one ship, which afterward, when he heard that it was
also lost by tempeste in the Sea, together with all his monne and merchandise
fraighted in the same: he said.

O Fortune how nobly have thou dealt with me, thus to drive me unto the
Philosophical haven, and to wear again that unaccustomed apparel. What does
let us then but that we may take example at these men and follow them?
Haste thou been deprived of any office in the city? go then into the
country, and attend thine own private affairs. Have thou by importunate
suit, labor to creep into thy Princes favor, and suffered crepulse therein?
Thou shall then thereby live in safety, and free from al manner of charge and
commission of his affairs. But perhaps contrarywyse, thou art troubled with
to many offices and wrapte in too many cares: I say to thee that warm water
does not so much noorishe and comfort the tender and delicate body (as
says Pyndarus) as honor, and glory, joined with power, and authority,
does make labor to seem pleasant, and easily employed. But thou art
offended and grieved because others do talk of thee, or bear thee envy, or
unjustly slander thee: well, this is but a prosperous wind meet to carye
thee unto the Musis and into thuniuersities. As it chanced to Plato, at such
times as he was taken unawares with the friendship of Dionisius, as though it had
been with a cruel storm or tempest. And therefore it helps not a little
toward ye quieting of the mind, diligently to note and to mark thexamples
of the worthy and famous men, whether perchance they have suffered the like
evil at any time, through the like occasion. As for exaumple, the loss of
thy children does grieve thee: behold then the Kings of Rome, whereof there
was not one that left a son behind him to enherite ye kingdom. Thou can
not patiently endure poverty: who^ then would thou wish to be amongste the
Boetians, rather the^ Epaminondas, or amongst the Romans, rather the^
Fabritius? But put case thy wife be naught of her body. Well, do thou
not know that Epigram of Aegides which is in Delphos? Haste thou not heard
also how that Alcibiades defiled Aegides wife called Timea, and how she her
self was wont to call the child yt she brought forth Alcibiades, and to whisper
in her maidens ears that they likewise should so call him? and yet Aegides was
no more let by this, to prove a right noble and famous man: then Stilpo the
Philosopher was let by the unchasteness of his daughter, to lead a merier
life then all the Philosophers in his time. Which thing being afterward cast
in his teeth, by one Metrocles: is then says he, this my fault, or my
daughters? The other answered, that the fault was his daughters, but the evil
chance and mishappe was his. How can that be (quoth he?) For be not faults
necligent, ouersightes and humain frailties? The other answered, yes in deed.
But then (quoth Stilpo,) be not the necligente ouersightes the errors also of
them that be ouerseen? Metrocles answered, yes certainly. Why then said Stilpo
should not therrours be the mysfortunes of those yt have so erred? By such kind
of pleasant talk and Philosophical quietness he declared the obiectio^s of
the other to be no other thing, but the slanderous talk and vain barkinges of a
currish fellow. There be many also that be not only moved with the vices of
their friends and kinsfolks, but also with those of their enemies. For whereas
opprobrious words, anger, envy, dishonestie, spightfull jealousy, should most
chiefly distain those me^ in whom they reign: yet the self same vices trouble
also and move thignorant sort, no less the^ the displeasures of their own
kinsfolks, or the frowardnes of their fre^des and familiars, or the wicked
wits and evil disposed minds of their own slaves and servants, wherewith
thou thy self also as it seems to me, art wont to be moved. For as those
Phisicions that be me^cioned in Sophocles do purge bitter choler with a bitter
medicine: eue^ so thou art wo^t to be angry with ye diseases and naughty
dispositio^s of other men's minds, and with like bitterness of thine own mind
(which is little to thy worship) to answer the^. And therefore those things
which thou do, be not done with a gentle and plain behauior, the meetest
instrumente for the purpose, but for the most part after a rough, crooked, and
frooward sort? And as to correct this fault, is more then thou can well
perform: so it is also in deed not very easy to be done. But if thou could
apply those things to their right use whereunto they were ordained, like as
Chyrurgians do their toothe drawing instruments, their lau^cing knives, and
closinge boocles, and show in thy self such meekness and modesty every
where according as occasion does requier: thou should be no more offended
with the leude behavior and wickedness of others, then rejoiced within thy
self with the conscience of thine own affection. For thou should think it
no more unmeet for such persons so to do: then it is unnatural for dogs
to bark. But if thou be so feable and weak of courage that thou will suffer
thy self to be oppressed by other men's evils: nombers of griefs flowynge into
thee, as into an abject place low couched and apt to receive ye same, shall
ouerwhelme thee, thou miserable man waxinge every day more sicker the^ other.
Yea what will you say, if many of the Philosophers have reproved the
compassion wherewith we are moved when we see any man in misery, affirmyng it
to be the part of a good manne, to help his kinsfolks and neighbors, when
they be afflicted with misery, and are by fortune overthrown: but not to be
partakers of their sorrow, or to yield to fortune with like subjection of the
mind. Yea and that which to every man's judgment seems a great deal more
strange. Though we know our selves to have offended and to be of a naughty
disposition: yet for all that they will not suffer us to be sorrowful in our
mind for the same, because those things ought to be corrected and amended
(say they) without grief or heaviness of the mind. If things be thus,
consider well whether it be not a foul thing for us to be displeased and
angry, whenever any man with whom we have to do, does perhaps deal with us
somewhat vngentlye or extremely. But I fear me (O most friendly Paccius yt self
love does deceive us, and that we be not so much grieved with other men's
offenses, as pleased with our own deserts. For the vehement affecting and
inordinate following of certain things, or contrariwise thauoiding and
abhorring of the same, otherwise then honesty requires: does breed many
times debate and strife amongst me^, and causes the one to be offended with
the other, whilst the one does attribute to thothers fault, for that he has
been prevented of this commodity, or has fallen into that danger. But if a
man could according to the success of things use to frame himself every
way in a moderate sort: that man with great facility might learn to live
with all men in all places. But now let us return again to those things,
from the which we have for a while digressed. As those that be sick of an
ague to whom all things do seem bitter so soon as they taste thereof,
until they see that others without making any sign of bitter taste, do
gredelye eat those meats which they did so lothsomly spit out: do no longer
the^ attribute the fault to ye meat or to the drink, but to the^ selves and to
their sickness: even so if we see that others with great quietness of mind and
with a merry countenance, do perform the selfsame things which we pass over
with great regreate and sorrowful complaints: let us the^ leave at length to
be so much grieved and offended with ye things themselves. But for to reteygne
a constant mind in time of adversity, it is very necessary and expediente,
not to pass over with winking eyes those things which luckely according to
our desire at any time have chanced unto us, and so with a meet mixture ye
evil mishaps, with happy happes to reco^pense. To recreate our eyes, when they
be daseled with overmuch beholding of glistering things, we use to turn the^
away, and to behold pleasant grene herbs and flowers. And yet our minds we do
co^trarywise dispose to Mela^choly and sorrowful things, forceyng it to have
remembrance of things most worthy repentance, and by violence we pull it
away whether it will or not from such things as are to be commended and
praised. And now it comes to my remembrance, that to this purpose may be
very well applied the saying which was sometime spoken against a curious
fellow that busilye searched after other men's matters nothing apperteynynge
unto him.

Why a mischief do thou most spightful man with kites eyes so narrowlye
mark other men's faults, and with the eyes of an Owl blindly passest over
thine own. Even so thou happy man, why do thou so diligently regard thy
griefs and evil mishappes, making them always present and fresh before
thine eyes by continual remembrance, and turneste thy mind from present joy
and prosperity. And like as scaryfyinge cups wherewyth Physicians use to
draw the foulest blood out of the flesh: so thou do gather thy woorst
things into thy self. Being in that case no better then ye merchant of Syo,
who though he sold much wine, yea and that principal good to others: yet
sought out always for himself that which was sour and without verdure. Whose
servant being on a time fled from him was demanded of one what cause had
constrained him to forsake his master? because (quoth he) my master having
good things in his custody will take no part thereof, but always for himself
seeks the woorst. There be many like this man, which forsakynge the sweetest
drinks do take them unto the sowrest and most harshe of taste. But Aristippus
did not so, who being placed as it were betwixt a pair of ballaunce, would
not discende into the heauiest and most priest down with evils, but mounted up
to the higheste and least chargied with grief. For when he had lost the
plesanteste lordship that he had: he spoke to one of those men which showed
themselves to be very sorry for the loss thereof and to lament much his
fortune: in this wise. Do thou not know (quoth he) that thou have but one
little ferme to live on, and I have three manours with the demeanes yet left
hole unto my self? that is true said the other. Why, then (quoth he) should not
I be rather sorry for thee, then thou for me? For it is very mad^es to be sorye
for things lost, and not to rejoice in things saved. And as little children
when any man, of many things takes but one little trifle from them do weep
and cry out castyng all the rest away: even so we being in any one little
thing by fortune disturbed: we lament and complain reiectynge all the rest as
unprofitable. But some man perchance would say what have we to rejoice in?
yea rather, what have we not? This manne has great honor, that manne a
fair house, this manne a wife, according to his mind, that manne a faithful
friend. Antipater tarsensis countynge in his death bed upon his fyngers all
the good things that ever he had in his life time: did not omytte so much
as his prosperous sailynge out of Cilitia unto Athens. Nor these common
things ought to be neglected, yea we ought to make some count of them. As for
that we live and be in health also for that we see the Sun, and that there
is neither war nor sedicion, that the land is errable, and the Sea easy for
every manne to sail on, finally for that it is free for us to speak, and to
keep silence to be occupied and to be idle. But the presence of these
things would gieue us the greater occasion of quietness: if we would fyxe
in our mind the Image of thabsence and lack of the same. Oftentimes
admonyshynge our selves how greatly health is desired of them that be
sick, and peace wyshed for of those that be troubled with war. And how
much the straungyer being of low degree, desyereth to get honor and fame
in such a noble City, and again how bitter a thing it is to lose yt which
was once gotten. For in mine oppinion none of these things, or such like,
ought to be esteemed or wished for, being once lost: sith that nothing is to
be the more regarded for that it leaves to have his being: nether yet ought
we to possess these things as things of excellencye or to keep them with
such carefulnes, watching them continually least we should be spoiled of them
as of things of price: yea rather though we safely possess the^, yet as
transitory things we ought to neglecte them and little regard them. For
these things ought to be used and enjoyed with pleasure, and chiefly to
thentent that if we should chance to lose them: we might the more quietly and
moderately suffer the loss thereof. But many as Archesilaus says, think it
labor well bestowed one man to come after another in course and order for to
behold with fixed eye, and mind, the poesies, pictures, and images of others:
neglecting their own life, which though it has many consyderacions and
aduertisementes and that not vnpleasa^t: yet they turnyng their eyes another
way, do rather consider and behold other men's fortunes, like aduouterers,
which abhorring their own wives, do covet other men's, leading their lives in
great error. For it imports much toward the preseruinge of the mind in
this constant estate: first for a man to weye and ponder himself and his own
peculier things, Or if he will not so do then to behold and to consider his
inferiors. And not contrariwise as the common sort does, to marvel at those
whom fortune does extol and advance to the highest degree of honor and
riches, so often as she is disposed to daly and play with the^. As for example,
such as remain bound and cheined in prison, think those to be happy yt be
discharged and set at liberty. And those that be set at liberty, compte them
happiest yt have been always free and never imprisoned, and they that have
been always free, count them happy that be free of the city. Again those
that be free of the city, judge them fortunate that be rich. The rich, the
rulers, the rulers, the kings, the kings, the gods, which also be not
content with their rule and kingdom, except they have power to send down
lightnynge and thunder. So that when they cannot be equal with their
superiors: they never keep themselves within their own precinct. I care not
(says Thasius) for all the riches of that notable rich manne Giges, nor do
I much maruayle at them, nor I seek not to counterfaite the maruailous
works of the gods, nor yet do I greatly desire to have rule or dominion.
For these things be far from my thought and clean out of my sight, thus
spoke Thasius. But lo, on the contrary side one of Syo, and also another of
Galathia, and one of Bithynia, who not contented to have gotten honor, and
office of rule amongst his Citizens: does yet complain with weepyng tears,
for that he is not one of the Senate house, which if thou shouldeste grant
him, yet it would not content him except he might be also Praetor, nor to
be Praetor, except he might be Consul, which though at length he
obteygned: yet would he not be satysfyed, unless he might be first
publyshed and proclaimed. What is this I pray you, but a tormentynge and a
contynuall punyshynge of him self, accusynge Fortune of ingratytude. But the
wise manne, though of so great a noumber of mortal men: as we be that live
in this world enioyinge the light of the Sun, and are fed with the
fruytes of the earth: he sees one or two to excel him, either in honor
or richesse, yet does not he for all that fytte lamenting by him self and
wryngynge his hands together, but rather considering how well he is dealte
with, in respect of an infinyte noumber that be in myserye: he reioyseth with
him self and embraces his own estate and condycion of life. At the Plays of
pryses, it was lawefull for no man to proceed Master of fence, or to be
accounted as vanquerour, except he had played with every one that came first
to hand, without any choice or eleccion permitted at al. And yet in our life
there is such variety of things, that every man has leave to choose many
with whose estate he may compare himself and his estate. And to take thereby
occasion tencourage himself, and to show himself more meet to be meruailed at
of others, then he to maruayle at them, except he be so impudent that he would
look to be fellow unto Briareus or to Hercules. And therefore whenever thou
liftest up thy head to behold any noble manne borne a loft in a Chayer on
men's shoulders: cast down thine eyes by and by to look also upon them that
bear him. Again so often as thou shalt marvel at Xerxes and count him
happy, for that he had such power to make a bridge over the sea called Helles
Pontus for him and all his army to pass: consider then also the miserable
slaves that by stripes of whippes were then forced to dig in the mountain
Athos, and to make way there, for the sea to pass, and how some of them were
mangled and hewed, and lost both nose and ears, by means that the bridge
being broken by rage of sea fell down upon them, and think that they would
extol thee and thy condition of life with infinite praises. When a certain
friend of Socrates came upon a time unto him complainyng yt all things in the
city were sold at excessive pryces, for wine of Syo was at.xl.s. purple at
vi.li. and half a pint of honey at.xx.d. Socrates taking him by the hand
brought him into the storehouse of meal, and told him that he might have half
a pint of yt for a halfpeny, and therefore corn was cheap. The^ he led him
into ye oil seller, and showed him that he might have a pynt of that for two
brass pence, wherefore quoth he all things in the city be not dear. Even
so if we hear any man say that our estate is very poor and miserable,
because we be not consulls or bear some other high office in the city: we
may answer him again, that our estate and condition of life is right
excellent and honorable, for that we have no need to beg from door to
door, nor to bear heavy packes and burdens on our shoulders as the porters
do, nor yet like Parasites to follow and to flatter great men for a dinner
sake. But though we be come to such madness that our life seems to
depend more of other men's, then of it self: and that our nature is so
degenerate, and with enuyous affectes corrupted, that we be not so much
rejoiced with our own, as grieved with other men's prosperitye: yet I say
if thou would not only behold the famous things and woorthye to be
seen, that are in those men, whom thou thynkeste to be so happy, and to
be as they say, in gods lap: but also would draw back that goodlye
fair veil, and outewarde show of their glory, and look further in: truly
thou shouldeste find many of their intrayles to be right sower and grieuouse
to behold. When that Pittacus who is yet so famous for the great wysedom,
fortytude, and Justice, wherewyth he was endewed, enterteygned at his Table
certain gheastes whom he had enuyted to his house: it is said that his wife
coming in sodaynlye, overthrew the boorde in a great rage and laid all the
meat on the floor, wherewyth he perceauyng his gheastes to be somewhat moved,
said thus unto them. Every one of you is grieved with some kind of evil,
and yet I in this kind of state as you see, do always thynk my self
maruaylouslye well dealte with all. This manne in the Markette place is judged
to be fortunate and happy, but so soon as he comes with in his own
doors, he seems to be (I will not say a wretch or a myser) but even
very myserye it self. For there, his wife possesses all, and rules al
imperiouslye at her own will, with whom he must contynuallye, fight,
chyde, and brawle, Yet said he to his gheastes, many things do grieve
you, but nothing ca^ grieve me at all. The like troubles be incident also to
states of honor, to rich men, yea, and to kings the^ selves, and yet not
marked of the rude and unlearned sort, because the courtayne of pride and
glory is drawn before their eyes, behind the which al things lies hidden.
And therefore they having regard only to the prosperity, and not to the
adversity of other men, do say with Homer.

How happy was Agamemnon
Of all the greeks most worthy wight
To whom all fate gave place alon
Whilste fortune gave her child such might.
But this strange kind of felicity or happiness, did consiste in harness,
horses, and hosts of men gathered about him, and therefore hear now again,
the inward voice of his sorrowful mind, crying out against the insolency of
such glory.

In grievous cares and deadly smart
Thus Jove has wrapte my woofull heart.
And therefore he compted those most happy that were free from all peril,
never advanced to honor but dyed without glory. With these and such like
kind of discourses, a man by little and little pull out of his mind that
iniquity, which is always complaining and blamyng fortune, and eleuate his
desperate mind, which whilst it has others in admiracion: does reject and
abase it self and all that it possesses. For truly it does greatly break the
quiet state of the mind, when a man toward the atcheauing of any thing does
force himself above his power, and as it were, bears a greater sail then his
proporcion requires. For being led by a little reioyceing hope, we rashelye
promise great things to our selves, and then if the success do not answer
thereto accordingly: we accuse fortune and our Angel of vniustnesse and
partiality. Whereas we ought rather to condemn our selves of small
discretion, and foolish rashenesse. As though we should be angrye with
Fortune, because we cannot shoot an arrowe out of a plowe, or hunt the Hare
with an ox, and as though some unjust god did hinder those that vainlye went
about to hunte the Heart in chariottes, and not to be rather angry with our
own madness and foolyshnesse in attempting to bring to pass things
impossible. The cause of this error, is none other, but only self love, for
whylest men that love themselves to much: do attribute with great
comparyson, the chiefest honor in all places to them selves: they wax so
headye and so stubburne, that they leave no enterprise unattempted. Nor it is
not enough for them to be rich, eloquente and pleasant compaignions at the
board, yea to be frended with kings, to bear rule and office, except they
may have also the best dogs, the fairest horses, cocks, and quayles, with
other like birds of pleasure, for else they can never be quiet in mind.
Dionisius thelder was not contented to be the greatest and most mighty Tiraunt
that was in his time, but thinking it al to little and far unworthy his estate,
because he was not also so good in vercefying as Philoxenus the Poet, nor so
eloque^t as Plato: he was moved thereby to wrath which overcame him. And
therefore he banished Philoxenus into Latumias and sent Plato to be sold in
Aegina. But Alexander did not so, at such time as he contended with Brison,
whose chariot should run swiftest, for (they say) he was highly displeased
with Brison, because yt Brison to flatter him did not his best, but suffered
him to win the race. Wherefore Homer speaking of Achilles and Ulysses, did
very well to give each manne his due praise in this wise.

Of all the greeks there was not one
In chiualrye that could him pass
But law to plead such one there was
As him excelde who was alone.
Megabisus perses coming on a time into Apelles shop began to talk I know
not what of the art of paynctyng whose unskillful pratynge Apelles not
suffering: said thus unto him. Before that thou dyddeste utter thy self by
thy talk, we had sum good oppynion of thee, because thy garments of
Gold and purple did beautify and set forth thy silence. But now the very
boys of my shop which grind my coolours, do laughe at these thy foolyshe
bablynges. Some think that the Stoykes do mock us, for that they do not only
constitute and ordain their wiseman (which they feign unto themselves) to be
prudent, just, and valiant, but also they call him an Orator, an Emperor, a
Poet, and finally a king, and yet these glorious men abouesaide, be not
ashamed to attrybute al these names to themselves. And if they perceive at
length that they cannot attain to them all: they be immediatelye grieved, and
do take it very heauelye, Which thing how reasonable it is, they themselves
may easily see. Sithe they know that ye gods themselves be co^tente each
one, with his peculier and so^dry name. As this god because he has ye rule of
war and battle, is surnamed Emialius, and that other because he is God of
prophecies, Mantous, and another for that he is God of gain and lucre Cerdous.
Wherefore you shall read in Homer, how that Jupiter forbad Venus to intermedle
with warrelyke affairs as things not appertayninge unto her, and commanded
her to take cure and charge only of matters of weddyng, of bedding, and of
pleasure. Beside this some of those things which seem worthy to be desired
of us, are of a contrary nature one to another. As for example it behooves him
that endeavors himself to study eloquence, or any other of the liberal
sciences, to be quiet and free from all worldly affairs. For office in the
city, and the friendship of kings, are wont to cause much business, and
often to call away the mind from his determinate purpose. Also the aboundaunt
use of wine and flesh, makes the body strong and mete to wrestle, but it
makes the mind weak and frail. Finally in gathering and heaping up of
riches, a man must use great diligence te^crease them, and as great
carfulness in keeping them. Co^trarywise the despising of them, and to set
naught by them, is a great help and furtheraunce toward the study of
Philosophy and as it were the first practicing of the same. Wherefore al men
cannot have al things. And therefore it behooves every man tobay the precepts
of Pittachus, that thereby he may learn to know himself, and so to consult
with nature, and to follow her as his guide, by applying himself to some one
certain thing, rather then by passing from one kind of life unto an other, to
force nature. The horse is mete for the cart, the ox for the plowe, the
Dollphin for the ship, and the fierce mastife for the wild bore. For if a man would be grieved because the mighty strong Lion cannot be like a little
fawnyng dog daintelye fed in a widows lap: truly he might be well
compted for a very fool. And he likewise should not one whit be better, that
would take upon him both at one time to write of the world, and to search
out the natural causes of things, like as Empedocles, Plato, or Democritus
did: as also attend to embrace an old woman for richesse sake as Euphorion
did. Or else would be like unto those that were wont to spend the most
part of the night in bankettyng and reueling with Alexander, as Medius did,
and yet to thynk such pleasure to be nothing at al, except for richesse he
might be also no less notable then Ismenia, and for virtue, no less famous
then Epaminondas. Those that run for the best game, be content with their
reward, and do easilye suffer the wrestlers to enjoy to theymselues, those
Crowns of glory that they have won. Haste thou gotten Sparta (says Solon)
to be thy Country? then adourne it with good laws and ordynaunces. But we
would not (says the same Solon) change with you our virtue for your
richesse. For virtue is a stable thing, and the propertye thereof may be
possessed. But richesse are only granted too man's use for a time, passinge
often from one to another. Strato the natural Philosopher, when he heard that
Meuedemus had more scholars then he: said, is it so much to be maruayled at,
ye more desire to be washed then to be anointed? Aristotle writing to
Antipater said, that Alexander was much to be praised and extolled, not only
for that he had the rule and empire over many nations: but also for that he
had a better opinion then others of things appertaignyng to god. And therefore
if men would thus persuade with themselves that their own things ought to be
rejoiced in, to be praised, and not to be so little set by: they should not so
pine away, in maruailyng at other men. But now though there be none of us all that thinks the vine mete to bear figs, nor the olyue tree to bring
forth grapes: yet do we continually accuse our selves, and with unthankful
satiablenes vex and grieve our selves, yea we be weary of our selves except we
may be chief, so well amongst the rich as also among thelloquent, at whom in
peace, as abroad in war, as well amongst ye Philosophers as the soldiers, and
again amongst the flatterers, as amongst those that be true, and of a
faithful free simplicity, and finally so well amongst the covetous sparers,
and as the prodigal spenders. And yet we see with our eyes how maruaylously
well nature does teach us ye contrary. For as nature has ordained sundry
wyld beasts to live by so^dry kinds of food, and not to be all fed either
with seeds, flesh, or roots, but diverse to eat of diverse meats: even so
likewise ye self same nature has given to mankind diverse kinds of life, as
some to be herdme^, some plowme^, some foulers, and some fishers, wherefore it
behooves every one of us to take yt which we perceive is most meet for us,
and wholye applyinge our selves to that, to depart from the possession of
those things, which we know do apperteigne to others. For otherwise Hesiodus
should be unwise to speak in this sort.

The potter does himself with potters aye compare
And eke the smith his like in art texcell does care.
But now men do not contend one with another in likeness of art or
faculty, but the rich with the eloquente, the nobles with the rich, and the
lawyers with the subtle sophisters. Yea, free me^, gentlemen, and such as be
descended of an ancient stock, be amassed and do marvel so much at the
good success and promocion, that many times players of merye interludes and
commodies on stages, tumblers, and slaves, have in kings courts, that whilst
they think all their own honest qualities not to be esteemed: they vex
themselves with great grieffes and sorowfulnesse of mind, which at length
does kill them. But how every man has in his own mind a storehouse or
receptacle, and as it were a flowynge fountain both of quietness and of
carfulness, and has also the vessels (whereof Homer speaks) full of all
kind of good and evil, not as he says, laid at Iupyter his Door, but
placed within the soul: the dyuersityes of men, which we see to be
dyuerslye ruled by affections of the mind do right well declare. For fools
do not only pass over good things which be present, but also do neglect
those that be paste. So much are their careful minds bente to that which
is to come. But wise men contrariwise reuoluing things through good
remembrance before their eyes, do cause those things that as yet be not, to
be at hand, yea and to be present in deed. Whereas to fools (because
things present do chance in a momente, so sodainelye as they can not almost
be perceived) it seems that we have nothing nor that any thing
apperteigneth unto us. And as the Ropemaker which is paincted in Pluto his
Temple, for sloth suffers his Ass that stands by him, to eat up all the
cord that he of hemp has twysted: even so the ungrateful and sluggishe
forgetfulness of many, taking away the commodyties received of things
past, and cancellynge all the noble acts and woorthye enterpryses, all the
sweet time spente in quyete Study, free from all worldly affairs, all the
plesaunt and merry societies and fellow like living together of friends, and
finallye clean abolishyng all that part of ye life, that ever was given to
any myrthe or pleasure, will not suffer (I say) one self life to be made and
knit of things paste and present: but by seperatyng ye life past, from the
life present, and again the life present from the life to come, makes for
lack of calling such things to remembrance all things to seem, as though
they had never been done. Those that in the scholles of Philosophers do take
away thencrease of bodies, affirmyng the substance to vanish away by
continual wasting of breath, do seem to prove that every one of us do
alter state of body and daily decay by words. But such as do forgette
things past, as though their memory failed them, and will not repeat one
thing often, those do not in words, but in deeds make themselves every day
more miserable and poorer then other. Depending of ye time to come as though
things of a year paste and of late days, yea, and of yesterdaye, apperteigned
nothing unto the^: yea, and as though those things had never chanced unto
them. So that the quiet estate of ye mind, is by this means disturbed. And as
flies creapyng upon very smoothe and slippery glass do slide, and yet in
rough and cranyed places do easily stick: Even so men do fall from merye
and pleasant things, and do take sure hold on ye remembrance of heavy and
sorowefull things. Yea rather as by report, there is in Olinthios a certain
place called of the property thereof Cantharoletron, into the which when the
great betleflyes be once entered, they cannot find the way out again, but
after that they have many times tumbled to and fro and gone often about in
vain, at length do dye: so men being walowed into the remembrance of misery
and adversity, cannot afterward help themselves out, nor yet once take
breathe. And therefore as painters in their tables are wont with fair
glistering colors, to cover and to ouerlaye those colors that be duskishe
and not to be seen: So it behooves men in their minds with things woorthye
of remembrance and praise, to press down and to ouerwhelme all such
sorrowful chances as are not to be spoken of. For things paste cannot be
utterly abolyshed nor yet does it lie in man's power wholly to beware in time
to come. For the armony of this world is so diverse and so variable as is the
sound of the harp or vial. Neither does manne possess any thing that is
simple, sincere or pure. But as music is made of tunes high and low, and
grammar of letters, whereof some be vowelles, and some be consonauntes, and
yet he is neither Musician nor gramarian, that with either of these or those
wilbee offended, but rather that most aptlye can use them and compounde them
both together: so he finally seems most wisely to establishe and dyrecte his
life, yt has learned discretely to myngle together ye chau^ces and successes
of things yt be of diverse kinds, and contrary one to another: by
recompensinge ye haps unfortunate, with ye lucky and fortunate. For the
commodity of man's life will not suffer prosperity and adversity to be put a
sunder each one by himself, yea rather it behooves us, to make a certain
te^perature of them both, if we purpose to judge and to determine of them
rightly. Wherefore it is not mete to grunt or to groan at either of them, and to
lie down as one oppressed with a heavy burden for faintness of heart and
courage: but rather with the remembrance of better hap, to withstand and to
beat back again the force and violence of every unlucky chance. And by
covering the displeasures and incommodityes, with the veil clothe, of
pleasures and commodyties, to make the tenoure of the whole life, being knytte
and compacte of prosperitye and adversity: like a certain melodyous concord
tempered by art of music. Nor there is not (as Menander thought) one au^gel
appointed to man so sone as he is born to be ye directer of his life, and as a
master to teach him to live well: but there be rather (as Empedocles said)
two aungelles and two sundry fortunes, to whom he gave many sundry names,
which do receive us al into their powere and tuycion so soon as we come into
ye world, being immediately bound and given unto them, with like law and
condition of servitude. And he said that in our birth we receive the seeds
of al these affections. And therefore the way of our life is not plain and
smoothe, but roughe and full of hard passagies. For the which cause, the wise
man wysheth the best, and provides for the woorste, and uses both
temperatlye, aduoydynge in either part all extremity. For it is not so (as
Epicurus affirms) that he only with pleasure approaches the time to come,
which cares not whither he live so long or not: but those rather receive most
pleasure of riches, honor, power, and dominion, which if need should be,
could take the contrary state and condition of life in good worth. For the
vehemente desire of any thing is always accompanied with a certain fear to
lose the same, which fear appaullith man's mirth and oftentimes interrupteth
the same, like a flame of fire restrained by a greater violence of wind. But
that man whom reason has taught boldly without fear to speak unto Fortune in
this wise.

Like as tenioy thy gifts, I would be very glad
Even so to lose the same, I will be nothing sad:
Must needs I say trusting in himself enjoy things present with pleasure, nor
cannot be often vexte with fear, in remembering of any loss that may ensue.
When Anaxagoras heard that his son was dead: he said. when I did bigette
him I knew well that he should dye, and to that end I brought him up. This
affeccio^ of Anaxagoras ought as well to be followed of us, as to be maruailed
at. For every one of us, to any mishappe that chances, may immediately
say thus. I knew right well, that the riches which I possess, were but lent
me for a time, and not bound to me by any necessity, and that I had but only
the use of them. And I was not ignorant that they which gave me power and
authority, might also take it from me, if they list. I knew my wife to be
honest, and yet a woman also. And finally it was not hid from me, that my
friend was a man, which is a beast (as Plato says) whose nature will be
easily corrupted. Truly he yt will make compte of his affectes after this
sort and will build before in his mind such kind of Bulwarks and fortes of
reason: though any thing perhaps shall afterward chance against his desyer
or peruersely: yet shall it not chance sodaynlye or unlooked for. Because he
will never say (as the common sort does) that I would never have thought
it, or that I had a better hope, thynkyng that this could never have come so
to pass. Yea such a man I say, shall always be hable to put away the
waueryng of his heart, beatyng and quiuering for fear, and to bring it by and
by from trouble and vexacion, to rest and quietness. Carne^ades was wont to
put men most in remembrance of aduersitye, when they were in greatest
prosperity. Because that all things that come sodainlye and unlooked for:
be naturally apt to be received with grief and trouble of the mind, and as
it were with faintynge and soundyng. And now to confyrme that which has been
said with some exaumples. First how small a portion is Macedonye of the
Roman Empire? And yet when king Persis had lost it, he did not cry out
only of Fortune with foul complaints: but also seemed to many others to be
the myserablest manne and most unfortunate that ever was. But behold on the
other side Emilius, who departing out of the prouynce, after that he had once
vanquished Persis, and yielded up to his successor all the rule and power that
he had both by Sea and land: was received with crowns of glory and great
rejoicing. For all men in the time of doing sacrifice, did extol him with
praises up to ye heavens, and that not unworthily, yea most woorthely. For
this man had always in remembrance, how that ye Empire was given him but to
use for a time. But Persis contrariwise, was depryued of his kingdom by a
sudden chance and unlooked for. And truly it seems to me that Homer by a
goodly exaumple has very well taught us, how much more grievous sodayn
strokes be, then others. For Ulysses being come home again out of a strange
country, wept to see the sudden death of his dog. And yet sytting by his
lamenting wife, did not weep at all. For he being many times toward
coming home, conceived before in his mind, thimage of his weping wife. And so
that affection which without doubt, in a sudden would have bruste out: he
by laysure subdued, and by hardening his heart before, brought it clean under
his rule and power. But he was somewhat troubled with the sodein death of his
dog, because that in so sudden a thing he had not time to restrain the
force of his affection. And to speak brieflye, partlye such things as
chance otherwise then we desire: be intolerable and grievous to suffer by
nature, and partly a corrupt oppinion and naughtye custom of our selves has
taught us to be grieved therewith. And that is the greatest part, against the
which, it should be well done, to have always ready at hand this saying of
Menander. Thou never suffer any outrageous thing, except thou suppose it
so to be. For what need thou to care, so long as it pyncheth not thy flesh,
nor touches thy life, as for exaumple. The low birth of thy father, the
whoredom of thy mother, to be deprived of the honor of the highest seat, or
to be injured, in that the glory of the victory is taken from thee: what do
these things I say apperteigne to thee? For though all these things were so
in deed: yet nothing lets thee, but that thou may be well, yea and
very well dysposed both of body and soul. Now against such things as
naturally somewhat offend us as sickness, misery, and death of our fre^des, we
ought tobiect this sayi^g, woe is we. But why woe is me sith we have suffered
nothing, but that which apperteygneth to man. For there is no talk or saying,
that does more quickly reprove the passyble part of the soul, when it is
drawn out of ye right way by unbridled affections: then that saying which
does admonish us, and put us in remembrance of the universal and natural
necessity, and of that which must needs be, with the which necessity man is
noryshed up and wrapped in it, at the time of his birth and first knyttynge of
his body, which one knotte is only subject to fortunes assaults, and all the rest of natures gifts which be chiefest and of most valewe, he may
safely possess without danger. When King Demetrius had taken the city of
Megara, it is said that he demanded Stylpo the Philosopher, whether he had
lost any of his goods or not? To whom Stylpo answered. That he saw no man
taking away any thing of his, for (says he) though fortune has suffered
us to be robbed and spoiled of all the rest: yet we have some thing left
in us, which the Greeks can neither bear nor drive away. It is no reason
therefore, so much to despise and to reiecte nature, as though she had no jot
of fortitude nor of sufferaunce and therefore not equal in force, to Fortune.
But sithe we know right well that, that part of man which is to fortune
subject, is a very small portion of us, and little to be regarded, being so
brittle and so soft that it yeldeth at the first to every little poushe: and
that we be lords of the better part, wherein as in a strong hold all good
things be placed: yea, and wherein also, true glory, scyences, and all
studies apperteigninge to virtue have their being: which cannot be taken away
nor ever perish by any vyolence: it becomes us (I say therefore) to be in
mind invincible, and to trust in our selves, fearing nothing that is to
come. And to say to fortune, that which Socrates fainynge to have spoken unto
Anitus and Melitus his accusours, spoke in deed to the Iudgies. Anitus and
Melitus may well take my life from me, but hurt or damage they can do me none.
For though Fortune may oppress manne with diverse dyseases destroy his goods,
and accuse him to the Tiraunte, or to the people, yet she cannot make him an
evil manne, or a cowarde, or false hearted and faynte of courage or malicious,
and specially he being a good manne, and endued with manlynesse and stoutness
of courage. And finally she can not take away the right constitucion and
disposicion of the mind, which does help manne more to pass his life, then
thart of sailing does the mariner to pass the seas. For the stern man be he
never so expert, can no more still the raging sea or repress the violence of ye
boisterous winds, then to take haven where as he list, so often as he desires to
come from sea to shore. No nor yet ca^ his art perform this, that he being
taken in a sudden tempest may constantly and without fear escape such
necessity. But only it helps thus much that so long as he despaireth not but
that art may take place, he gathers in his sails as well as he ca^, and so
floteth with the tempest, whereas the cowardly maryner sits wryngynge his
hands together, and whilste the maste of the ship lies drowned by violence of
winds in the sea, he trembles and quaketh for fear. But the quiet mind in a
wiseman, both brings health to the body by the means of continency, good
diete and exercise (which things do aswage and clean take away the cause
and matter of sickness) and also if there be afterward perhaps any occasion
of trouble whereupon man's mind does run as upon a rock in the sea: he
hoyseth up sail, and as (Esclapiades says) quickly passes the same. But
fools not so much for desire of life as for fear of death, do hang on the
body by the hands closed lattys wise one finger with in another: eue^ as
Ulysses did hang by the wild fig tree when he feared ye dangerous goulfe
called Caribdis roaringe underneath him, who (as Homer writes) being suddenly
taken in the sea of Sycelye, was brought to such case yt by means of ye
violence of ye wind driving him hither and thither, he could nether go forward
nor backward, nor yet as the proverb says, as one yt holds a wolf by the
ears: was hable what for wearines, and for thu^handsomnes of the place, to
hold the tree any longer, and yet durst not let it go for fear of the
terrible monster. Truly if a man would by some means search out the nature
of our soul, and think with him self, that by death we pass from this life
to a better, or at the least not to a worse: certainly that man in despisinge
death, should prepare for himself no small provision, to conduct him in his
journey toward the quietness and tranquilitye of the mind. For he that as
well by force of virtue which is proper and peculyer to manne, may live
pleasantly, as also by means of other things not apperteygnyng to manne, but
given besides nature being of great power and far passing our own proper
things: may be of such bold spirit and courage, that he may say to
himself, I may depart, yea I say eue^ at the first instant, and by gods
leave when I will my self: How I pray you, or when may we think that any
grievous thing indissoluble or troublous, can chance to this man? But
whosoever he was ye first spoke this famous and renowned sentence, O Fortune I
have prevented thee, and taken up before all thy ways and passages be they
never so strayghte: truly that manne seems not to have encouraged and
boldned himself by strong buildings fast barred and surely locked: but rather
by Philosophical decrees and testimonies of wise men which be common and easy
for all men to have, yea and ready at hand to all those that shall
vouchesafe to receive them. Neither ought we to take away our credit from
such things as be consecrated to the memory of us and of our posterity, nor
yet to despair or to mistrust our selves as unable ever to follow any part
thereof. But as we ought to have the^ in admiracion, and as it were by a
certain inspiration of god to be amassed at the^: so also it behooves him yt
prepares himself to follow the same, too make such a show of himself that in
beginning first with small things, he may afterward attempt greater and
greater, and so at length atchieue to the highest. But we must take heed in any
wise yt we forget not to consider these things before, nor yet be grieved to
reuolue the^ often in our mind and to think of the^ with all our heart, which
thing is not, uneasy to be done. For as the dilicatenes of the mind, which
being occupied in every little trifle and things of small weight, is wont by a
naughty sufferaunce to withdraw it self from vnplesaunt things for to follow
things of pleasure: does annoy us and infect us with a certain slouthful
diliciousnes and te^dernes: even so, if a man would behold in his mind thimage
of sickness, labor, trauail, banishment, and such other like, and command in
him self the force of his wit and reason, diligently to discuss each thing yt
is to be pondered by it self: that man, that man, I say, with out doubt, should
quickly find those things that seem grievous and horrible, to be in deed vain
and for the most part not to be regarded, and finally to threaten more
outwardly, the^ they can perform inwardly. But the common sort do fear this
saying of Menander. There is no man that may glory so much of himself in his
life time as to say, that I will not suffer this, or that. And no maruayle
why, sithe they know not how much it helps toward thaduoiding of
heaviness, taccustom themselves to behold fortune with a froward countenance,
and with a fierce look, and not to be given to effeminate thoughts and
wavering delites, which being nourished in darkness, and abashed at every
glistering light of hope, do yield to every trifle. Albeit Mena^der might be
answered thus. A man ought not to say, I will not in my life time suffer this,
but rather ought to say, I will not whilst I live do this. As I will not lie, I
will not use subtle craft in deceauing men, I will not defraude them of their
right, I will not maliciouslye lay wait to take them in a trap. For sith this
thing consists in our power, it must needs be a very great help to those
that do further the^ selves tobteigne quietness of mind. Contrariwise a wicked
conscience is in the soul, like a wound in the body, and it causes
repentance, which continually fretteth and tormenteth the soul. For where as
reason is wont to take away all other griefs and heaviness, this naughty
conscience (I say) causes repentance for shame to provoke it self of the
own accord, and as it were eagerlye to byte and to tear it self in pieces.
And as the cold of a cold ague, or the heat of a burning feauoure does
much more vehementlye and grieuouslye afflicte the body, then any other
outward heat or cold. Even so the griefs and sorrows that come unto us by
chance, be easier to suffer, then those that by our own folly do breed in
our selves. This saying also which every man when he has done any mischief
is wont with weaping tears to howl out. There is no man to be blamed for
this, but I my self: makes the wound which is grievous of it self, much
more grievous and does pearce it deper. For neither goodlye buyldynges, nor
abundance of gold, nor yet nobleness of birth or great Empire, nor
fynallye, pleasant speech, eloquence, or promptnes of tongue, can bring
such stylnesse and pleasant quietness of life, as the mind that is free
from pensyuenesse and lives by it self, far of, from wicked thoughts.
Which mind having in it self a clear and pure fountain of life (whereby I
mean an honest dysposition and virtuous behauyoure from whence all commendable
doings do spring) as a thing encouraged I say by some inspiracio^ of god,
does bring forth all her doings in myrthe and pleasure, with the continual
remembrance whereof she is only fed, being to her a great deal sweter and
much more assured, the^ the hope whereof Pyndarus speaks, which (as he says)
does nourishe old age. And as the sweet gardein plots (as Carneades was wo^t
to say) though they be spoiled of their pleasant shrubbes, the roots being cut
or pulled up, do yield for all yt a certain sweet smell long time after: eue^ so
honest doings, do leave in the mind of a wyseman, a certain remembrance which
is always pleasant and fresh. With the which remembrance ye inward mirth
being watered, as it were wi^h a continual running brook, is alwais green and
brings forth young shootes and springes to the great shame of those that do
often lament and blame this life, affirminge it to be a counsel house of
mischief, and a certain assemble of banished folks, into the which the souls
be sent a way from above, as though they were banished out of their country.
Truly I cannot but judge this saying of Diogenes most worthy of remembrance.
Who espying a stranger on a time in Lacedemony gorgeously arraying himself
against a festival day, said thus, what (quoth he?) Is not every day to a
good man a festival day? yes truly (if we consider things well) most
festival and joyful. For the world is no other thing but a holy temple, and
most meet for God. And into this temple, man at his birth time is admitted,
not to behold images made by man's hand, and without sense or feling: but to
behold the Su^ne ye Moon, and the Stars, from whence our life took her first
beginni^g and moving, which things the providence of god gave us to beehold,
to thentent yt such things as be subject to the outward senses, might be (as
Plato says) images and examples of those things which are to be comprehended
and understood by the mind. Add hereunto the floudes continually bringing
fresh water and earth, which nourishes both plant and beast. It behooves our
life therefore, that will truly begin to celebrate this noble feast and
goodly sight, to be full of mirthe and quietness. And not to tarry for ye feast
of Saturn, of Bacchus or of Pallas (as many do) which do abide these and
such other feastyuall days when they approach with great expectacion, and
fynallye being come they receive them and the plays celebrated in the same,
with much reioyceing. And for their pleasures sake, they pay also hier to
players of Interludes, to Minstrels and to Tu^blers, that in those days they
may delyght themselves, the more wantonly with bought mirthe. But what ca^ be
a more indecent thing then this, that during such plays, we can sit quietly,
kepinge a maruaylous still silence, attendynge to nothing but to that only.
For neither does any manne lamente whylste he does Sacryfyce, nor yet
whylste he beholds the plays of Apollo, no more then he that sytteth at
Saturnes feast, complayneth for hunger. And yet such solemn feasts, as God
is aucthour of, and as it were ring leader, we many times defyle and vyolate,
by passing them over with lamenting, with bitterness of heart, and with
miserable living. And this also is very unseemly for us to be delyghted
with the melodious noise of Organes, and with the sweet singing of birds, and
wyllynglye to behold beasts whylste they play together, and leap too and
fro. And again to be offended with their loud howlynge, terryble roarynge,
and cruel lookynge. And yet we seeing our own sorrowful heavy and froward
life, drowned in noisome affectes, in troubles and cares inexplycable, be not
only unable to crave casemente for our selves and space to breathe: But
also unwilling to hear those that would exhort us thereunto. To whose
admonyshmentes if with ears unoccupied and well pourged we would attend, we^
should both use things present according as they be, without fear of
reproof, and also we should quiet our selves with pleasant remembrance
of things paste. And finally having an assured and joyful hope always
before our eyes, we should boldly aproche things that are to come.

Imprinted at London by Wylliam Seres dwelling at the West end of Poules at the
Sign of the Hedgehogge, the vii. day of June. An. domini. 1561.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum


