The A. B. C set forth by the Kings majesty and his Clergy, and commannded
to be taught through out all his Realm. All other utterly set a part as the
teachers thereof tender his graces favor.
A. a. b. c. d. e. f. g. h. i. k. l. m. n. o. p. q. r. r. s. s. t. u. v. w. x.
y. z. and. and: Est. Amen.

A. B. C. D. E. F. G. H. I. K. L. M. N. O. P. Q. R. S. T. V. W. X. Y.

A. B. C. D. E. F. G. H. I. K. L. M. N. O. P. Q. R. S. T. V. W. X.

In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost.

So be it.

The prayer of our lord.
Our father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. And
forgive us our trespaces, as we forgive them that trespace against us. And let
us not be led into temtacio^. But deliver us from evil. Amen.

The salutation of the Aungel to the blessed virgin Marye.
HAyle Mary full of grace the lord is with the. Blessed art thou among women,
and blessed is the fruit of thy Womb.

The Creed, or xii. articles of the Christen faith.
I Believe in god the father allmighti maker of heaven and earth And in Jesus
Christ his only son our lord which was conceived by the holy ghost, borne of
the virgin Mari, suffered under ponce Pylat was crucified, dead, buried, and
descended into hell. And the third day he rose again from death. He ascended
into heaven, and sits on the right hand of god the father almighty. From
thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead.

I believe in the holy ghost, the holy Catholyke church, the communion of
saints, the forgyuenes of sins The resurrection of the body, and the life
everlasting. Amen.

The x. commandments of almighty god.
THou shall have none other Gods but me. Thou shalt not have any graue^ image,
nor any likeness of any thing that is in heaven above, or in earth beneth, or in
the water under the earth, to thin te^t to do any godly honor or worship unto
the^ Thou shall not take the name of the lord god in vain. Remember that thou
keep holy the Saboth day. Honor thy father and thy mother. Thou shall do no
murder Thou shall not commit adultery. Thou shall not steal. Thou shall not
bear false witness against thy neybour. Thou shall not unjustly desire thy
neybours house, nor thy neighbors wife, nor his servant, nor his maid, nor his
ox, nor his ass nor any thing that is thy neybours

Lord into thy hands I co^me^de my spirit, Thou have redeemed me lord god of
truth.

Grace before dynner.
THe eyes of al things do look up and trust in the O lord, thou give the^
meat in due season. Thou do open thy hand, and fillest with thy blessing
every living thing. Good lord bless us and al thy gifts which we receive of
thy bou^teous liberality, through Christ our lord. Ame^. The king of eternal
glory make us parteners of the heavenly table Ame^. God is charity, and he yt
dwells in charity, dwells in god and god in him. God grant us all to
dwell in him. Amen.

Grace after dynner.
THe god of peace and love vouchsafe always to dwell with us. And thou lord have
mercy upon us. Glory, honor, and praise be to the O god, which have fed us
from our tender age and gyueste sustenau^ce to every living thing, replenishe
our herts with joy and gladness that we always hauig sufficient may be rych and
ple^tiful in all good works kes through our lord Jesus Christ Amen.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Our father which art in heaven. etc.

Let us not be led into temptacion.

But deliver us from evil.

Lord here my prayer.

And let my cry come to the From the fiery darts of the devil both in weal
and woe, our savior Christ be our defender, buckler, and shield. Amen.

God save the church our king and realm, and god have mercy upon all Christen
souls. Amen.

Grace before supper.
O Lord Jesus Christ without who^ nothing is sweet nor sauery, we beseech the
to bless us and our supper, and with thy blessed presence to chere our
hearts, that in all our metes and drinks we may taste and savor of the, to thy
honor and glory. Amen.

Grace after supper.
BLessed is god in all his gifts And holy in all his works. Our help is in
the name of our Lord, who has made both heaven and earth. Blessed be the name
of our lord. From henseforth world without end.

MOst mighty lord and merciful father we yield the harti thanks for our bodily
sustenance requiring also most intierly thy gracious goodness so to feed us
with the fode of thy heavenly grace that we may worthily glorify thy holy name
in this life, and after be partakers of the life euerlastig, through our lord
Jesus Christ. Amen.

God save the Church, our king Queen and the Realm, and god have mercy upon
al christian souls. Ame^.

De profundis clamaui. psalm. cxxix.
From the depth I called or the (O Lord) lord heart my voice. Let thine ears
give good head to the voice of my prayer.

If thou lord wylt look straightly upon sins, O lord, who shall abide it.

But with thee is mercy, and for thy law I have suffered the o lord My soul
has abyde^ in his word my soul has trusted in the lord. From the morning
watch until night let Israel trust in the lord.

For with the lord there is mercy and with him is plenteous redemption.

And he will redeem Israel from all his iniquities.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Our father which art. etc.

Let us not be led into temptacion.

But deliver us from evil.

Lord give thy people eternal rest.

And everlasting light shine upon the^

From the gates of hell

Lord deliver their souls.

I trust to se the goodness of god

In the land of the living.

Lord hear my prayer.

And let my cry come to thee.

ALmighty God and most holy father lord both of the lyuinge and of the dead,
merciful to all the^ that lean unto the by love and belief, we humbly beseech
the, that all thy people living here in this world, and they also that be
deceased into another world in thy name by thy merciful clemency, may obtain
pardon for all their sins, and finally the joys of the life everlasting,
through our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

Confitemini domino quoniam bonus. Quoniam in seculum misericordia eius.

COnfiteor deo beat Marie, omnibus sanctis: et vobis, peccaui nimis in
cogitacione locutione, and opera mea culpa, precor sanctam mariam: et omnes
sanctos dei et vos orare pro me.

MIsereatur vestri omnipotens deus, et vimittat vobis omnia peccata vestra
liberet vos ab omni malo saluet et confirmet in bono et ad vitam perducat
eternam, Amen.

These questions the master ought to demand and to learn his scolers.
Speak my good child. Tell me what art thou.

The child answers.

The question.

The answer.

The question. what is baptism.

The answer. It is called the lauer or water of regeneration, by the which
every one that believes is received and consecrated into the fellowship of
Christ's Church, to be partaker of the life everlasting.

Question. In whom beleuest thou.

Answer* I believe only in god the father almighty, and so for the as the
Creed speaks.

Question. what is faith.

Answer. Faith is a sure confidence und trust of mind, trustyng and
beleuynge in the very living god.

The question.

The answer.

The question.

There are three persons which is god the father, god the son, and godde the
holy ghost, three persons in trinity, and one god in essence. The question.
What is god. The answer. God is he of whose goodness and by whose power I am
persuaded and assured through my faith to receive all yt good is, unto whom also
I fly in all adversities and perils, as unto a present al alone is sufficict
help for me, he pacie^tly abides our turninge from sin: full of mercy,
gentyl, good, ready always to forgive, suffers no sin to be unpunished, and
that unto the third and fourth generation until none of that sinful flock be
left alive.

The question.

The answer. I believe in god the father almighty maker of heaven and earth,
and in Jesus Christ his only son our lord. etc.

The question.

The answer.

The question. What menest thou by the third, fourth fyfth, and syxt articles.
etc.

The answer.

The question.

The answer. It works in me love to God, and to my neighbors, as to my
self, and so changes me into a new man, so yt now I believing and knowing
god to have showed so exceeding love for me, and study to do his
commandments, and am full heavy in my heart that I can not fulfill them.

Then when the child is come to discretion, let him be induced to know what
god is.
GOd is might, wisdom, and infinite goodness, without beginning and with
out endyng, truth, unchangeable, just, and mercyful, only god in three persons
the father, the son and the holy ghost, in who^ al things be, by whom al
things be made and created. And by whom all things be given to us, and in the
life to come.

It is also necessary to know what man is.
Man is created after the lykenes of the Image of God. And through the sin
of our first father Adam, is made pore, vile wretched, ignorant, inconstant,
frail, and ready to sin, full of Ipocrisie, and vainglory, and ready to fall into
eternal dampnation. All this folowethe after that we are conceived and borne
into this world.

A godly rule of the true and Christian religion.
TO serve God freely, even from the heart. To bear his Cross and obey our
rulers, to profit al men and hurt no body, to trust in the merits of Christ's
passion, to be saved from sin, and none otherwise, this is the only and best
religion.

Here after follows an invocation unto the holy Trinity.
HOly Trinity be helpinge unto me. O God in thy name shall I lift up mine
hands, the triumphant cross of the passion of our Lord Jesus Christ. Jesus
of Nazareth, king of the Jews, son of God have mercy upon me. In the name
of the father, the son, and the holy ghost. So be it.

Grace before dynner or supper.

Praised be thou our most mercyful and heavenly father which of thy inestimable
goodness have given thy most dear beloved son Jesus to paynefull death for
our sakes, thereby not all only delyuering us and all faithful from
everlasting death and damnation, but also purchafynge unto us euerlaftynge
life, joy, and felicity. endue we beseech thee thy holy spirit into our
hertes, that we may daily more and more walk and go forward in the pleasant
path ways of thy ryghteous laws and commandments. So be it.

After dynner or supper.
Now you have well refresshed your bodies, remember the lamentable afflictions
and miseries of many thousands of your neigh bours and brethren in Christ
visited by the hand of god, some with mortal plages and diseases, some with
imprysonment, some with extreme poverty and necessity, so that either they can
not or they have not to feed on as ye have done, remember therefore how much and
how depely ye present are bound to the goodness of almighty god, for your
health, wealth, liberty, and many other his benefits given unto you.

GOD SAVE THE KING the Queen and the Realm, and send us peace in Christ Amen.
Imprinted at London by Wyllyam Powell.


