A Prayer or supplycation made unto God by a young man, that he would be
merciful to us, and not keep his word away from us, but that the truth may
spring.
Psalm, C.xix. Wherein has a young man O Lord to rejoice,
But in thy word: therefore put I forth my voice.

O Lord of mercy us behold
The which are here in great mysery
And in doing thy will lord we are to cold
Therefore on us show some pytye
For mercy unto thee now do we cry
That thou in our sins suffer us not to dye.
Let us not be forsaken of thee O lord
Although we be wretched and sinful
But thy mercies now show abroad
And to us sinners most wicked be merciful
For mercy unto thee now do we cry
That thou in our sins suffer us not to dye.
Thou dyddest thy word plentyfully sow abroad
Even unto us lord of time very late
But we were to unthankful, all with one accord
Therefore thou dyddest, o lord, it away take
Wherefore now for mercy unto thee we cry
That thou in our sins suffer us not to dye.
Good lord be merciful unto us we thee pray
Although destruction we have deserved
Let us have thy word again, O lord, to be our stay
That by strong faith in thee, we may be saved
For only unto thee continually will we cry
That thou in our sins suffer us not to die.
Take away Idolatry, o lord, let that no more vpspring
In this, O lord, thy poor and simple land
Thou dydst plague us lord, in taking away our King
Wherefore hold over us now thy right hand
And forgive us lord, now do we cry
That in our sins thou suffer us not to dye.
Full godly and ryghteously did he begin
For the time thou gave him space
To set forth thy glory, and punish sin
This was the intent of his grace
Therefore for the like do we now cry
That thou in our sins suffer us not to dye.
Images, o lord, he plucked clean down
And ceremonies that were naught
And priests he made leave Baales crown
And thy word he caused to be taught
For by thy word all thing did he try
that we in ignorance should not dye.
He was the sower thy seed to sow
As thy Evangelists do plainly write
But some of thy seed away did go
Among the hard ground did it light
therefore for forgeuenes now do we cry
that thou in our sins suffer us not to die.
We are that hard and stonye ground
Where some of thy sede did fall
Of which seed small rote is found
Satan almooste had dried up all
Therefore for mercy now do we cry
that thou in our sins suffer us not to die,
O Lord, make us of that fruytfull ground
the which does keep thy commandments
That great increase of godlynes in us may be found
that we may serve thee with good intentes
And always for mercy unto thee to cry
That we in our sins do never die.
Full notable and excellent kings thou have given us
King Henry the eight of most famous memory
Which abolyshed the bishop of Rome from us
And by thy mighty power plucked down much idolatri
We consideringe this, for mercy do now cry
That in our sins thou suffer us not to die.
Also we were made to go and worship a false God
Which was a great abomination and ydolatrye
But thy commandments he set forth abroad
In our own native speech most truly
Teachinge us always on the for to cry
that we in our sins lord, should not dye.
Even as Esechias was unto Iudae
So was King Henry unto England
Unto this King, o lord, compare we
Edward the syxte whom thou have in thy hand
Which thy word set abroad most manifestlye
That we in our sins Lord, should not dye.
Although that in age he was not so hye
Yet unto his steps he went very nere
Unto the glory of thy blessed Majesty
And unto the soul health of us his subjects dear
Therefore unto thee, o lord, do we now cry
that thou in our sins suffer us not to dye
His father broke the Pilgrimages going
to this saint and that saint, to and fro
But he, o lord, at his up coming
Brought down all as thou do know
For by thy word he did all thing try
That we in our sins should not die.
He was in age like to that virtuous king
Josias, which in Jerusalem did reign
One and thirty years had he there his being
And executed thy law this is very plain
But for our unthankfulness, o lord, truly
Thou causedst our worthy king shortly for to die.
I heartily beseech thee, o eternal God
To keep and preserve Elysabeth our Queen
That she may thy word now set abroad
Now in her time as before has been
By her godly Father and brother, for which thing we cry
That we may repent, and not in our sins die,
Finis,
Quod John Pyttes
Printed at London in Aldersgate street by William Herforde. The.xxiii. of
March. M.D.lix.


