The sick-mans Couch. A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE THE MOST noble Prince Henry at
Greenewich, March 12. Ann. 1604.

By Thomas Playfere professor of Divinity for the Lady Margaret in Cambridge.

PRINTED BY JOHN LEGATE, Printer to the University of Cambridge. 1605. And are
to be sold in Paul's Church yard at the sign of the Crown by Simon Waterson.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable my very good Lord, Sir Edward Denny, Knight, Baron of
Waltham, grace and peace.
RIght Honorable, being appointed to preach the last Lent, I delivered so much
as filled up the ordinary time of an hour. But that was scarce half this
sermon. I uttered no more, to avoid the offense of the hearer; I write no
less, to procure the profit of the reader. For as tediousnes without regard of
due time, especially in so high a presence, soonest offends: so fullnes,
where the reader may peruse more or less at his pleasure and leisure, best of
all edifieth. Therefore I thought good in publishing this sermon rather to
enlarge it to the comprehension I had conceived and meditated in my mind, then
to scant it according to that strict compass of time which I was tied to in
the pulpit. For by this means all that will vouchsafe to look into it may
make their profit thereby. They which were present by veiwing the whole,
whereas they heard but half: they which were absent, by having the preachers
meaning, though they be unacquainted with his affection. And yet perhaps it may
please God to bless this poor exercise to diverse heavenly minded men in such
sort, as they may take occasion by some things here intimated, not only to
conceive more then they find directly specified, but also to be more diumely
inspired and sweetly affected, then it pleased God to vouchsafe me of his
grace, either at the preaching or penning of it. Howsoever, seeing this
discourse exhorts principally to repentance and patience in the time of
sickness, and to a preparation of our selves by a good life unto a happy death,
which is a doctrine most necessary in this great mortality, that has lately
bin, and is yet feared: especially also for that the greater part of it I never
preached any where, but only penned in my study, I thought my self so far
bound in duty to this blessed church wherein we live, as not to hide it in a
napkin, but according to the Apostles rule, if I have found comfort my sefe by
some meditations here opened, then to comfort them that are afflicted by the
same comfort wherewith we our selves have bin comforted of God. And bethinking
me of one under whose protection it might pass in public, I thought best to
make bold with your Lordship. For though all sorts peradventure may be fitted
with some thing or other in this plain sermon, which they may make use of, yet
those I am sure will conn me most thanks for my well-meaning endeavor, which
have had most experience and trial of Gods loving mercy in this kind. Now
your good Lorship having bin delivered more then once or twice from dangerous
sickness, have learned such patience, such meekenes, such unfeigned repentance,
such true mortification, such assurance of Gods love, such confidence in
Christ, such other good virtues of a right sanctified spirit, by this fatherly
visitation of the Lord which is not wanting even oftentimes to his dearest
children, as you could never have learned, at leastwise in the same measure, in
health. Besides, I have bin so especially beholding to your Honor, even since
you were first of S. John's college, that I could not satisfy my self with the
inward duty and thankfulness toward you which I have ever faithfully laid up
in my breast, except I also showed the same by some such outward testimony, as
might clear me to you and the world of vngratfulnes. Wherefore I do so
presume to dedicate this small labor to your good acceptance, as withal I
heartily desire all those that shall receive edisication thereby, to pray
together with me for the continuance of your Lord-ships good health and
welfare, that long you may even in this world enjoy this your late honorable
addition, and all other good gifts of God, and favors of our gracious
Soueraygne, to the benefit of this Church, and commonwealth. From Cambridge the
28. of June, 1605.

Your Lordships ever to command, THOMAS PLAYFERE.
The quotations in the margent with figures, were, or should have bin,
delivered at the preaching: the rest with letters, are only for the printing.



THE SICKEmans Couch.
Psalm. 6. v. 6. I water my couch with my tears.


NOthing is more delightsome then the service of God, and love of virtue:
nothing more full of grief and sorrow, then sin. Gods commandments are not
heavy 1. Ioh. 5.3.
: yea his yoke is easy, and his burden light Matthew. 11.30.
. On the other side, how deeply sin wounds the very conscience, the
heathen Orator confesses, saying, I will not buie repentance so dear Non emam
tanti poenitere. Demosth.
. Agreeable to that of the Apostle, What fruit have you of those things,
whereof you are now ashamed? For the end of those things is death Romans 6.21.
. Look how the Israelites wearied themselves in clay and brick, without any
profit or reward; nay when they had don there very best, they were by Pharaos
taske-masters well beaten for their pains Exodus 5.14.
: even so the world, the flesh, the devil, as rigorous taske-masters incite
men to sin, but all the reward they yield them, is only mortal and
immortal grief. And as the sea roareth and fometh, and never is at rest Esa.
57.20.
; after the same sort, the wicked are like the raging sea, foming out their
own shame Epist. Iud. 13.
, and never rest, till having made shipwreck of faith 1. Tim. 6.9.
, they be drowned in perdition and destruction. They which worship the beast,
have no rest day nor night Revel. 14.11.
. Now what beast so cruel as sin? which not only kills the body, as a
beast does, but sleieth the soul Sapien. 1.11.
, yea it destroieth both body and soul in hell Matthew. 10.20.
. Therefore this indeed is the beast, which depriueth all those that serve it,
of liberty and rest. Of whom the Prophet Jeremy writes thus; Ier. 9.5.
They have taught their tongues to speak lies, and they take great pains to
do wickedly.

This, holy King David had good experience of. Namely, that in sin, there is
nothing but sorrows and pains. For lying here sick in his bed Hereupon I
entitle this sermon, The sicke-mans couch.
, and feeling this same sickness to be a stroke of Gods heavy hand for his
offense, he cries God heartily mercy, and says, Have mercy upon me, O Lord,
for I am weak: O Lord, heal me, for my bones are vexed. My soul also is sore
troubled, but Lord, how long will thou delay? Now that his soul is sore
troubled, he proves in this present verse; I am weary of my groanings, every
night I wash my bed, and water my couch with my tears. The soul must needs
be sore troubled, which is so grievously tormented. Especially in the words of
my text, by three notable amplifications, he shows how serious and sincere
his repentance is. First, says he, Not only I wash, but also I water:
secondly, Not only my bed, but also my couch: thirdly, Not only with my
gronings, but also with my tears. I water my couch with my tears.

These will be very godly and ghostly meditations. The rather, in this time of
lent. Only the worst, I doubt, will be mine. For that having discoursed at
large of this doctrine else where In the sermon entitled, The mean in mourning.
, I can not now cull out the choicest matter, but must be fain to gather
together such fragments as were then left. I water my couch with my tears.

The first amplification is in this word, I water. Not only I wash, but also I
water. The faithful sheep of the great shepherd, go up from the
washing-place every one bringing forth twinns, and none barren among them Cant.
4.2.
. For so Jacobs sheep having conceived at the watering-troughs, brought forth
strong and parti-colored lambs Genesis 30.38.
. David likewise, who before had erred and strayed like a lost sheep Psalm.
119. vlt.
, making here his bed a washing-place, by so much the less is barren in
obedience, by how much the more he is fruitful in repentance. In Salomons
temple stood ten Caldrons of brass, to wash the flesh of those beasts, which
were to be sacrificed on the alter 1. Reg. 7.38.
. Salomons father, makes a water of his tears, a cauldron of his bed, an
alter of his heart, a sacrifice, not of the flesh of unreasonable beasts, but
of his own body, a living sacrifice, which is his reasonable serving of God
Romans 12.1.
. Now the Hebrewe word Askch.
here used, signifies properly, To cause to swim, which is more, then simply to
wash. And thus the Geneua translation reads it, I cause my bed every night to
swim. So that as the priests used to swim in the molten Sea 1 Reg. 7.47.
, that they might be pure and clean, against they performed the holy rites and
services of the temple: in like manner the princely prophet washes his bed,
yea he swimmeth in his bed, or rather he causes his bed to swim in tears, as
in a sea of grief and penitent sorrow, for his sin. Neither were this so
much to be wondered at, but that he frames the amplification thus; Not only I
wash, but also I water. Watering in scripture is attributed to sundry things.
The holy ghost waters. Except a man be borne again of water, and of the holy
Ghost John. 3.5.
. Because the holy ghost purges and cleanses like water. The word waters.
Paul planteth, Apollo waters, but God gives the increase 1. Cor. 3.6.
. Baptism waters. Which was prefigured in the water of Noah's floode 1 Peter.
3.21.
, and more plainly in the water that came out of Christ's side John. 19 34.
. Repentance waters. As in this place; I water my couche with my tears. Out
of Eden went a river to water the garden Genesis 2.10.
: but David's eyes gush out many rivers of water Psalm. 119.130.
, to water his couch with his tears. As in Sicilia there is a fountain called
Fons Solis, out of which at midday when the sunn is nearest flows cold water,
at midnight when the Sunn is farthest off, flows hot water Pomponius Mela.
: so the Patriarch David's head is full of water Ierem. 9.1.
, and his eyes a fountain of tears, who when he enjoyed his health, as the
warm sunshine, was cold in confessing his sins, but being now visited with
sickness his reins chastising him in the night season Psalm. 16.7.
, is so sore troubled, and withal so hot and so fervent, that every night he
washes his bed, and waters, nay even melts his couch with tears. For this
Hebrewe word Amseh.
, is diuersely translated also as well as the other. The best learned
interpretors Bucerus: Tremellius: and alii.
translate it Liquefacio, I melt. And then the meaning is, I water my couch so
thoroughly that I make it melt with my tears. We see ice and snow swim a while
in the water, but anon after they melt away: right so the holy kings heart in
the midst of his breast is even as melting wax Psalm. 22.14.
, yea his very couch being rensed and steeped in tears, melts away as snow
before the sun. Neither yet does he think himself clean enough for all
this, but still bewayling his offense, he says with blessed Job, Job. 9.30.
Though I wash my self with snow-water, and purge my hands most clean, yet
shall thou plunge me in the pit, and mine own clothes shall make me filthy.

Hence we may learn two special points for our instruction. One is, that our
repentance must be continual. For the Psalmist having said before, Laborauiin
gemitu meo.
I have bin weary of my gronings, adds here at the last, Stratum meum rigab^.
vulg.
I will water my couch with my tears. I have bin weary, and, I will be weary:
or, I have watered, and I will water; implies a perpetuity of repentance. We
read it commonly in the Psalm thus; The mouth of all wickedness shall be
stopped Psalm. 107.42.
. Which is true, first in this life. Where seeing before their eyes so many
examples of Gods providence and protection over his children, if they will not
praise him, yet they shall be enforced, will they nill they, at leastwise to
hold their peace, and not blaspheme him. Then at the day of judgment. For that
ghest, who when the king asked him, why he wanted a wedding garment, was
altogether speachles Mat. 22.12.
, though he be but one yet is a pattern of all, and shows what a pitiful
case all the wicked shall be in at that day, when their mouths shall be
stopped, having not a word to say for themselves. But it might as well out of
the original be translated thus; Kaphetzah. Hebr. Ithcassemath. Chald. Omnis
iniquilas contrahit os suum. Muscul. Oppilabit: in margin, Oppilauit. Vulg.
The mouth of all wickedness is stopped. For foolish men are plagued for their
offenses, and because of their iniquities Verse. 17.
. Because they rebel against the words of the Lord, and lightly regard the
council of the most high Verse. 11.
. Therefore many times their fruitful land makes he barren for the wickedness
of them that dwell therein Verse. 34.
. Yet so foolish are they, that they will not once open their mouth to
confess, either their own wickedness, or Gods goodness. Their mouths are so
stopped, that they will neither cry to the Lord in their trouble, that so they
may be delivered from their distress, nor yet when they are delivered, praise
the Lord for his goodness, and declare the wonders that he does for the children
of men. The stopping of their mouth the^, is a double, both sin in them, and
punishment to the^. A double sin, because they open it not, to cry unto the
Lord for deliverance, or to rejoice in the Lord, and to praise him after
deliverance. A double punishment, because for their not praising God, their
mouths shall be so stopped that yet they shall not blaspheme him; and for their
not dispraising themselves, and confessing their sins, and repenting, and
crying to God for pardon, they shall have nothing, though they would never so
feign, at the last to say for themselves. Whereby we see that wicked men's mouths
shall be stopped, because they have bin stopped. Seeing if they had bin open in
this life to accuse their own selves for their sins, then they should be open
also at the day of judgment, being excused by the Lord. But, because they have
bin stopped here to cover their sin, therefore they shall be stopped hereafter to
discover their shame. Now if the wicked shall have hard hap hereafter, when
their mouths shall be stopped, because they have had hard hearts here, where
their mouths have bin stopped: then consequently, the godly must at no time
stop, either their mouths from confessing, or their eyes from bewayling their
sins. Tertullian de Poenitentia. In fine.
says of himself, that he is Omnium notarum peccator.
a notorious sinner Et nulli rei nisi poenitentiae natus.
, and borne for nothing but for repentance. He that is Omnium notarum peccator,
soiled with every sin, must be Omnium horarum poenitens, ass^y^ed every hour
of his sin. And he that is b^^ne for nothing but for repentance, must
practice repentance as long as he lives in this world, into which he is borne.
Not, says Hilary In Psalm. 135. Quod peccandum semper sit, v^semper si^
confitendum.
, as though we should continually sin, that we might continually repent Sed
quia peccati veteris and antiqui vtilis sit ind^f^ssa co^fessio.
, but because it is very be^oofefull for us, that that sin, which we know
well is already released by the Lord, should yet still be confessed by us. For
by this means, the merits of Christ are continually imputed unto us, which we
by our sins had justly deserved to be deprived of. And moreover, though in
some sort we be sure of pardon already, yet the daily exercise of true
repentance makes our vocation and election more and more sure unto us 2 Pet.
1.10.
. In this sense the Psalmist says again Psalm. 32.5. Notum facia^, non
abscondi.
, I will acknowledge my sin, and mine iniquity I have not hid. I have not
stopped my mouth, and I will not stop my mouth: I have not hid mine iniquity, and
I will not hide mine iniquity; a continual repentance. As it is here also, I
have bin weary, and I will be weary; I have watered, and I will water: I water
my couch with my tears.

The other point which we may hence learn is this, That our repentance must
always be joined with a purpose of new obedience. I have bin weary of my
gronings, says he. That he is sure of, and that is past. But though he have
bin weary, yet indeed he is not weary, seeing he purposes twice as much as he
has performed. For for one performance Laboraui, that is past, here are two
purposes, Lauabo and Rigabo, that are to come. I have done it already, says
he, so so: but if I live longer, I will do it oftener, and better. I will wash
my bed, and I will water my couch with my tears. So that the greatest
righteousness of the saints in this life, consists rather in a daily deploring
of their sins, and in a faithful purpose to amend, then in any eminent and
absolute perfection Nostra iustitia tanta est in hac vita, vt po^ius Peccatorum
remissione cons^^t, quam perfec^ione Virtutum. August. de Ciuit. Dei. l. 19. c.
27
. Not that we ought to serve God by halfes as it were, with purposes and
intents, but that hereby the vnperfitnes of our obedience may appear, which
though it be as much as we can do considering the weakness of our ability,
yet it is not half so much as we ought to do, considering the excellency of
Gods law. Wherefore I show now, not what should be, but what is, because the
best obedience of ours that is, is not so much as the lest part of that which
should be. Harken I pray you attentively to that which S. Paul writes Romans
7.19.
; To will is present with me: but I find no means to perform that which is
good. For the good which I would do, that do I not: but the evil which I
would not do, that do I. Now if I do that I would not, it is no more I that
do it, but sin that dwells in me. Where the Apostle plainly
distinguishes between these two, to will good, and to perform good. And the
one he says is present with him, but the other he can no where find. Now if so
chosen a vessel Acts. 9.15.
, will much more good, then he can perform, then questionles we that are
far inferior, please God, rather by a willing purpose to do good, then by
any full performance of that which we purpose. Again, whereas he says; If I
do that I would not, it is no more I that do it, but sin that dwells in
me; he means not to excuse or extenuate his fault any way, but to show, that
the principal scope and intent of his heart is to serve the law of God,
howsoever contrary to his intent by the violence of his flesh, he be drawn
to serve sin. And therefore he says, The good which I would, that do I not;
but the evil which I would not, that do I. Insinuating hereby, that the
regenerate man, being not wholly flesh nor wholly spirit, but partly flesh and
partly spirit, as he is spirit would do that good, which as he is flesh he
does not, and as he is flesh does that evil, which as he is spirit, he would
not. Which makes him also say, Act. 24.16.
Studeo, I study, or I endeavor my self to have always a clear conscience,
toward God and man. He speaks not of his Apostleship, in which he was
immediately inspired, and continually directed by the spirit. For touching that
he says el^where Nihil mihi conscius sum.
, I am guilty to my self of nothing 1. Cor. 4.4.
. But out of the compass of his Apostolical calling, he dares not warrant,
that he has a clear conscience every manner of way, but only that he studieth
or endeauoreth to have a clear conscience. So his fellowe-disciple Barnabas
exhorts them of Antioch that with purpose of heart, they would cleave unto
the Lord Act. 11.23.
. For as long as we live in this tabernacle, sin cleaves so fast to us Hebr.
12.1.
, that we can not constantly cleave unto the Lord 1. Cor. 7.35.
. Notwithstanding at least wise in purpose of heart it is good for us to shake
off all sin, and only to hold us fast unto god Psalm. 73.28.
. But this our prophet, even in one psalm, to wit the hundred and ninetenth,
affords us many pregnant testimonies to this truth. 112. Verse.
I have applied my heart to fulfill thy statutes always, even unto the end.
Though he can not fulfill gods law as well as he would, yet as hard as he
possibly can he plyes it, and applies his heart to it 57. Verse.
. O Lord thou art my portion, I have determined to keep thy words. Mark ye
this. He can not say, he has ever kept the word of god in deed, but yet
because his hearts desire is earnestly bent that way, he says; I have
determined to keep thy words. 106. Verse.
I have sworn and am steadfastly resolved, to keep thy righteous judgments. O
loving heart to God! O loathing heart to his sins! O zealous, O fiery words!
I have sworn and am steadfastly resolved to keep thy righteous judgments.
Iurani and Statui. This iuror having sworn himself to gods statutes to keep
them, yet is the foreman of the quest to give in a verdit against his own
self, that he has not kept them. So that David's Statuo is all one with Paul's
Studeo. And therefore though we may perhaps, and, alas, do daily (god forgive
us) transgress these righteous judgments, yet our holy oath, our solemn vow,
our assured promise, our steadfast resolution, is, I hope, I am sure ought to
be, to the contrary. For after our first conversion and unfeigned repentance, as
we can never satisfy god, so we must never satisfy our selves. Seeing the
best thing that is in us, is no great performance of any good, god wot, but
only a ready will to do good: a studious endeavor to have a clear
conscience: a purpose of the heart to cleave unto the lord: an applying of the
heart, to fulfill gods statutes: a settled determination to keep gods words: a
steadfast resolution to keep gods righteous judgments. As we may see in this
place. Laboraui, I have been weary of my gronings. That's true. I but I purpose
to do much more hereafter. Lauabo and Rigabo. I will wash my bed, and I will
water my couch. I water my couche with my tears.

The second amplification is in the word, my couche. Not only my bed, but also
my couche. The bed is a place of rest. Especially that flourishing bed Floridus
lectulus. Can. 1.15.
, wherein the heavenly husband gives his well-beloued sleep Psalm. 127.3.
. Yet as the darkness is no darkness to god, but day and night are both alike to
him: Psalm. 139.12.
so the bed is no bed to David, but in it and out of it, to him are all one.
Therefore he may well complain with poor afflicted Job Job. 7.15.
; when I say, my couche shall releive me, and my bed shall bring comfort in my
meditation, then fear thou me with dreams, and astonishest me with visions.
Now the fearfulst vision of all, which most astonishes him, and holds his eyes
waking Psalm. 88.9.
, and enforces him to wash his bed with his tears, is the horrible sight and
greiuous remembrance of his sins. Nevertheless the amplification is much
enlarged by that he says, Not only my bed, but also my couch. For there is as
I take it, a double difference between these two. First, a bed is to sleep in
by night: a couch is to sleep upon in the day time. As Mephibosheth at noone in
the heat of the day slept upon a couch. 2. Sam. 4.5.
And David in the aftern-noone rose from sleeping on his couch 2 Samuel 11.2.
, when he first saw Vriah's wife. Then again, a bed is standing and higher: a
couch is like a pallet, either upon the bare flower, or else very near it. As
in Salomons bedchamber, Can 3.10.
the bed was of gold, the couch, whereby he stepped up to his bed, of purple
Recli. at^rium a^r^um, Asce^sus purpureus.
. David also says, Psalm. 132.3.
I will not climb up into the bed of my couch Non asiendam in lectum strati
m^i.
; as much to say as, into that bed, to which I ascend by a pallet or couch. So
that his soul no question was sore troubled, when as lying sick in bed he
wept so abundantly, that with his tears, not only he washed his bed wherein he
himself lay, but watered his couch also, which couch lay beneath or beside his
bed. That precious ointment was sure very liquid, which did runn down from
Aarons head to the skirts of his garments. Psalm. 133.2.
That current of tears was very swift, which streaming from Mary Magdalens
face was sufficient to wash Christ's feet Luc. 7 38.
. That bloody sweat was very painful, Luc. 22.44. (...).
which bathed our Lords body all over, and besides trickled down x to the
ground. Axa requested her father Caleb to give her a blessing. For says she,
thou have given me the south country, give me also springs of water. And he
gave her Joshua 15.19. Irriguum superius, and irriguii inferius.
the springs above, and the springs beneath. This same blessing and gift David
likewise had here obtained of God. For his washed bed was a spring above, and
his watered couch a spring beneath. Even as the ointment, upon Aarons head was a
spring above, upon the skirts of his garments a spring beneath: and the tears,
upon Mary's face were a spring above, upon Christ's feet a spring beneath: and
the sweat, upon our Lords body was a spring above, upon the ground a spring
beneath. So here, I say, is, irriguum superius, and irriguum inferius, a spring
above, and a spring beneath: I wash my bed, and water my couch with my tears.

Hence we may learn one very excellent good lesson. That we ought in the same
kind and sort as we have sinned, if it be possible, to make some part of amends
for our sin. David had haynously transgressed against God upon his couch,
where he committed adultery. Therefore that in the self same place, where
before he had bin overcome by the devil, he might erect an eternal monument
of his victory and triumph over the devil, he says here; I water my couch
with my tears. In the very same couch God is as highly now honored, as he was
before offended. Because David did before pollute it by adultery, but now he
does sanctify it by repentance. So the Israelites Exodus 35.22.
, once plucked off their earings to make a golden calfe: but anon after,
repenting them, they offered their earings to the building of the temple. And
so with the same Jewels, wherewith they did erect Idolatry, now they maintain
Gods service. Zacheus Luc. 19.8.
being a Publican, no doubt got much of his goods by plain briberie and
extortion: but not long after, he restored all again fourfold, and spent of
his wealth very frankly and bountifully to give Christ a friendly welcome, and
kind entertainment in his house. That sinful woman Luc. 7.38.
, of whom I spoke even now, never took half so much delight in entising her
lovers with her beautiful locks, as now she is glad with all her heart to
wipe the very feet of our Savior with them. A worthy example of this we have
in our own stories. Archbishop Cranmer See Master Fox his book of M^rtyrs.
of blessed memory, could never satisfy his conscience after his recantation,
till he had burnt that hand to ashes which subscribed. And so he took a holy
revenge of himself, as S. Paul wills us 2. Cor. 7.11.
, by suffering in a manner two martyrdomes, one after the other. One, which he
put himself to, by burning first his right hand: the other, which the Papists
put him to, by burning afterward his whole body. And so that constant and
faithful right hand of his, never so much dishonored God by his subscription
with ink to the bill, as it did honor God by his inscription with blood in
the fire. The Apostles words are general, Romans 6.19.
As you have given your members servants to uncleanness to commit iniquity, so
now give your members servants unto righteousness in holiness. Even as the
Israelites gave their Jewels, and Zacheus gave his goods: and Marie gave her
haite: and Cranmer gave his hand. Yet we read Eusebius Histo. Eccles. l. 6.
cap. 8.
that Origin made himself an Eunuch: Democritus put out his own eyes: Crates
cast his money into the sea: Thracius cut down all his vines. David did not so.
He kept the same couch still, and only changd his mind. As for Origin, strange
it is, that perverting so many other places by allegories, only he should
pervert one place by not admitting an allegory. For our Lord commanding to cut
off the foot, or any part of the body which offends us Marc. 9.47.
, does not mean we should cut it off with a knife, but with a holy and a
mortified life. Therefore Origin was justly punished, by using too little
diligence, where there was great need, because he used to great diligence
where there was little need I^a euemit, vt cum aliquid vbi non oportet
adhibetur, illic vbi oportet negligatur.

Tertul. libro de Poeniten. initio.


. How much better did Joseph, Genesis 39.10.
who being assaulted by Putiphars wife, did not any way maime himself, but
still kept his body undefiled as the temple of the holy ghost? And so pleased
God, as well then in chaste single-life, as in chaste matrimony afterward.
What should I say of Democritus, who was blinded before he was blind?
Tertullian writes thus of him, In Apolog. c. 45. Democritus excoecando scipsum
incontinentiam eme^datione profitetur.
Democritus putting out his own eyes, does by that very remedy which he uses
against incontinencie, profess the greatest incontinencie of all. At
Christianus salvis oculis ^oemina vid^t, animo aduersus libidines caecus est.
But a Christian need not put out his eyes for fear of seeing a woman: for
howsoever his bodily eye see, yet still his heart is blind against all
unlawful desires. Here Tertullian uses two very pithie and grave reasons. One
is this; The putting out of the eyes is not a bridle to restrain
incontinencie, but rather a mark to descrie it. For he that does so, in a
manner openly confesses, concupiscence so reigns in him Romans 6.12.
, that he can by no kind of means resist it, but by a violent boaring out of
his own eyes. The other is this; The fault is not in the eye, but in the
heart. Therefore to put out the eye, is to make clean but the outside of the
platter Luc. 11.39.
. For if the affection of the heart be well ordered, the sight of the eye need
not be feared. Just Lot every day seeing the unlawful deeds of the Sodomites 2.
Pet. 2.8.
, was grieved with it, but not endaungered by it For he said no doubt with
holy Job, Job. 31.1.
I have made a covenant with mine eyes, not to look upon a maid. Now Crates
The banus was not well advised neither, who did cast his money into the sea,
saying, Ego m^rg^ vos, ne ipse mergar a vobi^.
Nay sure I will drown you first in the sea, rather then you should drown in
me in covetousness and care. Lactantius reasons with him thus, Institut. l. 3.
c. 23. Si tantus pecu^iae contemptus est, fac illam beneficium, fachumanitatem,
largire pauperibus.
If thou contemn money so much, then do good with it, show thy liberality
by it, bestow it on the poor. Potes^ hoc quod perditurus es multis
succurrere, nefame, aut siti, aut nuditate moriantur.
This money that thou art ready to cast into the sea, might relieve a great
many, that they perish not, by hunger, or thirst, or nakedness. The sum of his
argument is this; Every Crates must not look to be Polycrates. Or so happily
to get his money again, as he got his ring again. Therefore, that man cares
not for money; not which flings it away, but which spends it well: not which
imploies it to no use, but which imploies it to a good use: not which casts it
into the waters, where he is like never to see it again, but which casts it
upon the waters Super aequas. Ecclesiastes 11.1.
, where the poor shall find it. For so Abraham being very rich, laid out his
substance for the most part in hospitality. He used to sit at his tent door,
under the oak of Mambre, just about dinner time Genes. 18.1.
, to see what strangers passed by, that he might bring them in with him to his
table. Thus must we (most Honorable, and blessed Christian brethren) thus
must we, I say, make us friends of the unrighteous Mammon Luc. 16.9.
, that every way we may glorify God, with our souls, with our bodies, with
our substance and goods. Lastly Thracius, of whom Aulus Gellius writes
Noctium Attica. l. 19. cap. 13. Homo miser vites suas sibi omnes detruncat.
, was, for any thing that I can see, even at that time most of all drunken,
when he cut down all his vines, least he should be drunken. For he that so
foolishly did cut down all his own vines, by the same reason, if all the
vines in the world had bin his own, would have cut them all down. Howbeit, if
every thing must be taken away that may be abused, then away with the name of
God, away with the word of God, away with all good things that are. Therefore
we can not allow this devise of Thracius, but we must disallow S. Paul's advise
to Timothy 1. Timo. 6.23. Modico vino vtcre. Vulg.
; Use a little wine for thy stomachs sake, and thine often infirmities. For if
all vines were cut down, where should Timothy get a little wine? Wherefore he
holds a good mean between two extremities. To be drunken, is one
extremity: to cut down all the vines, is another extremity. But Timothy
keeping the right mean, uses wine, least all the vines should be cut down:
and yet but a little wine, least he should be drunken. He uses wine, to help
his infirmity, and yet but a little wine to avoid superfluity. And he puts
the modicum before the vinum, the little before the wine, as S. Bernard notes
Omnes rum ex qu^ monachisumu infirmum stom^chum habemus and ta^ necessari*
Apostoli de vtendo vino co^silium merito non negligimus: modico tamen, quod
ille praemisit, nescio cur praetermisso. In Apologia ad Gulielmum Abbatem.
(...) sus finem. ^^csi di^cret; vinu^ Apostolus admittit, monachus immittit:
modicu^, Apostolus praemittit, monachus praetermittit.
. Because of two extremities, drunkenness, and drynes; that he knows to be the
greater, this to be the lesser. Therefore he is not so desirous to drink wine,
that his stomach may be strengthened, as he is careful to drink but a little
wine, least his head should be weakened. To conclude then; David deals not so
with his couch, as Origin did with his body: as Democritus did with his eyes:
as Crates did with his money: as Thracius did with his vines; No such matter:
but contrariwise; Even as Joseph with that same body did raise up himself a
holy seed, wherewith others commit uncleanness: and Lot, with those same eyes
did lament the sins of his people, wherewith others allure and are allured to
lightness: and Abraham with that same money did entertain strangers, wherewith
others are cast away when they have cast it away about nothing: and Timothy
with those same wines did help his disgestion, wherewith others ouerwhelme
their nature: so David in that very same couch, wherein many committ folly, and
wherein once he himself also had bin as much ouerseen as any other, does now
offer up the sacrifice of his sorrowful soul, and contrite spirit to God. So
that he cuts not off any member from his body, but prays that he himself (as
he had well deserved) might not be cut off, as a dead member from the body of
Christ: he puts not out his own eyes, but almost weeps them out: he drownes
not his couch in the sea, but in his tears: he auoides drunkenness, not by
cutting down all his vines, but by taking the cup of salvation, and calling
upon the name of the Lord Psalm. 16.13
, and drinking-vp this cup full of vinum Angelorum Est lacryma pingue
holocaustum, virtutum matter, culparu^ lauacrum, Angelorum vinum. Johan. Climacus
, the tears of which he says here, I water my couch with my tears.

The third and last amplification is in the last word, with my tears. Not
only with my groanings, but also with my tears. The church militant here on
earth is resembled, to a turtle. The voice of the turtle is heard in our land.
Cantic. 2.12.
Because Turtur gemit, non cani^.
the voice of the turtle is not cheerful or merry, but groaning or mourning.
Now in sacrificing the turtle Leuit. 1.15.
, among many other ceremonies, the Priest was appointed to wring the head of it
backward David also, cleapeth himself a turtle when he says, O deliver not
the soul of thy turtle-doue into the hands of the enemies. And he is
sacrificed by having his head wrong backward as it were, when as looking
backward to his former sins, he groaneth, and is weary of his groanings. But
yet the amplification runs in a far higher style, for that he says, Not
only with my groanings, but also with my tears. Augustus Caesar was much
delighted in the company of learned men. Especially of two famous Poets which
lived in his time, Virgil and Horace. Of the which, Virgil was so much given to
groaning and sighing, that commonly he was called Suspirabundus: and Horace was
borne bleare-eyed. Therefore upon a time Augustus sitting in the midst between
Virgil and Horace, and one that might be bold asking him what he did: mary
says he, S^deo int^r sus^iria and lachrymas.
I sit here between groanings and tears. Our Augustus, King David I mean,
sits not between groanings and tears, but lies sick in his bed, very sore
troubled and even almost overwhelmed with them both. For as that little cloud
like a man's hand, which Elizeus saw, brought with it at length a great shower
1. Reg. 18.44.
: in semblable wise, those gronings of his, as a cloud, or as thu^der, did
give warning in a manner, that anon after would follow a dreery shower of
tears. And as the sea sends forth floods which water the whole earth Eccles.
1.7.
: so the sweet singer of Israel otherwise, but here alas the pitifulst weeper
in the world, his contrition being great like the sea Lament. 2.13.
, makes a floode as I may say, and waters his couch with his tears. S. Austin,
Confess. l. 8. cap. 12.
warranteth both these co^parisons, of a shower of tears, and of a flood of
tears. The first in these words; Vbi. alta co^sideratio co^gessit totam
mis^riam meam in conspectu cordis mei,
When I deeply considered with my self the miserable estate wherein I stood,
oborta est procella ingens ferens ingen^e imbrem lachrymarum.
there arose in my heart a tempestuous storm, bringing with it a mighty
shower of tears. There is a shower of tears. The second in these words; Ego
sub quadam fici arbore stra^ime, and dimisi habenas lachrymis,
Then I laid me down flat groueling upon the ground under a certain
fig tree, and did let mine eyes weep, and spare not, even their fill, as much
as they would, and proruperunt flumina oculorum meorum.
and presently gushed forth whole floods of tears. Here is a flood of tears
Perque sinus lacrymae fluminis instar eunt.
.

Hence we may gather two very profitable notes, worthy of our remembrance.
The first is, That every new act of sin must be bewailed by a new act of
repentance. Not that it is possible for us to reckon up or even so much as to
remember all and every of our sins, but that having heartily repented of
those, or of that sin which most dangerously has wasted and al-most
destroyed our conscience, then we ought at the last to say with the Psalmist,
Psalm. 29.12.
Who can tell how often he offends? O cleanse thou me from my secret sins.
This same holy prophet, even when he was in the state of grace, defiled
himself with an other man's wife. Yet he slept not ouerlong in this sin, but
being awaked by the prophet Nathan, and more thoroughly by this sickness which
was gods messenger unto him, he renewed his repentance, and watered his couche
with his tears. So must we. For it is nothing but a slander which the church
of Rome casts upon us, that forsooth we should teach, a man whose person is
justified by faith in Christ committing some foul act, is never a whit the
worse for it. Nay, our doctrine is this, That such an one has hurt himself
two ways. In respect of his own guiltines; and in respect of Gods
righteousness. For the first; though God for his part do not break off the
purpose of adoption, and adiudge him to wrath, and therefore he is not guilty
of condemnation for sin; yet he is simply guilty of sin, and has grievously
wounded his own conscience. For the second; though God again has pardoned all
the sins of his elect, even those that are to come, by his decree, by his
promise, by the valewe and price of his sons merits, yet absolutely and
actually he does not apply this pardon to the apprehension and feeling of the
sinners faith, till he recover himself, and renew his repentance. Marry this
we teach, that god vphouldeth his chosen children so by faith and repentance,
that it is impossible any of the^ should die in final impenitency. But that
sweet sanctifiing spirit which dwells in them, is still busy like a be as we
say, and never leaves stinging them, and stirring them up to repentance, and
working them like wax as it were, till as much as it was before greiued for
their auersion by sin, so much it be after delighted for their conversion by
amendment of life. Therefore as all they need not to doubt a whit of their
salvation, who after they have fallen a sleep in sin, awake betimes, and
water their couch with their tears: so I assure you (Holy Brethren) their
case is dangerous and desperate, nay they are in a cursed case, which will not
be awaked, but lie still sleeping and snoring in sin. Seeing no pardon can be
procured, but where repentance is renewed. For god does not give us rules to
keep, and break them himself. Now his rule is this; Luc. 17.4.
Though thy brother sin against thee seven times in a day, and seven times in
a day turn again to thee, saying, It repents me; thou shall forgive him.
Therefore as I am bound to forgive my brother in deed, though he do not ask
me forgiveness, but I am not bound to go to him and tell him, I forgive him,
except he first come to me and tell me He repents, but if he do thus, then am
I bound also to tell him I forgive him: so the lord though in the gracious
degree of his fatherly adoption he have sealed up the remission of all our
sins, yet he does not open the bagg, and show the treasures of his mercy to
us ward in it, till he see us become new men. For then he has bound him self
by his loving promise, and has given us his word* that he will forgive us our
sin. At what time soever a sinner repents, says he Ezech, 18.21.
, and waters his couche with his tears, I will remember his iniquities no
more. Naaman the Syrian was willed to wash himself seven times in Jordan. 2.
Reg. 5.10.
Why seven times? was not one time enough? Yes surely. For him it was enough,
but not for us. For that was done, rather for our example, then for his
benefit. Seeing his malady was only a leprosy: but our soul is leprous with
sin. And therefore if he for one leprosy wasnt himself seven times, how
much more ought we every time we sin to be sorry for it, and if we do not
wash our selves seven times for one sin, yet at the leastwise to wash our
selves seven times for seven sins, seeing the most just of us all, as
Solomon witnesses Pro. 24.16.
, may seven times fall in one day? Or rather many men in the world have not
only seven deadly sins, but even seven devils in them Luc. 8.2.
, which they can no ways wash out, but by bitter weeping, and watering their
couch with their tears. To the angel of Ephesus thus says the spirit Revel.
2.5.
, Remember from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do the first works,
or else I will remove thy candlestick out of his place. So that if we let our
sin stand still, our candlestick shall be removed: but if we would have our
candlestick stand still, our sin must be removed. We must repent and do
the first works, not those which we must repent of, but those which we are
fallen from. Wonderful are the words of the Apostle; God has committed the
word of reconciliation unto us, therefore we are Christ's ambassadors, and God
entreating you as it were by us, we beseech you in the name of Christ, that
you would be reconciled to God 2. Cor. 5.20.
. What, may some man say, were not the Corinthians reconciled already?
wherefore then is the Apostle so earnest about nothing? I but they do not
understand the Apostle which make this objection. He knew well enough they were
reconciled before. But he knew as well, the best of us all can not stand in
Gods favor one minute of an hour without a good mediator* For since our
first reconciliation to God, we have so often offended his majesty, that if we
do not plie him with humble supplications, and daily Petitions, and hearty
repentance, and unfeigned tears, he and we can not possibly be friends. And
therefore the Apostle calls upon the Corinthians so earnestly, and cries to
them, and says, Take heed, Fear God, Offend him not, Ye can get nothing by
falling out with him, But in case ye have bin overtaken with any sin Gal. 6.1.
, ye have an advocate with the father 1. John. 2.1.
, Fly unto him for succor, If you be wise be reconciled to God as soon as
you can, God entreats you: (O merciful Lord, do thou sue and seek to us?
and is there any thing in the world that we can pleasure thee in? can our
goodness reach unto thee Psalm. 16.2.
? and do thou entreat us? yea says he) God entreats you, and we his
Ambassadors in the name of Jesus Christ beseech you, that you would be
reconciled to God. Be reconciled to God, and though you have offended him never
so much, he will be reconciled to you. Assure your selves, you may lay your
life of it, he will presently turn unto you, if you in true repentance will
turn unto him, and water your couch with your tears. For so this our Prophet
did no sooner confess his fault, but Nathan proclaimd his pardon 2. Sam. 12.13.
. Whereupon he himself also has these words Psalm. 32.5.
, I said I will confess my wickedness unto the Lord, and thou forgauest the
iniquity of my sin. As the Lioness having bin false to the Lion, by going
to a Libard; and the Storke consorting with any other besides her own mate,
wash themselves before they dare return home: in like manner the prophet here,
before he can be reconciled to God, after this great breach by adultery and
murder 2 Samuel ii.4. and 15.
, is feign to wash his bed, and to water his couch with his tears. But here a
question may arise: If the faithful be subject, neither to aeternall
condemnation when they do sin, nor yet to final impenitencie when they have
sinned, what need they at all, either avoid sin for which they shall not be
condemned, or else hasten their repentance, of which they shall not be deprived?
This question consists of two parts. The one touching condemnation: the other
touching impenitencie. To the former part I say as before, Though there be
sin in them, yet there is no condemnation to them, which are in Christ Jesus
Romans 8.1.
. But how? This is no thanks to them that sin, thereby making themselves
guilty of sin, and as much as in them lies subject also to condemnation for
the same: but only to God, who wrappeth up all the sins of his children in
the bowels of his dear son, that they appear not in his sight to condemn
them, either in this world or in the world to come. As Shem went backward and
covered his fathers nakedness Genesis 9.23.
: so God casts our sins behind his back, and does not impute them to us.
Howbeit though condemnation need not be feared, yet there are reasons enough
besides to persuade all those to hate sin, that love God. One is, because God
does usually withdraw the outward signs of his favor from them which forget
their duty toward him. The whole book of Job is proof sufficient.
Especially in one place Job. 7.20.
he says; I have sinned, what shall I do unto thee, O thou preserver of men,
why have thou set me as a mark against thee, so that I am burden to my self?
And David Psalm. 44.24.
, Why stand thou so far off, O Lord, a and hidest thy self in the
needful time of trouble? For as Joseph made himself strange to his brethren,
and spoke unto them roughly Genesis 42.7.
, though he loved them well enough: even so the Lord, though he take not his
mercy from his children, yet he chastises their iniquities with rods, and
their sins with scourges Psalm. 89.33.
. An other is, because the faithful sinning loose the inward feeling of Gods
favor. As Job testifies in these words; Thou writest bitter things against
me, and thou will consume me with the sins of my youth Job. 13.26.
. And David, O give me the comfort of thy help again, and establish me with
thy free spirit Psalm. 51.12.
. He wanted not Gods help, nor his spirit, but yet he was so discouraged and
cast down in his own conscience, that he felt not the comfortable taste of
Gods help, nor the blessed freedom of his spirit. And even so generally, the
godly sinning, though they quench not the spirit altogether 1. These. 5.19.
, yet by greeuing it they feel such a desolation in their souls, as if they
were quite cast out of favor with God. To the latter part of this question I
answer, that the sins of the godly are therefore with repentance, because the
graces of God are without repentance Romans 11.29.
. And as it is impossible that they which sin in despite of the spirit,
should be renewed by repentance Hebr. 6.6.
: so it is impossible that they should not be renewed by repentance which sin
of infirmity, as all the faithful do. For though the flesh have the upper
hand one while enforcing them to sin, yet the spirit will get the masterie an
otherwhile, making them heartily sorry for their sin. Nevertheless great reason
is it they should not abuse the patience of God moving them to repentance Romans
2 4.
, but rather that they should instantly stir up this gift of God in them 2.
Tim. 1.6.
, to which they are sure at length the course and motion of Gods spirit will
bring them. For first, what a horrible thing is it, either for God to withdraw
his fatherly and favorable countenance from us, or for us to have a hell as it
were in our own consciences, both which as I have already showed, do
necessarily follow sin? Besides, seeing all the good we get by sin is
repentance and grief, far better it is to begin betimes to repent, and so
forthwith to enjoy the comfortable feeling of Gods merciful pardon, then by
deferring our repentance, still to be tormented with the horror of our guilty
conscience. Moreover, the end is not a bar against the means, but rather a
great furtherer and setter of the^ on forward. We being therefore sure we shall
repent at the last, ought never a whit the less to use the means as soon as
we can, by ceasing to do ill, and learning to do well Esa. 1.17.
. Even as S. Paul, though he knew certainly he should not perish in that
shipwreck, yet he used the best means he could to save his life Act. 27.44.
. Lastly this is one maine difference between the wicked and the godly, that
they having their consciences seared with a hot iron 1. Tim. 4.2.
, and being past feeling Ephesians. 4.19.
, go on still in sinning without any sense of sin Consue^udo peccandi tollit
sensum peccati. Aug.
: but these, having their senses exercised to discern between good and evil
Heb. 5.14.
, never rest if they be hurt with the sting of sin, till they be eftsoons
salued and healed by Gods mercy. For as the Swallowe perceiving himself
almost blind, presently seeks out the herb Chelidonia Celandine
: and the Heart feeling himself shot with an arrowe sticking in him, forthwith
runs to the herb Dictamnus Ditany.
: right so do the godly. Take Ezechias for an example of a Swallowe. All that
is in mine house have they seen, there is nothing among my treasures that I
have not showed them 2. Reg. 20.15.
. There he is blind. For the more treasures the King of Babels ambassadors
saw, the more was Ezechias blinded with ambition in showing them. Like a crane
or a Swallowe, so did I chatter, I did mourn as a dove. I shall walk weakly
all my years in the bitterness of my soul Esa. 38.14. and 15.
. Here Is the Chelidonia. For this bitterness of his soul, does cure the blindness
of his soul. Take Job for an example of a Heart. The arrows of the almighty
are in me, the venom whereof does drink up my spirit, and the terrors of God
fight against me Job. 6.4.
. There he is shot. For if he had not bin strooken before with the arrows of
his own wickedness, he should never have bin strooken thus with the arrows of
Gods correction. I abhor my self and repent in dust and ^shes Job. 42.6.
Here Is the Dictamnus. For this abhorring of himself is a recovering of
himself: and the sooner he repents in dust and ashes, the sooner is he freed
from all his sins, and from all the punishments due to the same. But now some
man may further object and say, He is not yet fully satisfied for this latter
part, because talk as long as we will, all these inconveniences which come,
as has bin declared, by perseuering in sin, are either no bridle at all, or
else not so strong a bridle to restrain men from sin, as if they be
persuaded, they may by sinning quite and clean loose all justifying grace, and
so may be finally impenitent when they dye. But he which will put forth this
doubt must remember, that the children of God are led by the spirit of God Romans
8.14.
. And the spirit though not in the same degree, yet in the same sort works in
all those that have bin, are, or shall be sanctified 2 Cor. 4.13. Eundem
spiritum.
. Who as they serve God not for any servile fear of loosing their faith, or of
dying in impenitency, or such like, but only for pure love of his majesty: so
they can neither will nor choose, but being bitten with sin they must needs
in their souls and consciences feel the smart of it. Therefore S. Paul says,
The flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, and
these are contrary one to the other, so that ye cannot do the same things
that ye would Gal. ^.17.
. For if the faithful would do Gods will in earth as it is in heaven, and
serve him as obediently and as perfectly as the good angels do, they can not,
because still in them the flesh lusts against the spirit: and so again, if
they would sin with full consent, or with an obstinate purpose to continue in
sin, as the evil angels do, they cannot do this neither, because still in
them the spirit lusts against the flesh. Which spirit though it may for a
time be shut up as it were, yet it will find means well enough at length to
show it self. Thus Elihu says; The spirit within me compels me, Behold my
belly is as wine which has no vent, and like the new bottles that burst.
Therefore will I speak, that I may take breath Job. 32.19.
. As Elihu then kept silence some while even from good words, though it were
pain and grief to him; but at the last the fire kindling and his heart being
hot within him, spoke with his tongue Psalm. 39.3.
: so the spirit of god in all the elect of god, is like wine put into a bottle,
which will have a vent to spurge out, or else it will burst the bottle; or like
fire rakt up in embers, which will have a passage to burn out, or else it will
consume the whole house 1. John. 3.9.
. And therefore Saint John likewise says; Whosoever is borne of God does not
sin: for his seed remains in him, neither can he sin, because he is
borne of God. Mark ye this well. The Apostle thinks it not enough to say,
He does not sin: but adds moreover, He cannot sin. What Is that? To wit,
presumptuously without fear, he does not sin: and desperately without
remorse, he can not sin. He can not sin, I say, presumtuously, as Pharaoh
did: desperately, as Caine did: maliciously, as Judas did: blasphemously, as
Julian did: He cannot, he cannot sin thus. Why so? Because the seed of God
remains still in him. And what is this seed of God? It is the spirit of God,
of which S. Paul said even now; The spirit lusts against the flesh, and these
are contrary one to the other, so that ye cannot do the same things that ye
would. Ye do not sin, nay ye can not sin as the flesh would have you; ye
can not do the same things that ye would: but ye do, nay ye can not choose
but do many times as the seed of God remaining in you, and as the spirit of
God lusting in you, would have you. So that this is a legal kind of preaching
to say; Take heed you sin not: ye may happen so to loose your faith: to
loose all the justifying grace which God has given you: to be for ever
excluded out of the kingdom of heaven. This is to be said to vassals, to
drudges, to slaves; not to sons. To sons this may be better said Hebr.
12.5. vobis vt filiis.
; Take heed ye sin not: God has adopted you and given you the earnest of
his spirit 2. Cor. 5.5.
. Therefore grieve not this sweet Spirit whereby ye are sealed up to the day
of redemption Ephesians. 4.30.
. If ye be loving children indeed, though there were no hell to fear, no
heaven to hope for, no torments to dread, no rewards to expect, yet ye will
obey your good father, and be the sorrowfullest creatures in the world if you
have but once displeased him, only for the mere love ye bear toward him,
and for the unspeakable love he has showed toward you Diligenti deu^
sufficit ci placere quem diligit, quia nulla mayor expetenda est remuneratio
quam ipsa dilectio. Leo Magnus sermon. 7. de Ieiunio.
. For if he gave his only begotten son to die for you when ye were his
enemies Romans 5.10.
, now you are sons and such dear sons in his dearest Son Ephesians. 1.6.
, what duty will you deny him? what loyalty will you grudge him? what
hearty thankfulness and good will is there which you will not affoard him? what
faithful honor and service is there which you will not yield him? In one
word, (ye holy ones of God, I speak now to you all, beloved) he which stands
much upon this objection, has no faith, no repentance, no justifying grace at
all in him. For the faithful will never make that liberty which Christ has
purchased for them with his precious blood, a cloak to cover their wickedness
1. Pet. 2.16.
, but rather a spur to incite them to godliness Luc. 1.74. Liberamur, v^
serviamus ei.
. Neither will they at any time reason thus; Romans 6.15.
We will sin, because we are not under the law, but under grace: nor yet
thus; Romans 6.1.
We will continue in sin, that grace may abound: but always thus; Romans 6.11.
By that we are dead to sin, we gather that we are alive to God: or else
thus; Tit. 2.11.
The grace of God has appeared, teaching us to deny ungodliness and worldly
lusts. Thus you see then how in the regenerate man, every new act of sin must
be bewailed by a new act of repentance. For God will not forgive me except I
repent, no more then I am bound to tell my brother I forgive him, except he
tell me He repents. Naaman must wash himself seven times, before he can be
clean: the Angel of Ephesus must rise from his fall, and do the first works,
or else his candlestick shall be removed: the Church of Corinth though it be
never so holy, yet by sin violating Gods love must oftentimes be reconciled
anew: even king David in this place, though he were a man according to Gods
own heart, yet, before Nathan would absolve him, he was feign to cry peccavi:
and before God would forgive him, he was feign to confess his wickedness, and
to water his couche with his tears.

The second note is, That a great act of sin, must be bewailed with a great
act of repentance. I mean not, that any pain or grief of ours, can make
satisfaction for the least of our sins, or that our contrition can be any
cause of remission, but only that where sin has abounded, there sorrow
should abound also, that grace may superabound at the last Romans 5.^0.
. The Schoolmen show here that great grief may be considered two ways.
According to a man's appretiation, and according to his intension Vide Bellar.
de Poenitentia libro. 2. c. 11.
. As the Patriark Jacob in his intension did lament his son Iosep, hwhome he
thought to be dead, more pitifully, then he did any sin that we read of Genesis
37.34.
; but in the appretiation or estimation which he had of the hainousnes of sin,
certainly he would rather have lost ten sons, then once have find against
God. Therefore, howsoever in intension sorrow for sin be none of the
greatest, yet in appretiation they would ever have it excessive. But we need
not borrow such uncouth words of the Schoolmen to express our meaning, if we
can tell how to use those words which we have of our own. For if we look
narrowly into this place, we shall see that the Prophet David is both ways in
the highest degree sorrowful. First, by how much the more dearly he esteemed
Gods love and friendship, then the health of his body, by so much the more
is he greiued, that that is violated, then that this is inda^gered. And yet
again, how intensiuely and bitterly he bewaileth not so much the sickness of
his body, as the cause thereof the sin of his soul, appears in that he
trifleth not, but washes his bed, and waters his couch with his tears. We
read of three that Christ raised from death. Iairus daughter: the widows
son: and Lazarus De tota hac Alegoria, vide Aug. ser. 44. de Verbis Domini.
and Tract. 49. in Ioha^nem. Eras^um etiam in contione de Misericordia dei. and
Ferum in Johan. c. 1^. Hanc approbat and Calvinus. in Lu. c. 7. verse. 11. his
verbis; Scimus inucnem hunc quem Christus a morte suscitauit, specie esse
spiritualis vitae quam nobis restituit.
. For raising up of Iairus daughter Mark. 5.38. and deinceps.
, many weeping and wailing greatly for her; he came to the house, and went in
where she lay: and suffered but a very few to go in with him: and took her
by the hand: and said unto her Maiden arise: and straightway she arose and
walked: and charge was given, that this should not be to told abroad. For
raising up the widows son Luc. 7.12. and deinceps.
, much people of the city weeping with his mother for him, who was now carried
out of the gate to be buried; he went and touched the cofin: and said, Young
man arise: and he that was dead sat up: and began to speak: and he delivered
him to his mother: and the rumor hereof went forth thorugh out all Judea. For
raysing-vp Lazarus John. 11.33. and deinceps.
, when he saw Mary weep, and the Jews also weep which came with her; he
groned in the spirit: he was troubled in himself: he, understanding he had bin
dead and buried four days, wept for him: he groned again: he came to the
grave: he caused the grave stone to be taken away: he lifted up his eyes to
his father: he prayed very fervently: he cried with a loud voice, Lazarus come
forth: then he that was dead came forth: bound hand and foot with bands:
and his face was bound with a napkin: and Jesus said unto them, Loose him and
let him go. Now these three sorts of corses, are three sorts of sinners Ista
tria genera mortucrum sunt tria genera peccaterum. Aug. ser. 44. de verbis
Domini.
. Iayrus daugter, lying dead in her fathers house resembles them that sin by
inward consent: the widows son, being carried out of the gate of the city,
them that sin by outward act: Lazarus, having bin dead and buried four
days, them that sin by continual custom Resuscitauit filiam Archisinagogi
adhuc in domo iacentem resuscitauit iuvenem filium viduae extra portam
ciuitalis elatu^: resuscitauit Lazariun sepultum quatriduanum. Aug. Tractatu.
49. in Johan.
. The first, was dead but one hour: the second, but one day: the third four
days; The young maiden lay in a bed: the young man, in a coffin: Lazarus, in a
grave. For the first, Christ touched her hand: for the second, he touched the
coffin: for the third, he touched nothing. Before their raising up; because the
maiden figured those that sin, not so much in act as in consent, he touched
her hand which had bin no great instrument of any act: because the young man
had sinned in act, but not in custom, into which he might have fallen if he
had lived longer, he touched the coffin which kept him from custom: because
Lazarus smelled having bin dead now four days, the first day by conceiving
sin, the second by consenting to sin, the third by acting sin, the fourth
by co^tinewing in sin Prima est quasititillatio delectationis in cord,
secunda consensio, tertium factum, quarta consuetudo. Aug sermon. 44.
, Christ touched him not at all. At the raising of the first; few were present,
and they were charged also to make no words of it, that the maiden might be
less shamed, which had sinned for the most part but in consent: at the raising
of the second; much people of the city were present, and the thing was noised
abroad far and near, that the young man might be more ashamed, which had
sinned also in act: at the raising of the third; a huge number of Jews were
present, which saw his face bound with a napkin, to testify the extreme
confusion and shame that covered his face, and they loosed him themselves and
let him go, being eywitnesses of his servitude and slavery which had sinned so
long by custom. After their raising up; Iairus daughter straight way arose and
walked, because for her that had stepped aside but by consenting to sin, it was
easy to recover, and to arise, and forthwith to walk in the way of Gods
commandments: the widows son sat up, began to speak, was delivered to his
mother, because for him that had actually committed sin, it was a harder
matter to recover, and therefore by little and little he came to it Residet
enim, qui peccare desinens erigit se ad propositum vitae melioris: loquitur,
qui confessus suam tur pitudine agnoscit dei misericordiam: redditur vivus
matri, qui peractis remediis restituitur Ecclesiae communioni. Eras. vbi supra.
, first sitting up, by raising up himself to a purpose of amendment, then
beginning to speak, by confessing his own misery and acknowleding Gods mercy,
lastly being delivered to his mother, by returning to the bosom of the holy
Church, and enjoying the remission of his sins: Lazarus came forth bound
hand and foot with bands, because for him that had had a stone laid upon him
Molesilla imposi^a s^^ulchro, i^sa est vis d^ra consicludinis, qua premittur
onima nec ros^rg^re, nec respirare permillitur. Aug. ser. 44.
, and had made his heart as hard as a graue-stone or as a nether-milstone by
making a custom and as it were a trade of sin it was a matter impossible to
our thinking to recover; only the omnipotent power of Christ could bring him
forth bound hand and foot, and break these bands asunder, and restore him
again to the liberty of the sons of God. For you must know Ex Epiphanio
Catalogo dogmatu^ Manichai.
that thirty years old he was when he was raised up, and thirty years more he
lived after he had bin raised up. So that half his life he spent in sin: the
other half in repentance for sin. But I have a little forgot my self. Yet
it will be no great fault, (right Honorable, and beloved in our Lord,) if it
will please you to pardon it. I should have observed to you in the first place,
how Christ was earnestly requested to raise up the first Mark. 5.23.
; but raised up the two last of his own accord Luc. 7.13. and Ioh. 11.11.
: and contrariwise, how for the two first their friends only wept Mar. 5.38.
and Lu. 7.13.
; but for the last, besides his sisters and friends, Christ also wept
exceedingly John. 11.35.
. These are very important matters, and properly belonging to the point in
hand. For seeing the young maiden by sinning in consent had less offended
Christ, he would not have troubled himself about her, but upon entreaty of
others: but the two last, the one an actual, the other a customable sinner,
which were in a more dangerous estate, he came-to being brought by the bowels
only of his own mercy, and raised them up: on the other side, the two first
having sinned, the one in thought, the other in deed, did not so much move
Christ as Lazarus, which was grown to a custom in sinning both ways; and
therefore for the^ he was content their friends only should weep, but for this
last he wept and trobled his own self very much. So that the first he neither
restored of his own accord, nor yet wept for her: the second he restored of
his own accord, but wept not for him: the third he both restored of his own
accord, and also wept for him. Why so? The reason is this. The young maidens
sin, the less it hazarded her own soul, the less it grieved Christ's
soul, and so the less he had a care, either to cure it, or to rue it: the
young man's sin, being neither so small as the maidens, nor so great as
Lazaruses, Christ raised him up of his own accord because he was more then a
sinner in thought, and yet wept not for him because he was less then a sinner
in custom: Lazarus sin, the more rank and deadly it was, the more did it
require the skill and love of such a Physician, as by his passion could mend
it, and by his compassion would moan it. Where we must observe with Saint
Augustine, that our blessed Savior did not take on thus grievously, for
himself so much, or for Lazarus, as for us. He groaned in the spirit: he was
troubled in himself: he wept: he groned again: he lifted up his eyes: he
prayed fervently: he cried with a loud voice. So that here he might well have
said with David; I am weary of my groanings: and, I water my couche with my
tears. But wherefore did he groan thus, weep thus, cry thus, pray thus, lift
up his eyes thus, lift up his voice thus? Saint Augustine tells us Quare
sleuit Christus, nisi quia ^lere hominem docuit? Aug. Tr. 49.
. Wherefore, says he, did Christ weep, but to teach us to weep Quare
fremuit, and turbauit scipsum, nisi quia fides hominis sibi merito displicentis
fremere quodammodo debe^ in accusatione malorum operum, vt violentiae
poenitendi cedat consuetudo peccandi: Aug. ibid
? Wherefore did he groan and trouble himself, but because the faith of a
christian, displeasing himself in his sins, should after a sort groan in
accusing himself for his sins, that so at length the obstinat custom of his
sinning, might yield and give place to the violent force of his repenting? And
a little before; What Is the cause, says he, that Christ troubled himself Quid
est quod t^rbat scip sum Christus, nisi vt significet tibi quomodo turbar^ tu
debeas, cum tanta mole peccati grauaris and premeris?
, but to signify unto thee, how thou ought to be troubled when thou art
pressed, and oppressed with a dead weight of sins Attendisti enim te, vidisti
te reum co^putasti tibi, illud feci and pepercit mihi deus, illud commisi and
distu^it me, euangelium audita and contempsi, baptizatus sum and iterum ad
eadem reuolutu sum: quid facio, quo eo, vnde evado? Quum ista dicis, iam fremit
Christus, quia fides fremit, In voce frementis apparet spes resurgen^is. Si
ipsa fides estintus, ibi est Christus fremcus. Si sides in nobis, Christus in
nobis.
? For thou have examined thy self, thou have found thy self guilty, thou have
reasoned thus with thy self; I have done such or such a thing, and God has
all this while spared me: I have committed such or such a sin, and he has
still borne with me: I have heard the word of God, and yet I have carelessly
contemned it: I have been baptized and had my sins washed away, and yet I have
returned to them again: what do I? whether go I? what will be the end of
this? when thou say thus, then Christ groaneth, because thy faith groaneth.
By the voice of thy groaning may be gathered good hope of thy rising. If this
faith be in thee, Christ groaneth in thee. If faith be in us, Christ is in us.
Thus far S. Augustine. In conclusion then; If Christ winking at lesser sins,
or at least not so much lamenting them, did out of all measure bewail Lazarus
case, betokening those that have bin long dead in trespasses and sins, though
it pertained not directly to himself: how much more good Lord, ought I, which
am a far more heinous sinner then ever Lazarus was, as my sins, mine own
sins I say, for number are more then the hayres of my head Psalm. 40.30.
, and for greatness have reached up to heaven Ezra. 9.6.
, so never to leave groaning, and weeping, and crying, and praying for the
pardon of them, that I may truly say with the Psalmist; I am weary of my
gronings; and, I water my couch with my tears. The old testament does show this
as plainly as the new. For in the law, the greatness of the sin was estimated
according to the condition of the sinner. The private man's sin was little:
the princes sin great: all the peoples sin greater: the priests sin
greatest of all. Therefore for each of these was ordained a several sacrifice
Leuitic. 4.
. For the private man and the prince, a goat. But for him a shee-goate Verse.
28.
: for this a hee-goate Verse. 23.
. Now the male is compted a greater sacrifice, considering the perfection of
the sex. For all the people, and the priest, a young bullock. But for all the
people, the elders only did put their hands upon the head of the bullock Verse
15.
: the priest did put his own hand upon it Verse. 4.
. Now as a young bullock is a greater sacrifice then a goat: so the priest
does undergo a greater penance and more open shame the^ all the people.
Besides, of all these, their offense that sinned ignorantly, was accounted not
so great as theirs that sinned wilfully. And therefore they were to offer a ram
worth two shekels Lev. 5.15.
; but these a ram of what price the priest would appoint Liu. 27.12.
, according to the measure and estimation of the sin Leui. 6.6. Iuxta
aestimationem mensuramque peccati
. Now then, though Leuiticall priests and sacrifices are ceased, yet we that
are made spiritual priests and kings with Christ Revel. 5.10.
, must as it were enjoin our own selves penance, and according to the
quality of our sin, measure the sacrifice of our broken and contrite heart
which we offer unto God. If we had never sinned but of ignorance, yet every one
of us should be bound to offer a ram of two shekles. And what is this ram of
two shekles? It is even mine own self, a poor sinner Non habe^ nisi minuta
duo, imominutissima, corpus and anim^m, vel potius vnum minutum voluntatem
meam: and non dab^ illam ad voluntatem illius, qui tantus tantillu^ tantis
beneficiis praeuenit, qui toto se totum me comparauit? Bern. Sermon. de
Quadruplici Debito. page 100
, that have nothing to offer but the widows two mites, nay a great deal
less then two mites, I mean my body and my soul: or rather I have but only
one mite to offer, only my good will, which I must henceforth conform to his
will, who being rich became poor for me, and gave his body and soul to
redeem my body and soul from death. But now seeing we have almost as often
sinned wilfully, as either of ignorance or infirmity, what manner of men ought
we to be in humbling our selves under Gods mighty hand 1. Pet. 5.6.
, in judging and condemning our selves 1. Cor. 11.31.
, in repenting as heartily as we sinned haynously, in washing our bed, and
watring our couch with our tears? Even this our Prophet shows also very good
evidence for this same doctrine else where. Have mercy upon me, O Lord, says
he, after thy great goodness, and according to the multitude of thy mercies do
away mine offenses. Wash me thoroughly from my wickedness, and cleanse me from
my sin Psalm. 51.2.
. The goodness of God is always like it self, neither great nor little but
absolutely infinite. Therefore it is never a whit the greater for our compting
it not little, nor never a whit the less for our counting it not great: but
though we count it great yet it is still as little as it should be, and though
we count it little yet it is still as great as it can be. So that the Psalmist
in tearming Gods goodness great, sets forth the greatness, rather of his own
badnes, then of gods goodness: confessing his own sin indeed to be great, and
so consequently Gods goodness likewise to be great, but yet in this respect
only, not because it can take any increase of greatness into it self; but
because it can give increase of gladness to him, who for a great sin is almost
overwhelmed with as great a grief. The same may be said of Gods mercies, that
they are neither many nor few, but as his goods is incomprehensible, so his
mercies are innumerable. Nevertheless the Prophet sticks not to say;
According to the multitude of thy mercies, do away mine offenses. As if he
should have said; According to thy mercies, do away the multitude of mine
offenses. The multitude then, to speak properly, is not of Gods mercies, but
of mine offenses, and yet seeing the mercies of God are as many as all mine
offenses, nay a great many more then all the offenses of all the world,
therefore he me^tions a multitude of Gods mercies. Because nothing can assuage
the multitude of sorrows which arise in my heart Psalm. 94.19.
, for the multitude of my offenses, but the multitude of Gods mercies. The
multitude of mine offenses asking indeed, as on Gods behalf a multitude of
mercies, so on my behalf a multitude of tears. And therefore he says also;
wash me thoroughly: or as it is in the latin translation Amplius. laua me.
, wash me yet more. Wash me and wash me: and yet more: again and again; wash
me thoroughly from my wickedness, and cleanse me from my sin. For even as a
vessel that has bin tainted with poison, or some infectious liquor, will not
be clean with once washing, but must be often scalded, and thoroughly washed,
before it will be sweet: so having heretofore possessed my vessel in
impuritie 1. These. 4.4.
, though I now wash me with niter, and take me much soap, yet mine own
uncleanness is still marked before thee Ierem. 2.22.
, only thou O Lord can wash me thoroughly, who am grieved thoroughly,
because I have bin thoroughly defiled. And indeed though I can not wash my
self thoroughly, yet I am sure thou have washed me thoroughly, because I have
repented me thoroughly. I have mingled my drink with weeping Psalm. 102.10.
; and, My tears have been my meat day and night Psalm. 42.4.
: nay, Every night I wash my bed; and, water my couch with my tears. It is a
clear case then, that a great act of sin must be bewailed with a great act
of repentance. For the raising of Lazarus which has bin dead four days,
requires the greatest groaning and weeping: the greater sin, as of the
Priest, or voluntary, or such like, requires the greater sacrifice: if I have
committed great wickedness, except I show great repentance, I cannot obtain
great mercy: if I have bin thoroughly defiled, except I be thoroughly washed,
I can not be thoroughly cleansed. And therefore the holy Prophet, that he may
obtain great mercy, and that he may be thoroughly washed, says here; Every
night I wash my bed, and water my couch with my tears.

To return then where I left, and so to make an end; S. Austins two
comparisons, of a shower of tears, and of a flood of tears, may seem to some
very incredible, and much more these three amplifications of the Prophet David.
Especially if we read these words, as I have noted they are in the Hebrew;
Every night I cause my bed to swim; and I melt my couch with my tears. But
howsoever they may seem to be, they are I grant very hyperbolicall. Yet so,
as the meaning of them is plain enough. As if he should have said; I do not
indeed cause my bed to swim in showers of tears; neither do I melt my
couch with floods of tears: but yet if ever any man had done so, or if it were
possible any man could do so, then my repentance is so great, and my tears so
abundant, that I think verily whosoever is one I should be an other, which
should cause my bed to swim, and my couch to melt, seeing, Every night I wash
my bed, and water my couch with my tears. Therefore they which can gather no
good meaning out of these words, do consider, neither how fearful the wrath
and indignation of God is, nor yet how horrible is the sense of sin. Augustus
Caesar Relata ad se mag^itudine aeris ali^i quam quidam eques Romanus dum vixit
celauerat, culcitram emi cubicularem in cius anctione sibi iussit.
, of whom I spoke before, hearing the^ talk in his court what a huge sum of
money a certain Knight in Rome owed at his death, and that all his goods were
to be sold to make payment of his debts, commanded the master of his wardrobe
to buie for him that bed, wherein this Knight used to lie. For (says he) Et
praeceptu^ mirantibus hanc rationem reddidit; Habe^da est ad somnu^ culcitra,
in qua ille, cum tantu^ deberet, dormi^e potuit. Macrob. Satur. l. 2. c. 4.
if I can not sleep soundly in that bed wherein he could sleep that owed so
much, then surely I shall sleep in none. If this famous Emperor thought it a
matter almost impossible for him to sleep quietly in his bed which was so
deeply in debt; what would he have said, if Christ who was borne in his time,
had bin bred in his heart Galat. 4.19.
? I mean, if he had seen by the light of Gods word, that no debts are
comparable to sins? And therefore if that poor Knight could hardly sleep in
his bed, then that servant which owes his master ten thousand talents Math.
18.24.
(as alas which of us all, beloved, if we remember our selves well, is not
guilty of so many sins?) can hardly take any rest. This if the Emperor had
known, he would rather have bought David's couch that he might not have slept
for bewayling his sins, then this banckrupts bed that he might have slept
notwithstanding all his cares. For these, these, even our sins, these are the
debts which so trouble and torment the soul, that a man were better have many
common wealths in his head, yea the cares of all the world in his head, the^
be disquieted and distracted with them. Wherefore, dear christians, if we be
in good health, let us be thankful to God for it, and let us accoumpt it a
special blessing without which all worldly blessings are nothing, and let us
use it as all other good gifts of God to his glory and the good of one an
other. If contrariwise it please the Lord at any time to visit us with
sickness, let us not in this case despair neither. But first, whatsoever other
causes we may conceive, let us ingeniously acknowledge one cause of our
sickness to be our sins. For if we would prevent the judgments of god by
timely repentance, and judge our selves, we should not be judged of the Lord.
But because men will not when they are in health think of him that gives
health, therefore oftentimes they are sick, and now and then also fall a sleep
1. Cor. 11.30.
. For even as malefactors which will not by gentle means confess their
heinous crimes, are by racking or such like tortures enforced to confess: so
when grievous sinners can see no time to repent, God in his justice, or rather
indeed in his great mercy, does as it were rack them upon their couch with
sicknesses and bodily pains, that they may be constrained to confess their
sins, and so may be freed of two sicknesses, their bodies sickness and their
souls sickness both at once. O happy, happy men are they, which when they are
young, remember their Creator before they be old Ecles. 12.1.
: and when they are in health confess their sins, and forsake them before
they be sick Prove. 28.13.
. And yet, good loving brother, if thou happen to be sick, be not in any case,
as I said before, be not altogether discouraged by it. But in the next place,
remember that thy sickness is nothing else, but Gods fatherly visitation to do
the good, and especially to move thee to repentance. Listen a little. Harken I
say. Do thou not hear him rapping a loud, and knocking hard at the door of
thy hard heart, and saying to thee, whosoever thou art; Maiden arise; Young man
arise; Lazarus arise and come forth. Awake therefore, awake, thou that sleep,
Ep. 5.14.
and stand up from death, and Christ shall give thee life. Say with the
spiritual spouse: In my bed by night I sought him whom my soul loves Cant.
3.1.
. Say with this our Prophet; Did I not remember thee upon my bed, and meditate
of thee in the night season Psalm. 63.7.
? Look not still to have pillowes sowd under thine elbowes, neither boulster
up thy self any longer in thy sins Ezech. 13.18.
. Lie not upon thy beds of iuorie, neither stretch thy self upon thy couch
Amos. 6.4.
: but every night wash thy bed, and water thy couch with thy tears. Behold,
says thy heavenly husband, Revel. 3.20.
I stand at the door and knock, if any man hear my voice and open the door, I
will come in unto him, and will suppe with him, and he with me. And again;
Cant. 5.2.
Open unto me, my sister, my love, my dove, mine undefiled, for my head is full
of dew, and my locks with the drops of the night. Wherefore seeing Christ
knocks so loud at the door of thy heart for repentance, knock thou as loud
at the door of his mercy for pardon: seeing he would so feign have thee turn
unto him and hear his voice, be thou as willing to call upon his name that he
may hear thy voice: seeing he is so forward to sup with thee by receiving thy
prayers, be thou as desirous to sup with him by obtaining the benefit of his
passion, even the remission of thy sins. And as he says to thy soul; Open
unto me, my sister, my love, my dove, mine undefiled: so be thou bold by faith
to turn the same words upon him again, and say, Open unto me my brother, my
love, my dove, mine undefiled, for my head is full of dew, and my locks with the
drops of the night. And why is my head full of dew, and my locks with the drops
of the night? Because every night I wash my bed, and water my couch with my
tears. Then, dear Christian brother, then thy sickness shall not be unto death,
but for the glory of God John. 11.4.
. For God will turn all thy bed in thy sickness Psalm. 41.3.
. And so whereas before it was a bed of sickness, he will turn it into a bed
of health: whereas a bed of pain and grief, into a bed of rest and comfort:
whereas a bed of tears and repentance, into a bed of joyful deliverance.
Remethy self well. At least wise as well as thou can, and well enough. What
happened to Job, who was sick, and sore all his body over, and had not a couch
neither to lie on, but was feign to lie on a dunghill? Did not all this turn
to his great good, whenas the Lord did bless his latter end much more then his
beginning Job. 42.10.
? What happened to Ezechias, who had sentence of death gone out against him? Did
not he lying sick in his bed turn him toward the wall and weep, and got the
sentence of death reuersed, and fiftene years more added to his life Esa. 38.6.
; What happened to the man sick of a palsy, who was let down thorough the
tyling bed and all in the midst before Jesus? Did not Christ with one word in
an instant heal him, so that he took up his bed and departed to his own
house praising God Luc. 5.25.
? What happened to the man which had bin sick eight and thirty years and was
not able to stepp down into the poole? Did not Christ saying but; Rise, take
up thy bed, and walk; cure him so, that presently he was made whole, and took
up his bed, and walked Ioh. 5.8. and 9.
? What happeed to Eneas, who was sick of the palsy, as one of these two that I
spoke of last, and had kept his bed eight years, as the other of them? Did not
S. Peter saying but thus unto him; Eneas, Jesus Christ makes thee whole, arise
and trusse up thy couch; so restore him that immediately he arose Act. 9.33.34.
? What happened to S. Paul who was pressed out of measure passing strength, so
that he altogether doubted even of life? Did not the Lord, when he had received
the sentence of death in himself, deliver him from this great danger 2. Cor.
1.8. and 9.
? What happened to S. Paul's fellow-souldier Epaphroditus, who was sick, and no
doubt sick very near unto death? Did not the Lord show mercy on him, and give
him health again, to the great joy of the Philippians, and general good of
all the church? Philip. 2.27.
What happened to holy David in this place, who says of himself; O Lord I am
weak: my bones are vexed; my soul also is sore troubled; I am weary of my
gronings; every night I wash my bed; and water my couch with my tears? Did not
the Lord finding him in this miserable pickle and plight, deliver his soul
from death; his eyes from tears; and his feet from falling Psalm. 116.8.
? So that in thankful and joyful manner he triumphs and says; the Lord
has heard the voice of my weeping: the Lord has heard my petition: the Lord
will receive my prayer. Even as S. Paul says; He has delivered us from so
great a death: and does deliver us: in whom also we trust that yet he will
deliver us 2. Cor. 1.10.
. O faithful and dear loving Lord! He has delivered, he does deliver, he
will deliver. He never yet has forsaken, he never does forsake, he never will
forsake, those that put their trust in him. For tell me, my good Brother, if
thou can tell any thing, tell me, did Christ so miraculously restore Job,
restore Ezechias, restore the man sick of the palsy, restore the bedred man,
restore Eneas, restore S. Paul, restore Epaphroditus, restore king David, to
their former health, and can he not restore thee? Did he restore the most of
these, when he was crucified upon earth, and can he not restore thee now he is
crowned in heaven? Is his arm now shorter and his power lesser then it was
then? Where, I marvel, where is the Centurions faith? Christ said then; I have
not found so great faith in all Israel M^t. 8.10.
: now if he were among us he might say; I have not found so great faith in all
the world. The Centurion believed though Christ came not under the roof of his
house, but spoke the word only, his servant might be healed well enough: and
do thou think Christ cannot heal thee except he come in person, and stand
by thy bed side, and take thee by the hand, and raise thee up? For shame away
with such infidelity. This is a thousand times worse then all the sickness of
thy body. Nay rather assure thy self, if god say but the word, thou shall
soon recover, and have thy health better then ever thou hadest, and live many
happy and joyful days after. Therefore mind thou only that which belongs
to thee: that which belongs to God meddle not with it, but leave it wholly
unto him. It is thy part to bewail thy former sins, and in bewailing them to
water thy couch with thy tears, to cry to the Lord for mercy and forgiveness,
to resolve with thy self steadfastly hereafter, if it please God to give thee
thy health again, to lead a new life. This belongs to thee, and therefore this
thou must meditate of, and employ thy self about day and night: but whether
thou shall recover or not recover, that belongs to God. That rests altogether
in Gods pleasure and will. If thou do recover, thou have thy desire. Or
rather perhaps thou have not thy desire. Seeing the holiest and best men of all
incline neither this way nor that way, but wholly resign themselves, as in all
other things, so especially in this case to Gods will Non mea, sed tua voluntas
fiat.
. Or if they determinately desire any thing, it is for the most part, to be
dissolved, and to be with Christ Philip. 1.23.
. But suppose thou desire to recover, and recover indeed. Then as thou
obtainest thy desire: so thou must perform thy promise. The promise which thou
madst when thy body was grieved, with sickness and pain, when thy soul was
oppressed with heaviness, when thou wateredst thy couch with thy tears. And
what was that promise? Namely, as I said before, that if it pleased god to give
thee health again, thou would love him more sincerely, serve him more
obediently, tender his glory more dearly, follow thy calling more faithfully,
then thou have done. If thou have offended him with pride, to humble thy self
heareafter: if with dissolutenes, to be sober heareafter: if with couetuousnes,
to be liberal heareafter: if with conuersing with the ungodly, to abandon
their company heareafter, and to say as it is in this Psalm; Depart from me ye
workers of iniquity, for the lord has heard the voice of my weeping. This if
thou conscionably and constantly perform, then in a good hour (as we say) and
in a happy time thou did recover. But suppose thou desire to recover, and
yet, neither thy self see any liklihood, nor god see it good thou should
recover. Then hearty repentance and watering thy couch with thy tears is most
of all necessary. That the fear of death may not affright thee, but being
truly penitent at thy departure, thou may be sure to depart in peace Luc. 2
29.
. And so God granting not thy will but his will* may indeed grant both thy
will and his will. Thy will, which is not simply to recover, but conditionally
if god will: and his will which is not to have thee lie languishing any longer
in this warfare, but to triumph for ever in heaven. Aliquando sancti non
recipiendo quod petunt magis exaudiuntur, quam exaudirentur si illud
reciperent. Plus enim non recipiendo bea^us Paulus exauditus est, quam ^i illud
recepisset pro quo (sicut ipse ait) ter d^minu^ rogauerat. Exauditus est
igitur, ne exaudiretur. Non enim nisi bonum Apostolus querebat, quamuis illud
non bonu^ sibi esse non intelligebat. Exauditus est igitur recipiendo bonu^ ne
exaudiretur recipiendo non bonum Qui enim sibi bonum non querit dum se sibi
bonu^ quaerere putat, si id recipiat quod quaerit, no^ exauditur: si non
recipit, exauditur. Deus igitur qui non aliud nisi quaeretis affectu^
considerat, bonu^ ci reddit qui se bonum quaerere credit, etiam si sibi non sit
bonum quod quaerit. Emisse. bom. inlitaniis maioribus. p. 138.
O blessed tears are these, which are recompensed with such high happiness, and
such inestimable commodities. As namely fredome from all sins, past, present
and to come: deliverance from all the miseries and troubles of this woeful
world: consu^mation of holiness, of humblenes, of purity, of devotion, of all
other christian virtues, which were but begun and imperfect in this life:
putting away of all corruption and mortality, and putting on the royal robe
of immortality and bliss. For that which happened to Christ shall happen to
thee also, because by faith thou art not only in soul, but even in body
unseparably united and joined unto him, being by virtue of this mystical union
made bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh. Therefore as he, from that agony
wherein he prayed with strong crying and tears, from that cross wherein he
commended his spirit into his fathers hands, from that grave wherein death for
a time seemed to insult and to trample upon him; rose up again, and ascended
far above all heavens, and now sits at the right hand of glory: so thy
soul shall certainly be in the hand of God, and thy very body also, after it
has a while rested from watering thy couch with thy tears, and from all other
labors of this life, shall be raised up again, and caught up in the clouds,
and shall together with thy soul for ever reign with Christ in the life to
come. Which God grant to us all for the same our blessed Savior Jesus Christ's
sake, to whom with the Father, and the holy Ghost, be all honor and glory,
power and praise, dignity and dominion, now and ever more. Amen.

FINIS.
Errata.
In the Epistle for even since read ever since page 19. lin. 20 for up himself
read up to himself page 35. lin. 25. for Iosep,h whom read Joseph, whom page
37. lin. 22. for days; The read days. The

