PLATOES Cap. Cast at this Year 1604, being Leape-yeere.



LONDON Printed for Jeffrey Chorlton. 1604.

(...) ble Venus, till all the States smile at him, if your Glances be not too
full of yron-moulds, I presume you will fling one smile at our button-Cap, and
I wish no higher:

For

A smile is constant and does gild each Style:
But laughter is the Fool of every smile.
The wonders we entreat of here have little harm in them, you may take more
hurt in a Barbers shop, if you sit there fasting, than all my prognosticating
Comedy, or comicke Prognostication aims at, and if these Events chance to
happen, they will be but merry ones, for they wish il to none, but to those
that wish ill to themselves, and none can justly except at this, but those that
cannot well read it, for there is great difference between reading and reading
well, for those that read well have a good tongue of their own, and spoil
nothing in the spelling, and to such I cast up my Cap, both in
Paules-churchyard, Popeshead Alley, and at Temple-barre.

Yours for a Raynie day. Adam Euesdropper.

MIHILL Mercury the Pothecarie in praise of the Book.
IF I have skill,
This Booke's not ill,
But chaste and pleasant:
If I knew the Author,
I swear by my Daughter,
I Would give him a Pheasant.
Nor do you wonder
You writers of Thunder,
I know not the Poet.
It Is the Books praise I write,
But I would not for a mite
Have he himself know it.
For if he should spy it,
I Would flatly deny it,
He would fret, chafe, and Nestle.
Stamp more in a minute
Then I in a Sennet
At home with my Pestle.
Therefore my best way
Is, not long here to stay,
Because I Am no fighter.
This course then I took,
To commend the Book,
But not meddle with the writer:
And because his Art
Is so pretty and tart,
And his ink so well sauourd,
I swear by my simples,
A Nose full of pimples
Is very ill favored:
For so he does prognosticate, and shows
A white flax beard wastes with a fiery Nose.
See where he comes, I dare not stay, I fly:
So:
All Enuies poison go with Mercury.
The same Hand again.
PLATOES Cap.
THE Revolution of this present year 1604, takes his beginning, at what time
the Sun enters into the first minute of Aries, when many a scold shall be found
in Ramme-Alley, whose tongues will never linne iangling, until the Sun enter
into another Sign, as the Myter, or rather some bowzing Tappe-house, where
they must all drink themselves friends again, till they are able to speak no
more than a drowned Rat, and then by that time, I hope they will be quiet.

Next I find, that the Sun entering into Taurus, it will be exceeding good
this year for the Butchers both in Southwarke, Eastcheape, and Saint Nicholas
Shambles, for he takes his entrance just upon Easter Tuesday, to the deposing
of Lent, and the overthrow of salt Sammon, and fresh Cod, and to the restoring
again of Heroick-valiant Beef, that ancient and surly Courtier, that never
appears without a mess of Mustard his Gentleman-usher bareheaded before him:
Red Herring may go hang himself then for a Tweluemonth upon the rusty beam
of some Farmers chimney, until the hungry Ploughboyes cut him down and
quarter him: for Oliver Offall the Butcher will be fat and flourish, and
Gregory Gizzern the Poulter will bring forth his Progenies of Partridges,
Plouers, and Blackebirds, and what a pitiful sight it will be for poor
Wayters and Trencher-bearers to see wise men their Masters feed upon
Woodcockes.

From thence the Sun travails into Gemini, not into Germany, (as some
Mechanicke-readers will read Germany for Gemini) and then Mayds beware of two
at once, or two at a Birth, if you love to preserve your own Credits, but you
especially this double sign threatnes most, that live in Merchants houses
amongst wanton Springals your Fellow-seruants, and are at midnight at the
massacre, and sacking of a Posset, when your sober Master and continent Mistres
are in their first sleep, and little dream of your Sinamon and Sugar, which
are always the two sweet Presenters of a Sack-Posset, the Scene being laid
in a Bowl, or a Basin, and the Actors some half a dozen of silver Spoones,
which seldom are out of their parts, until all be eaten: there is much
peril and danger in this Sign, you Damsels of seauenteene, and one and
Twenty: therefore if I might counsel you, you should be your own
Pothecaries, and preserve your honesties better than Barberies: Go to bed
presently after your Master and Mistress, save candles and Candles, pound, for
there is craft now adays in waighing of Candles, and great policy in the
uttering of Puddings.

Next the Sun takes his Journey into the stinging Sign Scorpio, and then
beware of Brokers, Usurers, and Pettifoggers the Scorpions of a kingdom, come
not in their villaynous clutches all that Month especially, for they will make
you pay well for it, more in one Month, than you shall be able to recover
again a whole Tweluemonth after.

But entering into Sagittarius, it will be passing good for the Fletchers in
Grubstreet, and all the Caualeero Bowyers, tweluescore Pricks will be in
season, and those may shoot at Bun-hill, that are nonsuited at Westminster
Hall.

After this the Sun mounts into Capricorn, and then woe be unto you that
are Horne-madde, and have three Acres at Cuckolds Haven, you are well landed
then, for one Acre there, is more than ever you will be able to make away as
long as you live: This Sign reigns Ielosie upon men and women, upon old
frostie men that have young lusty wives, and upon old riueld women, that
have young beardlesse Husbands, for the (...) poison of Ielosie swelles the
bosoms of unequal Bedfellowes, and a piece of a Unicorns Horn can help any
man but a Cuckold, whereby that old moth-eaten Proverb is verified, which
says, One man's meat, is another man's poison: For if he should take it down,
he would think it would breed more Horns within him: such is the strange
property of invincible Jealousy, that is stronger than the great Spanish
Armado in Eighty eight.

Next the Sun enters into Aquarius, and then there will be good doings for
Watermen, many wanton meetings at Brandford, fresh water Voyages to
Blacke-wall and Greenewich, reuelling and domineering among amiable Lads and
young Wenches over the water: but that which I find most lamentable in this
watery Sign Aquarius, and most to be feared of all those that love valiant
Licour, is the single-sole disposition of Brewers that will put to much Thames
in their Beer, and I fear me make it hop but of one leg, and that so
lamely too, that a little thing will make it hoppe quite into the Thames
again: and because Ale-brewers and they are Brothers, it is as much to be
doubted on the other side, that each Ale-brewer will play the Jew of Malta,
and put but a little Malt in the Ale: so I hope there will be fewer Red-noses
this year than was of a Year a great while, amongst the baser Rank, and as
for Tauerne-whiffers. I do not think but the honest virtuous Vintners will
take an order, and assuage the desperate and furious humors of their Wines,
with a good sober quantity of fair temperate Water: nor can I much blame
them, for after the Reckoning has been discharged and all, you should have
some cast it up again before the Vintners face, and think themselves
misreckoned in the Pottle, until they see two Gallons apparently lie upon the
floare before their eyes, and then they will believe it, and therefore good
sober Vintners I will not condemn, but rather applaud the watring of your
Wine: for by that honest-profitable policy, those that are your common
Winesuckers will surfette and be sick ten times, ere they be drunk once,
and so much for the Suns taking Barge in Aquarius.

The Twelfe and last, is when he turns golden Angler, and catches Pisces, and
then woe be unto you that are dissolute full mouthed Swearers, for you will
never catch Haddockes as long as you breath, for you shall never hear a true
Fisher indeed, swear beyond Coddes-fish, and no oath at all that has any
flesh in it: In this last and finnye Sign Pisces, there will be odd dooinges
in old Fish-streete, Lobsters will be no meat for Lobcockes, as long as they
pass for two Shillinges apeece, Maids will be no Fish for Harlotts, nor
Soles for Brokers, the one wanting continence and the other conscience, marry
Gudginnes will be your only Dish for Country Gentlemen, such as are come to
their Lands, before they come to their Wit, and are one and Twenty year
old in Acres, but scarce scauen in discretion or manners, such as these may
fitly dwell at Fishers Folly, when they have made away all their Fish Pondes in
the Country, and this shall suffize for the Suns Twelve strides into the
Twelve Signs.

NOW FOR General dispositions in all Rancks of people whatsoever, bred by
variable, womanish, and unconstant Planets.
THe great conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, changed from the watrie
Triplicity to the fiery, is to be noted specially (as our Prognosticators
would have it) nevertheless I hope there will be small hurt done by fire this
year, because Faggots, Billets, and Char-cole bear such a price, that no
poor snake is able to purchase them, and the most danger for fire lies in
their Cottages, because for the most part they are low, old, and rotten, and
as for rich men they could build up their houses again: but those which most
prevent this great and si^rie Conjunction, are Usurers, and Niggards, both
which are sure to have no sparkle flying, or lying about their houses, for they
will have never a cole in their chimneys.

This hot Conjunction being but badly affected, shows, that those which were
widows the last Year, will be caught up this year, more for wealth and
spending-money, than for love and honesty, they shall have many gallant
suitors, that will carry all their Lands upon their backs, and yet swear they
have grounds, Backsides, and yards, when they have no more Ground tha^ the
Kings high way, no more Backsides than one, and no Tauerne-potts shall fly
from one end of the Room to the other, and do much hurt, if they light upon
men's Pates: Many cracked Crowns shall pass current thorough Cheape-side by
Goldsmith stalles, and yet never suspected: Many terrible Frayes in Smithfield
between sergeants and Gentlemen, marry sergeants will win the day, and get
the Victory, especially if they be six to one, then there is no remedy but
the Counter in Woodstreete must part the fray: there shall be a dreadful
war between the wife and the husband for Superiority, in so much that the
good man shall be feign to give over first, cry mum, and let her do what she
will all the year after.

Shrewd Tempests shall arise about Cole-harbour, and many a maid shall be cast
away about Westminster: there shall be a Battle between the feure knaves at
Cards for superiority, and between false Dice and true, for antiquity.

Women that wear long gowns shall be glad to take up their clothes in the
street, when it raynes, although a hundred men stand and look upon them, yet
they shall blush no more to hold them up if it be very durtie, then men to
make water in broad day at the Pissing Conduit if they have need.

The Bakers, Woodmongers, Butchers, and Brewers, shall fall to a mighty
conspiracy this year, so that no man shall have bread, fire, flesh, or drink
without credit or ready monney: Barbers shall be mightily out of work this
year, by reason of the French disease, for many shall loose their Hair,
before they can come to their shops, and so put them quite out of work: and
Beards shall be Commodities hard to be gotten, but more hard to be kept, for
many hairs will start out this year that will never come in again, but
perish and drop down by the way: And amongst all other Trades and
Occupations, Masons poor souls shall be much troubled with the Stone this
year, if there chance to be any great Buildings, as by my skill I find no
less: marry I doubt Powles will scarce have a new Steeple this year, and in
that, I think I shall be the truest Prognosticator, that writ Almanackes this
twenty Twelue-months: The Gowt, I find, will keep a foul Racket this year,
and play at Tennis in a Usurers puffed Toe, but his gaping Son and Heir shall
have little hope of his dying, i will put him in that Comfort, because he may
linger yet above Seven years longer, and his Toe serve out above four
Prentiships to the Gowt.

Tailors shall be mightily troubled with the stich, and sow many false seeds
which shall peep out, before a Moon come about, and having a Hell of their
own, being but a bare board between, woe be to pieces of white
Fustian-linings, for they fall in with their heels upward, Satin is the
cheifest Devil there, and domineeres over all inferior Blackes. Velvet that
old Reueller and brave Courtier, lies there most tragically dismembered, poor
Perpetuano is perpetually damned, and desperate Rash falls in headlong.

Only in this all Tailors are most true,
They damn false bodies, and give them their due.
And what a lamentable thing it is on the other-side, that so many of our
English women should wear French Bodies, and be a scorn and by-iest to all
riotous Nations.

But shall I discover to the world wondrous events indeed, and tell how
Muscadine in Vintners Sellers shall indite their Masters this year of
Commixtion, and arraigne them at their own Bar: and how Bayliffes and
Marshals men shall be content to arrest any man, if they can catch him.

Poor men shall be accounted Knaves without occasion, and those that flatter
least, shall speed worst, and never be worth Three Hundred a year, if they
should live until Doomes-day: Many shall eat upon other men's Trenchers, and
surfette upon other men's Costs, but scarce feed upon Holland Cheese in their
own Chambers.

The Palsy will be a very shrewd disease this year, for some shall have it in
their heads, and shake so long till they have no more wit in their brains then
Will. the Bel-ringer: some shall have a Palsy in their Teeth, in so much that
they shall eat more in a week, then they will be able to pay forin a
twelue-moneth, Othersome shall be troubled with a Palsy in their hands, and
those are your riotous elder Brothers that can keep nothing fast, but will
shake all the monney out of their hands that comes in to them, Videlicet, in
Tauernes, Tenniscourts, and Dicing-houses, and lastly some shall have a Palsy
in their feet, and will not be able to stand to any thing but shake and
reele from the stall into the Channel, your excellent Reele-pots, and so I
leave them full in a puddle.

Some there shall be which shall have such a smell in their Nostrils that no
Feast shall escape them without they have share in it.

But Consumptions this Year are dangerously threatened, by the fiery
copulation of those two surly and ambitious Planets, for some shall be so
consumed in their members, as they shall find never a good Tongue in their
heads, some so consumed in conscience, that they will take above Forty in the
Hundred, and more too if they can get it, othersome so consumed by inchastity,
that if the Constable should search them, he should find about them very
little honesty.

Those that singe Bases this year shall love to take their licour soundly, and
Trumpeters that sound Trebles shall stare by custom.

There shall be many Fortune Tellers, that shall shut a Knave in a Circle, and
looking about for a Devil find him locked in their bosoms.

Many strange events shall happen and befall this year in those houses where
Virgo is predominant with a master, but wants a Mistress to look narrowly
unto her, for the influence of the Grocers shops being elevated within a few
sweet degrees presageth that some shameless Drabbes shall be still gadding
about the streets for figs, almonds, and Confects, and that without regard
of either Wit or Honesty.

Great Mistes and Fogges will arise and fall this year, so that some shall not
see but to take their Neighbors bed for their own, and if Watchcandles could
tell tales, they would make you laugh, though your wives went to burying.

Many men shall be so venterously disposed, that they shall go into
Brothelhouses, and yet come out again as honestly, as when they went first in.

Bakers shall thrive by two things this year, skores well paid, and Millers
that are honest, which are as rare to be found now a days, as black
Swannes, and white Ravens. Long bearded men shall not be the wisest: nor the
most grauest in looks, the most holy in life.

The Haberdashers by the natural operation of this conjunction, are very
fortunate. For old Hats new trunde shall not last long, and new Hats for the
most part shall have old trimming: and so by this means foysting John shall
thrive better by his knauerie, then any plain dealing John about London by the
Talent of his honesty: and so I end, wishing all the Felts in his shop no more
wickedder Block then his own Pate, and then I am sure they will be so far
from good fashion, that no honest man in England would be hired to wear
them: and so farewell John, it is good luck some times they say, to end with a
etc.

FINIS.

