TEN SERMONS PREACHED

By that eloquent Divine of famous memory, TH. PLAYFERE

Doctor in Divinity.

Prove. 10. 7.

The memorial of the (...) shall be blessed: but the name of the w^ked
shallro^te.

Printed by CANTRELL LEG, Printer to the University of CAMBRIDGE. 1610.

To Sir Reynald Argal Knight.
RIght Worshipful and my especial good friend: How desirous I have bin to
answer some part of your worthy courtesies, at least by laying them open to the
world, this small remembrance may testify for me: and how unable I am to
equal deseruings, the same remembrance testifies against me, whether I will
or no; be^ing borrowed from the monuments of a dead man, the only glory of
his times while he lived. But it was fit that a far greater gift then mine
own should aspire to be the instrument of your honor: and the testimony of
the dead, I took to be meeter even in this regard, because that is as
unsuspected, as your kindness toward my self has been evermore uncorrupted.
And no further disturbing the harmony of your best thoughts, or as you are
wont to account it, dimini^hing the reward which is laid up for you in heaven,
by untimely blazing merits upon earth, I commit this depositum to your favor
and Patronage, my self also, and my endeauours; resting always at

Your Worships disposition D. C.

To the Reader.
WHat a loss the Church of God had by the death of D. Playfere, I had rather
the opinion of the world should determine, then my slender pen attempt to
express. If ever those combinations of Virtue and Learning, of Knowledge and
Utterance, of Wit and Memory, of Reading and Use, of Wholesome and Delightful,
of School and P^lpit, of Old and New, or in one word to say, of Nature and
Ind^strie, of hum^ne felicite and heavenly grace, concurred to make a Scribe
perfect and absolute to the kingdom of God; we may not be so much our own
back-friends (though we detract not from the fortune os places further off) nay
w^ may not so impeach the honor of the gi^er, nor disparage the worth of our
friend departed, as to doubt but this was principally manifested in M. Playfere.

Who because he was but lent the world for a time, nay because he was
redemaunded sooner then his time, (if it were lawful to control the heavenly
w^sedome with that word Sooner, but I mean in regard of the Churches use, and
that same propter vos, which Phil. 1. 24.
made the Apostle to demur) I say since he was to be returned back again to
his maker, and ouer-ripe perfection not to continue ouerlong, it had been to
be wished, he had left behind him some more monuments of his trauails, as well
comfortable to the suru^uers, as honorable ^o himself. Which whether he in
his discretion, and because he had so resolved, was nice to do, after the
example of them that would write nothing, though very able, or was then a
doing most when God called him, I cannot say. This which the good Reader will be
loath perhaps to hear, I may not conceal, that these are the last of all his
labors which are like to be divulged. Into so small a compass is that spirit
now ranged, as to be as she says, (...) a^ud Proper. (...). (...). 12.


En sum quod digitis quinque leuatur onus, or indeed not so much as a just
handful, which lately was not co^finable with^n bounds too great for me to
speak of.

But the sum is this: (For I list not to defend his method of preach^ng
against the Method-masters of our age, who me thinks should know either that
of the Apostle, Diuersitas donorum est, sed vnus spiritus: or that of the
Prophet, Laudate eum in tuba, laudate in cithara: or if nothing will please
them but what they do themselves, we must be feign to say as Crassus did to
Scevola, O^nium igitur conciones tu conficies vnus, omnes ad te sub tempus
veniemus, etc.) I say the sum is this: that as the Sun-light is pleasantest
toward the set, and the skillful ear finds most store os music in the close:
so this Sun, this Swan, this sweet singer of Israel, (for what lesser terms
can our love affoard him? if any bring more we will not refuse them) his last
monuments, and his last labors, that the world may ever hope for, shall find
we trust the dearer intertainment.

A SERMON PREACHED AT WINSOR before the Kings Majesty, the 11. day of
September. 1604.
Matthew. 4. 4. Man lives not by bread only, but by every word that proceeds
out of the mouth of God.
CHrist our Savior came into the world, to dissolve the works of the Devil.
Now how thoroughly he would afterward destroy the devil, and all his works,
he gave a taste, as it were, in this his first encounter. Wherein we may note
what great difference there is between the first Adam, and the second. The
first Adam was in Paradise, a place of all abundance and pleasure: the second
Adam in the desert, a place of all scarcity and want. The first was full, and
so the less needed to eat the forbidden fruit: the second fasting, and so the
easilier drawn to make himself meat. Yet the first, though he were in
Paradise, and full, when his wife intised him to eat the aple, took it and ate
it: but the second, though he were in the desert, and fasting a long time, when
the devil enticed him to turn stones into bread, would not yield to him, but
said, Man lives not by bread only, but by every word that proceeds out of
the mouth of God.

Howbeit as Christ herein was contrary to Adam; so he agrees very well with
Job. Holy Job was upon a dunghill: Christ was in the desert. Job had fasted
seven days, and seven nights: Christ had fasted forty days and for^ie
nights. Job when his wife enticed him to curse God and die, would not, but
said; Thou speak like a foolish woman: Christ when the tempter entised him,
not to curse God and die, but to distrust God rather then he should die, would
not, but said, Man lives no^ by bread only, but by every word that
proceeds out of the mouth of God.

Where, before we go any further, it will not be amiss, to assoyle one
question, Why our blessed Sa^iour a^ his mothers request turned water into
wine, and yet at the devils request would not turn stones into bread. But the
answer is easy enough. This begi^ning of miracles, says S. John did Jesus at
Cana in Galilie, and his Disciples believed in him. Two ends therefore did he
propound to himself in working that miracle. The increase of his own glory,
and his disciples faith. Now here, neither of these two ends could be attained:
For how should he not have disgraced his glory, if he had showed any vain
glory? If thou be the son of God, says the tempte^, command that these
stones be made bread. So that his temptation tended only to this end, to make
the son of God vainglorious. Again, how could we have been persuaded by
him, if he had been persuaded by the devil? For he might have seemed to have
done this miracle not only by the devils appointment, but by his power. The
sum is this therefore, To convert any poor soul unto God, or to make a
son of God, he would have done it, vaine-gloriously to show himself the
son of God he would not do it; but said, Man lives not by bread only, but
by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God.

The word man is very material: As if he should have said, Any ordinary man
lives not by the bread; but by the power, and strength, and as the Prophet
calls it, the staff of bread, which God gives it. Now if he that is but a
bare man lives rather by the blessing of God, then by the bread; much less
need I presume upon unlawful means, that am both man and God. Again, we must
observe that by The word which proceeds out of the mouth of God, we are not
to understand the written will or word of God, but the secret counsel and
decree of God, in preserving and sustaining his creatures: For example, if the
word have gone out of Gods mouth, and if God have set it down, and said it,
that I shall live as well without bread as with bread, so it shall be. Or if
God in his providence have provided that a stone shall nourish me as well as
bread, then I shall not need to distrust his goodness, or to use unlawful
means for my relief. For, Man lives not by bread only, but by ^ery word that
proceedeh out of the ^outh of God.

There are two places of Scripture, which are fit commentaries upon this text.
The first is written in Ecclesiastes: ca^. 9. ^. 11.
I returned, says Solomon, and I saw under the sun, that the race is not to
the swift: nor the battle to the strong: nor yet bread to the wise: nor also
riches to men of understanding: neither yet favor to men of knowledge.

First, says the preacher, The race is not to the swift. Asahel was as swift
of 2. (...). ^. 1^.
foot as a roebuck, yet Abner met with him, smote him under the sift rib, and
slew him. So that the swiftest that is may sometimes be overtaken. It is not in
him that wills, or in him that runs, (...) 9. 16.
but in God that shows mercy, Nec curentis, Ne^ volentis, says S. Paul: but
a noble man gives it for his word, Nec volentis, ne^ volantis: It is not in him
that wills, or in him that runs, yea though he could run as fast as a
bird can fly; but in God that shows mercy. Therefore man get^eth not the
race by swistnes only, but by the mercy of God: Man lives not by bread
only, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God.

Secondly, says the Preacher, The battle is not to the strong. Golias was a
mighty strong giant: His height was six cubits, and a hand breadth: he had 1.
S^. 17. 5.
an helmet of brass upon his head, and a brigandine upon his body: and the
weight of hi^ brigandine was five thous^nd shekels o^ brass. He had boots of
b^asse upon his legs: and a shield of brass upon his shoulders. And the shaft
of his spear was like a weauers beam: and ^is spear head weighed six
hundred shekels of yro^: and one bearing a shield went before him. Wherefore
think you is all this furniture so particularly set down? Wherefore, say you?
Marry to show, how great strength, the Lord if the word have proceeded out of
his mouth, can overcome with weakness. For so little David confesses: Thou
come to me, says he, with a sword, v* ^5.
and with a spear, and with a shield, but I come to thee in the name of the
Lord of hosts. This name of the Lord of hosts, this mighty word proceeding out
of Gods mouth, stroke the stroke. Even as holy David humbly confesses, saying,
We got not the victory by our own sword, neither was it our arm that did
save us: but thy right hand, O Psalm. 44 7.
Lord, and thine arm, and the light o^ thy countenance, because thou had a
^uour unto us. So that man gets not the battle by strength only, but by
the favor of God: Man lives not by bread only, but by every word that
proceeds out of the mouth of God.

Thirdly, says the preacher, Bread is not to the wise. One would think him
but a simple wise man, that can not by his wisdom provide himself bread, that
is, sufficient maintenance for his estate. Yet thus it fallet^ out oftentimes.
The prodigal child was wise enough. (...). 15. 17.
Being but the younger brother, he handled the matter so, as that he got of his
father an equal portion of goods with his elder brother. But what came all his
wisdom to in the end? Forsooth at length he was driven to such shifts, that
for want of bread he was feign to eat husks with the hogs. And then he
said, How many hired servants in my fathers house have bread enough, and I
starve here for hunger? Thus falls it o^t many times wi^h the^ that are wise
to sollow their own pleasures, and not to serve god. But with the servants of
god it is not so. Therefore says the princely Prophet, I have been young, and
now am old: yet did I never see the righteous forsaken, nor their seed begging
their bread. So that man gets not bread by wisdom only, and when he has
gotten bread, Man lives not by bread only, but by eue^y word that proc^edeth
out of the mouth of god.

Fourthly, says the preacher, Riches are not to men of understanding. That
rich man in the gospel wanted not Luke 1^. 2^.
greatly any understanding. When he had so much riches, that he could not tell
what to do with them, he resolved to pull down his old barnes which were too
little, and to build bigger. But what said the answer of god? Thou fool, this
night shall they take away thy soul from thee, and then, whose shall thy goods
be? Wherefore he that thought himself of great understanding before, is here
declared to be a fool, and a poor fool also, having not so much as his soul
left to help him. The loss whereof can not be recompensed and counter^ailed
with winning the whole world. A man's life then does not confist in the
abundance of those things which he possesses. But the louingkindnes Psalm. 63.
4.
P^ov. 10.
of the Lord is better then riches, better then living, yea better then life it
self. For in God only we live. And only the blessing of god makes a man
rich. Whereupon we may conclude, that man gets not riches by understanding
only, but by the blessing of god: Man lives not by bread only, but by every
word that proceeds out of the mouth of god.

Lastly, says the preacher, Favor is not to men of knowledge. It seems that
a man of knowledge and learning should obtain favor and acceptance,
wheresoever he becomes. But it is not so. Oftentimes, either he gets none,
or else he loses that which he has gotten. Haman a man of great (...). 7. 10.
knowledge, and a^thoritie, and favor with his Prince. Yet because he abused
this fa^our to the oppression of gods people, and of true religion, therefore
he lost it. And that mischief which he imagined against others, lighted upon
his own^ pa^e. Indeed when god has appointed any one to be a notable
instr^ment of his glory, either in Church (...) Common-^ealth, then suddenly
the Lord gives him extraordinary favor. So he gave Joseph favor with king
Pharao: so he gave Mardocheus favor wi^h king Assuerus. For favor and
promo^ion comme^h neither from the East, nor from the West, nor from the North,
nor from the South, but god it is which sets up one, and casts down an
other. He, as the blessed Virgin sings in her Magnisicat, casts Luke 1. 52.
down the mighty from their seats, and exalts the humble and me^ke. Wherefore
man gets not favor by knowledge only, but by the favor of god: Man lives
not by bread only, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of god.

This doctrine teaches us, that if we have gotten the race, gotten the battle,
gotten bread, gotten riches, gotten favor, we should not ascribe these things
to our own sacrifices, to our own strength, to our own wisdom, to our own
understanding, to our own knowledge, but to the grace of god, and the blessed
word proceeding out of his ^outh. Thus the Prophet exhorts, saying, Let not
the wise man glory in his wisdom, nor the strong man in his strength, but let
him that gloried glory in this, that he knows the Lord. Now no man knows
the Lord, but he which knows that all good success he has in any thing,
comes of the Lord. And thus much for the first place of Scripture, which is a
commentary upon this text. Man lives not by bread only, but by every word
that proceeds out of the mouth of god.

The second place of Scripture is written in the Prophet Hagge. Ye have (...).
1. ^.
sown much, and bring in little: ye eat, but you have not enough: ye drink,
but ye are not silled: ye cloth you, but ye are not warm: and he that earneth
wages, puts the wages into a broken bag.

First, s^ith the Prophet, Ye have sowed much, and bring in little. Almighty
God for the sin of the people makes many times the heavens brass, and the
earth iron. So that neither the heavens droppeth down seasonable showers,
neither does the earth bring forth her ^ncrease. When one came to a heap of
twenty measures, there were but ten, says this our Prophet: when one came
cap. ^. 15.
to the winepresse for to draw out fifty vessels out of the press, there
were but twenty. This is to sow much, and bring in little, to look for
twenty measures, and find but ten: to look for fifty vessels, and find
but twenty. On the other side, holy Isaac sowing in the Genesis ^6. 12.
land of king Abimeleck, gained every year an hundred fold: so mightily says
the Scripture, did the Lord bless him. For except the Lord build the house,
they labor but in vain that build it: and except the Lord till the field and
sow the seed, they labor but in vain that sow it. Paul planteth, Apollo
watere^h, but God gives the increase: which is true not only in the
spiritual wa^ering of the word, but also in natural planting and sowing
seed. So that man brings not much in by sowing only, but by the en^ease
which God gives: Man li^eth ^ot by bread only, but by every word which
poceedeth out of the mouth of God.

Secondly, says the Prophet, Ye eat, but ye have not enough. Many there are
which want for no eating, but like that rich glutton fare deliciously every
day: yet it is smally seen by them. But as Ge^. 4^. ^1.
those seven lean kine having devoured the seven fat, were never a whit the
fuller; so these. Whereas holy Daniel having nothing to eat but poor pulse,
nothing to drink but cold water, looked more cherefully and beautifully, then
any of the children which did eat of the portion of the kings meat. And that
the Eunuch saw well enough, and consessed D^n. 1. 15.
at the ten days end. Therefore a little thing which the righteous
inioy^th, ^sal. 37. 1^.
is better then great riches of the wicked. Better is a little with the fear
Prove. 15. 16.
of the Lord, then great treasure and trouble therewith. Better is a dry
morsel (...). ^7. 1.
if peace be with it, then a house full of sacrifices with strife. Better is a
dinner (...). ^7.
of green herbs were love is, then a stawled ox and hatred therewith. In
conclusion then, Man has not enough by eating only, but by the peace and and
love of God. M^n lives not by bread only, but by every word that proceeds
out of the mouth of God.

Thirdly says the Prophet, Ye drink, but ye are not filled. Many consume, and
as we say, drink down their whole patrimony. Like the horseleach they ever
say, Give, give: like the man in the gospel, that had the dropsy, they dri^ke
still, and the more they drink the more they list. Committing in the mean
season two sins, fors^king God the fountain of li^ing waters, and digging
^er. ^. 1^.
to themselves pittes that can hold no waters. On the other side, Elias, when
as the Angel brought him a cake bakt' on the harth, and a pot of water, was so
^ully satisfied with these, that he went in the strength of this meat and
drink 1. Reg. 1^. ^.
forty days unto Oreb the mount of God. Could such a small pittance of bread
and water of it self sustain him so long? No marry. What was the matter
then? The word that proceeded out of Gods mouth had appointed so, that one
cruse of water should suffice him all that time. Whereby we see, that man is
not filled with drinking only: Man lives not by bread only, but by every word
that proceeds out of the mouth of God.

Fourthly, says the Prophet, Yea cloth you but you are not wa^me. Peter (...).
i^ 1. ^g. ^.
Martyr shows, that clothing does keep the body warm two ways: By keeping
in the natural heat of the body: and by keeping out the accidental cold of
the air. Now though this be the property of clothing, yet God as it pleases
him, can suspend the effect of it. Whereupon he says, I will take away my
corn in the time thereof, and Ho^. 1. 9.
my wine in the season thereof, and I will deliver my wool and my flax.
Signifying that even when the corn is come to the ripeness, and the wine now
ready to be drunken, God will depri^e them of it. But especially we must mark
that he sai's, I will deliver my wool and my ^laxe. Whereby he (...) la^ (...)
and (...) m^ u^.
teaches us, that God has as it were, if I may so say, bound all his
creatures prentises to us, to preser^e us, and serve us, if we serve him. But
in case we serve him ^ot, then the creatures are delivered, and are bound no
more to serve us. The wool and the flax contrary to their nature will not serve
our turn, if we contrary to grace rebel against God. Whereas John Bap^ist
having a garment of Camels hair, and a girdle of leather abo^t ^is loins, was
(...) enough. This leather served him to as good use as flax, and the Camels
hair kept him as warm as wool. Man therefore is not warm by clothing onel^,
but by virtue of God annexed to the clothing. Man li^eth not by bread only,
but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God.

Lastly, says the Prophet, He that earneth wages puts the wages into a
broken bag. We see in the world many me^ have great fees, great offices,
great revenues, and yet can scarce keep themselves out of debt. Other some,
have but very s^all wages, and yet maintain themselves well enough, and help
their poor friends also. Only the word that proceeds out of Gods mo^th,
makes this difference. As we may see in Judas. Who indeed earned wages, b^t
seeing it was the wages of unrighteousness, therefore it run out of the bag
as f^st as it was put in: For first, when he ^ad it he could not ^old it in his
hands, but brought it b^cke again, saying, I (...) sinned in (...) (...)
innocent blood. Then himself went and made away himself, and that which is
fearful but once to name or mention, all his bowels gushed out: There is a
broken bag. But the Patriarch Jacob, earning wages very hardly, to wit,
serving fourteen years for his v^cles daughters, and six years for his
lambs, in all twenty years, in the end filled his bag full. And though
Laban changed his wages ten tims, yet he could not one time change that
blessing of God, which was always upon him. And though he allotted his nephew
only the spotted lambs, which commonly were very few to his wages, yet the
word proceeding so out of Gods mouth, this proved an infinite gain unto him.
Whereupon the blessed Patriarch humbles himself in true (...) ^2. 10.
humility and thankfulness to God, and says, O Lord, I am not worthy of the
least of al thy mercies: for with my staff came I over this Jordan, but now
do I ret^e with two troops. O that we had such good souls, such thankful
hearts in us, as that every one of us would in like sort confess and
acknowledge his own unworthiness, and the wonderful worth and wealth of Gods
mercy. O Lord, sai's he, I am not worthy of the least, or I am lesser then
the least of all thy mercies. He makes no mention of his own pains and
travails, though they had been very great in that long service, but only of
the mercies of God. These were the only cause that his bag was so full.
Wherefore man fills not his bag by earning wages only, but by the mercies
of God. Man lives not by bread only, but by every word which proceeds out
of the mouth of God.

This teaches us, that whether we sow, or eat, or drink, or cloth us, or
earne wages, we must do all to the glory of God. And all we do to the glory
of God, when we refer the glory of all we do to God. Not sacrificing to our
own yarne, as the Prophet speaks, or kissing our own hand: but kissing the
son, and offering up to him only the sacrifices of praise and thanksgiving at
whose hand we receive all good things. For it is not our painful sowing that
gives us a plentiful crop: not our eating that f^edeth us: not our drinking
that satisfies us: not our clothes that warm us: not out earning wages that
fills our bag: but the good word that proceeds out of Gods mouth, which
blessed all these things unto us. Therefore as we must not begin any of these
without grace-saying: so we must not end any of them without thanksgiving. And
thus much for the second place of Scripture, which is a commentary upon this
text; Man lives not by br^ad only, but by every word which proc^edeth out of
the mouth of God.

To make good use then of all that has been spoken, I shall desire you to
observe four points. First, that God can work great matters with small
means. Thus says our Lord; When I brake the five loaves among five thousand,
(...). 8. 19.
how many baskets full of broken meat took ye up? they said unto him, Twelve.
And when I brake seven among four thousand, how many baskets of the leauings
of broken meat took ye up? and they said, S^auen. Certainly there is no
reason in the world that seven loa^s should satisfy four thousand, and much
less, that five loaves five thousand. But Christ having given thanks and
blessed the bread, did that by the might of the word proceeding out of his
mouth, which by the natural power and condition of the bread could never have
been done. Therefore also he repeateth it, and questioneth with his disciples
about it. That by their confession and report, all the Church afterward might
believe, that God can work great matters with small means, and that Man
lives not by bread only, but by every word which proceeds out of the
mouth of God.

Secondly, that God can work strong matters with weak means. What a strong
violent matter is it, to pull the soul of any one sinner out of the bottom of
hell, and out of the jaws of destruction? yet this God does. But how does he
i^? This strong matter, how does he work it? By the weakest means that may
be. We have this treasure, says the Apostle, in earthen vessels, 2. Cor. 6. 7.
that the excellency of that power might be of God, and not of us. O marvelous
words, That the excellency of that power might be of God, and not of us. For
if Angels were sent to preach unto us, it might be thought, that the conversion
of sinners consisted in the excellency of the Angels ministry, not in the
power of Gods word. Now simple and sinful men, such as our selves are, no
better then earthen vessels, bringing such a ^reasure unto us, the excellency
of this work must needs be wholly ascribed to God. And as it is in spiritual
food, so it is in corporal. It is not the teacher, but the doctrine taught:
or rather not the doctrine barely taught neither, but the divine operation of
Gods spirit working with the word which co^uerteth the soul. And so it is not
the bread only, but the blessing of Gods grace upon the bread which sustaineth
our li^e. Thus God can work strong matters with weak means; and Man lives
no^ by bread only, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God.

Thirdly, that God can work some matters with no means. When King Asa saw
himself ouerpressed with the 2. Chr. 14. 11.
multitude of his enemies, he prayed thus to God: O Lord, it is all one with
thee, to save with many, or with no power. If he had said with many, or with a
small power, it would have been plain. But with many, or with no power, is
very wonderful. Or rather it is no wonder a^ all, seeing it is spoken of God,
with whom it is a very ordinary matter to save, not only as well with a
small or a weak power, as with a great or a strong power, but also as well with
no power, as with some power. It is a good carpenter, who ha^ing crooked and
roug^ timber put into his hands, can h^w it and make it fit for the building.
Only the creator of all it is which can work, having no matter at all to
work upon. The ordinary means for plants and herbs to grow by, is rai^e:
Yet God provided for Adam plants and herbs Genesis 2. 5.
(...) ever it had rain^d. The usual ^eanes for light is the sun. Howbeit
(...). ^. 3.
^od (...) light before he made the (...). Light the first day, the sun the
(...) day. We see then that God is ti^ to no means. God can save with no
(...), as well as with some power: God can gi^e us herbs with no rain, as well
(...) with some rain: God can give us light without any su^ne, as well as with
^he sun^e: God can feed us if it please him, as well with no bread as with
bread. Therefore God can work some mat^rs with no means; and so Man li^eth
not by bread only, but by every word that proceeds out of the mou^h of God.

Fourt^ly, that God can work others^me (...) wi^h contrari^ means. ^e c^n no^
only show us light with any s^nne, but also bring light out (...). Cor. ^ 6
of darkness. So our Savior, when ^e went about to cure him that was (...)
blind, tempred spittle and clay, (...). ^. ^.
(...) put it upon his ^yes. This plaster (...) more likely to put out his
eyes (...) sees* then to cure his eyes who is blind. Yet this is the power of
the word proceeding out of Gods mou^h. So the Prophet Elizeus, when
colloquintida 2. R^g. 4. 40.
was put into the pot, by casting in a little meal^ into it, made of rank
poison a wholesome brot^. So, when the Israelits wanted bread in the desert,
God sent them Manna from heaven; and Moses said unto them, This is the bread
^xod. 1^. 15.
which the Lord has given you to eat. Many things here were contrary to
nature. One thing especially, that the dew which made the manna, fell in the
morning, whereas other dew uses to fall in the evening, and ascend in the
morning. Therefore Moses putte^h Israel in mind of this strange miracle
afterward; God made thee hungry, and fed D^ut. ^. 3.
thee with Manna, says he, which ^hou knew not, neither did thy fathers
know it, that he might teach them that man lives not by bread only, but by
every word that proceeds ou^ of the mo^th of the Lord, does a man live.
Christ's answer then to the tempter is, as if he should have said; I want now
bread in the desert, as long ago the Israelites wanted it. But God by his word
provided for them. Therefor I need not incroach upon unlawful means, but
depe^ding still upon his providence, I shall ^euer want. For God can work great
matters with small means, strong matters with weak means, many matters with
no means, and some matters with contrary means. So that Man lives not by
bread only, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God.

And yet this is no doctrine of idleness and security neither. As we must not
by diffidence or distrust in God, use unlawful means: so we must not by
presuming upon God, neglect lavvfull means. That we be not too distrustful
we are sent to the lilly, and yet that we be not too negligent we are sent
to the ant. S. Paul knevve right well, neither (...). 27.
he nor any of his company should be cast away in that shipwreck: yet for
all that, he did not lay him down upon a pillovve and sleep, but he used all
good means for the safety of the compa^ie. He cast out the wheat and the
tackling of the ship: he loosed the rudder bands, and hoysed up the main sail.
And when the ship was splitted, he persuaded some by bords, and other by
other pieces of the ship to swim safe to land. The more to blame were they
The^ was a fire in Winsor to^ne.
yesternight, which when they might have done good, stood by still and loo^ed
on. As though it were a disparagement, or rather it were not a very
honorable part for any to help in a common danger? Or as though the fire
which was kindled by negligence, should have been extinguished with
negligence also. Yea rather the Lord did by this fire, chastise the negligence
of some, that he might stir up the diligence of all. No less blame vvorthie
was the whole town, which standing so near the royal presence of the
kings majesty and the Q^eenes majesty, yet was utterly unprovided of all
help in this case. No buckets, no hooks, no ladders, no axes, could be
gotten; no carpenters could be heard of, which might have done most good at
such a time. So that if the mighty and merciful word proceeding out of the
mouth of God, had not helped in necessity and time of need, suddenly caulming
and stilling the vvind, even at that very instant, which had been busy all
the day before, no question it had grown to a far greater damage and
danger. But I am ill advised to meddle with these things. I make no doubt but
order will be taken, though I hold my peace, that hereafter the ^ovvne for all
such casualties be better provided. Therefore here I end. God for his mercy
sake grant that neither by too much presuming confidence we may neglect the
lavvfull means, nor yet by too much distrusting diffidence we may use
unlawful means; but that depending upon thy providence O Lord, we may
diligently follow the works of our calling, and so continually receive a
blessing from thee, thorough Jesus Christ: to whom with the Father, and the
holy Ghost, be all praise, and glory, now and evermore. Amen.

FINIS.
A SERMON PREACHED AT HAMPTON Court before the Kings Majesty, the 23. day of
September. 1604.
2. Cor. 4. 17. The momentarie lightness of our affliction, works us a
surpassing exceeding eternal weight of glory.
SAint Peter foretells ^. (...). ^.
that some should pervert S. Paul's epistles to their own damnation. Such are
they of the church of Rome. Among other places of S. Paul's epistles, they do
notably p^ruert this. For out of that the Apostle says, Affliction works
glory; they endeavor to conclude, that the patience of the Saints, and other
their virtues, merit everlasting life. But first the word, To work, is very
general and signifies not only causes properly so named, but also any
antecedent, though it be but an adiunct or an accident. Again, the Apostles
words elsewhere are these. I suppose Romans 8. 1^.
that the afflictions of this life, are not worthy os the glory which shall be
revealed. Wherefore they might have done well, to choose some indifferet
construction which would have reconciled both these places together, rather
then to embrace such an exposition of the one, as does iustle, nay quite thrust
out the other. S. Bernard does thus, saying, that good wor^es, are not any ^.
cause meriting a kingdom, but only a way directing to a kingdom. For seeing
they are no cause, neither have any correspondence, or proportion in them in
respect of the glory to come, therefore the Apostle says, The afflictions of
this life are not worthy the glory that shall be reueiled. And yet again
because the possessing of our souls in patience, is a way directly tending to
the salvation both of our souls and bodies, therefore he says, The momentarie
^ightnesse of our affliction works us ^ surpassing exceeding eternal weight
of glory. To which our Savior subscribeth in these words, The gate is
straight, and the way narrow which leads unto life. This straightness
therefore and narrowness of affliction, is not a cause which deserves, but a
gate or a way, which leads unto life. So in an other place we have, that by
many tribulations we must enter into the kingdom of heaven. Not by many
tribulatio^s, no not by any tribulations, we must merit heaven, but by many
tribulations as by a gate or way, we must enter into the kingdom of heaven.
And in this sense S. Paul says, The momentarie lightness of our affliction
works us a surpassing exceeding eternal weight of glory.

But now though this sentence do not confirm any Popish error, yet it does
excellently comfort any distressed and afflicted. For it exhorts us to be
patient in all afflictions, and that for four reasons. The two first drawn
from the nature of our affliction, the two last from the nature of that glory,
which shall be the reward of our affliction. T^ first is, because our affliction
is momentarie: the second, because our affliction is light: the third, because
our glory shall be eternal, yea surpassing eternal* the fourth, because our
glory shall b^ weighty, exceeding weighty. And therefore he says, The
momentarie lightness of our affliction, works us a surpassing exceeding
eternal weight of glory.

Ineede not here make any apologi^ for my self, nor yet render any reason, why
I discourse of poverty, before the rich, of affliction before those that are
euere way slourishing. This point was ^.
cleared so reverently and so learnedly of late in this high presence, that I
am sure it must needs be yet well remembered. Certainly though ye have not
been afflicted heretofore, neither are at this time, yet being men, ye may be
hereafter. Wherefore it is no^ (...), that we all learn the doctrine of
patience in tribulation. Partly that we may be more thankful to God, i^
hitherto we have not been afflicted and plagued like other men: Partly that if
any time of affliction happen hereafter, as any grief, any loss, any
sickness, or such like, we may be prepared aforehand, and as it were armed with
patience to endure it. For the momentarie lightness of our affliction works
us a surpassing exceeding eternal weight of glory.

First, our affliction is momentarie. Well ^.
sai's Eucherius, Nothing is of great importance, which is of small
continuance. Now our whole life is very short. What ^.
is our life, says S. James? It is a vapor which for a time appears, but
anon after vanishes away. Therefore says the Prophet, O Lord, thou know my
Ps^. 56. ^.
life, as it is in the Sept^agint: but as it is in the Hebrewe, Thou know my
fli^ting. And theresore seeing our whole life is but a vapor, or a flitting,
certainly our afflictions which are all comprised within the compass of this
life, must needs be much more momentarie. All affliction, as the Apostle
writes, Heb. 12. 11.
for the present seems not to be joyous but grievous; but afterward it
brings forth the quiet fruits of righteousness to them that are exercised
thereby. He says not that affliction is, but that it seems to be. So that
affliction seems to be one thing, and is indeed an other. It seems to be
grievous, it is indeed joyous: it seems to be troblesome, it is indeed
comfortable: it seems to be long and tedious, it is indeed momentarie and
short. Even as God himself determines this matter; For a moment, says he, in
Esa. 54. 8.
mine anger, for a little season have I hid my face from you; but in
everlasting mercy will I turn unto you again. That we should not doubt of
this doctrine, he redoubles the promise, for a moment, for a little season.
Therefore the Princely Prophet says plainly. Heaviness may endure for a
night, but joy ^ (...). 30. 6.
comes in the morning. As the two Angels then that came to Lot log'd with him
for a night, and when they had dispach't their arrant, went away in Genesis 19 2.
the morning: so afflictions, which are the Angels or the messengers of God.
God sends afflictions to do an arrant unto us, to tell us, we sorget God, we
forget our selves, we are too proud, too self concei^ed, and such like, and
when they have said as they were bad, then presently they are gone. Whereupon
we read, that the spirit of life returned (...) ^1 11.
into the two witnesses which had been slain by the beast, after three days
and an half. Why after three days and an half? To teach us, that affliction
and persecution may perhaps tyranize over us three days and an half, but they
shall not fill up the whole four days. For the elects sake those Math. 24. 22.
days shall be shortened. Agreeably to that which John Baptist begun his
preaching with, Repent; for the kingdom Matthew. 3. 2.
of heaven is at hand. Repent, that is a matter of mortification and affliction
to the flesh. For the kindome of heaven is at hand, That Is a matter of comfort
and joy. So our Savior, Behold I come Revel. 22. 12.
quickly, and my reward with me: if Christ will come quickly, then affliction
will be gone quickly. Thus momentarie is our affliction: For our whole life is
short, much more then the afflictions of this life: affliction is grievous but
for the present: heaviness endures but for a night: persecution lasts but
three days and an half: the kingdom of heaven is at hand, theresore
deliverance is at hand: Christ will come quickly, therefore affliction will be
gone quickly. Wheresore seeing our affliction is so momentarie, let us be
patient in affliction: For the momentarie lightness of our affliction works
us a surpassing exceeding eternal weight of glory.

Secondly, our affliction is light. Almighty God setting forth his own
excellency, says, Who has measured the Es^. 40. 1^.
heavens with his span, and the waters with his fist? By the heavens are meant
the divine blessings of God; by the waters, afflictions and woes. Those he
measures with his span, which is a longer measure: these with his fist, which
is a shorter measure. So that the Lord is as I may say a rhetoritian, very
plentiful and copious in his blessings; he measures them with his spanne: but
he is a logitian, more short and sparing in his afflictions, these he measures
with his fist. For in the hand of the Lord there Psalm. 75. ^.
is a cup, the wine is read, and full mixed, he powers out of the same: as
for the dregs thereof, the wicked of the earth do drink them up. First, we
drink not this cup only full of red wine, that is, of the wrath and
indignation of God, but mixed with diverse comforts otherwise. Then besides we
meddle not with the dregs. Upon the ungodly he shall rain snares, sire and
brimstone, storm, and tempest, this shall be their portion to drink. We
drink only a little of the uppermost. And therefore he says, God powers out
of the same. That after we have suffered a modicum, as S. Peter speaks, we
may 1. Pat. 5. 10.
then enter into glory. According to king David his prayer, Comfort us, O
Lord, now for the time wherein thou have afflicted us, and for the days wherein
we have seen evil. Hierome notes that having first said wherein thou have
afflicted us; he expounds it after by these words, wherein we have seen evil.
(...) 15.
Therefore that which Acteon wished, ^
that he might see only his hounds hunting, and not feel it, that happens
indeed to us. Our affliction is, not a feeling of evil near at hand, but
only a feeling of it a far off. As the Persian Kings children in their
minority, if they had committed a fault, were not corrected themselves, but
only saw some of meaner birth chastised before them: so God teaches us to
take heed, rather by other men's, then by our own harms. And look how Abraham
laid nothing but wood upon his son Isaac, carrying the knife and the fire
himself: after the some sort deals our heavenly father with us. He lays
upon us wood without ^ knife. The Physician (...), that is the best exercise
which is ad ruborem, non ad sudorem, refreshing the spirits and stirring up the
blood a little, but not putting a man into any great sweat. But the divine may
say, that is the best affliction, which is ad sudorem, non ad sanguinem.
Therefore God lays upon us wood ad sudorem, to make us sweat, In the sweat of
thy brows Genesis 3. 19.
shall thou eat thy bread; not a knife ad sanguinem, to make us bleed, Ye have
Heb. 12. 4.
not yet resisted unto blood. God lays upon us wood without fire. Now wood
without fire, is not greatly dangerous. Or say he lay upon us both wood and
fire: yet the voice of the Lord deuideth the flame of fire. For in the flame of
fire naturally there is heat and light. But notwithstanding, the omnipotent
voice of the Lord divides these, one from the other. As the cursed in hell
show, and the elect upon earth. I am tormented in this flame, says Dives.
There Is heat, but no light. Contrariwise the three children in the furnace
shined as Angels for light, but were so far from heat, that no one hair of
their head, or of their apparel perished. When Moses saw a bush burning and
not consumed, he said, I will go, and see this great vision. A great vision
indeed. There was a flame of fire. Else how was the bush burning? There was
light. Else how did Moses see it? There was no hear. Else how was not the bush
consumed? (...) 3. ^
Yet in every faithful one afflicted you may see this great vision. The voice
of the Lord in his affliction, as in the (...) 11.
flame of fire, divides the heat from the light. So that he is not consumed by
the heat, (nay rather his infirmities and carnal concupiscences are consumed
thereby) but only illuminated by the light. According to that, Only vexation
gives understanding. And in an other place, Light is sprung up to the
righteous, and joy to them that are true of heart. Thus ye see how tenderly our
dear father deals with us. He lays either no fire at all upon us, or else
no burning fire for heat, but only a blasing fire for light. To make short.
Many hands (as we say) make light work. Now we have many comparteners and
fellows which make the labor of our affliction light. First, all creatures
sigh and groan with us; Then, (...) ^ 1^.
all the faithful bear one an others (...) ^.
burdens, and so fulfill the law of God. Thirdly, the good angels have a
(...). ^1. ^1.
ch^ge given them of us, that we hurt not our foot at any time against a stone.
Next, God the father bids us cast Psalm. 55. 23.
our burden upon him, and promises to nourish us. Fifthly, the holy Ghost Romans
8. 2^.
helps our infirmities, and helps them even when we are ready to be
oppressed by them. Lastly, God the Mat^. 11. ^0.
son sets to his hand likewise, and says, Come unto me all ye that
labor and are heavy laden, and I will resresh you: take my yoke upon you;
for my yoke is easy, and my burden is light. As is he should have said, To
draw in the yoke without me, would be a hard matter; and to bear the burden
without me, would be above your strength: but if you come to me, if you draw
and bear with me, I will refresh you; For my yoke is easy, and my burden is
light. Thus light is our affliction. For God measures to us the water with his
fist, which is the shorter measure: he causes us to drink of the cup no
otherwise but as it is mixed with many comforts: he makes us not swallow up the
lees of it, but only a little modicum of the uppermost: he lays affliction
upon us, which is rather a seeing, then a feeling of evil: he lays wood upon
us to exercise us, but neither a knife to cut us, nor yet fire to burn us.
Lastly, we have many fellows in our affliction which make it light. All
creatures: all the faithful: all the good angels: God the father: God the holy
Ghost: God the Son, who says, My yoke is easy, and my burden is light.
Wherefore seeing our affliction is so many ways light, we must be patient in
all affliction; For the momentarie lightness of our affliction works us a
surpassing exceeding eternal weight of glory.

Thirdly, our glory is eternal, yea surpassing eternal. The glory we look
for, is called a kingdom. Of which the princely Prophet says thus; Thy
kingdom Psalm. 145. 13.
is an everlasting kingdom, and thy dominion endures throughout all ages.
Whereupon Origin notes, that ^.
as there is a holy, and a holy of holies; as a saboth, and a saboth of
saboths; as a heaven, and a heaven of heavens; as a song, and a song of songs:
so there is an age, and an age of ages. And again, as that which is not only
a holy, but also a holy of holies, is the holiest place of all; as that which
is not only a saboth, but also a saboth of saboths, is the perfectest rest of
all; as that which is not only a heaven, but also a heaven of heavens, is the
highest heaven of all; as that which is not only a song, but also a song of
songs, is the excellentest song of all: so that which is not only an age, but
also an age of ages, and especially, as the Psalmist speaks, an age of all
ages, is the most infinite eternity of all. Which seeing it is attributed to
the kingdom of Christ, being likewise the kingdom of all true Christians, it
follows that our glory is surpassing eternal. Whereupon Prosper notes, De
promiss^ and (...).
that that which Virgil writes of Augustus Caesar, He has given us an Empire
Imperium sine sine ded^t.
without end; may much more fitly be applied to Christ. For though Augustus
reigned very long, above fifty years, yet at length his government as all
other earthly kingdoms, was determined. But of our heavenly king only the
angel Gabriel said most truly, Of his kingdom there shall be no end. Luk 1.
53.
Now this glory is as well called a crown, as a kingdom. And this crown, as
S. Peter says, is vndefield, ^. Pet. 1. 14.
which never fades away. The Greek (...).
words which S. Peter uses, are Latin words also: and they are not only
appellatiues, being the epithites of this crown, but also propers, the one
the proper name of a stone, the other of a flower. For Isidore writes there is
a precious ^.
stone called Aniantus, which though it be never so much soyled, yet it can
never at all be blemished. And being cast into the fire, it is taken out*
still more bright and clean. Also Clemens ^.
writes, that there is a flower called A^rantus, which being a long time hung
up in the house, yet still is fresh and green. To both which, the stone and
the flower, the Apostle, as I am verily persuaded, alludeth in this place. As
if he should have said, The crown which ye shall receive, shall be studded
with the stone Amiantus, which cannot be defiled; and it shall be garnished
with the flower Amarantus, which always is fresh and never fades away: ye
shall receive a crown undefiled, and that never fades away. Which, as Beda
notes, was insinuated in the crown round about the Arc of the Testament. For
in a circle there is neither beginning nor ending. Or rather every where there
is a beginning, every where an ending; and so no where any beginning or ending.
To show that the patient also shall have a crown set upon their head per
circuitu^, running round in a circle and never coming to any end of eternity.
Well, our glory is called also a treasure. Three kind of treasures there are.
A treasure in hell: a treasure in earth: a treasure in heaven. That in hell is
a treasure of torments* that in earth is a treasure of snow: that in heaven,
is a treasure of eternity. For the first, S. James says; Go to now you rich
men, weep and ^.
howl for the miseries that shall come upon you: your riches are corrupt, and
your garments are moth-eaten: your gold and silver is cankred, and the rust of
them shall be a witness against you, and shall eat your flesh as it were fire:
Ye have heaped up treasure for the last days. Here Is a treasure in hell. Which
to be a treasure of torments the Apostle proves, saying, Thou after thy Romans
2. 5.
hardness, and heart that cannot repent, treasurest unto thy self wrath
against the day of wrath. A treasure of wrath and of torments. ^ro^ which God
for the dear blood of his son sake deliver us every one. The second, is a
treasure in earth. O^ which our Savior says; Lay not up treasures for your
(...). 6. 1^.
selves upon earth, where the moath and canker corrupt, and where the eues dig
thorough and steal. And this is a treasure of snow. For S. Gregory upon
those words of Job; Who enters into ^.
the treasures of snow; shows that earthly treasures are treasures of snow.
You see little children what pains they take t^ ^ake and scrape snow together
to make a snowe-ball: right so, they that scrape together the treasure of this
world, have but a snowe-ball of it; as soon as the sun shines, and God
breaths upon it, and so enters into it, by and by it comes to nothing. The
third, is a treasure in heaven. Concerning which our Savior says, Lay Man.
10. ^1.
up for your selves treasures in heaven, where are bags that never wax old.
Now this is a treasure of eternity. And therefore the Christians of the
primitive Church, suffered with joy the spoiling of their goods, knowing that
they H^b. 10. 24
had in heaven a better, and a more enduring substance. They contemned all
treasures of snow in respect of this substance. For they have no substance,
neither are simply good, though they be called goods, but melt away as snow:
this is a better, and a more enduring substance; yea a most enduring, a
surpassing eternal weight of glory. Thus ye see how eternal our glo^ie is.
It is a kingdom: a crown: a treasure. And this kingdom is an everlasting
kingdom: this crown is an incorruptible crown: this treasure is an eternal
treasure. And therefore seeing our glory is so surpassing eternal, we must be
patient in all affliction. For the momentarie lightness of our affliction
works us surpassing exceeding ^ernall weight of glory.

Fourthly, our glory is weighty, yea exceeding weighty. ^he glory to come,
by some resemblances is showed to be eternal, by other to be weighty. First,
to this purpose it is compared to wine. Touching which our Savior says,
Herea^r will I not drink with (...). 14. (...).
you of the fr^ite of the vine, till I drink it nevve with you in my fathers
kingdom. Now how weighty this wine shall be, appears in that the spies
bringing clusters of grapes out of Ca^, (...) them upon a poal^ on their (...).
13. 2^.
(...). To show, in the celestial (...) glory there shall be. So when (...)
Lord turned water (...) wine, h^ ^ommanded to ^ll the vessels to the (...).
These vessels top^ll Io^. ^ ^.
of wine do signify at the marriage o^ the Lamb, that ^e (...) shall h^ a ^ll
reward: pressed down, sh^ken 2. Ioh. ^.
together, r^g over. So that every one of them may say, M^ cup does (...).
(...).
ouerflowe. Again, (...) glory is com^d to a penny. Now in a penny we consider
four things. The image: the superscription: the sound: the weight: So our
Savior when they showed him a penny, a^ked whose image and superscription it
was. First then for the image, Christ shall change our vile bodies, Philip. 3.
2^
that they may be like the glorious body of his son: that as we have borne
the image of the earthly, so we may bear the image of the heavenly. For the
superscriptio^ our Savior says, To him that overcomes will I give a R^l. 1
17.
white stone, and in it a name written, which no man knows but he that
receives it. As a Prince seeing his name upon a piece of coin, knows it is
of his own mint: so every patient Christian seeing his own name in this white
stone, which is a token of honor, knows it properly belongs to himself.
For the sound, the Psalmist says, Blessed are they that dwell in thy house,
they shall always praise thee. This shall be the sound of the penny
continually, the praise of God. As the four and twenty elders, never ceased
day, nor night, to sing, Holy, holy, holy* to (...) ^* ^
him that is, and was, and is to come. Fourthly, for the weight, the shekel of
the Sanctuary was twice as weighty as the common shekel: in like m^ner our
glory shall be as the shekel of the Sanctuary exceeding massy and weighty.
But what speak I of wine? What of a penny? God himself shall be our glory.
According to that; Thou art my glory Psalm. 3. 3.
and the lifter up of my head. As if he should have s^id, as^liction would make
me cast down my cou^ance, and hold down my head like a bulrush: but the
rem^brance of this that thou art my glory, (...) me li^t up my head. So s^i's
God to Abraham; F^re not Abraham, I am thy bu^ler, and thy exceeding (...).
(...). ^.
g^at reward. I am thy bu^kler to l^ch the blows which affliction (...) lay
upon thee: and thy ex^ding ^reat (...)* blessing thee with ex^eeding weighty
glory. For they that shall enjoy this glory, shall see God. Agreeably to that
of our Lord; Blessed are the pure in s^irit for they shall see (...). ^ ^.
God. And how shall they see God? Not st^nding behind the lattisse, or looking
out of a window, that is darkly and obscurely, 1. Cor. 1^. 12.
but face to face, talking with him familiarly as one friend does to an other.
O joy above all joys! O glory that passes all understanding! when we see the
amiable and gracious countenance of our Lord reconciled to us by Christ.
Do^btles if the Queen of Saba thought her self happy, for hearing the
wisdom of Solomon, and seeing the riches of his house, and the order of his
servants: then much more shall we be happy, when we shall see the glory and
hear the wisdom of the Father, not as the preachers show it out of ^he
word, but as our own ^ies shall behold it in heaven. O how blessed shall we
think our selves then, that by any pains, by any afflictions we have at
length attained to such weighty glory. For this glory is wine running over;
is a penny weighty according to the shekel of the Sanctuary; is the blessed
sight and fruition of God himself. Wherefore considering how weighty our
glory is, we must be patient in all a^liction. For the momentarie lightness of
our affliction, works us a surpassing exceeding eternal weight of glory.

Compare then the affliction on the one side, with the glory on the other
side: the shortness of the affliction, with the eternity of the glory: the
lightness of the affliction, with the waightinesse of the glory. And then be
content for an eternal glory to suffer momentarie affliction: for weighty
glory to suffer light affliction. The Stoickes, if their grief were either
momentary or light, cared for no more. For if it were short, they cared not how
heavy it were: again, if it were light, they cared not how long it were. Our
affliction is both momentarie and light. One help was sufficient for them: we
have two for failing. A stark shame therefore it would be for us, if heathen
and pagans, having fewer means then we have, should show greater patience
then we show. But the Scriptures affoard us yet more forceable inducements.
Jacob being in love with Rachell, served for her first seven years, and
afterward seven years more, in all fourteen; and these many years seemed to
him but a few days. O dear Lord, that we had thy grace to love thy eternal
weighty glory, but as well as many a man has done a mortal earthly
crea^ure. Then n^ doubt many years of affliction would seem to us but a few
days: heavy burdens of affliction would seem to us very sweet and light.
Christ Jesus for the joy that was se^ before him, endured the cross, and
despised the sh^me, and now (...) a^ the right hand of the throne of God.
Questionles, beloved, the cross of Christ was tedious and long; the shame that
he suffered was heavy and intolerable* Yet this cross seemed but momentarie
to him, and this sh^me seemed but light unto him, in comparison of the joy that
was set before him, and of the eternal weighty glory which he ha^h now
attained, sitting at the right hand of the throne o^ God. To the which pl^ce of
honor and worship, we beseech thee, O loving Lord, to bring us, a^er all the
afflictions of this wretched world; not for our own deserts or merits, but for
the merit of that cross which Christ endured, of that shame which Christ
despised. To whom, for his cross, be all praise, ^or his shame, be all glory;
together with the ^ather, and the holy Ghost, now and e^rmore, Amen.

FINIS.
A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE* THE King^ Majesty lying at the Lord SAY^ house,
called Broughton, besides B^c, the 2. day of (...). 1604.
Romans 8. 31. If God b^ with v^, who can b^ against v^?
T^ese words (...) a most (...) and triumphant conclusion arising o^ of the
^ormer discourse. For the A postle having be^re prooue^, that man is justified
only by the s^e grace and mer^ie of Christ (...) any merit and desert of go^
works, at length concludes in the beginning of this chapter, Therefore there
is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Ies^s: and so likewise here, If
God be with us, who can be against us?

Maximilian the Emperor so admired (...) Ci^ in (...).
this sentence, that he caused it to be set in lette^ of checker work upon a
table at which he used to dine and suppe, that having it so often in his eye,
he might always have it in mind also: si Deus pro nobis, quis contra nos? If
God be with us, who can be against us?

The truth of it is so apparent, that it has been made a common wat^hword,
not of Chris^ns only, but even of heathenish soldiers. Our word is Immanuel,
that ^s, by interpretation, (...) 8. 3.
God with us. And some of the a^ent Romans used likewise i. their wars this
watchword, Nobiscum D^, (...) l. 3. ^ ^.
God with us. ^or indeed, if we be of the college and society of Immanuel,
and if God be on our side, we shall be sure to prevail. If God be with us, who
can be against us?

(...) says well according to the Scripture, Our God is above all (...).
Gods. And so likewise Cyrill, The (...).
power of our God is above all power. Therefore, if that power be on our side
(...). (...). (...).
which is above all power, and that God which is above all gods, nothing can
hurt us; If God be with us, who can be against us?

S. Austi^ shew^th out of the verse (...) Apo^li. ^r. 16.
immediately going before, that four especial ways God is with us. God is
D^s pro (...) no^.
with us, in that he has predestined us: God is with us, in that he has
called us: God is with us, in that he has justified us: God is with us, in
that he has glorified us. Innocentius the t^ird, shows out of the words
consequently In (...). Apo^. ^m. 2.
following aster, that four special enemies are against us. The inferior
enemy Ho^ ^tra nos ^rior homo.
against us, is man: the exterior enemy against us, is the world. the
interior enemy against us, is the flesh: the superior ^emie against us, is
the devil. So that whereas the Apostle s^i's here, If God be with us, who can
be against us? It is all one, as if he should have said; If God have
predestined v^, what can man do against us? If God have called us, what can
the world do against us? If God have justified us, what can the flesh do
against us? If God have glorified us, what can the devil do against us? If
God be with us, who can be against us?

The first enemy against us, is man. Homo homini lupus. And an other (...)
says, Either a god or a devil. ^.
^or to say nothing, that no time is sreeed, no place privileged, no degree
secured, no torment unpracticed, only thi^ I will touch, that no age is
exemp^ed. But the cruelti^ of man rages, not ^y upon ^e old after they a^e
buried, but also upon the young before they are b^e. Thus says the Lord, ^or
(...). ^. 1.
^ree transgressions and for for, I will ^ot turn unto Moab, because they
dug up the bones of the king of ^dom, and burnt them to li^. The king of
Edom was a wicked man, yet God de^sted so thi^ unnatural and (...) c^uelty
o^ the Moabits ^ard the dead, that for this especially he would not be
reconciled to them. The like (...) have not wanted in o^r la^d, and almost in
our time. Tr^cie two years, and Wickliffe two and forty years after he was
buried, was dug up. So even of late they used Martin Bucer and Paulus
Phagius in Cambridge, and Peter Martyrs wife in Oxford. Such cruel men, if
they had as great power over these holy Martyrs souls, as they had over their
bodies, doubtless they would have pulled them out of heaven. For as long as they
had a finger, or a foot, or a bone, or a piece of a bone in the gra^e, they
never left mining and digging, till they had rooted it out. So that at the
least wise we may say of them with the Psalmist, The dead bodies of thy
servants, O Psalm. 7^. ^.
Lord, have they given to be meat to the fowls of the air, and the flesh of
thy Saints to the beasts of the field. Now the cruelty of man against man, as
it ends not, when life ends: so it begins before life begins. For not
only Esa^ that cruel and cursed reprobate, strugled and wrastled with his
brother Jacob in their mothers womb: but also the Ammonites ripped up the women
of Gilead being gre^ A^. 1. 13.
with child, and the Babylonians cause^ La^. 2. ^0.
the women of Jerusalem to ^ate their own fruit, and their children of a spa^
long. And not long ago in the Isle o^ Garnsey, when a faithful women, (whos^
(...) M^.
^ame need not hear to be rehearsed while she was burning at the stake, wa^
delivered of a goodly man-child, some were so hard-hearted, to fling him bac^
again into the fire, there to be murthe^ red, as they mean^ it, but indeed
ma^tyred with his mother. O blessed babe Because there is no room for him
(...) ^he inn, as soon as he is borne, he is laid in a manger. Nay, because
there is no room for him in an^ one corner of all the world, by and b^ he is
baptized with the holy Ghost an^ with fire. O blessed, I say again, blesse^
babe! Before thou art lapped in swadli^g clothes, thou art crowned wi^
^tyrdome: and before thou fully br^thest in the breath of life, thou happen
^est out thine innocent soul to God. But fie upon such beastly and cruel
murders. Out upon such deuilli^ and fiendish tormentors. These Saints? ^ese
Catholics? who are Scythians, if ^ese be Saints? who are Canibals, if ^ese be
Catholics? which holding it as ^n article of their faith, that all children
^ying without baptism, are damned, ^et wittingly did put this innocent ^hild
to death before he was baptized. and theresore as they made the mo^er suffer
the most intolerable ^aines ^f childbirth and martyrdom both to^ether: so, as
they verily thought and ^eleeued, they slung the infant also ^odie and soul
into an earthly fire, and ^to hell fire all at once. This is the ^rueltie of
man. He would, if he could, ^ull some out of heaven after they are ^uried, and
thrust some into hell before ^hey are borne.

But God has predestined us. And (...). ^ 4.
^ot only before we were borne, but al^o before the world was created, has
^hosen us in Christ. Even as Christ shall ^ay at the last day, Come ye blessed
of (...). ^5. (...).
^y father, inherit the kingdom of heaven prepared for you before the
foun^ations of the world. For look how careful parents provide for their
children, (...) in 2. (...). c. 1. (...) se^laria.
and put them in their will before they are borne: so God gives us the grace to
live with him, before he give A^or.
us time to live ^ere. Even as the Son Dona (...).
says, Fe^re not, little flock: for it is you^ fathers will to give you a
kingdom. And the father ^imselfe, I, eue^ I am h^ that comsort you: who art
thou the^ that searest a mortal man, who fades away as grass? Therefore
every couragio^s Christian may comfort his hea^ in God, and say with the
princely Prophet, The Lord is my light, and my salvation, whom then shall I
fear? the Lord is the strength o^ my life, of who^ then shall I be afraid?
when the wicked eu^ mine enemies and my foes, com^ upon me to eat up my flesh,
they stu^ble^ and s^ll. T^ough an host of men we^ (...) me, yet shall not my
hea^ be afraid, and though there rose (...) war (...) me, yet will I put my
tru^ i^ ^im. I will ^ot be afraid of ten thous^ of the people, that have set
themsel^ (...) me round about. Ye^ (...) I (...) through the valley of ^he
shadow of death, yet will I fear^ no ^uill: for thou, O Lord, art with me, thy
^od and thy staff they comfort me. So that I may boldly say, The Lord is my
^elper, neither will I sear what man can do unto me. The Lord of hosts is
with us, the God of Jacob is our refuge. And if the Lord of hosts have
predesti^ated us unto life, what can man do ag^st us? what before we live?
what while we live? what after we live? If God be with us, who can be against
us?

The second e^emie against us is ^he world. Which ass^ileth us as well ^y
adversity, (...) by prosperity. What is the world, says S. Ambrose, but a
race or (...) ^st (...), (...) pl^ (...)*
a course full of trialls and troubles? It is a fi^ld, wherein is little corn,
but much cockle. It i^ a garden, wherein are few roses, but many thorns. Yet
these thorns of adversity do not so much ^.
oftentimes (...) us, as the baits of prosperity. The world is more
dangerous, says S. Austin, when it slattereth, then when it threatens: and is
more to be feared, when it allureth v^ t^ love it, then when it enforces us to
contemn it. For even as Judas by a kiss betrayed his master: so the world is
a very Judas. It means most falsely, when it imbraceth most friendly.
Wherefore the Apostle says thus of Demas; Demas has forsaken us, and embraced
this present world. So that the immoderate embracing of this world, is a flat
forsaking o^ Christ and his gospel. Unskillful swimmers, when they begin to
sink, if they catch hold of weeds in the bottom, the faster they hold, the
surer they are ^.
drowned: and in like sort they that shake hands with the world, and embrace
the pleasures and prosperity thereof most greedily, plung themselves most
deeply into destruction.

But God has called us. And therefore neither adversity nor prosperiti^ can
hurt us. Marvel not says our Savior, though the world hate you. It hate^ me
before it hated you. If you were of the world, the world would love you, but
because you are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world,
therefore does the world hate you. Well, as the world hates us: so we must
hate it again. As it contemns us, so we must contemn it again. According
to that of S. Paul, The world is crucified to me, and I unto the world. I am
crucified to the world, that is, The world contemnes me: the world is crucified
to me, that is, I contemn the world. The world contemnes me, and I contemn
it. For as Gregory says, He Moral. ser. 10 c. 12.
that has nothing that he loves in the Qui nil habet in mundo quod ap^etat,
nihil est quod de (...).
world, has nothing to fear of the world. And Cyprian, What need he to fear
of the world, who has God his protector, his tutor, his defendour in Cyprian.
Qui, ci d^ seculo metus est, c^i in seculo d^us tutor (...)
the world? He that is of God, overcomes the world. And this is our victory
whereby we overcome the world, even our ^aith. Whereupon our Savior says, Be
of good comfort, I have overcome the world: and behold I am with you even unto
the end of the world. So that the world, and the trouble we shall have in the
world, shall have an end: but the comfort we have in God, shall have no end.
Behold, I am with you, says he. And if God be with us, and have called us out
of the world, what can the world do against us? If God be with us, who can be
against us?

The third enemy against us, is the flesh. Solomon says this is one thing
Proverb. ^0. 22.
which makes the earth even tremble, when a servant begins to bear rule.
The flesh is, and ought to be a servant. Yet it bears rule in the
unregenerate. Yea it strives to bear rule, and begins to bear rule, even
in the godly. A man's enemies are they of his own house. It is mine own
familiar friend, that lists up his heel against me. This familiar friend was
Paul much troubled withal, when he said; I see an other law in my members,
rebelling against my (...). 7.
mind, and leading me captive unto death. And Lot, who being a just man, that
could not be overcome with all the sins of Sodom, by immoderate drinking of
wine fell to ^llie. And Sampson, who otherwise impregnable, yet yielded to
Dalila. Therefore in the bosom it lies, which strives to lay our honor in
the dust.

But God has justified us. And having justified us, in some measure also has
begun to sanctisie us. So that the flesh lusts against the spirit, and the
spirit against the flesh, in so much as we cannot do as we would. Not only
the flesh against the spirit, but also the spirit against the flesh. So that we
cannot do as we would. For if we would serve god so holily as the angels, we
can not, because the flesh lusts against the spirit: again, if we would
sin with full consent of will so brutishly as the wicked do, we cannot,
because the spirit lusts against the flesh. But even as Castor and Pollux
live by turns, one one day, an other an other: so the flesh and the spirit
prevailing, sometimes one, sometimes an other, make mixed actions. So that
neither can our good actions justify us, because in them the flesh lusts
against the spirit: nor yet can our ill actions condemn us, because in the^
the spirit lusts against the slesh. For now that Sara is mortified, her womb
is dead, and it cease to be with her after the manner of women. Now that
Jacob has wrestled with God, his thigh is shrunk up. Now that Paul is
converted, he chastises his body, and brings it into subjection. Now that
the blessed virgin is freely beloved, she keeps her self within, and knows
no man. And therefore sa^ the Angel, Hail Mary freely beloved, the Lord is
with thee. But the blessed Virgin fearing, the Angel added; Fear not Mary, for
thou have found favor with God. As if he should have said; Fear not the angel
of the Lord, seeing the Lord of the angel is with thee. Thou have found favor
with God, to have the fruit of thy slesh, the savior of thy foul. So that if
God have a favor unto us, and have justified us in Christ, what can the flesh
do against us? The spirit will not let it do as it would. For If God be with
us, who can be against us?

The fourth enemy against us is the devil. And he is the worst enemy of al^
Therefore sai's the Apostle, we hau^ not to fight with flesh and blood, but
with principalities and powers, and with the Prince of darkness that rules
in the aver. This Prince vvarreth against ^s two ways. By persecutions, and
per^vvasions. For the first, he is described ^n the Revelation to ride upon a
black and a red horse. The blackness of the horse snevveth how terrible
the devil is, the reddenesse, how bloody. Neither does he come single, but
seven of (...) 8. ^.
them at once possess Mary Magdalen. Neither do they only sight against us
being alive, but the devil fought with Michael th'arkeangel for the body
(...) ^.
of Moses when he was dead. Neither do they terribly set upon us to get our
bodies only, but our souls also. Especialy, they do this at the day of death,
and will do more diligently at the day of judgment. Now their persuasions
are yet more dangerous then their threatenings. When they come to us in the
shape not of an unclean spirit, but of an angel of light. Thus Satan did set
upon the first Adam, Has God indeed Genesis 3.
commanded you not to eat of the tree? He makes a question of it. And; if ye
eat, you shall be as Gods knovving good and evil. A fair promise, but a
contrary performance. So he did set upon the (...). ^.
second Adam; All these things will ^ give thee, if thou vvilt fall down and
worship me. He would hire Christ, and give him good vvagesto serve him*
which would have deprived our Savior of all his eternal glory.

But God has glorisied us. It is not now to be doubted whether Satan shall
prevail against us or not, but it is most sure he shall not. He has glorified
us. says S. Paul. Though the possession of it be to come, yet the assurance of
it is past. Even as our Lord avouches is an other place, He that believes in
me, has passed from death to life. Not shall pass, but has passed. So S.
Paul, He has made us to sit with himself in heavenly places above. No^ he
will make, but he has. Therefore Chrysostom writes very resolutely. Only
in one point I am proud, and very (...)
proud, namely in renouncing, an^ denying the devil. He is indeed a strong
man. But yet a stronger then he has thrust him out, and spoiled him of all his
goods. He is a roaring lion. But the lion of the tribe of Iud^ has overcome
him. He is an old serpent, almost of six thousand years standing and
experience. But Christ the new serpent, prefigured in the brazen serpent, has
bin too cunning for him. Therefore though he seek to winnovv Peter as corn is
sifted, yet no danger; Christ has praised for Peter, that his faith should
not fail. Where by the way, we may mark the difference betvveen Christ and
the tempter. Christ has his fan in his hand, and fanneth us; the tempter
has his sieve in his hand, and sifteth us. Now a fan casts out the vvorst,
and keeps in the best: a sieve keeps in the vvorst, and casts out the
best. Right so Christ in his trialls purges chafe and corruption out of us,
nourishes and increases his graces in us. Contrariwise the devil, is there
be any ilthing in us, that he confirms, if faith or any good thing else, that
he weakneth. But Christ has prayed for us, yea does still at the right hand of
the father make intercession and request for us, that our faith should not
sail. So that all Satan's power, yea the gates of hell shall never prevail
against us. In like manner S. Paul being buffeted by the angel of Satan,
prayed that he might be delivered. The answer of God was, My grace is
sufficient for thee. Whether Satan busset us, or not buffet us, still the grace
of God shall suffice us. Much more his glory, who has glorified us. For God
does give both grace and glory, and no good thing will he withhold from the^
that live a godly li^e. Therefore every child of God may triumph with Job, ^.
saying, Stand thou beside me, and let any man's hand fight against me. For if
God be on our side, what can the devil do against us? if God be with us who
can be against us?

N^ianzen makes a good conclusion, This only is a fearful thing to fear any
thing more then God. Fear God, (...)
and sear nothing else: fear no^ God, and fear every thing. For in the fear
of the Lord is the confidence of courage. Because sai's Gregory, he that in a ^
chaste and fili^ll fear, is subjected to God, by a hopesull kind of boldness
is above all save God. But he that fears not the Lord may be annoyed by any
thing. Mice were too strong for the Philistims, and lice for the Egyptians. So
that if God be against us, who can be with us? But if God be with us, who can
be against us? Now certainly God is with us. Do you doubt of this? Then
consider how that all great Potentates os the world, who of late were some of
them scarce our good friends, do now earnestly desire to be made partakers of
our peace. What do I speak of men? The very heaven, and the elements, and
this so seasonable harvest, such as A^. (...).
has not been known, if one may take any guess by these outward things, do
plainly declare that God is now with us, and purposes to power out his
blessings and benefits most abundantly upon us. Nothing then remains, but
that as God is with us, so we labor to be with God. And as S. Peter
admonishes us, make our election sure by faith and good works, living
soberly, uprightly, and godlily in this present world. That so we may fear no
cruelty of man, no misery of the world, no entisements of the flesh, no
terrors of the devil, but in all these things may be more then conquerours,
assuring our selves, that if God be with us, nothing can be against us. Which
that it may be so, God grant for Jesus Christ's sake, to whom with the Father,
and the holy Ghost, be all honor and glory, now and evermore, Amen.

Blessed are they that hear the word of God, and keep it.

The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the fellowship of
the Holy ghost, be with us, that nothing may be against us, this day and
evermore, Amen.

FINIS.
A SERMON PREACHED AT THE Court at Whitehall. March 10. 1598.
John 20. 27. After said he to Thomas, Put thy finger here, and see my hands,
and put forth thy hand, and put it into my side, and be not faithless, but
faithful.
Our blessed Savior Jesus Christ has his wounds yet to be seen in his body
for four causes. First, to approve his resurrection: secondly, to appease his
father: thirdly, to confound his enemies: fourthly, to comfort his friends.
After, said he to Thomas, Put thy finger here, and see my hands, and put forth
thy hand, and put it into my side, and be not faithless, but faithful.

The first cause, why Christ has his wounds yet to be seen in his body, is
to approve his resurrection. When Jacobs children told him, saying, Joseph is
yet alive, his heart failed, and he believed them not, but as soon as he saw
the chariots, which were sent for him, by and by his spirit reuined, and he
said, I have enough, Joseph my son is yet Genesis 45 28.
alive. In like manner, when the dis^iples said to Thomas, we have seen the
Lord, he believed them not; but now that he beholds Christ's glorious wounds,
the triumphant tokens o^ his victory, and the chariots, as I may say, whereby
we are with Elias carried up into heaven, he confesses indeed that Christ is
risen again; and that the true Joseph is ye^ alive. Even as Anna seeing that
spaniell coming homeward, which (...). (...).
went forth with her son at the first, knew certainly that her son Tobias
himself was not far off, but followed immediately after: so Thomas, seeing
those wounds in Christ which accom^anied him to his grave, knew assuredly that
no other body was risen again, but only the very self same body of Christ,
which was buried. S. Peter, being brought out of prison by an Angel, went forth
with to the house of Marie, where kno^king and calling to get in, a Act. 12. 14.
maiden named Rhode, before ever she saw him, knew him by his voice. And
although they that were within told her she wist not what she said, yet she
still constantly affirmed it was none other but he. Christ's rising out of the
grave was as strange, as Peter's deliverance out of prison: the rovvling away
of the stone as strange, as the opening of the iron gate. And albeit Thomas
was not so forvvard as Rhode to know Christ by his voice, when he said,
Peace be unto you, yet as soon as Christ took him by the hand, and shevv*d
him his side, he made no more doubts, but presently believed. For if Protogenes
(...). (...). 35. (...) 10.
seeing but a little line drawn in a table, knew straightwaies it was Apelles
doing whom he had never seen: how much more easily then might Thomas know
Christ, seeing not only one line, but very many lines, yea whole pictures of
his passion, and of his resurrection, in his head, in his hands, in his side,
in his ^eete? When king Arthurs (...). (...).
body was taken up somewhat more then six hundred years after his death, it
was known to be his, by nothing so much, as by the prints of ten several
wounds which appeared in his skull. Christ our king, who did overcome death,
could likewise, if it had pleased him, have quite and clean defaced and
abolished all the marks of death. Nevertheless as at his transfiguration he
showed Peter, James, and John, the signs of immortality in his body, which was
then mortal: so here contrariwise at his resurrection, he shows Thomas the
signs of mortality in his body, which is now immortal. That he and all we
might undoubtedly con^sse, that though they perhaps might be deceived in King
Arthurs body, yet we can never be deceived, so long as we believe, that the
very same body of Christ, which in Golgotha the place of dead men's skuls was
wounded from top to toe, and put to death for us, is now risen again from death
to life. Even as king Alexanders (...). l. (...). (...).
stagges were known a hundred years together by those golden collars which by
the kings commandment were put about their necks: so, much more might Thomas
know Christ by his wounds, which were as a comely ornament to his head, and as
chains unto his neck, we also when we preach the resurrection of Christ,
preach no other thing, but that which we have heard, which we have seen with
our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled of the word of
life. Socrates in his Ecclesiastical history writes, that Athanasius being
accused by one Iannes, to have killed Arsenius, and after to have cut off his
hand, that he might use it to magic and ^orcerie, cleared himself notably of
this slander. Having by good hap found out Arsenius who lay hid for the
nonce, he brought him before the Counsel of Tyrus, and there asked his
accuser, whether he ever knew Arsenius or no? He answered, yes* Then Athanasius
called him forth, with his hands covered under his cloak, and turning up the
one side of his cloak, showed them one of his hands. And when most men
surmised, that the other lib. 1. cap. 21.
hand ^t leastwise was cur o^f, Athanasius without any more ado casts up the
other side of his cloak, and shows the second hand, saying, you see Arsenius
has two hands, now let mine accuser show you the place where the third hand
was cut off. Christ's case was even almost the same. He was thought by some to
be quite dead and gone. Bu^ Thomas, seeing those very hands of his which were
n^iled to the cross, acknowledges, that this our brother was dead, and is
alive again, was lost an^ is found. For if the spies that were se^ to view
Jericho, knew Rahabs hou^ (...). (...). 13.
from all the rest, by a red thread, which hung out of the window: how much
more easily then might Thomas know Christ, especialy seeing Rahabs house was a
figure of Christ's body, the window a sign of the wound in his side, the red
thread a figure of the stream of blood issuing out of that wound? When Ulysses
had been long from home, no man almost at his return knew him, yet Euriclea
his nurce espying by chance the mark of a wound in his foot, which he got by
hunting the wild boar, by and by made him known (...). O^y. 9
to his friends. In like manner Thomas, beholding the wounds not of Christ's
feet only, but also of his whole body, believes verily, though the wild
boar out of the wood stroke sore at him that he might fall, yet that he has
now recovered him self, and is risen and returned home again. Even as the
wise men knew Christ was borne, by the star which appeared in the East, Man.
2. (...).
and knew also where he lay when he was borne, by the standing of that star
directly over against him: so Thomas, not by one star, but by many stars,
which notwithstanding are more beautiful and bright then all the stars of
heaven, knows and confesses that the true sun of righteousness is now
risen, and shines over all the earth. Thus these blessed wounds witness and
(...) my hands, and put forth thy hand, and put it into my side, and be not
faithless, but faithful. So much for the first cause, which is to approve
his resurrection.

The second caus^ why Christ has his wounds yet to be seen in his body, is to
appease his father. Almighty God was once ready to have destroyed the
Israelites, had not Moses his chosen Psalm. 100. 23.
stood before him in the gap. Moses as he was a mediator between God and the
people, was a singulur type of the Messiah to come. And standing in the gap, he
did as it were point to Christ. For when our Saviors side was wou^ ded, then
indeed there was a great gap, and a great breach made, by which all we that
believe in him may escape. Therefore Moses his standing before the Lord in the
gap did signify, as S. (...). (...)* Ca^.
Barnard notes, that Christ making intercession before his father for us,
should always stand in the gap, and show how he himself was broken upon the
cross, and, as I may say, trodden down for our redemption. That poor creeple
also which begged at the beautiful gate of Ac^ 3. ^.
the temple, teaches us what he continually does, who when he was rich, became
poor for our sakes. The temple is his body, which after it had been
destroyed, was built up again in three days. The beautiful gate of this
temple, is the precious wound in his side, of which the Psalmist says, This is
the gate of the righteous, the just shall enter in by it. Therefore as that
poor creeple, lying at the beautiful gate of the temple, was healed by S.
Peter; so Christ, lying a^ the beautiful gate of his own body, showing his
most grieuo^s, b^t yet most glorious susferings and torments, appeaseth his
fathers wrath, and obtains whatsoever he entreats of him. King Ezekias
having received ^sa. 37 14.
railing letters from Senacherib, went up to the temple, and spread the letters
before the Lord, and prayed, saying, Open thine eyes, O Lord, and see and hear
all the words of Senacherib, who has sent to blaspheme the living God. No
Ezekias was ever more taunted and reviled, more scorned and reproched, then he
who was counted the shame of men, and the outcast of the people. Wherefore now
he spreads forth, and lays open, not only the blasphemous words, which
were v^tred against him, but also the dolorous wounds and gashes which were
given him, that so he may put out the handwriting that was against us, and
appease his father, and thoroughly reconcile him to us. And look how king
Solomon, when he 1. Reg. 8. 22.
prayed for the people, stood before the altar, and stretched out his hands
toward heaven: in semblable wise Christ, who is far greater then Solomon,
stands evermore beside the altar o^ his cross, and stretches out his
beskarred and wounded hands toward the throne of his heavenly father, that he
may move him to have pity and compassion of his people. Pelopidas a noble
Grecian, ^irmished with the Lacedaemonians against the Arcadian^, until such
time as being hurt in seven places, he fell down at last for dead. Then
p^esently Epaminondas stepping forth bestrid him, and (...) to defend his
body, he alone against many, till being sore cut on his arm with a sword,
and thrust into the b^east with a ^ike, he was even ready to give over. But at
that very instant, Agesipolis king of the Lacedaemonians came with the ^.
other point of the battle in a happy hour, and saved both their lives when
they were past all hope. If we would apply this sto^ie to our purpose now in
hand, we must make, man like Pelopid^s, Christ like Epaminondas, God like
Agesipolis. Since the overthrow of Adam, who went down from (...) to Ierico,
how every man has been wounded, not only with Pelopidas in seanen pla^es of
his body, but even in all the par^s and powers of his soul* each one knows
best by experience in himself. But Christ has sheilded us with his grace, and
fought for us, no^ till he was with E^aminondas cut o^ his arm with a sword,
and trust into ^he breast with a pi^e, but that which is in a manner all one,
till his h^nds were goared with nails, and his side thrust ^orough with a
(...). Wherefore God the father with Agesipolis seeing him in the work of his
mediation, s^ght still for us, clothed even now in heaven with a garment dip^
in blood, can not be angry either with him, or with us, but when we are
dead in sin, quic^neth us together in him by whose grace we are saved, and
raises us up, and ma^eth us for his sake sit in the heavenly places above.
Marcus Servilius a valiant Roman, who had sought three and ^vventie combats
os life and death in his own person, and had always s^ine as many of his
enemies as chaleng'd him man to man, when as the people of Rome resisted
Paulus Emilius ^iumph, ^.
stood up and made an oration in his behalf. In the midst whereof he cast
open his govvne, and s^evved before them the ins^ite skarres and cuts he had
received upon his breast. The sight of which so prevailed with the people,
that they all agreed in one, and granted Emilius triumph. After the same
fashion, Christ has spoiled principalities and powers, and has made a show
os them openly, and has trium^ over them in his erosse, yea and yet now
bears about in his body the marks and tokens of this triumph, that a final
agreement and atonement being made between God and us by his only mediation
and means, we also may be more then conquerours in him that loves us, and may
every one of us say with Saint Paul, Now thanks be unto God, which always
makes us to triumph in Christ. Among other ornaments of the Sanctuary there
was a golden censer sull of holes, by which the sweet odours fumed forth, when
Aaron once a year burnt incense therein. No other high Priest do we
acknowledge ^.
but Christ the true Aaron, who has entered, not into any Sanctuary made with
hands, but into heaven it self. And his golden censer is his ^wne body which
through the wounds (...) are in it as through chinks or holes, fu^eth for^h
always a pleasing and a sweet savor in the nosthrils of his father. The
sign of the coueant which God made wi^h Noah was a rainebowe in the (...). And
indeed that is a sure token unto us, that the world shall never Genesis 9. 16.
be drowned again with a general slood of water, as it was in Noah's time. But
the rainebowe which assures us we shall never be drowned in the pit of
everlasting perdition, is no such thing. Why may some man say, what is it?
Marie it is the blood of Christ, which makes as it were, a rainebowe in his
side. For the other rainebow is but a transitory sign, which shall pass away
with the clouds and with the world. But this rainebowe, whereof the other is
but a shadow, shall continue for ever in the sight of God, as the author to
the Hebrews sai's, that Christ is entered into heaven, vt appareat nunc vultui
Dei pro nobis, to appear now in the sight of God for us. Therefore S. John in
the Revelation witnesses, that he saw a door open in heaven, and a rainebow
round about the throne of God. He saw a door open in heaven, to teach us that
we can have no access unto the father, but by Christ, neither yet by Christ
simply, but as he is crucified, and has set open a door in his side for us to
enter by him. He saw a rainebowe round about the throne of God, to teach us
that the throne of God would be altogether a throne of justice, a throne of
wrath, a throne of anger and indignation, were it not that the blood of Christ,
spinning out as I may say still lively and freshly in the sight of his father,
makes a rainebowe round about his throne, puts him in mind of his covenant,
appeaseth his displeasure, and Genesis 30. 37.
so makes his throne to all us that love him, a throne of grace, a throne of
compassion, a throne of favor and mercy in Christ. We read that Jacob ^illed
certain rods, which being laid in the watering troughes before the sheep,
made them bring forth such lambs, as afterward fell to his own share. So
likewise if we sin, we have an advocate with the father Jesus Christ the
righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins. The mark of the rods
in his wounds laid open in the sight of God, ingendreth and breeds in him a
love and a liking toward us, so that he conceiueth well of us, and seuereth us
as good sheep from the goats, and in the blood of the lamb is pleased and
appeased, and satissied for our sins. This blood is the blood of sprinkling,
which Heb. 12. 24.
speaks better things then that os Abel. For Abels blood upon earth cried our
once for vengeance, but Christ's blood in heaven cries continually for mercy.
One deep calls another, because of the noise of the water pipes. Christ's
wounds are the watering troughs and the water-pipes, by which all graces flow
unto us. So that one deep calls an other, because of the noise of the water
pipes; because the wounds of Christ make a continual noise in the ears of his
father, and the depth of the extreme misery which he was in upon earth,
calls for the depth of Gods bottomless and insinite mercy in heaven. Thus
these holy wounds of Christ pacisie and appease his father. For now Moses
standing in the gap sues sor pardon: the poor creple lying at the beautiful
gate begg's an alms: Ezechias spreading open his letters, makes his
supplication: Solomon streatching out his hands offers up his prayer:
Epaminondas being wounded, moves Agesipolis to save Pelopidas: Seruilius
discovering his wounds, persuades the people to grant Emilius triumph. Aaron
burning incense in his golden censer, perfumeth the whole sanctuary: Noah
pointing to his rainebowe puts God in mind of his promise: Iaacob laying
forth his rods make most of the lambs his own: Abel holding up his blood,
calls and cries for mercy: Christ showing his hands and his side appeaseth his
father. As if our Savior should say thus unto his father, O my loving father,
look upon the face of thine anointed, look upon the hands, look upon the
side of thine anointed. The hands of thine anointed, how cruelly they are
mangled, the side of thine anointed, how woefully it is wounded. Behold and see
if there be any sorrow like to my sorrow. These hands can signify what
exceeding sorrow I have suffered: this side can show that I have humbled my
self, and have been obedient unto death, even unto the death of the cross.
Therefore, O my dear father, Put thy finger here, and see my hands, and put
forth thy hand, and put it unto my side, and as thou art not faithless, but
faithful, so be not merciless, but merciful for my sake, and pitiful to thy
people. So much for the second cause, which is to appease his father.

The third cause, why Christ has his wounds yet to be seen in his body, is
to confound his enemies. When Saint Paul the Apostle before his conversion
persecuted the Church of God, Christ called to him from heaven, and said, Saul,
Saul, why persecutest thou me? Who art thou, Lord, says Saul? I am, says
Christ, Jesus of Nazareth, whom thou persecurest. Alluding to the title of his
cross, which was, Jesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews. At which words Saul
both trembling and astonished, said, Lord, what will thou have me (...). (...).
do? Now if Saul, who repen^d him afterward of his pers^cuting C^st, stood so
astonished, when he (...) but a piece of the title upon his cross^, (...) then
shall all they be astonished, how shall they be confounded, which without any
repentance or remorse of cons^ience, persecute Christ continually, when at the
latter day, not only the title written over his head, but even the very print
of the wounds in his hands and side, shall rise up in judgment to condemn
them? When like as Joseph said to his brethren, I am Joseph your brother,
whom you sold into Egypt: so Christ shall say unto them, I am Jesus of
Nazareth, whom you persecuted and put to death? Wonderful indeed is the
fear and confusion of a wicked conscience. After that Herod had beheaded John
Baptist, he imagined still he saw and heard that holy head, showting and crying
out against him. Whereupon hearing the same of Jesus, he said Mar. (...). 16.
not as others said, It is Elias, or, It is one of the Prophets: but, It is
John, says he, whom I beheaded, he is risen from the dead. Saying, whom I
beheaded, he confesses not his fault in true repentance, but only with his
own mouth bears witness o^ his own wickedness. In so much as that may be
said to him, which David said to the Amalakite, who brought him news of Saul's
death, Thine own mouth testisieth against thee, saying, I have slain the
Lords anointed. Now if the remembrance of this cruel act, so vexed and
disquieted Herod day and night, that he could take no rest for it, but still,
thought waking, and dreamed sleeping, John Baptist was risen again, to be
revenged of him, how then shall they be affrighted, how shall they be
confounded, which have not beheaded John, but crucified Christ, yea and
crucisie him continually with their sins, when at the resurrection of all
slesh, they shall see him whom they have pierced, and wring their hands, and
weep and wail before him? Scipio appointed his sepul^hre to be so placed, as
his image standing upon it, might look directly toward Africa, that being
dead he might still be a terror to the Carthaginians: after the same sort, the
Prophet Et erat sepulc^m ^-cius gloriosum.
Esai prophesying of Christ, says, In that day the root of Iesse shall stand
up for a sign unto the people, and even his sepul^hre shall be glorious. So
that as the body of Cadwallo an ancient king of the Brittayns, being embalmed
(...).
and dressed with svvete confections, was put into a brazen image, and set
upon a brazen horse over Ludgate, for a terror to the Saxons: in semblable
sort he that is called Faithful and true shall sit upon a white horse, and out
of his mouth shall proceed a sharp sword, wherewith he shall smite and slay
the heathen. The sword wherewith David hackt off Golias head, after he had
wrested ^. Sa^. 21 9.
it out of his hand, was kept in the Tabernacle, wrapped in a cloth behind the
Ephod. Which when Abimilech the Priest brought forth, David said, There is none
to that, give it me. Christ also did conquer death even with those weapons and
armor wherewith death assaulted him. And he keeps still a memorial of this
conquest in the tabernacle of his body. That as the Philistims were afraid,
when they saw David fighting in the ^ield with that sword: so all Christ's
enemies may be confounded, when they shall see the sign of the son of man
appearing in the clouds with power and great glory. It was a strange miracle
that of Aarons rod which budded. Therefore the Lord said unto Moses, Bring
Aarons rod again Number. 7 10.
before the testimony to be kept for a token to the rebellious children. The
body of Christ was a green tree before it was crucified. After being dead,
it was clung and dry like Aarons rod. But it budded, when as the third day it
rose again. Therefore it is kept still for a token to the rebellious children.
That as Aaron convinced the murmuring Israelites, and confirmed the authority
of his priesthood by the budding of his rod, which otherwise was but a dead and
a dry thing: so Christ may con^ound his enemies, when he shall show such
flourishing glory, such excellent majesty in his body, which has yet in it
the tokens and the marks of death. It is reported that Zisca the valiant
captain of the Bohemians, commanded that after his discease his skin should
be fleed from his body to make a drume which they should use in their battles,
affirming that as soon as the Hungarians, Fox. Act.
or any other their enemies should hear the sound of that drume, they would
not abide, but take their flight. And surely every battle of the warrior is
with noise and with tumbling of garments in blood, but this battle, wherein
Christ shall tread Satan and all his enemies under his feet, shall be with
burning and consuming of fire. So that no drum can be more terrible then the
last trumpet shall be, when the Lord Jesus shall show himself from heaven with
his mighty angels, and shall so come down with the very same marks and scars
in his skin as the men of Galile saw him ascending up. They which dispatched
noble Julius Caesar in the senate house, did set a good face of the matter a
while, till Antonius the next (...). ^4.
day showed his robe in the market place, all bloody cut and full of holes, as
his enemies had left it. The^ the people were so incensed and enraged against
them, that they made the best of the^ all glad to hide their heads. The Romans
said, we have no king, and therefore they slew Caesar: the Jews said, we have
no king but Caesar, and therefore they slew Christ. But at the day of
judgment, what shall Christ say? Those mine enemies, which would not that I
should reign over them, bring hi^her, and slay them before me. Then not only
the angels, but all creatures shall be ready to execute vengeance on these
murderers, when they shall see the robe of Christ washed in wine, and his
garment in the blood of grapes. When Thamar Genesis 38. 26.
Judas daughter in law was accused for committing folly in Israel, she sent
to her father in law saying, Look I pray thee whose these are, the signet
and the staff. Judah by and by knevve them, and said, She is more righteous
then I. And so shall Christ's enemies be enforced to confess him more righteous
then themselves, yea they shall be quite confounded, when they shall see how
they have abused him, when they shall see the marks, which their signet and
staff have made, their signet in his hands, and their staff in his side. The
Prophet Daniel records, that while Da^. 5. 6.
Balthazar was drinking wine in the golden vessels, which he had taken out of
the temple, there appeared fingers of a man's hand that wrote upon the wall, and
the king saw the palm of the hand that wrote. Then his countenance was
changed, and his thoughts troubled him, so that the joints of his loins were
loosed, and his knees smote one against an other. In this case of Balthazar we
may consider the state of the wicked, what it shall be at the last day. When
they shall see the fingers and the palms of Christ's hands, which they have so
pitifully wounded, writing down their doom, they shall tremble every joint of
them, and be at their wits ends, and they shall say to the mountains, Fall
on us, and to the rocks, Cover us, and hide us from the presence of him that
sits on the throne, and f^o^ the wrath of the lamb. Thus these victorious
vvou^ds of Christ shall confront and confound his enemies. As Saul was
astonished, when be heard Jesus of Nazareth calling to him: as Herod was
affrighted, when he thought John Baptist was risen again: as the Carthagineans
were troubled, when they saw Scipio's sepulcher: as the Saxons were terrified,
when they saw Cadwallo's image: as the Philistims were afraid when they saw
David's sword: as the Israelits were appaled, when they saw Aarons rod: as the
Hungarians were d^unted, when they saw (...) as drum: as the Romans were
dashed when they savve Caesar's robe: as I^da was ashamed when he savve
Thamars signet and stasfe: as Balthazar was amazed, when he savve the hand
vvtiting upon the wall. So shall Christ's enemies be confounded, when they
shall see his hands and his side. As if our Savior should say thus to every
one of his enemies, Thou enemy of all righteousness, Many things many times
have thou done against me, and hitherto have I held my tongue, but now will I
reprove thee, and set before thee the things that thou have done. Thou art the
man, thou art the man, that did murder me, and put me to a most shameful
death. Deny it if tho^ dare. Deny it if thou can. These ^.
are thy marks which are yet to be seen in my hands. This deadly wound is thy
doing, which is yet to be seen in my side. Therefore thine own eyes shall
give evidence, and thine own conscience shall give sentence against thee. See
now whether I say true or no. Look what thou have done. Put thy finger here,
and see my hands, and put forth thy hand, and put it into my side, and as thou
art not faithful, but faithless, so look sor no mercy at my hands, but for
shame and everlasting confusion. So much for the third cause, which is to
confound his enemies.

The fourth cause, why Christ has his wounds yet to be seen in his body, is
to comfort his friends. Almighty God in the old law appointed cities of
refuge, whither they which had sinned Number. ^5 ^5.
unwillingly might sly and be safe, if they stayed in any os them till the
death of the high Priest. Our high Priest can yet plainly prove by his hands
and side, that once he died for us. Whither then should we fly sinful
souls, whither should we fly for succor and comfort but to Christ? His
wounds only are the cities of refuge^, wherein we are safe and secure,
according to that of the Psalmist, The high hills are a refuge for the wild
goats, and so are the stony rocks for the conies. O blessed be these high
hills, blessed be these stony rocks, which protect and defend us, yea though
we have willingly sinned, not only against the fury of man, and the rage of
the world, but also against the terrible and dreadsull displeasure of almighty
God. Therefore our Savior speaks to his Spouse in this sort, My dove thou
Ca^. 2. 14.
art in the holes of the rock, in the secret places of the stairs, show me
thy sight, let me hear thy voice. Insinuating, that the Church dares neither
be seen nor heard of God, except she be in the holes of the rock, and in the
secret places os the stairs. The rock, is Christ. The stairs also and the
ladder, whereby Jacob climb's up to heaven is Christ. So that the dove, which
is the Church, lying hid in the holes of this rock, and in the secret places
of these stairs, dreadeth nothing, but with great boldness, why do I say
boldness? yea with great joy, with great comfort, shows her self to God, and
speaks unto him. Here the sparrow finds her a house, and the swallow a
nest, where she may lay her young, even thine altar, that is thy wounds,
whereby thou did offer up thy self, as a sacrifice for our sins, even
thine altars, O Lord of hosts, my King, and my God. When Elias flying from
Achab came to Beersheba, he sat down under a juniper tree, and desired that
he might die. A juniper tree makes the hoatest coal, (...). 15.
and the coolest shadow of any tree. The coal is so hot, that if it be rackt
up in ashes of the same, it continues un extinguished by the space of a whole
year. Therefore whereas we read in the hundred and twentieth P^alme, With hot
bur^ing coals, it is in the Hebrew, as S. Hierom notes, with Juniper coals.
Which proves that juniper coals be the most hot burning coals that are. Now
the coal is not so hot, but the ^dowe is as cool. Insomuch as the only
shadow of the juniper tree sleeth and kills serpents. Therefore Elias seeking
to rest himself where he might be safest from serpents, and other dangers,
sat down under a juniper tree, and desired that he might die: For he thought he
could never with the sparrow find him a house, and with the swallow make him a
nest, in a better place, the^ where he was ouershadowed with that Juniper tree,
which shadowed out the tree of the cross of Christ. Of which the Church says,
Under his shadow had I delight, and sat down, and his fruit was sweet unto
my mouth. So that if Simeon holding the child in his arms, desired to die, how
much more blessedly then might Elias have departed now in peace, when as being
wearied with the world, he was shadowed with the tree of life, and not only
held the child in his arms, but also was held himself as a child in the
wounded and naken arms of Christ. Notably also does the story of Noah declare
what singular comfort the faith full find in Christ's wounds. For only Noah
saved all: only Christ redeemeth G^n. 6. 16.
all. Noah signified rest: Christis our rest and peace. Noah saved all by the
wood of the arc: Christ redeemeth all by the tree of the cross. Noah was
tossed up and down upon the waters: Christ says to his father, Thou have
brought all thy waves upon me. Noah saved all by the door in the side of the
arc: Christ redeemeth all by the door in the side of his body. Noah the
fortieth day after the decreasing of the flood opened the window: Christ the
fortieth day afer his r^surrection ascends up and opens heaven. Lo ye, how
all things agree together. None but Noah, none but Christ: Noah's rest, Christ's
peace: Noah's arc, Christ's cross: Noah's water, Christ's woe: Noah's door,
Christ's side: Noah's window, Christ's kingdom. The Prophet Hose foretells
that Ephraim shall fly away like a bird. This is fulfilled not only in
Ephraim, but even in all mankind. All have gone astray, all have flowen away
from God: as a hawk which takes a check and gives over her pray: wherefore
Christ holding out his wounded, and bloody hands, as meat to reclaim us,
calls us as it were, and says, Re^urne, Can 6. 12.
return, O Shulamite, return; return, that we may behold thee. Prudentius
writes, that when Asclepiades commanded the tormentors to strike Romanus on
the mouth, the meek martyr answered, I thank thee, O captain, that thou have
opened unto me many mouths, whereby I may preach my Lord and Savior: Tot
ecce laudant ora, quot sunt vulnera, Look how many vvounds I have, so many
mouths I have, to praise and laud the Lord. And look how many vvounds Christ
has, so many mouths he has to call us to himself, so many lures he has to
make our soul fly for comfort only unto him. Manna was a most comfortable
meat, which God gave the Israelites. It was like to coriander seed, and the
Exodus 16. 32.
taste of it was like unto vvafers made with honey. This our holy Saniour
applies to himself. For when the Capernites said, Our fathers did eat Manna
in the desert, Jesus ansvvered, Your fathers did eat Manna in the wilderness,
and are dead. I am the living bread, which came down from heaven. Therefore as
then there was a golden pot of Manna kept in the Tabernacle, that the
posterity might see the bread wherewhith the Lord fed them: so there is yet a
golden pot of Manna Berna^d. de (...). de^. c. 2.
kept in heaven, that the faithful in allages may taste and see how sweet the
Lord is, which feeds them with his own body and blood, the least drop
whereof, though it be as small as a coriander seed, yet it is as sweet as a
wafer made with honey. Hard it is to give a reason wherefore Christ, when he
came to the city of Sichar in Samaria, where was Jacobs well, sat down upon
the well about the sixth hour. But certainly he did this not so much for
himself as for us. That hereby we might learn when the sun is hotest about
the sixth hour of the day, when we are most exercised with afflictions, when we
are sorest grieved for our sins, always to have recourse unto Christ,
alvvaies to go with the king into the wineseller, always to sit down upon
Jacobs well. Ioh. 4 6.
Of which the Prophet Zachary sai's, In that day there shall be a fountain
opened to the house of David, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem for sin and
for uncleanness. Whereupon S. Austin In omnibus (...) bus non in (...) tam
efficax remedin^ quam vulnera Christi.
says very divinely, In all adversities, sai's he, I could never yet sind any
remedy so comfortable and so effectual as the vvounds of Christ. Christ is
not unlike to the poole in Jerusalem, called Bethesda, having five porches,
which Ioh. 5. 2.
being troubled by an angel, healed any man, that went first into it,
whatsoever disease he had. Bethesda signifies the house of effusion or
povvring out, in which house Christ dwelled when he povvred out his blood and
his soul for our salvation. Therefore he alone is the angel, which came
down at a certain season into the poole, and troubled the water, because
when the fulness of time was come, he came into the world to be troubled
himself, and to be crucified, that he might heal not only that one man which
had bin diseased eight and thirty years, but even all mankind with the
troubled water and blood which issued out of his side. So that there is nothing
so comfortable for sick and sinful men, as to sit in the seats and porches
of this poole. Wonderful are the words of the Prophet concerning Christ, He
shall feed his flock like a shepherd, he shall gather Es. 40. 11.
the lambs with his arms, and carry the^ in his bosom. Which was prefigured in
the high Priest, who did bear up with his shoulders a breast plate, wherein
were the names of the twelve tribes written in twelve precious stones. That
which the shepherd does with his arms and bosom: that which the high Priest
does with his shoulders and breast: that does Christ with his hands and side.
He is the good shepherd, which brings home the lost sheep upon his
shoulders. Yea he writes the names of all his sheep in his precious wounds,
which are the precious stones upon his breast plate, that both declare his love
to us, and also allure us to love him. This makes David say in great devotion,
The Lord is my shepherd, therefore can I lack nothing. He shall feed me in a
green pasture, and lead me forth beside the waters of comfort. For as the
hen gathers her brood under her wings: so God gathers his children
together. And as an eagle stirs up Deuteronomy. 3^ 1^.
her nest, flo^ereth over her birds, takes them, and bears them on her
wings: so Christ, carries us up in his hands to the high places of the earth,
and causes us to suck honey out of the stone, and oil out of the hard rock.
Butheius an excellent painter, painted an eagle carrying Ganymedes into heaven,
so nicely and tenderly, that her talents did not hurt him, but only bear him
up. And in like sort Christ bears us up in his hands, that we dash not our
foot against a stone, yea his right hand is under our quia Domi nus supponit
m^num sua^.
head, and his left hand does embrace us, so that though we should fall, yet we
can not be hurt, because the Lord stays and supporteth us with his hand.
Therefore S. Chrysostom gives us good counsel, not to have iayes eyes, but
eagles eyes, that we may behold these hands of Christ, and see his side in the
sacrament. For indeed as often as we celebrate the memory of our Lords death,
Christ our Savior, delivering the bread and the cup by his minister, says
in a sort to every faithful receiver, Put thy finger here, and see my hands,
and put forth thy hand, and put it into my side, and be not faithless, but
faithful. But yet we shall not always drink of this fruit of the vine. The
time will come, when we shall drink a new kind of wine in Christ's kingdom.
Wherefore he says, As often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink this cup,
you shall show the Lords death til he come. Till he come. Declaring hereby,
that when he is come, his death shall be showed an other way. Namely by his
wounds, which always he shows to his Saints. Even as we sing in that
heavenly Hymn or Psalm, The humble suit of a sinner; Whose bloody wounds are
yet to see, though not with mortal eye, yet do thy Saints behold them all,
and so I trust shall I. O how unspeakably do the Saints rejoice, how glori^
also shall we triumph! when we shall see Christ in his kingdom, and behold
those blessed wounds of his, whereby he has purchased so many, and so great
good things for us? This is the new wine, which we shall drink. This is the
Eucharist of the Angels: the food of the Elect: the spiritual banquet of the
Saints. For wheresoever the dead body is, thither fhall the eagles resort. And
we that with eagles wings fly up by faith into heaven, shall ever resort to
this dead body, and we shall unsatiably desite to feed our eyes and our
souls with the sight of Christ, who was once dead, and even now has in his
body those skarres which continue the memory of his death, that in all
eternity it may never be forgotten. Thus these heavenly wounds of Christ
delight and comfort his friends. As the cities of refuge, which save the
sinner: as the holes of the rock, which defend the dove: as the shadow of the
juniper tree, which reuiueth the wearied: as the door of the Arc, which
preserves the world: as the lure of the soul, which calls home the
Shulamite: as the pot of Manna, which nourishes the Israelite: as the well of
Jacob, which refreshes the ^hirstie: as the poole of Bethesda, which ^ealeth
the sick: as the arms of the shepherd, which gather his lambs: as the wings
of the eagle, which bear up her birds. So do the hands and side of Christ
comfort his friends. As if our Savior should say thus to every one of his
friends, Can a woman forget her child, and not have compassion on the son of
her womb? though they should forget, yet would not I forget thee. Behold I
have graven thee upon the palms of my hands. Here I have still in my hands
that price of thy redemption, which I paid for thee, so that no man can take
thee out of my hands. Yea I have written and sealed thy salvation in my side. A
spear is the pen: my blood is the ink: my body is the paper. Here thou
may see the bowels of my compassion, thorough the wounds of my passion.
Assure thy self therefore, assure thy selse of my love, of my good will, of my
favor for ever. Make no doubt of it. If thou doubt any thing, Put thy finger
here, and see my hands, and put forth thy hand, and put it into my side, and be
not faithless, but faithful. So much for the fourth cause, which is to comfort
his friends.

You see then, blessed Christians, you see how these causes of Christ's wounds
differ one from an other. The first cause, to approve his resurrection, was,
but neither is, nor shall be. The second cause, to appease his father, was, and
is, but shall not be. The third cause, to confound his enemies, neither was,
nor is, but shall be. The fourth cause, to comfort his friends, both was, and
is, and shall be. So that Christ's wounds, did serve, to approve his
resurrection, only between his resurrection, and his ascension: do serve, to
appease his father, only between his ascension, and his second coming: shall
serve, to confou^d his enemies, only at the day of judgment: did, do, and
shall serve, to comfort his friends, for ever. Wherefore though we be never so
great sinners, yet let us never despair of the grace and mercy of Christ. His
hands are still stretched out to embrace us, his side is always open to
receive us. Therefore let us creep low, and come humbly to him, that we may
with the woman in the Gospel, touch but the hemme of his garment, nay that we
may with S. John, lean upon his blessed bosom, yea that we may with S. Thomas
in this place, put our fingers into his hands, and our hands into his side. And
even as Constantine the great used to kiss that eye of Paphnutius which was
boared out in Maximinus time, and the Iayler in the Acts washed S. Paul's
stripes and wounds: so let us kiss the Son least he be angry, and honor
his holy wounds, which are the precious balm wherewith he has healed us and
restored us to everlasting life. To the which we beseech thee, O good Lord to
bring us, not for our own deserts or merits, but for the tender bowels of
Christ Jesus love and mercy toward us, to whom with the Father, and the holy
Ghost, be all honor and praise both now and for evermore, Amen.

FINIS.
Matthew. 5. v. 19. He that both does and teaches, the same shall be called
great in the kingdom of heaven.
Beloved in our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, It is a very monstrous thing,
that any man should have more tongues then hands. For God has given us two
hands, and but one tongue, that we might do much, and say but little. Yet many
say so much and do so little, as though they had two tongues, and but one
hand: nay, three tongues and never a hand. In so much as that may be aptly
applied to them, which Pandulphus said to some in his time: You say much, but
you do little* (...).
you say well, but you do ill: again, you do little, but you say much: you
do ill, but you say well. Such as these (which do either worse the^ they
teach, or else less then they teach: teaching others to do well, and to do
much, but doing no whit themselves) may be resembled to diverse things. To a
whet stone, which being blunt it self, makes a knife sharp. To a painter,
which being deformed himself, makes a picture fair. To a sign, which being
weather-beaten and hanging without it self, directs passengers into the Inn.
To a bell, which being deaf and hearing not it self, calls the people into
the Church to hear. To a nightingale, which being restles and sitting upon a
thorn her self, brings others by her singing into a sweet sleep. To a
goldsmith, which being beggarly and having not one piece of pla^e to use
himself, has store for othe^s which he ^hewes and sels in his shop. Lastly,
to a ridiculous actor in the city of Smyrna, which pronouncing, o coelum, O
heaven, pointed with his finger toward the ground: which when Polemo the
chiefest man in the place saw, he could abide to stay no longer, but went from
the company in a chafe, saying, This fool has made a solecisme with his
hand: (...).
he has spoken false Latin with his hand. Such are all they, which teach one
thing, and do another: which teach well, and do ill. They are like a blunt
whetstone: a deformed painter: a weather-beaten sign: a deaf bell: a restles
nightingale: a beggarly goldsmith: a ridiculous actor, which pronounces the
heaven, and points to the earth. But ^e that sits in the heaven, shall
laugh ^ll such to scorn, the Lord shall have ^em in derision, and hiss them
off from the stage. Because howsoever they have the heaven commonly at their
tongues end, yet they have the earth continually at their fingers end. So that
they speak false Latin with their hand, nay that which is worse, they
speak false Divinity with their hand. Whereas we might easily avoid all
such irregularitie, and make true co^ gruitie betvveene the tongue and the
^a^d, if we would make this text of holy scripture, the rule of our whole
life. For then, I assure you, we should every one of us play our parts so
well, that in the end, the tragedy of this woeful life being on^e finished,
we should have an applause and a plaudite of the whole theater, not only of
men and Angels, but even of God himself, who does always behold us. Wherefore
out of these few words, let us observe these two parts. The sirst negative,
what must (...).
not be: neither Pastor nor people must teach one thing and do another. That
must not be. The second affirmative, what must be: both Pastor and people must
do that themselves, which they teach others to do. That must be. For He that
both does and teaches, the same shall be called great in the kingdom of
heaven.

First, that the Pastor must not teach one thing and do another, appears in
the fourth of Leuiticus. Where almighty (...). 4. ^0.
God appoints the self same sacrifice should be offered for the sin of the
Priest, which is offered for the sin of the whole people. So that all the
people may better sin, though it be a thousand times, the^ the Priest may
sin though it be but once. For the people sinning, offend only by their
sin: but the Priest sinning offends Exodus ^.
more by his example then by his sin. Therefore Moses being commanded by
throwing down his rod, to work Exodus 7.
miracles, delivered it to Aaron. To signify, that especially it belongs to
him to do somewhat himself, whose duty is to teach others. Whereupon also
our Savior gives us a caveat, to beware of false Prophets, because they say
and do not. They say one thing, and do another. Matthew. 23. 3.
They bind heavy burdens which Luke 11. 46.
they tie upon other men's backs, but touch not these burdens themselves, so
much as with the least of their fingers. So that that which was fondly and
falsely said of Christ, He saved others, himself Matthew. 27. 42.
he cannot save: may be fitly and truly said of these. They save others,
themselves they cannot save. Whereas the Apostle making Timothy an example for
all Ministers to follow, writes thus to him; Take heed to thy self, and to
doctrine: 1. (...). ^ 16.
for in doing so, thou shall both save thy self, and them that hear thee. By
taking heed to thy doctrine, thou shall save them that hear thee: by taking
heed to thy self, thou shall save thy self. Otherwise if thou take heed to
thy doctrine, and not to thy self, thou may well save others that hear
thee, but thy self thou can not save. Thou may well preach to others, but
thou shall be sure to prove a castaway thy 1. ^or. 9. ^7.
self. For when two pray, if the one bless, and the other curse, whose prayer
will God hear? And is it not then much more dangerous, when out of one and the
self same mouth comes both blessing and cursing? When one ^am. 3. 10.
and the self same Minister, teaches well, whereby the people are blessed,
and yet does ill, whereby he himself is accursed? Is it not likely that God
will rather respect his cursed doing to punish it, then regard his blessed
teaching to praise it? Certainly the Psalmist puts the matter out of all
doubt, where he says, That God will surely cast away, P^l. 8. ^.
God will reject, God will destroy the enemy and the auenger. The enemy and
the auenger: Who is he? He that is an enemy to Gods glory in that he does
ill, and yet would seem to be an auenger, to be a maintainer, to be a defender
of Gods glory, in that he teaches well, he is the enemy and the auenger. And
such an one as this, which is indeed an enemy, and yet would seem to be an
auenger, which is indeed a foe, and yet would seem to be ^ friend, which does
indeed ill, and yet would seem to teach well, such an one I say, will God
destroy. To the wicked thus says the Lord, Why do thou Psalm. 50. 16.
^reach my laws, and take my statutes in thy mouth, whereas thou hate to be
thy self reformed by them, and have ^st my words behind thee? By thine Luke
19. 22.
own mouth, by thine own confession I will condemn thee, thou naughty, thou
lewd servant. Thine own words Job 15. 6.
shall accuse thee, and not I, yea thine own lips shall bear witness against
thee. For why go thou about to take a little moate out of thy brothers eye,
Matthew. ^. 5.
and do not first cast out that great beam which is in thine own eye? Why
go thou to other men's houses, Mark. 5. 10.
and pryest into other men's matters, and do not first go to thine own
house, and see that all be well in thy own heart? What meanest thou to do?
Thou that teach others, do thou not teach thy self? Thou that preachest
(...). 2. 21.
a man should not steal, do thou steal? If thou be a Preacher, then preach
to thy self as well as others. If thou be a Physician, then cure thy self as
well as (...). 4. 13.
others. Seeing indeed as Hierome writes, ^.
he is too nice and too dai^tie a Physician, either for the body or else for the
soul, which prescribes fasting to others, and is sick of a surset himself.
Wherefore the godly Pastor must not prescribe fasting to others and be sick of
a surfeit himself, he must not teach one thing and do an other. For not he
that only teaches, but He that both does and teaches, the same shall be
called great in the kingdom of heaven.

Now the people also are forbidden to teach one thing and do another, ^s well
as the pastor. For all Christians (...) imitate the example of Christ. And f^r
Christ S. John tells us, that he was full of grace and truth. The fullness Ioh.
1. 14.
of his truth, made him teach well: of his grace, do well. Saint Peter
likewise, 1. Pet. 2. 22.
that he did no sin, neither was there guile found in his mouth. Many have no
guile found in their mouths, which notwithstanding do sin. But even as
Christ had neither guile in his teaching, nor yet sin in his doing: so we
that are Christians must neither deceive others by teaching guilefully, nor yet
deceive our selves by doing sinnefully. For we know that not every one that
says, Lord, Matthew. 7. 21.
Lord, shall be saved. Neither yet every one that says, The Temple of the
Lord, the Temple of the Lord, shall be I^r. 7. 4.
blessed. Seeing oftentimes a man, the nearer he is to the Temple of the Lord,
the further he is from the Lord of the Temple. Therefore as that figtree was
accursed, which did bear leaves, and no M^. 1^. 14.
fruit: so shall every man be accursed which bears leaves without fruit. I
mean, a slourish of teaching, without any fruit of doing. Yea such a man being
once accursed, shall be ever tormented. For knowing his masters will, nay
knowing Luke 12. 47.
it so well, that he is able to teach it others also, and yet doing it not
himself, he shall be beaten with many stripes. Chrysostom (...).
says, that drunke^ men have both strings wherewith their tongues are tied, so
that they can teach nothing well; and also strings wherewith their hands are
tied, so that they can do nothing well. They are both tongueti'de, and
handti'de. But such as know their masters will, and do it not, are worse then
Mark. 7. 35.
drunken men. For though the string of their tongue be loose, as that
stammerers in the Gospel was, so that they can teach well enough: yet the
string of their hand is not loose, their hand is still bound up in their
bosom, as that loyterers in the Proverbs is, so that they Pro. 26. ^5.
can do nothing well. Therefore they draw near to God with their tongues,
I^r. 12. 1.
but are far from him with their rains. Yea they are so far from coming to
him with their hearts, that they never come near him so much as with their
hands. But though they have the smooth tongue of Jacob, which teaches ^.
well; yet they have the rough hand of Esau, which does ill. Such do not
touch Christ, but throng Christ. They touch Christ, as that good woman did,
Luke 8. 45.
which follow him, and come near unto him by well doing. They throng Christ,
as the rest of the people did, which oppress and ouerwhelme him with a
multitude of words, without any matter or manner of doing; which are as wells
without water, or as clouds 1. Pet. 2. 17.
without rain. Such, as the Prophet Ie^emie Fur^ntur verba.
speaks, do steal Gods word. I^r. 23. 30.
They have not only false and lying tongues, but also filching and stealing
tongues. For teaching well, and doing ill, their teaching does not become them,
it does not beseem them, it does not belong unto them. It is strange that a
man should steal with his tongue: even as it is strange also, that a man
should speak with his hand. Yet as I noted before, that these speak false
construction with their hand: so now I note that these steal true construction
with their tongue. They steal their words I say, howsoever otherwise they be
most true, who as Austin writes, would Qui boni vo lunt vide^i loquendo quae
dei sunt, cum mali si^t, ^ciendo qu^ (...). August.
seem to be righteous in that they teach the words of God, whereas indeed they
are unrighteous, in that they do the works of the devil Wherefore we that
are a holy people, must not teach the words of God, and do the works of the
devil; we must not teach one thing, and do an other. For not he that only
teaches, but He that both does and teaches, the same shall be called great
in the kingdom of heaven.

Thus much for the first part negative, what must not be. Neither pastor nor
people must teach one thing and do an other. That must not be.

The second part affirmative follovveth, what must be. Both pastor and people
must do that themselves which they reach others to do. That must be. First
for the pastor he has two kind of garments. A brestplate, and an Ephod. (...).
28. 4.
The breast plate shows that he must have science to teach: the Ephod shows
that he must have conscience to do that which he teaches. And in the very
brestplate it self is written, not only Vrim, but also Thummim. Vrim
signifies (...). 28 ^0
light. Thummim signifies perfection. To prove that the pastor, must not only
be the light of the world, but also the salt of the earth: not only a light of
direction in his teaching, but also a pattern of perfection in his doing. For
even as the snuffers of the (...). 25. 30.
tabernacle were made of pure gold: so preachers which should purge and
dress, and clear others that they may burne-out brightly, must be made of
pure gold, that by doing well they may also shine themselves. Hence it is that
the Priest has out of the sacrifices for (...). 18. 18.
his share, the shake breast and the right shoulder. The shake-breast puts him
in mind of teaching well: the right shoulder puts him in mind of doing well.
That great Prophet Elias is called, The horseman and the Chariot of Israel. A
(...). ^. 1^.
horseman directs the chariot, and keeps it in the right way: a chariot goes in
the right way it self. And so a minister must not only as a horseman direct
others, and set them in the right way, but also as a chariot, he must follow a
good course, and walk in the right way himself. He must be both the horseman
that teaches, and the chariot that does, both the horseman and the chariot of
Israel. Therefore he has upon the fringes Exodus 39. 25.
of his vesture pomgranats and bells. Many preachers are full of bells which
make a great ringing and gingling, but because they have not pomgranats as well
as bells, therefore all the noise that they make is but as sounding brass, or
as a tinckling cymball. For the godly pastor must not only say well, and sound
out the word of the Lord to others clearly as a bell, but also he must do
well. and as a pomegranate be fruitful himself and full of good works. Even
as the pillars of the tabernacle were Exodus 26. 37
made of Shittim wood, and ouerlaid with pure gold: so preachers (which are
called in the Epistle to the Galatians the pillars of the Church) must not
only be ouerlaid outwardly with pure gold, te^ching the word of God purely,
but also they must do as they say, and inwardly be made of Shitrim wood,
which never corrupts, never rotteth, having no corruption, no rottennes in
their lives. Hereupon our Lord, speaking to his Prophet says, Lift up thy
voice as a trumpet. Diverse things there are which sound louder then a trumpet,
The sea, the thunder, or such like. Yet he says not, Lift up thy voice as the
sea, or lift up thy voice as the thunder, but lift up thy voice as a trumpet.
Because Esa. 58. 1.
a trumpeter when he sounds his trumpet, he winds it with his mouth, and holds
it up with his hands: and so a Preacher which is a spiritual trumpeter, must
not only by teaching well, sound forth the word of life with his mouth, but
also by doing well he must support it, and hold it up with his hands. And then
does he lift up his voice as a trumpet. Those mystical beasts in Ezekiel,
Ezekiel. 1. 8.
which S. Gregory understands to be the ministers of the Church, had hands
under their wings. Many preachers are full of feathers, and can soar aloft iu
a speculatiue kind of discoursing: but if you should search for hands under
their wings, perhaps you should scarce find many times so much as half a hand
amongst them. But the godly pastor must have not only wings of high wisdom
and knowledge, but also hands under his wings to do that which he knows. For
as the Prophet Malachie witnesses, The Priests lips Mal 2. 7.
should keep knowledge. He says not, they should babble or utter knowledge to
others, and have no care to keep it themselves. But having delivered it to
others, they must as well as others observe and do it themselves. And then
indeed may their lips rightly be said to keep knowledge. For even as they
which repaired the walls of Jerusalem, held a sword in one hand and wrought
N^h. 4. 17.
with the other: so Preachers which by winning souls repair and build up the
walls of the heavenly Jerusalem, must not only hold the sword of the spirit,
which is the word of God in one hand, but also they must labor with the other
hand. Else they shall pull down and destroy rather then build up. But if they
do as fast as they say, then they shall build apaee, and edify very much.
Therefore Saint Paul exhorts Timothy to show himself a workman, 2. Tim. 2.
25.
which needs not to be ashamed, dividing the word of God aright. He must not
only be a word-man, but also a workman. He must not only hold a sword in one
hand, to divide the word of God aright, but also labor with the other hand,
and (...) his best to show himself a workman which need not be ashamed. And
the same Apostle exhorts the same Timothy again, to 2. Tim. 1. 13.
show the true pattern of wholesome words. Wholesome words is sound teaching:
the true pattern of wholesome words, is well doing. So that he shows the true
pattern of wholesome words, which patterns and samples his teaching by doing,
making them both matches and paires, so that (as Mark the Eremite (...)
speaks) a man may easily read all his sermons, and all his exhortations to
others, written down as it were, and expressed in the lines of his own life.
And thus must every faithful preacher do. He must have not only a
breast plate, but also an Ephod: he must have written in this breast plate, not
only Vrim, but also Thummim: he must be like the snuffers of the tabernacle,
not only purging others, but also made of pure gold himself: he must have for
his share of the sacrifices not only the shake-brest, but also the right
shoulder: he must be as Elias was, not only the horseman, but also the chariot
of Israel: he must have upon the fringes of his vesture, not only bells, but
also pomgranats* he must be like the pillars of the tabernacle, not only
ouerlai'd outwardly with gold, but also inwardly made of Shittim wood: he must
not only lift up his voice, but also lift it up as a trumpet: he must not
only have wings, but also hands under his wings: he must not only with his
lips utter knowledge to others, but also keep knowledge himsel^e: he must
not only hold a sword in one hand, but also labor with the other hand: he
must not only divide the word of God aright, but also show himself a
workman which need not be ashamed: he must not only deliver wholesome words,
but also show the true pattern of wholesome words, which is a godly life. The
sum is this: The faithful Pastor must not only teach well, but also DO well.
For He that both does and teaches, the same shall be called great in the kingdom
of heaven.

Now the people likewise are commanded to DO that themselves, which they teach
others to do, as well as the Pastor. We read that Abraham buried Genesis 23. 19.
Sarah in the ca^e of Macpelah, that is in a double sepulcher. He that burieth
his mind in knowledge only, without any care of practice, he buries Sarah in
a single fepulchre: but he that buries his mind as well in the practice and
feeling of religion (which is all in all) as in the knowledge and understanding
of it, he buries Sarah in a double sepulch^e. And so must all we do which are
the true childr^n of Abraham. For then with Abraham burying our spirit in a
double sepulcher, we shall with Elizeus have a double spirit. A spirit that as
well does, as teaches. God appointed Moses to make a lauer with a base (...)
30. (...)
or a foot. Now the word (...), signisies as well a lip, as a la^er. So that
the la^er which washes must have a base, and the lip which teaches must
have a foot. Otherwise if tea ching do not stand upon doing as upon a foot,
then surely it is footelesse, and so consequently it is bootelesse, and
altogether unprofitable. Holy Job says (...). 31. 36.
thus, Though mine adversary should writ a book against me, would not I take
it upon my shoulder, and bind it as a crown unto me? That which he says of
his adversaries book, may not altogether vnsitly be applied to Gods book
which we must study, not so much that we may bind it to our head, or bear it
in our memory to teach it, as that we may bear it upon our shoulders to DO
it. Then shall it be every way a crown unto us. Simeon the ^nne of Onias was
as a saire Olive tree (...). (...)
that is ^uitfull, and as a Cypres tree, which grows up to the clouds. A
Cypres tree is high but barren: an Olive tree is fruitful but low. So a
christian must, not only as a cypres tree (...) up to the clouds, by a high
gif^ in teaching, but also he must as an olive tree bring forth the oil of
mercy, and be every way fruitful in doing. Then he shall be like Simeon,
neither low nor barren. But though he be an olive, yet he shall be as high as
the cypres tree: and though he be a cypres, yet he shall be as fruitful as the
olive tree. Noah is (...). ^. 16.
appointed to make a window in the top of the Arc, and a door in the side
of it; A window is for the eye only to look out; a door is for the whole
body to go out. And in like manner a godly man, must not have a window for
contemplation as Daniel had, who said his prayers thrice a day looking out of
his chamber window; but also he must have a door sor action as Abraham had, who
entertained his guests about the heat of the day, sitting in his tent door. At
the window of contemplation he must meditate and look to his teaching; at the
door of action he must go forth to his doing. Therefore by the old law all
those (...). 11. ^.
beasts are accounted unclean that chew the cud, but divide not the (...);
which law was not made for beasts, but for men. To admonish us, that all they
are unclean in the sight of God, which chew the cudde by meditating of his
word to teach it, and yet divide not the hoof by following the same to do it.
When Gedion went to war against (...). 6.
the Madianites, he sent home again those fouldiers which kneeled down to lap
water, and took those only with him, which lapt out of their hands. Because
indeed they are not fit to be soldiers in Christ's camp, which have mouths
to say somewhat, but no hands to do any thing. For if they have no hands to
help themselves, much less to hurt their enemies. And look how these
Soldiers did put their hands to their mouth; in like sort the wise woman
puts her fingers to the distaffe. Now there is a great resemblance between
the distaffe and the tongue. For as a thread either longer or shorter is spun
off from the distaffe; so from the tongue a speech. Therefore he may be said to
put his fingers to the distaffe, which puts his doing to his (...). 31 ^9.
teaching, and does that which he teaches. Our Savior speaking to his
Spouse, says thus, Let me see thy fight, let me hear thy voice. As if he
should say, Let me not only hear a voice of thy teaching, but also see a
sight of thy doing. Let me see thy sight, let me hear thy voice. Whereupon
Seneca ^um (...) magistrum quem magis admire^ cum videas, quam cum audias.
says fitly, Be sure thou imitate him above all other, whom thou may admire
more when thou see his sight, then when thou hear his voice. So Paul
wishes the Philippians to follow Phil. 4. 9.
those things which they had heard of him, and seen in him. His teaching they
had heard of him: his doing they had seen in him. So Moses was mighty Act. 7.
^.
in words, and in deeds: Not mighty in words, and weak, or no body in
deeds: but mighty in both, in words and in deeds, in teaching, and in doing.
So Aarons rod brought forth blossoms, Numb. 17. 8.
and almonds. Now as almonds are the fruit of blossoms: in like sort doing is
the fruit of teaching. So the Baptist was a shining, and a burning Ioh. 5. ^5.
light. He shined in knowledge, which made him able to teach well, he burned in
zeal, which made him willing to do well. So David says, Establish (...). 51.
12.
me with thy free spirit, then shall ^ teach thy way unto the wicked. He did
not only teach others the way of God, but also he was established with the
free spirit of God to do well himself. So Titus was an example of good (...).
2. ^.
works, and vncorrupt doctrine. Vncorrupt doctrine is teaching well: good
works is doing well. How then was he an example of good works, and vncorrupt
doctrine? Clemens Alexandrinus makes the answer. Teaching as (...)
he did, and doing as he taught, he was an example of good works and vncorrupt
doctrine. And so must every one be which is the sincere servant of God. He must
with Abraham bury Sarah not only in a sepulcher, but also in a double
sepulcher: he must with Moses make him, not only a lauer but also a base: he
must with Job, not only bind the book to his head, but also bear it upon his
shoulders: he must with Simeon, not only be a cvpres tree, but also an olive
tree: he must with Noa make him not only a window, but also a door: he must
with those clean beasts, not only chew the cudde, but also divide the hoof:
he must with those valiant Soldiers, not only bow down his knees, but also lift
up his hands to lap water: he must with the wise woman, not only have a
distaffe, but also put his singers to it: he must with the Church, not only let
Christ hear his voice, but also let him see his sight: eue^ as Paul's excellent
virtues were not only heard of him, but also seen in him: eue^ as Moses was
mighty, not only in words, but also in deeds* even as Aarons rod did bear not
only blossoms, but also almonds* even as Io^ Hiptist was a light, not only
shining, but alfo burning: even as king David was a prophet, not only teaching
others, but also established with grace himself: even as Titus was an example,
not only of vncorrupt doctrine, but also of good works. The sum of all is
this: The sincere setuant of God, must not only teach well, but also (...)
well. For He that both does and teaches, the same shall be called great in
the kingdom of heaven.

Now then, beloved, let us blush and be ashamed, that even the very Gentiles
should go before us in this point. Sosiades a heathen man could say thus much,
Better done then said. A good (...)
thing if thou know it, do it. It is written of Julius Caesar, that he never
said to his soldiers, Ite. but Venite: he never said, Go ye yonder, but Come
ye hither: I will go with you; nay I will go before you. And so says our
heavenly Captain and conqueror Jesus Christ, not Ite, but Venite, Come unto
me all ye that labor, and learn of me, because I am meek and humble in
heart. He says not, because I talk of my humility, but because I am humble,
because I show the practice of it continually in my self. I (says he) came
down from heaven to earth, I left my fathers bosom, and took a traitors
kiss, to teach all men true humility. Therefore there is no teacher to me,
there is no master to me: Learn of me, because I am mecke and humble in heart.
This kind of instruction both by teaching and by doing, is that two-edged
sword, which proceeds out of the mouth of the Lamb. For tell me I pray you
(if it be no trouble to you) tell me, what is the reason think you, why so
many Preachers in their Churches, so many masters in their families, secke to
redress abuses, strive against sins, and yet prevail so little, but only
because they fight not with this two-edged sword, but with a backsword. The
sword which they fight with all is very sharp, and cuts deep on the
teaching-side, but it is blunt and has no edge at all on the doing-side.
Whereas if we would fight against ungodliness with this twoedged sword, both by
teaching and doing, we should soon cut down sin in such sort, as it should
never be able to stand out against us. Therefore David being ready to reform
many things among his people, says in one of the Bonitatem and sci^ntiam doc^
me.
Psalms, O Lord give me goodness and knowledge. Goodness, that I may do well,
and Knowledge, that I may teach well. For I am sure (says he) that all my
teaching without doing, all my knowledge without goodness, is to no purpose.
Theresore O Lord give me goodness and knowledge. But first goodness, and then
knowledge. Because indeed, one heartfull of goodness, is worth a hundred
headfulls of knowledge: one handful of doing, is worth a hundred tongue-fulls
of teaching. For what is the hand else, but the very seal of the tongue? So
that as a writing is not pleadable by the law of man without seals; no more is
a word warrantable by the law of God, without works. And theresore if they
which serve the beast, receive the mark os the beast, not only in their
foreheads, but also in their hands: how much more the^ ought we which serve the
huing God, to receive the mark of God, not only in our foreheads by open
professing of him but also in our hands by faithful ^sing that which we
profess. Therefore it is a usual phrase well-nigh in all the Prophets to say,
The word of the Lord by the hand of Amos, by the hand os Zachary, or such
like: I know indeed it is an Hebrevve phrase, where the hand of the Prophet
signifies the ministry of the Prophet. But yet this phrase may give us thus
much to understand, that if the Prophets dealt so, as every word of God passed
not only thorough their mouths, but also through their hands, that then we
also must so deal in hearing and handling the word (...)
of God, as we may bring unto God says Agapetus, not only a profering of
words, but also an offering of works. Wherefore dear brethren, let your light
so shine before men, that they not only hearing your good words, but also
seeing your good works, may glorify your father which is in heaven. For then
I assure you, if we glorify our father which is in heaven, he will glorify
us his children which are upon earth, and in the end make us great in the
kingdom of heaven. O remember therefore that golden saying in the Scripture,
The sear of the Lord is (...). (...).
the beginning of wisdom, a good understanding have all they that do
thereafter, the praise of it endures for ever. A good understanding have all
they that do thereafter? Why so? Because an ill understanding have all they
that do not thereafter. They that have understanding, and do not thereafter,
that is, according to it, have an ill understanding. But they that have
understanding, and do thereafter according to it, have a good understanding. A
good understanding have all they that do thereafter: the praise of it endures
for ever. It shall be eternally rewarded. O how richly are the Apostles
rewarded, how highly are they now honored in heaven, because when they were
upon earth, they had a good understanding. They had cloven tongues. Cloven
tongues? What Is that? Act. 1^.
I Will tell you. Do you not see how our hands are cloauen and divided into
fingers; So were the Apostles tongues. They (in a manner if I may so say) had
fingers upon their tongues, as well as we have upon our hands. It was but a
word and a work with them. They had no sooner taught others any good thing (as
O Lord what good thing did they not teach us all) but by and by they were
ready to practice it and to perform it themselves. Therefore they are
already great in the kingdom of heaven, yea and much more shall be. The
twelve Apostles shall sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of
Israel. And if we can happily obtain so much grace and goodness of God, as that
we may have a care and a conscience as well to do as to teach, then as sure as
God's in heaven, we likewise shall be great in the kingdom of heaven. We shall
be enstalled with Christ and his Apostles, in the throne of glory, when we
shall hear him say unto us, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the
kingdom of heaven prepared for you. For ye have not only professed, but
practiced: ye have not only taught well, but wrought well: ye have not only
said well, but done well: therefore now you shall be great in the kingdom of
heaven. To the which kingdom of heaven, we beseech thee, O Lord, to bring us,
even for Jesus Christ's sake.

Amen.
A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE the Kings Majesty at Drayton in Northhamptonshire.
August. 6. 1605.
Psalm. 132. 18. As for his enemies I shall cloth them with shame; but upon
himself shall his Crown flourish.
THe Royal Prophet having settled himself in his kingdom according to his own
desire; and besides having after many wanderings to and fro, at length brought
back the Arc again to Jerusalem; makes here his most zealous and devout
prayer to God for the continuance of his favor both to the Church and
Commonwealth committed to his government. Return, O Lord, to thy resting
place, sai's he, v. 8. and deinceps.
thou and the Arc of thy strength. Let thy Priests be clothed with
righteousness, and let thy Saints sing with ioyfulnesse. For thy servant
David's sake turn not away the face of thine anointed. Now that he might
apparently see how near the Lord is to all them that call upon him in
faithfulness and truth, he vvaiteth not long for an answer, but carries it
away with him before he depart. For to David's petition, Return O Lord, unto
thy resting place, thou, and the arc of thy strength; Gods answer is this, v
1^. and de (...).
This shall be my resting place, here will I dvvell, for I have a delight
therein. I will bless her victuals with increase, and will satisfy her
poor with bread. To David's petition, Let thy Priests be clothed with
righteousness, and let thy Saints sing with ioyfulnesse; Gods answer is
this, I will cloth her Priests with salvation, and her Saints shall rejoice
and sing. Lastly, to David's petition; For thy servant David's sake turn not
away the face of thine anointed: Gods answer is this; There shall I make the
horn of David to flourish, I, I have ordained a light for mine anointed. As
for his enemies, I shall cloth them with shame; but upon himself shall his
crown slorish. As if he should have said; Turn away the face of mine anointed?
Nay, that will I never do, I will indeed turn away the face of the enemies
of mine anointed. Their face shall be covered with confusion, and clothed with
shame: But contrariwise, I have ordained a light for mine anointed. He ever
shall have a light in his face, and a crown upon his head. As for his enemies,
I shall cloth them with shame; but upon himself shall his crown flourish.

These words are principally to be understood of Christ. For never were any so
clothed with shame as his enemies the cursed Jews which murdered him. There
eitie was sacked, not one stone of it being left upon another, and they
themselves as stubble or chafe were scattered over the face of the earth. So
that they are the very shame of men, and the outcast of all people. Insomuch
as when we would signify we hate a man deadly, indeed we commonly use to say,
we hate them worse then a Jew. On the other side Christ is so exalted now,
that all power is given him in heaven and earth, yea God has given him a name
above al names, that at the most sweet and most excellent name of Jesus,
every knee and every heart also might do obeisance. And as the Apostle
proves out of the eight Psalm, The Lord now after all his dolorous pains
and torments, has crowned him with honor and glory. Nevertheless in a
secondarie sort this promise may be applied also to David, who was a notable
type of Christ; and so consequently to every faithful successor of David,
which is Christ's vicegerent and liefienant upon earth. For ye know what was
the end of all David's enemies: Absalom his disobedient son hung up by the
goldylockes of pride. Achitophel his travterous Counselor made away himself.
Shemei a reuiler of him, and a de^ractor from him, in his gray hairs put to a
shameful death. The same may be said of the rest. But holy David himself
could never be overcome. For though many enemies, specially Autiochus
Epiphanes, bent all their force, to the very uttermost, to root out David's
posterity, and to destroy Gods people; yet mangre their heads and their he^ts,
David's crown yet flourished and continued in his stock, till at the length
the son of David came into the world; of whom the Angel Gabriel spoke to
the blessed virgin Marie in this sort; (...). 1. 32.
He shall be great, and shall be called the son of the most High; and the
Lord God shall give him the throne of his Father David, and he shall be ruler
over the house o^ Jacob, and of his kingdom shall be no end. Now if this
Scripture be so notably verified in David, he having faithfully served in his
time, and bee^g now by the will of God dead; no reason but that we may
understand it also generally of every holy one of God, which treads in David's
steps, going in and out before Gods people. As for his enemies, I shall cloth
them with shame; but upon himselse shall his crown flourish.

Here are two parts. His enemies; himself. His enemies, first shall have
shame; secondly shall be clothed with shame. Himself, first shall have a
crown: secondly shall have a flourishing crown. As for his enemies I shall cloth
them with shame; but upon himself shall his crown flourish.

The shame which the Lord God assures David shall light upon his enemies, is a
veri^ dreadful judgment against them. Nicetas says plainly; No punishment
so grievous as shame. And Nazianzene yet more expressly; Better were a man die
right out, then still live in reproach and shame. This, diverse valiant
worthies have showed to be true, ridding themselves voluntarily of their life,
that so they might be rid of their shame. Ajax being ready to dispatch
himself, used these as his last words; No grief does so cut the very heart of
a generous and magnanimous man, as shame and reproach. What should I speak of
any more Grecians, or Romans, as of Brutus, Cassius, Antonius, Cato Vticensis,
and such others? In Scripture we have a plain proof. Mighty Sampson, being
I^g. 16. 28.
about to pull the whole house upon his own head, said thus: O Lord God I
pray thee strengthen me at this time only, that I may be at once avenged of
the Philistims, for my two eyes. He desired rather once to die valiantly, then
long to live wretchedly. For as Saint Ambrose writing of Samson, says, (...)
and (...). (...).
For a man to live, or die, is natural: but for a man to live in shame and
contempt, and to be made a laughing stock of his Enemies, is such a matter, as
no well bred and noble minded man that has any courage, or stomach in him,
can ever digest it. Yet the Lord God promises David his anointed that shame
shall be the reward of all his enemies; shame I say, which is a great deal
worse then death it self. As for his enemies, says he, I shall cloth them
with shame.

Secondly, they shall be clothed with ^hame. To be clothed is an Hebrew phrase,
signifying to have any thing unseparably cast upon one. And it is taken both in
the better and in the worser part. As a little before; I cloth her Priests
with salvation: that is, I will furnish Syons Priests with such indowments and
graces from above, which they shall be as it were invested into; that both by
their life and doctrine, they shall still further the salvation both of
themselves, and of them which hear them. Contrariwise, in this place, I will
cloth them with shame; That is, shame shall so unseparably accompany them,
that as wheresoever a man goes, he carries his clothes with him; so
wheresoever they go, they shall carry their shame with them. And that which
is strangest of all; they which are ashamed use to cloth or cover their shame,
and then think themselves well enough. But David's enemies shall be so shamed,
that even the very covering of their shame shall be a discovering of it; and
the clothing or cloking of their ignominy, shall be nothing else but a girding
of it more closely and more unseparably unto them. So the Prophet speaks
elsewher^, (...). 35 (...).
Let them be put to confusion and shame together, that rejoice at mine hurt.
Let them be clothed with rebuke and dishonor, that lift up themselves against
me. O Lord God, say Amen to it; let it be even so, O Lord, Let them be clothed
with rebuke and dishonor that lift up themselves against thine anointed. And
again, (...). (...). 19.
Let shame be unto him as a cloak that he has upon him, and as the girdle
that he is always girded with all. And yet again, (...).
Let mine adversaries be clothed with shame, and let them cover themselves with
their own confusion as with a cloak.

But to leave the word, and come to the matter. The enemies of David shall be
clothed with shame three ways: In their own conscience; In the world; In the
day of Judgment.

Touching their own conscience, S. Austin says well, Omnis (...) est (...)
p^a.
All inordinate desires, as none are more inordinate then traiterous and
rebellious enterprises, carry in themselves that bane which poisons and
punishes them at the last. Whereupon the Prophet says, Psalm. 57. (...).
Hide me, O Lord, under the shadow of thy wings, until iniquity be ouerpast,
as the Septuagint translate it. But we read it, Until this Tyranny be
ouerpast. And others translate it, Until this Calamity, or this Misery be
ouerpast. Which indifferent acceptance of the Hebrew word, shows that
nothing does so tyrannize over the conscience, nothing is such a calamity and
misery to the mind, as iniquity and sin. Judas after he had betrayed his
Lord and Master, was so confounded in his own conscien^e, that he cried out,
and said, (...)
I have sinned, in betraying innocent blood. Proditor Cas^a, vile traitor: if
his blood be innocent, then thy conscience is guilty. And if thou can
confess thou have sinned, when it is too late, why did thou (...) take
heed of sinning when (...) time? I have sinned says he, sinned in betraying
innocent blood. A thousand hells could not have more tormented him, then this
desperate sorrow and extreme shame wherewith his conscience was clothed,
tearing his bowels whilst he was alive, and pouring them out when he died.

Now as for shame in the world, we read Genesis 4. 5.
that God did set a mark upon Cain the murderer of just Habel; and so
consequently the ringleader of all David's enemies. Therefore as when men see a
wolf or a fox, or any such hurtful beast in the forest, they set all their
dogs upon him; so the enemies of the Lords anointed, being burnt as it were
and branded with the marks of shame, are howted and hunted wheresoever they
go. One example at this time shall suffice. Maxentius a wicked rebel against
his own Lord the famous Emperor Constantine the great, devised to have a
bridge made with cock-boats chained together over a river near Rome, thinking
to train the Emperor that way, and there to them in the river. But God so
wrought for his chosen servant, that the enemy himself being compelled to
fly that way, was taken in that pit which he dug for others. And so as
Pharaoh was clothed with shame in the open view and sight of all the world,
when he and all his host were drowned in the red sea, after the same fashion
Maxentius was dressed.

Lastly, touching shame in the day of judgment, David's enemies at that day,
shall stand before the tribunal seat of Christ, being naked in all respects
else, but only covered with their own shame. Then they shall be vexed with
horrible fear S^pien. 5. 2.
, and clothed with confusion; whereas the righteous shall be clothed with
incorruption; yea though 1. Cor. ^5.
in this life with the rich glutton, (...). 16. 19.
they have been clothed with purple and fine linen, yet then their attire
shall be dishonor, and their garment shall be shame. Thus will the Lord cloth
the enemies of his anointed with shame; cloth them in their own conscienc^;
cloth them in the world; cloth them in the day of judgment. As for his
enemies I shall cloth them with shame; But upon himself fhall his crown
slourish.

The one half of this Sermon is now past, the other shall be as soon dispatched.
But upon him shall his crown slourish.

First himself shall have a crown. Tertullian In (...).
reports out of Diodorus Siculus, that the first that ever ware a crown was
Jupiter. The soldiers gave him a royal crown for a reward of his victory
and triumph over the Titans* Hereupon Jupiters priest (...). (...).
brought (...) and crowns to the gates of Listra, and would there have
sacrificed to Paul. Afterward, when Gods people the Israe^ would needs have a
King, as other nations had round about them; then their Kings would needs have
crowns also, as other Kings had round about them. Hence we read that David
having vanquished the king of Rabbath, ^. (...). (...). ^.
took the crown from off his head, and found it the weight of a talent of
gold, with precious stones in it; and set it upon his own head. Though indeed
long before that 2. (...). 1. 10
the Amalakite brought him a crown, which he took from Saul's head when he
slew him.

So that the thing God promises is this; that any crown which king David
should get, either by conquest, or by succession, or by any other just title,
should still slourish more and more. Some there are in the world which to be
sure of outward ornaments enough, will needs wear a triple crown. Others
have been unwilling to wear that one which they might. Canutus, that was
absolute king almost of five kingdoms somewhat before the conquest, upon a
time in his progress riding near the Thames, lighted and sat down besides
the shore. Then, as it were to try a conclusion, he commanded the water
being now ready to arise again and to slow, not to come any nearer him. But
the water keeping his natural course, came still up higher and higher, till it
began to wette him. Whereupon turning to his Nobles, which were about him, Ye
call me (^aies he) your king and Master, and so indeed I am; and yet lo ye,
I cannot command so much as this little stream, but do what I can, that will
still do as it list. Whereupon presently he posted to Westminster, and
resigned his crown to the crucifixe there; neither could he ever after this be
persuaded to wear it any more. Now as the pride of that man of sin, which
sits under the sign of the triple crown, is too intolerable: so on the
contrary part this was too much niceness in Canutus. Seeing, it follows
not, because he could not command the sea and the waters, as Christ did, that
therefore he might not wear a crown. For, neither does Christ himself in
heaven wear such a crown, as kings of the earth do. But the truth is this,
that royalty and majesty, which is essential to God, he is content to
communicate to his holy ones, and to his anointed, by participatio^ and grace.
Therefore the Lords anointed, which is as it were his favorite, may very well
do all these three things at once; wear the crown which God gives; and yet
detest the pride which God abhors; and still admire the Majesty, which God
enjoys: So that the Lord promising his servant David a crown, promises him
wealth, wisdom, renown, dignity, prosperity; in one word, all royalties
belonging to a crown. But upon himself shall his crown slourish.

Secondly, he shall have a flourishing crown. Flourishing is metaphorically
attributed to a crown. As in the next verse before. There shall I make the
horn of David to ^lourish. A metaphor taken from those goodly creatures, as
stagges, and such like; whose chiefest beauty and strengh consists in their
horns, especially when they bud and branch abroad. So in these words, But upon
himself shall his crown slourish. A plain allusion to those slowres which
either continually, or else a very long time, keep fresh and green. Besides at
the first, kings crowns were not made of gold and pearls, as I told you of
David's crown, but only of green oken leaves, as that of Jupiters, or else of
some other branches or flowers, as others. The Lord then meaning that David's
kingdom should be established for ever, and that his lasting glory should
still grow green, he makes this loving promise unto him; But upon himself
shall his crown flourish. How flourishing beautiful flowers are, consider but
the Lilly, and you shall soon perceive. Mark (says our Savior) Man* 6. 24
how the lillies of the field do grow, they labor not, neither do they
spinne, yet do I say unto you, that even Solomon in all his royalty was not
clothed like one of these. Now if God so cloth the flowers of the sield,
which grow to day, and to morrow are cast into the oven* how much more shall
he cloth Dauid^ enemies with shame; but upon himsel^e make his crown
flourish? For even as in Salomons Temple, five candlesticks at the right side,
and five at the left standing before the Oracle, and being made for matter of
pure gold, for form with branches and flowers, did well nigh dazill the eyes
of any that entered into the Temple 1. Reg. 7. 49.
; so the Lord here gives his word, that the kings crown shall ever flourish in
the house of our God, disparkling and displaying those rays of Majesty; those
beams of beauty, which shall amaze the world, and be a wonder as well to
Angels as to men: Wherefore, as I said even now of his enemies shame, that it
shall be threefold; so here I repeat the same again of his crowns
flourishing; His crown shall flourish in his own conscience: in the world: in
the day of judgment. Touching his own conscience the blessed Apostle calls
the Philippians his joy and a crown (...). 4 1.
. And to the Thessalonians he writes thus, What is our hope, or joy, or crown
of rejoicing? Are not even you it, in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at
his coming? yes, ye are our glory and joy ^
Now, if this precious vessel of honor rejoiced in nothing so much, as in the
testimony of his conscience, that in simplicity and godly pureness, and not
in fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, he had his conueration in the
world, the power of Gods spirit working still most mightily by his ministry
to the conversion of the world to Christ: how much more shall the Lords
anointed have his conscience crowned with flourishing joy, with comfort, with
content, with heavenly peace, when he shall remember, that not only sor
matters of religion and Gods true service, he has been and still is with
Saint Paul prositable to the Church; but also is a strong bulwark and a tower
of defense to maintain even the outward (...) and prosperity of Gods people;
yea the very particular tight, wealth, life of every one of them; all this I
say, and a 100. (...) more, (...) he considers, what a great and a glorious
instrument be (...) been every way of Gods glory* O Lord God what a heaven
shall he have in his heart? what a sweet paradise (...) pleasure in his soul?
what security* that assurance of Christ^ love? what a (...) and undaunted hope
of eter^ glory? what a slourishing crown (...) re^oycing shall he have even
in his very conscience? upon himself shall his crown flourish. Touching the
world, our holy Prophet speaking to God, though in the third person, yet of
himself says, Thou have prevented him with liberal blessings, and have set a
crown of pure gold upon his head. His honor is great in thy salvation; glory
and great worship have thou (...) upon him. Now that crown which is of gold,
yea of pure gold, must needs be very flourishing even in the view and face
of the world. Neither is this to be understood of David's person only, but even
of his posterity in all ages to come. How was he himself crowned with
conquests and victories over his enemies? How was his ^onne Solomon crowned
with riches, with wisdom, with fame and glory in the whole world? which
^lourishing of his son, as of a noble branch, graced in a manner the very
roo^e of David himself. For, as his worthy son teaches, (...). (...)
Childrens children are the crown of the elders, and the glory of the
children are their fathers. Therefore, as children may justly glory of the
renown of their fathers virtue and honor: so the excellent father is in a
sort crowned with happiness in this world, when he sees his childrens children
like to grow up and flourish after him. But upon himself shall his crown
flourish. Lastly, touching the day of judgment; then, then shall all the
righteous flourish, when as having been faithful unto the death, they shall
receive the crown of life. A crown as S. Peter calls it immortal and
undefiled, and that fades not away (...)
. Denying that eeuer it fades away, he affirms that it ever (...). I would
here be bold, (...) I might do it without offense, as I hope I may, to show
you one goodly (...) of grapes of the land of Canaan, a land flowing with milk
and honey, whether you are now going, before you enter into it. A worthy and
virtuous gentleman, whom I need not name in this place, because, no doubt many
ages ^il name him, and renown him hereafter, gives for his arms three
crowns with this posey, Quarta perennis erit. As if he should say, these three
crowns, which I bear in my coat, are but the difference of my house and
gentry, but Quarta perennis erit: the fourth crown which I look for in heaven
shall be everlasting and immortal. That fourth, though it be but one crown,
yet shall be worth all those three crowns, yea three thousand more such as
these are; The fourth shall be eternal. Now, if he, and we that are, such as
he no question is, faithful to God, and loyal to the chosen servant of God,
may well hope for a most flourishing incorruptible crown of glory, then much
more may David himself rejoice in God his Sa^iour, and say, Quinta, aut sexta
perennis erit: The fifth, or the sixth shall be eternal. This crown which God
of his grace with his own right hand and his holy arm has set upon mine head,
is indeed (thanks and praise be given unto the same God) a very flourishing
crown; flourishing in mine own conscience: flourishing in the world, both for
my person, and for my posterity; But it is nothing, in respect of that
flourishing crown which I shall receive at the day of judgment. For the
(...). 12.
just shall flourish like a palm tree, and shall grow like a Cedar in Lebanon.
Such as be planted in the house of the Lord, shall flourish in the courts of
our God. And then indeed shall this bountiful promise of God be most fully
performed, But upon himself shall his crown flourish. As for his enemies, I
shall cloth them with shame; but upon himself shall his crown flourish.

To draw then to an end; it may seem very strange, that David had any
enemies. Yet, out of these words, As for his enemies, I shall cloth them with
shame; it may well be gathered, that some he had. What? had David? meek David?
Lord remember David, and all his meeke^esse, says he, in the beginning of this
Psalm. He was the kindest, and the meekest man alive. When he had his mortal
foe at a vantage, and at a dead lift, as we say, and might have na^led him fast
to the ground with his spear; he only did cut off a lap of his garment, to
show, that when he might have hurt him, he would not. Posse, and nolle, nob^le.
Yet this meek David, patient David, merciful David, valiant and victorious
David, holy David, had enemies. Wherefore you most honorable and blessed
servants of God, you that excel in virtue, if you have some enemies, think
not strange of it. For, if you had nothing in you: no fear of God, no
reverence toward his word, no love and loyalty toward your Sovereign, no
fortitude, no temperance, no good thing in you; you might perhaps walk on long
enough, and no man envy you, no man malign you, or malice you. But because
God has inspired you with his principal spirit, and endewed you with special
great graces above your fellows: therefore does your adversary the Devil the
old enemy of all goodness and virtue, who is ready to burst to see you do so
well: he, I say, does bestirre himself, and raise up enemies against you. But
(O blessed be our good Lord) what a wonderful comfort and encouragement have
all you; what a horrible terror and affrightment have all your enemies, in
this text? For the holy Ghost says not, They shall be clothed, or you shall
cloth them: but I, even I shall cloth them with shame. It is impossible, says
he, that you should always be armed at all points, circumspect at all places,
vigilant at all times, provided at all occasions, to prevent the mischievous
practices of your deuillish enemies. No counsel of man, no policy, no
wisdom, no wit, can foresee all their barbarous undertakings and complottes,
to escape them. But in heaven, in heaven there is an eye, an hand there is in
heaven: an eye to descrie them, and a hand to persecure and punish them: both
an eye and an hand to deliver you from danger, and to cloth them with shame.
Therefore, says he, Cast your care upon me: let me alone with them, your
peril is my peril, your case my case: I Will pay them that they have deserved:
He take the quarrel into mine own ^ands: I Will trim them well enough. As for
your enemies, I shall cloth them with shame. Remember I pray you, beloved,
though indeed, they have made themselves worthy never to be remembered, or
once to be mentioned in our mouths any more; yet remember, I say, to their
egregious dishonor and reproach, how those are now clothed with shame, who were
the first cause of the solemnizing, or as I may say, of the sanctifying of this
present day for the day of the week, and of yesterday for the day of the
month, and of the twelve month, with so holy an exercise? How odious? how
execrable is their very name unto us? what true hearted loyal subject, such as
I am sure all are here, does not detest them, hate them, loath them, as a toad,
or as a viper, or as some hidious misshapen monster; and curse the very day
wherein such a rebellious generation, and such a traiterous brood were borne?
Certainly, my good brethren, if the mercy of God, which is incomprehensible,
did not give them grace, at the last gasp to repent and cry to God for
pardon: as they are clothed with shame in this world, so shall they be much
more in the world to come. And as we hold them for no better then cursed
creatures, so shall the Lord at last, say unto them, Go ye cursed into
everlasting fire. So let it be, o Lord, even so to all the enemies of thine
a^ointed, either open or secret, so let it be to them: As for his enemies, do
thou, thou, O Lord, thine own self, do thou cloth them with shame.

But upon himself shall his Crown flourish. These words, upon himself,
either are altogether impertinent and superfluous, or else they are very
important and material. For, it had been sufficient to have said; As for his
enemies I shall cloth them with shame: but as for himself, his ^rowne shall
^lourish. It is not greatly necessary, as it should seem, to (...), his
crown shall ^lourish upon himself. Yet the Lord in his gracious answer unto
David's prayer, thought good to put in this as a supernumerarie word, over and
besides the necessity of the sentence: to teach the good King, and us all
likewise, a very notable lesson. Namely, that he would bless the crown, the
dignity, the flourishing estate of his loving servant, not only in his own
person, and his posterity; in this world, and in the world to come, as I have
showed already, but also from a lesser weight of glory, still to a greater and
greater. Upon himself, says he, shall his crown flourish. For not only it
shall be as flourishing, as David left it, at the day of his departure to God;
but after his dissolutio^ and death: as fa^t as his body corrupts in the
earth, so fast shall his crown increase still in heaven. Trust me, truly, I
speak it before the living Lord, and this high presence, all the whole Church
which shall be edified to salvation, by David's blessed and godly government,
even after his death, shall yet suffer his crown never to die, but shall
continually keep it fresh and green. Ye^, as every one brought to the
building of the tabernacle, and to the reedifying of the temple, such as they
were able: so I assure you, I speak now a great word, every particular
subject, that is saithfull to God, and to his Prince; as he goes on forward to
God, by the peace, and by the religion which he has enjoyed under his Prince;
so he shall still beautify and deck David's crown; and one shall bring a
white rose, another shall bring a red rose, and add it to the crown: that so
upon himself still his crown may slourish, the white rose and the red rose,
that are in the crown already, being ever made more and more fragrant and
slourishing. O Christ, what a crown is this? And what will it grow to much
more in the end? You that are mighty Kings and Potentates upon earth, have
indeed great cares and continual business in your heads; but yet vouchsafe I
pray you to hearken a little, what I shall say unto you. You watch oftentimes
over us, when we are asleep our selves. You care for our peace, when it is not
in our power to further it; you procuring good to Sion, and prosperity to
Jerusalem, yet many times enjoy the least part of it your selves. But no force.
Take this still for your comfort. We that cannot all our lives long do the
hundredth part of that good which you do every hour, shall have nothing so
flourishing a crown as you shall have. Upon you, upon you shall everlasting
peace rest, upon you shall the glory of Gods Majesty shine, upon you, upon
you shall your crown slourish. Which the Lord of his mercy grant, I most
humbly beseech him for Jesus Christ's sake: that as David's crown ever
slourished, till the first coming of Christ: so our gracious Kings crown may
ever flourish, till the second coming of Christ: and then, that afterward for
ever his royal Majesty, may be roy ally crowned with eternal life:
thorough the same our dear Savior Jesus Christ: to whom with the father and
the holy Ghost, be all honor and glo rye, power and praise, dignity and
dominion, now and evermore. Amen.

FINIS.
A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE the Kings Majesty that day he entered into Oxford, at
Woodstocke, August 27. 1065.
Luke 8. 15. But that which fell in good ground, are they which with a good,
and a very good heart, hear the word, and keep it, and bring forth fruit with
patience.
IN this parable of the sower, are 4. grounds mentioned. Whereof three are bad,
and only one good. Namely, they which with a good, and a very good heart,
hear the word, and keep it, and bring forth fruit with patience. Almighty
God powers out his benefits no less plentiously then continually upon us: yet
we can make no requital: our goodness cannot reach to God. The only thing that
we can do for him, is to love and honor his word. Whereupon king David Psalm.
132.
thought it a death unto him, that being banished from his people, he could
not go up to the house of the Lord with the voice of joy and gladness among
such as keep holy day. And on the other side he said; I rejoiced when they
said unto me, We will go up into the house of the Lord. The Prophet Esaias ^a.
2. 3.
likewise, foretelling what alacrity and good will should be in the Gentiles
after they were converted to Christ, says thus; It shall be in the last days
that many people shall go and say; Come, and let us go up to the mountain of
the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us his ways, and
we will walk in his paths. Look how it is in the health of the (...). Hom.
4. (...) Genesis
body, and so it is in the state of the soul. If a man have a good appetite,
and a stomach to his meat, it is a sign he is well in health: in like sort,
if a man be content to follow Christ for the loaves to fill his belly, and
care not for the food of his soul; questionles all is not well between God
and him; but if he have a longing and a hungring desire of the word, then
indeed his heart is upright in the sight of God. For as S. ^.
Austen notes well; if the word of God be taken by us, it will take us. Seeing
the word of God so is, and so ought to be, unto the faithful, as a hook is to
fish. Then it takes, when it is taken. Neither are they which are taken hurt by
it. For they are not caught to be killed, but to be drawn out of the damnation
of this world, and to be translated to the liberty and glory of the children
of God. Wherefore as fishers take most delight in angling when they see the
fish bite Heb. 13. 17.
quickly and greadily: so if you would put life into your Preachers which are
called fishers of men, that they may preach the word with joy, not with
grief, you must shevve, by your countenance, by your attention, by your
reverence, by all your outvvard behavior, that you desire nothing so much as
(...) bite at this s^eete bait, that so you may be drawn by the father to
Christ. For they only are good ground as we have it here, which with a good,
and a very good heart, hear the word, and keep it, and bring forth fruit with
patience.

Here are three properties of good ground set down. All opposite to the three
bad grounds mentioned before. First, they that are good ground, hear the word
with a good h^rt; contrary to the ground on the high ways side, which when
they have heard, let the devil take the word out of their hearts, and so they
hear not with a good heart. Secondly, they keep the word with a very good
heart; contrary to the stony ground, which for a while receive the word with
joy, but in time of temptation they fall away, and so they keep not the word
with a very good heart. Thirdly, they bring forth fruit with patience;
contrary to the thornie ground, which after their departure are choked with
cares, and bring no fruit, and so do not (as it is said here that the good
ground does) bring forth fruit with patience. But that which fell in good
ground are they, which with a good, and a very good heart, hear the word, and
keep it, and bring forth fruit with patience.

The first property of the good ground is this, that they hear the word with
a good heart. The two disciples going to Emans, when Christ ^uk. 2^.
was departed from them, said thus one to another; Did not our hearts burn
within us when he talked with us by the way, and opened to us the Scripture? O
Beloved, now you are busied in hearing the word, Christ talks to you, and
you are in the right way to heaven. Therefore that we may hear with a good
heart, we must feel in our hearts that burning of which the disciples say; Did
not our hearts burn within us when he talked with us by the way? For so the
Spiritual spouse confesses of her self, My beloved put his hand to the hole
of the door, and my heart was affectioned toward him. And again: My soul
melted when my beloved spoke. Now Christ puts his hand to the hole of the
door, desiring himself to enter, and us to repent: now our beloved speaks
to us out of his word. So that we cannot be good ground, except our heart be
affectioned, and our soul melt toward him. When the blessed Lu^. 1 (...).
Virgin saluted her cousin Elizabeth, she felt the babe spring in her womb for
joy. Certainly Beloved, you have every one of you a babe in your hearts, even
the child Jesus, which is formed and fashioned in you. This babe we must feel
even to skip and spring in our hearts for joy, if we would assure our selves
that we be good ground, and hear with a good heart. Neither must we only
rejoice, but alfo fear. Serve the Lord with gladness, and rejoice before him
with trembling, says the Psalmist. We Psalm. 2.
read that when the Almighty uttered (...) 1. 24.
his voice, the four beasts, whereby are meant the Angels, let fall their
wings. Where are then our plumes of pride, our feathers whereby we fly so
high in an opinion of our own knowledge and wisdom? why are they not all let
down, that we may wholly submit our selves to the Lord, to be taught and
directed by his word? Remember I pray you what good Cornelius said. I know
well there was never more reverent hearing of the word in the Court, then at
this day, yet that which is very well already must so be commended, as that
which may be bet-^ter and better, be evermore enforced. Therefore as I was
about to say, remember what the Captain Cornelius said to S. Peter, when he
was ready to preach unto him; Now, says he, are we (...). (...). 33.
all here present before the Lord, to hear all things that are commanded thee
of God: O that we had this good heart to consider, when we hear a sermon,
that we stand not before a man, but coram domino, before the Lord. Then we
should hear the word, not as the word of man, but as it is indeed the word
of God. Then, we should put a difference between other things which perhaps
shortly we shall hear, either to recreate the mind or sharpe^ the wit. or for
state and majesty, or for some other earthly purpose, and between this
engrafted word, which is able to save our souls. It is strange, what is
reported D^ (...)
of Constantine the great in this kind. ^.
Eusebius writes of him that when di^ine service was said, he would help the
minister to begin the prayers, and to read the verses of the Psalms
^changeably. And when there was a Sermon, if any place of special importance
were alleged, that he would turn his Bible, to imprint the place in his
mind the better both by hearing and seeing it. He adds besides, that the
Emperor many times being as it were ravished with those things which he
heard, rose up suddenly out of his throne and chair of estate, and would
stand a long while to hear more diligently, and though they which were next
him did put him in mind to remember himself, yet he heard the word so
attentively, that he would not hear them. How wonder^ully does this confound
us, that are sarre inferior every way, when we hear and see that
Emperors, and mighty Kings and Potentates of the world, show such a good
heart in hearing the word, and we in the mean time have lumpish and dull
spirits and affections, and are never a whit moved? Certainly ye honorable
children of God, now Christ talks with us by the way, therefore let our
hearts burn within us: now Christ puts his hand to the hole of the door,
therefore let our hearts be affectioned toward him: now our well-beloved
speaks, therefore let our souls melt: now the blessed virgin, yea a greater
then the virgin, even the virgins Son, saluteth us, and wishes us all hail
out of his word, therefore let the babe spring in our hearts for joy: now the
Almighty utters his voice, therefore let our wings fall down, and let us
wholly submit our selves to be taught of God. Even as Cornelius the Centurion
thought when he heard Peter preach, that he stood not before a man, but before
the Lord: and Constantine the Emperor could never satisfy himself with
reverent attention of his good heart to the word. Then indeed shall we be good
ground as all they are which with a good, and a very good heart hear the word,
and keep it, and bring forth fruit with patience.

The second property of the good ground is this, that they keep the word with
a very good heart. In our English Cord bono and optimo. Vulga.
translation it is read thus, with a good and an honest heart. But I follow the
vulgar Latin, which reads thus; With a good and a very good heart. And I
refer the good heart to hearing, the very good heart to keeping: As if the
words stood thus; Which with a good heart, hear the word, and with a very good
heart keep it, and bring forth fruit with patience. To the matter then: It is
to no purpose that the seed be sown, except it be covered in the earth.
Neither that the word be heard, except it be kept. Therefore says the Prophet,
In my heart have I hid thy Psalm. 119.
word, that I may not sin against thee. So that to keep the word with a very
good heart, is to hide and cover this holy seed in the fallow grounds of our
heart, being plowed up by the preaching of the Gospel. Whereupon the kingdom
of heaven is likened to a tre^ sure hid in a field. And this very field i^ a
faithful heart, which keeps and hides in it self the word, which is the
direct way to the kingdom of heaven. According to that of our Savior, The
kingdom of heaven is within you. Ye^ Matthew. 13. 52.
a faithful heart, not only is a sield wherein is a treasure, but also is it
self a treasure, wherein are both old and new things. For every Scribe which
is taught unto the kingdom of heaven, is like unto a householder, which
brings forth out of his treasure things both new and old. His heart is filled
with a treasure of comforts, gathered out of the old and new Testament. The
wise woman, by whom is meant the spouse Prove. 13. 52.
of Christ, keeps her candle a light all (...).
the night long. Clemens understands this light to be the heart, and he
calls the meditations of holy men, candles ^.
that never go out. S. Austin writes among the Pagans in the temple of Venus,
there was a candle which was called, vnextinguishable: whether this be true or
no of Venus temple it is uncertain, only Austi^s report we have ^or it: but
without all doubt in every faithful hearer and keeper of the word, who is the
temple of the holy Ghost, there is this candle or light that never goes out.
For so we read, that the word Psalm. 19.
of the Lord illuminate^h the heart: there is the light. And that this light
goes not out at any time, appears by that which is written elsewhere: O
Psalm. 119.
Lord, how do I love thy statutes, they are my meditation continually? In the
old law those creatures only were accounted clean, which did chew the ^ud. No
otherwise shall we be accounted unclean in the sight of God, if we chew not
the cud as it were, and ruminate, and meditate of those things which we have
heard out of the word. For even as it is not available to eat, except the
meat be inwardly digested and divided to all the parts of the body: so
hearing is unprofitable, unless the word heard be kept in mind and memory,
and showed and set forth in all the parts of our life. Therefore they of
Berraea were esteemed more noble Act. 17. 11.
then they of Thessalonica, because they after Paul had preached to them,
conferred among themselves, and searched the Scriptures, not only to see
whether the Apostles doctrine were warrantable by the word, but also to
confirm their own memory, and to exercise their meditation in the Law of
God. Now then ye holy ones of God, if we would be good ground indeed, as the
Patriarch Jacob noted his son Joseph's Genesis 37. 11.
dreams; so let us not only hear, but also note the word. For this is proper
to the child of God, to have the law of his God in his heart. Not noted in
writing tables, or written in tables of stone, but noted and written in the
fleshie tables of the heart. And even as the holy virgin kept all those
sayings, and pondered Luke 2. 19.
them in her heart, which were by the Shepherds reported and published abroad
concerning her son Jesus: in like manner they that are wise will hear, nay
they will ponder and keep those things which they have heard, that so they
may the better understand the loving kindness of the Lord. Especially seeing
those things which we hear are no dreams, but unsearchable mysteries of our
salvation: neither are we that publish and preach them, such shepherds as the
Angel spoke unto, but we are appointed to vvatch over the flock which Christ
has bought with his blood. Therefore if you would show your selves to be
good ground, your very good heart must be as a field that has a treasure hid
in it: yea it must be as a treasure it self that has old and new things hid
in it: it must be as a candle that never goes out: and as a clean creature
that never leaves chevving the cudde: even as Jacob noted his sons dreams,
and the blessed virgin kept the shepherds sayings and pondered them in her
heart. For they only are good ground which with a good, and a very good
heart, hear the word, and keep it, and bring forth fruit with patience.

The third property of the good ground is this, that they bring forth fruit
with patience. Good ground is like a good tree. For indeed good ground will
make a good tree. Now a good tree brings forth good fruit. And the blessed
man which meditateth day and night in Gods law, is like a tree ^sal 1.
planted by the waters side, which brings forth his fruit in due season. So
that it is not enough for the word to go in at one ear, and out at the other,
but it must go in at both ears by reverent and religious hearing, and settle
deeply into the heart by faithful and diligent keeping, and lastly go out at
both hands, by bringing forth fruit with patience. Simeon the son of Onias
(...). (...). 1^.
was as a fair Olive tree, that is fruitful, and as a Cypres tree which
grows up to the clouds. A cypres tree is high, but barren: an olive is
fruitful but low* So a Christian, must not only as a cypres tree, reach up to
the clouds by meditation of high mysteries in the word, but also he must as an
olive tree bring forth fruit with patience. Then he shall be like Simeon,
neither low, nor barren. But though he be an olive, yet he shall be as high as
the cvpres tree: and though he be a cypress yet he shall be as fruitful as
the olive tree. Noah Genesis ^. 16.
is commanded to make a window in the top of the arc, and a door in the
side of it. A window is for the eye to look out, a door is for the whole
body to go out. And in like manner he that would be good ground, must not
only make him a window for contemplation, as Daniel did, at which he prayed
thrice a day, but also a door for action, as Abraham did, at which he sat
once a day. At the window of conte^plation he must meditate, with a very good
heart to keep the word: at the door of action he must go out to bring forth
fruit with patience. The Lord also commanded Moses to make a lauer with (...)
3^ 18.
a base or with a foot. Now the Latin word Labium signifies as well a lip, as
a lauer. So that the lauer which washes must have a base: and the lip which
utters great knowledge must have a foot to walk according to it. Otherwise
if knowledge do not stand upon doing and upon fructifying as upon a foot, the^
questioules it is footelesse, and so consequently it is bootelesse, and the
lauer wanting a base is altogether unprofitable. The Prophet Isaiah is willed
to lift Esai. 58. 1.
up his voice like a trumpet. Many things sound louder then a trumpet, as the
sea, the thunder, and such like. Yet he says not; List up thy voice as the
sea, or lift up thy voice as the thunder; but lift up thy voice as a trumpet.
Why so? Because a trumpeter when he sounds his trumpet, he winds it with his
mouth, and holds it up with his hand. And so every faithful heart, which is as
it were a spiritual trumpet to sound out the praises of God; must not only
report them with his mouth, but also support them with his hand. And then
indeed holding up the word of life with his hand, and bringing forth the fruit
thereof with patience, he shall lift up his voice like a trumpet. The Patriarch
Abraham buried Sarah in the cave of Ge^. 23. 19.
Macpelah, that is in a double sepulcher. He that buries his mind in knowledge
only, without any care of bringing forth fruit, he buries Sarah in a single
sepulcher, as Philo Iudaeus does allegorize upon this story; but he that
burieth his mind as well in the performance and practice of religion (which is
all in all) as in the knowledge and understanding of it, he buries Sarah in a
double sepulcher. And so must all we do, which are the true children of
Abraham. For then with Abraham burying our spirit in a double sepulcher, we
shall with Elizeus have a double spirit. A spirit that hears the word with a
very good heart, and with patience brings forth fruit. Neither is this
addition (with patience) altogether to be omitted. For though a man cannot
hear the word without patience, nor keep the word without patience, yet
patience is never so requisite, as in bringing forth fruit according to the
word which we have heard, and kept. Wherefore the holy Ghost says; Ye have
need of Heb. 10. 36.
patience, that after ye have done the will of God, ye may receive the promise.
He says not, After ye have heard it with your ear, or kept it with your
memory: but after ye have done the will of God, and brought forth the fruit
thereof, ye may receive the promise. For wherefore did not the stony ground
bring forth fruit, but only for want of patience. They received the word with
joy, and seemed to have very good hearts for a time: but in time of temptation
for want of patience they fell away. Wherefore did not the thorny ground bring
forth fruit, but only for want of patience? After their departure wanting
patience to digest their griefs they were choked with cares, and so brought
forth no fruit. Therefore as a good field must endure many a cold frost and
snow, and hard vveather in the winter time; before it can yield a fruitful
croppe in Summer: semblably ^e that would be good ground, must possess his
soul in much patience and continually endure, yea even manfully reject all the
motions of his flesh, all the allurements of the world, all the temptations of
the devil, whereby he may be hindered from bringing forth the fruit of good
life, according to the holy will and word of God. He must like a good tree,
bring forth good fruit he must with Simeon be not only high as the cypress,
but also fruitful as the olive: he must with Noah make him, not only a window
for contemplation, but also a door for action: he must with Moses, make him a
lauer with a base: he must with Esaias lift up his voice like a trumpet; he must
with Abraham bury Sarah in a double sepulcher: in one word he must always
bring forth fruit with patience. For they only are good ground which with a
good, and a very good heart hear the word, and keep it, and bring forth fruit
with patience.

To conclude then, It is not greatly needful to exhort you with a good heart
to hear the word. Never heretofore such diligent hearing in the Court, as now
a days. I dare be bold to say it; All the preachers in England, in very many
years by all their exhortations, could never have done half so much good in
this kind, as the one only, holy, and happy example has done, which we see
every day before our eyes. Neither need ye be greatly put in mind to keep in
mind the word heard. Memory ye have enough, understanding enough, knowledge
enough, learning enough: When you have heard a Sermon, you can remember and
repeat, and carry away, and keep much of it. But this, this is the thing
which I must ^all upon my self, and upon all you to think of, to wit, that we
bring forth the fruit of the word in patience, in temperance, and in all other
virtues of a sanctified life. For that Samaritan Woman did not fill her pitcher
at the well, ^o spill it by the way, but to carry it home full of water, and
there to use it as occasion served. Here where the word is preached, is the
well of living water, flowing forth to eternal life. But this water we must
carry away with us, and keep it to wash and purge our consciences, to cleanse
our ways, to water the roots of Gods graces in us continually, that we may
bring forth fruit with patience. Rachel also, that other holy woman, did not
desire the mandrakes so much to hold it in her hand, or to smell ^o it, as to
be made apt thereby (...) bring forth the fruit of her womb. To teach us,
that we must not labor so much to know the word, that we may subtly dispute
or discourse of it, as to practice it that we may show the fruit of it in the
amendment of our lives. Therefore king David being ready to redress diverse
things among his people, says in one of the Psalms; O Lord, teach me
goodness, and knowledge: knowledge, that I may keep thy word; and goodness
that I may show the fruit of it. For I am sure, says he, that al my keeping
without fructifying, all my knowledge without goodness, is to no purpose.
Wherefore, o Lord, give me goodness and knowledge. But first goodness, and
then knowledge. Because indeed a little goodness, though it be never so
small, is better then all knowledge, though never so great. One handful of
goodness is worth an hundred headfulls of knowledge. For the fear of the Lord
is the beginning of wisdom, a good understanding have all they that do
thereafter, the praise of it (...) sor ever. A good vnderstand^ng (...) all
they that do thereafter. Why so? Because an ill understanding have all they
that do not thereafter. They that have understanding, and do not thereafter,
that is, bring not forth fruit according to it, they have an ill understanding.
But they that have understanding, and do thereafter, and lead their lise
according to it, such have a good understanding. The praise of these shall
endure for ever. O how highly shall Christ praise you, how richly shall he
reward you, if you have a conscionable care to express his virtues, and to be
transformed as it were into the obedience of his word? Then he shall say unto
you; Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom of heaven. For ye have
not only heard my word, and kept it as far as knowledge goes, but also ye
have practiced it, and fructified thereby. I was in prison, and ye visited me;
I was harbourlesse, and ye lodged me; I was hungry, and ye gave me meat. These
and such other have been the good fruits, which have follovved your hearing
and keeping of my word. Therefore now ye shall be praised for your weldoing,
and for ever ye shall be blessed for your fruit-bearing. Which God grant to us
all for Jesus Christ his sake, to whom with the Father, and the holy Ghost, be
all honor and glory, power and praise, dignity and dominion, now and
evermore. Amen.

FINIS.
A FUNERAL SERMON PREACHED in S. Mary's. May 10. 1605.
Psalm. 32. 6. Surely in the flood of many waters they shall not come near him.
THe principal scope os the Prophet in this place is to prove, that the
righteousness, and so the blessedness of man, consists only in the free
forgiveness of his sins, and gracious imputation of Christ's merits. His
argument may be framed thus; That which the whole Church and every godly man
therein has ever especially prayed for in all afflictions and troubles, that
is happiness: But for remission of sins every godly man will ^ray in time of
tribulation: Therefore this is the felicity of the faithful. To confirm this
reason more fully he sets down, first, the circumstances going before the
prayer; For this shall every one that is godly make his prayer unto thee in a
time when thou may be found. Then, the form of the prayer it self; Thou art
a place to hide me in, thou shall preserve me from trouble, thou shall compass
me about with ^ongs of deliverance. Lastly, the effect following the prayer;
Surely in the flood of many waters they shall not come near him.

Prayer is the true sacrifice of faith. The efficacy whereof is briefly, but
pithily set down to the Hebrews. And I have spoken els-where somewhat largely
of this point. Now but a word only to make a fit entrance into this sermon.
Take it therefore thus. The effocts of prayer heretofore have been wonderful.
Prayer has fet down hailestones from heaven, to overcome five Kings with their
armies. Prayer has shut up the windows of heaven that it should not rain,
and again has opened them that the earth might give her increase. Prayer has
stayed the swist course of the sun, and caused it to go backward fifteen
degrees. Prayer has held Gods hands that he could not strike when he was
ready to plague his people. Prayer without any other help or means has
thrown down the strong walls of Jericho. Prayer has divided the sea, that
the floods thereof could not come near the Israelites. In this place it
delivers the faithful man from all the dangers of this world. Surely in the
flood of many waters they shall not come near him.

The sum is this; That no calamities of this world, no troubles of this life,
no terrors of death, no guiltines of sin, can be so great, but that a godly
man by means of his faith and felicity in Christ, shall wade out of them well
enough. For howsoever other things go, still he shall have such a solace in
his soul, such a comfort in his conscience, such a heaven in his heart,
knowing himself reconciled to God, and justified by faith, that Surely in the
flood of many waters they shall not come near him.

Which, that it may the better appear, I shall desire you to observe two
things. The danger: the deliverance. The danger is in these words; In the flood
of many waters. Where the tribulations that the godly man is subject to in this
life, are likened, First to waters: then to many waters: thirdly, to a flood of
many waters; In the flood of many waters. The deliverance is in these words;
Surely they shall not come near him. Where the deliverance of the godly man
has three degrees also. First they shall not come near: secondly him, they
shall not come near him: then Surely, surely they shall not come near him.
Surely in the flood of many waters, they shall not come near him.

First, the asflictions of the faithful are likened to waters. Fire and water
have no mercy we say. But of the two water is the worst. For any fire may be
quenched with water, but the force of water, if it begins to be violent, can
not by any power of man be resisted. Canutus who was King of England, Scotland,
Denmark, (...) lib. 7.
Norway, and a great part of Suevia all at once, sitting at a low water upon
the Thames shore, commanded the water not to come near him. But
notwithstanding his commandment, the water returning and flowing again, as
that in Ezekiel which came to the ankles, ^zek. ^7. 2.
then to the knees, and yet higher to the neck, so never left rising till it
came up near him and wet him. Then turning about to his noble men that were
there attendant on him, he said, You call me your Sovereign Lord and Master,
and yet I can not command this little channel of water, to keep aloose osf
from me. Whereupon he went immediately to Westminster, and with his own hands
s^t his Crown upon the Crucifix there, and could never be persuaded after to
wear i^ upon his own head. This experience that Canutus so mighty a King
made, does directly prove, that no man but God only can set bars and doors
against the water, Job. 38. ^1.
and say; Hitherto shall thou come, but no further, and here shall thou stay
thy proud waves. The afslictions of the righteous therefore being here
compared to waters, must needs be very violent. For thus the Psalmist says,
Psalm. 88. 8.
Thine indignation lies hard on me, and thou have vexed me with all thy waves.
And God himself; I will power out my wrath upon thee, as water. So that the
security and selicitie of the faithful man is invincible. He may be often in
danger of tribulations as of (...). 5. 10.
great waves or waters, but they shall never ouerwhelme him; Surely in the
flood os many waters they shall not come near him.

But these our tribulations which are waters, are also many waters. Our common
proverb is, Seldom comes sorrow alone. But as waters come rouling and wauing
(...) there: so the miseries (...).
of this (...) Prophet Ezekiel saw the roul^ (...) written with in and without,
and there was written therein, Lamentations, and singing, and woe. This book
is written within and without, to show that many are the troubles of the
righteous, both outward and inward. And it is two to one if any thing befall
us, it is rather an ill hap, then a good hap. Seeing for one singing, there
is in the book a double sorrowing, lamentations, and woe. Or if it be read as
some translate it; Lamentations, Et scripture in eo erat lamentationum, (...)
carminis, and (...). Trem^ll.
and mourning, and woe, then it is yet more plain, that in this world many
troubles as many waters come one in the neck of an other, no earthly joy or
comfort coming between. This the good King greatly complains Psalm. 42. 7.
of, One deep calls an other because of the noise of the water pipes, all
thy floods and storms have gone over me. And Job, He has given me one Job.
16. 14.
wound upon another, and he has run upon me as a giant. And Saint Paul
though in one place he write God Philip. 2. 37.
showed mercy (...) him, that he should not have (...) upon sorrow, yet
oftentimes els^ (...) speaks of his own manifo^d dangers. I soffered ^.
(...). 1^. 26
thrice shipwreck, says he: night and day have I bin in the deep sea. In
iourneying I was often, in perils of waters in perils of robbers, in perils
of mine own nation, in perils among the Gentiles, in perils in the city, in
perils in the wilderness, in perils in the sea, in perils among false
brethren. Thus we see how many waters the godly man is subject to in this life.
For one joy he has at the least two sorrows, if he have no more: one deep
calls an other: one wound brings another: he has sorrow upon sorrow: perils
upon perils, Many waters: many dangers. Never thelesse, Surely in the flood of
many waters, they shall not come near him.

Thirdly, the dangers of this life, are as a blood. The very naming and
mentioning of a flood must needs be very terrible, ever since Noah's flood
destroyed the whole world. For even as a horse or a mule of whom the Prophet a
little after speaks in this Psalm. having been once well lashed with a
whippe, does ever after fear if he hear but the bell which is tied to the
(...) so man since the world was so well scoured and scourged with a flood,
could never almost abide either to talk or think of it. Now though our whole
life be nothing else but a flood of many waters, yet nothing in the world may
more fitly be so called, then our going out of the world. This indeed brings
with it a blood of many waters, and an Ocean sea of infinite cares. Aristotle
writes that nothing is so terrible as death, which Antiochus feeling sensibly
in himself, cries out thus, Oh into 1. Mat. ^. 11.
what adversity am I come, and into what floods of misery am I now fallen? He
adds the reason anon after; For I must die with great sorrow in a strange
land. What speak I of a wicked tyrant? Holy men often are in great perplexity
at the time of their departure. S. Hiero^ (...). in (...).
writes of Hilarion, that being ready to give up the ghost, he said thus to
his soul; Go forth my soul, why fear thou? go forth, why tremblest thou?
Thou have served Christ almost these threescore and ten years, and do thou
now fear death? Christ himself also feeling that he was compassed about with
the sorrows of death, began to be afraid, and to be in great heaviness, and
he said moreover, My soul is very Mark. 14. 33.
heavy even to the death. I know well Christ was afraid without sin, nay
with great comfort. For he prays thus, Not as I will, but as thou will. And
again, Into thy hands I commit my spirit. This then was his comfort, that the
Jews could do nothing in putting him to death, but as S. Peter testifies,
that only which his father both by his counsel and will had decreed, and by
his hand had ordained. Hilarion also that holy ancient Father comfort
himself with this, that he had served Christ almost seauentie years. Other
children of God have had other comforts, and all have this, that both in life
and in death they are happy in Christ. Howbeit seeing many holy Christians,
and even Christ himself feared death, it remains that death simply and in it
self considered, is a flood of many waters. But yet the faithful man even in
death is out of all danger. Surely in the floods of many waters, they shall not
come near him.

Thus much for the first part which is the danger; In the flood of many waters.
The second part follows, which is the deliverance; Surely, they shall not
come near him.

First, they shall not come near. They, that is, The waters shall not come
near. The holy Church and every member thereof is likened to a house built
upon a rock. Upon which though the winds blow, and the floods Matthew. 7. 25.
beat, yet it can not be thrown down, because it is built upon a rock. So
that the floods which shake it, can never come near it to overthrow it. The
same may be said of the ship covered with waters. It might well floate, but it
could never be drowned. For as soon as the Disciples cried upon Christ to
Matthew. 8. 24.
save them, presently there followed a great calm. Therefore Luther when his
life was sought of all the world in a manner, translated the Psalm Deus noster
refugium, into dumb meerer, and Psalm. 46. 1.
caused it to be sung in all the reformed churches. God is our hope and
strength a very present help in trouble. Therefore will we not fear though
the earth be mooned, and though the hills be^ca ried into the midst of the sea.
Though the waves thereon rage and s^ell: and though the mountains shake at the
tempest of the same. ^. Peter the Apostle began to sincke, but he sunk not
right down. Christ was ready at hand to help him. For as soon as he saw
himself in present peril and danger, forth with he cried, Master save me.
Save me O God: for the waters are com ^. (...) 1. and 1^.
in even unto my soul. I sti^ke ^ast in the deep mire where no ground i^; I
am come into deep waters, so that the floods run over me. Take me out of the
mire that I sink not, and out of the deep waters. Let not the water flood
drown me, neither let the deep swall^w me up: and let not the pit that her
mouth upon me. S. Paul likewise suffered shipwreck, A (...).
but lost not by it one hair of his head. Whereby we may s^e the abs^rdity of
the Papists. They would prove that justifying grace may be lost, because some
have made shipwreck of faith. But if we should grant them that the Apostle
speaks of justifying not of 1. Tim. ^. 19.
historical faith, yet we have the help of a second answer. To wit, that
shipwreck is one thing, and drowning an other. Therefore faith which is wrackt
is not by and by drowned. For it may happen to suffer shipwreck as S. Paul
did, and swim out safe to the shore. But this is but a touch by the way.
Mean season we see how safe and secure the faithful man is in Christ. He is a
house to which the floods may come near to shake it, but never to throvve it
down, he is a ship, which the waves may come near to toss it, but never to
turn it over: even as Saint Peter began to sink, but still kept up his head:
and Saint Paul suffered shippewracke, but was not a hair the worse for it.
Surly in the flood of many waters, they shall not come near him.

Secondly, him. They shall not come near him. This word must in no case be
omitted. It helps us to answer a very strong objection. For it may be said,
Many holy men have lost their goods, have suffered great torments in their
body, have been troubled also in mind; how then did not the floods of many
waters come near them? The word Him helps us to answer. The very
Philosophers themselves reckoned their goods pertained no more to the^, then be
it spoken with reverence and regard, the parings of their nails. Zenon hearing
news he had lost all he had by sea, said only thus; Thou have (...) facis
(...) cum (...) compel^.
done very well Fortune to leave me nothing but my cloak. An other called
Anaxarchus, when as Nicocreon the tyrant commanded he should be beaten to death
in a mortar, spoke thus to the executioner; Beat and bray as long as thou will
Anaxarchus his bag or sachell (so he called his own body) but Anaxarchus
thou can not touch. Yet these making so small reckoning of their goods and
body, set their mind notwithstanding at a high rate. The mind (...) est
(...).
of a man, is himself, say they. Hence it is that Julius Caesar, when Amyclas
the Pilot was greatly afraid of the tempest, spoke to him thus, What meanest
thou to fear base fellovv, do thou not (...).
k^ovv thou cariest Caesar with thee? As if he should say, Caesar's body may
well be drowned, as any other man's may, but his mind, his magnanimity, his
valor, his fortitude, can never be (...). Thus far went Philosophy: But
Divinity goes a degree further. For Philosophy defines Him, that is a man,
by his reason and the moral (...) of the mind; But Divinity desineth a
Christian man by his faith and his conjunction thereby with Christ.
Excellently says Saint Austin: (...). 19. (...).
When e com's it that the soul dies? ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^
Because faith is not in it. Whence that the body dies? Because a soul is
not in it. Therefore the soale of thy soul is faith. So that if we would
know what is a faithful man, we must define Him, not by his natural
soul, as he is reasonable, but by the soul of his soul, which i^ his ^aith.
And then we easily answer the (...), that a (...) may come ^eere a faithful
man's goods, near his (...), near his reasonable soul, but ^o his says, that
is to Him, it can never come near. For if you speak of the life and essence
of him, that it is faith, the Prophet also witnesses, The just Abacu^k.
shall live by faith. And the Apostle, Gal. 2. 20.
Now I live not, but Christ lives in me, but that I live, I live by faith in
the son of God, who loved me; and gave himself for me. And he that was wiser
then all the Philosophers determines this doubt thus; The sum of the matter
when you have heard all is (...). 12. 23.
this: ^eare God, and keep his commandments; for this is all of man. All of
man, what is that. All of man which will hold out against all floods of many
waters. For the goods of man may be gotten away by ^orged cauillation: the
body of man may be weakened by sickness: the soul of man and the fae^lties
thereof, as memory, wit, and such like, may be impaired by age, but says in
Christ, the fear of God, a care to keep his commandments, is all of man,
which no (...), either in life or in death can over whelme. All of man wherein
man ought to employ himself while he is alive, and without which, man is but
vanity when he is dead, but with which, man both in life and death is most
blessed. For if this be the sum of all, then of any thing but this there is
no reckoning at all to be made. I have prayed for thee, says our Savior, that
Matthew. 16. (...).
thy faith should not fail, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against
thee. For love is strong as death: iealously is (...). 8. 7.
cruel as the grave: the coals thereof are fiery coals, and a vehement
flame. Much water cannot quench love, neither can the floods drown it. Even as
Paul also glories, that nothing can separate (...). 8.
him from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus. Wherefore seeing the godly
man is so invincible, that neither the gates of hell, nor the floodgates of
many waters, can prevail against him; Surely in the flood of many waters, they
shall not come near him.

In the last place must be considered the asseueration, Surely. For if both
living and dying my (...) be most certai^e in Christ, and yet I know not so
much, what comfort can I gather thereby? Now in all adversities this is my
greatest joy, that the favor of God which is most constant in it self, is
fully assured also to me. For, I know that my redeemer lives. And if I be
judged, I know I shall be found righteous. And I know whom I have believed,
and I am sure. In one word, I am Surely persuaded, that neither life nor death,
nor any thing else can separate us from Christ. Romans 8. 37.
Nay in all the flood of waters we shall be more then conquerours. They shall
not come near to conquer us. But rather we shall conquer them. Yea that which
is strangest of all, Surely we shall be more then conquerers over them. Though
an host of men were laid against me, yet shall not my heart be afraid: and
though there rose up war Psalm. 27. 3.
against me, yet will I put my trust in it. Not in him, as it is ill translated
in the English, but in it; that is, In the very war it self. I will not
fear. Nay I will be of good hope. Yea Surely in the very war will I hope and
trust. For even as a building made arch-wise, the more weight is laid upon it,
the more strong still it is: so the more force and strength is brought against
me, the greater triumph and victory I shall have. Therefore I will not be
afraid of ten Psalm. 3. 7.
thousand of the people, that have se^ themselves against me round about. For a
thousand of them shall (...) at my side, and ten thousand at my right hand, but
they shall not come near me. The Arc in the (...) was not drow^ed, as Genesis 7.
18.
other things were, but floated upon the waters. Yea the higher the waters
increased, the higher Surely for that did the Arc still arise. Likewise the red ^ea did not hinder the Israelites passage, (...). 1^ 22.
but opened an easy way to them. Yea Surely it was morcouer as a wall to
back them against all their enemies. The words o Saint James are ver^e
(...). 1. 2.
plain, My brethren, count it exceeding ^oy when you fall into diverse
temptations. Tenta^ion of it self does vex and disquiet a man. But to the
godly it is a joy. As we read else where, That they ^vhich are iustisied by
(...) have peace, nay, have easy access to God, and great joy in
tribulations. But the Apostle adding, that this joy is not common Ro^. 5.
or ordinary, but Surely exceeding joy, raises up the ampli^ication as high
as may be. Whereunto. S. Paul also accords; 2. Cor. 4. 9.
We are af^licted on every side, yet we are not in distress: in poverty, but
not overcome of poverty, we are persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down, but
we perish not. Here he proves directly, that the flood comes not near the
faithful. But where is the Surely? It follows in the same epistle; As dying,
and behold we live: as chastened, and yet not killed: as sorrowing, and yet
always re^oycing* as poor, and 2. (...). 6. 1^.
yet making many rich: as having nothing, and yet possessing all things. O the
securi^ie and felici^ie of the faithful! For his faith makes life of death:
joy of sorrow: riches of poverty. What shall I say more? or what would you
have me say more, then as the Apostle says? It makes all things of nothing. As
having nothing says he, and yet p^ss ssi g all things. But the special thing
to be noted in this sentence is, As dying, and Behold we live. For they import,
that death is no death, but As it were death, an image, or a shadow of death:
being indeed life, and Surely a better life and more immortal then we had
here. Therefore he says, Behold we live, to show that by death the faithful
live a life wherein there is some great specialty and excellency worthy indeed
to be beholded and regarded. As if he should say; Behold we live, Behold we
live a more happy life, then ever we lived in our life. S. Augustine often
comme^deth the saying Non ita ^ixi inter vo^, vt ^e pudeat viuere: nec mori
ti^eo, quia bonum dominum habemus. Pontius in fine vitae ^ius
of his master S. Ambrose when he was ready to die. Speaking to Stilico and
others about his bed; I have not lived so among you, says he, that I am
ashamed to live longer if it please God: and yet again I am not afraid to die,
because we have a good Lord. He does not say, Mine own goodness puts me out
of fear, but Gods goodness. This goodness of God makes me quiet in my
conscience, and secure in soul, ready to embrace death whensoever it
comes. Wherefore Surely is fitly added. For afflictions as waters do not
overcome the faithful. Nay they come not near him. But contrariwise the
faithful conquereth afflictions. Yea Surely he is in them all more then a
conqueror. In war he is not afraid. Rather he greatly hops. And Surely
even in the very war he hops. The flood of waters comes not near to
drown the Arc, but lift it up. And so much the higher Surely the arc still
rises, as the flood rises. The sea staieth not the Israelites passage. It is
a dry land for them to march on. As a wall moreover to back them Surely
against all their enemies. Tentation not only is no matter of sorrovve, but
also on the other side of joy, and Surely of great joy. Death is no death, but
a life, and Surely such a life, as only of it we may say, Behold we live. So
happy both in life and death is the faithful man; Surely in the flood of many
waters, they shall not come near him.

To conclude then; No calamity or adversity can possibly disseuer that
conjunction which faith makes of every godly man with Christ. For feeling the
remission of his sins assured and sealed unto him, he contemns not only
the works of the world, and dismaiments of his conscience, but even the very
fears and terrors of death. This our dear brother M. Edward Lively, who now
rests in the Lord, lead a life which in a manner was nothing else but a
continual flood of many waters. Never out os suits of law, neuerceasing
disquieters of his study. His goods distrained, and his ca^tell driven off his
ground, as Jobs was. His dear wife being not so well able to bear so great a
flood as he, even for very sorrow presently died. A lamentable and ruefull
case. So many children to hang upon his hand, for which he had never
main^enance, neither yet now had stay, his wife being gone. Well, but that
sorrowful time was blown over. He was appointed to be one of the chiefest
translators. And as soon as it was known how far in this travail he did
more then any of the rest, he was ver^e well provided for in respect of living.
For which my L. his Grace of Canterbury now living, is much to b^ reverenced
and honored. But beeins so well to pass both for himself an^ for his
children, so dainely he fell sick. He was taken with an ague and a squinsey
both together. And the more usual that was, the less dangerous was this
accounted, but the event shows the contrary. For the squinsey being both by
himself and his friends no greatly regarded, within four days took away his
life. These were many waters and diverse tribulatio^s. Besides a thousand more,
which I cannot now stand to repeat. Ye^ he carried himself so in life and
death, as these waters seemed not once to come near him. He was professor of
the Hebrewe tongue in this University thirty years. (As his father in law D.
Larkyn bad been professor of Physic sieve or six and thirty years.) Which
tongue, howsoever some account of it, yet ought to be preferred before all the
rest. For it is the antienst, the shortest, the plainest of all. A great part
of wisdom, as Plato shows, is in the knowledge In Cratylo.
of true Etymologies. These in other tongues are uncertain, in this taken out
of the natural qualities of every thing that is named. In so much as when any
man has found the Hebrewe Etymology, then he need seek no forther. Besides,
all the Scripture written before the birth of Christ, except a few chapters of
Daniel and Ezra, were written in Hebrewe. And the Rabbis themselves, though
they have no small number of fables and lies in them, yet diverse things they
have notwithstanding fit for the opening of the old Testament. Therefore though
a man cannot read the Rabbis, yet unless he can understand handsomely well
the Hebrew text, he is compted but a maimed, or as it were but half a Divine,
especially in this learned age. Lastly, diverse learned men are of opinion, to
whom I very willingly assent, that the holy tongue which was spoken in
paradise, shall be eternally used in the heavenly paradise, where the Saints
shall ever extol and praise God. But this worthy professor deceased, got him
great credit, as well by the continuance, as by the holiness of his
profession. For he was not a professor for one or two years, as others are,
but full thirty In ^tio page 444.
years together. Nathan Cytraeus writes, that in Prage an University of
Bohemia, where John Hus and Hicrome of Prage professed, that they that have
continued professors for the space of 20. years together, are created Earls
and Dukes both together. And therefore their style is to be called Illustres,
whereas they which are singly and simply but only either Earls or Dukes are
called Spectabiles. Neither makes it any matter that they have no revenues,
to maintain Earldomes or Dukedomes. For they have the title notwithstanding
even as Suffragans have of Bishops. Our good brother having no such profit or
dignity propounded unto him, but contenting himself with his stipend, spent
half his life in this place. For he was upon threescore years old when he
died. He wrote a book of Annotations upon the first five small Prophets,
dedicated to that great pa^ron of learning and learned men, Sir Francis
Walsingham. Wherein diverse speeches and phrases of the Prophets are compared
with the like in Poets and Orators both Greek and Latin, and many notes
neither unpleasant nor unprofitable to be read, are set out of the Rabbis. But
in mine opinion he took greatest pains in his Chronology, which he dedicated
to Doctor John Whitgift the reverend late Archbishop of Canterbury. This book
indeed is full of hidden learning, and shows infinite reading in stories. I
asked him within this little while, whether he had written no more books. He
told me he had, but printed no more, because he had no time to peruse and per
(...) them for other business. Now by business he meant, I ween especially his
study and care to perform well his task in the translation. Wherein how
excellently he was imploved, all they can witness who were joined with him in
that labor. For though they be the very slower of the University for
knowledge of the tongues, yet they will not be ashamed to confess, that no one
man of their company, if not by other respects, yet at leastwise for long
experience and exercise in this kind, was to be compared with him. For indeed
he was so desirous that this business begun by the commandment of our most
gracious Sovereign King James, should be brought to a happy end, that
oftentimes in many men's hearings, he protested he had rather die, then be any
way negligent herein. Which as some think by all likelihood came indeed so to
pass. To wit, that too earnest study and pains about the translation,
hastened his death, and brought it on sooner. Now as he lived so, in his
profession, in his writings, in his translating, as though all the floods of
many waters had never comn' near him: even so also he died. During the short
time of his sickness, he carried himself, as always before, humbly, mildly,
quietly, constantly. One of his loving friends standing by his bed, and saying;
M. Lively, I pray God you may have patience, and hope, and especially faith
unto the end. He lifting up his hands said heartily and cheerfully, Amen.
Little he used to speak, and more he could not say, for the pain and
impediment of his squinsey. Which though it made a speedy end of him, as the
apoplexy did of the good Emperor Valentinian, yet how could any death be
sudden to him, whose whole life was nothing else but a meditation of death, and
whom the Lord whenever he came, might find doing his duty? Wherefore no
reason we should lament his departure out of this world. He lived blessedly, he
died blessedly in the Lord. Rather, you Reverend and learned Vniuersitie-men,
lament for this, that you have lost so famous a Professor, and so worthy a
writer. Lament you translatours, being now deprived of him, who no less by
his own merit and desert, then by the privilege of his place, was to order
and ouersee all your travails. Lament you poor orphans, eleven poor children
of you, which he left behind him, as Christ ascending left eleven Disciples,
bereaved of your kind and dear Father, destitute of necessaries for your
maintenance, to seek of all help and means, but only (as poor folks use
to speak) such as God and good friends shall provide. Lament, lament all of
you, of the town as well as of the University, because our School has
lost such a singular ornament of this age, because our Churches have lost such
a faithful and sincere s^ruant of Christ. Questionless, as it should seem by
the taking away of this man, almighty God is greatly angry with us all for
our sins. Christ Jesus our Master as though he meant no more to care for us,
seems to lie fast asleep in the ship, while we most miserably in the flood
of many waters are turmoiled and tossed. Wherefore let us in time cry aloud,
and awake him with our prayers. Or rather indeed he is not asleep, but awake
already. We have awaked him, not with our prayers, but with our sins. Our
sins have cried up to heaven. And the Lord being awaked, as a giant comes
forth against us, and as a mighty man refreshed with wine. For not only those
are waters which are in the channel, or in the sea, but as waters are here
understood, even those fires are waters, those fires I say, which very lately
awaked us at midnight, and affrighted us at noone day: which raged on the South
side, and anon after on the North side o^ the town. It was but a few men's
loss, but it was all men's The plagu^, (...), (...)
warning. And what? shall we make nothing of this, that one kind of disease
deuoureth up the townsmen, an other the scholars? This is now the tenth
course of scholars, which within this month has been brought forth to
burial, not one of them dying of the plague, whereas heretofore if one or two
scholars have died in a whole year out of all Colleges, it has been
accounted a great matter. This and such like grievous judgments, beloved, do
plainly declare, that the Lord being awaked with the cry of our sins, is
grievously displeased and offended at us. Wherefore let us yet now at the
length in the name of God, rowfe up our selves, and awake out of our deadly
sins. Let this that our holy brother did so suddenly in a manner, fall
asleep, be a loud O yes, as it were to awake us all. Let every one of us,
amend one, judge one, accuse one, condemn one, that we be not all condemned of
the Lord. Let every one of us I beseech you cry up to heaven for mercy, and
say with David, I have sinned and done wickedly. Or with Jonas; Take me, for I
know that for my sake this great tempest is upon you. Then our most merciful
father shall bless us all, as he has done this holy Saint, both in our life
and in our death, by the pardoning of our offenses, and covering all our
sins, with the bowels and blood of Christ. And though in this world we be
ever subject to a flood of many waters, yet he shall draw us still out of many
waters, as he did Moses. Surely in the floode of many waters, no more then
they did to Jonas, they shall not come near us. Neither only shall we be safe
in the flood of death, but also in the flood of the day of judgment. For that
also is a flood, and a terrible fearful one too. To wit, not of water, but of
fire. As it was in the days of Noah: so shall it be at the coming of the
son of man. In the first flood they which had not an arc, ran up to the
tops of houses, to the tops of trees, to the tops of mountains; because
they desired to hold up their heads above the still rising raging water. In the
second, they which are not found in Christ, shall say to the mountains, Fall
upon us: and to the caves, Cover us, and hide us from the wrath of the Lamb.
Then they shall be glad to creep into every hold and corner, that they may
avoid the burning of fire. But we that confess our sins, and forsake the
fame, shall lift our heads to no other mountain, but to Christ from whom
comes our salvation: we shall desire to be covered with no other rock, but
only with that out of which came the blood and water of life. For never did
Noah's flood so clean wash away all wicked men from the face of the earth, as
the blood of Christ shall purge us from all our sins, and present us
blameless before the face of our father, only if we be faithful unto death.
For then the next thing is felicity, and the crown of life. Which God for his
mercy sake grant us all, that as we make no doubt, but this our holy brother
now triumphs with Christ, so all and every one of us, after we have waded
through this world as a flood of many waters, may inherit that kingdom of
glory, which our loving Lord Jesus has purchased for us with his dear blood:
to whom with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, be all honor and glory, now and
evermore: Amen.

FINIS.
A SERMON PREACHED AT WHITEhall before the King on tewsday after Lo Sunday.
1604.
2. Cor. 3. 18. But all we, with open face, behold as in a glass the glory of
the Lord, and are transformed into the same image, from glory to glory, as by
the spirit of the Lord.
THe old Testament, and the new Testament, in sum and substance, are all one.
Christ Jesus the very sum and substance of them both in himself is one and
the same, yesterday, Heb. 13. 8.
and to day, and for ever. Those mystical wheels, which Ezekiel Ezeck. 1. 16.
sees in a vision: are one within an other. After the same sort, there is
gospel in the law, and there is law in the gospel. One wheel is within
another: one testament is within another. For neither is the law so full of
threatenings, but that it has some comforts in it: neither is the gospel so
full of comforts, but that it has some threatenings in it. So that the law,
is nothing else but a threatening gospel; and the gospel, is nothing else, but a
comfortable law. The two cherubims Exo. 25. 20.
, which shadow the merey-seat, have their faces one toward another. In like
manner, the two testaments which shadow out Christ the true mercy-seat unto
us, have their faces one toward another. For the old testament looks forward
toward the new, which is come: and the new testament looks backward,
toward the old, which is past. Those glorious seraphims (...). 6. 3.
which sing, Holy, Holy Holy, do call to one another. So the law and the
gospel, lauding him alone, which is the holy one of God, do call to one
another. Behold the Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the world.
There, the law calls to the gospel, when John commends Christ. Among them
that have been borne of women, there has not risen a greater, then the
Baptist. Here on the other side, the gospel calls to the law, when Christ
co^mends John. Whereupon also commending his spouse Cant. 4. 5.
, he says, Thy two breasts are like two young roes, that are twins, feeding
among the lillies. The two breasts of the church are the two testaments; out
of which we that are the children of the church, suck the pure milk of the
word of God. These testaments feed among the lillies. Because they treat and
discourse especially of Christ, who says, I am the lilly of the valleys.
These testaments also are like two young roes, that are tvvins. Because
tvvins, (as we read of Hippocrates t^ins) when they go, they go together,
when they feed, they feed together. And after the same fashion, the two
testaments, being the two breasts of the church, go together, and feed
together, like two young roes that are tvvins, feeding among the lillies. The
Prophet Zachary (...). (...). 11.
sees in a vision, two olive trees, which thorough two golden pipes, empty
themselves into the golden candlestick. This golden candlestick, shining
continually, and giving light to uery one that came into the tabernacle, was a
figure of that light, which lighteneth every one that comes into the world.
And even as the light of that candlestick, was always maintained only with
the oil, which dropping from the olive trees, and distilling thorough the
golden pipes, was conveyed into it: so Christ shines in our hearts, only by
the light of his word, and the two testaments, are, as it were, two golden
pipes, slowing-forth, and streaming both together, whereby the oil of all
gladness and goodness is powered into us. Wherefore, it is manifest, that the
old testament and the new testament, as Ezechiels wheels, are one within
another. Yea moreover, as those ch^rubins, they look one toward an other: as
those seraphims, they sing one to an other: as those young roes, they feed
both together: as those golden pipes, they flow forth both together. And
therefore, as there are two cherubims, and yet but one object that they both
look upon, which is the mercyseate; as there are two seraphims, and yet but
one song that they both sing, which is the Holy; as there are two roes, and yet
but one food that they both feed upon, which is the lilly: as there are two
pipes, and yet but one vessel that they both flow into, which is the golden
candlestick; so, there are two testaments, and yet but one sum and substance
of them both, which is Christ. Christ the only Mercy-seat; the only Holy; the
only Lilly; the only golden Candlestick.

But now, though these two testaments agree together thus in Christ, whom S.
Paul calls, (...), the recapitulation, ^ph. 1. 10.
or the abridgment of them both; yet, if it will please you to consider the
diverse dispensation of them, you shall in this whole verse observe six
differences between them. And every difference, is a dignity. Every
difference of the gospel from the law, is a dignity of the Gospel above the
l^we.

The first difference is in these words, But all we. In the time of the old
testament very few did behold the glory of the Lord. When the law was given,
only Moses might come up to the top of the mount, all the people stood below.
Which custom continued even until the coming of Christ. For when incense was
offered, Luke 1. 10.
only Zachary went into the temple, all the multitude stood without. But
suppose more men then Moses or Zachary did at that time behold the glory of
the Lord, yet certainly more nations then the Jews did not behold it. The
Jews only were Gods peculiar people. As for the Gentiles they were suffered to
walk in their own ways. The Lord showed his word unto Jacob, his statutes and
ordinances unto Israel. He dealt not so with any other nation, neither had the
heathen knowledge of his law: which likewise continued even until the coming
of Christ. For when a woman of Canaan cried to our Savior, saying, Have mercy
on me; he answered her, I am not sent but to the lost sheep of the house of
Israel. Yea, not only he himself denied mercy to the Gentiles, but also he
charged his disciples for a time to show no mercy unto them. Go not into the
way of the Gentiles, says he, Mart. 10. 5.
and into the cities of the Samaritans enter ye not. But go rather to the lost
sheep of the house of Israel. So that it was but one man only among all the
people, namely Moses, or Zachary: or, to take it at the very highest, it was
but one people only among all nations, namely the Jews, or the Israelites,
which did in the time of the old testament behold the glory of the Lord.

But all we, now all we, with open face behold as in a glass the glory of the
Lord. Then, they did sing (...).
Notus in Iudaea deus, In Iewrie is God known, his name is great in Israel.
But now we sing, (...).
laudate dominum omnes gentes, O praise the Lord all ye heathen, praise him all
ye nations. Then, no uncircumcised stranger might eat the passover, (...). 12.
(...).
only those might eat it, which were borne in the land. But now, all we that
are otherwise strangers from the commonwealth of Israel have an altar H^b. 13.
10. (...) (...) od. qu^t. 24.
, and being circumcised with circumcision made without hands, we may all of us
eat the Easter-lamb, which has bin slain for us. Then, the name of Christ
was as an ointment kept close in an alabasterbox, the savor whereof perfumed
only a part of the house. But now, it is as an Vnguentum (...)
ointment powered out (...). 1. 2. Christi no men ante eius aduentum in Israel
populo (...) in (...) aliquo (...) batur, (...).
the sweet smell whereof perfumeth all the house of God. Then, the doctrine of
salvation was preached only in the secret places of Palestina, which was but a
corner of the world. But now, it is, as it were, proclaimed upon the tops of
houses Luke 12 3.
, and published over all the whole earth. Then, only the ass used to the
yoke, the Jew used to the yoke of the law, was brought unto Christ. But now, he
has ridden into Jerusalem, upon the asses foale ^.
and he has made all the Gentiles, which were before like untamed colts,
tractable and obedient and serviceable to himself. Then, only natural
branches, which were the Jews, did by faith take root downward, and by
charity bear fruit upward. But now, wild branches are grafted into the right
olive tree To. 11. 17.
, and all the Gentiles are incorporated into the body of Christ.

Therefore that is now most true which our Savior says concerning his Church,
^an. 6. 8.
The Queens and the concubines have praised her. The Queens are the Jews,
whom Christ of old had espoused to himself. The concubines are the Gentiles:
which though heretofore they have run a whoring after strange gods, as the
Prophet speaks, yet now they are faithful unto Christ. So that, not only
the Queens, but also the concubines praise the Church, yea all generations do
call her blessed. Which is the cause, why Solomon also had three hundred
queens, and seven hundred concubines 1. Reg. 11. 3.
. Not so much to satisfy his own fancy, as to signifi^ Gods pleasure. Namely,
that there should be seven in the time of the Gospel, to three in the time of
the Law, seven to three, which should love the true Solomon Christ Jesus. And
that, not only three hundred persons among the Jews, but also seven hundred
nations among the Gentiles, yea all the nations of the earth, should at length
be joined to Christ. Now Solomon, not only by the multitude of his concubines
(and likewise by marrying Pharaohs daughter) did foreshewe the calling of the
Gentiles; but much more 1. Reg. 5. 1.
by requesting Hiram king of Tyrus, to help him build the temple. For none but
Israelites did meddle with building the tabernacle; whereas Sidonians, and
diverse other Gentiles, did help to build the temple. Which did mystically
insinuate a further thing. To wit, that though the Synagogue of the Jews did
consist only of Israelites, yet the Sidonians, and all other nations, should
one day come together, and put-too their helping hand, to edisie and build up
the Church of Christ. Even as the father of Solomon prophesied of it long
before, ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ lib. 8.
The kings of Tarsis and the Isles shall give (...), the kings of Arabia and
Saba shall bring gifts. Al people shall fall down before him, all nations
shall do him service. We read Number. 33. 9.
that the Israelites removed their tents from Marah, and came to Elim, where
they found twelve fountains of water, and seauentie palm trees. All the while
they were in Marah, which signifies bitterness, they saw no fountain, no palm
tree. But when they came to Elim, which signifies ra^s, then they found twelve
fountains, and seauentie palm trees. This journey of the Israelites did
intimate thus much. That the Church of Christ, should never leave iourneying on
forward, till it came from Marah to Elim. That is, from the Jews, whose
mouths are full of cursing and bitterness, to the Gentiles, which are the true
flock and sheepfold of Christ. Here, the Church finds twelve fountains, and
seauentie palm trees, ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^
twelve Apostles and seauentie Dis^iples. Which twelve Apostles, as ^welue
fountains, have flo^ed more gene^ally over the face of all the earth to renew
it, the^ Noah's slood did to de^ it. And the (...) Disciples, as seauentie palm
trees, have flourished and spread themselves over all the world, so that, as
the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 80 10.
The hills are covered with the shadow of them, and the boughs thereof are like
the goodly Cedar trees. Almighty God commanded Moses to make 12. cakes, which
should be set continually upon the table of shewbread, yet so as they should be
changed every Sabba^h d^y ^.
. These twelve cakes did presigure the twelve Apostles ^ ^ cap 7.
, and all those disciples of Christ, which continually show to his people the
bread of life, that is, the word of God. Now these twelve cakes are changed,
when as the twelve fount^ines, and the seauentie palm trees, are changed into
twelve Apostles and seauentie disciples. That so, Gods promise to his Church
may be fulfilled, which is this, ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^
In steed of thy fathers thou shall have children, whom thou may make
Princes in all lands. As if in other words he should have said, Thy shewbread
shall be changed. For in steed of thy twelve fountains, and thy seauentie
palm trees, thou shall have twelve Apostles and seauenty disciples, whom
thou may make Princes in all lands. To this mystery of the twelve
fountains, is answerable that which is written of the twelve oxen ^. Chr.
^ 4.
. The molren sea did stand upon twelve oxen, whereof three looked toward the
North, and three looked toward the West, and three looked toward the South, and
three looked toward the East. The great caldron was called a molten sea,
because it did foreshew the depth of the twelve Apostles doctrine, which
flowing from them, as from twelve fountains, did make, as it were, a maine
sea. This sea did stand upon twelve oxen, that is, as Saint Paul does interpret
it ^.
, upon twelve Apostles. Which in that they looked four ways, East, West,
North, and South, they did teach all nations. ^.
And in that they looked three and three together, they did represent the
blessed Trinity. Not only teaching all nations, but also in that sea of water
baptizing them, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy
Ghost. Wherefore, though the two kine which carried the Arc, wherein were the
tables of the Law, went straight and kept one path, turning neither to the
right hand nor to the left 1. Sam. 6. 1^.
: Yet these twelve oxen which carried the molten sea, signifying the doctrine of
the Gospel, went not straight, neither kept one path, but turned into the way
of the Gentiles, ^ea they looked all manner of ways, East, West, North, and
South. And those two kyne stood still and lowed no more, when they came to the
field of Joshua, dwelling in Bethshemesh, that is, in the house of the sun. To
note, that all the kine, and calves, and sacrifices, and ceremonies of the old
law, wear to cease and stand still, when they came to Jesus, which is the true
Joshua, dwelling in heaven, which is the true Bethshemesh. But these twelve
oxen, wear so far from leaving off, either to go, or to low, when they came
to Christ, that even then, they went much faster, and lowed much louder, so
that now their sound is gone out into all lands, and their words into the ends
of the world, and in them has god set Bethshemesh, that is, a house or a
tabernacle for the sun. Therefore as the material sun, thorough the twelve
sig^es in the Zodiake, goes forth from the v^termost parts of the heaven, and
runs about to the end of it again Psalm. 19. 6.
: in like sort, the spiritual Son of righteousness, by the twelve Apostles,
as by twelve signs, has been borne round about the world, that he might be
not only the glory of his people Israel, but also a light to lighten the
Gentiles, and that al, all the ends of the earth might see the salvation of our
God. Truth it is, touching the Synagoge of the Jews, Christ says, (...). 4.
12.
My sister, my spouse, is as a garden enclosed, and as a fountain sealed up.
For as Saint Jerome writes ^.
, the whole country of Iewrie where the Jews dwelt, lying between Dan and
Beersabee, was scarce a hundred and three score mile long. So that, it might
well be likened, to a garden enclosed, and to a sountaine sealed up. But now,
this sealed fountain has been turned into a springing well, since the twelve
fountains have flowed over all the earth: and, this enclosed garden has been
turned into an open field, since the twelve oxen have plowed the field of all
the whole world. Therefore now Christ says of himself, (...). 2. 1. ^go (...).
I am a flower of the field. And so likewise to his spouse; Cant 7. 11.
Come my well-beloved, let us go forth into the field, let us remain in the
villages. For though before his passion he was apprehended in a garden, yet at
his passion he was crucisied without the gate Heb. 13. 1^.
. To signisie, that he would be, not only a garden-flower, but also ^
feild-flower; and that he would remain, not only for the salvation of the
Jews within the city of Jerusalem, but also for the salvation of the Gentiles
without the gate of the city, in all the villages round about. Nabuchadnezar
Da^. 2. 35.
saw in a vision a stone cut without hands, which became a great mountain, and
silled all the whole earth. This stone cut without hands, is Christ begotten of
a pure Virgin, without the company of man. Who was indeed a very little stone
or, as I may say, but a spark at the first. Wherefore, the Jews for his
poverty and humility despised and refused him. But now this poor little
stone which the builders refused, is become the head-stone in the corner, and
it is made a great mountain, which fills all the whole earth. According to
the prophecy of Esaias; cap. 2. v. 2.
It shall be in the last days, that the mountain of the house of the Lord shall
be prepared in the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills,
and all nations shall flow unto it. So that now Christ, which is the
head-corner-stone, may be fitly called the second Adam. The Greek letters of
which name, as S. Cyprian ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^
writes, do severally signify all the quarters of the earth. (...), the East:
(...), the West: ^. again, (...), the North: M. (...), the South. According to
the promise of God unto Abraham, ^ (...).
Thy ^eed shall be as the dust of the earth: (that is, As the first Adam was made
of the dust of the earth: so thy seed, which is Christ the second Adam, shall
be dispersed as dust over all the earth.) Thy seed shall be as the dust of the
earth; and thou shall spread abroad, (as a great mountain,) to the East, and
to the West, and to the North, and to the South; and in thee, and in thy seed,
shall all the familes of the earth be blessed. The lewish Synagogue speaks in
this sort, (...) ^. 1^. A^a ^a conturbau^t me, propter (...) Ami^adab.
My soul troubles me, for the chariots of Amminadab. Amminadab signifies a
willing or an obedient people. Such are the faithful Gentiles. Of whom God
says, Ps. 1^. ^4.
A people which I have not known shall serve me. As soon as they hear of me
they shall obey me. But the strange children shall dissemble with me. The
strange children shall fail, and be afraid out of their prisons. Though God
have been a loving father to the Jews, yet they dissemble, and are strange
children to him. Contrariwise though God have not known the Gentiles, yet they
do know and serve him. Therefore the obstinate Jews repining and grudging
that the Gentiles are called, say every one of them, Anima mea conturbauit me,
My soul troubles me, thorough envy, malice, blindness, and disobedience.
Because they fail, and are afraid out of their prisons. On the other side, the
obedient Gentiles, being called to this liberty of the sons of God, lie not
in any prisons, but ride in the chariots of Amminadab. Because, as soon as
they hear of God, they willingly obey him. Which is implied, in that a man of
Cyrene, named Simon Mat. 27. 32. Vt tali facto (...) gentium sides. ^. (...) de
Pas. do. s. 8.
, did carry the cross of Christ. A man of Cyrene, is a Gentile: Simon
signifies hearing and obeying. Therefore, a man of Cyrene named Simon, carrying
the cross, is a faithful Gentile, which as soon as he hears of God, does
willingly obey him. For now God has persuaded Iapheth to dwell in the tents of
Shem Gen ^ 27.
. That is, he has persuaded the Gentiles coming of Iapheth, to embrace that
obedience unto Christ, which the Jews coming of Shem have refused. This is
the reason, why the Hebrew Scriptures are translated into Greek, and Latin,
and all other languages. To show, that Iapheth does now dwell in the tents of
Shem. And that those oracles, which before were appropriated to the Jews Romans
3. 2.
, are now imparted unto all the Gentiles. So that the prophecy of the
Patriarch Jacob is now also fulfilled, who says, Genesis 40. 21.
Nepthalie shall be as a Hind let loose, giving goodly words. For Christ did
first preach in the land of Nepthaly among the Jews Math. 4. 13.
. But seeing the Jews would not obey him, therefore he has turned to the
Gentiles Act. 13. 46.
. And so Nepthalie is as a hind let loose, giving goodly words. Because Christ,
who first preached in Nepthalie, is not now any longer in prison among the
Jews; but, as a hind let loose, leaping by the mountains, and skipping by the
hills Cant. 2. ^.
, so he has run swiftly over all the world Ps. 147. 15.
; and with his goodly words, with his gracious words, he has persuaded
Iapheth, and all the Gentiles, to dwell in the tents of Shem, and to ride in
the chariots of Amminadab. These chariots of Amminadab are called in Latin,
Qu^drigae, because each of them is drawn with four horses. Which very aptly
befitteth the doctrine of the Gospel. For, as Cal^ (...) in the Epistle before
his Harmony, God has of set purpose orda^ed that the Gospel should be written
by four Evangelists, that so he might make a triumphant chariot for his son
Videtur ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^.
. Which being drawn with four horses, and running upon four wheels, might
quickly pass over all the earth, and so show the glory of the Lord, unto all
his Church. Wherefore, the Church is like a grain of mustard-seede Mat 13. 31.
, which is indeed the least of all seeds, but when it is grown, it is the
greatest among herbs, and it is a tree, so that the birds of the air come and
build in the branches thereof. Thus the congregation of Christ rises, from
small beginnings, to great proceedings. And though at the first, it was but
aseed, yea but a grain, yet now it is grown to be an herb, yea to be a tree;
wherein all the birds of the air ^ (...). 1^. (...).
, all the faithful in the world, do make their nests.

Therefore the church of Christ may be compared also to the Samaritans inn ^.
10. 3^.
. For that inn is called in greek (...), because it receives and lodges all
strangers that come: So the church lodges all pilgrims upon earth. (...)
In the Synogogue there was not lodging for all. For then it was said, (...).
^. 268
The Ammonites and the Moabites shall not enter into the congregation of the
Stabulum ecclesia est; v^de (...) do^ natus (...). Do. (...). (...).
Lord: But now, Christ is borne in an inn ^
. To signify, that in the Church there is lodging for all. For Christ is the
host: the Church the inn: the cross is the sign. Harken to the Host which is
Christ, and you shall hear him say, Come unto me all you that labor and
travail, and I will refresh you: I will bring you into the wineseller ^
, yea I will suppe with you, and you with me (...) ^. 1^.
* Go into the inn which is the Church, and there you shall find Parthians,
and Medes, and Elamites, and all nations under heaven, stayed with flagons, and
comforted with apples (...). 5.
; yea refreshed and filled with nevve wine Act. 1. 5.
. Look up to the sign, which is the cross, and you shall see diverse
things. First, you shall see one crown of thorns. To show, that the earth is
the Lords, and all that therein is, the round world, and they that dwell
therein. For the roundnes of the crown does declare the large dominion o^ him
that is crowned. Namely, that his dominion is from the one sea to the other,
and from the flood unto the worlds end Psy 2. 8.
. Secondly, you shall see two hands. To show, that God is, not the God of the
Jews only, but of the Gentiles also Romans 3 29.
. For not only one hand, but both his hands, are fast-nayled and stretched-out.
The one to the one thief, the other to the other theif; the one to the Jews,
the other to the Gentiles, that he may embrace all that love him. Thirdly, you
shall see three tongues. To show, that Christ, is not the king of the Hebrews
only, but of the Grecians, and the Latins also. For his title, Jesus of
Nazareth King of the Jews, is written in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin. That at
the most sweet and most excellent name of Jesus every knee may bow, and all
tongues may confess, that Jesus Christ is the Lord Pi^l. 2. 11.
. Fourthly, you shall see four quarters os the cross. To show, by the four
quarters of the cross, the four quar ters of the world. For God is no
accepter of persons, but in every quarter and country, he that fears him, is
accepted with him. Therefore also Christ's garments Ioh. 1^. 23
were divided into four parts. Because, out of what quarter or part soever we
come of all the four parts of the world, if we be naked, Christ has garments
to cloth us, if we be harbourles, Christ has room to lodge us. Even as he
himsel^e says, All that the Father gives me, shall come to me, and
whosoever comes to me, Non eijciam for^s, I will not turn him out of
doors. Wherefore whether we respect the host; or the hosts inn; or the innes
sign; and about the sign it self, whether we respect, one crown; or two
hauds; or three tongues; or four quarters; every of these does plainly show,
that now in the Church there is lodging for all, and so consequently that the
Church may be compared to the Samaritans in^e. It may be compared likewise to
Salomons troop of horse^ C^. (...).
. For Salomons troop of horses was kept in four thousand stables, ten and ten
in a stable 2. Chro. 9. 21.
; so that he had in his whole troop forty thousand horses 1. Reg. 4. 26.
; which were either bought by him 1. Reg 10. 28.
, or else brought to him ^. Chr. 9. 24.
out of all countries. So the Apostles, as we may read in the Acts, brought by
one sermon three thousand souls Act. 2 41.
, brought by an other sermon five thousand souls to Christ Act. 4. 4.
; and so every day, out of all countries and kindreds Reave. 7. 9
, there are added to the church by infinite and innumerable multitudes Dan. 7.
14.
, such as shall be saved. It may be compared to S. Peter's sheet Act. 10. 12.
* For in Peter's sheet, were all sort of beasts, four footed beasts of the
earth, and wild beasts, creeping things, and fowls of the heaven. So, in the
Church there are all manner of men, Circumcised and uncircumcised, Barbarians
and Sythians Coil oss. 3. 11.
. It may be compared to Noah's Arc Gen 7. 1^.
. For there came to Noah into his Arc all kind of creatures, clean and
unclean, male and female. So there comes to Christ into his Church, all
manner of men, Jews and Grecians, bond and free ^. (...) 12. (...).
. It may be compared to S. James his net Luke 5. 10.
. For that net had cork above to make it swim, and lead below to make it
sink, that it might ^ake all sorts of fiishes. So, the Church has diverse
fishers of men, some that teach slightly and superficially, some again that
teach more deeply and profoundly, that all manner of men may be taught Ioh.
(...).
, and caught Matt^. 13. 17.
, and drawn unto Christ. Lastly, it may be compared to king Assuerus his feast
Lst. 1. 5.
. For that feast entertained all kind of guests, seven days together, in the
court of the garden of the kings palace. So, in the church, the Lord of hosts
has made unto all manner of men, a feast of fat things, even a feast of fined
wines, (to use the Prophet Esais Esaias 25 ^.
words) and fat things full of marrow, of wines fined and purified. Before that
this feast was prepared, the oxen and fatlings killed, and every thing else
provided, all men were not bidden. But now that Christ has bin killed, he
keeps, as I may say, open house Pro^. 9. 2.
, and sends his servants into the high ways (...) 14. 23
, to gather together all that ever they find. Yea his servants have not only
bidde^ all that they could sind in the hie-waies, but also they have crossed the
seas, and called the very further most Es. 60 9.
Islands of all the world, to behold the glory of the Lord. Blessed, O blessed
be the Lord for his unspeakable mercies toward this Island, now far more
slourishing then ever it was, in which we live. For, alas, in the time of the
old Testament, who was there, I pray you, in this whole Monarchy, at least
wise that ever we could read or hear of, which had any true knowledge of God?
S. Ierom, in the end of his dialogue against the Pelagians, writes thus, Vsque
ad ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^, ^ ^ ^.
Until the very coming of Christ, says he, the Province of Britain, which
has bin oftentimes governed by tyrants, and the Scottish people, and all the
nations round about the Ocean sea, were utterly ignorant of Moses and the
Prophets. So that then, by the testimony of S. Ierom, all our religion was
superstition: all our churchseruice, was idolatri^: all our Priests, were
Paynims: all our gods, were idols. Then there was in Scotland, the temple of
Mars: in Cornwall, the temple of Mercury: in Bangor in Wales, the temple of
Minerva Sto^ An nal. in (...) Morgani.
: in Malden in Essex, the temple of Victoria ^ ^ ^.
: in Bath, the temple of Appollo: in Leycester, the temple of Ianus: in York,
where Peter's is now, the temple of Bellona (...) A^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^.
: in London, where Paul's is now, the temple of Diana ^ ^ ^ ^ 12^.
. Therefore it is very likely, that they esteemed as highly then of the
goddess Diana in London, as they did in Ephesus Act. 19. 2^.
. And that, as they cried there, Great is Diana of the Ephesians: so they cried
here, Great is Diana of the Londoners. Even no more then three and fifty
years before the incarnation of Christ, when Julius Caesar came out of France
into England, so absurd and senseless were the people of this land, that in
stead of the true and everliving God, they served these heathenish and
abominable idols, Mars, Mercury, Minerva, Victoria, Apollo, Ianus, Bellona,
Diana, and such like. And not long after, to wit, an. Christ. 180. King Lucius
being first christened himself, forth with established religion, in this whole
kingdom. But thanks, tha^^s be to God, in the time of the new Testament, three
and fifty years after the in^arnation of Christ, when Joseph of Arimathea
came out of France into England, many in this Realm os blind and ignorant
Pagans, became very zealo^s and sincere Christians. For Saint Philip the
Apostle, after he had preached the Gospel through-out all France, at length
sent Joseph of Arimathea hither into England. Who when he had converted very
many to the faith, died in this Land, and he that had buried the body of
Christ, was bu^ied in Glasce^burie himself Gildas. lib. le (...). Am.
. Also Simon Zelotes an other Apostle, after he had preached the Gospel
throughout all Mauritania, at length came over into England. Who when he had
declared likewise to us the doctrine of Christ crucified, was in the end
crucified himself, and buried here in Britain ^.
. Ab^t this time (...) one of the sea^ntie Disciples ^.
, wh^m Saint Paul mentions in (...) Epistle to the Romans R^. 16. 10.
, was a (...) and a renowned Bishop in this L^d. Also, (...) a noble English
Lady Martial. Epigra^mat. lib. 4.
, whom Saint Paul mentions in his second Epistle to Timothy 2. Tim. 4. 21.
, was here amongst us a famous professor of the faith. Since which time, though
the civil state has bin often turned vpside down, by the Romans, by the
Saxons, by the Danes, by the Normans, yet the Gospel of Christ, has never
utterly failed, or bin taken from us. This the holy Fathers of the church,
which have lived in the ages next ensuing, do declare. Tertullian, who lived
Ann. 200. writes thus, Adue^. Iudae. c. 3. (...) om^es termini, and Galliarum
(...) natione^, and (...) inaccessa Romany loca Christo vero (...).
All the costs of Spain, and diverse parts of France, and many places of
Britain, which the Romans could never subdue with their sword, Christ has
subdued with his word. Origin, who lived Ann. 260. writes thus, Hom. 4. in
Eze. Quando terra Britanniae ante a (...) Christi in v^i is dei (...)
religione^ Nunc ^ero vniuersa te^ra cum lae^itia cla^at ad (...).
Did the I Will of Britain before the coming of Christ, ever acknowledge the
says of one God? No. But yet now, all that country sings joyfully unto the
Lord. Constantine the great, the glory of all the Emperors, borne here in
England, and of English blood, who lived Ann. 306. writes in an epistle thus,
(...). l. 1. c. 9.
Whatsoever custom is of force in all the churches of Egypt, Spain, France,
and Britain, look^ that the same be likewise ratified among you. S.
Chrysostom, who lined* An. 405. writes thus, Hom. 28. in 2. C^r.
In all places wheresoever you go into any church, whether it be of the Mores,
or of the Persians* or even of the very Isles of Britta^ne, you* may hear John
B^ptist preaching. S. Hierom, who lived Ann. 420. writes thus, Ep^st ad (...).
The Frenchmen, the Englishmen, they of Africa, they A^o 500.
Columban^ in A^glia, Pall^as in ^cotia: Patricius i^ (...) flo^.
of Pers^a, and all barbarous nations, worship one Christ, and observe one rule
of religion. Theodoret, who lived Ann. 450. writes thus, Aduer^. Gr^. lib. 9.
The blessed Apostles have indu^ed the Englishmen, the Danes, the Saxons, in
one word, all people and countries, to embrace the doct^e of Christ. Gregory
the great, who (...) An. 605. writes thu^, ^ist. lib. ^. c. 58.
Who can sufficiently express, how glad all the faithful are, ^or that the
Englishmen, have for saken the darkness of their errors, and have again
recei^ed the light of the Gospel. Beda, who lived Ann. 730. wri^th thus, ^
England at this present, is inhabited by Englishmen, Britains, Scots, Picts,
and Romans, all which, though they speak ^iue tongues, yet they profess but
one faith. Thus you see, how the Gospel of Christ, having bin first planted in
this land, by Joseph of Arimathea, and Simon Zelotes, (in whose time
Aristobulus and Claudia, and not long after King Lucius also lived) has ever
since continued amongst us; as testifies, Tertullian, Origin, Constantine the
great, Athanasius, Chrysostom, Hierome, Theodoret, Gregory, Beda, and many
more, which might here have bin alleged Vide (...), (...) Beina^di. lib. 2.
cap. 7. and Bei nard. d^ (...). lib. 3.
.

Lo ye then, ye blessed and beloved of the Lord. Lo ye^, and mark it well I
bes^ech you, how far the new Testament, excels the old. In the time of the
old Testament, they did sing only, Notus in Iudaea deus: but now, we sing
also, Laudate dominum omnes gentes. Then they that were borne in the land
only, might eat the passover: but now, we that are strangers also, may eat
the Easter-lambe. Then the name of Christ was only, as an ointment kept in an
alabaster box: but now, it is also, as an ointment powered out. Then the
doctrine of Salvation, was only preached in secret places: but now, it is also
preached upon the tops of houses. Then, the old ass only, was brought unto
Christ: but now, the young foale also, is obedient unto him. Then, natural
branches only, did prosper and slourish: but now, wild branches also, are
grafted into the olive tree. Then, the Queens only, did praise the Church:
but now, the concubines also, do call her blessed. Then, Israelites only, did
build the tabernacle: but now, Sidonians also, do help to build the Temple.
Then, they pitched their tents only in Marah, where was neither fountain, nor
palmtree: but now, we pitch in Elim, where there are twelve fountains, and
seauentie palm trees. Then, the two kine which carried the Arc, looked only
one way: but now, the twelve oxen which carry the molten sea, look every way,
East, West, North, and South. Then, Christ was a flower, growing only in the
little garden of Judea: but now, he is a flower, flourishing in the wide field
of all the world. Then, Christ was only a little stone, cut without hands:
but now, he is a great huge mountain, which fills all the earth. Then, the
Church of Christ was, as it were, in prison, being tied and bound only to one
place: but now, it posteth over all places riding and triumphing in the
chariots of Amminadab. Then, the Church of Christ was only a small grain of
mustard-seede, which is lesser then any other seed: but now, it spreads
abroad as a mighty big ^ree, wherein all the birds of the air do make their
nests. So that, the Church of Christ, now in the time of the new Testament, is
like the Samaritans i^ne, which lodges all passengers. It is like Salomons
trou^ of hourses, which comes out of all countries. It is like Saint Peter's
sheet, which infouldeth, all sort of beasts. It is like Noah's arc, which
receives all kind of creatures. It is like Saint James his net, which catches
all sort of fishes. All Is fish, that comes to this net. It is like king
Assuerus feast, which entertaineth all kind of guests. To this feast all we,
that will come, are well-come. Not some few Jews only, But all we: even all we
Britains, all we I say, with open face, behold as in a glass the glory of
the Lord. This is the first difference, between the Law and the Gospel, in
these words, But all we.

FINIS.

