A President for Parents, Teaching the virtuous training up of Children and
wholesome information of yongmen. Written in greek by the prudent and wise
Philosopher Choeroneus Plutarchus, Translated and partly augmented by Ed.
Grant: very profitable to be read of all those that desire to be Parents of
virtuous children. ANNO. 1571.

Seen and allowed according to the Queen's Injunctions.

Imprinted at London by Henry Bynneman.

This little following work
a parent does exhort,
To train his child in virtuous ways,
in good and godly sort:
In youth to sow the seeds of grace,
of learning and of skill,
Within his young and tender breast,
to flee and void each ill.
The Translatour unto children, youth, and parents of England.
IF pruning herbs do culture want,
and lack their tillage due,
There is no sightlinesse in ground,
nor pleasure for to view.
If trees be graft in barren soil,
and in infertile ground,
In summer time to yield good fruit,
they are but seldom found:
So does a pregnant mind likewise
full soon degenerate,
In entrance first to vital life,
and vvandreth from his state,
Except it be well ordered,
and trained up with care,
And furnished with godliness,
with grace and lerning rare.
For though the earth breeds vvondrous things,
whose strength and vigor grene,
The sun and shovvres do increase,
as daily may be seen:
Yet painful labor must be put,
and faithful care to such,
Least vicious luxuriousness
impeache it ouermuche.
And eke the skill of things also,
thereto must joined be,
That nature may perform her work
with all integrity.
We see how vvylde and brutish beasts
their rigor put away,
And hagard natures do depell,
and violence do stay:
Such force there is in care, and toil,
in labor, and in pain,
In diligent sedulitie:
I have him known certain,
Which did degenerate from kind,
by study to depell,
And paynfull toil his errors vain,
and growing vices quell.
Sometime he that by natures art,
to gracious things is prone,
Is trapped in fond fancies snare,
and soon is far begone.
If culture, and if order due,
her cunning do not try,
As it does happen unto fields,
unhusbanded vhich lie:
VVherin we see through negligence
of some rude husbandman,
That thistles and such choking vveedes,
'mongs corn grows now and than,
When youth grows up to lusty age,
when strength begins to grovve,
And flower of life does burgen, then
must parents labor shovv,
And careful be, when that the minds
of their children full dear,
May bovved be, when like to wax
their loving sons appear.
Therefore O child, use thou good things,
that thy pure mind may have
His ornaments more precious
than bodies beauty brave.
For as the members have their use,
so vvorthier than they,
Thy mind is to be polyshed
with studious skill full gay.
Such riches and such jewels pure,
as will adorn thy mind,
In Plutarchs lore full briefly here,
thou shall be sure to find:
Which teaches thee for to increase
the dovvries of the same,
And to extirpe the spots by art,
which do thy body maime.
And greater things than these also,
O child, thou here shall learn,
What may become thy riper age,
when thou doste more discern.
A fruitful work and wholesome too,
which no life well can lack,
That coueteth the bonds of grace,
and virtue not to slack.
Which work because in Grekish tongue
good Plutarch first did wright,
Unknown to many, now it comes
in English to thy sight:
My simple labor in the same
therefore I have employde,
That thou might lern thereby t'imbrace
virtue, and vice avoid.
That English parents might survey,
how Greekish men were tought,
The way to train their children up,
by Plutarch which was wrought.
For countries cause I took this pain,
and travel herein spente,
With adding to the same my marks,
which others have me lent,
To furnishe poorly this my pain,
adjoined to Plutarchs lore,
Which if it may be fructuous,
to thee, I ask no more:
No hier nor no guerdon, I do crave
for this my pain,
That parents dear may learn thereby,
and children, is my gain.
And to purtray my humble heart
unto those gentlemen,
To whom I have this dedicate,
this travel took my pen.
Yet some I hope will vvish me well
for this my good intent,
When that they see and do peruse
my labor herein spent.
Which if they do they shall procure
me further for to vvade
Hereafter in untrodden paths,
allure and eke persuade.
And some perchance of learned sort,
when that they do this vevv,
Will judge my labor well imployde,
and worthy guerdon dew.
Such friendly men do know the fruit
that may hereof ensue,
If parents do embrace the same,
and do their sons endue
(...) be tamed, and accustomed to come to the hand of the Falconer, (which
serve us in our hauking:) so undoubtedly much more, tender age, is and ought to
be endued with faithful precepts, and tilled with holsom lessons, that in time
to come, they may be profitable members in the common weal, and with wisdom
and experience, politikely administer and govern the same. The men of old
time, as they suffered not their cattle to stray without a shepeherd or
herdesman, so neither permitted they their children to wander and run at
randon licentiously without a guide, a gouerner, or learned instructor. And
this was their intent, that their childrens tender years might godly and
purely be brought up. Therefore the valiante Philip king of Macedonia, did
not joy so much that a son was borne to him, as Philip king of Macedonia,
rejoiced that his son Alexander was born in Aristotle's time. Horatius.
he rejoiced, he was brought to light in Aristotle's time, that princely
Philosopher, that of him he might be taught and instructed, to live well and
blissedly. Wisely and truly has the Poet Horace soong.

Que semel est imbuta recens seruabit odorem testa di^. etc. The vessel will
conserve the taste
of lycour very long,
With which it was first seasoned,
and thereof smell full strong.
Even so a child, if that he be
in tender years brought up
In virtues school, and nurtred well,
will smell of virtues cup.
And in showing the way of this education, it shall not be out of the way, nor
inexpedient, to begin of the birth, and generation. Therefore, I would counsel
him How a pare^t ought too march him self, that would have excellent children.
that does desire to be the father of a virtuous and honorable child, not to
join himself, with those kind of women, which are deuested of the attire of
their shame, and disfurnished of all honesty, as baudes and common harlots:
for such as of dishonest and vicious parents be engendered, and brought to
light, through all their life shall not avoid the inexpugnible reproaches
taunts, quips, and nipping contumelies of their base birth and ignobilitie, but
at every hour be a laughing stock and ready gibe, to those that be prone and
bent to reprehensio^, ignominy, railing, and casting in the nose of such
obscure generation. Truly and wisely has the poet said, meritorious of
immortal fame.

(...)
(...).
When parents do not rightly lay
a firm foundation,
Of stock unspotted, often their sons
sustain calumniation:
And prove th'assaultes of fortunes threats
for filthy procreation.
Therefore honest and lawful birthe, is the excellent and beautiful treasure
Honest birth is the treasure of liberty.
of the liberty of speech, when none shall have occasion (what alteration so
ever happen) once to be so bold, as to object any brutall obscurity of
dishonest generation: which thing they must very often consider, which require
the lawful propagation of children: for those whose birth is blemished with
spot or blot, or taynted with the dye of unlawful color, naturally are wont
to be of an abject mind, and contemptible courage, as notably the Poet says:

(...)
(...).
That man though he be bold and stout,
in courage often does quayle,
When he does know his fathers evils,
or mothers faulties staile.
As on the contrary part, they, (which be the children of excellent and
illustrious parents) be stout, bold, courageous, fearing no thunderbolts of
infamy. Wherefore Fame has sounded in her golden trump, that doughtie
Diophantus, son Diophantus.
of worthy Themistocles, often and sundry times gloried, and vaunted, that all
those things which he liked, the Athenians allowed and ratified: for said he,
all things which pleased me, my mother approved, and what things my mother
counseled, Themistocles condemned not: finally what Themistocles enacted or
appointed, all the City of Athens followed and embraced. Also I judge the
Lacedaemonians worthy of perduring praise, for the Archidamus was amerced by
the Lacedemonia^s, because he espoused a woman of little stature.
great magnanimity, and courageous hearts, which douted not, nor adreaded to
punish by the purse, their king Archidamus, when he had taken to wife, a woman
of very small stature, and nothing strongly proporcioned in the liniaments of
her body: privily reporting that he minded not that Kings should come of him,
but Queens, to govern their posterity. Now consequently that follows here
to purport and to reveal also that which our Ancetors neglected not, nor
without great care ouerpassed. And what is that? they willed and counseled,
that those men, (which for the procreation of children associated them selves
to the company of women) should either wholly abstain from the drinking of
Wine, or at least with great moderation should drink the same: for such were
wont to glutte them selves with the love of wine, and prone to ebritie, which
have their beginning, and are engendered of temulent and drunken Parents.

Hereupon Diogenes, when he saw at a certain time a certain dissolute,
Diogenes.
foolish, and brainelesse young man, said:

(...)
Thy father thee begat my child,
When Bacchus cups had him beguild.
And as concerning the birth and propagation of children, let this brief
counsel suffice Now will I speak and declare my opinion of the bringyng up
and education of the same. Generally what so ever we were wont to speak of
Arts Sciences, and disciplines, the same must we also speak of Virtues: for
we think that these three things must be concurrent and run together, to the
perfect and just operation of the same. (...), Three things are required to
the attainment of virtue, nature, art and exercise.
(...) and (...), Nature, Discipline, custom or exercise. Out of each of these
three singular and excellent things do flow. But if any of these fail, and
be wanting, Virtue of necessity must be imperfect and lame: for nature without
discipline and erudition, is but a certain blind things, and Discipline
without nature is maynied and disfigured: and Exercise without both nature and
Discipline, is a great imperfection, and a thing of little valuation. For even
as in husbandrye, and well labored fields, it is especially convenient and
requisite that the ground be rank and fertile, and next the husbandman or
laborer cunning and skillful, and last, that the seeds be good and fructuous:
Semblably, nature is likened unto the goodness of the earth, the instructor
or master to the husbandman, and the precepts and wholesome admonitions of arts
and sciences are assimiled to the seed. Me think I dare boldly say, and
firmly assure, that all these conjoined together, were in the lives of those,
which are through all the world sole^^p^ized, as Pythagoras, Socrates and
Plato, which have obtained immortal glory, and achieved (through their
celestial wisdom and surmounting learning) the perpetuity of never dying
comme^dation. * Who Pythagoras, Socrates, and Plato had all these three
excellences.
commends not Pythagoras, who praises not old Socrates, who extols not
Platoes prudencie? those rare ornaments of natures working. Their virtues
conjoined with nature, Art and exercise, be wrapped up in the sereclothes of
eternity, and their praises are and shall be blased through all worlds.
Therefore we must needs think him far in Gods favor, and replete with
felicity and singular benifites, to whom God has given all these three
excellencies nature, art and exercise. But if there be any man which thinks,
that those men which be of base birthe, (notwithstanding endued Virtues
recompense the vva^t of nature in obseure birth.
with wholesome institution, and trained up in vertueus exercises) are not able
to repay and recompense the defect and want of nature, let him persuade
himself that he is much, nay altogether deceived.

For as luskishnesse and sluggishnesse does corrupt, mar and adulterate the
goodness of nature, so does learning and discipline correct and amend the fall
and vitiositie thereof. Likewise very easle things do escape and fly these
that pamper themselves in negligence, and implunge themselves in the filthy
puddles of idleness. And the hardest things with Of the ^ore^ and power of
diligence both in all other things, and also in education.
diligence, labor, and sedulitie be obtained and won. If thou turn thy
eyes to learn the things which in common use are accomplished, thou shall
soon most cuidently perceive, that diligence and labor are most
conuincible to the finishing and quick perfiting and absolution of things. For
the small drops of water do pierce and penetrate the dure rocks and slint
stones, and hard iron and brass with the often handling of the crafts man's
hands, are mollified and softened. But the Carte wheels bowed and crooked
with greatforce, can never come to their old strayghtnesse, do what may be
done. The crooked and retorted staves of stage plays ca^ by no means be
straightned. But on the contrary part, a supernatural thing may be bettered, by
the industry and labor of those things which are according to nature. * There
is nothing so hie, so sharp, so rigorous, so difficile, Labor improbus omnia
vincit.
which with dilligent study thou may not obtain. But if desire of learning,
desire of diligence be awa^ting, the most easiest things thou shall prove to be
most hardest, and nothing at all thou shall avail in learning. Even as a
husbandman, if he love his husbandry, shall accumulate a great heap of riches,
while nothing he shall so much esteem, which may call him away from his
husbandry, whereby he cannot execute all things in their time: so he which once
has given him self to dilligent studies of the Muses, and has tasted of the
pleasantness thereof, can by no means be disioyned or severed from that
diligent labor, but will perlustrate and search out the most secret
sanctuaries of the nine prudent sisters. Aristotle the Aristotle's indust(...)e
and diligenoe in s(...)clu^g out natures s(...).
splendent lamp of all abstruse things, was holden with a seruent love to
innestigate and find out the obscurities in nature: and therefore it irked not
him, whole xx. years, to hear his prudent master Plato, and to use his aid and
help to search out natures secrets. By that untired and vnweryed study, he
ascended the sort of all learning, and climed to the top of all surpassing
knowledge. Solon, the Sapient Solon was wont to say. Quotidie aliquid addiscens
sen^sco.
law maker among the Athenians, did much resemble him also, whichin his last
age would not be vndiligent, or slack his study. For when his brothers son in
co^potation and drinking, had sung a certain verse of Sappho, he was so delited
therewithal, that he commanded the young man his nepkew, to teach him the
same. Who often would say. (...), I daily wax old ever learning something: the
diligence of Diogenes is memorable: Who going to Athens, went to Antisthenes,
of whom he being often repelled and driven away, (for Antisthenes received no
scholars to teach) would not forsake him. Therefore Antisthenes accensed with
indignation against him, took up a staff to beat and aba^don him: but
Diogenes to testify his diligence and good zeal toward studies, was willing
enough to be smitten upon the head, saying: beat me as long as thou shall
please, but certainly no staff thou shall find so hard, with which thou
shall beat me away, as long as thou say nay thing. But do these things
only show the force and power of diligence? No verily, there be other things
innumerous, which most manifestly declare the same. Although a field by nature
be good and fertile, notwithsta^dingif, it be neglected for dressing A fertile
field for lack of tillage, waxes barren.
does wax barren, and how much it naturally is better, so much is it made worse
without tillage: and contrariwise, if it be foul for lack of good husbandry,
and ouergrown with weeds, notwithstanding, (if it be well labored and tilled)
it will be plentiful, and abound in all good fruits, and straightwayes by
course of time bring forth her received seeds and grains. What are trees if
they be neglected and had in no Trees if they be neglected, b(...) no fruits.
culture? do they not grow crooked, and become unfruitful? but if they have
their due dressing and timely tillage, they burgen and blossom, and timely and
abundantly yield their fruits. What is the strength of the body? is it not
dulled, weakened, enfebled, and perishes with the corruption of luxurious riot,
evil usage and custom? does not a weak, feeble, and impote^t nature, by
exercise and laborous industry, atchieue much vigor and strength? what be
horses, if Horses (if they be not tamed and broken) be intractable.
in time they be well broken and tamed? do they not patiently bear their
sitter, or rider? but those horses yt be unbroken, and remain unbridled, what
be they? are they not wont to be intractable, fierce, shreud, cursed, and
stifnecked? but to what end do we admit and marvel at the administration of
these things? Do we not see by manifest proof, yt the most cruel, terrible,
and hideous beasts by pain, labor, toil, industry and diligence, become
meek, gentle, and tame? well and prudently answered yt Thessalian, when he was
asked, who were the most quietest among the Thessalonians: even those (said he)
which cease and abstein from martial mutinies, and warring weapons. But what
need I herein use ma^y words? for if any affirm yt custom is ^urable, and
that virtues by custom and use obtained he also durable, shall we judge him to
think amiss? no. An example concerning these things will I recite, and so
ouerpasse it. Lycurgus the worthy lawma ker among the Lacedemonian (whose same
and excellent exploites be registered in yt annuals of eternity) took once two
young whelps having both one dam, and caused the^ to be brought up, the one
unlike the other, for the one he made gluttonous, and gour(...)andised with
ravenous pau^che, the other he accustomed to pursue the chase, and to find out
by his sagacitie the footings of wild beasts. Afterward, (when he had
congregated in a frequent assemble, together yt Lacedaemonians to see this
sight) he said to them: To yt attainment of virtue, O ye Lacedaemonians, use
discipline, learning and the institution and right framing What use ca^ do in
education, is shevved by two vvhelpes borne at one time of one damme brought
up and cherished by the singular counsel of (...)rgus.
of life is very commodious, and much avails, which at this time I am
intended and minded most perspicuously to show you. Then brought he out his two
diverse accustomed whelps, and (causing a pot filled with sodde^ sops or swil,
and a Hare to be placed in yt mids before the dogs,) uncoupled them, and let
them go. The one pursued, and ran after the Hare, and the other hyed hastily to
the pot. But when the Lacedaemonians could not yet divine nor conjecture what he
me^t thereby, nor wherefore he brought for the into the midst of them, those two
diverse natured and nourtured dogs: Both these (said Licurgus) had one dam, but
being with unlike use framed and taught, the one (ye see) is desirous to swill
and glutte and fill his paunche, the other applying the chase, and desirous to
hunt, and to follow the footings of wild beasts. Thus much of custom, use,
diligence and institution: now is occasion offered to speak somewhat of
nourishing of infantes. In my opinion, it is most conuenable and necessary,
that mothers norishe Mothers with their own paps ought to nourishe then
Children.
their own Children, with their own teates and paps: for mothers with great
benevolence and diligence will cherish them, because with a certain intier love,
and mere affection they tender them which they have born and bred: and love
even the nails of their fingers. But nursses and fostring dames do use no
true, but feigned and dissmuled love: because for lieu of guerdon and reward,
they practice their kindness. And Dame nature her self does evidently declare,
that mothers o^ght to cherish and battle with their own milk those, which
they have engendered and borne. And for that cause, to every living beast that
brings for the young, has nature granted and given, the power to nourishe
their young, with their own milk. And the providence of GOD by great wisdom
has given to women two breasts, that if it should happen, that they at one
birth should be delivered of two twins, they should have two fountains of
nutriment. Besides this, mothers are bound to their children with a greater
good will, and a more affectuous love, and that not incongruently: for the
conjunction in living, and bringing up together, is cause of yt increase of
beneuole^ce: for brute beasts deuoide of reason, (if they be disioyned and
disseuered from those, with whom they were brought up,) they be desirous of
them. Great care therefore must be employed, and labor bestowed, that the
very mothers them selves (as I have said) with their own breasts and pappes
nourish and foster their infants. But if mothers be with infirmities and If
mothers be sick, or big with other children a nourse must then be chosen that
is honest and sober.
diseases oppressed, and be unhealthful (which may happen) or hasten to the
procreation of other children, then must nourses be received and gotten, not of
the rascal rablement or rudest sort, but such as be sober, honest, discrete,
well conditioned and manered: for even as it is most necessary and expedient
to frame and fashion the limbs and members of children (as soon as they be
borne) that they grow straight and vncroked: so semblably is it convenient and
most decent (even from their cradles) to endue their children with good manners,
and to frame them up in civil behavior: for infancy is a flexible thing, and
fit to frame to what thing you please, and in their tender minds, precepts
and disciplines, with great facility are instilled: but that that is hardened,
is with great labor hardlye molli^ted and so^iened. Even as seals and images
be in soft wax inscupled and engraven, so are disciplines and eruditions
infigured and printed in childrens tender minds. And Plato (who directed all
his doings by the dial of discretion, and glass of understanding, of skilful
reason and learning) seems to me very diligently and learnedly to admonish
and inform nourses that they sing not to their babes and suckelings every
trifling tale, bandye song, and old wives fabled fancies, lest it fortune from
their cradles, that they be nousled in folly, and fraught with corrupt manners.
Likewise was the passing excellent Poet Phocillides wont to give this
exhortation and counsel.

(...).
While children be of tender age,
they must be taught most carefully,
Good works, as grace and virtue sage,
with wisdoms lore and honesty.
And this also can not in silence be inwrapped, nor worthilye ought to be
pretermitted. Let children have to associate What company a child ought to use
and what play fellows he most have.
and accompany them such companions and playfelowes, which be seasoned with
goodness, and endued with virtuous manners, and such as speak their language
quickly and readily, lest they using the company of barbarous and vicious
acquaintance be infected, corrupted, and imbroyned of them: for the diuulgated
proverb was not without a cause used:

(...).
If thou with him that halts do dwell,
To learn to halt thou shall full well.
And after children grow to some maturitie of years, and be of a riper age,
then must they be put to schole, and delivered to the government and charge of
masters, When a child ought to be put to scole, and what master he must be
co^^^ued too.
wherein parents must be circumspect and very careful, lest they yield and commit
their children imprudently to the custody of bondslaues, barbarians,
inco^stant, fickle and flingbrained dizards, and unlettered runnagates: that
that many men now a dais follow, is very ridiculous, and meriteth great blame:
for parents of their servants that be frugal, and studious of thriftinesse,
some they put to plow and carte, some they make mariners: some they set to
marchaundize, some they appoint and constitute their stewards and rulers of
their houses, and other they make usurers to fill their bags: But if ameng
all the crew of their domestical servants they find a vile and a contemptible
person, a blind idiote, wallowing drunkenness, and prone to lucurious
ingurgitation unprofitable and vnmeet^ for any thing, to him they deliver and
commit their children, without any consideration and advise: * A great
vncarefulnesse in many parents. But a studious and honest teacher and
instructour by nature ought to be such a one as was Phaenix Phaenix Achilles
mast.
Achilles tutor, a Phaenix in deed for his rare industry and diligence:
therefore of all the other things which I will speaks off, the greatest, the
most necessary, and peculiar thing is this, which now I will portray: which is,
that parents seek out and choose such an instructour for their children,
which in life is inculpable, in manners vncorrupt, in lerning excellent, by
experience long taught, sober, honest, and painful: for the fountain and
root of honesty and felicity is good institution, The rote of felicity is
good institution.
and learned information: and even as husbandmen to their grafts and plants
ding in stakes and adioyne hedges for the safety thereof: so fit, learned,
studious and experienced scholemasters do ^istil and plant in the tender young
mind of their scolers, salubrious precepts, and wholesome admonitions, that they
may burgen, flower, and proceed, as well in good manners, virtue and learning,
as in age. But who can now a days sharply enough reprehende, and with condign
tauntes proscide those parents, which (before they have experie^ced and
approved what the masters be) they not once doubt to co^inende and mancipate
their children to ignorant, unlearned, and suspected men of evil life and
scelerous conversation, polluted in the puddles of all filthiness, not able
almost to say B to a battledore: Is not this too ridiculeus and worthy blame?
If they do it through They are worthy reprehensio^ ^e blam which commit their
children to rude informers and va fit instructors.
ignorance, it is a very absurd thing, and altogether intolerable. And what
is that, oftentimes when they know by other men's report the lewdness and
rudeness, ignorance, and perverse behavior of the instructours and teachers,
notwithstanding to their credence and charge they commit their children:
because they suffer themselves to be won and conquered with the blandishing
words, and filthy flatterings of those of whom they be friendly, with a
pleasant chaunting tongue entertained and gallantly entreated: but such (which
with this favor gratify their friends) be likened to that man, which being in
body enfebled and diseased, relinquisheth the advice of a cunning and skilful
physician (by whose medicines he might be restored to his former health) for
frendships sake, and through adulatio^, does flee to an other, by whom he is
brought to the brinck of his bane, and often (through lack of experience)
dispoyled of his life. Or to him which (at his friends entreaties and
allurements) does prefer a foolish ignorant and unskillful shipmaster before a
trained, cunning, and experienced guyder and governor of his ship. O god,
what deformity is this? what folly? what dotage? is he worthy to be called a
father, which more estemeth the favor of his friends, than he regards the
good institution of his children? Therefore the old ancient and reverent
philosopher Crates Crates.
with great dexterity of wit and wisdom replenished, oftentimes said very
well, that (if it were possible) he would ascend and clyme the highest tower
and fort in the city, to cry out aloude and say: O mortal men, whither are ye
carried? whither run ye headlong? to what place do ye precipitate your selves?
which with all your endeuers, labors, cares, and toyls seek for money, and
gape for gain, but do nothing regard, nor make no account of your children, to
whom ye leave these rotten riches. And I may resemble these parents to him, who
being careful for shoes regards not his feet: many parents are so blinded
with the ambicious desire of gain and money, and have so alienated and
estranged their minds from their children, that they bestow no great cost upon
them, but choose men of no estimation, vile and contemptible to be their
childrens instructors, which are able to teach the^ nothing, but despised and
abject ignorance and error. * And such they elect for spare of money, that
are more fitter themselves to go to scole to be taught than to take such a
charge and burden upon their shoulders, as the good instructing of others: and
such now a days be ioly fellows and the most made of, if they can chat and
tell a pleasant English tale, to delight an unlearned parents ears, they have
all the learning in the world and bear the bell, when in very deed they be
no body, and have but a show of learning, runnagates and wanderers from place
to place: in the end dishonesting themselves, and marring the children
committed to their charge: for an unlearned master can not make a learned
scholar, Qualis praeceptor, talis discipulus. Qualis prae^^ptor, talis
discipulus.
If such were utterly refused, and esteemed as shadows, not able to sustain
any such vocation, nor maynteined with any lucre, then should learned and
painful instructours be had in more reverence, and better sought out than
they be. Many such vncarefull parents there be, and too many of such unfit and
brainlesse teachers, gadders and dishonesters of themselves and others that be
lettred, diligent and industrious: so that they oftentimes (which in deed be
very careful for their childrens erudition) be often deceived, and very often are
in doubt to receive those, that be able lightly to go away with that burden,
when they before have tasted of the negligence, ignorance, and folly of other.
Aristippus the courteous philosopher, well broken in the schole of civil
education, not with stupiditie, but with great vrbanitie, rebuked and blamed an
insensate and foolish father, deprived of reason, understanding, and common
sense. When one asked him for what stipende and reward he taught and
instructed a child: for a thousand grotes said Aristippus. But when the man
said in good sooth master Aristippu, your request and craving is very great
(for I can for so great a sum buy me a bondsman.) Verily an swered Aristippus,
thou shall have two bondme^, both thy son, and him whom thou have bought. *
Many such inconsiderate parents be in England, which had rather give a
thousand grotes for bondflaues, soon passing pleasures and pelting pastimes,
than one grote to the good instructour of their child. Nay I fear me, if
Aristippus were alive, and would receive no child into his scole, under the
number of a thousand groates, he should have no scholars brought to his
schole: or if all the trayners up of children were so determined too crave,
but half so much as Aristippus did, they should have very few auditors: so
cold and ^lacke be parents in rewarding the pains of paynefull. Aristippus
When on the contrary part, they can in no thing so well bestow their
liberality, as upon them, who have paynfully deserved the uttermost farthing,
of what soever they receive of parents, for the erudition of their children. If
the liberality of parents were as great toward Aristippus sect, as it is in
trifles and gewgawes, to make their children young lords before the time, I am
persuaded that there would be many more diligent and paynfull Aristippus than
there be, and an infinite number of better scolers in the circuit of one
shire, than now in a whole realm: so little regard have some parents to their
childre^s erudition. And to be brief, is not this a thing full of absurdity,
and worthy reprehension, to accustom children, to assume and take their meat
with their right hand, and to rebuke and blame them with great severity, if
they take it with their left hand? and to have no care, no remorse, no regard,
to have the^ seasoned with wholesome lessons, and endued with good lerning,
virtue and civility? what happens to these wonderful parents (if god say
amen) after they have norished euilly, and instructed negligently their
children, I will briefly show. After they come to man's estate, and grow to more
riper years Those children which be vncarefully brought up by their parents,
live very viciously.
of discretion, they abhor the healthful way of living, they contemn good
order and institution, they despise al godliness and godlimen, they regard not
holsom admonitions, and imbroyne themselves in the sink of al filthy
voluptuousness, and scurriliti, e and precipitate themselves into all servile
sensuality, and inordinate beastlines: then at length it repents the^ (when
all time is past) and then their hearts be frozen with the cold of sorrow,
then they grieve, mourn, and lamente, that they were so vncarefull, and so
rechelesse in instructing their children, and in training them up in godly
fear, virtue and lerning. Nethelesse, when as they be so far sotted in
brutishnes, and so long marched under pelting pleasures soon battered banner
(that by no means they can be amended, and reduced to godly life) then wayling
is their wealth, greeuance their guerdo^, lame^ting their liew, mourning their
mede, sorrow their sause, and altogether excruciate and torment themselves for
their childre^s sacinorous mischiefs: for some of them give up themselves to
tryfling flatterers, and parling Parasites, a scelerous and pestilent kind of
varlets, which deprave and corrupt all youth, and blast toward yongmen, with
the wind of execrable behavior, filthiness and brutalitie: other some haunt
harlots, and vile noughtie women, proud, disdainful, malicious, adorned with
sumtuous apparel, but yet disgarnished of all shame, honesty, and good
manners: other some use beastly bellycheere, and are enrachined in gourmandize
and gluttony, minding nothing but to pester them selves in riote,
drunkenness, and surfette. And some again imbrue themselves with fresher
evils: they commit abhominatio^, follow adulteries, and embrace all kind of
libidinouse lusts, most horribly, so that they stick not to buy only
pleasure with death. Which if they had been well nurtred and instructed under
a wise master, and experienced instructor, doubtless they would never have
been in these matters immorigera^t and disobedient to their parents: neither
would they have cast themselves into such irremiable gulphs of peremtorie
perilles, but would have been memorous of Diogenes lesson and exhortation,
Diogenes his admonition to yongmen.
which in words somewhat importunely but in deed truly, gave this admonition,
saying: Enter into some brothel house or stews, to learn and understand that
there is a difference between vile and precious things. * Diogenes thought, if
they should enter into this house of baudry, to vewe and discern the
filthiness there practiced, it would make them eschew and utterly abhor all
such viciositie. To be brief, the thing that now I Of the force and necessity
of right institution and of the collatio^ and propriety of the goods of the
mind, goods of the body, and goods of fortune.
will relate, I judge to be pondered rather as an oracle and infallible truth,
than as an admonition. In these, the first, middlemost, and last thing is good
and diligent education, lawful institution, and skill of things, because I know
and think these to be commodious, and profitable to virtue and felicity: and
al other humane goods be transitory, frail caduke, momentane, perduring a very
little time, not worth the labor, pain and toil, which men bestow in
obtaining and getting them. Nobility doutlesse and the descent from noble
progeny is a Nobility.
sple^dent thing, but such a good as lineally proceeds from our progenitors. *
And without virtue which engenders nobility, there is no respect of
nobility: but if any be virtuous he shall easily com to no fained and
dissimuled nobility (which issues out of lineal discents and prosage) but to
true nobility, which has virtue, whose reward is nobility: for with only
virtue is true nobility gotten: if any excel and surpass in the resplente^ce
of noble kindred, and in the mean season live vitiously and is deuoyd of all
virtue, thou can not rightly call him noble. Turn to the first beginnings of
nobilitye, and thou shall find, those to have gotten the images of virtue
their reward, which at home in civil administration, and in war in shocke of
shield, have excellently behaved them selves, by the aid of vortue, which does
nobilitate those that be obscure and base of birth. Therefore Phalaris (I
remember) in an Epistle Phalaris*
to Axiochus after this sort reasons of Nobility: Ego praeter virtutem
nullam agnos^o Nobilitatem: that is, I beside virtue know no nobility.
Reliqua vero cuncta fortuna astimo: all the other things I esteem to be in
fortunes power. For a man borne of a very low degree (if he be a virtuous
scoler) may com to be the most noblest of kings and other men: and contrariwise
one born of good parents may soon become evil, and more ignoble than him self,
and the vylest of all other. Men ought therefore to glery of the praises of the
mind, and not of the nebilitie of their ancetors, blemished and quite
extinguished in obseure pesteritie. Well reasoned Democratus, and Democratus.
rightly thought of nobility, which says: Pecudum nobilitas in bono va^doque
corporis habitu est: hominum autem in bonitate moru^: that is, the nobility of
beasts is in the good and valiant habit or state of the body: but man's
nobility is in the goodness of manners. And Martial reports in this wise:

Nobilitas sola est atque vnua virtus.
Only virtue certainly
Is sole and whole nobility.
Claudian also worthily has given this admonition:

Virtute decet, non sangui- niti,
Sola perpetua manent, subiecta nulli,
mentis atque animi bona.
It does become full decently
all men in virtue for to stay,
And not to blood to clyne truly,
or unto noble stock full gay:
For why the only gifts of mind
subject to nothing do remain,
In vigor shall we daily find
continually, and never stayne.
Richesse in value be great, and in deed Richesse.
precious things, but yet they be in fortunes power, and hang balanced in
fortunes skooles: for sometime fortune takes them away from him that inioyeth
them, and intrudeth the^ upon him which hoped not for them. * Riches make men
dote, and move them to all euilles, while they see that by the help of riches
they may obtain each thing but virtue. Alexander Riches east Alexander into
vile viccs.
the great that famous conqueroure, (before he enjoyed the Persian Monarchy,
and yet kept himself within the narrow limits of Macedonia) did in his mind
conceive the great works of virtue, and with excellent manliness, inferred
war to the Persians and achieved it with no less tra^pe of manhood. But
after he had subiugated and brought under his dominyon the Persian Monarchy,
and superfluously flowed with all riches, as he which had subdued Persia, and
almost had conquered the whole world, could not corquer nor tame himself,
which did precipitate himself hedlongs into vile vices, through the copious
affluence of goods and riches. Who when his riches were few and mean, was
relucent, and esclarished with fortitude, temperance, chastity, and clemency.
As Soon as he increased with the access of so many kingdemes and riches, he
douted not to take upon him unfit and base apparel, unworthy of such a stout
Macedoman, and to cast himself into all kind of luxurious riot, and in
drunkenness and tossing of cups, to ^lea his best friends, that now it was
safer for an enemy than a fre^d, to be conversant with him. So Ninus the
younger, lived more abject than any shameless woman, dissipating Ninus Junior.
and wasting the goods, which his father by manliness and fortitude acquired.
Therefore the learned lawmaker Lycurgus judged money (which is the strongest
instrument, and strength most Lycurgus caused money to be banished out of Sparta.
mighty of riches,) to be relegated and abandoned by him out of Sparta, as the
beginning and fruteful mother of all vices. Likewise Solon the sapient said,
riches is the mother of saturitie, and saturitie Solon.
engenders cruelty and violence. With him does excellent Euripides assent:
who says, (...). Riches breeds Euripides.
injurious contumely. Hither may Diogenes the Cynike his testimony come,
which affirmed, that riches were nothing else than the couerings of malice. For
the abundance of riches is a mark proponed to such as do their deuoire to
cut Pursses, to rob chestes, to filtch and pick, as light fingred fellows,
malignant servants, sycophants, cauillers, make strifes, factious and
dissensious persons, and which is the most greatest evil of all, they often
fall to the lottes of them which be the most pernicious and leudest lubbers.
And riches open the wyndowe (says Isocrates) to ^l^uthfulnesse and idleness,
which two things those think they have obtained, which flow in the
abundance of riches. For they persuade them selves, that goods mynister
idleness, and expenses (as they do in deed) to filthy pleasures. If any
abound in riches, he will not labor, he neglects virtue, he contemns all
honest pains, and cleaues (as a burre) to sluggishnesse. Such a one was
Pirrhus Pirrhus.
yt king of Epirus who about to proclaim war to the Romans, when Cineas
asked him why he would proueke the Romans with war? answered that he
desired to adiecte Italic to his kingdom. Cineas said again: if thou shall
cenquer Italic, what then will thou der O king? Pirrhus answered: then will I
assaye to subdue Cicilia. Cineas said again. What will thou then do? He
answered: I will wallowe then in delytes, I will turn to my pleasures, I will
macerate my self with riot, we will drink and quaffe, and pass away the time
in pleasant idleness. See how riches (as soon as they come) inuit us and
move us to luskishnesse, ignauie, and idleness. Like wise the sapient old
father Socrates said, that riches stay all the actions of virtue Socrates.
and honest life: and as long and loose garments let the bodies, so do
infinite riches harm the souls. Glory is a beutifull thing, and a tricks^e
ornament: but Glory.
unstable, unconstant, and soon is altered. It is but an image yt goes and
comes soon fading away. Beauty is a thing which all desire to have, but it
dureth a Beauty.
very small while. * There is so great inconstancy in beutie, that it can not
resist and withstand old age. Even as winter takes away all the flouring face
and springing greenes of the spring time and sommor, so does old age
appropinquating, destroy, wast and adnihilate, al youthful comeliness, and
lusty elegancie.

Nereus the fairest of the Grecians (being now waxen old) if in a glass he
beheld Nereus.
his face, he knew not ye same brightness of beutie which in his youth he had.
And Helena (that flower of fairness, and Helena.
the cheifest jewel that ever beauty had) in her age suffered the like
deformity. For whom (being in the flower of her green years) the Grecians
and Troyans were turmoyled in their ten years war: but when she was old and
well stricken in years, neither shepherds nor swineherds, muletours nor
horsekeepers, would take up hostility to enjoy her. Likewise Penelope the chaste
in her letters (wherein she calls home her loving Ulysses) complains,
Penelope.
saying: that her beauty (being now an old woman) is by the default of old
age abandoned and polluted. Therefore the fountain of Roman eloquence and
beauty of Italy, Cicero does thus reason Cicero.
of the instabilitie of the same: formae dignitas aut morbo deflorescit aut
vetustate extinguitur. The flower or excellency of beutie either by disease
decays, or with old age defloureth and blemisheth. Here may Nasoes
testimonies come in, who says:

Ista decens facies longis vitiabitur annis
Rugaque in antiqua front senilis erit.
This comely face and beautiful
long years shall vitiate,
And vvrinckles be in withered brows,
where beauty was of late.
And again: the same Naso says.

Ouidius. Forma bonum fragile est: quantumque accedit ad annos,
Fit minor, and spacio carpitur ipsa suo.
Nec semper violae, nec semper lilia florent:
Et riget amissa spina relicta rosa.
Beauty is a goodness frail,
and in short time decays,
And when it comes unto years,
it lessens and repayres.
And is consumed in short space:
nor Violets alvvay,
Nor Lillies ever do increase
and flourish, but decay.
And when the Rose is lost, the thorn
does wax full stiff straightvvay.
Infirmity, malady, sickness and disease, do corrupt the valiant and
beauifull constitution of the body, as daily experyence shows. Job the just
before he was exulcerated Job.
with sores, did wonderfully surpass in beauties gifts: but after he was
excarnificated and tormented with stinking sores, he lost all the trimnesse and
braveness of his beauty, as his friends witnessed which skarcely knew him
to be the same he was. If any be entriked in disease, he feleth the decency of
his beauty perish, and skarsly the shape of a man to remain. Therefore Seneca
rightly says:

Res est forma fugax: quis sapiens homo cenfidat fragili.
Beauty is a fading thing,
what wise man will have trust therein?
Eteocles spoke thus unto a certain yo^g E^t^cles saying to a yo^g man bosting
in his beauty.
man glorying in the fairness of his form and face. Art thou not ashamed to
auau^ce and lift up thy crests, and to be so proud for the gifts of beauty,
whose use is granted thee, and not propriety, and that for a very small time.
Health is precious and delectable, Health. Strength.
but very mutable. Bodily strength is worthy emulation, but with disease and
maladies it is defrayed and debilitated, and with old age (as beauty before)
is expugnable. In fine, if any trusts to yt strength and vigoure of his body,
and proudly reioyseth therein, he is quite deceived. * Let the huge Cyclops be
example, whom ye fortitud of Ulysses, seasoned with wisdom and reason, brought
to a miserable kind of life, while he pulled out his eye. Bulyris, Geryon, Cacus,
and Milo Crotonia^as may hither be fetched: and the too much presumption of
their strength, utterly ouerthrewe the Giantes, which adventured to depell
Jupiter out of his Imperial seat. How much is the strength of man inferioure
Man's strength is much inferioure to the strength of beasts.
and less than the mighty power, strength and hardiness of other beasts? I
mean of Elephants, Bulls, and Lions? In humain^e things, erudition is only
immortal, divine, and neighbor to diuturnitie. And two things there be most
peculiar in the nature of man, understanding and Understanding and reason be the
two chief things in the nature of man.
reason: Understanding rules reason, and reason is obsequious and morigerant
to understanding: which no fortune battereth down nor conquereth: which no
obtrectation or slander takes away, which no infirmity infecteth or
depraueth which no old withered age does deuastate or destroy: For only
understanding in old age perseuereth in his vigoure, and is then yonglike. And
time, (which consumes all other things) toold age joins science, and
adiecteth great experience. Neither war (which after the manner of a swift
running river draws and changes all things) can ever take away virtue and
learning. * Than How precious virtue and lerning be.
which, nothing of al other things is more splendent or constant, as mark now
and thou shall learn. For virtue does give us that glorious light of
Nobility, wherewith we most relucent appear in all men's eyes. Neither does
it suffer us or ours, to lurk in secret, or in duskous dens, but calls us
out, and makes us manifest. Even as a town that is situate and built on a high
hill, is in all men's eyes most manifest and apparent: even so virtue (in
whose breast it is enrachined and rooted) suffers not him to lurk and lie in
dark dungeons and vnlyghtsome holes, but does illustrate and illuminate him,
and sperpleth his fame and comme^dations, through all the tracts and costs of
ye world. What so extreme darkness can oppress and obscure the fortitude and
magnanimity of king Philips son Alexander the great? Of Julius Caesar,
renowned Prince, or of other noble and inuictoryous personages? What darkness
so obscure can obtenebrate the justice of Aristides, the integrity of
Phocion, the liberality and munificence of Cinon, and the most absolute virtue
of Socrates? Yea, what portion at least of Virtue (which in any, in all worlds
has shyned) has not been by the benefit of virtue challenged and called from
the destruction of Oblivion? Wherefore virtue is thus notably described of
Cicero. Virtus secu^dum Ciceronem.
Virtus est affectio a(...) constans conueniensque, laudabiles efficiens eos in
quibus est: That is, Virtue is a constant and convenient affection of the mind,
making them laudable, in whom it is. And virtue by her self is laudable: out
of which all honest wills, sentences, actiens, and all Out of virtue flow all
good actions.
right reason comes and flows. All other goods fade away and peryshe,
only Virtue never dies. It can not be taken away, neither with shyppewracke,
nor with fire it is lost, neither with the alteration of Tempests nor times it
is changed, with which whosoever are endued, they only are rich: they only
possess things both fructuous and perdurable. And they only are content with
that they have. It never forsakes man in old age: for virtue Virtus
senectutis viaticum.
is the best viandrie of old age, whereby the difficulties thereof are most
easily borne.

And Cato in Tullie says (reasoning of old age with Scipio and Laelius)
thus. Aptissima sunt omnino arma senectutis arts exercitationesque virtutum,
quae in omni aetate cult(...) cum di^ multumque vixeris, mirificos adferunt
fructus, non solum quia nunquam deserunt hominem, nec extremo quidem tempore
aetatis, quanquam id quidem maximum est: Verum etiam quia conscientia been
actae vitae, multorumque benefactorum recordatio incundissima est.

Cato by experience was taught what effect virtue traded, and where and when it
took place, being old him self, and replenyshed with this excellent jewel.
Even as Salt does conserve and keep flesh from corruption and stench: so
only virtue does defend us and our minds, least that we come into the dungcon
of corruption and destruction.

(...) thou do remember it always, and can never forget it: but if thou
shall either hear, read, or do any thing in thy elder age, the memory thereof
soon vanishes away: so if in thy years of infancy thou shall be put to
discipline and virtue, thou shall with use and custom so learn it, that thou
may never forget it. For what way any walks in, when he is young, the same
way shall he tread when he is old. But if thy child, in any other age than
childehoode, apply his mind to learning and virtue, perhaps many things may
happen in the mean season, to auert and turn his mind from it, when not yet
it has soundly taken root in his breast. Wisely therefore answered Agesilaus,
when he was asked, Agefilaus.
what things chiefly children should learn: Those things (said he) that they
may use, when they are grown to man's estate. By the which answer he deemed,
that in tender years the precepts of learning and virtue should be planted in
childrens breasts, if alwais afterward they would enjoy the same. Therefore,
although (as Plautus says:) Plautus.
Sera nu^quam ad bo^os mares via, the way to good manners is never to late, yet
notwithstanding, since there is but one way to virtue, and that most hard and
straight (as Hesiodus, and Pythagoras letter purport) if we will acquire the
possession In tender years must virtue and learning be gotten.
of virtue and learning, we must direct our journey thereto in tender years:
otherwise in elder age we shall be terifted from it by the hardness of the way,
and danger of the journey, which thing to too many does happen. And as I
admonish parents to esteem and regard nothing more than this virtuous and
learned bringing up of their children, so again do I exhort them, that they use
good, vncorrupt, and healthful education: for children must be prohibited and
repressed, from panegirical exercises, and from such esbatements as contain
praise and commendation. For he that pleases a multitude or common sort of
people, does altogether displease and discontent them that be wise. Of this is
the excellent Euripides my witness, which says:

(...)
(...).
To speak unto the common sort of men
I have no wit, nor knowledge I at al:
But cunninger and readier am I then,
among my equals, if they be fevv and small.
They (which wisemen disprove and diflike) have eloquent tongs before the
common crew of people: I my self have marked and perceived those (which have
studied, and with tooth and nail have labored by the chaunting upon the cords
of their pleasant tongue, to augurate the favor, and to hunt for the vain
commendation of the fickle and inconstant people) to live very intemperately,
and without any stay of continency, wallowing in all vice, and enuoluped with
too filthy pleasures And that (by him that guydes the heavenly scepter) not
without a cause. For if they (by their preparation of plesures for other) shall
neglect and transgress the limittes of honesty, they shall scarsly make more
of their own pleasures and illecebrous ways, than that is right, just and
wholesome. Furthermore what things shall we teach for children profitable, or
what good thing shall we oxhort them to apply, seeing that to speak and do
nothing temerously and without consideration, is a fair and godly thing, and
(according to the proverb) rare and (...)
fair things are hard and difficile. But inconsiderate talk, and the use of
speaking without premeditation, is fraught Children must not be suffered to
speak suddenly and extempore.
with inconstancy, vncarefulnesse, and lenity: so that they know not neither
where to begin, nor where to relinquish or leave: and (besides other
incommodities and harms) those, which suddenly, and hand over head (as it
were) without all consideration or thinking upon matters, shall talk and
reason, do fall into a certain inunoderation and dismeasured futilitie: but a
wise and advised premeditacion does not suffer the As unadvised talk harmeth,
so does considerate talk much profit.
talk and communication to pass his reach, nor to transgress his limits:
unadvised loquacitie has much endaungered the blabber out thereof, but talk
with judgment seasoned, has much auayled and profited. * There came once out
of Hellespontus to the Athenian baud Gnathaena the Athenian harlot.
Gnathaena, a certain babbling lover, stirred through her fame, and name, who
when among the cups he had babbled out many things, and did seem very
importune in his talk, Gnathaena answered: Say thou, thou camst out of
Hellespontu? then why (says she) know thou not the chief city there? who
(when he said) what is that* she answered: Sige(...) And so artificially
restrained the futilitis of her lover: for (...) amongs (...).
the Grecia^s signifies silence or taciturnitie. And so he received for a
reward of his loquacitie, shame. Pericles Pericles refused suddenly and without
premeditation to answer.
(as we have heard reported) when he was called of the people oftentimes to
make an oration, he refused and would not obey them, saying: he was unprepared,
and in no frame, so suddenly to talk. Semblably, the thundering eloquent orator
Demosthenes, in the administration Demosth.
of the common weal, Pericles his emulator (when the Athenians called him to
counsel) refused to be present, saying: he was not ready, nor had
premeditated. But peradventure some will insolentlye object, and say: This
assertion has no author, it seems to be feigned, and counterfayted. But
Demosthenes (in that his Oration that he made against Midias) does plainly
and clearly set out before our eyes the fruit and utility of consideration,
of premeditation, and diligence. Therefore (says he) I tell you O ye
Athenians, and I cannot deny, but that I have deeply considered, and with
ardent study perpended and poysed these matters in the ballaunce of
premeditation, as it was laufull and most expedient for me: for I were a
miserable man, and worthy of all misfortune and calamity, if I (having
suffered and presently sustayning such things, which have happened to me)
should neglect and come unprepared to speak of the things I should make
mention of. But I will not speak altogether to reprove or disalow this
quickness and promptness of speech, or again to affirm the exercise
thereof, as necessary, but I think it ought too be done moderately, as (in
taking a medicine in Phisike) it is decent and mete. For before he come to
man's estate Two times may be given to talk suddenly, and to discourse upon
matters out of hand:
I think a child ought to speak nothing out of hand, whatsoever is offered:
but when any has been long exercised in eloquent speaking, and ^ath laid a
deep foundation and roo^e in the entrayles of fine discoursing speac^e (if
opportunity and time minister occasion) then is it decent and lawful to use
liberty in talk and communication. For even as they, which of long time have
been imprisoned, and bound in fetters, although at last they be loosed and
dimis^ed, notwithstanding for the long use of the charnes and bonds they can
not go, but halte, and oftentimes fall flat town upon the earth: Even so
they, that have been long time repressed, brideled, and restrained to speak
(if at any time of a sodeyn necessity moves them to talk) nevertheless they
conserve and keep their wonted order and phrase of speech. But if such (as
have not passed their childhoode) be permitted to be practiced in the sudden
faculty of talk, it makes them (ever after) to be fools, garrulous, and
iangling Of the extremities or vices to be chefely elch^ed in talk.
chatters. A foolish fond paynter showed an image to Apelles (prince of
paynters) and said, this even now I painted. I saw and knew it (said Apelles)
though thou had held thy peace, and not spoken a word: I perceive thou did
paynt it with great festination, but I marvel why thou have not painted more
of this sort. As therefore (for now I will come again to my talk from whence I
am digressed) I have counseled and exhorted to flee and eschew a diverse and
changeable colored oration, and lofty and tragical talk: so again I do also
persuade them, to avoid a thin exile, and a lean oration: for a swelling
and turbulent oration lacks civility, and a hungry lean oration does not
smite nor greatly move the hearers minds. And as in a body only incolumitie is
not laudable, but also a firm and lusty disposition of the body is requisite:
so is it likewise expedient, that an oracion or talk should not be sickely,
weak, and imbecill, but strong, firm, and rigorous: for that, that is secure
and easy, is only commendable, and does alone merit praise, but that, that
is behedged with dangers and with studious labor atcheued, brings
admiration. Now have I to speak and to purport, how the mind ought to be
affected, which must not be temerous, rash, and aduenturous, neither cowardous,
timorous, soon affrighted and abject: for as What is decent and vndece^t in
the affects of the mind.
too much confidence and boldness shows forth an impudent and vnshamefull
mind, so does timiditie and fear draw and move the mind into seruilitie and
bondage. An artificial thing it is in all things most diligently and rightly
to enter into the mean way and keep it. * A great virtue it is to use
moderation and not to brust ye lists of mediocritie. And to open my opinion
more largely, and to touch this education more narowly, The harping of one
string only is odious, and the likeness of talk is irksome but variety and
change delightsull and pleasant.
first I think that kind of talk which is ever like if self, and never
variable, to be the most certain token of a bluntish brain, of a dull wit,
indocible, and very hard to be taught. Secondarily, I deem it not fit for any
exercise, which soon conceiueth, and not long retayneth. One song always, and
the iarring and chaunting upon one only cord and string, in all things is
yrkesome, tedious, and unpleasant to the ears: but variety and chaungeable
tunes (as in all other things innumerous, so in those things which be heerd and
seen) be most delectable, pleasant and delightful. * Importunity is always
odious, but to do all things fair and softly, and in their time, has great
grace. Even as that Musician is molestuous to all men, which among the self
same men does sing the self same song, and still twangeth upon one string: so
he that with one only kind of speech, harping upon one only matter, does
grieve the same men with his importunity loses ciuility, breaks the limits
of courtesy, and is thought a very importune fellow. One once came unto
Aristotle, and blabbed out many things very importunely, still using the same
words. Aristotle still held his peace, at last, said the prater: perhaps I
trouble thee through my garrulitie. No in good soouth answered Aristotle, for I
marked not, nor took heed what thou saydest. Semblably if any go unto men
grave in authority, and use this inuariable speech, and unpleasant tunes, he
escapes not blame and rebuke, neither doothe he further his suit. Not without a
cause does Terence Terentius.
propou^d unto us the example of Demea, whereby he admonishes us not to be
molestuous to the same man concerning the self same thing, with all one kind
of spech (as Demea was to his brother Mitio) when he with great indignation was
offended withal, saying: An toties de eadem re te audiam* shall I hear thee so
oftentimes iangling upon all one matter? Amongs the other tokens and marks
wherewith Theophrastus describes an importune talker, he recites this;
importunit as 'heophraus.
est occursus incidentibus molestus. Wherefore it is the part of a witty and
free child to hear and learn all the things which pertayn to the circle and
compass of all learnings: and as it were by the way to sippe and taste of each
one of them, seeing it is impossible, and out of the reach of man's capacity,
to excel, and have the full perfection of all disciplines. But in Philosophy
(before all other learnings) a child must most diligently labor. Philosophy,
that is the love of wisdom (so does the Greek word signify) above the
rest must be tilled of a child, and the fruits it brings forth must be
laid up and housed in the inward barn of a child's heart. And this my opinion
and mind, I am purposed to approve and declare, by an example or similitude:
for eue^ as it is an excellent and goodly thing, by navigations to have passed
by many goodly and notable regions, and to have sailed about many gorgeous
cities, but a commodious and fructuous thing, to inhabit and be resiant in the
best of them all. So a child that is capable of wit and learning ought to view
many goodly arts, and to run over with the glimse of his eyes, many
beautiful and resplendent sciences (impossible all to be attained) and to
choose one for his resting place and mansion of abode, which excels, and
far surmounteth all the rest. Marvelous witty and merry is the saying of the
philosopher Bion, which said: As the woers The witty saying of Bion.
which could not enjoy Penelope Ulysses wife, nor reap the flower of her
chastity, joined and coupled themselves with her handmaides: so they which are
not able to aspire to the height and lofty top of philosophy, do spend and
dissipate their time miserably in other disciplins of no value or estimation.
Wherefore among other disciplins, philosophy as a princess and chief crafts
woman ought to Philosophy is princess among other di^^iplines.
be constituted and made. For about the cure of the body men have invented and
found out by studious search, two disciplines, physic, and palestricall
exercise: whereof, the one conserueth the health of the body, and the other
does co^rroborate the good disposition and habitude of the same. But only
philosophy Philosophy is ^he curer and (...)medier of the (...)inde.
is the present physic, and ready remedy to recure and heal the maladies,
infirmities, griping greefes, and painful passions of the mind. Out of the
entrals of Philosophy, we are taught to know what things be honest and
dishonest, just and unjust, and in fine, what are to be required and chosen, and
again what we ought to eschew, flee and euitate. It Philosophy tea ^heth us
how (...) behave our (...)lues tovvarde (...)ll estates and ^egrees.
teaches us how we ought to use our selves toward god, our parents, elders,
laws, strangers, magistrates, and friends, that it behooves us to worship and
fear god, to honor our parents, to reverence our elders, to obey the laws, to
be obedient to magistrates, to love our friends, to live modestly with our wives,
with inward affection to embrace our children, to deal iusty with our servants,
not to be injurious to them. And to speak of the chefest things and most
po^drous, neither in prosperity (when fortune smileth on us with loving looks)
to triu^ph with to much iolitie, to be insolent with to much mirth: neither in
adversity (when fortune frouneth with cloudish countenance) to despair to
contristate, or to be to heavy and sorrowful: neither in pleasurs to be
dissolute, neither in anger to be passionated, and brutishly to be rigorous:
which I (amongs all the other things which issue out of the sugry rivers of
philosophy) esteem and deem the most antike, cheef, and worthiest thing. To
be of a Gentleness the token of a honest man.
gentle courage fraught with generositie in time of flourishing and fortunate
things is yt property of a man in deed: to be fortunate without ye grudge of
envy is the sign of a most quiet, peaceable, and placable man: to resist and
struggle against pleasures, is the token of a wiseman, and to cohibite and
bridle anger is not in every man's power. But I judge them perfect men, which
are able to interlarde, and to concorporate the civil adimnistration of the
public weal, with the study of wisdom. And I suppose They be perfect men
which join to the administration of the common wealth the study of wisdom of
philosophy.
the same to be the eminent enlargers, of two of the greatest goods. For while
to administer and govern the common weal they do the things that appertain
to common utility, and while they be labrous, and vigilante in the studies of
good arts, and intentive in philosophy, they ben in great tranquillity and
quietness. There be three kinds of life, the one is occupied in action Three
kinds of life.
or doing, the second in knowledge, the third in oblectation, and in the
fruition of plesurs, of which the last kind of life, delicious, voluptuous or
given to pleasures, The life that is led in pleasures is brutish.
is beastlike, brutyshe, abiecte vile, unworthy the excellency of man. And
the life which in knowledge consists, if it be disseuered or wander from the
active life, it is unprofitable and vnfrutful, Contemplative life without
active life is unprofitable.
and the active or civil life without philosophy and learning, is rude,
rustickelyke, unhandsome, and full of errors. Men must therefore labor, and
with all their might they can, prove, assail, and bend their endeavors,
both ryghtely to rule the common weal, and do the things which belong to
public commodity, and (as it is decent) when time and opportunity serves,
to take unto them the worthy When books of Philosophy must be red.
works, and learned volumes of Philosophy. After this sort governed Pericles
the common weal, after this sort Archytas Tarentinus, Dion Syracusanus and
Epaminondas the Thebane, which were Platoes scholars. And now concerning
institution of Children, I think I need speak no more. Besides these,
notwithstanding, I judge it a most profitable The worthy books of learned
authors must be bought, kept and red as a treasure of learning.
and necessary thing, to be diligent in the acquiring of antique Books, and
monuments, imitating the manner of husba^dmen: for even as not the possession
of many fields, but diligent tillage and good husba^dry does enrich them, so
not by the possession of many books, but by the diligent reading, and pure
judgment thereof, (as from a fountain) do we draw and acquire the knowledge
of things, science, and good litterature. And the old students of wisdom in
reading Books observed this, that thereout they might gather excellent
sentences, wherewith they might direct and order their life. And (as Plutarche
witnesses in an other Philosophy in the time of the ^ag^^ of Greece was
contained in sentences for their direction.
Book) at that time, (when the, vij. wise men of Greece flourished) all
Philosophy was contained in brief and few sentences, which partly by
experience, and partly by reding they acquired, and for the use of common life
set forth as their profitable sentences (which yet are extant) do manyfestly
show. And what commodity may come by the reading of them, Lucretius Lucretius.
full well knew, saying.

Floriferis vt apes in saltibus omnia libant,
Sic nos authorum decerpimus aurea dicta,
Aurea perpetua semper dignissima vita.
As laborous bees in forests green,
do suck, and flowers taste,
So we collecte the golden savves
of authors in times past:
The golden savves that they have left,
behind in memory,
And books of fame, worthy in deed
to live perpetually.
Socrates also, and other faithful teachers of How Socrates and other taught
children.
youth (if they took children to teach, inform and learn) they compelled
the^ to learn by heart, the sentences of Poets, orators, and Philosophers, yt
in time to come they might be a great profit to them to lead their life well,
honestly and blissedly. Moreover, if any buy and read yt volumes of
Philosophers, and cheefely Plato, shall see the sacred sentences of Poets,
which (as goodly trim pictures) they scattred and sowed here and there in their
books. Alexander Macedo, The great care of king Alexandee in reading of Homers
works.
yt inuictorius king (among so many turmoiles, tumults and sweats in war
sustained, almost surpassing the power of man) never neglected the reading of
Homers works, which describes to kings their duties. He would ever have it
laid together with his dagger under his pillowe. And yt the diligent reding of
good authors does bring a wonderful profit, Demetrius Phalereus sufficiently
enough proved, who How Demetrius Phaleri us exhorted king Ptolome to prepare
his books.
exhorted king Ptolomeus to prepare him such books, as intreted of a kingdom
and warlike dominion: and to reuolue the^ over, because those things in books
are written, of which friends dare not presume to admonish kings and princes.
why speak I not of Alpho^lus ye worthy persenage and famous king of Aragon who
(being vexed with sickness at the City Cap^a, and his Physicians ministering
many medicines in his grievous Alphonsus was restoted to health by the reading
of Quintus Curtius.
disease) began to read the Histories of Quintus Curtius, describing the noble
gestes of Alexander the great: with reading whereof, he being delighted (when he
had overcome all the violence of the sickness, and restored to health) Adieu
(said he) Auycen, adieu Hippocrates, adewe Galene and other Physicians, live for
ever Quintus Curtius, the restorer of my health. And the same king, (when he
hard trumpeters and minstrels iangling, (taking in his hands the famous
lucubrations of Tullie:) Be packing, be packing ye Musicians (say de he) for
Cicero the fresh fountain of Roman elequence is with me, which speaks
more sweet and pleasante things. And the same worthy prince at an other time,
(when he heard a king of Spain say, it was not decente for gentlemen and noble
men to be learned, lettered and to gaze upon books) is reported to have
exclamed: haec non est regis, sed bou^s vox. This is not the voice of a king
but of an Ox. No less lover of books The great love of Carolus Caesar to
learning.
and Monumentes of learning, was Carolus Caesar the fourth Emperor of Rome:
for entering into the schole of the Prageneians (when he heard the masters of
liberal sciences disputing the space of four hours, and his Guard was
offended and said, supper time is at hand.) It is not ready (said he) for
me, for this is my supper. This renoumed personage and mighty Emperor,
preferred the philosophical disputations, before most delicate banquets.
Carolus the fifth, August, and Ferdinandus Caesar (which fell into such
turbulent times, wherein the great confusion of the monarchy invaded al orders
as Lerning was the cau^e^hat Carolus the fifth, August and Ferdinandes Caesar
governed in most pearillous seasons.
well civil as spiritual) except they had bin instructed from their youth in
good letters, they could never have holde^ the government of their empire so
many years, with so great wisdom, and fortitude, in such mighty great perils
of tempestuous times, and impetuous seasons. Wherefore Thales Milesius, one of
the sages of Greece says, faciem componere non praeclarum est, sea bonarum
artium studijs animun excolere long praeclarius, not to trim, deck and dye the
face, is an excellent thing, but to garnysh and a dorne the mind with good
arts is a far more precious and beautiful thing: who also being asked, who
was happy, said: qui corpore sanus est, animo vero eruditus He yt in body is
helthful and whole, and well instructed in his mind with good learning, and give
me leave once again to name Alphonsus (so oftentimes of me repeated,) who was
wont to say, yt the dead were very good counsailoures, signifying books, wherein
he herd those things which he desired without fear and favor. Then Alphonsus
said that books were good counsailors, wherein we learn the things we desire
without fear or favor.
how can it be but most necessary, to be diligent in getting, and diligent in
studying yt momuments and books of worthy authors: out of which so many
commodities, so many fruits, so many aduises, so many good cou^sails, learned
lessons, and prudent exhortatio^s may be gathered. And now I think it not
expedient to pass over, and despise the exercises of the body, but most
convenient I deem it, to send children to the Childrens bodies must be
exercised, both for the agilitie of the body, and conseruatio^ of health.
houses and schools of those that be cunning and expert teachers, yt
sufficiently by labor they may obtain the same, and put them in practice, both
for the agilitie and nimblenesse of the body. And also to strengthen and
corroborate the same: for the foundation of good and honest old age, is in
children, the fit disposition, and habitude of the body. Children therefore,
(which are liberally brought up,) are not so dishonestly and vnciuillie to be
handled, to be driven from the exercises which childehoode and adolescencie,
and man's age ought to be practiced in, and much auail to the health of the
body. While the strength of heat accensed with moving, does more strongly digest
ye Exercises be neceslary for the bodies digestion.
meat and drink, and sends lively and pure blood, into all the members of the
body. * If ye take away moderate exercises, sluggish luskishnesse,
drowsinesse, lasinesse and filthy idleness shall possess thy children and
striplings: whereby they shall be made unfit to all yt honest actions of life.
Amo^gs The exercises used among the Grecians was cause of health, and little
sickenesle.
the old ancient Grecians (while these honest exercises of youth flourished)
there was not so great store of sickness and maladies, (as now amongs us,
which follow none, or very few exercises, but drunke^nesse, bellycheere, filthy
pleasures, and all inte^perancie. So that when we come to that age, wherein we
should serve our Prince and Country, in the offices of The lack of exercises
at this day is cause there be so many diseases.
peace or feats of war, we are hindered with yt gout, for lack of practice,
or one disease or other, which we have gotten by intemperancie, while we
despised to have a regard of our body, in exercising it with moderate and
co^uentent exercises. Even as therefore in Summer time it is conueuenable to
prepare and lay up those things that be necessary against winter: so in tender
youth, it behooves to prepare and hoorde up good manners, right order of life,
and modesty as a viandry and necessary provision for old age. And so with
labors voluntary to exercise their bodies, least (their strengthes being
exhausted and If the body be not exercised, it will hardly sustain the toils
in learning.
consumed) they may afterward refuse to abide and sustain the labors and
toils pertaining to the conservation of learning. For as the peerlesse
philosopher Plato affirms, sleep and labors be adversaries to disciplines:
he that accustomes himself to voluntarye labors, it shall not be grievous to
him, to perdure in ye toiles, which men often times must abide by reason of
their office: but he that does not exercise himself with willing labors, but
gives himself to be depraved with slothfulness, he shall never in necessary
labors with glory persevere. But to what end speak I upon these? and do not
rather hasten to purport that, which is the most peculiar, and chiefest thing
of all these? And that is this, that children be instructed It is expedient
that children be trained in martial practices.
in practices of war and feats of chiualry: as in handling the spear,
casting of darts, in iustings, bickerings, and hu^ting of wild beasts: for
the goods of them which are conquered in battle, fall to their lottes and
guerdons, which be conquerours and winners of the field: but to war, the
disposition and exercise of the body privately practiced, does not avail, but
a weak warrior, and silly Souldioure, (if he be trained up in martial
practices, and exercises of war,) penetrateth and sperpleth the well
garnished garrisons, and orderly adorned armies of his ennimies: so much it
avails to be exercised in these practices which ye worthy Greeks knew well
enough, who had commonly in use, games of exercise, For what use the Grecians
invented their games of exercise.
huntings, leapings, skippings, dansings, and other such esbateme^ts, wherewith
as with voluntary exercises they sharpened and exasperated youth to the true
and necessary labors of war, lest in idleness they should be s^outhfull,
spend their time luskishly, and the goods of cowardous fluggards (as
Demosthenes says) does fall to their lots that be laborous. Likewise, the
renoumed Romans had their games and Why the Romans found out their
exercises.
labors at home, wherewith they indurated and hardened their bodies, to
sustain the true labors in war, whereby their country might be defended, and
the territories of their Empire enlarged. But what will some say and object?
You promised to write precepts and rules, concerning To whom these precepts
are written.
the education of free children, but now you seem to neglecte the bringing up
of poor and needy children, and are only determined to give and set forth
instructions, fit and congruent for rich, and such as are descent from noble
progeny? Who may thus easily be answered: truly, I greatly wish and desire,
that these my precepts of education might be conducible and profitable to all
in general: but if there be any hindered through poverty, and oppressed with
penury and indigencie, shall not be able to use al my admonitions, let them
bewail and deplore their own misfortune and calamity, and not accuse and
insimilate him that gives these admonitions and wholesome precepts. Therefore
let the pore and indigent labor, endeavor and assay (as much as lies in
them) if they can attain to this cheifest and best education of children, which
we have made manifest. But if some shall not be able to use it, let them
practice that which is lawful and p^ssible for them. These things have I
chefely touched, that I might afterward anner and interlace other things
also, which anayle much to the right Institution of Children. I think it a
thing conuenyent, to draw and induce Children to Children must be induced to
studyes and other necessary duetyes, with gentlenes^e, persuasion,
exhortation, not with force, violence and stripes.
honest studyes, and to do their duties, with admonitions, persuasions, and
gentle entreaties, and not with force, violence, stripes, beating and bunching.
For these seem rather more derent for servants and bondslaues, than for
ingenious and freeborne Children. For sluggishe servants hardened in
idleness adread stripes, and with these are incyted and driven to labor,
partly for the smarting greefes of the stripes, and partly for contumelies,
reproaches and nipping tauntes. But praise and dispraise amongs ingenious
children are far more better and commodious, tha^ any other chastiseme^t. For
commendations and praises stir and inuit them to honest things, and
discommendations does call them away, restrain and terrify them from filthy,
dishonest, and vicious things. And sometime again diverse ways they must be
dispraised and chidden, and sometime commended, that after they shall nothing
set by chidings and chaffings, shame may restrain them, and again be made
glad, and reduced from the same, with praises and commendations: imitating
nourses and mothers, which (after their babes and sucklings have cried) give
and offer them the pappe, to still and aslake their cries. And here it
behooves Parents and good fathers to be circumspect, and diligently take heed,
that above measure they do not auaunce and extol with praises their children,
least they become too insolent, proud, arrogant and headie: For dismeasured and
too much praise, does infatuate, and make them more fierce and leuder. I have
known certain fathers, which with too much love have lost and marred their
Recreations must be given to tender age, least being tired and weried with
labors, it be overwhelmed, not able afterward to conceive any good
disciplines.
sons. While parents make posthast to have their children excel, and
surmount very festinely in all things, they lay such burdens upon their
shoulders, as they cannot bear nor sustain: wherewith (being too much
burdened and forefrushed) they fall down under them, when, as (being hindered
and stopped with other passions, molestations and greeues) they are not able
rightly to co^ceyue discipline and learnings lore. * They would have them
learned the first day, and perfect men the first hour, such too hasty Parents
there be, who (thinking to have out of hand surpassing children) make them
fools and dullardes through their hot festination. Even as young plants are
norished with the sprinkling of moderate water, but suffocated and choked with
dismeasured liquors poured upon them: Likewise a childs tender young wit with
moderate labors is augmented, but with superfluous pains and immoderate toiles
extinguished, overwhelmed and drowned. Wherefore some recreation, breathing and
refreshing from their continual labors must be permytted Children, * which
banisheth and dryueth away irksomeness gotten by serious toil, and does
restaurate and repair again their bodies and minds to labor. For even as
too much bending breaks the bow: so to be perpetually addicted to seryous
things, and never to refreshe and solace the mind with honest oblectations,
causes that man's mind can not long endure in earnest studyes. For this cause
in old time were solempnities Festival days in old time, were invented for
recreation.
and Festival days ordained, that men being called from labors, might
take delyghte in seruyng GOD: which delight without all controversy is the
most honest of all other. So students (least they fall into the detestable
vice of drunkenness, and contamynate them selves with filthy pleasures) had
their delights, music and other bodily exercises, wherewith their mind
(being tired with study) might be most pleasantly recreated. Then Parents
ought to remember (those I mean, which so burden their Childrens tender minds
with such too heavy burdens) that our life consists of remission,
recreation, study, labor, and pain. And therefore not only wakings, but
sleeping is found out, not only war, but also time of peace, not summer and
ser^nitie, but winter, blustryng blastes, chillie cold and impetuous
Tempests, peries and storms: To laborous operations and paynefull busy
works (as I said before) are Holly days invented a remedy. And finally, rest
and cessation is the medicine and sauce of labor Quies laboris remediu^.
and weariness: and that not in living creatures alone, but in things deuoyde
of life we by experience prove: for we unbend our bows, and let down and
slack the Harp and lutestrings, that we may bend them again. And generally
the body is preserved with emptying and filling again, and the mind with
remission, recreation and study.

And there be some Parents worthy great blame, and deserve severe
reprehension, which (after they have once committed their children to the
tutele and custody of the master and governor) never look nor try how their
children han^ profited, and gone for ward in good litterature, vnfatherly
neglecting their duties: for it behooves them (a few days after) to be
inquisitiue, and to make trial Parents after they have put their children to
schole, must be inquisitiue how they profit.
upon the studies and increasings of their childrens learning, and not to affie
their hole hope and trust in him that teaches for reward and gain. In so
doing, their children may euilly (without any profiting, waste and contriue
their precious time, and dissipate their parents money. For undoubtedly those
masters would be more diligent and painful in instructing their scholars, if
they knew they should render account of their institution and progression in
good lerning. And certainly that, that of horses is spoken, meriteth no small
grace: because nothing do so sone fatte^, and bring into good liking a horse,
as his owners eye. * Some parents I know in England, very careful in this
behalf, and such in deed be parents and love their children interly, which
daily enquire and try their children, though they be wholly persuaded in the
painful diligence of the Master.

Such must needs have toward, learned, and obedient children: and worthy of
great commendation they be, for the care and travel they take, in the virtuous
instruction of their children. But some other I have heard of, that are
altogether vncarefull, and nothing regard the good success of their sons,
not once in a whole year demanding how his child has profited. Such parents be
not worthy the name of parents, since they so temerously neglect their
childrens good education, whom nature has bound them, and God commands
them to season with virtue, and to train them up in fear and godliness. Nay
(the more is the pity) there be some which altogether neglect at all to put
the^ to schole, but permit them dissolutely, ydelly, and vaynely to contriue
and spend their time, thinking learning and virtue to be of no value,
supposing good institution to be a thing of naught, so that they resemble their
fathers evil ways: if they learn to swear and to rent God in a thousand
morsels, then have they learning enoughe, and then they be their white sons.
What be these^ the wicked parents of vicious children, unprofitable members,
worthy to be extirped out of a christian common weal, and as one said: (...).
An infertile mass of molde But I leave such to their own follies, and turn
to my The exer^y ses of a childs memory must not be neglected.
purpose, wishing that there were none such remaining. Before all things a
child's memory must be exercised: for memory is (as it were) the buttry or
pantry of all good learning: and therefore have poets, in their poemes feigned
and imagined memory to be the mother of the muses, and nine sisters of
learning: thereby privily interpreting and obscurely reueling, that nothing is
better tha^ fertile, pregnant and ready memory: which all children must
exercise: both they which naturally be endued with the beautiful benefit of
the same, and also those which be obliuious, and enjoy a very hard and dull
memory: so shall they corroborate and confirm the afflue^ce and goodness of
nature, and supply also the defect and want of the same: that they which have a
ready memory, and exercise it, may become better than others, and also the weak
witted and obliuious children may better themselves. Excellently has ye
ancient poet Hesiode said:

He^iod (...). (...)
(...).
If to a little thou do add.
a little, doing often the same,
At length a heap shall there be had,
and of a mass shall bear the name.
And parents ought to know this, that the remembrance of arts and sciences
does not only to erudition and knowledge of things, but also to other
practices and affairs of life, bring a great light, and is (as it were) a
looking glass and perfect example to live. * Labor parente to cause thy
child exercise his memory, endeavor thy self child and scholar with care and
diligence to hold those things thou shall learn. For except thou addest thy
diligence, to lay up those things (which thou by study have gathered into the
precious coffer of thy memory) thou in vain laborest in lerning, seeing only
we know that, that in memory we retain: But if with daily exercise thou
committest to thy memory, the things which by learning thou have attained,
doubt not but thou shall be learned. Even as the husbandeman in husbandry is
weried, if he suffer his corn to perish in the field, and there to rotte by
the violence of tempests: so unprofitable is the labor which thou take in
studies, if thou do not practice the things thou have conceived, and with
daily meditation fix them in thy memory. Once there was one, which What
chanced to him that committed nothing to memory
paynefullye trauayled at his Book, and committed nothing to memory, but to
papers and commentaries. I know not what chance befell, this loytring lubber,
and lerning eater lost all his bepaynted papers, wherein he had printed all his
learning: he bewailed his misfortune and made his complaynt to Antisthenes that
learned man, who spoke thus unto him: Thou ought to have written these in
thy mind, and not in papers: for

Tantum scimus quantum memoria tenemus.
So much we know assuredly,
as we do hold in memory.
It is also necessary and most needeful, Children must be prohibited to speak
filthy, and accustomed to use affability, gentle salutation, modesty,
temperance, and shamefastnes.
that children be repelled and admontshed from filthy scurrilitie and lewd
naughty communication: for (as Democritus said) talk is a shadow of a man's
work, and such things as man practizeth, such things does his communication
declare and relate. *If we use to speak filthily, we much harm and endanger
our estimation, while all men think us to be the neighbors and allies of
dishonest communication: but if we abstain from scurrilitie and vicious talk,
there is none but will believe we be honest, sober and discrete, if we utter
those things which lack dishonest talk, and abstain from vicious words, none
can blame us as filthy speakers. But if we pamper our selves therein, who is he
that will not speak ill of us, and procide us with worthy taunts and
ignominy? who will say, that Tibullus, Catullus Propertius Lascivious poets.
and Martial, and other such paultring lascivious poets, are not taynted with
infamy and slander, because they delighted rather to exercise their poetry,
with the composition of filthy verses, than were memorous of chastity and
moderate talk. Not to eschew (says Musonius) Musonius.
to speak obscene and filthy words is the fountain and beginning of evil
living. And that worthy sentence of modest Menander, (which saint Paul Menander.
uses) ought to be a good lesson for all parents to learn:

Corrumpunt bonos mores colloquia praua.
Evil talk and filthy which men have,
Good virtuous manners do deprave.
Next must parents accustom their affability.
children, to use affability, gentle and courteous salutation: for in good
manners there is nothing counted so odious, as to be churlish, froward in
words, and to estraunge them selves from company and talk. * If a man in
authority speak gently and courteously unto every one, it is almost incredible
to say, how much benevolence and favor he amongs all men does obtain: but if
he proudely disdain to speak unto his inferiors, thinking himself to be
polluted (as it were) with their talk, doubtless that man is odible in the
peoples fight, and judged a proud, scorneful, disdaynful, and hye stomacked
man. Marcus the Emperor Marcus the Emperor was commended for his affabilite.
is much commended, for his affability and courteous behavior, because he
gave his right hand to every one that came unto him, and gently with great
humanity spoke unto each man, although he had clymed the highest degree of
dignity. So likewise among the Hebrews Absolon, with his courteous affability
Absolon.
had moved and drawn almost all the Judicial people to his side, and (if it
had not otherwise pleased God) had invaded the scepters of the Israeticall
kingdom. So I know not, what sweetness the tongurs of Caesar, of Caesar,
Pompey, Sylla for their affability obtened much favor Pericles.
Pompey, of Sylla, and other noble personages had, whereby among their
citizens they obtained so much favor, that to them they were most grateful.
Pericles also using this affability (which I would have all Parents to
teach their children) was much esteemed among the Athenians: which is bruted
to have made his supplication to Jupiter, as often as he came abroad) that he
wuld not suffer one word to slip from his tongue amiss, whereby he might incur
the envy and conflate the hatred of the Athentan people to him self. What is a
more humane thing, than in talk, and affability, that children show
themselves meek, gentle, fair spoken, courteous and kind to all men? on the
contrary part, what is more truculent, beastlike, and cruel, than in comparison
of himself to despise other, and to suppose himself superior to all: even as
the nightingale with her shrill and sweet voice, deserves much favor amongs
al me^, and the owl with her deadly and mournful song incurs the hate of
each man, as a bird alienated from the kind of birds: so he which in company
does exercise affability and courteous behavior, is loved of all men: but he
that lives after the manner of an owl, and professes no affability, and
keeps no company (as the owl) he is a most unmanly man, and is recompted not
worthy the society of man. Roboam king Roboam.
Salomons son, deuoyde of affability, and despoyled of humanity (bitterly
accusing the Israelites with sharp words and severe) alienated all the other
tribes from him, beside Iudaes and Benjamin. But king Cyrus, that puisaunt
prince, because he showed gentleness and courteous Cyrus was courteous in all
his ages.
behavior in his childhoode, adolescencie, and all his other ages, felt the
wonderful increasings of felicity: therefore says Valerius Maximus,
Humanitaus dulcedo etiam efferat^ barbaroru^ ingenia penetrat: toruosque and
truc^ hostium mollit oculos. Viuat nam, prosternit odium hostilemque sanguinem
hostilibus iniscet lachrimis. See the force of affability, behold The force
of affability and gentle talk.
what courteous speech can do. Children that by their parents are taught this,
shall tenderly be loved of them, whose company and familiarity they keep and
enjoy, if they be not stifnecked, obstinate and opinatiue, for it is not only
a famous thing to ouerceme, but to suffer himself to be ouercomed, when the
victory little avails, but much endomageth and is hurtful. It is in deed a
victory, whereof comes Cadmea victoria.
more harm than good. Of this have I Euripides my witness, which says:

(...),
(...)
When two do talk, vvherof the one
does rage in anger, than
The other (which does not reply)
is iudgde the vviser man.
Modesty.
Again parents must be careful to attire their children with the weeds of
modesty, which brings to men beautiful ornaments But whosoever does
disseuer himself therfro, he polluteth himself with all dishonesty and
ignominious infamy: eue^ as he which is furnished with the civility of manners,
obtains amo^gs al men great praiso and commendation: so he (that is
esclarished with modesty the beautifullest ^illament of virtues) is every where
extolled into the says with many praises. Joseph yet is bruted and Joseph's
modesty.
blased, with fames perpetual sounding trumpe, to be the most excellent
example of modesty, because by no thundering threats, by no heavy manaces, he
could be persuaded, so much as to consent to the detestable allurement of the
most dishonest Aegiptian woman. Therefore chiefly modesty does maruelously well
become children, and is to them a precious jewel, ad the jewel of our time
Erasmus of Roterodame witnesses. And one other Vereeundia virtutu^ custos.
thing there is, which children must be trained up in, and that is
shamefastnes, which sullie calls the keeper of al virtues, eschuing
dishonestie, and gayuing praise. Even as a diadem and crown, does adorn and
beautify a kings head, so does shamefastness most gayly garnish a child and
yongman. Pamphilus in The shamef^^^nes in Pamphilus was a figne of goodness.
Terence was ashamed and blushed. Simon (as though al were well) then said thus:
Erubuit, saluares, he blushed, the matter is in good case. And therefore Pithias
Aristotle's daughter (being asked, what color was most beautiful) answered:
that Pythias Aristotelis filia.
which through shamefastness rises in ingenious men, and virtuous children.
And of this Cicero again does witness with me, saying: Sine verecu^dia nihil
recte agitur, without shamfastnes nothing is rightly done, for moderator
cupidua^s est pudor, shamefastnes is the governor of desire. These be the brave
arays yt children ought to be clad withal: and such garments must parents put
on their children. Now will I purport the things nothing inferior to these
before, wherein I would have young men exercised: first and before al things to
fere god, who is the seer God must be feared.
of al things, which knows the very secret cogitations of the heart, which
does defend the godly, and punish the malicious and impious: even as it is the
duty of a diligent scholar to add all his endeavor and industry to his
studies and honest actions, lest he offend his master through his negligence,
and ungracious facts: so is it the bounden duty of a young man alwais to bend
his endeavor to fere god, and justice, lest through his impiety and reckles
ways, he provoke Gods displeasure and revenge. Once a friend asked Demonax,
Demonax.
and requested him to go with him to the temple of Aesculapius, to pray for his
sons health, whom a perilous disease had cruciated. Demonax answered: think
thou that god is so deaf that he will not here us but in the temple? So also
ought we all to judge of the sight of God, that he is in each place, and
beholds each thing, and nothing so far distinct that Gods eye can not
penetrat. Worthily therefore let yongmen (what evil privily they be about)
dread and fear god, which is always present, and a beholder as well of the
things be well done, as the things be evil done. Next must they obey their
parents, for to them do children owe great honor: Yongme^ must obey their
parents.
by their benefit and mean we enjoy this light, by the^ we are nourished,
brought up, and instructed: what things soever parents have, at last fall to
their childre^s hands. It is known full well, and fame will never let it be
forgotten, how much reverence Coriolanus the famous Roman Coriolanue obedient
to his mother Veturia.
gave to his mother Veturia, whom when no force could withdraw from the
oppugnation of the country, the chiding and persuasion of his mother Veturia
pulled him away. So did a daughter norish her mother (condemned and kept in
prison) with her teats. Whereupon Valerius Maximus astonished with this piety
exclameth: Valerius Maximus
Quo non penetrat, aut quid non excogitat pietas? quae in carcere seruanda
genitricis noua^ ratione^ inne^^t-qued eni^ tam innsitatu^, quid ta^ inauditu^
qua^ matr^ vberibus natae alitam esse? Whither does not childish love perce,
what does not piety excogitate and invent? which has found a new way to save
her mother being in prison. What thing is so insolent or vnwent, what thing so
vnherd of, as a mother to be nourished with her daughters paps. Some will think
this against nature, unless it were the first law of nature, to love our
parents. The piety of Cimon Cimon his pie tie toward Miltiades his father.
toward his father is also every where commended, who lingered not nor doubted
to put on him his fathers fetters and chains, at the left that his father
Miltiades might obtain the honor of his grave. I might also recite the piety
of Joseph the Hebrew, but who knows it not? Thus ought children and yongmen
to honor their parents, who be the instruments of their life, of who^
whatsoever we have, we have received, so shall they be of al men commended, and
be judged virtuous, obedient, and godly. Next unto parents must friends be
remembered: for theyexhort Friends must be reverenced.
us to virtue, and dissuade us from vice and naughtiness, and by all means
labor to keep us in the limittes of shamefastness: even as a good neighbor
is to be reverenced, according to Hesiodus his precept (which sings that we
have gotten honor if we have gotten a good neibor) so certainly much more
honorably is a No treasure is more precious than a friend.
friend to be entreated, tha^ the which no possession is better, no jewel more
precious. Alexander the puisant Macedonian was not offended yt Hephaestion was
affected Alexander.
with regal honors of Darius niether: but when she craved pardon for her error,
Alexander alwais coragious, and then fraughted with a regal heart, said: be of
good there O woman, whatsoever honor thou haft be^^owed upon him, I think thou
have don it to me: for this man (apointing to Hephaestio^) (says he) est alter
ipse. A friend therefore is a rare tresurs, a desired name, a man scarce
appering, ye refuge of infelicitie, a possession scarsly to be found, a receuer
of secrets, a never failing rest, as Xenophon does excelle^tly tech us. (...)
Now folows, yt they exercise the^sclues Yongme^ must live fr^gally, bridle
their tongue, and represle anger, and keep their hands from unlawful pray.
to live quietly, to bride their tongue, to repress anger, and to retain and
keep in their hands from unlawful spoils. Of these (of what value each is)
let us consider, which with examples I will make manifest, and of the last I
will first begin. Some men having put their hands to unlawful prays, and
unjust gain, have disparaged al their glory, and disparkled all the
illustrious gestes of their progenitors and auncetors. As Gylippus the
Lacedemonian, who (because he had loosed and opened the money Gylippus
Lacedemonius.
bags, and stolen thereout a great sum of money) was abandoned his
country, and repeld from Sparta. Doutlesse he is a very wise man, which does
conquer his anger, and not suffer him self to be overcome with ire. Socrates
(when a certain temerous hawty fellow, and rash royster had spurned him with
his heel, and they which were present seeing it, were sore offended at him)
said, If an ass had kicked and winched against me with his heels, would ye
advise me, and counsel me again to spurn? Socrates surely did it not at
all, Socrates.
but (when they all pursued him, and called him a heel flinger, and spurner)
he was choked and stra^gled. Aristophanes in his comedy, entitled (...) which
Aristophanes.
he set forth, when with many contumelious tauntes and reproaches he had rent
and proscided the same Socrates, and one which was present reprehending him
said: Do thou not take this in indignation O Socrates? No verily answered
he, not I. For I am taunted now and bitten with railing words in the Theater,
as in a certain sumptuous and gorgeous banquet. Archytas Tarentinus, and
Archytas Tarentinus.
divine Plato, appear to have done ye like things to these: for certainly
Archytas returning from war (for about that time he gave himself to
chivalry) when he had found his ground untilled and foul to look upon for
lack of good husba^ding, (calling the steward of his farm unto him) thou
would weep (said he) unless I were too angry. Plato (being offended Plato.
with a gluttonous and proud servant) called unto him Speusippus his sisters
son, saying to him, go and whyp me this varlet, for I am accensed with
anger. Hard and difficile these be some will say, and by no means imitable. So
they be undoubtedly I cannot deny. Wherefore must yongmen do their deuoire (as
much as lies in them) to use these examples of this careful crew of
surmounting learned personages, as a glass to look upon, and as pictures to
behold, to qualify and te^per their vnte^perate and raging ir^. For although
(concerning other things) we be not to be resembled to them, neither in long
experience, virtue, honest life, nor learning: Nathelesse it is our duty (as
much as we may) to follow their footesteps, and in these things to imitate
and counterfeit them, as Prophets of ye gods, interpretors of sacred things,
and (as it were) the leaming lamps and flaming firebrandes of wisdom. To
moderate the tongue therefore and to keep it in, (for of this as I purposed,
must I speak) if any think it a small or pernicious thing, he wandreth from
the pathe of equity, and is quite deceived. For silence in due time is
wisdom, and more excellent tha^ all talk, * and sometime to hold thy peace
does bring far more commodity than to let thy tongue go at randon, for perhaps
we speak many things which may endamage our selves, and shortly utterly undo
us, but if we keep our tongue within The tongue untimely ^^lking, oringeth many
i^^ommod(...).
the walls of our teeth, we shall not be endangered. Even as a Bear, (while she
is kept in hole) will hurt no man, but as soon as she is let out from thence,
(while she rages against them she meets) does hurt both her self and other:
so ye tongue as long as she is imprisoned wtin the fold and hedge of the teeth,
it is harmless: but when she unadvisedly leaves the field of the teethe,
(wherewith she is enuir^ned) will enta^gle both her self and others with many
evils. And for this (as me seems) have ye me^ of old time co^stituted their
sacred ceremonies, full of mysteries and secrecies, yt men being accustomed in
those divine mysteries to hold their peace, might with like fear accustom
themselves faithfully to keep humane secrecy. The religious mo^ks in old time
(I have herd say) were wo^t among other virtues (wherwt but few of the^ were
endued among so populous a rablement) to practice silence, yt they might lern
what and when they should speak, lest peradventure with their unadvised temeritie,
they might endanger themselves in lothsom labirinths, and implu^ge others in
devouring gulfs. Paulus ye monk by surname Simplex, when he asked Paulu^
Monach^^.
whither Christ was firster than the prophets. etc. being commanded to lie up
in silence den his folish question, by yt space of iii. years, durst speak
never a word to any man* so learned he by his silence, what things ought to be
spoken, and not to be spoken. And it is noysed that Agatho the Abbot, How
Agatho learned to hold his peace.
putting daily a stone in his mouth, learned to hold his peace, and for the
space of three years observed it, least when he would speak, he might not
readely: for he had red in Salomons Proverbs thus: qui custodit os suum,
custodit animam suam: qui autem inconsideratu^ est ad loquendum sentiet mala.
Again I never heard man say he repented for keeping his tongue, but Men have
repented speking, but none holding their peace.
many I have heard repenting for their talking and futilitie of their tongue.
Besides this, it is an easy thing for a man to utter, that he has kept in,
but a difficile thing, nay rather impossible, to call again that he has spoken,
and rashly and unadvisedly uttered. I remember I have heard tell that
innumerable, (for the intemperancie of their tongue) have fallen into grievous
calamities, miseryes, misfortunes and discomfitures. Of the infinity of the
which, (for examples sake) I will recite one or two, relinquishyng the rest.
When Philadelphus espoused nuptials with his own sister Arsinoes, and one
Solades said these words: (...) (...). He was enforced Solades for his tongue
rotted in prison.
in prisone, fettered in bonds and chains, a long time to rotte and pine
away, and paid the price for his untimely loquacitie. For that he might be a
laughing stock and skorne to many, he long grieved, lamented, and pitifully
bewailed. Also Theocritus the Sophister spoke, Theocritus for his loquacitie
was beheaded.
and suffered things like to these, and a great deal more grievous. For when
Alexander commanded the Greeks to prepare them Purple garments, that (when he
returned) he might solempnise the triumph of the warlike exployts atcheeued
against the Barbarians and his vassalles particularly, and man by man brought
in their money, before (said he) I douted, and now I evidently perceive that
this is thy purple death as Homer says. From which time Alexander was ever
his foe, and enemy. Also he grievously offended and irritated Antigonus king
of ye Macedonians, when he cast his blindness in his nose. For he commanded
Eutropion his master Cook (which was in a certain ordinary empecheme^t) to
come unto him, to give and take an account. And when ye Cook had often
denounced these things to him, I know well (said Theocritus) yt thou art about
to set me raw before a one eyed king. And so to the one, ye is to ye king, he
vpbraided his blindness, and to the Cook he twited his evil cookery.
Eutropion therefore said, you shall leese thy head, yt thou may worthily be
punished for thy madness and dicacitie. When these were told to the king, he
sent those which executed and cut off the head of Theocritus. A due gained
guerdon for the intemperancie of his leudly walking and clattering tongue.
Notwithstanding two times there be (as Isocrates says) wherein it is There be
two times wher^^ it is better too speak than to hold thy peace o^ known
things and neceslarie things.
better to speak, than to use silence. The one is, when occasion of talk is
offered of the things you know most plainly and perfitly. For to reason of
unknown things is a dishonest thing: where on the contrary part, it is laudable
to speak in time, of ye things thou art perfect in. Gorgias Leontinus came to
yt temeritie, that he willed each man to propou^d the question, which he would
have canuased and discussed, and that he suddenly (and ex tempore) would answer
to every point. Many he deceived in this profession with his loquacitie. But
this proud sophister, and hautie soyler of questions, sapient Socrates brought
to that point, (as the dialogue of Plato does manifest, Gorgias Leontin^^ was
reproched of Socrates for his temeritie.
which is entitled Gorgias) that he knew not how to define an Rhetorica which
he professed. The same reproach sustained Protagoras, which (in ye dialogue of
Plato which is called Protagoras) did make his great vau^t, and too largely
promised yt he would so frame ye yongma^ Hippocrates (if he were committed to his
tuting) ye daily he should conceive wonderful increasings and augmentations of
virtue. But when he was asked this question, (an virtus doceri posset) he had
nothing to say: but sou^ded many trifeling toys which made nothing for ye
purpose. Is not he a laughing stock to al men yt reasons of yt things he
knows not? now adays many vaunt themselves very leudly to be passing learned
me^ among ye ignorant sort, and thunder out their boastes and gloriations, as
though they were painful students, and deeply learned clarks, bolstring out
with chaunting tongs, the names of Greek and Latin authors, to seem in the
judgments of the unlearned crewe, the pearlesse men in these days: when (if he
that is learned ask) what is this author or that author, whom with their
eloquent tongues and magnifical (forsooth) commendation they extol and lift up
to ye skies, or what matter they entreat upon or discourse, then they be mute
and not a word for a thousand pound. Thus many shame themselves, and great is
the number of such unlettered bragging gallants, as experience shows.
Therefore very merrily and trimly Zeuxis admonyshed Megabizus Zeuxis almonition
to Megabyzus.
after this sort, that he should not rashly speak of the things he knew not.
Megabizus in times past entered into Zeuxis shop, and with great commendations
praised certain rudely and grossly painted pictures, with no art nor cunning
polished, and blamed and dislyked others, which were very exquisitely wrought
and finished: at whose folly Zeuxis servant and boys laughed, and Zeuxis
said: O Megabyzus, while thou hold thy peace, and keep silence, these
boys can but marvel at the beholding thy gay garments, costly roabes, and thy
servant which follow thy train, but when thou vtterest and speak of the
things which pertain to this Art, thou art a gibe and laughing stock unto
them. Beware therefore, and take heed of thy self by these, in whose sight thou
do praise these, and repress thy to^g: and furthermore endeuer, that never
thou rashely speak of those Arts that thou know not. The other time is,
that thou may speak, and not keep silence, when talk of things
(necessarily to be spoken upon) is ministered. For if necessity require thee to
speak, to defend either thy self or thy friends, it is a dishonest and
indecent thing to be silent. But if no necessity enforce thee to If
necessity enforce thee to speak, talk is better than silence. (...)
speak, it is better for thee to hold thy peace. Even as it is the part of a
good man, to harm or hurt no man: but (if contrary to Gods law and man's law
he be injured of the wicked) laudably takes up weapons, and defends himself.
Likewise is that man accounted good, which seldom speaks, unless necessity
drive him to use his tongue. Zeno the Prince of the Stoikes was called with
other Philosophers, (by the Ambasiadors of Antigonus sent to Athens) to a
ba^ket: and when every one of them well whittled with Pacchu barrels) boasted
upon and showed out his learning, Zeno held his peace. But when the Legates
asked him, what they should declare to Antigonus concerning him? Hoc ipsum
dixit quod vide(...)s even this you see: for the Zenot' answer to the Legates
of Antigonus.
talk and tongue of all other is hardest to be moderated and measured. Aelchines
the scholar of Socrates, (being reprehended for his silence, seeing he had so
good Aeschines.
and vertudus a master as Socrates) said: Nonloqui solum a Socrate, sed etiam
^cere didici, I have not only learned of my master Socrates to speak, but to
hold my pea^^. These kind of talks of things, which thou know, and when
necessity constrains, contains many commodities, many vtilities, and
brings great honesty. But otherwise great incommodities and harms thou
shall reap, if thou te^per thy to^g to tattling and untimely talking. Besides
all these things, children must be accustomed to speak and tell Children must
be fiamed to speak truths.
truths, which is the best and most sacred thing of all: a servile thing it
is, and nothing decent, for a free born man to lie and forge: which all men do
abhor and hate. And not in bondmen and servant to be permitted. * Great
enormities issue of this Of lying flow many mischeeues.
vile vice, and most detestable wickedness: from hence come periuries, fra^ds,
deceits, violation and breaking of promise and faith, and innumerable such
horrible vices, which sow amongs men discords, debates, and deadly hatreds.
When Demetrius Phalereus was asked of a certain Demetrius Phalereus.
man, what punishment liers were werthy of, he answered: vt ne dicentes quidem
^era, digm fide haberen^ur^ therefore as it is the duty of justice, to keep
truth in deeds, sayings and tongue: so is it the part of injustice to lie:
Lying greatly displeases God, and is odious to the society of men. Above all
things Parents must be careful to root out from their childrens tender
breasts, this ugly monster, least it overthrow and quyte deprave all the good
qualities, and careful erudition, which they from their infancy and youth
have trained them in. And never more need than now ought Parents Lying was
never more a flote than (...)
to look to this. For it never so much reigned as now. Al children almost
have learned to dash out loud lies, and not one amongs a hundred, but can
invent handsomely, and maintain cunningly a lie, and with such means and
ways, as it is a wonder to behold: they are as perfect in their Art, if they
be but six years old, as if they had gone twenty year to schole to learn
some good discipline. Where is the fault? in parents that be so vncarefull to
virtuously teach them, and while they be young, to eradicate such growing evils.
The parents be more to be blamed, for in them is the remedy hereof. There be
to many parents (the more is the pity) that are delighted in their children,
that can handsomely frame a lie: and they the^ selves such is the peruersitie
of some) teach them how to lay sometime the foundation thereof. They count their
children ioly boys, if they once face a lie, swear, stare, and tear God with
oaths. Such ungodly and ungracious parents, shall not be unpunished for such
their informatio^, if they do not in time seek to recure this pitifal sore and
large ulcer, they ca^ never come to goodness when in youth they taste so much
of yt lakes of lies and puddles of untruths. Neither ever will they be honest
men, or esteemed in honest company for the author of lies is the hater of
honesty, Satan is the authoure of lying.
truth, right and goodness. If any feel themselves guilty herein, I mean
them, let them seek cheefely to abandon such a polluting evil, and infecting
sore, from the hearts of their children: as for such as be godly, I think they
know the enormities thereof well enough, and are careful to weed out such
evil swelling herbs from their childrens breasts. Hitherto Young men ought no:
to live as they list and run at randon, but under a governor, the viewer of
their studies, and honest informer of their manners.
have I spoken of the good institution, and right bringing up of children, and
of their behauior and decoration: now I think it convenient to turn my talk
to yongmen, and give them some precepts and good lessons. I have often
perceyned and found Parents to be the authors and only causes of naughtynesse
and perverse manners, which for their children have prepared and appointed
masters, governors, tutors, and guides, but have given the bridle at large to
their young men, and suffered them to live as they list, and to vage and run
at their pleasure: when contrariwise, they ought to have greater care, and more
vigilant respect to such, than to their children. Who knows not that
childrens faults and transgressions Young men ought more narowly be looked to
than children.
be small and curable, perpetrated perhaps through the negligence of
governors, and committed by disobedience? But the trespasses and offenses of
yongmen, are oftentimes great, horrible, and The transgressions of young men.
miserable, as intemperate gluttony, and ravening of the belly, the
expilation and robbing of their fathers goods, cards, diceplay, banketting,
the lawless love of virgins and women, the pollutings and corruptels of
marriages. Wherefore it behooves to tame, cohibite and repress the minds of
these with cares, diligence and sedulitie. For this age is prone to pleasures,
wanton and uncircumspect, and needs a bridle. Therefore they (which defendor
pamper this age) do open the window to offenses, and give them liberty,
winking at their wickedness. But wise parents ought cheefely at this time, to
have a diligent care of their yongmen, teaching them to be vigilant, modest,
and sober with precepts, lessons, menaces, observations, persuasions,
promises, and with the co^memoration of those men's example, which (having
pitched their te^ts in pleasures field) have cast themselves hedlongs into
peremtorie perils, and casual calamities, and with rehearsal of their examples,
which with constancy, suffera^ce and abstinencie, have got them passing pure
praise, gay glory, and conuement comme^dation, for their worthiness, courtesy,
good behauior, courage, and valiance. For these two things are as it were) the
Principles and incitations of The hope of honor, and fear of punishment be the
incitations to virtue.
virtue, the hope of honor, and the fear of punishment. The one, that is the
hope of honor does incite, and makes courageous and hilarous to famous
feats and excellent studyes: and the other, that is the fear of punishment,
draws us away from perpetrating filthynesse, and repelles us from scelerous
myscheeues. And first of all they ought to be banyshed the company and
conversation of The acquaintarce and familiantie of wicked persons is to be
elchued.
flagitious and naughty men: for with their malicious manners and beastly
behauior, they are embroyned, infected, and tainted. This same commanded
prudent Pythagoras by his obscure and dark sayings, which much avail to the
attaynement Pythagora ^nigmata.
of virtue. As (...): that is to say, use not company with those men, whose
lewdness of manners, may spot, blemish, diffame, and dishonest thee. Again,
(...), pass not the balance, that is, do nothing against right and equity.
For the balance in old time, was accounted a sign of equity, as an other
proverb witnesses, (...), iuster than the balance, or as true as Steel.
(...). That is, flee idleness, eschew slonth, and provide for things necessa^y
against the morrow. Again (...), desire not every man's frendshippe, nor put thy
self to every man's familiarity, but choose, whom thou may love. And many
such like, as be left to our memory by prudent Pythagoras, but I will turn
again to my former talk, from which I have digressed. As I have said before
that Parents ought to endeavor them selves, and be circumspect, that their
children avoid and flee all wicked, leude, and vicious company: so likewise I
think it most meet and convenient, they be abandoned from fleering, flanting,
and frantic flatterers. As I have spoken it to many parents so now I dout not
again to confirm it, There is nothing worse than the company of flatterers,
chefly to yongmen
that there is no kind of men more pernicious or worse, which more depraueth
and sooner corrupts tender age, and strangleth youth, than flatterers: which
even the fathers themselves, with their children most miserably infect, and
search to the quick: for old hoare hearedmen by such gabbing Gnathoes, and
pickthanke parasites, are afflicted and converted into luctuous heaviness, and
their children run headlong into present destruction. * Even as the old
serpent turned his blandiments, and sugry sweet words, to the perdition and
overthrow of mankind, (while he deceived our first parents) so flatterers with
their gallant blandishing tongue circumuent us, and throw us into a thousand
miseries. They allure and entice yongmen to delicious pleasure, wherewith ye age
is very greatly delighted. When their fathers exhort them to frugalitie, to
modesty, and to sobriety, that hagard and savage crew of caytife Ctesiphoes,
prating Phormioes, and guilefull Getaes, impell them to drunkeanes and
surfeiting. When their The persuasion of parasites.
parents move them to temperance and continency, this rascal rout inuegle them
to lasciviousness and inordinate lusts: when their parents persuade them too
be sparing, laborious, and paynefull, this ragmannes roll draw them from
labors, to idleness, sloth, and drowsiness, saying, that all our life is
but a moment of time, and therefore ought they to live, and not basely and
obscurely spend the short time, defrauding pleasures: wherefore ought we to
care for our fathers threats and many menaces? he doteth through age, he is a
neibour to the coffin, and a grave spirit, which very shortly we will lift
up, and carry out a doors to his funeral farewell. And some of these
makelesse marchantes draw them to baddes, and to other men's married wives, so
that they rob, spoil, and pray upon their fathers treasures, which be as a
viandry and necessary provision for their old age. O execrable enemies too
young men, and wicked graffes, which while they feign them selves hipocritically
to be friends) they utter nothing freely. They gape and wait upon rich men,
and set not a straw by poor persons, and indigent men: marking what young men
do, that (when they that Si quis ait aio. Si quis negat, nogo.
maynteyne them laughe) they may laughe also, as they which do all things
with a feigned and flattering mind. And when they turn them selves to the beck
and book of rich men, by fortune they be free, but in mind bondeflaues. And
although they have not been affected with injuries, yet notwithstanding they
cry out, and piteously plain, that they be wrongfully entreated. And for this
purpose, least not in vain, and without a cause, they should be thought to
be nourished and maynteyned. Marcus tho rough parasites was corrupted.


* Commodus the son of Marcus the Emperor would never have so degenerated
from his fathers virtues, and chosen a kind of life more worthy a worseler or
champion, than an Emperor, if flatterers (whom Constantinus the Emperor named
rattes and mothes of the palace) had not so corrupted him, and so have throwe^
him headlong into that dishonest life. And therefore This saying some attribute
to Diogenes.
Antisthenes (well waying the great incommodities that come by flatterers) was
wont to say: It is far better to fall amongs ravens than flatterers. For
flatterers eat up, and devour quick bodies, and the ravens dead carcasses.
Wherefore if any parents have a care to have their children well instructed and
rightly brought up, they must amoue and banish these pestiferous parasites,
hellish hounds, and mischeuous monsters, and other ungracious fellow scholars
far from the company and society of their children: for these are able to
euert and utterly deprave, and coinquinate any meek natures good dispositions
and pregnant wits. * Also parents must modestly adorn and deck Parents must
modestly apparel their children.
their children, and move them by their exhortation or rather example, to
despise riot and to much elegancie in apparel. For to gain glory, and to
require renoume by the superfluous elegancie of garments, is a dishonest thing,
but to respect (in every thing, and in apparel) decency is a glorious thing,
and thereby were men wont to be beautified with glories garlands. Even as to
ouerlade himself with to much wine, and to incur the vice of ebrietie is
great filthiness to a man: so not to observe measure in furnishing the body,
is subject to crime. One exhorted once Alphonsus The answer of Alpho^sus to one
that exotted hin. to wear gay garments.
king of Aragon to wear rial robes, and princely apparel (for in array he
nothing differed from his vassals and subjects.) But he gave this worthy
answer: Malo moribus and authoritate meos excellere, quam diademate and
purpura, I had lieuer surpass my subjects in good behavior, majesty, and
authority, than in crown and purple clothing. So Augustus Augustus Caesar
hated excess in apparel.
Caesar the renowned Roman, had in deadly hate the excess of apparel: for
this was he accustomed most gravely to say: gallaunt and trim clothing is the
banner of pride, and nest or lodging of luxurious lasciviousness: and we by
experience are taught, that even in these days, they that be to curious in
array, and perilous brave fellows, thinking better of themselves than any
other, gimping in ye streets like gamesters, and manifesting themselves to the
eyes and looks of people, are counted light persons, spendthriftes, riottous,
proud, hautie, foolish, impudent, and of wise men more euilly thought of, and
severely reprehended: A mean in all things is to be kept, which (whosoever in
his degree He that passes the mean passes honesties bonds.
does pass) does infringe the bonds of honesty. Diogenes (when he saw a
yongma^ delicately and effeminately appareled) said: Non te pudet, qui peius
tibi velis, qua ipsa natura voluit* illa siquidem te virum esse voluit, tu vero
teipsu^ ex vestitu mulie^e^ facis, Art thou not ashamed to wish worse to thy
self than nature her self would? she would have thee to be a man, and thou
make thy self by thy array, a woman. Gravely therefore says Marius in Salust,
Ex parente meo, and ex alijs sanct^s viris ita accepi, munditias mulieribus,
^iris laborem co^uenire, I have thus heard of my father, and of other holy men,
that the curious clenlynesse and gandy garments are meet for women, and labor
for men. Labor and study must young men be accustomed too, not to superfluous
apparel, and curious decking of the body: they ought to refuse no pain, no
toil, no travel, no journey to attain learning, and to haste to such as may
instruct them in virtue and lerning, which by sweat and labor must be
achieved, or else it will never be gotten. No journey so long, no way so
tedious Virtue and learning are by labor obtained.
ought to deter a yongman, no pain (though it be never so grievous) ought to
hold him back, from going to learned masters, persuading him self, that he
shall so remunerate al his toils so tedious and yrkesome, with more ample
commodities, and larger gaynes within a little while. He must remember that
Pythagoras the most Pythagoras.
perfect work of wisdom (from his youth, entering into a desire of
Philosophy, and all other good learning and honest virtues) went into Aegipt*
where being trained in the lerning of yt nation, searching out the commentaries
of the priests of former age, knew the observations of innumerous worlds: thus
he departing unto the Persians, gave him self to the exact wisdom of the
Magi, to be fashioned and framed: of whom with great docilitie of mind, he
learned the mouings and courses of the constellations, and propriety and effect
of every thing. Then sailed he to Crete and Lacedemone, (whose manners and
laws when he had seen and graven in mind) he went to the games of Olympus
Here is example for yongmen to follow that would be perfect men, and in time
to come, profitable members in the common weal. And not Pythagoras only, but
divine Plato, leaving Plato.
his own country Athens, and his learned wise master Socrates, a place and
master most resplendent in learning and experience of things, (being
beautified with abundance of wit, and garnished with all good learning and
sw^^tenesse of tongue before) passed over* Aegipt, where he learned of the
Priests the manyfolde numbers of Geometry, and the observation of celestial
planets, and their influences. And at that time when young men came flocking to
Athens to seek and hear their master Plato, he becam a scholar of the
Aegiptian elders, passing the banks inexplicable of Nilus, the huge fields, the
danrous dens and mountayns, and bowing circuites of rivers and lakes, no pain
called him back, no travel could abate his greedy desire of lerning. These
examples ought parents to set before their yongmen, to move them to labor for
good lerning, virtue, and honesty: we read that many noble yongmen, from the
furthest coasts of Spain and France, went once to Rome to Titus Liuius flowing
with the sweet milky fountain of eloquence: and now shall it yrke yongmen of
these days to measure out, and run over a little way and short journey, to
learn the precious precepts of learning, of learned professors? Which
learning is as it were the staff to a weak body, and vaindry to old age.
^socrates admonished Isocrates.
Demonicus, to spend the void time and vacant hours that were given him in
hearing: not in vain things, in studies (whereof always do proceed the
increase of learning, and augmentation of virtue) as to hear learned men, to
read their lucubrations, not in riot, in wantonness, in trifles and toys.
Plato oftentimes disputed, and when he sent away the company of the reasoners,
he always vled to admonish them thus: Videte o adolescentes, vt etium in re
quapram honesta collocetis, Take heed, O ye yongmen, and beware, that ye
contrine and spend your leasured hours in some honest thing. What can be more
honest than to hear (if leisure permit) men resplendent in arts, and to peruse
the worthy works, and modest monuments of surpassing authors, in all good
sciences: what more dishonest, than to wallow in ydlenes, to spend the time in
dicing, carding, riot, drunkenness, and other naughty and pernicious
exercises. I would old Scipio his words were Scipio.
written with golden letters, in the tables of yongmens hearts, who (when he
from mortal affairs gained any leisure or vacant time, and was intentive to
lerning) was wont to say: Se nunqua^ minus ot^osum esse, qua cu^ ot^osus: nec
minus solum qua^ cum solus esset. So shall they with out any vexation or great
toil understand those things, and be perfited in those sacred stie^ces, which
those learned authors with unspeakable labor, toil, and encombrous pain have
found out. But those yongme^ which be dissolute, and refuse this institution,
shall never be beautified with sciences, nor replenished with knowledge of good
arts. What a benefit is it to enjoy the lucubracions of famous learned men,
out of which issues profits to us, and labors redounded to them. These
things therefore are honest and profitable, and (if yongmen and parents be
vigilant and laborous but to view the same) will bring infinite commodities, both
to themselves and other. And those things that now I will speak upon, are
fraught with humanity, Children must be kept in doing their dune rather with
lenity and gerdenesle, than sharpness and importunity.
and replete with courteous lenity. Neither do I counsel parents to be altother
wayward, froward, peuish, hard, and by nature to sharp, sell, and severe: but
to wink at certain faults of your yongmen, and to remitte and pardon their
transgressions, remembering, that they themselves were once young and faulty
likewise. Even as Physicians do temper bitter drugs and medicines with sweet
and dulcete sapours, that being concorporate and mixed with swetenes, and
received of their pacients, may remedy and recure them: so it becomes fathers
and good parents to mix the bitter rigor of their rebuks, and blustering
blasts of their reprehension with meekness and lenity, and to grant sometime
unto the lusts of their children, and to pardon their offenses But if it
pleases not them so to do, fathers may be angry, but soon they ought to
quell and quench it: for it is a great deal better for a time to be
wrathful, than long to be angry. For the continual abiding in anger, and the
hard reconcilement of favor is a great sign, and manifest token of a mind
alienated from children, and hateful toward them. And also it is decent for
parents, that they feign themselves to conceal some of their childrens faults.
For the incommodities of sight and hearing, (that is blindness and deafness
which Parents must sometime conceal their childrens faults.
follow old age) (as it were) not to see certain things which they see their
children do, nor to hear certain things which they hear. Seeing we wincke
at, and suffer our friends faults, what marvel is it if we tolerate the same
in our children: and oftentimes we have not rebuked and reproved our servants
rioting and surfeiting. If thou sometime would have him live sparingly and
hardly, other sometime minister unto him costs liberally: if thou have been
angry with him at any time, pardon him again: if at any time he had deceived
thee through thy servants, refrain thy anger, if he shall take out of thy
field a yoke of oxen, remit him: if he at any time come exhaling the surfeit and
drunkenness the night before received, agnize it not, do as thou knew it
not: if he smell of his odoriferous waters, and siuet powders, make no words
of it, know it not: and by this way may lascivious youth, and wanton be tamed,
ordered, and restrained. And parents must endeavor to prepare them wives, which
can not resist vain pleasures, nor abide bitter rebukes, when they At what
time yongmen must be given to marriage, and what wives must be chosen for the^.
hear of their faults. For matrimony is the most firm bond, and sure bridle
of lascivious and wanton youth. And such wives must be matched and coupled
with them, which neither in stock nor substance surpass them: it is a wise
part to choose a wife that is his equal, like in all respects: for they which
espouse wives which be better than them selves, they are not the husbands of
their wives, they rule not their wives, but are made their servants, for their
higher blood and richer dowry sake. But to draw to an end, and to leave off
this giving of precepts, before all other things it is requisite and most
necessary, that parents live an inculpable life, in nothing Parents must be a
lively pattern and as a glade of virtues, to their yongmen and children of
honest life.
offending, and do those things only which be honest, just and lawful: And to
show them selves a lively and manifest example to their children, that
beholding their honest and modest lives, as in a glass, may shun the woorks
and words which be dishonest, fylthie and unlawful. For parents, which (when
they reprove their childrens faults and vices) are filed with the same vices
themselves: whiles they accuse their children, they seem to insimulate and
accuse themselves. And they which leading a scelerous life, have no liberty to
rebuke their bondeslaues, much less their children. Moreover they be the
mouers and counsaylers to their children of vicious vices, and foul faults:
for when old men and parents pass the paths of pudicitie, and leap over the
limits of shamefastness, there must it of necessity be, that the younger sort
and their children be most impudent. * I would to God there were no suck
parents in this land, then should there be more virtuous impes than there be. I
fear me the number is very great, and the more to be pitied. But godly parents
must carefully practice, and exercise all things whatsoever apertaine to
temperance, and may draw their children to honesty, and sobriety: imitating
Euridices, which although she was an (...) born, and most barbarous,
notwithstanding for her childrens discipline and institution in the last time
of her age, addicted her self wholly to learning, and laborously trained in
paynefull studies. Which Euridices how intierely she loved her children, this
Epigramm^ (which she dedicated to the muses) does manyfestly declare:

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
Euridices. Euridices the learned dame
and holy citizen, for love
Oflearnings lore, this task did frame
unto the Muses nynes behoue:
For when her children grevv to men,
and passed from their child's estate,
She labored to learn (as then
a mother and a spoused mate)
Good arts, even for their only cause,
and monuments of fyled speech,
Of eloquence, and civil laws,
that she her children the^ might teach.
O that there were many such mothers as Eurydices or but a few like fathers to
the zealous mind of this surmountyng woman. What mother at this day would take
such pain, what parent would so consume her self with study for their
childrens erudition, though they love their children well, and desire to have
them learned, but they seek not the way? No not the father, which were the
fittest for such a purpose. A rare Phaenix was Eurydices, whose example if any
would follow, then should they undoubtedly have such virtuous sons as
Eurydices had. Therefore The epiloge of the translator.
to embrace all these our institutions and wholesome precepts, is rather the
work of prayer than of admonition: how be it, it is no small felicity and
industry to follow many of them. Let all true parents which desire to bring up
their children virtuously) try and prove how much it It much avails to
embrace these precepts.
avails to follow these precepts: no hard matter, it passes not yt power nor
reach of man. If they be diligent, if they be careful, if they be vigilant in
the good instruction of their children, let them embrace these precepts, follow
them, practice them, and undoubtedly they shall be worthis Parents, and have
virtuous, godly, honest, modest, discrete and painful children, endued with all
good qualities, and adorned with all civil behauior and good conditions, They
shall have at last the guerdon of their travel, they shall have the hire of
their pain, and reward of their diligence. When they are old, and run over
many a year, the virtues which they epsy in their well instructed children,
shall prolong their days, and comfort their hearts with great delight.

Here let Parents learn to be Parents, Lessons for Parents.
and in the pruning of their years look diligently to the good education of
their children. For those children which in the beginning be well nurtered,
instructed and brought up, and whose foundation of good education is well and
virtuously laid, shall easily understand and follow the other things, which flow
from the beginning. But what child soever is not taught to know the
principles of good institution, shall be ignorant in all the other duties of life,
which flow from the beginnings. He that is seasoned with the wholesome precepts
of adolescencie, and after them exercises the course of his life, he shall
after wards easily understand and perceive, what rules may be anornament and
furniture to all the following ages. Joseph in his childehode Joseph.
and adolescencie, was so taught the scare of God, and so geuerned both those
two ages, according to the fear of God, that when he was well stricken in
years, he also knew what duties were decent and most meet for an old
man's gravity. Therefore as his childehode and adolescencie, so also was his
old age famous and passing in those duties, which every age requires.
Semblably, whosoever shall honestly direct his youth, stall be able to lead the
action of his manhood and old age most orderly, decently, and plausibly. Be
which in his youth shall follow temperance, and learn what convenient meats
and potions, and other good exercises are to be offered to this age, shall
know what order of living he ought to use when he is a man, and an old man:
and what duetyes he ought to practice. So that parents in the beginning must be
careful for this, if they will be parents of good children. Yet not with standing
I know if they do all these things and practice all these fruteful lessons, yet
shall they hardly overcome, and utterly eradicate the naughtiness and prauitie
of humane nature. Humane nature is corrupt
For our nature by yt fall of our first Parents was so depraved and corrupted,
and hidden under the veil of al vices, so that it can hardly be made sound
(vices being abandoned) although thou leauest nothing undone, and no ways and
precepts untried in the good and true education of thy child. But if that fault
and crime had not so imbroyned and defiled us (the issue of our first parents)
and also had not oblitterated and obscured in us yt fotesteps of virtue,
peradventure we might have with greater facility been called again to the
path of virtue, in it to persevere. Even as the Esopicall fable admonysheth, The
fable of Esope or the young man and cat does resemble man's nature.
so stands humane state, although there be never so much labor, travel and
pame exhausted and consumed in our education and institution. A certain Cat
(says Esope) was the only delight of a certain yongman: which yongman desired
Venus to change her into a woman: the goddess pitiyng the desire of the
yongman, converted her into a beutifull woman: with whose beuty the young man
acce^sed and enflamed, carried her with him home, and when they were set together
in a chamber, Venus desirous to prove whither the cat had altered with her body
her manners, sent a mouse into the midst of the chamber: but she (having
forgotten those that were present, and her nuptialles, rifing up) ran after
the mouse, desirous to catch her and eat her: so man howsoever he be trained
up in virtue, can never so belche out the old poison and venim of vices, that
(when occasion is ministered and offered) he feleth not the prickings of vices,
If a man be never so ver^o^slye brought up, yet be not the instigations of
vice extinguished in him.
and is not enflamed to syn, of this we may take the Judicial people for a
manifest example, so intierly beloved of the Lord, who although they had
received fathers, laws grace favor, a land flowing with milk and honey, and
infinite other benefits of the Lord, and were subject to many punishments,
could not be brought to forget their corupt nature, and aspire into a new man,
in who^ Adam was dead, and Christ lived. They always desired to go again into
Egypt, and (neglecting the worshipping of the lord) took again the most vain
superstitions of the Gentiles. The Bethlemeticall king and Prophet David,
although God thought King David fell through natures corraption.
and spoke of him honorably for his godliness and piety, notwithstanding,
(although he was excellently brought up, and instructed in gods law) he could
not take heed to himself, but fell into most filthy and detestable adultrie,
which he impiously incresed by the slaughter of the stout man Vrias, not
deserving the same. What speak I upon David? Not Noah (whom Noah committed
incest
God spared, when all other almost perished in the deluge and inundation) could
so warely walk before the Lord, but he committed incest, and not with incest
alone, but with drnkennesse polluted he himself. Samuel in other things a
godly Samuel was negligent in the bringing up of his children, and rebuked of
the Lord.
and just man, notwithstanding he could not take heed but fell into yt crime,
which to parents brings great reproach and infamy. He was blamed and
rebuked because he instructed not his children in the Arts, erudition, and
learning of the country. And to come to Profane examples, what shall we say
of Aristotle that peerless Prince of Philosophers? Aristotle.
He could not conquer his corrupt nature, (although without all controversy
he ascended the top, and scaled the fort of Philosophy) but fell into the
most filthy love of a woman, which enforced him like a brute beast to take the
bridle in his mouth, and like a horse to carry a weman upon his back. What is
filthyer than this, or of a Philosopher what can be fouler spoken. Although
there be some, (which otherwise expound this, and refer all things to the
nature of things) which would deliver him from this infamous reproach, indecent
in a Philosopher. Demosthenes also the Prince of Oratoures, the eloquentest man
that demosthenes
ever spoke with Greekish tongue, (whose Orations fraught with fleudes of
Elequence, do declare the singular granitie of the man, and show forth his
severe authority) could not dissemble nor conceal the vice of his corrupt
nature. As the receipt of the money craved by him of the Miletians to hold his
peace, do manifestly purtray, who for the great sum of money received, when he
should make his oration against the Miletians coming to Athens, to crave help,
came forth among the people (having his neck rolled about with wolle) and said
(...), so that he could not speak against the Miletians: then one amongs the
people exclamed, that it was not (...), but (...) that Demosthenes suffered.
And Demosthenes himself afterward concealed it not, but for a glory assigned
to himself: for when he ashed Aristodemus the actor of plays, how much he had
taken to play, and Aristodemus answered a talent: but (says Demosthenes) I
have taken more for to keep my tongue and hold my peace. Cicero the beauty of
Rome, and ornament of Italy no less excellent C(...)o.
Latin Orator, and famous Philosopher, (although he was most expert in pleding
causes, and beutified and adorned withal the precepts of Philosophy, as one
who had traueld through all learned Greekish writers, and exenterated ye bowels
of Philosophy, hindered by his corrupt nature) could not obey nature, if we
believe Salust his inuectiues against him: which no man will judge altogether
false, who so ever with equal mind and right judgment shall read them and
judge of them. The mighty Monarche and puissant Prince Alexander the great,
had the eximious teacher of youth, and best learned scholemaster Aristotle his
instructor: He although in all his sayings and deeds (an ambitious Prince you
will say) did set glory before him (as the end) and detested infamy.
Notwithstanding, he could not so bridle and tame his nature, but sometime did
very filthily, as he may see, whosoever considers his luxurious riot, (to
which he filthily fell) after he had conquered ye Persian Prince Darius, and
other things also, which they impute to him, which has blased forth, and
eternised (by their writings) his gestes and worthy exploites. Therefore has
Horace rightly said.

Natural expellas furca, tamen vsque recurrit.
If nature thou abandonest,
and do with forke expel,
Nath'lesse it will return again,
As Horace does thee tell.
And as the common proverb says,
that we by nature have,
Will stick by us, it will not thence,
till we be laid in grave.
And prudent Pyndarus has told us, that neither the subtle and crafty Fore,
nor strong and cruel Lion, can change their native inclination and nature: for
although man's labor may tame a Lion: yet he turns to his natural feritie and
wildness. And a for does not forget his native craft and fraudule^t
disposition, although he be made gentle, tame and tractable. Therefore as the
same Pindarus says, it is a very hard thing to alter nature. Seeing these
things be so, and that the nature of man is corrupt, let not parents yet
neglect to do their duties, but labor with all their power, to prevent the
corruption of nature as much as they may, which must only be by good
education, wholesome precepts and diligent awe, that when their children grow to
man's estate, they may be a joy to their parents, a profit to them selves, and
great ornaments to the common weal.

FINIS.
The Translator, of the bringing up of children, taken partly out of the.xxx.
chapter of Jesus the son of Sirach.
WHo loves his child, in tender years does labor him to train
To tread the trace of virtues lore in ma^ners, grace and pain
Sometime he does rebuke his faults, and sometime does exhort
Him fatherly and prayseth him in good and godly sort,
He warns him, and forces him, to do those things be due,
And those things that indecent be, he wills to eschew,
That when to riper years his son and loving child shall grow,
He may then reap the seeds of ground, that he in youth did plow,
Even the rewards of al his pain, which is an inward joy,
To see his child embracing grace, with vices sore annoy.
What more delight can parent have, than when he does epsy,
His children following virtues steps, and ways of piety,
To be among the noblest men, descent by lineall line
Esteemed, and to bear the bell, in grace because they shine?
Abundant joys do fill the heart of such when at they die,
When in their sons their virtues rare yplanted they epsy,
That though the fates have losde the threde of their desired life,
Yet may their children aid their friends in doutful things of strife,
And may his child a ^ampier leave, unto himself and his
Against the shot of enuies threats, a bulwark strong iwi^.
But whosoever p^mpereth and cockereth soc^shly
His son, and never suffers him to weep, to mourn nor to cry,
But when he has deserved stripes, a thousand times and more,
Does maintain him in naughtinesle, and still in vice to go,
That man does bear a stony heart, and iron heart in breast,
And has the name unworthily of parent sweet expressed.
He that absteines for to correct, with nipping rod his child,
and blames not the faulties great of youth, with words vnmild,
He is a fool, and hates his child, wise Solomon has told,
And harms him much, when that he thinks in love he does him hold.
Even as a wild vnta^^ed horse, which has not f^lt the bit
Of bridle yet, cannot abide on back the rider sit,
Even so a child that pampered is, under his fathers wing,
Does flow in manners vicious, and many a filthy thing,
And runs at randon wickedly abandoning all shame,
Vngratiously against all laws, he kicks most worthy blame,
Not tractable to virtues trace all precepts does despise,
Disdainful when he warned is in good and godly wise.
Such does reject the wholesome ^awes and good monition,
Of friendly friends with deadly hate and vile obmurmuration,
And so in gulffes of vices vame, implunged do remain,
And at the last runs hedlongs down to ruin all on maine.
Through fathers folish pa^pring, through mothers cockring love
A world to see such fondnesle foul, that parents such does move.
But thou O parent which do care, in deed for thy dear child,
In tender years apt to be r(...)d, in pliant youth and mild.
Laugh not on him pamper him not, give him no liberty,
In youthful days take heed no ways thou do excuse his folly
Least tainted when he grows to years with vices vicious sore,
He may believe all things be fit and lawful as before.
Bow down his neck while he is young and use correction dire,
While that he is in tender years, least when he does aspire
To riper years, he stubburne wax, and forces not all
So shall thy life be mest^ous, and bitterer than gall,
So shall he cause thee to lament, to mo^tue, to sob, to cry,
For to repent thy negligence, in trayning him duly.
Teach thou thy child most fatherly, instruct him still with grace,
Be diligent in warning him to walk in virtues race,
Lest that he shame thy hoared hears, and grieve thy heart full sore,
Lest that he cause thee tear thy eyes, and cockering deplore.
Oh pampring fare does harm, and hurt a tender mind,
Imperious words do profit much, with minaces unkind.
Stop the beginning carefully, long is it ere the tree
Be overthrown, that rooted is fast in the ground we see.
See that he void all idlenesle, th'increasing of all vice,
And set him to some busy work, and laborous exercise.
Always see that thou hold him in, not suffering him to stray,
That when he comes to mature years, for parent he may pray.
Set him to schole in tender years, commit him to his book,
That he may learn good sciences, as in a glasle to look,
Which common life can no ways want a passing pleasant thing,
Which richesle pass, and treasures all of Craesus caytif king.
To school commit your tender sons good sciences to gain,
That they may profit country soil, if learning they obtain,
And be a joy to parents dear, and glory to their kind.
God stir the hearts of parents all to have so good a mind.
Finis.
quod T Grant.

Faults escaped in printing.
In B. 1. page 1. line. 11. for fall read fault. In B. 1. page 2. line. 22.
for conuincible, read conuenable. In B. 2. 1. page 2. line. 6. for plays.
read players. In B. 3. page 1. line. 15. for admit read admire. In C 4. page
2. line. 9. for sangui read sanguine. In C 4. page 2. line. 14. for cline read
cliue. In D. 2 page 1. line. 10. for culta, read cultae In D. 5. page 1. line.
27. for (...) read (...). For
(...) read (...). In G. 1. page 1. line. 10. for viuat nam, read, Vincit
iram, In G. 2. page 2 line. 23. for distinct, read disiunct. In G. 3. page 1.
line. 21. for seruanda, read seruandae.
Ad Lectorem. F. Y.
HEc ego cum vigili legissem scripta labor
Impressa in libro quae praeeunte vide^,
Nil aliquando fui visus reperire, quod vllo
Esset par illis vtilitate modo.
Quisquis enim quanto virtus sit, quaeris, honor,
Teque lubens eius, participare cupis,
Hunc legito libru^, quae dant haec scripta meme^to,
Versatoque diu quae meminisse voles.
Haec been scripta leg as, been qui vis dicere mores,
Qui pius esse voles, haec been scripta legas.
Virtutis quicunque tenet praecepta, suprema
Ill'e potest magni scandere regna Iouis,
Est homo qui nouit, qui nescit moribus vti
Non homo, sub specie, sed fera bruta, viri.
Vnde feni lauds? Iuueni laus vnde lato(...)
Vnde fuit Fabio gloria tanta duci?
Multa viris sedem virtus elegit in illis,
Iunctus and ingenua cum grauitate pudor.
Quod si sint mores and tanto pondere virtus,
Hic liber exigui ponderis esse nequit
Quod Plutarchus enim Graecis prius, ille Britannis
Transtulit, and scriptis amplificauit opus.
Desine propterea Momi stirps tota loquacis
Immeritam verbis rem violare malis
Si lauds cessent, cessent male vulnera hij quae
Mome tuae, and linguae scommata Mome tuae.
Hoc eteniu^ quaecunque vides inscripta libello
Non nisi cum magno scripta labor vides.
AD LECTOREM. L. A.
MOmus abesto procul, mordaces cedite linguae,
Cedite mordac^s, Momus abesto procul.
Zoilus abscedat, vacuas latratibus auras
Impleat, haud istum diruet ore librum.
Brachia virtutis latissima tollere neseit,
In vetito virtus tramite tentat iter.
Traiani praeceptor erat Plutarchus, at illum
Effigiem viuam principis esse liquet.
Plutarchum hi^c constat quodda^ scripsisse volumen,
Ad quod Traiani docta iuuenta fuit.
Que^ Grantus patriae linguae studiosus, et auctor,
(Quandoquide^ pueros posse iuuare videt:)
Ad nos e Graecis in nostros transtulit vsus,
Disceret vt mores nostra inuenta bonos.
Excipiant igitur Grantum, Grantique libellum,
Queis virtus, mores, queis bona facta placent.
Moribus egregijs animo quicunque studebi^,
Egregij mores vnde parentur habes.
Authorem defend libri, defend libellum,
Grandius et posthaec forte volumen erit.
AD LECTOREM. G. D.
HAec studiose viri studiosa volumina docti
Lector habe, pueris non minus apta tuis.
Tradita sunt linguae primo haec monimenta Pelasgae,
Primus and illorum haud sordidus author erat,
Quae nunc in linguam legitis translata paternam
Non sine doctrina, and sedulitate pari.
Propterea ingentes eius spectate labores,
Qui vos hac linguae commoditate iuuat.
Tradita qui Graecis aperit praecepta Britannis,
Qui quoque, quae fuerant abdita plana facit.
Huic, qui de vobis meruit been, gratia detur,
Nil opera illius gratius esse potest.
Tutaque quae vobis traduntur, tuta tenete,
Ne sint Zoilea dedecorata manu.
Quod si feceritis, fient magis inde volentes,
Vt tradaent alij pluria scripta viri.
Imprinted at London by Henry Bynneman, dwelling in Knightrider street at the
sign of the Marmayde. ANNO. 1571.


