A SOLEMN Contestation of diverse Popes, for the aduaunsing of their
supremacy: quoted and collected faithfully out of their own Canon law,
according to the very words, style, and tenor of the same their own Canons,
Decres, Decretales, Clementines, Extrauagantes, Bulls, Epistles, and commen
Gloss upon the same. Histories and stories of Roman Bisshops etc. Inform and
words, as their are to be seane, and found by the Quotations here unto annexed.

Imprinted at London by John Day, dwelling over Aldersgate. Cum gratia and
priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.

To the Christen Reader.
IN reading this Book understand (gentle Reader) nothing here to be feyned or
forged of vs^ otherwise than the Popes themselfes in their own Persons speak
and write in their own Laws and Canones, according as their words and
sentences shall declare, if thou please to search them and to confer the
quotationes here in the Margent, with their writings as they stand in their
own Books. Wherein, if thou shalt find any line or sentence through this
whole Book alteryng or vareyng from their words and truth of their writings:
then judge and wey not so much our labor in gathering, as mark the matter and
manner of their handling, and then be not ashamed to confess the truth.

Vale.
A Solemn Contestation of diverse Popes.
F Pope Bonifacius 8. Extrauag. de Maiorit. and obed. c. Vna^.
Or as much as it stands upon necessite of salvation, for every humane
creature to be subject unto me, the Pope of Rome, it shall be therefore
requisite and necessary for all men that will be saved to learn and know the
dignity of my sea, and excellency of my domination, as here is set forth
according to the truth and very words of mine own laws, in style as
follows. Distinct. 28^ ca. Decretis^
First my institution began in the old Testament, and was consumate and
finished in the new: in that my pristhode was prefigured by Aaron: And other
bishshopes under me were prefigured by the sons of Aaron, yt were under him.
Pope pelagius Distinct. 21. c. Qua^uis.
Nether is it to be thought that my church of Rome has been preferred by any
general counsel, but obtained ye primacie only by the voice of the gospel,
and the mouth of ye savior. Pelagius ibidem.
And has in it neither spotte nor wrincle, nor any such like thing. Pope
Nicolaus Did. 21. cap. Inferior.
Wherefore as other seats be all inferior to me, and as they can not absolve
me: so have they no power to bind me, or to stand against me, no more tha^ the
axe has power to stand or presume above him that heaweth with it, or the saw
to presume against him yt rules it. Pope Lucius 24. q. 1. cap. a. Recta.
This is the holy and apostolic mother church of all other churches of Christ,
Pope Calixtus Did. 12. cap. Non decet.
From whose rules it is not mete that any person or persons should decline, but
like as the son of God came to do the will of his Father, so must you do the
will of your mother, the church of Rome, ye head whereof am I. Pope
Innoce^tius. Distinct. 11. cap. Quis.
And if any other person or persons shall err from the said church, either
let them be admonished, or else their names taken, to be known who they be that
swerve from the customs of Rome. Pope Stephanus Distinct. 19. ca. Enim^ero.
Thus the^ for as much as ye holy church of Rome, whereof I am governor, is set
up to the whole world for a glass or example, reason would, that what thing so
ever the said church determyth or ordeneth, that to be received of all men for
a general and a perpetual rule for ever. Pope Bonifa. 8. Extrauag. c. vna^
sancta^. Item Pope Ioannes. 22. Extrau. cap. Super ge^tes.
Whereupon we se it now veryfide in this church, that was forprophesied by
Jeremy, saing: behold I have set thee up over nations and kingdoms to pluck
up, and to break down, to build, and to plant etc. Pope Innoce^tiui 3. art.
de mayor and obe. c. Solitae.
Who so under stands not the prerogative of this my Priesthode let him look
up to the Firmament, where he may see two great lights, the sun and the moon, one ruling over the day, the other over ye night. So in the firmament of
the universal church. Pope Gelasius distinc. 96 cap. Duo.
God has set two great dignities, the authority of the Pope, and of the
emperor. Of ye which ij. this our dignity is so much more weightier, as we
have ye greater charge to give account to god, for kings of the earth and the
laws of men. Ibidem.
Wherefore be it known to you emperors, which know it also right well, that
you depend upon the judgment of us, we must not be brought and reduced to
your will. Innocentius De Mayor. et obed. c. Solitae.
For, as I said, look what difference there is betwixt the Sun and the Moon,
so great is the power of the Pope ruling over the day, that is over the
spirituality, above emperors and kings rulinge over the night that is over
the laity. Glosa ibide^.
Now seeing then the earth is seven times bigger then the Moon, and the sun
eight times gretter than the earth, it follows that the Popes dignity 47.
times does surmounte the estate of Emperors. Ibidem.
Upon consideracion whereof I say therefore and pronounce, that Constantine the
Emperor did naught, in setting the patriarch of Constantinople beneth him on
his left hand. Innoce^tius Glosa ibidem.
And although the said Emperor wrote to me alleging ye words of saint Peter
commaundyng us to submit our selfs to every humane creature, as to kings, dukes
and other for the cause of God. etc. 1. Peter.2. yet in aunswering again in my
decretall, I expounded the mind and the words of s. Peter to pertain to his
subjects, and not his successors, willinge the said emperor to consider the
person of the speaker, and to whom it was spoken. For if the mind of Peter had been there to debase the order of pristhod and to make us underlings to every
humane creature, than every Jack might have dominion over prelates which
makes against the example of Christ, setting up the order of presthod to bear
dominion over kings, being said to Jeremy the Prophet: behold I have set the
up over kings and nations. etc. Pope Cleme^s. 5. Clement. de iureiurando c.
Romani.
And as I feared not than to write this boldly to Constantine, so now I say to
al other emperors, that they receiving of me there approbation, unction,
consecration, and croune imperial, must not disdain to submit there heads
under me, and swear unto me there allegiance. Pope Ioa^nes. Did. 96. c.
Nunquam.
For so you read in the decree of pope John, how that princes heretofore have
be^ wont to bow and submit there heads unto bishops, and not to proceed in
Judgment against the heads of bishops. Pope Cleme^s. 5. clement. de Sente^t.
and reiud, c. Paestos ralis.
if this reverence and submission was wont to begeuen to Bisshops, how much
more ought they to submit there heads to me being superior not only to
kings, but Emperors, and that for two causes, first for my title of
succession that I pope of Rome have to ye empire, the room standinge vacant.
Also for the fullness of power that Christ the king of Kings, and lord of
Lords has given to me in the person of Peter. Pope Innoce^tius 3. De iudiciis
cap. Nouit.
By reason whereof, seeing my power is not of man but of God, who by his
celestial providence, has set me over his whole universal Church master
and governor, it belongs therefore to my office to look upon every mortal
sin of every Christian man: Ibidem.
Whereby all criminal causes as well of kings, as all other, be subject to my
censure, Pope Julius. Cause. 2. q. 6. c. Ad Romana^.
in such sort, that in all manner of pleadyng if any manner of person at any
time either before the sentence given, or after shall appele to me, it shall be
lawfulfor him so to do. Innocentius Ibidem.
Nether must Kings and Princes think it much to submit themselfes to my
Judgment for so did Valentinianus the worthy Emperor, so did Theodosius, and
also Carolus.

Bonifacius Did. 40. cap. Si papa.
Thus you see all must be judged by me, and I of no man, yea and though I
Pope of Rome, by my negligencie or evil demanner befound unprofitable, or
hurtful other to my self, or to others, yea, if I should draw with me
innumerable souls by heaps to hell, yet no mortal manne so hardy, so bold,
or presumptuous to reprove me, Glosa. Extrauag. de sede vacant. Ad apostolatus.
or to say to me: Domine cur ita facis? Pope leo. cau. ^. q. 7. c. No^.
for although you read that Balaam was rebuked of his ass, by the which Ass
our subjects, by Balaam we prelates are signified: yet that ought to be no
example to our subjects to rebuke us. Gregorius 2. q. 7. c. petr^^.
And though we read in the scripture that Peter, who received the power of
kingdom, and being chief of the Apostels, might by virtue of his office
controlle all other, was content to come, and give answer before his
inferiors, obiecting to him, his going to the gentiles, yet other inferiors
must not learn by this example to be chekmate with their prelates, because
that Peter so took it at there hands, showing thereby rather a dispensation of
humility, than the power of his office, by the which power he might have
said to them again in this wise, it becomes not sheep, nor belongs to
their office to accuse or carpe their sheapherd, etc. Pope Nicolaus Did. 21.
cap. In tantu^.
For else why was Dioscorus patriarch of Alexandria condemned and excommunicate
at Chalcedon? not for any cause of his faith, but only for that he durst stand
against pope Leo, and durst excommunicate the Bishop of rome, for who is he
that has authority to accuse the seat of saint Peter. Hiero. Cause. 2 q. 7.
cap. Paulus.
Albeit I am not ignorant what saint Hieromy writes, that Paul would not have
reprehendid Peter, unless he had thought himself equale unto him: Glosa
Gratiani ibidem.
yet Hieromy must thus be expoundid by my interpretation, that this equality
betwixt Peter and Paul consists not in like office of dignity, but in
pureness of conversation. Glosa. in Did. 11. c. Quis.
For who gave Paul his license to preach but Peter, and that by the authority
of God, sayng, separate to me Paul and Barnabas. etc. Cause. 2. q. 7. ^o beati.
Wherefore be it known to all men that my Church of Rome is prince and head
of al nations, Pope Nicolaus Did. 22. c. oe^s.
the mother of the faith, Pope Anacletus. Did. 22. c. Sacrosa^cta.
the fundation cardinal, whereupon all churches do depend as the door does
depend by the hinges: Pope pelagius Did. 21. qua^uis.
the first of al other seats, without al spot or blemish: Pope Nicolaus Did.
21. cap. Denique.
Lady mistres and instructor of all Churches. Pope Stephanus. Did. 19. Enimuero.
a glass and spectacle to al men, to be followed in all, what so ever she
obseruith. Pope Lucius. 24. q. 1. Arect.
Which was never found yet to slide or decline from the pathe of apostolic
tradition, or to be inta^gled with any newnes of Heresy. Pope Nicolaus Did.
22. Oe^s.
Against which church of Rome who so ever speaks any evil, is forthwith an
heritike: Pope Gregorius. Did. 81. cap. Siqui.
yea a very pagane a witch and idolater or infidele. Pope Leo. Cause. 3. q. 6.
cap. Multu^.
Having fullness of power only in her own hands in rulyng, Did. 20.
Decretales.
desisinge, absoluinge, condemning, casting out, or receiving in, Pope Julius.
Cause. 2. q. 6. Qui se.
albeit I deny not but other Churches be partakers with her in laboring and
caryng. Cause. 2. q. 6. Arguta. ite^ c. Ad Romana^.
To the which church of Rome it is lawful to appeal for remedy, from al other
Churches. Cause. 2. q. 6. cap. Placuit.
Although it was otherwise concluded in the general counsel of Carthage, that
no man should appeal over the sea, under pain of ex communication, yet my
gloss comes in here with an exception, Glosa. Gratiani. Nisi.
Nisi forte Romanam sedem appellauerint: 1. Except the appeal be to ye sea of
Rome, etc. Pope Gelasius. 25. q. 1. cap. Co^fidimus.
By the authority of which Church of Rome, all sinodes, and decrees of
counsels stand confirmed. Pope Vrbanus. 25. q. 1. c. Su^t.
And has always full authority in her hands to make new Laws and
decrementes: Pope Pelagius 25 q. 2. ca. posteaquam.
And to alter statutes privileges, rightes or Documentes of churches to
separate things joined, and to join things separated upon consideration
either in whole or in part, personally, or generally. Bulla Donationis. Did.
96. c. Constant.
Of the which Church of Rome I am head as a king is over his judges, Pope
paschalis Did. 63. cap. Ego.
the vicare of S. Peter. Pope Cleme^s 5. Clement. c. Romani. Glosa.
yea not the vicare of Peter properly, but ye vicare of Christ properly, and
successor of Peter. Pope Bonifacius 8. Sext. Decretal. cap. vbi.
vicare of Jesus christ, Ibidem.
Rector of the universal church: Director of ye Lord his universal flock:
Pope Bonifacius. prohem. Sext. Decretal. ib. Sacro sancta.
Chief magistrate of the whole world. Anacletus. Did. 22. cap. Sacro sancta.
1. Cephas. i. caput, the head and chief of the Apostolic Church. Pope
Bonifacius 4. Sext. Decret. de paenit. and remiss. cap. 5. Glosa.

Item Alexander 4. Sext. Decre. c. 4. in Glosa.


universal Pope, And diocesane in all places exempt as well as every
Bisshoppe is in places not exempt. Pope hilarious. 25. q. 1. Nulli.
most mighty Priest. Sext. Decret. cap. Ab arbitris. Glosa.
Lex animata in terris. 1. Pope Bonifacius. Sext. Dec. De co^st. cap. licet.
a living law law in the earth having all laws in ye chiste of my breast
Pope Innoce^tius. 3. De tra^sl. c. Quanto.
bering ye person of no pure man: Prohaem. Clement. Glosa. Papa Stupor mundi
etc. Nec Deus es nec homo, quasi neuter es inter vtru^que.
being nether God nor man, but the admiration of the world, and a middle thing
betwixt both: Pope Bonifacius. Extr. De Maiorit and obed. ca. vna^. Ite^ Did.
22. c. Oe^s.
Having both swords in my power both of ye spiritual, and temporal
jurisdiction, Sext. Decret. De sente^t. and re. c. Ad Apostolicae. ite^ in
Glosa. ibide^.
so far surmou^ting ye authority of the emperor, yt I of mine own power alone
without a council have autorite to depose him, to transfer his kingdom, and
to give a new election, as I did to Frederick and diverse other. Pope Nicolaus
Did. 22. cap. Oe^s.
What power than or po^estate in all the world is co^parable to me: who have
authority to bind and lose both in heaven and earth. Glosa. ibide^.
That is, who have power both of heavenly things, and also of temporal
things? Pope Gelasius. Did. 96. c. Duo.
To whom Emperors and kings be more inferior, tha^ lead is inferior to
Gold. Pope Gelasius. ibidem.
For do you not see the necks of great kings and princes be^d under our
knees, yea and think themselves happy and well defensid, if they may kiss
our hands? Did. 96. cap. Illud.
Wherefore ye sawsines of Honorius the emperor is to be reprehe^did, and his
constitution abolished, who with his laity would take upon him to intermedle not
onl^^ with the temporal order, but also with matters ecclesiastike, and
elettion of the pope. Ex citatione Hier. Marij.
But here percase some will object the examples and words of Christ, saing,
that his kingdom is not of this world, and where he being required to divide
betwixt two brethren there hereditage, did refuse it but that ought to be no
prejudice to my power. Pope Hilde bra^dus, called Gregorius 7. Ex platina, in
Vita Gregorii.
For if Peter, and I in Peter, if we I say, have power to bind and loose in
heaven, how much more tha^ is it to be thought, that we have power in earth to
loose and take away imperes, Kingdoms, Dukedomes, and what else so ever
mortal men may have, and to give them where we will? Hildebrandus ibidem.
And if we have authority over Angels, which be the governors of princes, what
the^ may we do upon their inferiors and servants? Antonius in Tertia part
Su^mae maiori^.
And for that you shall not meruel, that I say, Angels be subject to us, you
shall here what my blessed clerk Antoninus, writes of that matter, saying, yt
our power, of Peter and me, is greater then the Angels in.4 things: In
jurisdiction, 2. in administration of sacraments: 3. in knowledge, 4. and in
reward. etc. Bulla Cleme^^^^
And again in Bulla Clementis, do not I there command in my Bull, the angels
of Paradise to absolve the soul of man out of purgatory and to bring it into
the glory of Paradise? Pope Innoce^tius. De electione c. Ve^erabilem.
And now besides my heaven by power to speak of mine earthly jurisdiction, who
did first translate the Empeire from the Greeks, to the Almanes, but I?
Extrauagan. De praeben. et dig. c. Execrabilis.
And not only in the Empire am Emperor, the place being empty, but in all
ecclesiastical benefices have full right and power to give, to translate, and
to dispose after my arbitreme^t. Pope Zacha^ias. Cause. 15 q. 6. c. Ali^^.
Did not I Zacharias put down Hildericke the old king of France, and set up
Pipinus? Pope Hildebrand. called Gregorius. 7. Clement. c. pastoralis.
Did not I Gregorius sept. set up Robert VVysarde and made him king of Sicilia
and Duke of Capua? etc. Ex Gestis Hildebrandi^
Did not I the same Gregorius also set up Rodulphus against Henricus
the emperor? Baptista Egnatius.
And though this Henricus was an Emperor of most stout courage, who stood,
62. times in open field against his enemies. Platina Benno.

Nauclerus^


yet did not I Gregorius bring him, coram nobis, and made him stand at my gate
three days and iij. nights barefote and barelegge with his Wife and Child,
in the deep of winter, both in froste and snow entreating for his absolucion
and after did excommunicate him again, so was he twice excommunicate in my
days? Platina Egnatius.

Benno.


Again did not I Paschalis after Gregory, set up the Son of the said
Henricus, against his Father in war, to possess the Empere, and to put down
his father, and so he did? Polido. Virgilius. Historia Iornalensis de rebus
Anglorum.
Ite^ did not I pope Alexander bring under Henry the second king of England,
for the death of Thomas Becket, and caused him to go barefote to his tomb at
Canterbury with bleding feet? Chronica ver^acula.
Did not I Innocentius the third, cause king John to knele down at ye fete
of Pandolfus my legate, and offer up his crown to his hands? also to kiss
the fete of Steven La^ghton bishop of Canterbury, and besides marsid him in a
M. Marks by year? Pope Vrbanus. Cause. 15. q. 6. cap. Iuratos.
Did not I Vrbanus 2. put down Hugo earl in Italy, discharging his subjects
from their oath and obedience to him? Pope Pasch^lis. Carsulani^^ Platina.

Vincentius.

Stella.

Antoninus.

Matheus pari^siensis.


Did not I Paschalis excommunicate also his Son Henricus 5. and gate out of
his hands al his right and title of electio^s, and donacions of spiritual
promotions? Did not I Gelasius.2. bring the captain Cintius under, Pope
Gelasius.^.
unto the kissing of my fete? And after Gelasius, Pope Calixtus ^2.
did not I Calixtus 2. quale the for said emperor Henricus 5. and also did
bring in subjection Gregory whom the said Emperor had set up against me to be
Pope, Platina de vitis pontificu^.
bringing him into Rome upon a Camel, his face to the horse tail, making him
to hold the horse tail in his hand in stead of a bridle? Pope Innoce^tius.2.
Platina.
Further did not I Innocentius 2. set up and made Lotharius to be Emperor for
driving out Pope Anacletus out of Rome. Nauclerus.
Did not I the said Innoce^tius take the Dukedom of Sicile from the Empere, and
made Roger to be king thereof, whereby afterward the kingdom became the
patrimony of s. Peter? Pope Alexander.3. De spo^sal. and matr. c. Non e^t.
Did not I Alexander.3. suspende all the realm and Churches of England for the
Kings marriage. Anno 1159. Nauclerus. Acta. Romans pontificum.
But what do I speak of kings? did not the said Alexander bring the valiant
Emperor Frederick the first to Venece, by reason of his son Otho there
taken prisoner, and there in s. Mark his Church made him fall down flat upon
the ground, while I set my foot upon his neck, sayng the verse of the Psalm.
Super a^pidem and basiliscum ambulabis etc. Pope Adrianus. Vitae To. pontificum.
Did not I Hadrianus pope and an English man borne excommunicate William King of
Sicile, and refused his peace, which he offerid. And had not he overcome me in
plain field, I would have shaked him out of his kingdom of Sicile and
Dukedom of Apulia? Ex A^entino.
Also did not I the said Adrianus, controlle and correct the forsaide
Fridericus emperor for holding the lea^te sturrup of my horse wha^ he should
have holde^ the right? ^ulla Adriani ^o^tr^ Caesare^.
And afterward did excomunicate and curse him, for that he was so sawsie, to
set his own name in writing before mine? Acta Romans pontifi.
And although a pore fly afterward overcame and strangled me, yet I made
kings and Emperors to stope. Pope Innoce^tius 3. Ex vitis and Actis Romans
pontifi^cu^.
Did not I Innocentius.3. deiect Philippus brother to Fridericus from the
imperial crown being electid without my leave, and after set him up again?
And also set up Otho of Bru^swicke, Ex Abbate Vrspergense.
and after did excommunicate and also depose the same 4. years, setting up the
french king to war against him? Ex eodem.
Then was Fridericus.2. by me set up and reigned.37. years, and yet five
years before he died. Pope Honorius 3. Ex Mario.
Did not I Honorius interdicte him, for not restoring certain to their
possessions at my request? Pope Gregorius. 9. Ex eodem.
Whom also Gregorius.9. did excommunicate twice together, and raised up the
Venetians against him. Pope Innoce^tius.4. Hieronimus Marius Petrus de Vineis.
And at length Innocentius spoiled him of his empere, after that caused him to
be poisoned, at length to be strangled by one Manfredus, and did excommunicate
his son Conradus after him, not only depreuing him of his right inheritance,
but also caused him, with Friderick Duke of Austria to be beheaded. Ex Chronic.
Car^onis.
Thus then did not I excommunicate and depose all these Emperors in order.
Henricus.4. Henricus.5. Fridericus.1. Philippus Otho.4. Fridericus.2. and
Conradus his son? Historia An^gloru^.
Did not I interdicte king Henry the eight? Ibidem.
And all his kingdom of England? Ibidem.
And had not his prudence and power preue^tid my practice, I had displaced him
from his kingdom also? briefly who is able to comprehend the greatness of my
power and of my seat? Pope Marcellus. Did. 17 cap. Synodu^.
for by me only general councels take their force and confirmation, Did. 20^
Decret^les.
and the interpretacion of the said consels, and of al other causes hard and
doubtful ought to be referred and stand to my determination. Pope Nicolaus
Did. 19. Si Romanoru^.
By me the works of all writers what so ever they be, either be reproved or
allowed. Ibidem.
Then how much more ought my wrytinges and decrees to be preferrid before al
other? Did. 20. Decretales.
In so much that my letters and epistels decretall be equivalent with general
councels. Symmachus Pope. 9. q. 3. Alioru^.
And where as God has ordenid all causes of men, to be judged by men, he has
only reseruid me, that is, the Pope of Rome, without all question of men, unto
his own judgment. Pope Innoce^tius. 6. q. 3. c. Nemo.
And therefore where all other creatures be under their judge, only I which in
earth am the judge of all can be judged of none, nether of Emperor, nor the
whole Clergy, nor of Kings, nor yet of the people. Ibidem.
For who has power to judge upon his Judge? Pope Gelasius.9. q. 3. cap. Cuncta.
This judge am I, and that alone, without any other assistance of any ^ouncel
joined to me. For I have power upon councels, councels have no power upon me.
But if the counsel determe amiss, it is in my authority alone to infringe it,
or to condemn whom I lust without any council. Ibidem.
And all for the premine^ce of my predecessor blessed saint Peter, which by the
voice of the lord, he receuid, and ever shall retene. Anastasius patriarch. D.
q. 3. c. Antiquis Item. 1^. q. 3. cap. Quamuis.
Farthermore and where as al other sentences and judgments both of councils
person or persons may and ought to be examined, Pope Gregorius.2. q. 3. c.
Quatuor.
for that, they may be corrupted four ways, by fear, by gifts, by hatred,
by favor: only my sentence and judgment must stand, Pope Agatho. Did. 19.
cap. Sic oe^s.
as given out of Heaven by the mouth of Peter himself which no man must, Pope
Nicolaus.9. q. 3. cap. Patet.
break, nor retract.

Pope Innocentius 2. Art. 17. q. 4^ Si quis.
No man must dispute or doubt of. Did. 19. cap. In memoriam.
yea and if my judgment statute or yock seame scarsly tolerable, yet for
remembrance of s. Peter it must be humbly obeyed. Sextus Decret. Tit. 7. De
renunciat. Quonia^. Glosa.
yea and moreover obedience is to be given not only to such decrees set forth
by me in time of my Popedom, but also to such as I do foresey and commit to
writing, before I be Pope. Of^ic. l. 1.
And although it be thought by some writers, to be given to all men to ere, and
to be deceauid, Glosa. Extra. De verb. signif. cap. Ad.
yet nether am I a pure man, Pope Gregorius. Cause. 35. q. 9. Apostolicae.
and again the sentence of my Apostolic seat is always co^ceauid with such
moderation, is concocte and digestid with such patience, and rypenes, and
delivered out with such gravity of deliberation, that nothing is thought in it
necessary to be alterid or retractid. Pope Symmachus. Cause. 9. q. 3. Alioru^.
Wherefore it is manifest, and testified by the voice of holy bishops, that the
dignity of this my seat is to be reverenced through the whole world, in that
all the faithful submit themselfes to it, as to the head of the whole body:
Ibidem.
Whereof it is spoken to me by the Prophet, speaking of the arche: if this be
humiled, whether shall you run for succor, and where shall your glory become?
Seeing then this is so, that so holy Bishops and scriptures do witness with me,
what shall we say then to such as will take upon them to judge of my doings,
to reprehend my procedinges, or to require homage and tribute of me, to whom
all other be subject: Pope Grego^rius. 6. q. 3. Scriptu est.
Against the first sort the Scripture speaks Deutero. thou ought not to
put thy sith in an other man's corn. Which thing to attempt against me
what is it but plain sacrilege. Cause. 17. q. 4. Sacrileg. Glosa.
According to my canonists, which thus define sacrilege to consiste in three
things, either when a man judges of his princes judgment: or when the holy
day is profaned, or when reverence is not given to Laws and Canons. 2. q. 7.
cap. Plaru^que Glosema Gratiani.. Item.
Against the second sort makes the place of the book of kings, where we
read, ye arch of God was brought from Gabaa to Jerusalem, and in the way the
Arch inclinyng by reason of the unruly oxen, Ozias the Leuite put to his hand
to help, and therefore was stricken of the Lord. By this Arch is signified the
Prelates, by the inclination thereof, the fall of Prelates, Ibidem.
which also be signified by the Angels, that Jacob did see going up and
coming down the lader. Ibidem.
Also by ye Prophet, where he says: He bowyd down the Heavens and came down
etc: By Ozias, and by the unruly Oxen are mente our subjects. Ibidem.
Then like as Ozias was stricken for putting his hand to the Arch inclining, no
more must subjects rebuke there Prelates, going awry, Ibidem..

His itae.


Albeit here may be answered again, that all be not Prelates which so be
called, for it is not ye name that makes a bishop, but his life. Pope Vrbanus.
23. q. Tributu^.
Against the third sort of such as would bring us under the tribute and
exactions of seculare men, makes the new Testament, where Peter was bid to
give ye grot in the Fishes mouth but not the head, nor the body of the fish:
No more is the head or body of the Church subduid to Kings, but only that,
which is in the mouth, that is, the externe things of ye church And yet nor
they nether: Ibidem.

Quamuis.


For so we read in the book of Genesis, that Pharao in time of darth subduyd
all the land of thegiptians, but yet he ministered to the Priests, so that he
took nether there possessions from them, nor there liberty. If then the
prelates of the Church must be nether judged, nor reprehendid, nor exacted,
how much more ought I to be free from the same, Pope Benedictus. Extr. De
aut. et. vs^ pallij. c. Sa^sta.
which am the Bishop of bishops, and head of prelates For it is not to be
thought that the case betwixt me and other prelates, betwixt my sea, Pope
Stephanus. Did. 19. Enimuero.
and other churches be like. Pope Pelagius. Did. 21. Quamuis.
Although the whole catholic and apostolic Church make one brydechamber of
christ: yet the cathol. and Apost. church of Rome, had the preeminence given
over al other, by the mouth of the lord him self sayng to Peter: Thou art
Peter. etc? Did. 21. De^ cretis.
Thus a discretion and difference must be had in the church, as it was betwixt
Aaron and his Children, Pope Anaclotus. Did. 21. in non^.
betwixt 72. disciples, and the 12. Apostels: betwixt the other apostels and
Peter. Pope Bonifacius and Greg. Did. 89. Ad ^oc.
Wherefore it is to be co^cludid, that their must be an order and difference of
degrees in the Church betwixt powers, superior and inferior, without which
order, the university of ye whole can not consist.

Ibidem.
For as amongst the Angelical creatures above in heaven there is set a
difference and inequality of powers and orders, some be Angels, some
Archangels, some Cherubin Seraphines: Did. 89. cap. Singula.
So in the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy of the Church militant in the earth
priests must not be equal with Bishops. Bishops must not be like in order with
Archebishops with Patriarchs or Primates. Ex Citatione Bull. Decr. 5. Ser. 3.
Who co^teyne under them three Archbishops, as a King contains three Dukes
under him. In the which number of patriarchs comes in the state also of De
officio Archipresby^. in Glosa.
Cardinals or Principales, so called because as the door turns by his hinges,
so the universal church ought to be ruled by them. (...)
The next and hiest order above these is mine, which am Pope, differyng in
power and maiorite, and honor reuerentiall from these and al other degrees of
men. Ex 3. Part. Su^mae maioris. b. Antonini.
For the better declaration whereof, my Canonistes make 3. kinds or power in
earth, Immediata, which is mine immediately from God. Deriuata, which belongs
to to other inferior prelates from me. Pope Innocent. 3. De sacra unction.
Qui venisset.
Ministralis, belongyng to Emperors and Princes to minister for me, for ye
which cause the anointing of princes and my consecration does differ: for they
are anointed only in the arm or shoulders, and in the head to signify the
difference of power betwixt princes and me. Pope Nicolaus Did. 22. cap. Oe^s.
This order therefore of Priests, Bishops, Archbishops, Patriarchs and
other, as a thing most convenient, my church of Rome has set, and institute
through all churches following therein not only the example of the Angelical
army in Heaven, but also of the Apostels. Pope Clement. Did. 80. cap. In illis.
For amongst them also there was not an uniform equalite or institution of one
degree, Pope Anacletus. Did. 22. c. Sacrosancta.
But a diversity or distinction of autorite and power, albeit they were all
Apostels together, yet it was granted not withstanding to Peter, (themselves
also agreyng to ye same) that he should bear dominion and superiority over
all the other apostels. Ibidem.

Quasi vero Petrus no^ a Petra, sed (...) ducatur.


And therefore had his name given him Cephas, that is, head or beginning of ye
apostelhode. Did. 21. cap. In nouo.
where upon the order of Priesthod first in the new Testament began in Peter,
to whom it was said, Thou art Peter, and upon thee I will build my church.
Ibidem.
And I will give the keys of the kingdom of heaven. And thou being conuertid
confirm thy brethern. Did. 21. cap. Decretis.
I have prayed sor thee, that thy faith shall not fail. Wherefore seeing such
power is given to Peter, Pope Leo. Did. 19. c. Ita Dominus.
and to me in Peter, being his successor, Pope Nicolaus In ta^tu^. Did. 22.
who is he then in all the world, that ought not to be subject to my decrees,
which have such power in heaven, in hell, in earth, with the quick and also
the dead, Pope Cleme^s. in Bulla Vie^nae, in scruiiis priuilegioru^.
commanding and grau^ting in my Bulle of lead sent to Vienna, unto all such
as died in there peregrinatio^ to Rome, that the pain of hell should not
touch them: And also that all such as took the holy cross upon them should
every one at his request not only be deliuerid himself, but also deliver three
or iiij. souls whom so would, out of purgatory. Did. 21. cap. Decretis.
Again having such promise and asserance, that my faith shall not fail, who
then will not beleaue my doctrine? For did not Christ him self first pray for
Peter that his faith should not fail. Pope Anacletus. Did. 22. c.
Sacrosancta.

Scripture well aplied, and like a Clerk.


Also have not I a sure promise of Paul his own mouth, writing to my Church by
these words. God is my witness whom I serve in my spirit, in the gospel of his
son, that without ceasing I make mention of you always in my prayers? Romans
1. Pope Damasus. 25. q. 1. c. Omnia.

Item, Pope Gregor. Did. 19. Nulli.


Wherefore as I condemn all such worthily, which will not obey my decrees, to
be disposessid of al their honor with out restitution: Pope Nicolaus Did. 22.
cap. Oe^s.
So all they that believe not my doctrine, or stand against the privilege of the
church especially of the Church of Rome, I pronounce them heretics. Ibidem.
And as the other before is to be called unjust, so this man is to be called an
heretic. Ibidem.
For why he goes against the faith, which goes against her, who is the mother
of faith.

Did. 20. Decretales.
But here may rise percase a doubt or scruple, that if my faith and knowledge
stand so sure by the promise of Christ, and by the continual prayer of s.
Paul: whether is it true, or is to be granted, that any other should excel me
in knowledge or interpretation of holy scripture. Ibidem.
For look whose knowledge is grou^did of most reason, his words should seame
to be of more autorite. Ibidem.
Whereunto I answer, and grant, that many there be and have been more
abunda^tly endued with fuller grace of the holy ghost, and greater excellence of
knowledge, And therefore that the tractationes of Augustine, Hierome and others
ought to be preferrid before ye constitutio^s of diverse popes: yet I say in
determination of causes, because they have not ye virtue and height of that
authority, which is given to me, therefore in expou^ding of scriptures they are
to be preferred, but in dissising of matters they stand inferior to my
authority. By virtue of which authority, Did. 19. Si Romanoru^.
both they themselfes be allowed for doctors, and there works approved, and
also all other matters be ruled, through the power of the keys which be given
to me immediately of Christ. Although I deny not but the same keys be also
committed to other Prelates, as they were to other Apostels, besides Peter:
Gabriel Biel. li. 4. Did. 19.
yet it is one thing to have the keys, an other thing to have the use of the
keys. Petrus de Palude.
Wherefore here is to be noted, a distinction of keys, after the mind of my
Schole-doctors, one key which is called Clauis ordinis, having authority to
bind and lose, but not over the persons whom they bind and lose, and this
authority they take not immediately of Christ, but mediatly by me ye vicare of
Christ. The other keye is called Clauis iurisdictionis, which I ye vicare of
Christ take immediately of him, having not only authority to bind and lose,
but also Dominion over the^ on whom this keye is exercised. By ye Jurisdiction
of which key, the fullness of my power is so great, that where as all other
are subjects, Did. 96. cap. Si Imperator.
yea and Emperors themselfes ought to subdue there executions to me. Only I
am a subject to no creature, Gabriel. lib. 4. Did. 19.
no not to me self, except if I list, In foro paenitentiae, to my Gostlyfather
submitting me self as a sinner, but not as Pope, so that my Papal majesty
ever remains vnminished, Superior to all men, Pope Nicolaus. Did. 19. cap.
Si Romanoru^ in Glosa.
whom all persons ought to obey, Item. 24. q. ^. Hae^ est.
and follow, Did. 40. cap. Si Papa.
no man must judge, nor accuse of any crime either of Murder, Adultery, Symone,
or such like. 2. q. 7. Nos si. in Glosa.
No man depose but I me self. Extrau. De elect. Innotuit.
No man can excommunicate me, yea though I communicate with the excommunicate,
for no Canon binds me. Whom no man must ley to. De penite^tia. Did. i. c.
Serpe^s in Glosa.
For he that leyth to me is a churchrobber. Did. 19. cap. Nulli.
And who obeyth not me is an heretic, and an excommunicate person. August. de
Ancho.
For like as al Jews were commandid to obey the hey priest of Leuiticall
order, of what state or condition so ever they were: So are all Christen men
more and less bound to obey me Christ's Leauetenant in earth concerning the
obedience of whom or disobedience we have in Deuter. 17. Glosa Ordinaria.
Where the commen gloss says that he who denies to the hey priest
Obedientiam, leyth under the sentence of comdemnation, as much as he that
denies God his Omnipotentiam. Thus then appears the greatness of my
Priesthod, Antoninus.
begone in Melchisedech, solemnized in Aaron. Continued in the Children of Aaron:
perfectionated in Christ: Representid in Peter: Exalted in universal
jurisdiction, And manifestid in Syluester. etc? So that through this
Praeemiance of my pristhod, having all things subject to me, Antoninus.
it may seame well verified in me, that was spoken of Christ. Summae Ma^^ris.
3. part. ^ist. 22.
Psalm. 8. Omnia subiecisti sub pedibus eius, oues, and boues, and vniuersa
pecora campi. Volucres caeli and pisces Maris. etc. i. Thou haste subduyd all
things under his feet, Sheape and Oxen, and all cattle of the field: The
birds of Heaven, and Fish of the sea etc. Ibidem.
Where it is to be noted, that by oxen Jews and Heretics, by Cattle of the
field, Paganes, be signified. For although as yet they be out of the use of
my keys of binding and losing, yet they be not out of the jurisdiction of my
keys, but if they return, I may absolve them. Ibidem.
By sheape and all catell, are meant al Christen men both great and less,
whether they be Emperors, Princes, Prelates or other. By birds of the air
you may understand the Angels and potestates of Heaven, who be all subject
to me, in that I am greater than the Angels, and that in four things as is
before declared, and have power to bind and lose in heaven, 23. q. 5. cap.
Omnium.
and to give heaven to them yt fight in my wars. Ide^ Antoninus mi^i.
Lastly by the Fishes of the sea are signified the souls departid in pain or
in purgatory, as Gregory by his prayer delivered the soul of Traianus out of
hell, and I have power to deliver out of purgatory whom I please. Ibidem.
Lastly by the Fisshes of the sea are signified such as be in purgatory. In
as much that they stand in neade and necessity of other men's help, and yet
be in their journey Viatores, and de foro papae, i. passingers, and belong to
the court of ye pope, therefore they may be relieved out of the storehouse of
the church, by the participatio^ of indulge^s. Antoninus. August. de Ancho.
Thomas. Part. 4.
And for as much as some do object, yt my pardons ca^ not extend to the^ that
be departed, for that it was said to Peter: what so ever thou shall lose upon
earth, and therefore seeing they are not upon earth, they can not be losed of me.
Here I answer again by my Doctors, that this word Super terram, i. upon the
earth may be referred two manner of ways, first to him that is the loser, so
that he which shall lose shall be upon ye earth. And so I grant that the pope
being dead can loose no man. Also it may be referrid to him that is losed, so
that who so ever is loosed must be upon the earth or about the earth. And so
the souls in Purgatory may be losed which albeit they are not upon the
earth yet they are about the earth, at lest they be not in heaven. And because
often times one question may rise upon an other, August. de Ancho.
and heads of men now a days are curious, a man hearing now that I can
deliver out of Purgatory, will ask here a question, An papa possit totum
purgatorium expoliare.
whether I be able also to empty all purgatory at once, or not? To whom my
Canonist August. de Ancho. does answer by a triple distinction, Quantum ad
absoluta^ meam iurisdictionem, quantum ad ordinatam executionem, quantu^ ad
diuinam acceptationem: Ibidem.

Absoluta Iurisdictio.


First touching my absolute jurisdiction he says I am able to ride out all
purgatory together, for as many as be under my jurisdiction, as be all, except
only infantes unbaptized In limbo, And men departed only cum baptismo
flaminis. That is with ye Baptism of spirit. And such as have no friends, to
do for them that, wherefore pardones be given. These only exceptid, for all
other besides, the pope, he says, has power to release all purgatory at
once, as touching his absolute jurisdiction. Albeit Thomas Aquine part.4.
denies the same, for as much as Christ him self, he says, when he came down
did not utterly at once release al purgatory. Doctors disagre in purgatory.
As touching my ordinary execution this they hold that I may if I will,
August. De Ancho. Antoninus.

Or^^nata ex (...) Diuina acceptatio.


but I ought not to do it. Thirdly as concerning the divine acceptance, that
is, how God would accept it if I did it, that they say, is unknown to the^, and
to every creature, yea and to the pope himself.

Antoninus in Summulis.

Augustinus de Ancho. in Decret.

Astesanus Minorita.


And to the intent I would all men to se and understand that I lack not witnesis
moo besides these, if I list bring them out, Baptista de Salis. in sua

Batistiniana.

Bonauetura.


you shall hear the whole queare of my divine Clergy brought out with a full
voice testifiyng in my behalf, in their books, tractations, Distinctions,
Titles, Gloses, and Su^mares, Campe^sis. lib.

Co^trouersiaru^

Coclaeus.


as by their own words here follows. The Pope, say they, being ye vicare of
Jesus Christ through out the whole world, Durandus, in Speculo.

Dreido, de eccles. Scripturis and Dogmat.


in ye stead of the living God, has that Dominion and lordshippe, which
Christ here in earth would not have, although he had in habitu, but gave item
to Peter in Actu Edoardus Po^uellus, Anglus co^tra Lutheru^

Ecchius i^

Enchirid.


that is the universal jurisdiction both of spiritual things and also of
temporal, which doble jurisdiction was signified by the two swords in the
Gospel: And also by offering of the wiseme^, Franciscus.

Fulgo.


who offered not only Incense, but also God, to signify not only the spiritual
Dominion, Gabriel Biel. ex Spica.

Gaspar.

Gratianus in Decr^tis.

Gerson doctor Illuminatissimus. De ecclesiastica potestate.


but also ye temporal to belong to Christ and to his vicare. For as we read,
ye earth is the Lords, and the fulness thereof, and as Christ says al power is
given to him both in heaven, and earth, so it is to be affirmed, Inclusiue,
that the vicare of Christ has power on things celestial, Hugo Cardinalis in
postilla.

Hostiensis.

Holkot.

Hosius.


terrestial, and infernal. Which he took immediately of Christ, al other take
mediatly by Peter and the Pope. Wherefore such as say that the Pope has
Dominion only on Spiritual things in the world, Ioannes Andreae.

Innocentius.

Ioa^. de Turr^ Cremata de ecclesia S^^ma.


and not of temporal, may be likened to the counselors of the king of
Syria.3. Reg. 20. Which said, The Gods of the mounta^ce be their Gods, and
therefore they have overcome us, Lanfrancu^ co^tra Wiclef.

Li^ius Historicus. Anglus.

Lapus.

Laurentius.


but let us fight against them in the low meadows, and in valles, where they
have no power, and so we shall prevail over them: So evil counselors now a
days through there pestiferous flattery deceive Kings and Princes of the
earth, sayng: Magister Sen^te^tiaru^.
Popes and prelates be Gods of Montance, that is, of spiritual things only,
but they be not Gods of valles, that is, they have no dominion over temporal
things, Nicolaus.
And therefore let us fight with them in the valles that is, in the power of
temporal possessions, and so we shall prevail over them. Okam in Dialogo,
part. 1. lib. 5.

Oytanus.


But what says the sentence of God to them let us hear. Because, says he,
the Syrians say, that the God of Mountance is there God, and not the God of
valles, Petrus de Palude.

Petrus de Tharam.

Petrus de Aliaco.

Panormitanus.


therefore I will give all this multitude into your hand, and ye shall know
that I am the Lord. What can be more effectually spoken to set forth the
majesty of my jurisdiction which I received immediately of the Lord, of the
Lord I say, and of no man. Alexander de A^es.
For where as Constantine the emperor gave to Siluester, induyng him with this
possession and patrimony, Raymu^dus in Su^ma de Ca^^sibus.

Richardus.

Rabanus super Math. cap. 16.

Rupertus Tu^itiensis.


that is so to be expoundid and taken not so much for a Donatio^, as to be
counted for a restitution made of yt, which tyra^nously was taken from him
before. And again where as I have given at sundry times to Ludouicus and other
Emperors of my temporal lands and possessions, yet that was done, not so
much for any recognizing of homage to the^ as for keeping peace with the^. For
I owe to Emperors no dew obediance that they ca^ cleame, Scotus Doctor
Subtilis.
but they owe to me as to their superior. And therefore for a diversity
betwixt there degree and mine, in their consecration they take their unction on
the arm, I on the head. Thomas Aquin.
And as I am superior to them, so am I superior to all Laws, and fre from all
constitutions. Which am able of my self, and by my interpretation to prefer
equite being not written, before the law written. Vlricus.

Waldemus co^fessionate, and De Sacrame^tis.


Having all laws within the chiest of my breast, as is aforesaid. And what so
ever this my sea shall inacte, approve or disprove all men ought to approve or
reprove the same, with out either judging, disputing, doubting, or retracting.
Such is the privilege given of Christ in behalf of Peter to ye church of Rome,
Joan. Dreido. De Dogmatibus va^iis, lib. 4.
yt what Country so ever, kingdom or province, cheusing to them selfs Bisshops
and ministers, although they agree with all other christ's faithful people in ye
name of Jesus, that is, in faith and charity, believing in the same God, and in
Christ his true son, and in the holy ghost, having also the same Creed, the
same Evangelists and scriptures of the Apostels, yet not withstanding unless
their Bishops and Ministers take their origin and ordination from this
Apostolic seat, they are to be counted not of the Church. So that succession
of faith only is not sufficient to make a church, except the Ministers take
their ordination by the^, which have there succession from the Apostels. So
their faith, supremacy, the chair of Peter, keys of heaven, power to bind
and loose, all these be inseparable to the church of Rome, so that it is to be
presumed, that God always providing, and saint Peter helpyng the bishoprike
and diocese of Rome shall never defayle from faith. And likewise it is to be
presumed and presupposed that the bishop of that Church is always good and
holy. yea and though he be not always good, or destitute of his own merits,
yet the merits of S. Peter predecessor of yt place be sufficient for him, who
has bequethed and left a perpetual dewrie of merits, with inheritance of
innocencye to his posterity. Hugo. in Glosa. Did. 40. c. Non Nos.
yea and though he fall into Homicide or adultery, he may sin, but yet he can
not be accused, but rather excused by the Murders of Sampson, the theftes of
the Haebrues, the adultery of Jacob. Glos. in Cause. 11. q. 3. cap. Ab sit.
And likewise if any of his clergy should be found embrasing a woman, it must
be expou^did and presupposed that he does it to bless her.

Furthermore the Pope, say they, has all the dignities and all power of all
Patriarchs. In his primacie he is Abell, In gouermente the Arche of Noe, In
Patriarchdo^ Abraham, In order Melchisedech, In dignity Aaron, In authority
Moses, In seat judicial Samuel. In zeal Helias, In mekenes David, In power
Peter, In unction Christ. (Du bist das Antichrist.) My power they say is
greater than all the saints. For whom I confirm no man may infirm. I
may favor and spare whom I please, Glosa. in c. 11. q. 3. Si inimicus.
to take from one, and to give to an other. And if I be ennemy to any man, al
men ought to eschew that person forthewith, and not to tarry and look while I
bid them so to do. All ye earth is my diocese, and I the ordinary of al meune,
having the authority of the King of all kings upon subjects. I am all in all
and above all, Hostiensis in cap. Qua^to. D^ tra^sl. praeb.
so that God him self and I the vicare of God have both one Consistory, Ex
summa casuum fratris Baptistae.
and am able to do almost all that God can do, Claue non erra^te. Ex Citatione
Hen. Bulling. De fine seculi. Orat. Prima. Item ex citatione Iacobi Andreae,
aduersus Hosiu^. lib. 5.

Item ex citatione Hierom. Marij. in Actis 2. Diei.


Ite^ it is said of me, that I have an heavenly arbitrament, and therefore am
able to change nature of things, Substantialia vnius applicando alteri. And
of nothing to make things to be, and of a sentence that is nothing, to make it
stand in effect. In all things that I list, my will to stand for reason. For
I am able by the law, to dispense above the law, De co^cessione praeb. ca.
Proposuit.
and of wrong to make Justice, in correcting Laws, and chau^gyng the^. You
have herd hitherto sufficiently out of my Doctors, now you shall hear greater
things out of mine own decrees. Pope Nicol^us^ Did. 96. c. Satis.
Read there Did. 96. c. Satis. 11. q. 1. Sacerdotibus.
also, Cause 11. q. 1. ca Sacerdotibus. 12. q. 1. c. Futuram.
Also, 12. q. 1. cap. Futura^. Do not you find there expressed how Consta^tinus
the Emperor sitting in the general Council of Nice, called us Prelates of the
Church all Gods. Decretal. De Transl. episc^ cap. Quanto.
Again read my Canon Decretal. De transl. episc. cap. Quanto. Do you not see
their manifestlye expressed, how not manne, but God alone separateth that
which the Bisshoppe of Rome does dissolve and separate. Wherefore if those
things that I do be said to be done not of man, but of God, what can you
make of me but God? Again if Prelates of the Church be called and counted of
Consta^tinus for Gods, I then being above all Prelates, Thus ye may se i^
veri^ide that s. Paul prophesies of y^ aduersarye setting in ye temple as God,
and bostyng him above all that is named God. etc. 2 Thessalonians. 2.
seame by this reason to be above all Gods. Wherefore no meruell, if it be in
my power to change time and times, to alter and abrogate Laws, to dispense
with all things yea with the precepts of Christ. For where Christ bids Peter
put up his sword, monishyng his disciples not to use any outward force in
reue^ging themselves, Pope Nicolaus Cause. 15. q. 6. c. Autoritate^.
do not I pope Nicolaus writing to the Bishops of France, exhort them to
draw out there material swords in persuyng their enemies, and recovering
their possessions, setting against the precept of Christ, the prophet sayng:
The Prophets mind well expou^did.
Dissolve colligationes impietatis etc? Item where Christ was present himself
at yt marriage in Cana Galileae, Pope Martinus. Did. 34. cap. Lector.
do not I Pope Martinus in my distinctions inhibite the spiritual clergy to
be present at marriage feasts, and also to mary themselves? Item where
matrimony by Christ ca^ not be losed but only for horedom Pope Gregorius
Junior. 32. q. 7. cap. Quod proposuisti.
Do not I Pope Gregorius Junior, writing ad Bonifacium, permit the same to
be broken for impote^cie or infirmite of body? Pope Innoce^tius. 4. Sext.
Decretal. De sente^tia exco^. cap. Dilecto.
Item against the express caution of the Gospel does not Innoce^tius 4.
permit vim vi repellere? Pope Alexander. 3. De Decimis. cap. Ex part.
Likewise against the old testament I do dispense in not gyuing tithes. Pope
Nicolaus. 15. q. 6. Autoritatem.
Ite^ against the new Testament in swearing, and that in these six causes: De
elect. and elect. Potestate. Significasti in Glosa.
Pax, and fama, fides, reuerentia cautio Damni
Defectus very, poscunt sibi magna caueri.
Wherein two kinds of oaths is to be noted whereof some be promissoria, some be
assertoria. etc? Baptista de Salis. in Su^ma casuum ex Pauormitano
Item in voues and that ex toto voto. Where as other Prelates can not dispense
ex toto a voto, but I can deliver ex toto a voto, like God himself. Pope
Innoce^tius. 4. De elect. Venerabilem.
Item in perjury if I absolve my absolutio^ sta^dith. Ext. De Iure iurando. cap.
Venientes.

Ite^. De Elect. Significasti^ in Glosa.


Where also note that in all swearing, always the authority of the superior is
excepted. Pope Martin^ 5. Extra. cap^ Regimini Vniuersalis eccl^siae.
More over where Christ bids to lend without hope of gain, do not I pope
Martinus give dispensation for the same, not withstanding the council of
Thuron enactid the contrary, yet with two Bulls I disamillid that decreme^t.
Pope Vrbanus 2. Cause. 23. q. 5. c. Exco^municatorum.
What should I speak of Murder making it no Murder nor homicide, to s^aye
them that be excommunicate. Pope Nicolaus Cause. 15. q. 6. Autoritate^.
Likewise against the law of nature, Ibidem.
Item against the Apostle, Distinct. 82. c. Presbyter.
also against the canones of the Apostels I can and do dispe^se. For where they
in their Cano^ co^mau^d a priest for fornication to be deposed, I through ye
authority of Siluester alter yt rygor of ye constitution. Pope Pelagius. Did.
34. cap. Fraternitatis.
Considering the minds and bodies also of men now to be weaker than they were
then. Baptista de Salis. fol. 184.
Briefly against the universal state of ye Church I have dispensation, sc^
quando status ecclesiae non decoloratur. Ibidem.
And for marriage in the second degree of consanguinite and affinite, In
collateralibus aequali linea, that is betwixt brethern children: although not
inaequali linea, so that the uncle may not mary his nice, unless for an vrge^t
and weight cause. As for all such co^tractes betwixt party and party, where
that matrimony is not yet consummate by carnal copulation, it is but a small
matter for me to dispe^se with all. In summa, if ye list briefly to here the
whole number of al such cases as properly apperteine to my Papal dispensation,
which come to the number of one and fifty points, that no man may meddle
with all, but only I my self alone, I will receite them first in Latin, then
in English, as they be set forth in my Canonical Doctors.

Casus Papales.51. Apud Fratrem Astesanum, sine de Ast. Doctore^ solemnem in
Summa confessionis. Item apud Hostien^em. De offic. legate. reperti and his
versibus comprehensi.
SI sit catholicus papam non iudicat vllus.
Erigit, and subdit cathedras, Diuidit, unit
Mutat vota crucis, ^i. votu^ terrae sanctae.
Restituit, Eximit..i. degradatos.i. ep^os et alios.
Ad se
Maiores, causae referuntur. Legitimatque.
Promouet,.i. insufficie^tes.
Appellare vetat, Prohibet profiteri.i. intra^tes religione^.

Deponit, transfert, suppletque,.i. defectu^ regi vacant regno.
Renunciat illi
Praesul, and exe^ptus. Simon, Iurans, Anathema, Symonia, Iurame^tu^,
Exco^municatio

Vel proprium, a papa facta
vel legati, vel lex vtriusq^ ta^ papae q legati

Tu^ neque participans, Etfi que^ sponte salutat, i. soluitur papa

Que^ Canon damnat, Sibi soli quando reseruat,
Soluitur a papa: nec non que^ regula damnat. qui irregularitate^ incurrit.

Addas suspensu^, Causam, sc^. addas.
cum fertur ad ipsum.
Rescriptum, i. addas
fidei dubium. Confert bona plura i. pluralitate^ beneficioru^.

Irritat infectu^. Legem co^dit generalem.
Approbat imperiu^, i. imperatorem.
firmat, Deponit, and vngit.
Consilium generale facit. Sacrat quoq^ Sa^ctos. canonizat.

Eus non esse facit. de aliquo facit nihil.
Non eus fore. de nihilo aliquid.
Pallia semper i. palliu^.

Portat. i. palliu^.
Concedit, Legi non subiacet vlli.
Appellatur ad hu^c medio sine, i. immediata
Iudiciu^q^
Est pro lege suu^. Monachu^ reuocat renuentem, de monacho no^ monachu^ facit.

Maius adulterio soluit generaliter. i. incestu^ etc.
Arctat
Et laxat quicquid sponsis nocet. i. impedimen^tum matrimonia
Ordinat extra
Tempora da^do sacru^. i. extra 4. te^pora.
Promotu^ promouet ide^.
Ordinat atque die qua consecratur and ipse
Viue^tisq^ locu^ co^cedit, i. sacerdotiu^ confert nondu^ vacans.
Iureq^ private.
Insignit. insignia episcopalia co^cedit.i. a decimis eximit.i. praesbyter^
concedit infantes vngere
Laieo sacra donat. Chrisma ministro.
Su^ma sede sedet, plenusq^ vicarius extat.
Si sit catholicus papam non iudicat vllus.
Cases Papale, to the number of one and fifty, wherein the Pope has power only
to dispense and none else besides. Except by a special license from him.
FIrst Determination of doubts and questions belonging to faith. 24. q. 1.
Quoties.


Translation of a Bishop, Extr. De tra^slat. c. Inter.
elect, or confirmed: likewise of abbotes exempted.

Deposition of Bisshops. 3. q. 6. Quam^is.


The taking of resignation of Bishops. 9. q. 3. Deniq.


Exemption of Bisshops, 16. q. 1. Frater.
not to be under Archbishops.

Restitution of such as be deposid 2. q. 6. Ideo.
from there order.

Extr. De restitutione cap. Cu^ venissent.
The judicial definition, or interpretation of his own privileges.

7. q. 1. Te^poris.
Changing of Bishoprics, or dimission of Couents etc.

16. q. 1. Felix.
New erectio^ of bishopsseats, or institution of new religions.

16. q. 1. Et Christus.
Subjection or division of one bisshoprike under an other.

Extr. De voto. Ex multa.
Dispensation for vowiug to go to the holy land.

Extr. De s^atu monachi. c. Cum ad.
Dispensation for the vow of chastity, or of religion, or of holy orders.

Extr. De iurame^to. cap. Venientes.
Dispensation against a lawful oath, or vow made.

Extr. De Iudicio. c. At si clerici.
Dispensation against diverse erregularities, as in crimes greatter than
adultery, and in such as be suspendid for simonie.

Dispensatio^ in receuing into orders him yt had ij. wives. Extr. De bigamia.
c. Nuper.


Dispensing with such as being within orders, Extr. De clerico non ord.
ministra^te.
do yt which is above there order, as if a Deacon should say Mass, being not
yet Priest.

To receive into orders such as be blemished or maimed in body. Extr. De
corpore vitiatis. and Did. 55.


Dispensatio^ with murder, Did. 50. Miror.
or with such, as willing cut of any member of a man's body.

Dispensing to give orders to Extr. De se^tentia and exco^. ca. Cu^ illoru^.
such as have been under the sentence of the greater curse or excommunication.

Ibidem.
Dispensatio^ with such as being suspe^did with the greater curse, do minister
in any holy order.

Extr. De filijs praesbyt. c. Is qui.
Dispe^sation with such as being unlawfully borne, to receive orders, or
benefices.

Ext. De praebend. c. De ^ulta.
Dispensatio^ for pluralites of benefices.

Extra. De elect. cap. Cu^ nobis.
Dispensation to make a man Bishop before he be thirty year old.

Extr. De aetate and qualit. Generale^.
Dispensation to give orders under age.

Did. 15. Per totu^.
The Pope only has power to make and call a general council.

9. q. 3. c. Per principale.
The Pope only has power to deprive an ecclesiastical person, and give away
his benefice being not vacant.

The pope alone is able to absolve him that is excommunicate, De elect. cap.
Venerabile^.
by name.

The pope only is able to absolve him whom his legate does excommunicate. Extr.
De officio legati. c. Quaere^ti.


The Pope both judges in ye causes of them that appele unto him, 9. q. 3.
Aliorum.
And were he judges none may appele from him.

Only he has authority to make Deaco^, Extr. De Te^pli ordine. c. Cu^ in
Distrib.
and prist, whom he made subdeacon, either upon sondayes, or upon other feasts.

Extr. De vsu pallij. cap. Ad ^onorem.
Only the pope, and none else, at all times, and in all places wears the palle.

Extr. De elect. c. Dudu^.
The Pope only dispensith with a man, either being not within orders, or being
unworthy, to be made bishop.

Extr. De elect. c. Venerabilem.
He only either confirms, or deposith the emperor when he is chosen.

Tractatu. De censuris.
A man being excommunicate, and his absolution referrid to the Pope, none may
absolve that man but the Pope alone.

Extr. De elect. c. Inno^uit.
The same has authority in any election, before it be made, to pronounce it
none, when it is made.

He does canonise sanctes, Extr. De religione et veneratione Sa^ct. cap. 1.
and none else but he.

Dispensation to have many dignities or personages in one Church and without
charge and cure of soul, Extr. De praebe^d. cap. De multa.
belongs only to the Pope.

To make that effectual which is of no effect, Extr. Qui ^i. sint leg. cap.
Tanta.
and contrariwise, belongs only to the Pope.

To pluck a Monk out of his cloister both against his own will and the
Abbates, 9. q. 3. cap. Vltimo.
perteyneth only to ye Pope.

His sentence makes a law. Extr. De Se^te^t. et re Iudic. c. In causis.


The same day in which the pope is consecrate, Extr. De elect. cap. Quod sicut.
he may give orders.

Extr. De restit. spo. Literas.
He dispenses in degrees of consanguite and affinite.

Ext. De praescript. c. Vlt. and De Iudicio c. Nouit.
He is able to abolishe laws, quoad vtru^que foru^, that is both civil and
canon, where danger is of the soul.

Thomas.
It is in his dispe^satio^ to give general indulgences to certain places, or
persons.

Extr. Qui fi. sint legit. c. Per venerabilem.
Ite^ to legitimate what persons so ever he please, as touching spiritualties?
in all places, as touching temporalties, as honors, inheritance, etc.

Petrus de Palude. lib. 4.
To erecte new religions, to approve, or reprove rules, ordinances, and
Ceremonies in the Church.

He is able to dispense with all the precepts and statutes of the Church.
Secundu^ Thoma^ in 4.


Item to dispense and to discharge any subject from the bond of allegance or
oath made to any manner person. 9. q. 3. Per principalem.


No man may accuse him of any crime, Did. 40. Si Papa.
unless only of heresy, and that nether, except he be incorrigible.

The same also is fre from all laws, Ibidem.
so yt he ca^ not incur into any sentence of excommunication, suspension,
irregularitie, or into the penalty of any crime, but into ye note of crime he
may well.

Finally he by his dispensation Distinct. 32^ c. Praeter hoc.. Veru^.
may grant, yea to a simple priest, to minister the Sacrament of confirmation
to infantes, also to give lower orders, and to hallowe Churches, and virgins
etc.

These be the cases wherein I only have power to dispe^se, and no man else,
nether bishop, nor Metropolitan, nor legate, without a special license from
me.

After that I have now sufficiently declared my power in earth, in heaven, and
in purgatory, how great it is, and what is the fulness thereof, in binding,
losing, co^mau^ding, permitting, electing, confirming, deposing, dispensing,
doing, and undoing etc. The riches and possessions of the Pope.
I will entreat now a little of my riches likewise and great possessions, that
every man may se by my wealth and abundance of al things, rentes, tithes,
tributes, my silks, my purple, Miters, Crowns, Gold, silver, Perles and
Ge^mes, Lands, and Lordships, how God here prospers and magnifieth his
vicare in the earth. For to me pertains first the imperial city of Rome,
the Palace of Lateren, ye kingdom of Sicile is proper to me, Apulia, Capua be
mine. Also ye kingdom of England and Ireland be they not or ought to be
tributaries to me? Did. 96. Co^stan^inus.
To these I adioyne also, besides other provinces and countries both in the
occident and orient, from the North to the Southe, these dominions by name, Ex
Co^mentarijs Theodorici Niemi. quem citat Illyricus in catalogo testiu^. fol.
228.
as Surrianum, Montembordon, and lunae insula^, Cor^icae regnu^, Paruam Mantua^,
Montenselete, Insulam venetiaru^, Ducatum ferrariae, Canellum, Canioda^,
Ducatum Histriae, Dalmatiam, Exarchatu^ Raue^nae, Faue^tiam, Cesenam, Castru^
Tiberia^us, Rocca^ Mediolanu^, Castru^ ceperianum, Castrum Cu^ianu^, Terr^^
Cornularia^, Ducatu^ Arimini, Conta^, Monte^ ferretum, Montem Capiniae, seu
Olympicum, Castru^ exforij, Robin, Eugubin, V^bin, foru^ Sempronij, Galli, and
Senogalli, Ancona^, Gosam, Ducatu^ perusij, Vrbeneta^, and Tudertu^, Castru^
Cinianu^, Ducatu^ Spoletanu^, Theanu^, Calabria^, Ducatu^ Neapolim, Ducatu^
Beneue^ti, Salernu^, Sorre^ti insula^, Cardinia^ insula^, Anciae insula^,
Territorium Cutisan, Territorium praene^^inum, Terra^ Silandis, Terra^ Clusiu^,
Terra^ fundan, Terra^ vegetan, Terr^^ Claudiana^, Terra^ camisina^, Terram
Fabine^sem, Terra^ Siram, Terra^ portue^sem, cu^ insul^ Archis. Terra^
Ostiensem cu^ maritimis, Ciuitatem Aquine^sem, Ciuitatem lamentum, and
Sufforariam, Ciuitatem Falisena^, Fidenam, Feretrum, Cliterna^, Neapolim,
Galiopolim, with diverse mo Did. 96. Constant.
which Co^stantinus the emperor gave unto me, not that they were not mine
before he did give the^. Antoni^us in Su^ma Maiore. 3. Part.
For in that I took the^ of him I took them not as a gift, as is before
mentioned, but as a restitution. And that I renderyd them again to Otho, I did
it not for any duty to him, but only for peace sake. What should I speak
here of my daily revenues of my first fruits Annates, palles, indulge^ces,
bulls, confessionales, indultes and rescriptes, testaments, dispensations,
priuilegis, elections, prebendes, religious houses and such like which come to
no small mass of money. In so much that for one palle to the Archebishoppe of
Mentz, which was wont to be given for ten thousand Ex libr^ Grana^mu^
nationis Germanicae.
F^orence, now it is groune to xxvij. thousand florence, which I received of
Iacobus the archbishop not long before Basell council. Besides the fruits of
other bishoprics in Germany, Above fifty bishoprikes in Germany
coming to the number of fifty, whereby what va^tage co^mith to my coffers,
AEneas Syluius.
it may partly be coniectured. But what should I speak of Germany, Sext.
Decret. De penis. cap. Felicis in Glosa.

Ite^, De priuilegijs. c. Autoritate^ i^ Glosa.


wha^ the whole world is my diocese, as my Canonistes do say, and all me^ are
bound to believe, Pope Bonifacius. 8. Extr. De Maio. and obed. c. Vnam sanctam.
except they will imagine (as the maniches do) ij. begi^nings which is false
and heretical. For Moses says: In ye beginning god made Heaven and Earth, and
not in ye beginnings. (...)
Wherefore as I begone, so I conclude commau^ding, declari^g, and pronou^cing,
to stand upon necessity of salvation, for every humane creature to be subject
to me.

Ibidem.
Datum laterani. 14. Dece^b. An. pont. nostri 8.


