THE HISTORY OF POLYBIVS THE MEGALOPOLITAN. The five first BOOKS entire: With
all the parcels of the subsequent Books unto the eighteenth, according to the
GREEK ORIGINAL. Also the manner of the Roman encamping, extracted from the
description of POLYBIVS.

Translated into English by Edward Grimeston, Sergeant at Arms.

LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Oaks for Simon Waterson. 1633.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE WILLIAM LORD CRAVIN, BARON OF HAMSTEEDMARSHALL, etc.
MOST WORTHY LORD,
PArdon I beseech you, if (being a stanger and unknown unto you) I have
presumed to inscribe your title on the Frontespiece of this Book, (...) to
publish it to the world, under your Lo, favorable protection. I confess my
disability might well have deterred me: But the reason which induced me to this
presumption, was your noble and generous inclination to Arms (being the
subject of this History) wherein you have carried your self so worthily in
many great and dangerous exploits, in foreign parts, under two of the greatest
Commanders of Christendom, as you have done great honor to your Country, and
won unto your self perpetual fame and reputation. This Consideration has
made me confident, that during your vacancy from Military actions, your
Lordship will vouchsafe to cast your eye upon this History written by Polybius,
who (in the opinion of most men of Judgment) has been held to be very
sincere, and free from malice, affection or passion. And to justify the truth
thereof, he protests that he was present at many of the actions, and received
the rest from confident persons who were eyewitnesses. It is a general
History of his time, of all the wars which past in Asia, Greece, and the
Roman State, against the Gauls, and Carthaginians, which two Cities
contended for the Empiry of the world: which war was of longer continuance,
and had more cruel and variable encounters and battles than any that has
been written of: For the first Punique war (where they fought for the
Conquest of Sicily) lasted four and twenty years; and the second in Italy
under Hannibal, General for the Carthaginians, continued seventeen years, to
the subversion (in a manner) of the Roman State, had not Scipio forced
Hannibal to return home to defend his own Carthage, where in Battle he lost
the glory of all his former Victories, and brought his Country into the
subjection of the Romans. This work I present unto your Lordships favorable
Censure, humbly praying that you will be pleased to bear with my harsh and
unpolished style, and to pardon the errors committed at the press during my
absence: for which favor I shall hold my self much bound unto your Lordship,
and will always rem^ine

Your LordPs. most humbly devoted to do you service, EDW. GRIMESTON.

Jews Maigret a Lionnois to the FRENCH Nobility.
GEntlemen, we are all borne by nature to so much poverty, and inuolu'd in so
many miseries, as there is no work of Man, how small soever, which giving
order to his meanest actions, does not minister occasion of some Esteem. So as
whereas his diligence guided by reason, shall find it self crossed, I know not
by what power, which commonly fortune usurps over the judgment and
consideration of Man, we may (as we think) justly blame it, in excusing with
compassion the workman and his misfortune. And if on the other side, to show
her great magnificence and bounty, she imparts her favors (...) ^rder or fair
course, seeks to bring some Enterprise to an end, so as that notwithstanding
his ouer-weaning and folly she makes it perfect: Then we hold her prodigal,
detesting her unreasonable and inconsiderate bounty, grieuing at her benefits
so ill employed. Behold how, (I know not by what law received among men) we
commend or blame every one in his profession and works, so far forth as they
see his industry and diligence employed or defective. If we have reason then
in so great Esteem, as we seek it in all our actions, and in matters of the
smallest consequence, blaming him that neglects it: How infamous we hold the
carelessness and neglect of a man in the order and conduct of affairs, wherein
not only the ruin of his estate, life and honor, but also that of his
Country, Parents, and Friends, and finally of his Prince and Sovereign, is
many times brought into great danger? But if there be no Enterprise among those
which Men pursue, wherein such things ought to be drawn into Consideration, as
proper and ordinary vnhim, and without the danger whereof he can reap no
benefit, I am of opinion that that of war ought in reason to be preferred
before all others: Although there be many, which cannot always be brought to
a good end, without the hazard and danger of those which pursue them. In truth
it is a profession, which experience has taught in all Nations, to be so
rough and fierce, and finally so difficult to manage, as never man could carry
himself so discreetly, nor with so great fortune, nor recovered such rich
spoils, nor obtained such Triumphant victories, but they have purchased him
new causes of Care and fear, not only of great Envy, and of new Enemies, but
also loss and ruin. I will not speak of the irreparable defeat of the
brauest Men in an Army, which a Victory worthy of renown requires, as it were
by advance, when as the Enemies perform the Duties of good soldiers. The
Carthagians thrusting an Army into Sicily, at their first entry obtained some
Conquests, so soon after they provoked hatred of the Romans: which was but
the beginning and prefage of a future ruin. But when as the fortune of the
wars began to smile upon Hanibal, and to give him a full Gale, so as his
exploits were so great in Spain, as afterward he presumed to force Nations,
Mountains, and rivers, and in the end to fight with the Extremity of the
weather for the Conquest of Italy: Then, as it were, fearing her own power, to
be in a manner vanquished, she began to practice and forge means, not
only to ruin her so much favored Hanibal, but the whole Carthaginian Empire.
And therefore it is credible, that (I know not by what inconstancy, or rather
extrauagant and savage Nature) she makes friends of Enemies, and enemies of
her own friends; so much she fears (as I imagine) the ease and rest of those
whom she favors. It is true that traffic by Sea is not without great
terror, amazement and hazard, for the danger of the waves, Tempests and
storms, with a thousand other accidents. But if war once set up her sails,
being accompanied with rage, fury, and many other disasters, which the malice
of Men have invented to make use of, believe me that these other furies, which
the winds procure at Sea and in the Air, which many times are more fearful
than mortal, will not seem in regard of those of war, but a light
amazement, and, as it were, a false allarum. What torment at ^^ea, or violence
of the winds has ever been so soddaine, which the long experience of a wise
Pilot, could not by a thousand signs and tokens foresee, devising sufficient
remedier to avoid it? But when a war is managed by Judgment and discretion,
as it is requisite, the shows are commonly contrary, to that which they
pursue. Wherefore the more an Enterprise is dissembled and keept secret, the
more easy it is to put in execution. Finally, if we will confess the truth,
it is a profession which among all others, requires the greatest vigilancie; a
continual Care, with an incredible diligence: whereof a good Judgment must
have the conduct, that by conjecture drawn from things formerly practiced, or
from a probability of that which he sees, he may soon after judge of the
Enemies resolution, and finally attempt and hope for a victory.

And although it has been always held, that Money is the sinewer of War;
yet I hold its force without Conduct* like unto that of a strong, able Man,
oppressed with a deep sleep, whose senses have made their retreat for his
rest. So there is nothing so strong, nor so quick in this world as the sense
of man: Nor any thing so powerful and terrible, which the understanding does
not master and subdue. And therefore we say commonly in France, that wit is
better than force. Yet I know that Courage is a great advantage; and necessary
for a soldier, but especially for a General: But I fear that for want of
Judgment and a good consideration, it makes them not sometimes ouer-weening
and careless of danger. So as many times it gives occasion to a weak and
cowardly Enemy, to undertake a Victory, and to perform the Act of a valiant
man. Wherefore courage without conduct, and vigilancie, is always subject to
Ambushes and shameful flights: which are inconuentenees, whereof a Coward is
always wary, for that fear makes a Man vigilant and careful. But was there
ever Nation more hardy, nor more warre-like, nor that more carefully observed
the ordinances of war than the Romans? How then did Hannibal defeat them so
often, not only in Encounters, but in pitched Battles, and in the open field,
by his great Judgment, and his subtle policies? In what fear, and with what
admiration has the fury of the Gauls, been held in old time by all Nations,
who parting from their own Country and Towns, to seek new habitations, have
conquered land in diverse Countries by Arms, building Towns not only in Italy
their Neighbor, but also in Germany, and in the end in Greece, and Asia? Who
has defeated and quite ruinated them in a short time, but their own
Consideration, and an ouer-weaning confidence in their force and courage? I
hold for certain, which you know well, that it is not sufficient for a Prince
or General to have his Army complete with foot and horsemen, how resolute
soever, and with all necessary provisions for a war: No more than for a
Soldier to have youth, strong and active Members, a daring courage, and
complete furniture. He must have to vanquish (the which many times the
vanquished improperly call misfortune) that piece of harness so well steeled,
which we call Judgment* or a good conduct. Believe me that like unto a
horse, when he has taken the ^it betwixt his teeth, forcing his Master, flies
without fear through Woods, Rocks, and Precipices, with the danger of his
life, be he never so nimble and courageous; so a hardy and resolute soldier
does easily his own ruin, if he wants conduct and Judgment. You must
understand that as the body requires Exercise to preserve in health, and to
make it active, and hardened to endure labor and pain; so the understanding
in like manner desires to be exercised and employed, either by the
consideration of things past, or by those which are visible.

It is true, that those which are seen by the eye, have a greater viuacitie,
and a stronger impression, than those which are past: For that living things
are of greater force than dead. Yet, if we shall duly consider the length of
time, which the experience of a thousand kind of policies, which war
requires before that a wise Man will dare to adventure himself in a bold and
hardy Enterprise, we shall find that the knowledge of the ancient wars,
which have been left us in writing, will be of no small consequence unto him.
For besides the assurance of danger, he may in a short time see by
Historiographers, the great and wonderful exploits of the Ancient in a manner
since the Creation of the world, to pleasure and contentment from them, with
some Encouragement to do as well or better hereafter. You know well that the
war which is seen by the eye, is not always made betwixt warre-like people,
nor under resolute Commanders, that are skillful in their profession: so as it
is a difficult thing under such to see any valiant exploits, nor Enterprises
attempted with good invention, nor well executed. We say commonly in France,
that the Combat is dangerous, when as courage fights against courage. So is it
credible* that when an Army consisting of warre-like men, is under the leading
of a wise and resolute Commander, having in front an Enemy equal unto him in
all degrees, there must needs be valiant exploits performed, with hardy
Enterprises wisely managed.

If there have been any wars, attempted by fierce and warlike Nations, and
governed by wise and famous Captains, believe me this present Historiographer
has used great diligence to set them down in writing: Laboring only to
mention the deeds and valor that was most worthy of Relation, that with the
pleasure and contentment which they may reap in reading them, they may draw
some instructions and means, not to fall into the inconuiences of war, into
the danger whereof many times both Captain and soldiers may be engaged,
through want of experience, good advice and council. So as among others, you
shall see Enterprises of the Romans against the Carthaginians for the conquest
of Sicily. During the which there were many Encounters and cruel battles, as
well by Sea as land. You shall likewise read the furious Combat of the Gauls
against the Romans: And moreover the war betwixt Cleomenes and Antigonus,
for Morea, the which Philip the Son of Demetrius took afterward. And
besides many other notable exploites, (which at this present I will forbear)
you shall see the Conquests which Hannibal made in Spain, with his incredible
voyage into Italy, performed in his younger years, and his victories gotten
of the Romans with such policy and wisdom, as it is a difficult thing (if
we shall consider the people and number of his Army, having regard to courage
and power of those with whom he had to deal) to judge truly, whether there
were ever Captain in the memory of man, that may with reason be compared unto
him. Finally my Masters, I do not promise you in this History, those
miraculous Battles, which exceed the apprehension of man, performed in the
Kingdom of Logres, nor I know not what Quest of that barking Beast. Make your
account that you shall not find any Tract or mark of a Beast, nor finally any
thing that holds of it. Believe me in times past, Men did not feed their
understandings with dreams, nor fables invented in barbers-shops, without any
color of Truth. It is impossible an ignorant Master should make a learned
disciple. Finally they are discourses fit for old women's tongues to entertain
little children, whilst that for weakness of their Age, their understanding
has no apprehension, nor sufficient Judgment of reason, Wherefore we may
with reason say, that such as consume their years, and grow old in such
dreams, have a will to continue still children. And although they commonly
say, that war is managed by the eye: So as it seems they will thereby
infer, that we must not think of it, but when necessity does force us: And
that peace should procure no benefit to a Soldier, but idleness; yet he must
foresee long before, part of that which afterward he must govern by the eye.
And as a horse which is pampered and not ridden, grows restit; and proves
unprofitable to his Master for travail: so the understanding of a soldier,
idle during peace, or fed with dreams and foolish inventions, will fail him
at need; and in the end purchase him dishonor and shame; Yet do not imagine
my Masters, that I have used this speech as blazoning you, and holding you for
men of so poor an Enterprise, whose principal study and affections is the
reading of such Books, rather then in some worthy recreation and exercise. My
meaning was only to advertise you, that Histories, from whence with pleasure
you may draw great profit, as these are which this Historiographer imparts unto
you ought to be in greater recommendation than those Fables, which have no
grace, but when they are most without reason or any show of truth.

Finally, I hope you shall find such sufficiency in our Polybius, as you will
make no question to prefer him as the paragon before all others, as well
Greeks as Latins, which are come to the knowledge of men. Of whom I have
presumed to translate in the best sort I could, those five first Books, which
of Forty which he has written, have been preserved half ruined by the
negligence of time: Hoping you will receive them as willingly, as I offer them
with a good heart.

When as after the Printing of these five first Books, I had recovered some
Latin Translations, of three parcels of the sixth, whereof the first and the
third had not any GREEK Coppie, And likewise afterward another of the
sixteenth, both in Latin and Greek, I employed my self to put them into
French, adding thereunto the form of the Romans Camp, as I could conjecture
it, by the description which Polybius maker, in the parcel of the sixth Book.
And when as the Printers successor had a desire afterward to print the whole,
and entreated me to spend some time in the Remainder of that which was newly
published of Polybius his works, which are certain parcells, and as it were
Relics (besides the above named) of the seventh and eighth, and of all the
subsequent Books unto the seauententh inclusiue, it was not in my power to
deliver him any other but those of the seventh and eighth, being afflicted with
a quartane Ague, besides his obstinacy in using a small Character, for the
sparing of Paper distasted me: Expecting that which afterward followed, that
few men would rest satisfied, for that all things how good and excellent
soever, are thereby found without grace, dull and unpleasing. For this cause
desiring that so excellent a writer, should not remain disdained and without
grace for want of an honorable Impression, and that the studio^s of Histories
should be the more encouraged, I resolved to add the remainder of that, which
at this day is come to our knowledge, assuring my self that the Printer for
his part will have a care that for the saving of his money he will not do
wrong to his honor, nor loose his charges instead of gain.

TO GOD alone be all honor and glory.
The Printer to the READER.
COurteous Reader, I desire your charitable censure in that there be some
litterall faults escaped, to the grief of the Author being not able to attend
the Press, and likewise being absent at that time from London, and having but
a young Corrector which took too much upon him.

Errata.
PAge 27. line 21. for report read support, p. 27. l. 9. for wridgt r. rigg, p.
33. l. 28. for ready the r. ready for the, p. 34. l. 27. for nor be r. nor to
be, p. 35. l. 39. for them r then, p. 40. l. 19. ^or yet began r. yet it
began, p. 45. l. 38. for had been r. had not been, p. 51. l. 44. for Hanniball
r. A^i^car, p. 62. l. 37. for Arcanians r. Acarnaniens, p. 68. l. 18. for
^ss^ire r. Assi^, p. 79. l. 37. Rhine r. Rhosne, p. 105. l. 30. r. time to
pass, p. 133. l 7 for and past r. be past, p. 131. l. 4. r stuff^ their
plays, p. 132. l. 38. r. struck dead or hurt, p. 1^5 l. 47. r. Romans, l.
18. r. unto the Adriatiq^e, p. 177. l 20. r. (...) as without, p. ^^6. l. 43.
r. in common assemblies, l. 45. r. dancas, p. 189. l. 12. r. raises his Camp,
p. 193. l. 44. r. did not openly. p. 194. l. 15 r. creat a King, p. 198 l. 9.
r. with great ships, p. 220. l. 24. r to bring him, p. 230. l. 40 r. not
executed, p. 23^. l. 28. r. against them, p. 240. l. 2. 1. no way, p 246. l.
10. r. which the (...), p. 249. l. 25. borne away by the river, ^bid. l. 38 r.
was, p. 254. l. 44. 1. parted from Lydi^, p. 264. l. 3. r. as his, p. 266. l.
46. r. arrived, p. 267. l. 38. r. which Ptolomy was, p. 274. 134. r. of the
Phan^tensi^, p. 278. l. 6. r. greater danger, p. 279. l. ^3. r. for all them
which.

THE FIRST BOOK of the History of POLYBIVS.
IF the Commendation of the excellency of Histories had been omitted by such
as before us have written the Worth and Prowess of Men, happily it should be
necessary to use some Arguments to make it to be generally Accepted and
Received: For that there is no way more easy to reform and better Men, then
the Knowledge of things past. But seeing that not only some, but in a manner
all, begin thereby and finish it amply, so as they are of Opinion that the
Knowledge of Histories is a true Discipline and Exercise for the Conduct and
man^aging of the Affairs of a Commonwealth, and that she only is the
Mistress, and means to bear the Variety and inconstancy of Fortune patiently,
by reason of the example of another man's adversities, it is apparent that no
man will hold it necessary to renew the Discourse of things, which have
formerly been so well delivered by others: Especially by me to whom the
newness of Actions, whereof we intend to Write, is much more then sufficient
to persuade and draw the hearts of men, as well both Young and Old, to read our
History. For where is any man so depraved or silly, which desires not to
understand the means and manner of Government, by the which the Romans have
subdued and brought under their Obedience in a manner, all the Nations of the
World, within the space of fifty and three years? the which in former times
was never heard of. Or what is he so much given and desiring to know other
things worthy of admiration and other Disciplines, but will conceive that there
is not any thing in this world worthy to be preferred to this knowledge? I hope
they will see how great and excellent our Work is, if we make comparison of
other Principalities with the excellency of the Roman Empire, and namly of
those which have been in great honor and glory, whereof Historiographers have
written much. Behold those which are most worthy to be compared.

The Empire and power of the Persians for a time has been great, The Persians.
but whenever they did adventure to pass the bounds and limits of Asia they
were in danger to lose not only their Empire, but their lives. The
Lacedaemonians made a long war for the Empire and command of Greece, The
Lacedaemonians.
but they could hardly keep it twelve years quiet after their Conquest.

It is true, The Macedonians
the Macedonians have domineered and ruled in Europe, from Adria to the Danowe,
which is but a small portion thereof. And since they have held the Empire of
Asia, after they had ruined the Monarchy of the Persians. And although that
these have in show been great Lords, and enjoyed large and spacious Countries,
yet they never touched the greatest part of the World. As for Sicily, Sardinia,
and Affricke, they never made show to challenge any thing. In regard of other
Nations, the most Martial of Europe, and the most Western, they hardly in my
opinion did ever know them: The Romans.
But the Romans have not only conquered a part of the World, but in a manner
all. They may also know by our sequel, how great the profit will be to such as
affect the knowledge of History.

Finally, The beginning of the History.
the beginning of our Work shall be according to the time, since the hundred
and eight and forty Olimpiade: As for the Actions, and first of the Grecians,
we will begin with the sociall war, the which Philip (who was Son to
Demetrius, and Father to Perseus) attempted first with the Acatans, against the
Et^lians, and in regard of those which inhabit Asia, the beginning shall be at
the War which was in the Valley of Syria, betwixt Antiochus, and Ptolome,
Philopater.

But as for Italy and Affricke, we will begin with that betwixt the Romans and
Carthaginians, which many call the war of Hanniball. The History shall begin
at the end of that which Sicionius has left in writing. Before these times the
affairs of the world were without Ciuillity. Since it has happened that the
History is in a manner drawn all into one, and that the actions of Italy, and
of Affricke, are mingled with those of Greece and Asia, and that all tended to
one and the same end. And therefore we have begun our work in those times,
when the Romans had vanquished the Carthaginians in this war, thinking they had
performed their greatest task, and to be able to assail the whole world, they
presumed presently after to fall upon the rest, and to pass into Greece and
Asia with great forces.

But if we had seen and known the manner of living, and the Laws of
Commonweals contending for the Monarchy, happily it would not be needful to
make any great search, to what end, nor upon what power relying, they have
entered into such great actions. But for that the manner of living, the
precedent forces, and the actions of the people of Rome and Carthage are
unknown to the greatest part of the Grecians, I have held it necessary to make
these two first Books, before I enter into the History, to the end they should
have no occasion to wonder nor inquire in reading our Work, what Council,
what Forces, and what Treasure and Wealth the people of Rome had to undertake
the war and conquest of the whole Earth, and of all our Sea: Considering that
they which shall require it, shall see plainly by these first Books of our
Preparation, that the Romans had reasonable cause to undertake the Empire and
Sovereignty of all things, and to attain unto their ends. Believe that the
proper object of our Work, and the excellency of the Actions of our time,
consists principally in this, that as Fortune has in a manner reduced all the
affairs of the world into one, and has forced them to draw to one and the
same end: So the force which she has used for the perfection of all public
government, must be reduced and propounded to the Reader in one brief History.

This has chiefly incited and urged me to the enterprise thereof, especially
for that none of our time has undertaken to write a general History: neither
would we have attempted it: But seeing that many had written some particular
Wars, and their private Actions, and that no Man (to my knowledge) has
hitherto made an universal and general commemoration of things past, neither
when nor how they began, nor how they were executed and performed, nor what
issue they had: I conceived it would be well done, if by our means our
Contrymen might read a work of Fortune excellently good and profitable: For
although she had done excellent things and worthy of admiration among man: yet
she has not done any thing unto this day, nor purchased the glory of victory
comparable to our times. The which they that have written the particular
Histories cannot make known, but that some one who peradventure for that he
had lived in some renowned Town, or for that they had seen them in picture,
imagine presently they know them: and consequently the situation, the form,
and the order of the World, the which is not probable nor likely.

They which are of Opinion that a particular History is sufficient for the
understanding of the general, in my Opinion stray no less from the truth, A
good Comparison.
then if some one considering the parts separated of a living Body, think by
this means to have the knowledge of all the perfections and graces of the
Creature. There is no doubt; but if any one takes these distinct and separated
parts, and does presently join them together, and make a perfect Creature,
giving it form and life, and then presents it unto him, he will soon
confess that he has been deceived, like unto them that dream. It is true,
we may have some apprehension of the whole by the parts: But it is not possible
to have a true and certain Science and Knowledge. And therefore you must
imagine that a particular History is of small use for the knowledge of the
general: And that by the c^nnexion, comparison and similitude of actions,
there will be no Man found, who in reading, will not reap singular profit and
pleasure by History. We will therefore make the beginning of this Book at the
first Voyage which the Romans made by Sea, Timerus an Historiographer.
which is subsequent to those things which Timerus has last written: which was
in the hundred and nine and twentieth Olimpiade. We must therefore relate how,
and what time they ended their Quarrels in Italy, and what means they had to
pass into Sicily: For this is the first voyage they ever made out of their
Territories, whereof we must set down the reason simply and without
disguising: to the end that by the search from one cause to another, the
beginning and consideration of the whole may not prove doubtful. The beginning
also must be agreeable to the Time and Subjects, and that it be known to all:
the which they may consider by themselves, yea, in seeking out those things
which were past long before, and in the mean time relate the Actions
summarily: For it is certain that the beginning being unknown or obscure, its
continuance cannot persuade, nor purchase belief: But if the Opinion of the
beginning be true, then all the subsequent Narration does easily content the
Auditors ear.

Nineteen years after the battle wone upon the River Aegos, and sixteen
years before the War of Leuctra, where the Lacedaemonians treated a peace
with An^alcides King of Persia, when as Denis the old held the City of Rhegium
in Calabria besieged, D^nis.
after that he had defeated the Grecians inhabiting upon the limits of Italy,
near unto the River of Elleporis: and that the Gauls having wholly ruined
Rome, held it, except the Capital: During which time the Romans having made an
accord with them, which they found good and profitable, and had recovered their
liberty contrary to their hope and expectance, and had in a manner taken a
beginning of their increase, they declared War against their Neighbors. As
soon as the Latins had been vanquished, as well by their prowess as by the
fortune of the War, they turned their Arms against the Tuscans, then to the
Celtes which are in Italy, and finally upon the Samnites which confine the
Region of the Latins, toward the East and North. Sometime after, the
Tarrentines seeing the outrage which they had committed against the Roman
Ambassadors, not relying much upon their own forces: they called in King
Pyrrhus the year before the Descent of the Gauls into Italy, and before the
Retreat of those which were defeated in Battle near unto Delphos. Then the
Romans after they had vanquished the Tuscans and Samnites, and beaten the
Celtes often, began to make war against the rest of Italy, not as contending
for another man's Lands, but as for their own, and formerly ^^^onging unto
them, being now grown warlike by the Wars which they had had against the
Celtes and Samnites.

The Romans then after that Pyrrhus and his forces had been chased out of
Italy, taking this War to heart, they pursued such as had followed his party.
Being suddenly become Masters of all according to their desires, and that all
Italy was wholly subdued, Rhegium besieged by the Romans
except the Celtes, they presently besieged some of theirs which held Regium.
One and the like fortune befell two Cities situated upon the Straight of that
Sea, that is, Messina and Rhegium. The taking of Messina by some Campanois.
Some Campanois having been lately in pay with Agathocles in Sicily, wondering
at the beauty and wealth of Messina, they suddenly when they found an
opportunity, assailed it, breaking their Faith, they having been received into
it by Friendship: where they expelled some of the Citizens, and slew others.
After which wicked act they shared their Wives and Children among them, as
their fortunes fell out during the Combat: Then they divided their goods and
lands. But after this sudden and eas^e Conquest of so goodly a Country and
City, they soon found others that did imitate their villainies.

They of Rhegium amazed with the descent of Pyrrhus at such time as he past
into Italy, and fearing in like manner the Carthaginians, being then Masters
of the Sea, they craved a Garrison and men from the Romans. Those which they
sent unto them, were to the number of 4000. under the command of Decius the
Campanois, they kept the Town for a time, and their faith in like manner with
the Citizens, in defending them; but in the end moved by the example of the
Mamertins, who solicited them to commit this base act, they falsified their
faith, being as well incited by the opportunity of the deed, as by the wealth of
Rhegium, and chased away some Citizens and slew others, The taking of Rhegium
by some Campanois being there in Garrison.
finally, they seized upon the City as the Mamertines had done. And although
the Romans were discontented at the misfortune of the Rhegins, yet they could
not relieve them, for that they must settle an order for their precedent
VVarres. But after they had ended them, they besieged them of Rhegium, and
afterward they entered it by force, The taking of Rhegium by the Romans.
whereas many were slain: who being certain of the punishments they were to
endure, defended themselves valiantly to death. Above three hundred were taken
alive, who presently after their coming to Rome, the Commanders of the War
commanded them to be brought into the Marketplace, The punishment of Traitors.
where they were whipped, and in the end their heads struck off, after the
manner of the Country. They did use this punishment to the end that their
Faith (as much as might be possible) might be confirmed toward their
confederates. Presently after they caused the Town and Country to be
delivered to the Rhegins.

But whilst that the Mamertins (youmust understand that the Campanois caused
themselves to be so called after the taking of Messina) were relieved by the
Romans which held Rhegium by force, The Campanois (...).
they not only enjoyed the Country and Town peaceably, but they committed
great spoils upon many other Towns their Neighbors, as well of the
Carthaginians as of Saragosse (otherwise Siracusa:) The greatest part of Sicily
was tributary unto them. But soon after when they were deprived of those
succors, and that they which held Rhegium were besieged, they were in like
manner by them of Saragosse, for the causes which follow: As a little before
the men of war of Saragosse camping near unto Mergane, being in dissension
with the Goutrnours of the Commonweal, Hieron chosen King of the Saragossins.
they chose for their Captains Artemtdore and Hieron, who afterward was their
King, being yet very young: But finally so well endowed with all the gra^es of
Nature and Mind, as he wanted no Royal conditions but the Crown. Having
accepted the Magistracy, and made his entry into the Town very well
accompanied by his Friends, where having vanquished the Burgesses of the
contrary faction, he used the Victory with so great clemency and modesty, as
by a common consent of all in general he was chosen their Commander, although
they did not allow of the Election made by the Soldiers.

It is true that Hieron made known to men of judgment and understanding, that
he had conceived greater designs in his mind then to be their Leader. First
knowing well that the Saragossins were mutinous and desirous of innovation,
whenever they sent their Soldiers and Commanders out of the Country, and
that Leptine was a man of great reputation, and of more credit then any other
of the Citizens, and that he was very pleasing unto the Multitude, he held it
fit to make an alliance with him, to the end he might leave some report in the
City for him, whenever he should go to the War, and lead an Army out of
the Country. An alliance made by Hieron with Leptine.
Having therefore taken the Daughter of Leptine to Wife, knowing well that the
old band of foreign Soldiers were changeable and subject to mutinies, he led
his Army of set purpose against the Barbarians, The policy of Hieron.
who held the City of Messina: And having seated his Camp near to Centoripe,
and put his men in battle close upon the River of Ciamossure, The River of
Ciamosure.
he stayed in a place apart all the Horse and Foot of his own Nation, as if
he meant to charge the Enemy on the other side: suffering the foreign
Soldiers to be defeated by the Barbarians, and whilst the others fled, he
makes his retreat safely with all the Saragossins to the City. When he had by
this policy brought his design unto an end, and had freed his Army of all the
Mutines, he makes a great leuy of Soldiers. Soon after when as all things
were settled in good order, Hieron seeing that the Barbarians were grown too
audacious and proud of their late Victory, he parts from the City with an Army
of his Country soldiers, well trained and disciplined, and making diligence,
he came to Mile, where along the Banks of the River of Longane, he fought with
them with all his forces. Having vanquished them and taken their Captains,
seeing their pride much abated by this Victory, he returns (...) Saragosse
with his Army, and was by the general favor and consent of all the Citizens
saluted King by the Allies. The Mamertins deliuor their Town and Fort unto the
Carthaginians.


The Mamertins as we have said, being deprived of the succors of of the Roman
Legion, and having lost so great a Battle, their hearts being broken, they
retire for the most part unto the Carthaginians, and yield themselves and their
Fort: Succors required from the Romans by the Mamertins.
The rest sent unto the Romans, delivering their Town unto them, and requiring
succors as to those that were of the same Nation. The Romans were long in
suspense what to do: For they found it strange, having lately punished their
Citizens so severely, for violating their faith with the Rhegins, to send
succors now unto the Mamertins who were guilty of the like crime. They were
not ignorant of all these things: Yet considering that the Carthaginians had
not only drawn Affricke under their obedience by force of Arms, but also
many places in Spain, and moreover all the Islands of the Sea of Sardinia and
Italy; they doubted that their Neighborhood would be dangerous, if they made
themselves Lords of the rest of Sicily. They likewise understood, that it would
be easy to effect, if the Mamertins were not relieved: And there was no doubt,
that if Messina had been delivered unto them, they would presently have
recovered Saragosse, for that they held all the rest of Sicily. And as the
Romans considered these things, they were of opinion that it was necessary not
to abandon Messina, nor to suffer the Carthaginians to make unto themselves as
it were a Bridge, to pass into Italy at their pleasure.

This was long in debate, yet it was not concluded in that assembly: for it
seemed unto them as unreasonable as profitable to relieve the Mamertins. But as
the Commons much weakened with their former War^es, seemed to have need of rest,
so the Captains showing the great profit that might ensue, The Romans resolve
to succor the Mamertins by Appius Claudius
they resolved to succor the Mamertins. This Opinion being confirmed by the
Commons, presently they appointed Appius Claudius, one of the Consuls, to pass
the Army into Sicily, and to relieve the Mamertins, who had put out of their
Town, as well by threats as policy the Captain of the Carthaginians which (as
we have said) held the Fort. The Mamertins recover the Fort from the Captain
of the Carthaginians.
And they called unto them Appius Claudius, delivering the City into his
hands. The Carthaginians hung him on a Cross which had had the Guard,
supposing that he had yielded it basely for fear and want of Courage. Then
suddenly they drew their Sea-army near unto Pellore, and that at land about
the Country called Seen, holding by this means Messina straightly besieged.

In the mean time Hieron thinking to have found a good opportunity to chase
the Barbarians which held Messina out of Sicily, followed the Carthaginians
party. And going from Saragosse, Hieron follows the Carthaginians party.
he takes his way to the Town, and lays his Siege on the other side near
unto Mount Calshidique: By this means he took from the Townsmen all means
to sally forth on that side. But the Consul passing the Sea by night with
great danger, in the end he arrived at Messina: where seeing the Enemy round
about it, and that this Siege was as dishonorable unto him as dangerous, for
that the Enemies were the stronger both by Land and Sea, he desired first to
try by Embassies sent to both Camps, if it might be possible to pacify things,
so as the Mamertins might be freed. But the Enemies not vouchsafing to hear
them, he was in the end forced to undergo the hazard, and resolved first to
give battle to the Saragossins. He therefore causes his Army to march, and
put it in battle: to the which the King likewise came speedily. But after that
Appius had fought long, The defeat of Hieron by Appius.
in the end he prevailed over his Enemies, pursuing them into their Fort. The
Consul after the spoil of the dead, retires into the City: and Hieron being
frustrate of all hope, recovered Saragosse speedily the Night following.

The next day Appius Claudius advertised of the flight of the Saragossins, and
having resumed courage and confidence, The defeat of the Carthaginians by
Appius.
he had no will to stay, but to go and fight with the Carthaginians. Wherefore
he commanded his men to be ready, and the next day he past early and charge
his Enemies, whereof some were slain, and the rest forced to save themselves
in the neighbor-towns. By this means the Siege being rai^ed, he rauaged and
spoiled the Country to Saragosse and their Allies without danger: And after
that he had ruined all, in the end he besieged Saragosse. Behold then (for the
causes above mentioned) the first Voyage which the Roman Army made out of
Italy. And for that we have held it fit for the entrance of our design, we
have made it our beginning, in looking somewhat back to the times past, to the
end we may not leave any occasion of doubt upon the causes we shall yield. And
in truth I have held it necessary to declare first at what time, and by what
means the Romans being in extreme danger to lose their Country, began to
grow fortunate: And when likewise after they had subdued Italy, they began to
conquer other Countries; to the end that the greatness of their Empire, which
was since, may seem more likely in knowing the beginnings. No man must wonder
when as we speak of Towns of Note, if happily we seek for things farther
off, in that which we shall relate hereafter: For we do it to the end that our
beginnings and grounds may be such, as they may plainly understand the means
and reasons, by the which every City is come to the estate wherein it now
stands, the which we have done here of the Romans.

It is now time that in leaving this Discourse we return to our design, in
showing first summarily and briefly the things happened before the times,
whereof we mean principally to Write: Among the which the War betwixt the
Romans and Carthaginians in Sicily is the first, then followed the Punique: In
the which the deeds first of Amilcar, then of Asdruball, are joined with those
of the Carthaginians: At what time the Romans began first to sail into
Slauonia, and other parts of Europe. Moreover their Battles against the Gauls,
who at that time made a descent into Italy: The War also which was in Greece
at the same time, called Cleomenique, to the which all this relation* and the
end of the second Book tend. Finally, I have not held it necessary nor
profitable for the Reader, to relate things in particular: Neither is it my
intention to Write them, but only to touch that summarily which may concern
our History. And therefore in relating briefly, we will endeavor by an order
of continuation, to join unto the beginning of our History the end of those
Actions, which we shall deliver by way of preparation. By this means in
continuing the order of the History, they shall see we have touched that which
others have left in Writing: and also made an easy and open way for all
subsequent things, to those which desire to know. It is true that we^ have had
a special desire to write somewhat at large this first War of the Romans in
Sicily against the Carthaginians, for that they shall hardly find a longer
War, nor greater preparations and expense, nor more encounters, nor greater
diversity of fortune on either side; For these two Nations in those times lived
in their laws with mean wealth and equal forces. Wherefore if we shall
consider the Forces and Empire of these two Cities, we cannot so well make a
Comparison by the other subsequent Wars as by this. But that which has most
incited me to write this War, The blame of Philin and Fabius ^istoriographers.
was for that Philinus and Fabius, who are esteemed to have written well, have
in my Opinion strayed too much from the truth: Yet I would not tax them to
have done it maliciously, considering their life and intention: But I conceive,
the affection which they bear unto their Countrymen, has deceived them after
the manner of Lovers. In regard of Philinus, for the affection he bears to the
Carthaginians, he is of Opinion that they did all things with good Conduct,
Prudence and Courage; and the Romans the contrary. As for Fabius he holds the
contrary party. Peradventure a man would not blame this manner of doing in
other courses of life. In truth it is fit and commendable for a good man to
love his Friends and Country, and to be a friend to the friends of his
friends, and to hate his Enemies. But he that takes upon him to Write a
History, must use such things with discretion, sometimes commending his
Enemies, when their actions require it, and blaming his Friends and Neighbors
when their faults are blame worthy. Believe me, as the remainder of the Body of
a Beast, which has the eyes pul^ out, remains unprofitable: So if truth be
wanting in a History, the Discourse proves fruitless. And therefore when
occasion is offered, he must not forbear to blame his Friends, nor to commend
his Enemies, nor to hold it a dishonest thing to praise those whom we have
sometimes blamed. Neither is it likely, that they of whom we write, have
always done well, or erred continually. We must therefore in leaving the
persons, judge and speak of their actions sufficiently in our Comentaries.

To prove my assertian true, Philin.
we shall easily see it by that which Philin writes. Who in the beginning of
his second Book says, the Carthaginians and Saragossins held Messina
besieged, and when as the Roman Army, after they had past the Sea, was
arrived, they made a sudden sally upon the Saragossins, where they were
vanquished and defeated, and so retired into the Town* they made a second upon
the Carthaginians, where they were not only defeated, but most part of them
taken: Presently after this Speech he says, that Hieron after this Encounter
had so great a fear, that he not only set fire of his Lodgings and Tents,
retiring by night to Saragosse, but moreover abandoned the strong places, lying
betwixt Messina and Saragosse. He relates also that the Carthaginians being in
like sort amazed, dispersed themselves here and there throughout the Towns of
Sicily, and that they durst never after that keep the Field, and that
moreover, the Captains seeing their men discouraged, gave advice that they
should no more run into the danger of the war, nor hazard any thing. He says
moreover that the Romans in the pursuit of the Carthaginians, not only ruined
their Province, and that of the Saragossins, but also laid siege to Saragosse.
This Speech is so far from reason, as it were but lost time to seek to
confute it: For he pretends that they which besieged Messina, (to whom he gives
the Victory) presently after abandoned their Camp, and that they fled,
retiring into the City with great fear, and that finally they were besieged.
In regard of those he affirms were besieged by the Carthaginians, after the
battle lost, he makes them suddenly Victors, and besieging Saragosse, having
taken their Camps, and made courses into the Enemies Country. Doubtless these
are discourses which cannot well be reconciled; for either that which he says
first, is false, or that which follows: But it is certain, and known to all
men, that the Carthaginians and Saragossins abandoned their Camp, and raised
the siege retiring into their Town, and that the Romans used great diligence
to besiege Saragosse: Wherefore the probability is great, that his first Speech
is false, and that notwithstanding the Romans had gotten the Victory before
Messina, yet this Historiographer has supposed that they were defeated by the
Carthaginians. You shall often see Philin in this error: and Fabin no less,
as we have observed in many places. Wherefore to return where we left, we will
use all possible endeavor to make the truth of our History clear and plain,
for those that desire to understand it.

After that the news of Sicily were come to Rome of the Victory of Appius and
his men, Marcus Valerius and Octocilius Consuls.
Marcus Valerius and Octacilius being newly chosen Consuls, they were sent
thither with all their Roman power. The Romans had four Legions in their Army
of their own Nation, The order of the Roman Armies, and the number of men in
a Legion.
besides the succors which they drew from their Allies. Every Legion consisted
of four thousand Foot, and three hundred Horse. By this means at the Consuls
coming, many Cities as well of the Carthaginians, as of the Saragossins,
yielded to the Romans. But when as Hieron saw that the Sicillians fainted, and
that the Roman Army was great, and their forces increased, he held it better to
follow their party, then that of the Carthaginians. He therefore sends an
Embassy to the Consuls, to treat of Peace and Friendship.

The Romans seeing the Carthaginians Masters of all the Sea, fea^ing likewise
that the passage for their Victuals might be interdicted, for that their Armies
which had formerly past, had suffered great wants and necessities, they found
the friendship of Hieron to be of great consequence for them in this regard. An
accord betwixt Hieron and the Romans and what it ^^ntaines.
Wherefore they treated a peace with the Saragossins under these following
Conditions. First, that the King should free the Roman Prisoners without
Ransom, and moreover should pay a hundred Tallents of Silver, and that
hereafter the Saragossins should term themselves Allies and Friends to the
Romans. Afterward Hieron, who of his own free will put himself under their
protection, succourd them with men and victuals when need required: So as
afterward he past the Remainder of his life with as great happiness and
fortune that ever Grecian had done. And in my Opinion this was an excellent man
amongst others, who had been always happy in good Council, as well for the
affairs of the Commonwealth, as for his own particular. When as the news of
this Treaty came to Rome, and that the people had confirmed it, they did not
think it necessary hereafter to send all their forces out of Italy: Wherefore
conceiving that two Legions would suffice there with the alliance of King
Hieron, they made their reckoning, that the War would be more easily
managed, and that by this means the Army would be the better supplied with
all things necessary. But when as the Carthaginians saw that Hieron was become
their Enemy, and that the Romans held the greatest part of Sicily, they knew
well that they must have a greater power to resist them; Supplies which the
Carthaginians put into Agragas.
Wherefore they made a great leuy of Geneuois and Gauls likewise of Spaniards
to fortify them: And after they had caused them to pass into Sicily, and
seeing the Town of Agragas very fit for the preparation of this War, and
that it was a frontier place, and strong toward the Enemy, they put into it
all the men they could draw together with store of Munition, making use of it
against the Enemy as of a Fort for the War.

After the accord past by the Consuls with Hieron, they left the Province; in
whose place Lucius Posthumus, and Quintus Emilius newly chosen Consuls, come
into Sicily with an Army: who after they had carefully considered of the
Carthaginians Designs, and their preparations for War made in the Town of
Agragas, they were of opinion to manage the affairs of Sicily with greater
courage and resolution then the last Consuls had done: Agragas besieged by the
Romans.
Wherefore they drew together all their Army, and besieged Agragas within eight
Furlongs, and so kept in the Enemy. The time of Harvest was come, eliery man
made his reckoning that the Siege would be long; wherefore the Soldiers
straying from their Camp, adventured somewhat too far in the gathering of
Corn. When the Carthaginians saw their Enemies thus dispersed; running here
and there confidently throughout the Province, they conceived a great hope that
they should one day be able to defeat them; whereupon some of them assaulted
the Camp with great fury, and the rest charged those which gathered Corn.
Severity of the Romans toward their Soldiers.
But the diversity of the action saved the Romans for that day, as it had done
many times before; they having a custom to put those to death, which abandon
the place which is appointed them during the fight, or which fly from the
Camp upon any occasion whatsoever. By this means although the Carthaginians
were far greater in number, yet the Romans resisted them valliantly, who with
great loss of their men made a greater slaughter of their Enemies. Finally,
they not only repulsed them from their Camp, but pursued them, ^illing part
of them, and forcing the rest to retire in a thrung into the Town. Moreover
that day was so dangerous to both Armies, as afterward their fear was great,
so as the Carthaginians durst no more assault the Romans Camp inconsiderately,
nor the Romans suffer their men to gather Corn rashly. But for that the
Carthaginians made no more sallies, but did only fight a far off with
casting of Darts and Stones, the Consuls divided their Army in two: whereof the
one was planted on the side of Esculapius Temple, and the other on that side
which does look directly unto Heracleum: And that which remained betwixt the
two Camps of either side of the Town, was rampered with a double rank of
Piles: Then they made a Trench betwixt them and the Town, to guard themselves
from the Enemies sallies, and another without the Camp, to hinder the succors
which the Neighbor-towns do usually send to the besieged. The places which
were betwixt the Trenches and the Camp were well guarded. Moreover all the
Allies used great diligence to bring into the Town of Erbese, victuals, and
all things necessary for the Camp; so as the Soldiers lived at more ease, for
it was not far off.

The Romans and the Carthaginians were five Months in this estate, fortune
showing herself no more favorable to the one then to the other: But what
happened by their shooting and casting of Darts: But when as hunger began to
press the Carthaginians, Fifty thousand men within Agragas.
by reason of the great multitude of Men which were coopt up within the Town,
(they were in truth above fifty thousand Men) Haniball who was General of the
Army, having no more hope, sends speedily to Carthage, to acquaint them with
the Rampire and Pallisado made about the Town, and to demand succors. The
Carthaginians moved at this News, raised an Army with a great number of
Elephants, and sent them by Sea into Sicily to Hanno, who was another Captain
General for them: who after he had drawn together his whole Army, marched to
the City of Heracleum, and at the first (after he had considered what was to
be done) he took the Town of Erbese by Treason, the which until that day had
been a Storehouse to the Romans. By this means he deprived them of Victuals
and (...) things necessary for their Camp: wherefore the Romans were no less
besieged, then they that were besieged. The want of Victuals did often force
them in a manner to resolve to raise the Siege: the which undoubtedly they
would have done, if Hieron King of Saragosse had not used great diligence to
furnish the Army with Victuals and other necessaries.

But when that Hanno (after all these things) saw that the Romans were much
oppressed with diseases, and want of all things (without doubt the plague was
great in their Camp) and that his Men were fresh, and resolute to fight, he
drew together above fifty Elephants: And when as all the bands of Soldiers
were assembled, he draws his Army out of Heracleum, and causes the Numidian
Horsemen to march before, giving them charge to skirmish, and to do all their
endeavors to draw the Roman Horsemen to fight, upon whose charge they should
turn head, and not cease to fly until they were returned unto him. A
skirmish offered the Romans by the Numidians.
The Numidians failed not to execute the Command of their Captain, nor to
skirmish with one of the Camps to draw them to fight. Presently the Roman
Horsemen charge them, and pursue them indiscreetly: But the Numidians
observing the Commandment fly back to Hanno, and re-charging the Enemy
again, slew many, chasing the rest unto their Camp.

After these things the Carthaginians marched, and planted themselves upon
Mount Tor^, which was not ten Furlongs from the Enemies Camp. Continuing in
this manner for the space of two Months, they attempted not any thing, but
skirmished daily with their Arrows and Darts. In the mean time Haniball made
fires often in the Night, and sent men to Hanno, to advertise him that the Army
could endure hunger no longer, and that many of his men were retired to the
Enemy for want of Victuals. Finally, Hanno moved by these reasons, A battle
betwixt the Carthaginians and Romans.
put his men in Battle: wherein the Consul used no less diligence in regard
of their necessities. Either Army drew forth in Battle into an equal place:
Then they came to combat, whereas they charged one another with great fury.
The Battle was long and cruel: Finally, the Romans brake the Vanguard, and
forced them to fly among the Elephants: who being terrified, opened the ranks
of the Carthaginians. The Captains of Hundreds following the Route of the
Elephants, forced the Enemies to turn head. By this means the Carthaginians
having lost the Battle, and part of them shine, the rest retired to Heracleum:
The Carthaginians lose the Battle.
and the Romans after the taking of most of the Elephants, and all the baggage
of the Carthaginians, retired to their Camp. But for that they were negligent
to keep a good Guard the night following, as well for the great joy which men
usually have for their good fortune, as for the toil of the Battle past;
Haniball being frustrate of all hope, The Retreat of Haniball from Agragas.
thought this a fit and convenient time to save himself and his Army, for the
reason above mentioned. Wherefore he drew all his forces out of Agragas, and
passed thorough the Enemies Trenches, filling them with straw: By this means
he escaped without any loss, and without their priuity.

At the break of day, when as the Romans (...) advertised of this Retreat,
they followed the Enemy a little; but returning soon to take the Town, they
gave an assault unto the Gates, where they found no resistance. The whole Army
entered and spoiled: It was a rich Town, where as the Soldiers took many
Slaves, Agragas spoiled by the Romans.
and got great Wealth. When as the news came to Rome of the taking of Agragas,
after the defeat of the Carthaginians, the Romans lifted up their Heads, and
began to conceive greater Designs. They did no longer insist upon the
reasons for the which they were first moved; neither were they satisfied, for
that they had preserved the Mamertins and Messina, or to have much weakened the
Carthaginians in Silily: But hoping for greater Matters, they desired to chase
them away wholly, which done they had a great Hope and opinion to enlarge their
Empire much. They were therefore very attentive to this business, and had no
thoughts but of Sicily: knowing well that they were undoubtedly the stronger at
land.

After the taking then of Agragas, Lucius Valerius, and Titus Octacilius being
chosen Consulls they were sent into Sicily with a great Army. Thus the War
was in a manner equal, for that the Carthaginians were Masters of the Sea
without contradiction; whereof this is the reason; for after the taking of
Agragas, most of the Towns which were in the heart of Sicily, yielded to the
Romans, fearing their Army at Land: But when as the Carthaginians Army by Sea
was arrived, many more Sea-townes yielded for fear to their Obedience. Thus
their forces were equal. Many times also the Sea coasts of Italy were spoiled
by the courses of their Army at Sea, the which Affricke did not suffer. The
Romans considering carefully of these things, resolved to fight with their
Enemies by Sea.

This is the thing which has moved me most to Write this present War more
at large, to the end the Reader may not be ignorant of this beginning, that is
to say, in what manner and for what causes, and in what time, the people of
Rome were induced to put an Army to Sea, Six score vessels for the Sea made
speedily by the Romans.
and to fight with their Enemy. Seeing then that there was no probabillity that
the War should be otherwise ended, the Romans speedily made six score
Vessels for the Sea, whereof a Hundred were Quinqueremes or of five banks, and
the rest were Triremes. It is true that the Quinqueremes were more difficult to
make, for that they had never used any such Vessels in Italy until that time.
Wherein the excellency and great courage of the Romans is worthy of admiration,
considering they had never been inclined to actions by Sea, neither had they
ever thought of it until that day; yet they adventured it with such courage
and resolution, as they had sooner fought with the Carthaginians, then made
trial of the dangers of the Sea. Although the others held at that time, in
that circuit of the World the principallity and command of the Sea, as
formerly gotten by their Predecessors, and left it unto them as an hereditary
right: which is a singular testimony of the things which we have Written, of
the Romans boldness and courage. Believe me, when they first adventured to
pass their Army to Messina* they were only a Hundred ships of War, and
moreover they had not one Galley nor one Briggandine. It is true when they
undertook the Voyage of Sicily with an Army, they made use of the Quinqueremes
and Triremes of the Tarrentines, Locreins, and Neapolitans.

At that time many Carthaginian Ships scoured the Seas about Sicily, whereof a
Quinquereme straying far from the rest, was broken by casualty, and
afterward taken by the Romans, which afterward served them for a pattern to
make the like, so as all their ships were made in that manner. Wherefore if
this had not happened, they would have ^ound themselves much troubled in their
enterprise. The Romans invention to invre their men to the Oar.
Whilst these were a making, they did practice a number of men to the Oar
after this manner. They did set banks in order upon the Sand, upon the which
the men that were to Row were placed, being attentive to the voice of the
Patron or Governor, who was in the midst of them, where as they did learn
to stretch forth, and pull back their arms altogether, and did draw their
Oars in the Sand; finally they began and ended altogether according to the
Patrons whistle. By this means having learned the Art to Row, and their
ships finished, they put to Sea, and within few days after made a Trial. And
when as the Consul Cornelius, lately appointed Commander of the Sea Army, had
given charge to the Sea Captains, to draw unto the Port as soon as the Vessels
should be ready, he went directly to Messina with seauenteene ships, and left
the rest upon the Italian shore, whereas having made provision of things
necessary for the equipage of his ships, he sails upon necessity directly to
Lipparo sooner then was needful. At that time Haniball Commander of the
Carthaginians, kept his Sea Army at Palermo, who being advertised of the
Consuls coming, sent one Boodes a Senator of Carthage, with twenty ships to
draw into that Quarter: Who arriving by night, found the Roman ships, and
besieged them in the Port, so as at the break of day, the multitude got to
Land.

But Gneius Cornelius thus unfortunately surprised, Certain of the Roman ships
with their commander Surprised by a Carthaginia^ Consul.
could find no other means but to yield himself unto the Enemy. The
Carthaginians after this prise returned to Haniball; soon after this apparent
and new defeat of Cornelius, Haniball (to whom Fortune was at that time
gracious) received as great a loss. He had intelligence that the Romans Army
at Sea, which coasted about Italy, was not far from Sicily. Wherefore
desiring wonderfully to see their number, and their order, and the manner of
the trimming of their ships, he takes fifty Vessels and sails into Italy. But
for that he had a contrary VVind, the which was favorable to the Romans by
the reason of the Coast of Italy, A defeat of Hanibals ships, for want of a
good Wind.
he fell unadvisedly into their Army, which was in order and in Battle, where
he was suddenly charged, so as he lost in a manner all his ships, and saved
himself with very few contrary to his Hope, and the opinion of all the World.

The Romans after this defeat, approached nearer unto Sicily, and being
advertised by the Prisoners of the Consuls ouer-throw, they sent speedily to
Caius Duellius Consul* having at that time the charge of the Army by Land:
Where having attended some space, and received news that the Enemies Army at
Sea was not far off, they all prepared to battle. They planted upon every
one of their ships, (for that they were ill built and heavy,) a kind of Engine,
An Engine invented by the Romans called a Raven.
which was afterward called a Raven; behold the fashion of this Engine. They
did set a Pillar or Mast of four fathom long, and nine inches thick upon
the Prowe, the which had also a pulley on the top, and one the side was made an
assent of boards all along, the which was four foot broad and four fathom
long; the passage was turning about the pillar, in the two first fathomes of
the assent: About the which were bars of either side to the height of a man's
knee, and they had set at the end of it an Iron like unto a pestell, which went
up straight, the which had on the top of it a King, so as altogether seemed as
an Engine wherewith they pound things. To this Ring was fastened a cord, by
means whereof at the encounter of the ships, they fastened the Ravens by the
pulley, and let them fall upon their Enemies ships. Sometimes at the Prowe,
sometimes on the side in turning, when as they could not assail them by the
flank; and after that the Ravens were fastened within the bands of the ships,
and that the Vessels were grapled and fast, if they found themselves upon the
side, they entered it of all sides: And if it were by the Prowe, they marched by
the bridge two and two to the Combat, whereof the first covered their bodies
with their Targets, and they which followed defended the flanks, and held
their Targets even with the bars. When as this Equipage at Sea was ready, they
attended a convenient time for the battle. When as Caius Duelius had been
suddenly advertised, of the misfortune of the Commander at Sea, he left that
at Land to the Tribunes of the men of War, and makes have to that at Sea. And
being advertised that the Carthaginians spoiled the Country of Miles, he drew
thither with his whole Army: But when the Enemy was certain of his coming,
they were in great hope, thinking the Romans understood not any thing in
Sea Fights. Wherefore they drew out to Sea, with an Equipage of six score and
ten Vessels, thinking this War not worthy of any order of battle, as if they
had gone to a certain booty. Whereof this Haniball who (as we said) retired
his Army by night, and past over the Enemies Trenches,) was Commander. He had
a Vessel of seven banks which did sometimes belong to Pyrrhus King of the
Epirotes.

When as the two Armies began to approach, and that their Engines called
Ravens were discovered, the Carthaginians were a time in suspense for the
nouelty. Finally whatsoever it were, without any further reckoning they charge
with great fury. The ships joined and grapled, A battle at Sea betwixt the
Carthaginians and Romans.
so as the Roman soldiers by means of their Engines called Ravens, entered
their enemies ships, where there was a great slaughter made of the
Carthaginians. The rest being amazed at this kind of Engines, yielded: you
would have said it had been a battle at Land, where the danger is not less.
The thirty Vessels of the Carthaginians, which gave the first Charge were
taken, among the which was that of the Captain, which we have said had
belonged unto King Pyrrhus. Haniball whose Fortune was otherwise then he
expected, saved himself in a little Skiffe: The rest of the Carthaginian Army
came with great fury against their Enemies, as the former had done; but when
they were advertised that their first ships had been taken by the means of
the Engines, they did not charge in Front, thinking to avoid them, but came
upon their flank, trusting to the lightness of their Vessels, thinking by
this means to avoid the violence of their Engines; The flight of the
Carthaginians.
but they were made in such sort as of what side soever the Enemy approached,
they could easily grapple with them. Wherefore the Carthaginians amazed with
the strangeness of these Engines, in the end fled, after the loss of fifty of
their ships.

The Romans being now become masters of the Sea, contrary unto* their Hope,
sailed about the Sea toward Segestane, and raised the siege which lay before
the Town. Macelle taken by assault.
Then parting from thence, they took the Town of Macelle by assault. After
this battle at Sea, when as Amilcar (being then Captain General in Sicily of
the Army by Land) was advertised, remaining at Panorme, that there was a great
quarrel betwixt the Romans and their-Allies, touching the prowess and glory
of the Combat, A defeat of four thousand men, allied to the Romans by
Amilcar.
and that the Allies after they had been beaten, were retired apart betwixt
Prope and Termine, he marched with all speed to the Allies Camp, and slew
four thousand by surprise. Haniball after all these Fortunes, retired to
Carthage, with those few ships which he had remaining at the battle. Within
few days after he was dispatch to go with an Army into Sardinia, with some
excellent Sea Captains, but he was soon enclosed in a Port by the Romans, and
in a manner lost his whole Army: And as he had escaped the Enemy, he was
suddenly taken by the Carthaginians which had saved themselves, and was
crucofied. Haniball crucified.
Moreover the Romans employed all their care to seize upon Sardinia, being now
Masters of the Sea.

The year following there was not any thing done worthy of Memory in Sicily by
the Roman Army. Caius Sulpicius, and Aulus Rutilius were afterward made
Consuls, and sent to Palermo, for that the Carthaginians forces wintred there.
And after the Romans had past, they put themselves in battle before the Town:
But the Carthaginians being within it, presented not themselves to battle.
Hippane and Mysistrate taken with many other Towns.
The which the Romans seeing, they left Palermo, and went to Hippane, the which
soon after they took by assault: The Town of Mysistrate was taken likewise
by the Consuls, having held out sometime by reason of the situation of the
place. And as they had besieged the City of the Camerins, which had lately
abandoned the Romans, it was taken by force by the means of their Batteries
and breaches: Afterward A^ta was carried by assault with many other Towns of
the Carthaginians; Lippare was also besieged. The year following, the Sea-army
of the Romans lay in the Haven of the Tindaretins under the charge of Aulus
Rutilius, Aulus Rutilius Consul.
who seeing the Carthaginian Army near the shore, he sent word unto his ships
to make haste to follow him* In the mean time he* put to Sea before the rest,
only with ten Vessels: But when as the Carthaginians saw that some did but
imbarque, others began to set sail, and the first were far from their Fleet,
and near unto them; they turned with incredible swiftness, and compast them
in, so as most part of them were sunk, and the Consuls ship had like to have
fallen into the Carthaginians hands, with all that were within it: He hardly
escaped by the force of his Oars and lightness.

In the mean time the rest of the Roman Army, which had gotten into the open
sea, encountered the Enemy, whereof ten ships were taken, and eight sunk, and
the rest recovered the Islands called Lipparees. But howsoever either of them
parted from this Combat with an Opinion to have gotten the Victory: Wherefore
they were more eager to continue the War by Sea, and were more attentive to
Marrine affairs. As for their Armies at Land, during this time, they did
nothing worthy of Note, busying themselves about small things, and of little
esteem. But the Summer following having given order for their affairs, (as we
have said) they prepared to War. The Romans Army by Sea. The Promontory of
Pachina.
In regard of the Romans, they made their assembly at Messina, to the number of
three hundred and thirty Vessels armed; and sailing from thence leaving Sicily
on the right hand, and passing the Promontory of Pachina, they sailed to
Echnom^n, The Carthaginians Army of three hundred and fifty sail.
whereas the Army by Land attended them. The Carthaginians in li^e manner put
to Sea, with three hundred and fifty Sail armed, and stayed at Lilybeum, and
from thence went to Heracleum, and so to Minoe. The Romans intention was to
pass into Affricke, and there to make their chief War, to the end the
Carthaginians should not only run the hazard of the War of Sicily, but also
have it at their own Houses. On the otherside the Carthaginians considering
how easily their descent would be into Lybia, and what little defense the
Contrymen would make when they should be once entered, they desired to fight
presently with the Romans, and by that means to hinder the descent into
Affricke. Wherefore the one being resolved to defend themselves, and the other
to assail them, considering the obstinacy of either party, there was
likelihood of an undoubted battle. When as the Romans had given order for all
things necessary for the equipage of their Sea-army, and to make their descent
into Affricke, they made choice of the ablest men in all their Army at Land,
and embarked them, and then divided their Army into four, whereof either had
two Names. The first was called the first Battalion, and the first Army: So
were the rest according to their order, but the fourth and the third were
called Triarij, as in an Army at Land. All this Army at Sea amounted to above
140000. An Army of 140000. Romans and more Carthaginians.
men. Every Vessel had three hundred Rowers, and six score Leginaries.

In regard of the Carthaginians, they were furnished only with men accustomed
with Sea Fights, being in number above 150000. men, according to the order of
their Vessels. Wherefore they that were present and saw the great danger, and
power of the two Armies, the great charges, the multitude of combatants, and of
ships, they did not only wonder, but they also who heard speak of it. The
Romans considering that upon necessity they must go upon the side, and that
their Enemies sailed more lightly, they employed all their Art to make their
battle strong and invincible. For the effecting whereof they set two Vessels
in front of six Banks in equal distance, in the which were Marcus Attilius,
and Lucius Manlius. After which marched the first and second Battalion of
either side, their ships following one another, so as the distance of the two
Battalions did still enlarge themselves. The stems of their ships looked
outward. By this means the Battalions drawn thus in length, made the two
parts of a Triangle, to the which they added the third Battalion in the same
fashion, as a foundation, so as the three Battalions made a perfect sigure of a
Triangle. After the third Battalion the ships which carried the Horses, were
ordered one after another, serving as a Rampie^ to the third Battalion.

The Triarij followed after in their order, making the fourth Battalion, every
Vessel being ordered in such sort, as they past the precedent on either side.
All the Roman Army was thus ordered, whereof the first part, that is to say,
the two sides of the point of the Triangle, were empty in the midst: but the
sides following after the foundation were better supplied. A Remonstrance made
by the Carthaginian Captains to the Soldiers of their Army.
By this means their Army was firm and hard to break. In the mean time the
Commanders of the Carthaginians drew their Soldiers together, and put courage
into them, letting them understand, that if they wone the battle, there would
be no more War but in Sicily: But if the Romans had the Victory, they must
expect not to fight for Sicily, but for their own Country, their Houses and
their Children.

After this exhortation, they make them imbarque; the which they did
resolutely, and prepared to fight, thinking of the time to come, according to
the discourse of their Captains: Who seeing the order of the Roman Army,
divided theirs likewise into four; whereof three gayning the Sea, making the
Right-wing longer, stayed as if they would inviron their Enemies, against whom
they turn their beake-heads; and they make the Fort to look toward the Land,
by a circuit of the Left wing of the whole Army. Hanno and Amilcar were
Commanders of the Carthaginians, Hanno (who was defeated at the battle of
Agragas) had the leading of the Right wing, with the lightest Vessels, and
Amilcar of the Left. This is he who as we have said, fought at Sea near unto
Tyndaris, who hazarding then the midst of his Army, used this kind of
Stratagem of War for the Combat.

The Romans seeing at the first charge, that the Battalion of the Carthaginians
was weak, forced resolutely thorough them: But the Carthaginians observing the
Commaundment of Amilcar, left the place presently, making show to fly, to the
end the Roman Army should separate it self, whom the Romans followed with too
great heat: And therefore the first and second Battalion sailed with too great
Courage after the Enemy, but the third and fourth were stayed, drawing after
them the ships that were laden with Horses, with whom the Triarij remained for
their Guard. A Battle at Sea betwixt the Romans and Carthaginians.
When as the two first seemed to be far from the others, the Carthaginians
(...) sign given them by Amilcar, as he had instructed them, turning the Prow
suddenly, they all assault the Roman Vessels which followed them.

The Combat was cruel; It is true, the Carthaginians had a great advantage by
their lightness, and their policy in turning: But when as they came to fight,
and that the Armies affronted one another, the Romans had no less hope then
the Carthaginians, for the Force and Prowess of their men; and by the staying
of their Ships, and casting of their Engines, and finally by the Combat of the
two Commanders, and the hazard they were in their fight.

This was the estate of the Battle: Presently after Hanno, who as we have said
had the charge of the Right wing, and did not budge before the first charge was
given, seeing the Battle begun with the Romans, went to Sea and charged the
Triarij, where there was a great fight, the which was long in suspense. In the
mean time the fourth Battalion of the Carthaginians, which continued near the
shore, turning the Prow upon the Enemy, assaulted the Battalion in front, by
the which the ships which carried the Horses were towed* who suddenly slipped
the Ropes and fought with great fury.

There they saw three parts of the Battle, and three Combats at Sea at one
instant, in three diverse places, and far remote. The Combat was equal, for
that the Ships of eyther^ side were of the like number. Without doubt every man
performed his Duty in fighting, so as all was indifferent and equal. Finally,
Amilcar was defeated, and forced to fly with his Squadron. Amilcar vanquished.
And Lucius Manlius towed away the ships that were taken. In the mean time
Attilius seeing the Combat of the Triarij, and of the ships wherein the Horses
were, came presently to succor them with the Vessels of the second Battalion,
which were yet whole and entire: But when as the Triarij who had been long and
violently charged by Hanno, so as they were in great danger, saw the Consul
come, they resumed courage, and recharged him resolutely: And then then the
Carthaginians being much discontented to have an Enemy in front and behind,
and to be invested by succors contrary to their expectation, gained the open
Sea, relying upon the lightness of their Vessels, and saved themselves by
flight. And Lucius Manlius in the mean time seeing the third Battalion pressed
near the shore by the left wing of the Carthaginians, and Marcus Attilius in
like manner, leaving the ships with the Horses and the Triarij in safety,
resolved both together to succor those that were in danger: For they were in a
manner besieged, and almost at the last gasp, and had been defeated, if the
Carthaginians had not feared to join with them by reason of their Engines or
Ravens: Neither did they press upon them, but only to chase them to the
shore. Finally, the Carthaginians were suddenly compast in by the Consuls,
whereof fifty of their ships were taken with the men. A Victory of the Romans
against the Carthaggnians.
Some being driven unto the shore, saved themselves. Behold the three several
Combats which the Romans and Carthaginians had in one day: Yet the Romans in
the end had the Victory of the whole Battle: In the which 24 of their ships
were broken* and above thirty of the Carthaginians. There was not one Roman
Vessel taken whole by the Carthaginians with the men. But the Romans took
three score and four of the Carthaginians with all the men. Soon after this
battle, the Romans parted with an intent to sail directly into Lybia, after
they had made provision of Victuals, and all other munition, joining to their
Army the ships taken, being well repaired.

There is a place in Affricke which they call the Cape of Mercure, running
far into the Sea, The Cape of Mercure.
and is directly against Sicily, where the Romans arriving and receiving their
Vessels, repaired all: Then passing this strond, they sailed unto the City of
Aspis, where they put their Army in Battle near unto the Town, and retired
their ships, rampering them with Ditches and Pallisadoes, resolving to besiege
it, for that they which held it would not yield to the Romans. It is true that
the Carthaginians who a little before had escaped from the Battle at sea, and
recovered Carthage by flight, furnished the most necessary places belonging to
their City, with Horse and Foo^, and with necessary shipping, supposing that
the Roman Army after the Victory would come directly unto them. But when they
were advertised of their descent, and of the siege of Aspis, they levied men,
and regarding no more the landing of the Romans, but having an eye as well to
foreign affairs as to their own Country, they omitted nothing of that
which was necessary for the Guard of the City and Province. Aspis taken by the
Romans.
In the mean time the Consuls after they had taken Aspis by assault, and put a
Garrison into it, and in the Country, and had sent unto Rome to advertise the
Senate of their success, to the end they might consider what was afterward to
be done, Courses made by the Romans in the Carthaginians Country.
they drew the whole Army into the Carthaginians Country, where they found no
Resistance, spoiling and setting fire on their goodly and glorious buildings,
so as they carried away a booty of all sorts of Beasts, with above twenty
thousand Prisoners, which were Embarked.

In the mean time they received news from Rome, by the which the Senate sent
them word, that one of the Consuls should remain in Affricke, with sufficient
forces, and that the other should Return with the ships. The pleasure of the
Senate being known, Marcus Attilius Regulus stayed in Affricke with forty
ships, fifteen thousand foot, and five hundred Horse, and Marcus Manlius set
sail with the rest of the ships and Army, having the Prisoners with him, and
arrived first in Sicily, and then at Rome without any mischance. But the
Carthaginians foreseeing that the Romans War would be long, Asdruball, Bostar,
and Amilcar Commanders of the Carthaginians Army.
they first made two General Captains in their Army, which were Asdruball the
son of Hanno, and Bostar: Moreover they sent for Amilcar, who was in
Heracleum, who Embarking presently with five thousand foot, and five hundred
Horse, came to Carthage, and was constituted the third Captain of the Army,
taking the Conduct of the War with Asdruball and Bostar.

When as these Captains had held a Council, concerning the Affairs of the
War, they were of opinion that it was necessary to relieve the Province, and
not to endure so (...) a pillage and spoil of the Country. Marcus Attilius
some few days before marching into the Country, razed the weaker Castles, and
besieged the stronger. But when he was come to the City of Adis which was
worthy of a siege, he plants himself before it, and endeavors to force it.
The Carthaginians ^^uertised hereof made have to succor it, desiring to Raise
the siege. And therefore they march with all their power against the Romans,
Recovering a little Hill to the prejudice of their Enemies, and very commodious
for themselves: Whereon planting their Camp, they hoped for an absolute
Victory, by the means of their Horse and Elephants. Leaving therefore the
plain, they drew (...) high and uneven places, as if they would advertise the
Enemy what they had to do, the which undoubtedly they effected. For when the
Romans had considered the little use of Elephants, for they were in a
Mountainous and Hilly Country, in the which the Enemies had settled their chief
hope, as of great effect and terrible, they advised not to attend their Descent
into the plain: Wherefore using the opportunity of the time, they shut them up
at the break of day in the Mountain of all sides.

By this means their Cauallery and their Elephants were altogether
unprofitable: Their adventurers only did their duties in ^ighting on the top,
and had already forced the Roman Leginaries to give back a little, when as
suddenly the rest which had gained the top of the Mountain showed themselves.
The Carthaginians seeing themselves enclosed of all sides, abandoned their
Fort, and fled into the deserts of the Mountains. The Elephants and Horses
recovered the Plain, and saved themselves without danger. The Romans made some
little pursuit after the footmen, then they spoiled the Camp, and ouer-ran
the whole Country, wasting all, and ruining the Town.

Some few days after they besieged Tunes, Tunes taken by the Romans by assault.
which they took by assault, where they planted their Camp, for that the
place seemed convenient unto them to manage the War, being a frontier to
Carthage and to the whole Province. The Carthaginians having a little before
been defeated at Sea, and now by Land, not by the cowardice of their
Soldiers, but by the baseness of the Commanders, they fell into a miserable
and desperate estate: For after their last defeat and flight by the Romans, a
great Troop of Numidians, gaping after spoil, fell upon them, The Nunidians
great robbers.
doing them in a manner as great harm as the Romans. It is a wandering and
vagabone Nation and great thieves, carrying away all they find.

The Carthaginians* terrified by the Numidians abandoned the Country, and
retired to Carthage, where they suffered much, as well by famine, as for their
own cowardice, and moreover the multitude being great they feared a long
siege: And although that Marcus Attillius was persuaded that the Carthaginians
were wonderfully weakened, as well by Land as Sea, being in hope that the City
would be in short time delivered unto him: yet fearing that the new Consul,
whom they expected soon in Affricke, Ambassadors sent by the Carthaginians to
Marcus Attilius.
would reap the honor of his prowess and valor, he began to treat of a
peace with them, whereunto they willingly (...). Wherefore they sent the chief
of their City in Embassy to the Consul, to make this treaty. But when as they
were arrived, they were so far from agreeing, as they could hardly without
choler hear the unreasonable things that were enioyn'd them. Make your
account that Marcus Attilius did hope that his offer would be accepted as a
thing of grace, for that he had prevailed in all his affairs: The
Carthaginians on the other side, thought that when as fortune should reduce
them to extremity, the Consul could not make them a more bitter answer.

Their Ambassadors therefore returned, not only without any agreement, but
d^^^ting wonderfully the Consuls answer, as to hard and proud. The which being
heard by the Senate of the Carthaginians, they entered into so great an
indignation upon the Consuls demand, and resumed such courage, that although
formerly they were out of hope, yet then they resolved to attend all
extremities, and rather to try their fortune, and to attend the time, then to
suffer so ignominious a thing and unworthy of their valor. It happened a^ the
same time, that some one of those which had been sent into Greece, in the
beginning of the war to Levy Men, returned and brought with them a good
number of Soldiers: among the which there was one Xantippus a Lacedemonian,
Xantippus a Lacedemonian.
a man of Judgment, and practiced in the war: who after that he had heard a
relation of the defeat of the Carthaginians, and the manner* the place, and
that what time it happened; having also considered the equipage of the
Carthaginians, with the number of their Horses and Elephants, he returned
suddenly to his Companions, saying, that the ignorance of the Captains, not
the Romans, had defeated the Carthaginians. This speech ran presently
thoroughout the whole City, and came unto the Princes.

The Carthaginians caused him to be called, and resolved to use his Council,
who in their presence delivered plainly the Reasons of his speech, and the
cause of their Defeat; and if they would follow his Council, and hereafter
keep the Plains, leaving the hilly Country, and there plant their battle,
he would teach them how their Army should be out of danger, and their Enemies
Vanquished. The Captains moved with the words of Xantippus, presently
Resigned unto him the Conduct of all this War, The Leading of the
Carthaginians Army, given to Xantippus.
and now there ran a brute throughout the whole Camp of Xantippus speech,
with great Hope and Joy. But after that all the Companies of the Army were
drawn into the field, and that he had put them is order, there was so great a
difference betwixt his and that of the other Captains, who understood not the
Art of War, that presently the common cry demanded nothing but to fight, so
much they were assured under the leading of Xantippus.

This done, the Carthaginian Captains seeing the courage of their Men,
exhorted them a little according to the opportunity of the time, and within few
days after they marched to find out the Enemy. There were in the Carthaginians
Army above twelve thousand foot, four thousand Horse, and near a hundred
Elephants. When as Marcus Attilius heard of the coming of the Enemy, and that
the Carthaginians kept their Horses upon an even Country, camping contrary unto
their custom on the plains, he wondered as at a new accident: Yet he marched
directly to them desiring battle, and lodged within twelve hundred paces of
their Camp. Three days after the Carthaginian Captains held a Council what
was to be done: But the multitude desiring the combat, turned toward
Xantippus, calling him by his name, with a countenance see^^ing to be willing
and ready to undergo all dangers, and entreated him to lead them speedily unto
the battle. When as the Carthaginian Captains saw their Men thus resolute,
and desirous to fight, and that Xantippus said the time was ^itting and
convenient, they suffered them to prepare to battle, and gave him leave to do
all at his pleasure. Who after he had taken charge of the Captains, he orders
the battle, The order of the bat^ell by Xantippus.
before the whole Army he sets the Elephants one after another. After which
he causes a Legion of Carthaginians to march, with some distance, and places
the strangers upon the Wings. Then he orders the brauest among his foot, to
fight of either side betwixt the Wings of the Horsemen.

The Romans seeing the Carthaginians in battle, stayed not to do the like;
yet fearing the Violence of the Elephants, they set in Front the most active of
their men, re-inforcing their Rear with many Ensigns, and dividing their
Horsemen upon the Wings. Their Ordonance was less then formerly, but more
close, for fear least the Elephants should open them. But as the Romans had
set a good order against the Elephants, so they had neglected to keep
themselves from enclosing. For as the Carthaginians had a greater number of
Horse, so the close Ordonance, gave them an easy means to break and separate
them.

The two Armies being in battle, Battle given by the Romans to the
Carthaginians.
either attending who should first Charge; suddenly Xantippus causes the
Elephants to begin the Charge, and break the Enemies ranks, and that the
Horsemen of both Wings should withal charge furiously. The Romans cause
their Trumpets to sound after the manner of the Country, and charge where the
Enemies forces were greatest. It is true that the Roman Horsemen terrified
with the multitude of their Enemies, abandoned the two Wings: And the Foote-men
of the lest Wing wauing from the Fury of the Elephants, and making no account
of the foreign Soldiers, charged the right Wing of the Carthaginians with
great fury, and put it to flight, pursuing them unto their Fort. On the other
side, they which endured the charge of the Elephants, were broken and trodden
under their feet by heaps. It is true that the whole Ordnance continued for a
time in battle, for that their supplies being in the Rear were very close.
But after that the Roman Legions, set in the Reareward, and compassed in of
all sides by the Carthaginian Horsemen, were forced to make resistance there,
and that they (who as we have said) were appointed to make head against the
Elephants, were by them repulsed into the thickest of the enemies Battalion,
where they were defeated and slain,^ then the Romans being assaulted on all
sides, some were beaten down and slain by the intolerable fury of the
Elephants, and others by the Horsemen, in the same place where they had their
first posture given them, some few of them seeing no more hope, Marcus
Attillius taken with 500. Romans.
sought their safety by flight, of which (considering that the Country was very
plain) some were defeated by the Elephants, and the rest by the Horsemen: And
some flying with Marcus Attilius, were taken to the number of five hundred.

The Carthaginians lost that day but five hundred Adventurers strangers, whom
the left Wing of the Romans had defeated: But of all the Roman Army there
escaped but two thousand with their Ensigns, who (as we have said) pursued a
troop of enemies into their Fort. All the rest were cut in pieces, except
Marcus Attilius and a few Men which fled with him; in regard of those Ensigns
which beyond all hope escaped, they came unto Aspis. Finally the Carthaginians
after the spoil of the Dead retired to Carthage, with the Consul and other
Prisoners, making great joy and triumph.

If we shall duly consider this, Aremonstrance of Polybius.
we shall find many things profitable for the conduct of Man. First, Marcus
Attilius serves for a fair example to all the World, that it is a great folly
and indiscretion, to put his Hope in Fortune, under the color of good success
and enterprises brought to an end according to our desire: Who of late after so
many tryumphant Victories, had not any compassion of the Carthaginians, being
reduced to extremity, refusing to grant them peace, which they craved with so
much humility, has been presently after reduced to that constraint, as to
make the like request.

Moreover that which Euripides has formerly spoken so well, that the good
Council of one man alone does vanquish a great Army, has been this day
verified by that which has happened. In truth one man alone, and the Council
of one man, has vanquished and defeated an Army, formerly invincible; raising
and restoring a Town lost, and the hearts of so many desolate men. Believe
me* I have thought good to relate these actions for the benefit and
instruction of the Readers of these Commentaries.

For as there are two means easily to correct and amend our errors, whereof
the one is his own Misfortune, and the other the example of another man's
Miseries; there is no doubt but the first has greater efficacy, but it is not
without the loss and prejudice of him to whom it happens: And although the
second be not of so great force, yet it is the better for that they are out of
danger, and therefore no man imbraceth the first means willingly, for that
they cannot help it without their own trouble and loss. As for the second,
ever man follows it willingly; For we may see by him (without any hazard or
loss) what we ought to follow for the best.

Wherefore if we consider it well, we shall find that experience (by the
remembrance of another man's faults) seems to be a very good doctrine of a true
life: Without doubt it is that alone which makes the good Judges of reason
without any loss: But we have discoursed sufficiently of this Subject.

The Carthaginians having ended their affairs happily, and to their content,
they rejoiced in many sorts, both in giving thanks unto God; and sacrificing
after their manner, or in using amongst themselves a mutual benevolence and
courtesy.

Soon after that Xantippus had raised the hearts of the Carthaginians,
Xantippus returns into his Country.
he returned into his Country, as a man well advised: For the Prowess and
Valor of men, and their Virtues, are many times the cause of great envy and
detraction: Against the which Citizens that are well allied, and have many
Friends, make easy resistance: But strangers which have not that support, are
easily ruined and defeated. They say he went away for some other reason, which
we will deliver when it shall be fitting.

After that beyond all hope the Romans had received News of the defeat of
their Army in Affricke, Aspis besieged by the Carthaginians.
and the taking of the Consul: And that the remainder of their men was
besieged in Aspis, consulting presently of the safety of those which were
remaining in Affricke, they appointed an Army to be raised to go thither with
all speed.

In the mean time the Carthagaginians besieged Aspis, striving to force it,
with hope soon to have this remainder of the Battle: But the Virtue and
Courage of the Romans which defended it, was so great, as all the Enemies
attempts could not prevail. Wherefore being out of hope to enter it, they
raised the Siege. Soon after News came that the Romans prepared an Army at
Sea to send into Affricke: For the which the Carthaginians being moved, they
used all diligence to repair their old Vessels and to make new. Presently
after they labored to stand upon their guard, and to hinder the descent of the
Romans into Affricke, with two hundred Vessels armed and well furnished: But
when as the preparation of three hundred and fifty Roman Vessels was ready,
they sent Marcus Emilius and Seruius Fuluius with the whole Army into Affricke
in the beginning of the Spring. When as the Consuls had set sail, to draw
first into Sicily, and from thence into Affricke, they were not far from the
Cape of Mercure, but they presently discovered the Carthaginian Army: the which
(as we have said) watched their coming at the passage, One hundred and
fourteen Vessels of the Carthaginians taken by the Romans.
and charged them suddenly with great fury, taking a hundred and fourteen
Vessels armed: sailing from thence to Aspis, they retired their Men, and after
they had stayed some time in Affricke, they returned into Sicily.

But when they had past the Sea betwixt Affricke and Sicily with a prosperous
Wind, and had anchored near unto the Camarins Town, it is not possible to
deliver the greatness of the torment and misery that befell them. Hardly could
they preserve four score Vessels whole of four hundred three score and four
which were in their Army. A great number of the Roman ships perished by a
Tempest.
All the rest (either sunk in the Sea, or split against the Rocks) filled all
the shore with wracks, or dead Bodies.

It is not in the memory of man of any such shipwreck by a tempest. This
miserable misfortune happened not casually and by chance, but by the
ouerweening of the Consuls, considering that the Mariners had let them
understand, that they must avoid the Coasts above Sicily, for that it was not
to be approached, being bad and difficult to sail in, especially at that
season, for they sailed betwixt the Stars of Orion and the Dog-starre.
Whatsoever it were the Consuls disdaining the admonition of the Mariners, made
have with a glorious confidence of their late Victory, to surprise some Towns
a long that shore: where as they fell into extreme calamity under the shadow
of a poor hope. Then they knew their folly, carrying the repentance of their
presumption. Defacing by this wrack the things which formerly they had done
well.

And although that in all things the Romans rely upon their forces, and think
whatsoever they resolve, must be put in execution, holding nothing impossible
when they have once undertaken it, and that this obstinacy does many times
turn to good. Yet sometimes they fall into great and apparent errors,
especially in Sea-matters. It is true that in Battles at Land fighting with
men, it is not so strange if they vanquish: For the Combat is equal, although
they be sometimes vanquished: But as for the Sea, for that they thrust
themselves into hazard, and without consideration, they fall many times into
great inconveniences.

This happened at this time, and has done formerly, and will befall them many
times hereafter, until they have suppressed and reformed this ouer-weening,
thinking they are able to go to Sea at all seasons. The Carthaginians being
advertised of the shipwreck of the Roman Army, they had the greater desire to
raise an Army both by Land and Sea: For that their force seemed as great at
Land, as that of the Romans, by reason of the defeat of Marcus Attilius: The
like they conceived of the Sea, after the great loss the Romans had endured.
Wherefore they presently sent Asdruball into Sicily with the old Bands, and a
new levy of the Men of Heracleum, with an hundred and fifty Elephants. They
wrigd out a Fleet of two hundred Vessels, Asdruball sent into Sicily by the
Carthaginians.
and other Equipages necessary for Navigations. When as Asdruball landed at
Lylibeum with his whole Army, he trained his Men, and exercised his Elephants,
making roads into those Countries which were allied unto the Romans. Finally,
he was very watchful and dilligent. And although the Romans loss had much
abated their courage, yet they used all possible diligence to raise a Fleet of
two hundred and twenty Vessels with a Pallisado: the which they effected within
three Months, and put it to Sea, the which is difficult to beleene, to the end
the World should not think they would strike sail unto the Carthaginians.
Lucius Aquilius, and Caius Cornelius Consuls, were appointed to lead this
Army, to fight with the Carthaginians in Sicily, who passing the Sea presently,
arrived at Messina, where they received the Remainder of the ships, which had
been preserved in the storm. By this means their Army consisted of three
hundred Vessels.

From thence they took their Course to Palermo, the chief Town of the
Carthaginians, the which they assailed vigourously, Palermo besseged by the
Romans, and taken by assault.
erecting two sorts of Engines, and other preparations to that effect, so as
they easily overthrow a Tower seated upon the Sea, by the which the Soldiers
entering by force, took that part of the Town which was called Naples. After
this the Burgesses dying for fear, yielded unto the Consuls the other part
which they called the old Town.

After the taking of Palermo, the Consuls put in a good Garrison, and then
returned to Rome. The year following, Gneus Sempronius, and Caius Seruilius
were Consuls, who in like manner past into Sicily with an Army, to go from
thence into Affricke: where being arrived, they dispersed their Men into diverse
places, and committed great spoils, yet they did not any thing worthy of
Memory. Finally, they arrived at the Island of Lotophages, which they call
Mirmyx, which is near unto a little Shelfe or Bar of Barbary, where not
knowing the passages, they were in a great straight, and were stayed by reason
of the ebbing of the Sea: They were for a time in suspense what to do.
Finally, the Flood coming suddenly upon them, they were almost driven to
despair: Yet they could not save themselves until they had lightened their
ships, and cast out their baggage to save themselves.

After that Day the Romans were so amazed with so many dangers, as they sailed
continuallly as if they had fled. Soon after they returned into Sicily, and
leaving Lilybeum, they took Port at Palermo. But soon after that they were
gone from thence to sail into Italy, there rose so great a storm as above a
hundred and fifty of their ships were driven up and down, One hundred and
fifty of the Roman Vessels lost.
and in the end perished. And although the Romans after so many losses, were
of advice to prefer the honor and Majesty of the Empire before all other
things, yet they were so broken with so great miseries, as they resolved to
abandon the Sea. And therefore they only levied an Army by Land, wherein they
thought they should be more confident and of better hope, the which they sent
into Sicily with the two Consuls, Lucius Cecilius, and Caius Curious: To whom
they delivered only three score Vessels for their Victuals. By this means
the Carthaginians, became again Masters of the Sea with out contradiction,
seeing the Romans had no more any Fleet at Sea. Moreover they had great
confidence in their Army at Land, and not without cause. For after that the
report of the battle given in Affricke, came to Rome, and that they understood
that the defeat of their men happened by the force and fury of the Elephants,
for that they had broken the Ranks and opened the battalions, and that they
had made a wonderful slaughter of them.

Their fear of the Elephants from that day, was so great, as for two years
after they never durst charge the Carthaginians, although they made many
incounters in Affricke, and in the Country of Selinuntia, nor Camp in the
Plains within five or six furlongs of them, keeping always the Mountains
and hilly Countries, to save themselves from the Elephants; Theruce and Lipara.
so as they only forced Theruce and Lipara. Wherefore the Romans knowing the
fear their Army had, resolved again to put a Fleet to Sea.

At that time the Roman people being assembled, they chose unto the Consulship
Caius Attilius, and Lucius Manlius: They also made fifty new ships, A new Army
at Sea, prepared by the Romans.
and Rigged out the old, the which they furnished with Soldiers
proportionably. When as Asdruball General of the Carthaginians, knowing well
the fear of the Romans, had been advertised by the Fugitives, that one of the
Consuls was returned unto Rome with half the Army, and Cecilius remained alone
at Palermo with the other, he parts from Lylibeum (when as Harvest approached)
with his Army to spoil, and falls upon the Territory of Palermo, planting his
Camp upon the Mountains. Cecilius having news of their coming, and knowing
that Asdruball desired nothing but a battle, kept his Army within the Town.

By this means Asdruball growing very confident, conceiving that Cecilius kept
himself close for fear, he causes his Army to March to Palermo, having
ruined and burnt all the Champion Countries. The Consul was always of opinion
not to go to field, until that his enemy was drawn to pass the River, which
runs near unto the Town Walls. But when he saw that the Camp and the
Elephants approached, The policy of Cecilius to defea^e the Elephants.
he caused a ^ally to be made by the nimblest and most active men of his Army,
commanding them to skirmish with the enemy, until their whole Camps should
be forced to come to the combats. And afterward considering that matters had
succeeded as he desired, he ordaines the lightest and most active, to plant
themselves beyond the Town ditch, giving them charge to cast Pertuisans,
Darts, and Spits a far off at the Elephants: And if they came running upon
them with fury and violence, they should slip into the Ditch, and from thence
cast their Darts at them. He also commanded the Archers of the Marker place,
to go out of the Town, and to fight at the foot of the wall. In the mean
time, he issued forth with all the E^signes, by another side of the Town
right against the enemies left Wing, and sent many to those which fought with
Darts.

Presently after the skirmish began, the Master of the Elephants, who with a
desire of glory would have the honor of the Victory, incensed them against the
enemies, not attending Asdrubals pleasure. The Romans observing the Consuls
commaundment, turned head presently; and when as the Elephants pursued them
with fury, they slipped into the Ditch, the Elephants being upon the side of it,
they were suddenly charged with Darts and Pertuisans, as well by the Townsmen
which were upon the Walls, as from the Soldiers which lay in the Ditch. And
when as they could pass no further, they turned head, being necessarily forced
to fall upon their own battallions with great slaughter.

In the mean time Cecilius goes suddenly to field, having his whole Army
entire and in good order, by another gate, and charge his enemies furiously,
A defeat of the Carthaginians, by the Romans.
who being already broken by the Elephants, and charged again by the Consuls
Troops, were easily defeated. A part of them were slain, the rest saved
themselves by flight: There were ten Elephants taken with their Indian
Masters; (...) after the battle, their Governors being cast down. This
Victory purchased great honor to Cecilius, as the Man who by the report of all
the whole World, had been the cause that the Romans after that time resuming
courage camped in the Plains. When the Romans had news of this Victory, it
is not credible the joy which they conceived, not so much for the taking of the
Elephants, whereby the Carthaginians power was much decreased, as for that
their men seemed to be grown^ more hardy in the War, An Army at Sea prepared
by the Romans.
for that they had conquered them. Wherefore they Prepared an Army at Sea, as
they had formerly resolved, and sent the Consuls into Sicily with two hundred
Vessels, desiring to make an end of that War: Whither they past having made
provision of Victuals, and other things necessary. This was the foureteeneth
year since the beginning of the War.

The Consuls being arrived, and receiving the Bands of Soldiers that were
there, they go and lay siege to Lylibeum, hoping after the taking thereof, they
might easily transport the War into Affricke: But the Carthaginians moved
with the like considerations, resolved by all means to keep it, knowing well
that after the loss of Lylibeum, they had nothing else remaining in Sicily.
The Romans in truth held in a manner the whole Island, except Trepanum. But to
the end that what we speak of Sicily, may not seem obscure to some one, by
reason of the ignorance of places, we will deliver the Situation in few words.

All Sicily has its Situation in regard of Italy and the limits thereof, The
Situation of the Island of Sicily.
like unto Morea in respect of Greece, and its bounds. It is true, ^here is
some difference, for that there is a little Sea betwixt this and Italy. Whereas
Morea is joined unto Greece, by a little slip of Land, for they may go on dry
foot from Morea unto Greece, and not from Sicily into Italy without shipping.
Sicily is of a Triangular form, Three principal promontoties in Sicily.
and so many Angles as it has, so many Capes or Promontories there are upon
the Sea shore. Among the which, that whereon the Sicilian Sea does beat is
called Pachinus, and looks toward the South: that which tends toward the
North, where the Sea does end, and is not above a mile and a half from Italy,
is called Pelorus. The third which has his Aspect toward Affricke, and
toward the Winterly West; and which is right against Carthage, from the which
unto the Affricke shore, there is not above one hundred twenty and seven miles,
is called Lylibeum, dividing the Sea of Sardinia and Sicily. There is a Town
on this Cape, which carries the same name, the which the Romans besieged at
that time: The which is strong with Walls and Ditches, and moreover with
Marshes and Pooles, by the which lies the passage for ships into the Port; but
the entry is difficult, and not accessible but by expert Mariners.

The Romans then to besiege it thoroughly, made round about it Trenches,
Rampires, and Bastions, one near unto another. Finally, they set up their
Engines of War; neither did they omit any thing that was necessary to force a
Town. Many Towers ruined by their Engines.
At their first beginning they battered a Tower, which was scrared upon the Sea
shore, looking toward Affricke, adding daily new Engines and planting them in
order. Finally, they overthrew at the same time six other Towers near unto
it, by the shaking of great Beams, armed with iron at the end, like unto a
Rams-head. Wherefore as this siege was troublesome and dangerous, and that some
Towers were much indammaged, and others ouerthrown by the Violence of the
Engines, and the Town continually battered, the besieged began to faint, and
to grow fearful and amazed. They were ten thousand Soldiers besides the
inhabitants of the Town. Yet Imilcon, who had the guard thereof, maintained
this siege against the Romans by his Council and great courage: Imilcon.
Wheresoever the Romans made any breach in the Walls, he repaired it within;
and if the enemy did Mine, he prevented them by countermines. By this means he
still defeated their interprises. Sometimes he also made sallies, hindering
them much in all their attempts, and trying if he could to fire their Engines
of battery. Many times he gave Allarums, both by day and night, so as there
was a greater slaughter and loss of men by this kind of incounters, then many
times in their set Battles.

At that time some Commanders of mercenary Soldiers, A Conspiracy by
merce^ary Soldiers s^ruing under the Carthaginians.
conspired to yield the Town unto the Romans; who being confident of the
consent of their Companions slipped down the Wall in the night, and goes unto
the Camp, discovering their charge unto the Consul: At what time there was
likewise a Grecian in Lylibeum called Alexon, Alexon.
who had sometimes saved the Town of Agragas from Treason, when as the
Saragossins held it.

This man after that he had understood the enterprise of the Treason, revealed
it unto ^milcon: who caused all the Captains to be presently called, except
such as had slipped down the Wall, and declared unto them what he had understood
of the Treason, entreating them they would not so ignominiously deliver him and
the Town unto their Enemies. Moreover he made them great promises, if they
would keep their faith: And when they had all consented to that which he
propounded, he presently sent Haniball with them to pacify a Troop of Gauls.
This was the Son of that other Haniball, who (as we have said) was hanged
upon a Cross in Sardinia, after he had made that loss of the Army at Sea. He
hoped well that he would be pleasing unto them, for that had been at the War
with them under his Fathers command. He likewise sent Alexon to other bands
of strangers, for that they had great confidence in him. Presently after he
had assembled the Companions, he prevailed so by prayers and promises, as all
generally kept their Faith and Friendship with the Carthaginians. Wherefore
as soon as the Chief of the Treason were returned, and ready to speak unto
them, and to relate what they had treated with the Romans, they not only
denied to consent unto them, but they disdained to hear them, driving them
from the Walls with Darts and Stones.

Thus the Carthaginians being in a great and manifest danger of Treason, had
like to have fallen into their Enemies (...) But Alexon (who formerly for to
keep his Faith with them of Agragas, had not only preserved the Town, but
the Country likewise, their Laws, and liberty) was the cause at this time (in
the opinion of all the world) that the Carthaginians were not defeated. The
foresight of the Carthaginians.
And although they of Carthage could not be advertised of the affairs of
Lylibeum, yet doubting the necessi^ies which they might fall into during a long
Siege, they armed fifty ships with ten thousand men: whereof Haniball the Son
of A^ilcar, Haniball son of Amilcar, Captain of 50 ships with 10000. me^*
who formerly was Captnine of the Triremes, and a great friend to Atarbe, had
the leading* to whom they gave charge in few words to do what possible he
might, to enter into Lylibeum, and to suceour the besieged. Haniball then with
these ten thousand Soldiers, arriues first at the Islands of Eguse, which are
midway betwixt Carthage and Lylib^um, and there attends the Wind: After which
setting sail, he bent his course directly to the Haven of Lylibeum, having his
men all in battle and ready to fight.

The Consuls amazed at this sudden approach of the Enemy, doubted that if
they attempted to fight with them, the violence of the wind would likewise
drive them into the Port. Wherefore they resolved not to stop their entry. It
is true that they prepared themselves upon the shore, and sought to terrify
them at their entry. In the mean time all the troops within the City, seeing
succors come, resumed courage, le^ping for hope and joy, and giving courage by
signs and shours to their Succors. Haniball with incredible courage, sails
wonderful swiftly and enters the Port, the which no man would have immagined,
and puts his Army safe into Lylibeum. It is incredible the joy which they
within the Town conceived, after their succors were entered, not so much for
the refreshing of men, but for that the Romans durst not hinder the entry of
the ships.

But Imilcon Commander of the Carthaginians, seeing that the Soldiers
demanded nothing but to fight, as well the old Garrison, in regard of their
supplies, but the new succors, for that they had not felt the former miseries;
he would not loose this opportunity, resolving to set fire on the Romans
Engines by what means soever. Wherefore when he had drawn them altogether,
he made a speech unto them, promising good rewards to such as should show
themselves brave Men: And assured them that the Carthaginians would acknowledge
it. The Soldiers moved with these speeches, told them that they were ready to
do their duties. Moreover they cried out with a loud voice, entreating him that
without any further stay he would lead them to fight. Imilcon commending their
courage, sent them to refresh themselves, and gave them charge to be ready, and
to perform that which their Captains should command them: Whom presently
after he draws a part, and acquaints them with his interprize; then he
appoints unto every one his Quarter and place, commanding them that every one
should retire speedily in the beginning of the night, the which they performed.

At the break of day Imilcon made his sallies in many places, and fell upon
the Engines. The Romans who doubted the enemies design, were not negligent,
but were all in Arms keeping a good Guard. Wherefore as soon as the
Carthaginians began their sally, they marched against them, so as the Allarum
was great near unto the walls. The Carthaginians were about twenty thousand
men, and the Romans many more. And for that the combat was without any order
of battle, the danger was the greater: For in so great a multitude of
Soldiers, they did fight Man to Man, as if it had been a single combat. It
is true, that the heat of the fight, and the greatest Allarum was near unto
the Engines. Believe that they which were appointed, as well by the Carthaginians
to assail, as by the Romans for defense, cam^ to so great and cruel a
combat, as they dyed with incredible Resolutions, never abandoning the place
which they had been ordained them. But they which were mingled in fighting,
cast themselves upon the Romans with such great courage, assailing the Engines
with fires, Darts, and such like Arms, as the Romans that day, seeing
themselves not able to resist the enemies interprize, thought in a manner all
to be utterly lost.

When as the combat had continued long, Imilcon seeing the great loss of his
men, and that he could not prevail, he caused a Retreat to be sounded. And
although the Romans were that day in great danger to loose all their equipage
for battery, yet in the end they defended their Engines, and all their
furniture, resisting the enemies with incredible valor.

After these actions, Hanniball parting in the Night from Lylibeum, unknown to
the Enemy, with all the ships which he had brought with him, he sailed to
Tripanum to Adherball, who was General of the Carthaginians, for that they had
always a great care to keep it, in regard of the opportunity of the place,
and the beauty of the Port: It is but fifteen miles from Lylibeum. And
although that in the mean time the Carthaginians were very destrous to hear
news of the affairs of Lylibcum, yet it was not possible, for that the Town
after Hanibals departure was kept so short, H^^iball a Rh^dieu.
as no man could enter or come forth.

At that time a Rhodien named Haniball, an able Man, seeing the great desire of
the Carthaginians, promised them to enter into Lylibeum, mauger all the World,
and to bring them certain news of their estate. But although the
Carthaginians were glad to hear him, yet they held it impossible, for that the
Romans Army at Sea was in a manner within the Port. Yet the Rhodien ^ssures
them, and parts with his ship: And being arrived at an^ Island near unto
Lylibeum, three days after having the Wind in Poope, The great resolution of
the Rh^di^n,
he sailed directly thither at noone day, and in the sight of the Enemy,
(striving by all means to hinder him) he entered, performing that which he
had undertaken.

One of the Consuls wondering much at the great courage of this man, drew by
night to the entry of the Port ten of their best Sayle^s to surprise him in his
return: with the which he himself kept watch upon the departure of the
Rhodien, and gave (...) to the whole At, my to do the like.

The ships which were at the entry of the Port of either side the Marshes,
attended with their Oars ready the return of the Rhodien ship, thinking
that he could not avoid it, but would be invested: But the Rhodien relying
much upon his courage, and the swiftn^sse of his Vessel, past thorough the
Enemies ships being thus prepared, (...)
not in the n^ght, nor by stealth, but in two open day: and not contenting
himself to be thus escaped safe with his Men, seeing himself a little out of
the press, he turned the Prow of his Vessel, calling them to fight, yet no
man durst assail him, in regard of the swiftness of his V^ssell.

Finally, he returned to Carthage, having triumphed over the Enemies with one
Vessel, and related all the news unto the Senate. The which he has performed
since many times, doing great service by this means to the Carthaginians, in
aduertising them of what was necessary, and bringing hope and comfort to the
besieged, with an amazement to the Romans of so great boldness, wherein he
was animated, for that a little before the route that was made unto him by
dilligens experience: But suddenly when he was discovered, he turned his
Prowe directly to the Tower which stands upon the Sea toward Italy; so as they
which look to Lybia were in sight to all Men: which was the only means
whereby Sailors might with a good wind recover the Port. Many moved with the
undaunted (...) of this Rhodien, and knowing the places presumed to do the
like.

The Romans discontented with this great aff^ont and scorn, used all
diligence to fill up the entry of the Port, for the effecting whereof they
filled many Merchants ships with ^and, and sunk them: Then they cast great
store of earth upon them, yet they lost their labor and time, for the great
depth swallowed all; and the ebbing and flowing of the Sea dispersed whatsoever
they cast in. Finally, there was some part, which by chance had made a Bar or
Bank, where suddenly a Carthaginian Quadrireme sent in the Night was stayed:
After the taking whereof, being well armed and furnished in the Port, the
Romans attended the coming of others, especially of the Rhodien Vessel. By
chance he arrived with the accustomed celerity: But at his return, the
Quadr^reme pursuing him, began to press him near. The Rhodien at the first
sight wondered at the lightness of the Vessel: But having well viewed it, he
knew that the Carthaginian Quadrireme had been taken by the Romans. Wherefore
having no more hope in flight, he resolved to sight.

But when they came to join, the Romans had the advantage, as well by reason of
the multitude of their ships, The Rhodi^^ taken with his ship.
as the bounty of their men. Wherefore the ship was easily taken with the
Rhodien. After which prize the Romans joined it to the Quadrireme, and kept
them continually armed and ready in the Port: By which means they took from
them all easy entrance into Lylibeum. In the mean time they battered the
Town violently, and the Walls were overthrown in diverse places with their
Engines. But Imilcon built a new Wall where as the old had been overthrown,
having no more hope in his Sallies, nor be able to set fire on the Engines. And
as they had continued some time in this manner, there did suddenly rise so
great a storm, as all the Engines and Instruments were shaken by the ve^emency
of the Wind: so as the upper story of some Towers were overthrown to the
ground.

Some Grecian Soldiers among the besieged, A Sally of the Carthagini^ns upon
the Romans Engines of Battery.
holding this very commodious for the burning of the Engines, discover their
Opinion to the Governor, who finds this conceit good, and after that he had
made provision of things necessary, he suddenly makes a Sally, and casts fire
in three places upon the Engines. The which when the Soldiers had done
suddenly, the fire by reason of the violence of the Wind ^ooke easily, and
consumed them speedily, for that they were dry, and had been long burnt in the
Sun Neither was it possible to prevent it by the hand of Man, for the
violence of the Wind. In truth they were so amazed at this new accident, as
they had not judgment to see and confider what they had to do, so as striving
to succor their Engines, some fell, being overthrown with great Firebrands
falling from above, or blinded with smoke. And the more the Romans found
themselves crossed and troubled for the reasons above mentioned, the more
beneficial and fortunate it was for the Carthaginians: For they might easily
discover the Enemies and all the Engines, and if they they cast any thing
against the Romans or their Engines, the Wind drove it with great violence,
and made the blow more forcible. Finally, the fire was so great, as the
foundation whereon the Towers were set, were burnt, and the Heads of the Rams
consumed.

The Consuls after this had no more care to repair their Engines, resolving to
carry the Town by a long siege, in causing a great Trench with a Rampi^r to be
cast up round about it, and there Camp, with a resolution not to raise the
Siege before they had taken it. When as they of Lylibeum had rampired all
places necessary, they endured the Siege with great courage. But after the
Romans had received news of this Disaster, the Senate caused ten thousand men
to be raised, which they sent into Sicily to refresh their Army, for that many
had died at this siege, and their Army at Sea was bare of Men: These faild
first unto the Port, then they marched by Land unto the Camp before Lylibeum.

Appius Claudius being now Consuil, An enterprise of the Romans upon Tripan^m
and chief of the Army, and the other Consuls upon their return to Rome,
seeing the Succors also arrived, assembled the Captains, and let them know
that in his Opinion it was time to sail to Tripanum with all their forces by
Sea, to surprise Adherball, the General of the Carthaginians nothing doubting
of the Succors which were newly arrived into Sicily, and would never conceive
that the Roman Army would put to Sea after so great a loss of men, during the
siege of Lylibeum. When as this advice was approved by the Captains, he made
choice of some out of the old and new Bands, and furnished all his ships with
the ablest men in the whole Army, who embarked most willingly, for that the
Voyage was short, and the promises great. Being then ready, they parted at
midnight unknown to the Enemy, and sailed directly unto Tripanum.

But at the break of day, being near the Town, and they discovering that
they were Roman ships, Adherball recovered his spirits, and assured himself,
although tha^ at the first he was amazed at their ^uddaine arrival, resolving
to try the fortune of the fight, and to undergo the hazard rather then to be
besieged shamefully in the Port. Wherefore he presently caused their Oars to
imbarke, and caused the Trumpet to round, to draw the Soldiers together,
showing them in few words, according to the necessity of the time, that if they
did their duties, there was hope of Victory: But if they refused to fight, he
laid them before the miseries of men besieged. And when as the Soldiers made
show of resolution, crying o^t that he should make no stay to march against
the Enemy, then Adherball commending their forwardness, causes them all to
imbarke, giving them charge to have an eye unto his ship, and that they should
follow with courage. Presently after he parts first our of the Port, as he had
said, on the contrary side to the Romans.

But the Consul seeing the Enemies contrary to his hope, not to abandon the
place, nor ready to fly, but seeking the Combat with great heat, he called
back his ships, whereof some were already in the Port, others at the entry,
following them near. And when as the first turned head, according to the
Consulls command, and that the rest which followed far off made have to
enter into the Port, they fell foul one upon another at the entry, and at the
coming forth, so as the Romans were in danger to have lost all. Finally after
the Vessels had recovered the open Sea, the Captains Ranked themselves along
the shore one after another, turning their Prowe to the enemy. But the Consul
who from the beginning had always followed the Army, made the left Wing,
casting himself into the open Sea.

In the mean time, Adherball having gotten above the left Wing of the Romans
with five Vessels, and turning the Prowe to the enemy, he fortified himself
by the Sea, commanding other four which followed him to do the like. When
they were thus in Front against the enemy, he gives them a sign to charge the
Romans, whose ships (as we have said) were Ranked along the shore. It is true
they had done it, to the end that the enemies Vessels which should part out of
the Port, A Combat at Sea betwixt the Romans and the Carthaginians.
might be incountred with more ease. The battle was long and furious, so as
the danger seemed equal; without doubt they were the choice men of both the
Armies at Land. Yet the Carthaginians had always the better, for that their
Vessels were lighter, their men more expert in Rowing, and moreover they were
in the open Sea, where they might turn up and down at their pleasure. If any
one were near pressed by the Enemy, he knew how to sau^ himself suddenly, by
the lightness of his ship* And if the Enemies pursued him, many others turning
presently together, compassed and hemb'd them in by their lightness.

By this means they spoiled them much, and sometimes sunk them. And if any
one of their companions were in danger, they relieved him easily without
peril, sailing in the open Sea. Contrariwise the shore near unto the Romans
did annoy them much; for being forced in a straight, they could not Retire in
necessity, nor defend themselves, nor succor them that were pressed, nor pass
beyond the Enemies to charge them again. Which is a m^st requisite thing in
fighting at Sea. For that they were closed up in a straight, and their Vessels
were heavy, and their Mariners vnskilf^ll in Sea causes, nor well practiced to
Row. The Consul seeing that all went from ^ad to worse, some of his ships
being broken upon the shore, A Victory at Sea by Adher^al against the Romans.
others sunk, and finally being void of all hope, he flies away first. There
were about thirty Vessels remaining of the whole Army, which by chance were
near him, and followed him; all the rest to the number of fourscore and
thirteen were taken by the Carthaginians. Moreover all the ^ands of men were
taken, except those which (...) by the Wrack.

Adherball was in wonderful great esteem among the Carthaginians for this
Victory, having well managed the Affairs by his only Wisdom and great
Courage. Whereas on the other side, Appi^s Claudius was infamous, and endured a
thousand injuries by the Roman people, for that he had carried himself so
indiscreetly, and had drawn the Roman Commonwealth into so great danger.
Finally, being Deposed from the Consulship, Appi^s Cl^udius deposed from the
Consulship, and condemne^ to dye.
he dyed by the hand of Justice with great ignomy and shame.

And although the Romans were very sensible of this great Defeat; yet like Men
of great Courage and Resolution, they suddenly prepare a Fleet at Sea with a
new Leuy of Men, Lucius Iunius.
and send Lucius Iunius the Consul into Sicily; to whom they give charge to
Relieve the Camp before Lylibeum, and to carry them Victuals and other
necessary Munitions. He sai^'d directly to Messina with threescore Galleys, and
there draws together all the Vessels with Beake-heads in Sicily out of
Lylibeum, and makes a Fleet of sixescore Men of War, besides the Merchants,
and those which he had to carry the Victuals, to the number of eight hundred,
of which he gave in a manner the one half to the Questor, with some that had
Beake-heads, to conduct the Victuals unto the Camp. In the mean time he
stayed at Sarragosse, expecting the rest of the ships which came after him from
Messina, and the Corn which the Allies of the inland Country did furnish. At
the same time Adherbal sent the Prisoners and ships which he had taken at the
battle to Carthage. Then he dispatched Captain Carth^l^ with thirty Vessels,
to go and find the enemy, whom he followed near with threescore and ten others.

Moreover he gave charge to Carthalo, to take what ships he could whole from
the Enemy, and to burn the rest. The Romans surprised by Carthalo.
When as Carthalo (using diligence to sail all night) had surprised the
Roman Fleet suddenly, which was retired into the Port of Lylibeum, and had
burnt some, and taken others, he drew the Romans into great danger; for when
as they which kept a Guard about the ships made great cries, and gave an
Allarum, Imilcon hearing the noise, and seeing theirs coming at the break of
day, he presently made a sally upon the Enemy. By this means the Roman Army
being environed on all sides, was in great danger.

After that Carthalo had taken and burnt some Roman ships, he went to
Heracleum, to cut off the Victuals which came from thence to the Camp. And as
he made the Voyage, some Discouerers bring him news that they had seen a
great multitude of ships. After which reives, Cartha^o without making any show;
(for that he did not much esteem the Romans in regard of the former
Victories) makes have to mere them. The Romans were likewise advertised that
the Carthaginian Army approached But for that they did not hold themselves able
to encounter them at Sea, they cast themselves by Fortune upon the
^^erestshore, where there were some retreates and turnings: Over the which did
hang some Rocks, whether the Romans retiring, they repulsed the Enemies ships
with stones and slings: And although at the first the Carthaginians were
resolved to keep them besieged until they had taken them. Yet seeing that the
place by Nature defended them, and that Romans, resistance was greater then
they expected, they sailed in the end (after they had taken some Merchants
vessels) to a River which lay near unto them, to observe the parting of the
Romans. In the mean time the Consul having dispatched the Affairs for the
which he stayed at Sarragosse, he past the Cape of Pachinus to come unto
Lylibeum, having no advertisement of that which had happened unto his men some
days before.

The Carthaginian Captain having news by his Scouts of the Consulls coming,
used all diligence to encounter him far from the other ships. But when as
Lucius Iunius saw the enemies Army a far off, he was amazed at the great
number, so as he durst not fight; neither could he well fly being so near
unto them. Wherefore Retyring by dangerous and difficult places, he stayed in
the first Port, resolving rather to endure all extremities, then to suffer the
Roman Army to fall into the enemies hands. The which Carthalo Commander of the
Carthaginians perceiving, he made no more pursuit, but retired into a Port
betwixt the two Roman Armies, hoping by this means to keep both Armies from
parting. Some few days after there rose a great storm; the which the
Carthaginians perceiving, as Men which had great experience in Sea matters, and
knowledge of the places where they were, The Romans Fleet broken at Sea by
the Violence of a storm.
informed Carthalo that in passing speedily beyond the Cape of Pachinum, he
should avoid the violence of the storm: whereby they preserved all his Fleet.
But the Romans were so beaten with the storm, for that the places where they
were had no Ports, that their ships were broken in such sort, that there
remained not any thing, whereof they could afterward make use. By the means
of these misfortunes at Sea, the Carthaginians were afterward the stronger.

The Romans having lately made so great a loss at Tripanum, and now again
having lost all their Equipage abandoned the Sea, relying only upon the Land.
The Carthaginians on the other side were Masters without contradiction:
neither were they without hope at Land. And therefore the Lords of the Senate,
and they which were at the siege at Lylibeum, were of advice to continue the
siege, although they had bin affllicted with the former misfortunes. By this
means the Romans sent to the Camp at Lylibeum whatsoever they thought
necessary, and they of the Camp used all possible means to continue the
siege. Lucius Iunius after this great shipwrack^ arrived at Lylibeum much
discontented, studding continually how he might perform some Act, whereby he
might in some sort R^payre his disgrace for the last loss. Mount Erix.
Wherefore soon after he took by Treason without any great occasion Mount
Erix, the Temple of Venus and the Town. Erix is a Mountain of Sicily, which
has his Aspect upon the Sea toward Italy, betwixt Trypanum and Palerm^, but
nearest to Palerm^. It is the greatest in all Sicily, Mount Aetna.
but Aetna. It^ has a plain upon the top, where stands the Temple of Venus
Ericina, the which (by the Report of all the World) is the richest and most
beautiful of all Sicily. A little under the top of the Hill, there is a Town
of the same name, which is very long, and has the ac^esses very uneasy and
difficult on all sides.

The Consul set a Garrison upon the top of the Mountain, and at the foot upon
the approaches from Trypanum, thinking by this means that he should be able to
keep the Town and all the Mountain safely. After the taking of Erix, the
Carthaginians made Amilcar, surnamed Barca Captain General of their Army at
Sea. This man falling upon Italy with his Army spoiled all the coast (it was
then the eighteenth year since the beginning of the War) and from thence
(after that he Amilcar spoils the Coasts of Italy.
made great spoils in the Countries of the Locrines, and Calabria) he returned
into the Territory of Palermo with his whole Army, where he planted himself in
a Place betwixt Rhegium and Palermo, the which lay high above the Sea, and was
fortified by nature, and safe for his Camp.

It is a Mountain environed with caves and holes, upon the which there is a
plain not less then twelve miles in compass, the which is commodious and fit
for labor. It has moreover all the Sea Winds, and is not infected with any
venomous Beast. Moreover it is environed both by Sea and Land with inaccessible
Rocks, in regard of the places which are betwixt both there is no great need
of buildings. It has on the top a little Hill which serves for a Watch and
Fortress; it has likewise a very pleasant and commodious Port, for such as
pass from Trypanum or Lylibcum into Italy; and it has store of Water. There
are but three ways to go unto this Mount, which are difficult and uneasy, two
upon the firm Land, and the third toward the Sea. Amilcar Planted his Camp
there, where there was no convenient Town, Amilcar.
but was lodged among his enemies, whom he did not suffer to live in rest: For
many times he went to Sea, and spoiled the coast of Italy unto Cumes, and then
he led his Army by Land unto Palermo. and besieged it within eight hundred
Furlongs of the Romans Camp: where he stayed near three years, performing
many brave Acts which were difficult to relate in particular. For even as when
excellent Combattants re-doubling their blows with dexterity and force, the
prize of the Victory being propounded, it is neither possible for them, nor for
the standers by, to yield a reason of every charge and blow, taking in general
a sufficient knowledge of their Valor, as well by the Prowess of the Men, as
by their mutual endeavors, and by their Experience and Virtue; we must
conceive the like of the Commanders of whom we now speak.

For if any one will Write the causes, or manner how they lay Ambushes, and
intertayne skirmishes and incounters, he should not be able to number them, and
would cause a great trouble without any profit to the Reader; where we may
better attain to the knowledge of things past, by a general narration and by
the end of the War. They likewise cannot perceive in this present War, any
thing by the History of the great policies, nor by the time, nor by the
feeling of the present case by things done, which have bin decided with an
ouer-weaning and violent boldness. There are many causes, for the which they
could not discern betwixt the two Camps; for the Armies were equal and their
Forts not easy to be approached unto, for that the space betwixt both was very
strong and little; so as there daily happened particular combats. Finally they
performed nothing which concerned the end of the War: For many times in
incounters some were slain, and others turning away, and escaping the danger
assured themselves, and fought again, where Fortune remaining like a good
Distributer, changing them from Front to Front, has enclosed them in a
narrower compass, and a more dangerous fight in regard of the place and
precedent Combat.

Whilst the Romans (as we have said) kept the top and foot of the Mountain of
Erix, Amilcar surprised the Town, which was betwixt the top of the Hill, The
Town of Erix taken from the Romans by Amilcar.
and the foot of it, where the Roman garrison lay. By this means the Romans
which held the top, were besieged by the Carthaginians, with great danger: The
Carthaginians likewise were no less in the Town, seeing they were besieged
from the top of the Mountain, and from the foot, and having but one way, they
could hardly draw unto them that which was necessary. Thus either Party
persisted one against another with extreme obstinacy: Suffering great
extremities and running into great dangers. Finally, they purchased a sacred
Crown, not as Fabius says, as Men weakened and tired, but constant and not
vanquished: For before that one party overcame the other, although the War
continued two years, yet began to have an end by another means. Finally the
Affairs of Erix, and the forces were in this estate.

You may imagine that these two Commonweals, A good Comparison.
did like unto Ravening Birds fighting among themselves unto the last gasp:
For although that sometimes their flight failed them for want of breath, yet
they repulse the assaults with great courage, until that hiding themselves
willingly, they fled away easily; this done some take their flight before the
rest. In like manner the Romans and the Carthaginians tired with toil, grew
cold in their continual combats, abating their forces for the ordinary
charges. And although the Romans had abandoned the combats at Sea, almost for
fifteen years, as well for their misfortunes, as for that they did hope to
make an end of this War by the Army at Land; yet seeing their design not
successful, considering likewise the courage of Amilcar, they conceived a
third hope in their Forces at Sea. They advised well, that if their design
were successful, it would be a means to make an end of their Affairs, the
which in the end they effected.

First, they left the Sea yiedling unto their misfortunes: And for the second
time, for that they had bin vanquished near unto Trypanum, and finally at the
third time, they were of another humor, by the which being Victors, they cut
off the Victuals from Erix, and made an end of the War. This attempt for the
most part was like a Combat of great courage; for the public Treasure unable
to furnish this charge: But the Citizens contributing every Man unto his power,
many together built a Quinquereme, supplying the necessary expenses; so much
the peoples hearts were i^flamed to Arms, and to augment the Roman Empire. By
this means they made a preparation of two hundred Quinqueremes, after the
pattern of the Rhodien, the which as we have said had been taken before
Lylibeum: Wherefore they afterward gave the command unto Lucius Luctatius
Consul, and sent him in the Spring against the Carthaginians, The port of
Trepanum taken by Lu^atius, Commander o^ the Roman Army.
who being suddenly arrived in Sicily with his Army, took the Port of
Trepanum at his entry, and all the rest which were about Lylibeum.

In the mean time all the Carthaginians ships retired to their Captain.
Afterward he indeauoured to take Trepanum with his Engines, and other things
necessary to force a Town: But for that the Carthaginians Army at Sea was not
far off, they had a remembrance of things past, and of what importance the
knowledge of the Sea was, he was not idle nor negligent, causing his Rowers and
Mariners to be continually kept in practice, not suffering any one to be idle.
By this means the Soldiers in a short time were inured to the Sea. The
Carthaginians contrary to their hope, having news of the Roman Army at Sea,
presently prepared their ships, An Army at Sea prepared by the Carthaginians.
and rraighted them with Corn and other Munition, to the end the besieged
within the Town of Erix should not have any want of things necessary. Hanno
had the charge of this Army, who past first to the Island of Hieronesus, Hanno.
and from thence he made haste to sail above the Enemy to Amilcars Camp, to
discharge his ships, and to victual it. But Luctatius being advertised of
their coming, and doubting of their enterprise, (for it was not hard to
conjecture) made choice of the ablest men of the Army at Land, and failed
directly to the Island of Eguse, which is not far from Lylibeum. Then having
given courage to the Soldiers, he makes a Proclamation that every man should
be ready the next day to fight.

Three days after the Consul seeing at the break of day that the wind was
good and prosperous for the Enemy, and contrary to his Army; and that the Sea
was much troubled with a storm, he was long in suspense what he should do:
but suddenly he resolved, that if his men came to fight during the storm, he
should have nothing to do but with Hanno and his Army at Sea, and with ships
that were laden and encumbered: But if he should delay the fight until the Sea
were calm, he should have to deal with ships that were light and very swift,
and with the choice of the Land soldiers: and moreover with the courage of
Amilcar, who was then held to be very terrible. Finally, he resolved to fight
with the Enemy notwithstanding the storm and the contrary Wind. The
Carthaginians coming with full sail, A fight at Sea betwixt the Romans and
Carthaginians.
he put himself before them with his Army ready and in battle. When the
Carthaginians saw their course to be hindered by the Enemy, and their ships in
battle, they struck sail, and prepared to fight, where they charged of
either side with great courage: But for that things were managed in another
manner, than when they were defeated at the battle of Trepanum, it was no
wonder if that their Affairs had another success.

In regard of the Romans, their ships were very light, and free from all
incombrance, but of that which was necessary for the War. Their Rowers had
been long practiced, and were therefore eager and ready to fight. They had
also made choice of the best men in their Army at Land: the which fell out
contrary with the Carthaginians. Their ships were laden, and therefore unfit to
fight: Their Rowers and Mariners were men gathered together by chance, and not
accustomed to the War: their Soldiers were also new, and had not seen any
thing: for they had no more care for the affairs at Sea, imagining that the
Romans would not attempt any thing more at Sea. And therefore as soon as the
Battle began, the Romans had the Victory; A Victory of the Romans against the
Carthaginians.
whereas fifty of the Carthaginians ships were broken or sunk, and three score
and ten others that were laden, taken. The rest set sail and got the Wind,
and recovered Hieronese with incredible swiftness, by a sudden change of the
Wind. After the Battle the Consul retired to Lylibeum with his whole Army,
whereas the booty and Prisoners were divided amongst the Soldiers: For besides
the dead, there were above ten thousand men taken.

The Carthaginians amazed at this heavy and great defeat, found themselves
troubled for many reasons, although their minds were always inclined to
Wars. First they had no means to victual those that were in Sicily, after
the defeat of their Army at Sea: Considering that their Enemies were Masters
of all the Sea. Moreover they imagined that it would be a Traitorous act to
suffer their General and the Soldiers which had served their Commonwealth to
be lost. In regard of continuing the War, they had neither Men nor Captains to
manage it: wherefore they sent a Man to Amilcar, and gave him full power and
Authority to do what he should think fitting for the good of the
Commonweal. Amilcar performed the duty of a good and wise Captain: For
whilst there was any hope in the Carthaginians affairs, he never complained
of his pains, nor avoided peril, but being a man of great industry and
courage, he thrust himself continually into all dangers, to vanquish as well as
any of the other Captains. But when as he saw there was no more hope in the
Carthaginians affairs, he sent Ambassadors to the Consul, to treat upon an
accord, yielding wisely and discreetly unto the time: For we must know that
the duty of a good Captain consists as well in considering of the time, not
only to vanquish, but also to strike sail. Whereunto Luctatius did willingly
give care, knowing well the necessities which the people of Rome endured by
this tedious War, Finally, a peace was thus concluded: that the Romans and
Carthaginians should line in amity and friendship, if the people of Rome would
consent unto it: And that the Carthaginians should leave all Sicily: Neither
should they hereafter make War against Hieron, nor against the Saragossins, or
their Allies, and that they should restore all the Prisoners without ransom:
And moreover they should pay thirteen hundred and twenty thousand Crowns
within twenty years.

These Articles were sent to Rome, which the people notwithstanding would not
yield unto: but committed ten men with power from them who were sent into
Sicily: Being arrived, they altered nothing of the treaty of peace, but the
time of payment, which they shortened, augmenting the sum with 600000. Crowns
more. Moreover they did articulate, that they should not only dislodge out of
Sicily, but also out of all the Islands which are betwixt it and Italy.

Behold the end of the first War betwixt the Romans and Carthaginians for
Sicily. It continued four and twenty whole years, and has been the longest
and the greatest that was ever heard spoken of. During the which (I omit other
things worthy of memory) they have fought at one instant with above five
hundred Quinqueremes on both sides: Afterward with not much less then seven
hundred. The Romans have lost seven hundred Quinqueremes, besides those which
at sundry times the torments have sunk, and the Carthaginians about five
hundred. Wherefore they which formerly have admired Armies as well by Land as
Sea, and the Combats at Sea of Antigonus, Ptolomey, and Demetrius, have reason
to cease, considering the great deeds of the Romans and Carthaginians. But if
they will consider how great a difference there is betwixt the Quinqueremes and
Triremes, whereof the Persians made use against the Grecians, and which the
Athenians and Lacedaemonians used in their War, they shall undoubtedly see,
that there was never seen such great forces fight at Sea, wherefore that
appears plainly which we have propounded in the beginning, that the Romans
have not only indeauoured to conquer the universal Empire by valor, but
they have also accomplished their desire, not by good Fortune as some Grecians
suppose, nor by chance, but by a wonderful experience and practice in such
great affairs.

Although that some may demand how it happens that the Romans, who are at
this day far greater Lords both at Land and Sea, considering that they held
in a manner the Empire of the whole world, cannot draw together so many
Vessels, nor raise so great an Army at Sea at one instant. The reason will be
easy, when they shall let them understand what the Roman Commonwealth was,
what their Laws and their manner of living, although it will not be profitable
neither for us nor for the Readers of our Works, to make mention of things
which concern not our purpose. Without doubt the Reasons are great: the which
notwithstanding in my Opinion no man has known unto this day by the error of
Historiographers: Whereof some knew not what they wrote, and if others
understood them, they have made them obscure and unprofitable. If they would
duly consider this War, they shall find that the courage and power of these
two great Cities were equal. First their desire was alike, they had the same
courage, and the like desire of glory. It is true, the Romans had the better
Soldiers: But Amilcar General of the Carthaginians, surnamed Barca, Father to
Haniball, who afterward made War against the Romans, Amilcar Father to
Hanniball.
had not his equal in prudence and valor. When as the peace had been
concluded, either of them fell in a manner into the like inconveniences: for
Civil war followed after. The Romans had presently War against the Inhabitants
of Mount- Flacon: the which was soon decided and their Town taken.

But the Carthaginians being assailed at the same time by Strangers, Numid^ans,
and other people of Affricke, who revolted with them, were in a manner quite
ruined. Finally, they were forced to fight not only for the Province, but for
themselves, for their liberty, for their Children, and for their own Country.

This is a war which we will relate summarily and briefly, for it is worthy,
as we have promised in the beginning. So they shall easily see by the deeds of
these times what this war was, and of what fury, which they call i^
reonciliable: And they may likewise observe to what things the Commander of an
Army ought to have care, and to be wary how he imploies Mercinary men: And
moreover what difference there is betwix^ the confused manner of living of
Barbarians, and those that are b^ed up under Discipline, Laws, and Policy: And
wi^hall they may easily see by the knowledge of this war, the causes for the
which Haniball made war against the Romans, which is a principal point,
whereof in opening the truth, we have not done little for those which desire
to see our work. For that they have not only been doubtful and obscure to
those which have written, but also to such as have been present. After that
Amilcar had treated the peace with the Romans, he ^ed his Army from the Town
of Erix to Lylibeum, and resigned his charge, giving the conduct thereof into
Affricke to Captain Gescon, who was at Lylibeum: Gescon.
who fearing that if so great a multitude of men, should pass together into
Affricke, there would grow some mutiniy and contenttion for that there was much
due unto them for their pay, the which they could not satisfy for want of
treasure: Wherefore he provided long before, that the troops should not pass
altogether, but at diverse times, leaving some respite of purpose: to the end
that they might with more ease provide, in sending them back by troops, and
that the first might be reti^ed to their houses, before the second arrived. The
Carthaginians had consumed their treasure, in their former charges, and did not
send them back to their houses but commanded them to attend within the City
until the return of their Companions, to the end they might make some accord
with them altogether concerning their Pay. Insolency of the Soldiers within ^
Carth^^^.
But when as the Soldiers committed many Royots day and night within the City,
and that the insolences of such a troop were insupportable, the Carthaginians
called the Captains, and iurreated them to lead all this multi^ude assembled
in their City to the Town of Sicca, until they had given order for their
Provinces. Moreover they caused some money to be delivered to every one of
them, to the end they might tolerate their expectance the more easily. The
Captains obeying the will of the Carthaginians, drew forth their Men.

But for that every man desired to leave his baggage within the City, as they
had done, hoping to make a short return for their pay: the Carthaginians
doubted that if they should allow that, some would not budge for the love of
their children, others for their wives, and by this means they should be
nothing bettered within the City. Wherefore in the end they forced them to
depart with their baggage. Being within the Town of Sicca, they lived at
pleasure in idleness and basely, which is a pernicious thing for an Army, and in
a manner the only fountain and beginning of Mutinie^. Some began to demand
their pay more audatiously then they had been accustomed, and much more,
reducing to memory the promise of Presents, which the Captains had made unto
them at need, when as they entreated them to fight valiantly. More over they
expected much more then their Pay amounted unto: But they were frustrated of
their hope: For as soon as they were all assembled in Sicca, Hanno, Praetor of
the Carthaginians was sent unto them: Who bringing no presents unto them,
entreated them moreover for some abatement of their Pay, showing them the
poverty of the Treasure. They generally mutining at this speech, began to rise
suddenly, Mutiny of the Soldiers.
so as there was a great tumult and sedition in the Army, considering the great
diversity of their manner of living, and languages. It is true the
Carthaginians had some reason to raise their Army out of diverse Nations: For by
this means so diverse an assembly could not easily make a Conspiracy. Moreover
the Captains better obeyed. And likewise if there did rise any mutiny or
sedition in the Army, they should not find means to pacify them, for
ignorant men are moved with fury. Believe me when they are once in choler,
they increase it more and more, like brute Beasts with an vnrestraine cruelty.
The which happened at that time in the Carthaginians Camp: For some were
Spaniards, others Ganles, some Geneuois, and others of the Islands of Maiorqua,
and Minorqua.

There was also a good Troop of Grecians, most of which were fugitives and
slaves, and the greatest number were Affricans. Wherefore it was not possible
to draw them altogether at that time, although they could not have taken a
better course. Moreover Hanno could not understand all their languages: and it
seemed in a manner more impossible to employ many Interpreters at one time to
draw the Army together, and withal to use the same speech unto them four or
five times. The last remedy was to manage this by the Captains; the which
Hanno attempting prevailed nothing: For some understood not what their Captain
said unto them, others related it otherwise then they had spoken, although they
had consented unto the cliefe, some did it of ignorance, but the greatest part
through malice. Wherefore all was full of perplexity, inhumanity and distrust.

Among other things they complained, The complaint of the Soldiers.
that the Carthaginians of purpose did not send one of the Captains under
whose charge they had made War in Sicily, and who had made them so many
promises; but one who had been in those actions. Finally, they run to Arms
being all in a mutiny, making no account of Hanno, nor of the other Captains,
and marched directly to Carthage, planting their Camp near unto the Town of
Tunes, which is fifteen miles from Carthage, being above twenty thousand Men.
Then the Carthaginians began to look one upon another, and to acknowledge
their great error, when there was no redress in their affairs. In truth it
was a great fault in them to have drawn together so great a multitude into one
place after the War was ended. They committed another which was no less, when
as they did not retain their Wives Children and baggage, whereof they might
have made use in necessity as of Hostages. Being in no small fear of so great
a multitude of Men, they omitted nothing which they thought be hoouefull to
pacify their Rage, causing Corn to be carried unto them, and all other things
necessary, and to be delivered unto them at their own prize.

Moreover the Senate sent Embassies often unto them, promising to do according
to their command, so as it were in their power: But the Soldiers who are now
grown more insolent, did ^orge daily new Quarrels, perceiving the fear of the
Carthaginians, especially for that they had bin trayn'd up in the War of
Sicily, and that the Carthaginians nor any other durst look upon them in order
of battle Wherefore whereas formerly they had made their quarrel, but for the
pay that was due, they now demanded Recompense for their Horses that were
slain, and not content with that, they pretended there was Corn due unto them
for many years, for the which they demanded payment at a prise, whereof until
that day they had never heard them speak. Finally they daily pretended new
quarrels to enter into War, for the most Wicked and Mutinous had the greatest
credit in the Army.

And when as the Carthaginians had made promise unto them, to do all things
possible, in the end they agreed, that for any thing that should be doubtful,
they should Refer themselves to that which the General should decree, under
whom they had made War in Sicily. They did not much affect Amilcar Barca, under
whose charge they had bin, for that he came not to see them during this
dissension, and that he had formerly Relinquisht his command over them of his
own motion: Contrariwise they all in general loved Gescon, who had bin their
Captain in Sicily, Or Ges^on.
and who had entreated them courteously as well in all other things, as in their
passage to Affricke; wherefore he had the charge by a common consent. Presently
being embarked with Money, and a^iuing at Tunes, he called the Captains: then
he caused every nation to Assemble, and blamed them for their faults past,
Gescon makes remonstrances to the Soldiers
and admonishing them for the present, and giving them advice by a long speech
for the time to come, to continue good friends to the Carthaginians, who had
intertayned them so long. Finally he persuades them to Rest satisfied with
their pay, the which he desired to divide among the Nations.

There was by chance a Campanois in the Army called Spendius, who being lately
a slave unto the Romans, had fled into Sicily: This was a bold and hardy Man,
and a good Soldier: Spendius.
Who (fearing that if they agreed with the Carthaginians, he should be Restored
to his Master, and then put to Death according to the Roman Laws) used
Audacious speeches, and labored by all means to mutine them all, desiring
troubles rather then any accord, and Wars then Peace. Moreover an Affricaine
called Matho, Malbo.
a free Man who had been in the Wars of Sicily, for the Carthaginians, feared
to be punished, for that he had much incensed the Munity, during the
Dissension. This Matho joining with Spendius, draws together all the
Affricaines, and Aduises them to consider well what they had to do in this
Action, and that they should rest assured, that presently after the Retreat of
the other Soldiers, having received their pay, the Carthaginians would be
revenged wholly upon them, (laboring by this means to terrify all the
Affricanes with punishment) and for this reason they should look well to
themselves.

The whole Troop being much moved with this speech, and likewise for that
Gescon had only spoken of their bare pay, without any mention of Recompense
for Horses dead, nor of Corn for so many years, they drew presently all
together to consult of their Affairs. And when as Spendius and Matho used very
bad speeches against Gescon and the Carthagintans, they easily gave ear unto
them. And if any one sought to show the contrary, they had not the Patience to
hear them, if it were contrary to the opinion of Spendius, but beat them down
presently with stones. By this means the Murder was great, not only of
Captains but of simple Soldiers, so as there was nothing heard in the Army
during this Mutiny, but all cried out together, Charge, charge. And although
they did this continually, yet their fury was greater, when they parted drunk
from the Table. By this means as soon as any one cried Charge, the stones
flew about, so as there was no means of Retreat. Wherefore when no Man durst
speak any thing in the Assembly, they made choice by a general consent of
Matho and Spendius for their Captains. And although that Gescon saw this great
trouble and mutiny in the Camp, yet he desired to prefer the Public Vtility
before all other things. Wherefore seeing that by the mutiny of the Soldiers
increasing daily more and more, the Carthaginians were in great danger, he
resolved to pacify it, and to try all means with the hazard of his life.

One day he called the Heads of the Conspiracy, another day some Nation apart,
laboring to pacify their fury by prayers and promises. But for as much as they
had not yet received the Corn, which they said was due unto them, and that
they quarrelled continually, Gescon desorous to restrain their contempt,
commanded them to set down their demands to their Captain Matho. At which
words the Commons incensed grew so insolent, as they presently seized upon all
the Silver which was brought thither for their pay, laying hold upon Gescon and
the Carthaginians that were with him. But Matho and Spendius Captains of the
whole Troop, thought presently to commit some Act of great Villainy, to the end
that the War might be the more inflamed. And therefore in commending the
insolency of the Soldiers, they took with the Money all the baggage of the
Carthaginians, and gave order to shut up Gescon with all his company, after
they had done them many outrages.

After this, they made open War against the Carthaginians, with the most cruel
Conspiracy, that ever had been heard speak of unto that day. Behold the
causes of the beginning of this War, made against the Soldiers, Embassies sent
throughout all Affricke by Matho and Spend^us.
which they call Affricane.

After that Matho and Spendius had done as we have said, they sent Embassies
to all the people of Affricke moving them to liberty* and entreating them to
give them succors against the cruel and tyrannous Empire of the
Carthaginians, who in a manner all found the enterprise good, and sent Men and
Victuals in abundance. And after that the Captains had divided their Army in
two, one part went to besiege Bisarthe, and the other Hippona, for that they
would not consent unto the Conspiracy. The Carthaginians who had been
accustomed to feed their families only by Tillage, and to draw their public
Treasure from the Tributes of Affricke, and moreover to manage their War by
Mercenaries; being then not only frustrated of all these things, but moreover
seeing they were all turned to their Ruin, found themselves suddenly in great
difficulties, not knowing which way to turn them. And they found them the more
desperate, for that they had happened contrary to all opinion.

It is true, they were in hope, after they had been tired with the long Wars
of Sicily, and had in the end made a peace with the Romans, that they might
rest for a time, and take breath; but it succeeded otherwise. Believe me, this
War suddenly kindled, was more dangerous than the other: For that in the
first, they did not fight with the Romans but for the Conquest of Sicily; but
in this they were forced, to undergo the danger for themselves, for their
families and their Country. Moreover they were unfurnished of Arms, of a
Fleet at Sea, and of Equipage for shipping, for that they had lost many in
their battles at Sea. They had no more hope of Tributes, nor in the succors of
their friends and Allies. Finally they saw then what difference there was
betwixt a Foreign and Transmarine War, and the muti^y of a civil sedition,
The cruel and covetous Empire of the Carthaginians.
of which mischief undoubtedly they themselves were the cause: For in their
first War, they did Lord it over the people of Affricke, with too great Tyranny
and co^etousnesse, for that they were of opinion they had good cause, so as
they levied a full moiety of all their fruits. They also doubled the Tributes,
and did not pardon those which had offended through ignorance. They gave
Offices not to such as were mild and gracious, but to those which augmented
the public Treasure, although they had tyrannized the people, like unto Hanno
of whom we have spoken.

By this means it happened that the people of Affricke seemed glad to Reuolte,
not only at the persuasion of many, but at a simple Messenger. There is
nothing more true, that even the Women of every Town conspired, The Conspiracy
of the W^^men^^ Affricke.
for that in former times they had seen their Husbands and Children led into
servitude, for that they had not paid the Tribute: so as they made no
reservation of their goods which they had remaining, but moreover they did
contribute their Jewels, (a hard thing to believe) to supply the payment of the
Soldiers. By this means Matho and Spendius gathered together so great a
quantity of silver, as it was not only sufficient to satisfy the promises
which they had made to the Soldiers, from the beginning of the Conspiracy, but
they had more than was needful to manage the War. Wherefore a wise man must
not look unto the present time, but also unto the future.

And although the Carthaginians were environed on all sides with so many
miseries, yet they fainted not: but gave the conduct to Hanno (for that
formerly they held he had ended the War near unto Hecatontophylon) of those
Soldiers they could levy in this necessity of time. They also armed the young
men of the Town, and caused their Horses to be practiced: They repaired the
remainder of their ships, and old Tri^emes, and caused new to be made.

In the mean time Matho and Spendius, (to whom three score and ten thousand
armed men of Africa had joined,) after they had divided their Army in two as
we have said, held Bisarthe and Hippona b^sieged, yet not abandoned their
Camp near unto Tunes. By this means all Affricke was shut up to the
Carthaginians. You must understand that Carthage is seated upon a Promontory,
The seituation of Ca^thage.
which aduanceth into the Sea, and is in form of an Island, but that it ioynes
unto Affricke by a little space of land. In regard of the City, it is
enuiron^d of the one side by the Sea, and on the other by Marshes. The breadth
of the Country whereby it is joined to Affricke, contains not above three
miles; whereof the Town of Bisarthe is not far off from that si^e which looks
toward the Sea: And that Tunes ioynes upon the Marshes. The Enemies having
planted their Camps at Tunes and Bisarthe, took from the Carthaginians the
rest of Affricke: and making courses sometimes by Day, and sometimes by Night
unto the walls of the City, they gave them great Allarums, and put them in
fear.

In the mean time Hanno made preparation of all things necessary for the
War. (...).
He was a diligent man, and well practiced in such things; although that soon
after he had gone to field to find the Enemy, he committed an act of little
judgment in not discerning the times. You must understand that as soon as he
was sent to succor the besieged in Bisarthe, he forced the Enemies at the
first charge, being terrified with the multitude of Elephants: but afterward
his conduct was so bad, as he drew the besieged (for whose succors he was
come into great danger, and extreme misery. For when he had brought great
provision of all sorts of Engines for battery, and had lodged his Camp near
unto the Towne-walles: he fought with the Enemy, who could not endure the
violence of the Elephants: Wherefore they abandoned the Camp, with great loss
of their men, and retired to a little Mountain strong of it self, and full of
Groves. But Hanno who had not been accustomed to make War but against the
Numidians, The Nature of the Numidians.
who after they have once taken a flight, do seldom stay until the third
day, had no care to pursue them, supposing he had gotten an absolute victory;
but entered into Bisarthe, not thinking of any thing but to make good cheer.

But the Enemies having made War in Sicily under Amilcar, and been
accustomed many times to fly before the Enemy, and suddenly to charge again
the same day, having news of Hanno's retreat into Bisarthe, Surprise of the
Carthagi^ians Camp.
and that the Camp as Victors was secure; they assailed it by surprise, and
slew part of them: the r^st were forced to recover the Town, to their great
shame and ignominy. All the equipage of Engines was taken without resistance. It
is true, that this was not the only misfortune which at that time did
prejudice the Carthaginians by the folly of Hanno. For some few days after,
when as the Enemies camped near unto Sorze, and that an opportunity was
offered to defeat him easily, having been twice in quarrel, and twice in
battle one against another, as they are accustomed, he lost these two
occasions by his folly and baseness.

Wherefore the Carthaginians considering that Hanno did not manage this War
well, they by a general consent made Amilcar Captain again: Ami^car.
to whom they gave three score and ten Elephants, and all the Soldiers and
Fugi^iues, with some Horsemen, and the young men of the Town, so as he had
about ten thousand Soldiers. But as soon as he had marched forth with his Army,
he presently by his admirable virtue brake the hearts of his Enemies, and
raised the siege of Bisarthe: and then he showed himself worthy of the glory
which they had given him for his prowess in times past; and that he was
worthy of the hope which all men conceived of him. Behold wherein they first
discovered his diferetion and judgment.

The Cape whereon Carthage stands, is joined to Affricke like unto a crooked
back, and is very stony; with Mountains full of wood, whereas the ways are
very uneasy and inaccessible, they being most of them made by the hand of man.
And therefore Matho had seized upon all the little Hills that were upon the
way, and had planted good Garrisons. The River of ^achera.
Moreover h^e passed the River which they call Machera, the which has high
banks, and a very swift course, and cannot be past but by a Bridge, Sep^yra.
upon the which stands the Town of Sephyra, the which Matho did likewise hold.
By this means the pa^^ages of Affricke were not only shut up from the
Carthaginian Army, but also from a private person. The which Amilcar
considering, and trying all means to pass into Affricke, in the end he used
this invention. He had observed that sometimes the course of this River was so
stopped by the Wind, as the mouth of it ouerflowed, and made in a manner a great
poole, and at that time it had no great fall into the Sea. Wherefore he was of
opinion, that at this season they might pass it near unto the Sea. He kept
this secret, and only made necessary preparation for the Army to march. He
carefully attended the opportunity of the time, and then appointed his Army to
part secretly in the Night, and to pass the River.

But at the break of day the Enemy and they that were in the Town, were
wonderfully amazed at this passage. In the mean time Amilcar marched with his
Army directly to those which held Sephyra. When as Spendius had the news that
Amilcars Camp had past, he presently makes haste with his forces to succor
his men. Behold how the two Camps succored one another. There were 10000. men
in Sephyra, near unto the Bridge: and about 15000 in Bisarthe. These thinking
they might easily compass in the Carthaginians, if they all marched against
them at one instant, some in front, and the other at their backs, suddenly
they took courage, and marched against Amilcar with all their Troops; who
(...) the fore-ward, then the Horse and the Soldiers that were lightly armed,
and upon the Rear (...). But when he saw the Enemies charge his men
courageously, he presently changed the order of his Army, The Policy of
Amilcar.
and turned it quite contrary: So as they which were in the fore-ward, returned
back, making show of some fl^ght, and they which were in the Rear, taking
another way, marched directly to the fore-ward. The which the (...) seeing who
assailed the Carthaginians on eith^^ side, and thinking that the Enemies amazed
at this (...), had fled, they began to pur^ue them without order, and came
suddenly to fight. But when as they saw the Horsemen approach, and the other
Battalions to fall upon them with great fury; The Victory of Amil^ar.
am^zed at this new manner of War, they were soon broken; and in the end
flying away, ^ome were defeated by the Legionaries, who charged them upon the
(...) with great slaughter, others by the Elephants and Horsemen who entered
after the Legionaries.

There were six thousand men slain, and about two thousand taken; the rest
saved themselves by flight, some in the Town of Sephyra, the rest retired to
the Camp before Bifarthe. After this good fo^tune, Amilcar pursued those which
had gotten into Sephyra, the which he took at his coming, for the Soldiers
that were within it, fled presently to Tunes: and from thence running over the
Province, he took diverse Towns, whereof some were won by breach and assault.
By this means the C^rthaginians, who before were dejected and without hope,
took heart, and recovered their ancient courage.

At that time Matho held Hippona besieged, and had pe^swaded Spendius, and
Autarice, Captain of the Gauls, to pursue the Enemy, and that flying the
Plains, by reason of the multitude of Elephants and Horsemen, they should
keep the foot of the Mountains, and not to go far from them upon any
occasion that should be offered. Moreover he sends often to the Numidians and
Lybians, soliei^ing and entreating them to give him succors, and not to lose
so great an opportunity to restore Afric to liberty; Spendius then having
made choice of six thousand old Soldiers out of the Camp which was at Tunes,
lodged continually near unto the Enemy* keeping the foot of the Mountains.
Moreover he had the Gauls with him, which were under the charge of Autarice,
to the number of about two thousand men: for the rest of their Troop which was
in Sicily, had retired to the Romans during the siege of Erix.

Whilst that Amilcar stayed with his Army in a Plain^ wholly environed with
Mountains, Supplies of Numidians come to Spendius.
there came great supplies of Numidians and Affricans to Spendius. By this
means the Carthaginian Army was besieged with three Camps. The Affricans were
in front, the Numidians upon their tail, and Spendius on the side. Hannibal
was long in suspense what counsel he should take, being thus beset. There was
at that time among the Numidians a certain man called Naraue, of a noble and
aunci^nt extraction, Narau^.
and of a Royal courage. He had always been favorable unto the
Carthaginians, keeping his Fathers affection, and who then had succored them,
for that Amilcar was chosen their Captain. Thinking new to have found a good
opportunity to purchase their friendship, he marched directly to the Camp,
accompanied with about an hundred Numidians: being near unto it he makes a
stand, giving them a sign with his hand that he would parley. Amilcar wondering
at his great boldness, sends an Horse man unto him, to whom he said, that he
was come to speak with the Commander of the Army. And as Amilcar stood still
in doubt, and could not believe him; the Numidian leanes his Horse, his Lance,
and his Company, and goes directly unto him without any fear for amazement.
The whole Army wondered, and were ama^ed at this Numidians great confidence.
Finally, being called to parley, he told him that he had always borne a great
affection to the Carthaginians, and that he had long desired the Friendship of
Amilc^^. Moreover that he was come to do him service, and to put himself and
his estate faithfully into his hands upon all occasions. Amilcar hearing this
Speech, was so joyful, as well for the boldness of this young Man, who had
presented himself so confidently unto him, as for the plainness of his
Speech, that he not only made him Companion of his fortunes, but protested and
vowed unto him to give him his Daughter, in keeping his faith to the
Carthaginians. After this discourse Naraue retired to his men, and within three
days after returned to Amilcar with two thousand men which he had under his
charge.

The Carthaginians being fortified with this troop, Amilcar durst fight with
the Enemy. Spendius likewise supplied with Numidians and Affricans, draws his
Army into the Plain, and without any long stay comes to the Combat, which was
cruel. Finally, the Carthaginians relying in the multitude of their Elephants,
and likewise Naraue performing his duty well, The Victory of the Carthaginians
against Spe^dius.
they had the Victory: Autarice and Spendius having no more hope, fled. There
were ten thousand men slain, and about four thousand taken.

After this battle Amilcar freed those that would follow the War under him,
and armed them with the Enemies spoils, telling them that refused, that they
should no more carry Arms against the Carthaginians, and for all that which
they had formerly done they were pardoned. Moreover, that it was lawful for
them to retire into their Country, if they thought it good: but if they were
found heareafter attempting any enterprise, A mutiny of mercenary Soldiers in
Sardinia. Bostare slain.
their punishment was certain. At the same time the mercenary strangers which
kept Sardinia, assailed all the Carthaginians that were there, after the
example of Spendius and Matho, and having shut up Captain Bos^are with his
Company into a Fort, they put him to death. Hanno was afterward sent with a
new Army, against whom the Strangers conspired with the old Soldiers, and
after they had committed great cruelties, they hanged him. Then fearing to be
punished for so great a villainy, H^inno hanged on a Cross.
they slew and strangled all the Garthaginians which inhabited Sardinia, and
took all the Towns and Forts, ^nioying the I^^nd until that a sedition
rising betwixt them and the Sardinians, they chased them away, and forced them
to fly into Italy. By this means the Carthaginians lost Sardinia, a very
great Island, well peopled, The Carth^gin^ans lose Sardinia.
and abounding with all commodities: It will not be needful to relate those
things which are apparent by that which others have written.

Matho, Spendius, and Autarice Chief of the Gauls, fearing that this clemency
of Amilcar, in f^eeing the Prisoners with pardon, would gain the Lybians, and
other Soldiers, they labored to commit some villainous act, to estrange the
hearts of their men wholly from the Carthaginians. And therefore they assembled
them together, where soon after a Post comes with Letters, as if he had been
suddenly arrived from Sardinia; the tenor whereof was, that they should keep
Goscon and the other Prisoners carefully: and that there were some in the
Camp, who to purchase grace and favor with the Carthaginians, would set them
at liberty. Spendius having found this occasion, first advised his Companions
that they should not regard the delivery of the Prisoners, under the color of
Amilcars counterfeite clemency: For he had not freed them for any desire he
had to save them, but to the end that by this means he might have them all,
and afterward punish them ing^nertall. Moreover he gave them change to keep
Gescon with his Company carefully, that they might not escape through
negligence: but if they did otherwise, the Enemies would make no great account
of them, and withal they should have great inconveniences in their War.

But who will doubt that so excellent a Captain, and of so great experience in
the War, will not suddenly become their mortal Enemy, when he shall be
escaped by their negligence? Whilst he was thus speaking, Letters from Tunes,
to the Mutines Camp.
behold another M^ssenger comes from Tunes, bringing Letters of the same
Tenor, the which being Re^d unto the Assembly, A^tarice Commander of the
Gauls stood up, saying, that he saw no means for their safety, but by taking
away all the hope they have in the Carthaginians. For as long as any one has
respect unto their clemency, he can never be a loyal Companion in the War. And
therefore we must believe, hear, and consent unto the opinion of those, which
shall give advice to do the (...) we can unto the Carthaginians, and to hold
such as shall say the contrary for enemies and Traitors. When he had made an
end of this Speech, he advised them to put Gescon and his company to some
cruel death, with all the Carthaginians which had bin since taken:

This Autarice had great credit in their Assemblies, for that they all
understood him, speaking the Punique Language, which at that time was common
among the whole Army, by reason of the long War, wherein he had served under
the Carthaginians; and therefore his Advice was easily allowed by the Army, in
regard of the favor he had among the Soldiers. And although many of every
Nation, walking and conferring together, did not think it fit to use such
cruelty, especially against Gescon, who had done them so much good, yet they
heard nothing of that which they spoke, for that they talked among themselves
in their Languages. But when as they saw that they did not like of putting the
Carthaginians to Death, a seditious M^n who was by chance among them, cried out
with a loud voice, Charge: At which word they were presently beaten down with
stones by the Multitude, A great inhu^^nity.
so as their Kinsmen carried them away soon after, (...) as if brute Be^sts
had torn them in pieces.

This done, they take Gescon, and the other Prisoners which were to the number
of seven hundred, Gescon with his Company put to death.
and led them without the Rampires, and there beginning wi^h the head, whom a
little before they had chosen among all the Carthaginians, as the Man which had
entreated them best, they cut off all their hands, and Dismembered them, and in
breaking their Legs, they east them thus living into a Ditch. The Carthaginians
advertised of so great a cruelty done unto their Citizens, knew not what to do,
but that which was in them, to be wonderfully incensed, and to lament for the
great ignominy of their City, and the mise^y of their Citizens. Finally, they
sent to Amilcar and Hanno, which were the other Commanders of the Army,
entreating them that so great a cruelty done unto their Citizens, should not
remain unpunished.

Moreover they sent an Embassy to these enemies to require the bodies to be
interred. Who not only refused them, but also forbid them not to send hereafter
any Treaters of Peace unto them, nor Emb^ssies, A cruel resolution.
and if they did it they must expect to indu^e the like pains that Gescon had
suff^ed: and moreover they had concluded, that as many Carthaginians as fell
into their hands, should be cruelly slain: And as for their Allies they should
lose their hands; the which afterward they did carefully observe. Wherefore he
that will duly consider these things, may boldly say, that the Bodies of Men,
and some of their Vice^s, do not only increase sometimes, but also their
hearts much more. Believe that even as V^cers are inflamed by Medicines, and
are impaired if they be applied; and if they make no reckoning of them, they
dilate and extend themselves of their nature, and never cease until the Body
be wholly corrupted and rotten, so it many times falls out of the Vices and
corruptions of man's mind, so as there is no Beast so cruel or savage as Man:
To whom if thou do any grace or remission of punishment, or some other good,
he grows worse, esteeming all this but Deceit, and will be more distrustful of
his Benefactors: And if on the other side thou seek to resist him, there is
nothing so unreasonable, so cruel, nor so wicked, but he will easily undertake
it, glorifying himself in his presumption, until his proud Spirit has past
the bounds of Reason. Of which things the beginning and the greatest part,
proceeds from the lewd life, and bad breeding of Youth. There are other things
which add much unto it, and namely the Covetousness and cruelty of the
Captains. All which Vices were found at that time in this Army, and especially
in the Commanders.

In the mean time Amilcar bearing the enemies outrages impatiently, caused
Hanno, another Captain General for the Carthaginians to come unto him,
imagining that when the whole Army were together, the War would be the more
easily ended. Finally, he caused the enemies which were then taken, or
afterward, to be cruelly slain, or devoured by Beasts, hoping that the War
would then have an end, if he might put them all to Death. As the Carthaginians
seemed at that time to be in better hope, Fortune suddenly changed, so as
their Affairs began to impair and grow worse: For as soon as these two
Captains were joined together, Diffention betwixt Amilca^ and Hanno.
they fell into such dissension, as they not only l^^t pursuing the enemy, but
gave them great occasions of their own defeat.

For which causes the Carthaginians being moved; they sent word that one of
them should return to the City, and that he which the Soldiers loved best,
should remain in the Camp. They had also another inconvenience: For their
great ships wherewith they brought Corn and other necessaries to the Camp,
were in a manner all broken in a storm. Moreover Sardinia, from whence they
were wont to draw great succors for the affairs of War, was lost for them,
as we have said. And to the end their miseries should be full, The Towns of
Hippon^ and Bisarthe revolt from the Carthaginians.
the Towns of Hippona and Bisarthe, which alone among all the people of
Afric had kept their Faith inviolable to the Carthaginians, not only in this
War, but in that of Agathocles, and in the time of the Romans; revolted then
not only ignominiously from the Affricanes, but also showed them suddenly a
wonderful Affection and Love: And to the Carthaginians an implacable hatred,
casting into the Ditches all the Carthaginians with their Captains, which were
there for their Guard, to the number of five hundred, after they had cruelly
slain them: And they delivered the Town, and would not render the Bodies to
the Citizens of Carthage to interre them.

By this means Spendius and Matho grew more insolent, and laid siege before
Carthage. Amilcar at that time had Hannibal ^or a companion in his charge, whom
the Carthaginians sent him, when as the Soldiers left Hanno, to whom during
the dissension of the Captains, the people of Carthage left a power to retain
whom they pleased. Amilcar accompanied by Hannibal and Naraue, ouer-ran the
whole Province, cutting off the Victuals from the enemy; wherein the Numidian
Naraue did him great service. This was the estate of their Camps. The
Carthaginians being thus oppressed by their enemies, were forced to crave
succors from their Allies, The Prud^nc^ of Hieron.
to whom at that time Hieron of Saragosse sent them great assistance, supplying
them with whatsoever they demanded: For he was of opinion that the
preservation of the Carthaginians was necessary for him, as well for the safety
of his estate, as to entertayne the friendship of the Romans; to the end that
after the ruin of Carthage, they might easily do whatsoever they pleased
without contradiction.

This was wisely considered of him: For in truth no Man must seem careless of
such things, neither must they suffer any one to grow to so great a power, as
he shall have cause ever after to fear a manifest injustice. The Romans also
bound by the Articles of the peace, did what they could possibly to relieve
them. It is true, that in the beginning, there was some dissension for the
causes which follow. When the Carthaginians were first besieged, they took
about five hundred Men, who ^ayling from Italy for gain, were taken and put in
prison. The people of Rome took this in ill part. But when as soon after they
had sent an Embassy for this cause, the Carthaginians freed them, and
entreated them courteously. This was so pleasing unto the Romans, as presently
they delivered all the Prisoners, The courtesy of the Romans to the
Carthaginians.
which they had yet remaining since the Wars of Sicily, without Ransom,
succouring them still whenever they required it, and suffered their Merchants
to carry them Corn, forbidding them to furnish the enemies Camp with any
Victuals. Moreover at such times as the old Soldiers of Sardinia revolted
against the Carthaginians, they would not give Audience to their Ambassadors,
who were sent to deliver them the Island. A while after they would not receive
the Bisarthins, who would in like manner have given themselves unto them: For
that they would not in any sort infringe the Articles of the Peace: The
Carthaginians thus relieved by the succors of their Allies, endured the siege
more easily.

Matho and Spendius were no less besieged than they did besiege: For Amilcar
had reduced them to such great want of all things, as they were in the end
forced to raise the siege. Soon after they made choice of the ablest Men of
all their bands, to the number of fifty Thousand, and went presently to seek
out Amilcar. Moreover they kept not the plains, fearing the Elephants and the
Horse men, whereof Naraue had the Charge, but striving still to gain the high
and inaccessible places: during the which, although they were as strong and
hardy as the Carthaginians, yet they were often beaten, for that they
understood not the practice of War. Then they might easily judge what
difference there is betwixt the good conduct of a Captain, and the
ouer-weaning of a Multitude. He separated some and enclosed others by his
industry, being forced by their private necessity. He also defeated many by
Ambushes in full fight. Som^times he terrified the enemies, falling upon them
by surprise. All such as were taken alive, were cast unto the Beasts.

Finally, he lodged about his enemies to their great disadvantage, and to the
benefit of the Carthaginians, drawing them into such necessity, as they neither
durst come to fight for fear of the Elephants and Horsemen, neither could they
safely fly, The extreme necessity which pr^st the strangers Camp.
for that they were environed with Ditches and Pallisadoes. Finally, hunger did
so press them as they did eat one another. Behold the revenge which the gods
took of them for the cruelties they had committed against their Friends. They
came not to fight, both for that the Carthaginians were assured of the Victory,
and their punishment was certain. They made no mention of any treaty of peace,
for that they knew well there was no hope of Mercy, having committed such great
cruelties. Finally they endured all miseries, expecting daily succors from
Tunes. But when they had cruelly eaten up their Prisoners, Famine makes them to
eat men.
and their Servants, (a kind of living which they had long used) and that no
succors came from Tunes, they knew not what to resolve, for the extremity of
the Famine, and the fear of punishment. Finally, Autarice, Zarxe, and Spendius
resolved to parley with Amilcar. By this means they demanded le^^e to send
Ambassadors: The which being granted, the Embassy comes, with whom Amilcar
agrees, that it should be lawful for the Carthaginians, to choose ten such as
they pleased out of their whole Army, and that the rest might retire in their
shirts without any harm. The which when they had concluded, Amilcar told them,
that according to the agreement he made choice of those that were in his
presence. By this means Spendius, Autarice, and the other heads of the Army
were delivered unto him.

When the Lybians had news of the taking of their Captains, thinking that the
Carthaginians had broken their Faith, for that they knew not the Articles of
the peace, they took Arms, fortifying themselves in a Quarter of the Camp:
To whom Amilcar gave battle with the Elephants and his whole Army, and slew
them all, whereof the number was above forty thousand men. Forty thousand men
slain by Amilcar.
This was near unto a place which they call Serra, for that it does resemble
an instrument, which at this day is called Sie. This done, the Carthaginians
who before seemed to have lost all hope, began to assure themselves, and to
recover their courage and Spirits. In the mean time Amilcar with Hannibal and
Naraue ouer-ran the Country, and the Towns of the Province, where having
reduced the greatest part of Affricke with the Towns, they go and lay siege to
Tunes, and besiege Matho with all his Company. Hannibal lay on that side which
look^^ to Carthage, and Amilcar was opposite unto him: Thither they brought
Spendius and his Companions, who were hanged on a Cross.

Matho seeing that Hannibal made his retreat but badly, and without order, did
not think it fit to lose this occasion. Wherefore he presently gave a charge,
and slew part, A defeat of the Carthaginians ^y Matho.
the rest flying away. Finally he spoiled the Camp and all the Baggage.
Hannibal himself was taken, whom presently they crucified in the place of
Spendius, Hannibal crucified.
after they had done him a thousand indignities. Moreover they slew thirty
Gentlemen of Carthage, about the body of Spendius most cruelly, by a power
given them by Fortune for a mutual revenge. Amilcar was not soon enough
advertised of the enemies sally, by reason of the distance of the two Camps,
neither was it in his own power to relieve them, in regard of the difficulty
of the places. Wherefore leaving Tunes, and leading his Army to the River of
Machera, he lodged upon the banks at the mouth of it.

The Carthaginians having news of this defeat, began again to have a bad
conceit of their War: But they presently resumed courage, using all possible
diligence for the preservation of the City. They sent an Embassy to Amilcar
of thirty Senators, with a leuy of young men under the Command of that Hanno,
who formerly had been the General. They give these Senators charge, to deal
so with the two Captains, as their private hatred might be smothered and
suppressed, and that they should force them to manage this War by their common
Counsel, in laying before them the miseries of the time and the present
necessity. After that the Senators had drawn these two Captains together, and
used diverse speeches unto them, in the end they persuade them to pardon one
another, Reconciliation of Amilcar and Hanno.
and to obey the Carthaginians. By this means all the Affairs were governed
by a common Council, so as when as Matho was reduced to a straight, after many
incounters, Ambushes, and pursuits which they had laid for him near to the
Town of Leptis, and in other places, in the end they appointed a set day of
battle with the enemy: Assignation of a Battle.
to the which both Armies prepared with Resolution. So they called their
Allies, and drew men from all parts, even vnfurnishing their Towns of
Garrisons, as if by this battle they should decide all their affairs. When as
all things necessary for the fight were ready on either side, they joined upon
the day appointed. The battle was cruel, but in the end the Carthaginians had
the Victory. The greatest part of the enemies were slain in fighting: A
Battle won by the Carthagiginians,
The rest which retired to the next Town, yielded soon after to the
Carthaginians. In regard of Matho he was taken alive. They only of Bisarthe and
Hippona finding themselves guilty, and having no hope of pardon and Mercy,
continued obstinate in their Rebellion. See how a reasonable contentment has
power in all things, and how much better it is, not to affect and seek a
thing, which afterward is intolerable to another.

Finally after that Amilcar and Hanno began to approach near unto them, they
had no more hope, but were forced to yield upon such conditions as pleased the
Carthaginians. Thus ended the War of Afric, but so happily for the
Carthaginians, as they not only recovered Affricke, but punished all the Heads
of the Rebellion according to their merits. Thus Matho and all the other
Prisoners, were led in Triumph through the City by the Youth of Carthage,
Matho punished.
and in the end punished for their Villainies. This War continued near three
years and four months, the most cruel and inhumane that ever was heard
spoken of.

The Romans at that time solicited by the Soldiers which were retired out of
Sardinia unto them, Note the injustice of the Romans.
prepared to undertake the Voyage. And when as the Carthaginians were
discontented, saying that the Island belonged unto them, and prepared an Army
to send thither, the Romans laying hold of this occasion, signified War unto
them, complaining that this preparation of an Army was not so much for Sardinia
as against them. But the Canthaginians yiedling to the time, understanding well
their own weakness, to renew a War against the Romans, indeauoured to
avoid all occasions, so as they left the Island unto them. And moreover they
paid unto the Romans seven hundred thousand Crowns to redeem the War.
Thus matters past at that time.

THE SECOND BOOK of the History of POLYBIVS.
WE have related in the First Book, at what time the Romans began to invade
Foreign Nations, after they had pacified Italy: And ^ow they past into Sicily,
and the causes why they made War against the Carthaginians: A^ what time also
they began first to put an Army to Sea; and Summarily all the Affairs which
happened to the end of this War, to the one or the other. In the which finally
the Carthaginians (...) Sicily, whereof the Romans were absolute Lords, except
those places which Hieron King of Saragosse held. We have subsequently set
down, how after the Mutiny raised betwixt the Carthaginians and their
Soldiers, the War was kindled, which they call Affricaine: And what
extremity and incredible cruelty was used, and what the end was. Now we will
endeavor to write in few Words the accid^n^s which happened since, touching
every thing as we have propounded in the beginning.

After that the Carthaginians had reduced Affricke to their obedience, they
sent Amilcar presently into Spain with a^ Army, who (parting with all his
Troops, and having his Son Hannibal with him, about nine years of age) past
beyond the pillars of Hercules, and recovered a great part of Spain. Where
staying about nine years, conquering many Towns by force, and others by
composition, to have their lives and goods safe, The death of Amil^ar.
he dyed a Death worthy of his actions. For when he had made War against
courageous and powerful people, he dyed after he had exposed himself to all
dangers, with great assurance, and the admiration of all the World. After this
the Carthaginians made Asdrubal kinsman to Amilcar, Asdrubal made General.
(who had commanded the Triremes) General of their Army: At which time the
Romans passed to Sclauonia, and to that part of Europe with an Army. They
which desire to understand truly our Discourse, with the beginning and
increase of the Roman power, must diligently observe it. This Voyage by Sea,
was undertaken for the causes which here follow.

Agron King of Sclauonia, Agron King of Sclauonia.
was the Son of Plurate. This King drew to field more foot and Horse, than
any that had reigned before him in Sclauonia. It is true, that he was corrupted
with money at the persuasion of Demetrius Father to Philip, Demetrius Father to
Philip.
so as he succored the Midioniens, whom the Etoliens held besieged. You must
understand, that when the Etoliens saw that they could not draw the Midioniens
to live according to their Laws, they began to make War against them, laying
siege to diverse places, and doing what they possibly could to take the City.
And as in the mean time the day of the assembly was come, wherein they were to
choose another Captain of the Army, and that the besieged were grown so weak,
as they seemed to have no other thoughts but of yiedling; he which at that time
was General, came unto the Etoliens, and let them understand that it was
reasonable, that he who had endured so great pains, and exposed himself to so
many dangers during the War, should have the booty and spoil of the enemies
if they were vanquished. There were many, even of those which had any color to
attain unto that charge, who discontented with this kind of demand, entreated
the multitude not to determine any thing, but to leave the booty to him to whom
Fortune should give it. Finally the Etoliens decreed that whosoever should
win the Town, he should share a moiety of all the Booty, Riches, and Arms,
with him who formerly had been the Commander.

While matters stood on these terms, and that within three days after the
Assembly was to meet (where according to the Custom of the Etoliens, the last
Commander was to be Deposed, and a new chooses) there arrived in the night
about a hundred ships near to Midionia, Succors from Sclauonia to the
Midio^ians.
with ten thousand men of Sclauonia: Who after they had recovered the Port, and
the day began to break, they landed in haste and by stealth, and then they
marched in battle after their manner against the Etoliens Army. And although
the Etoliens being advertised of their coming, were at the first amazed at
this news, and the boldness of the Sclauonians: Yet having great spirits and
courage, relying also in their Forces, they drew out before their Camp, the
greatest part of their Horse and Armed men, and placed upon some passages,
which were not far from the Camp, some Horses and such as were lightly Armed.
The which were charged and broken by the Sclauonians, as well by reason of the
multitude of their Soldiers, as for that the midst of their battle was
strongly fortified. In regard of the Horsemen, they were forced to fly
shamefully unto their Camp: From thence thorough the advantage of the place,
they marched speedily against those which kept the Plain, A defeat of the
Etoliens by the Sclauonians
whom they charged and put presently to flight. The Midionians sally forth, and
pursue them; so as there was a great slaughter of the Etoliens, and many
Prisoners, with the spoil of all their baggage, having found no resistance.
When as the Sclauonians had performed their Kings Command, and shipped all their
baggage and booty, they set sail and retire to their houses.

The Midionians also being thus preserved contrary to their hope, they
assembled, and held a Council among themselves, as well for other affairs, as
for the division of the booty taken from the Enemy, and of their Arms, to
divide them in common, by an example taken of him who had been Chiose of the
Etoliens, and of those which according to the decree of the Etoliens, should
succeed him: as if Fortune had done it willingly, to make the world know her
force by the misfortune of the others. In truth, these in a short time made
their Enemies to feel the miseries which they themselves expected suddenly.
The Etoliens after this misery served for an example to the world, not to hold
future things as already done, nor to put their hope in things which may
succeed otherwise: And that we must always reserve some part in things which
may happen contrary to our hope, as well as in all other actions, (seeing we
are men) as in the affairs of War.

When as the victorious ships were arrived, King Agron transported with
incredible joy for the exploits of his men, having vanquished the Etoliens,
relying much upon their forces; he gave himself so to banqueting in the night,
and to a foolish delight of drinking and watching, as he fell into a
Pleurisy, The death of King Ag^on.
the which grew so violent, as he died within few days after. After whose
death his Wife Teuca reigned, Queen Te^^a*
governing the Realm by the counsel and advice of her Friends. But afterward
she followed her womanish affections, having no care but of this prosperity,
nor any regard to foreign affairs: suffering all those that would go to
Sea, to spoil all passengers. She also raised a great Army at Sea, letting
the Captains understand, that the Country which was right against hers, was
Enemy unto her: Who at the first assailed the Elienses and Messen^ens, whom the
Sclauonians spoiled often. But for that there is a large Sea, and that the
Towns of those Regions were all upon the firm Land; they could not easily
prevent the Sclauonians courses: and therefore they did spoil and ruin the
Country without any obstacle, And as at the same time they sailed to Epirus to
fetch victuals, Phe^ice taken by the Sclauonians..
they came to Phenice, where there were about eight hundred Gauls, entertained
by the Epirotes to guard the Town. Here they landed and parled with them to
deliver it, whereunto they yielded: so as they took it, and all that was
within it by the help of the Gauls.

When the Epirotes had the news, they came presently to succor them with all
their people, and lodged upon the banks of a near River. Then they took away
the planks of the Bridge, to be free from the danger of those which kept the
Town. In the mean time they were advertised, Scerdilaide.
that Scerdilaide came by Land with five thousand men, by the Streights of
Antigonia. Wherefore they divided their Army in two, whereof the one went to
guard the passages of Antigonia, and the other remained in the Campeidlely and
negligently, consuming what was in that Country without fear, and disdayning
to keep any watch or guard. The Sclauonians within the Town advertised of the
separation of the Army, and of the negligence of the Enemy, go forth at
midnight, and lay planks upon the Bridge: So crossing the River, they gain a
place strong by Nature, where they pass the remainder of the Night without any
noise. At the break of day either side were in battle, The Victory of the
Sclauonians against the Epirotes.
and the fight began. The Sclauonians got the Victory: so as few Epirotes
escaped, the rest being taken or slain.

The Epirotes seeing themselves inuolued with so many miseries, and out of all
hope, they sent an Embassy to the Etoliens and Acheins, craving Succors from
them; who having compassion of their afflictions, and desiring to relieve them,
marched to Heli^rane: whither the Sclauonians (who as we have said had taken the
Town of Phenice, being joined to Scerdilaide) came and lodged near unto them,
desiring battle. But the difficulty of the places kept them asunder: together
with their Queens letters, who comm^unded them to make no longer stay, but to
return, for that some Towns of Sclauonia had revolted to the Dardaniens.
Wherefore after they had spoiled the whole Province, they made a truce with the
Epirofes by the which they yielded the Citizens and the City, but carried away
all the slaves and pillage in their ships. Thus one part retired by Sea, and
the other by Land by the streights of Antigonia, leaving a wonderful fear in
the Sea-townes of Greece. Without doubt when they considered, that so strong
and powerful a Town of the Epirotes had been spoiled, contrary to all
expectance, they were not only in fear (as formerly) for the Country, but
also for themselves and their Towns.

After that the Epirotes had ended their Affairs far better than they
expected, they were so far from taking revenge of the wrongs which they had
received, or to thank those which had assisted them, as they presently sent an
Embassy to Queen Teuca, and made a league with the Arcanians and Sclauonians.
A reprehension of the Epirotes.
Wherefore following after that time the party of the Illiriens, they became
Enemies to the Acheins and Etoliens. Wherein they were not only ingrate and
unthankful to their Benefactors, but also they had been very ill counseled
from the beginning of their affairs. And where as many (like men) fall sometimes
by the hazard of Fortune into great adversities and miser^es, it happens not so
much by their own fault, as by that of Fortune, or by such as are the
procurers: But when as men seek their misfortune by their own indiscre^ion,
their fault i^ evident. And therefore when we see some great disaster and
adversity be^all some men by Fortune, we do not only pity them, but relieve
them to our power: whereas we blame, condemn, and hate those whom we know to
have been the cause of their own misfortunes by indiscretion and malice. The
which the Grecians might at that time do with reason unto the Epirotes.

But what man is so confident, which having no fear of the common fame of the
Gauls inconstancy, would have dared to commit so noble a City unto their
charge, Some Gauls banished their^ Country for their disloyalty.
who had so many reasons to doubt of their faith, being banished out of their
Country, for that they had falsified their faith with their own Nation: and
who af^erwards being retired by the Carthaginians, at such time as they had
War with the Romans, and hearing a brute of the reuolte of mercenary
Soldiers for pay which they had pretended was due unto them, beg^n first to
spoil Agragas, whereof they had the Guard, being about a thousand men.
Afterward they were put in Garrison into E^ix by the Carthaginians: the which
they would have betrayed whilst the Romans besieged it. The which not able to
effect, they retired to the Romans, who received them: After which they spoiled
the Temple of Venus Ericina.

When as the Romans saw the treachery and falsehood of these Barbarians, having
concluded a peace with the Carthaginians, they dis^rmed them, and shipped them
away, chasing them out of all Italy. These are the men whom the Epirotes made
the Guardians of their Laws and Common^wealth, to whom they entrusted ^o fair
and rich a City: Who will not then blame them? Who will not say but they have
been the cause of their own miseries? Without doubt it is a great folly and
indiscretion to entertain forces, especially of barbarous men; and to put them
into a Town where they may be the stronger, or more in number than the
Citizens. But we have spoken sufficiently of the Epirotes folly.

The Sclauonians before, and many times spoiled such as saild from Italy and
Phenicia, seeing that of late days they inhabited there, who separating
th^mselues sometimes from the Army at Sea, spoiled many Italian Merchants, or
slew them. They had also carried away a good number of Prisoners. When this had
been often complained of to the Senate, they made no account thereof: Yet in
the end they sent into Sc^auonia, Ca^us and Lucius Coroncanus in Embassy, when
as the complaints of many came unto them concerning the outrages of the
Illi^ians.

When the ships were returned from Phenicia in safety, The Illirians are
Sclauonians.
Teuca (wondering at the beauty and greatness of the spoil) had a great and
longing desire to make War against the Grecians; for in truth, it was the
richest Town of all Epirus: But for that her Country was then in Combustion,
she could not attempt it. Moreover, after she had pacified Sclauonia, and at
such time as she held (...) The Romans Embassy to Teuca Queen of Sclauonia.
besieged, which had always continued firm, the Romans Embassy arrived; who
having a day of audience appointed them by the Queen, they made known unto
her the outrages her men had done them. The Queen gave ^are unto them with
great (...) and arroga^cy.

After they had delivered their charge^he made answer, that she would take
order, that her Subjects should not make open War against them: but it was not
the custom of Kings to prohibit their private subjects to make what profit
they could at Sea. At which words the youngest of the Ambassadors made a bold
and courageous answer, but in bad season. And therefore said he, A bold answer
of an Ambassador.
Madame, it is the custom of the Romans to take a public revenge for private
wrongs, and to relieve the a^flicted: So as if it please God, we will take
such order, that her eafter you shall not be much troubled to reform this
kind of royal customs. The Queen an ouer-weening woman, grew into such a
rage, as neglecting the right of Nations, she sent men at the return of the
Ambassadors, to kill the youngest who had used this Speech.

The Romans being advertised of this great affront, prepared presently to
War, levied men, and made a good number of Vessels: Finally, they prepared
all things necessary to take revenge of so great a crime. In the mean time the
Queen sent in the Spring a greater number of ships into Gre^ce than formerly:
whereof one part saild to Corfue, and the other bent their course to the Port
of Durazo. Where making a show to refresh themselves with water and victuals,
they resolved to take the Town. They of Durazo being confident, and fearing
nothing, Durazo surprised by the Scla^oni^^s.
suffered them to enter without Arms, under color of water and victuals;
although their true intent was to take the Town by Treason. But when they ^aw
themselves within the Town, they took their Arms which they had hidden in
their vessels for water, and killing the Guards at the Gate, made themselves
Masters thereof. Those in the ships ^eing ready, entered in like manner, and
seized upon a great part of the Walls: And although that they of the Town
were much amazed at this great and sudden accident, yet they made a long
resistance, defending themselves valiantly; so as the Sclauonians were forced
to retire. By this means it happened, that the Durazins who were in danger to
lose themselves and their City by their negligence, after they had escaped the
peril by their virtue, did afterward settle a better order in their affairs.

The Sclauonian Captains weighed Anchor presently, and put to Sea, joining
with those, Corsue besieged by the Sclauonians.
who as we have said, went to C^rfue, and made haste jointly to besiege the
Town. They of Corfue being thus suddenly surprised, and not finding
themselves strong enough, sent to crave aid from the Acheins and Etoliens; the
like they did to them of Appolonia and Durazo: entreating them not to suffer
them to be thus shamefully chased away from their natural Country by the
Barbarians; who having pity of their fortune, armed ten ships of War of the
Acheins, and within few days after sailed to Corfue, hoping to raise the
Barbarians siege at their coming: But the Illirians having recovered seven
Vessels armed from the ^carnanians, with whom they had made a league, marched
against the Ache^ns, whom they encountered near unto the Islands which they
call Paxes, and there they fought. The Acarnanians and the Acheins ships fought
equally; and continued long firm, only their men were w^^nded. But the
Illirians interlaced themselves with their Enemies, who were tied four
together, and enuironing them, they hindered them much: Then the Enemies Vessels
were much troubled, being peirced and grapled withal, their Spurs being
fastened to the Sclauonians Vessels: who entered them with fury, and vanquished
them easily by reason of their multitude. By this means four Quadriremes of
the Acheins were taken by the Illirians, and one Quinquereme sunk, A Victory
of the Sclauonians against the Acheins.
and all that was in it: In the which was Marcus Caryneus, a man of great
esteem among the Acheins, who had always performed his duty well for the
Country. But when as they which fought against the Acarnanians, saw that the
Illirians had the Victory, they fled, relying much in the lightness of their
Vessels: And saved themselves from the Battle, retiring to their houses. The
Sclauonians growing proud of this Victory, besieged the Town more boldly than
they had done. They of Corfue having no more hope, Corfu yielded.
after they had maintained the siege for a season, in the end yielded it to the
Illirians, receiving their Garrison, and Demetrius of Pharos their Captain.
After which the Illirian Captains returned to Duraz^, and besieged it.

In the mean time the Roman Consuls, Caius Fuluius with an Army at Sea of two
hundred ships, and Anchus Posthumus with the Army at Land, parted from Rome: So
as Fuluius came to Corfue, thinking that the siege had continued still. But
when he saw that he came too late, for that the Illirians were within it, he
resolved to pass on, as well to understand what had been done, as to try what
Opinion they had of Demetrius: And for that he had understood that his Enemies
had brought him in disgrace with the Queen, and that he feared her fury,
Corfu yielded to the Romans.
he had sent men to Rome, to promise the^^ the Town, and whatsoever he held.
They at Corfu being joyful at the Romans arrival, delivered unto them (by the
consent of Demetrius) the Town and the Illirian Garrison. Finally, they put
themselves under their protection, hoping that by this means they should be
no more subject to the outrages of the Illirians. When the Romans had received
them into league, they sailed to Apolonia, whither Demetrius guided them. At
the same time Ancus Posthumus caused his Land-army to imbarke at Brunduzium,
being about twenty thousand Foot, and two thousand Horse, Apolonia yielded to
the Romans.
all which met at Apolonia; the which being yielded, they sailed to Durazo, for
that they had news the Illirians had besieged it: who being advertised of the
Romans coming, they raised the siege for fear, and fled here and there.

When the Romans had received them of Durazo into friendship, they sailed on
into Sclauonia, taking many Towns in their way, Parthenia yielded to the
Romans,
and shut up the Sardiens. In the mean time there came an Embassy from
Parthenia to the Romans, giving themselves and their City unto them. Who being
received with the Antitanes, they took their way to Isse, having understood
that the Illirians held it besieged: where they entered after they had raised
the siege: After which they took many Towns in Sclauonia by force, wherein
they lost not only many Soldiers, but also some of their Tribunes, with the
Questor near unto Nutria. They took twenty of the Illirian ships, which
served them to victual their Camp. In regard of those which were within Isse,
they were all defeated, and fled to Narente, except those which were of Pharos,
which were given to Demetrius. Queen T^uca with a small company retired to
Rhyzon, a strong Town, and far distant from the Sea, seated upon the Banks
of the River of Rhyzon.

When the Consuls had put many Towns and great Seig^uries into the hands of
Demetrius, they returned to Durazo, with their Armies both at Sea and Land.
From thence Caius Fuluius returned to Rome with the greatest part of both
Armies. But Posthumus stayed at Durazo, whereas he riggd forty Vessels, and
after he had levied men in the neighbor Countries, he settled his Garrisons,
having in his company the Ardienses, An accord made with T^uca.
and all the rest that were allied to the Romans. When the Spring came, Teuca
sent an Embassy to the Romans to treat a peace, the which in the end she
obtained upon these conditions. That she should pay them a yearly tribute,
and that she should leave all Sclauonia, except some petty places: And as for
that which concerns the Grecians, she might not sail beyond Isse, but only
with two ships without any furniture of War. During these actions Posthumus
sent an Embassy to the Cheins and Etoliens, to advertise them of the cause of
the War, and of the Romans voyage by Sea: And to let them understand what
they had done, and to read the conditions of the peace. Who after they had
obeyed the Consuls command, and had been well received by these two people,
they returned again to Corfue; the Cittis of Greece being then freed from
fear by this accord made with the Illirians. For in those times the Illirians
did not assault any one in particular, but all the world in general. These are
the causes for the which the Romans past first with an Army into Sclauonia, and
into that Country of Europe. Since they sent an Embassy to Corinth, and to
the Atheniens, at such time as the Corinthians desired to make the Romans
partakers of the War, which they made against them of the Iftmus.

At that time Asdru^al (for here we formerly left our discourse of the
affairs of Spain) had by his great virtues much increased the Carthaginians
Empire in Spain, and built a Town which some called Carthagena, Carthagena
built in Spain by the Carthaginians.
others Villanoua, most commodious by reason of its situation, as well for the
affairs of Spain as of Affricke* Of whose situation, and of the benefit it
may bring to the two Provinces, we will speak in another place when it shall be
fitting. The Romans seeing the Carthaginians forces grown thus powerful in
Spain, did not hold it fit to let things pass in this manner: But
acknowledging their negligence for that formerly like men asleep, they had by
their own weakness suffered the Carthaginians name to grow great there, they
resolved to repair this error: Yet they durst not begin a War, fearing a
descent of the Gauls, whose fury they apprehended much. And therefore they
resolved to treat first with Asdrubal touching Spain, and then to assail the
Gauls: And whatsoever should happen to undergo the danger, in holding it for
certain, that it was not possible for them, to be Lords of Italy, nor to keep
their own Country and houses, unless they had subdued the Gauls. A treaty
made betwixt the Romans and Carthaginian^
Thus they sent an Embassy into Spain to Asdrubal, who concluded a treaty of
peace: By the which among other things it was agreed, that the Carthaginians
should not pass the Riu^r of Ebro with an Army, and that they might over run
the rest of Spain. Presently after the conclusion of this treaty, they
prepared for War in Italy against the Gauls: the which we have thought good
to relate summarily, to the end that as we have proposed the preparation for
the other, Histories may be more manifest. We will look back unto the time
when as the Gauls seized first upon Italy. For in my Opinion the History will
not only be pleasant, and worthy of memory, but most necessary to understand
with what people afterward, and in what Couatries Hannibal trusting himself,
durst assail the Roman Empire. And first we will speak of their Province,
what situation, and what proportion it has to the rest of Italy. For by this
means they may the better understand the things which concern the knowledge
of the History, in declaring first the property of places and Countries.

All Italy is of a triangular form. A description of Italy.
That side which looks toward the E^st, is confined by the Ionian Sea, and
the Adriatique Gulf: and that which tends toward the South and West, is
enclosed by the Seas of Italy and Sicily. These two sides joined together make
the point of the Triangle: Where in front lies the Promontory, which the people
of the Country call Cocynthe, and has its aspect to the South, dividing the
Ionian Sea from the Sicilian. The third side, which tends to the Pole Artique,
and to the firm land, is limited by the continuation of the Alps, the which
beginning at Marseilles, and in those Countries which are about the Sardinian
Sea, continue unto the shore of the Adriatique Sea, leaving some little space
betwix^ both. Within on this side which we mean to be bounded by the Alps,
and is as it were the Basis or foundation of the Triangle, there are from the
Southern Country, tending toward the North, Plains which make the end of
Italy, and are the greatest and the most fertile in all Europe: whose figure is
likewise Triangular.

The Appenin Hill, and the Alps joining together make a point of the Triangle,
near unto the Sardinian Sea, and above Marseilles. That side which looks to
the North is made by the Alps, whereof the extent is two thousand, two hundred
Furlongs. That side which has its aspect to the South, is bounded by the
Appenin Hill, the which has three thousand and three score Furlongs in length.
The shore of the Adriatique Sea holds the fashion of the foundation of the
whole figure, whereof the greatness (which begins at the Town of Senegaille,
unto the Gulf of the same Sea) has two thousand five hundred Furlongs in
compass.

By this means the Circuit of the whole Plain contains ten thousand
Furlongs in compass. It is not in my power to describe the great fertillity of
the Country, The fertillity of Ital.
so much it abounds in all sorts of Fruits, that many times a Bushel of
Wheat, after the measure of Sicily* has been sold in our times for two
Soulz, About three pence.
and four Dencers: That of Batley for fourteen Deneers, and a Vessel of
wine for as much. Moreover it is not credible the abundance of Mill and
Panique, which they call Indian Oatmeale. There is also a great abundance of
Akornes, which come from the Forests which are in diverse parts of that Region:
Considering that the Italians breed an infinite number of Swine, to Sacrifice,
and for their use and necessary provision of an Army; the which the Fertillity
of this Country does supply abundantly.

It is easy to conceive that the abundance of other particular things
necessary for the use of Man, is great: Considering that when as Guests come
unto their Innes, they never make a particular price for the things they take,
as they do in other Countries, but only what every Man is to pay for his
share. When as the Guests had been honestly entreated, and have had whatsoever
was necessary for their re^ection, A p^ice hard to be credited.
they never paid above half an Assai^e, which is worth three-halfe-pence, they
seldom exceed this price. Moreover it is very well peopled; the Men are
active, goodly, and strong for the Wa^^e, the which is more easy to be known
by their Actions, than by that which can be spoken. The Gauls whom they call
Transalpins inhabit the Mountainous places on either side the Alps toward
the Rho^e and the North. And on the side of the plains dwell the Turinois, The
Turinois and Agoniens.
and the Agoniens, and many other Barbarous Nations, which are of the same Race
with the Transalpins, and differ only in their Habitation: The other are called
Transalpins because they dwell beyond the Mountains. As for the top of the
Mountains, it is so far from being inhabited, as they do not find so much as
the tract of a man, both by reason of the difficulty and vneasinesse, as for
that it is always covered with Snow, and full of Ice.

But the Genouois dwell above Marseilles, The Genouois.
where as the Appenin Hill begins to join with the Alps Moreover they hold
all that Coast which looks to the Champion Country, and to the Sea of Italy:
So as along the Sea they hold all unto the Town of Pisa, which is the first
City of Italy, toward the West, and toward the firm Land to Aretzo. Next to
the Genouois come the Italians, and of either side of the Appenine Hill lie the
Vmbrians. Then the Appenin Hill being distant about three score and three miles
from the Adriatique Sea, leaving the Plain, bends to the right hand, and in
crossing Italy, extends it self to the Sea of Sicily. The Country which is
betwixt it and the Adriatique Sea, extends unto Senegaille.

The River of Poe, The Poe.
which the Poets call Eridanus, and which begins at the Foot of the
Mountains, where as they make in a manner a point of the Triangle (as we have
said) takes his course to the plain toward the South, and from thence bending
toward the East, it enters by two mouths into the Adriatique Sea. It is the
greatest of all the rivers of Italy. For all the waters which descend from the
Alps and the Appenins, fall into the Poe. It is far greater in Summer than
in Winter, by reason of the abundance of Snow which melts. Volane.
It is nauigable from a place which the people of the Country call Volane, two
hundred and fifty miles toward the Alps. Its spring is but a small Riuolet;
but after it deuides it self in two^ and enters into the Adriatique Sea by two
Arms, Padoua.
which they of the Country call Padoua and Volane. The last is the safest Port
of all those of the Adriatique Sea.

They which dwell upon the Poe, Bodencus.
have sometimes called it Bodencus. Finally, the Grecians spoke many things of
this Poe, as that Phaeton governing the Horses of his Fathers Chariott, fell
into it (...) and how that the Heliades power forth tears continually, the
which are preserved by a Tree: and that the people of the Country since that
day began to wear black Robes in sign of mourning, and have always used it
since; with many other things, whereof I will now to leave to speak, for that
in my Opinion they do not conduce to the preparation of our Work. Hereafter
notwithstanding we will treat of them, when any necessary occasion shall be
offered: being most certain that Timeus did not understand those things which
did concern this Region.

The Tyrreins have formerly held all the Champion Country, which is confined
by the Appenine hill, and the Adriatique Sea, at what time also they enjoyed
the Country called Phlegrein, which is about Capoua and Nola^ at what time
also they purchased a great esteem of virtue. Wherefore Historiographers must
not attribute the power of the Tyrreins to the Region which they now inhabit.
The Gauls frequented much with them, by reason of their neighborhood: who
moved with the beauty and fertility of the Country, upon a small occasion made
War against them, and having chased them away, settled themselves there. The
Country betwixt the Poe and the Alps, is inhabited by the Lays, then by the
Vercellains. Near unto whom are the Milanois in great numbers, and upon the
banks of Poe lie the Cenomans. In regard of those places which are near unto
the Adriatique Sea, they are inhabited by people, which are aunciently
descended from Paphlagonia, whom they call Venetiens, The Venetiens come from
Paphlagoni^.
who differ nothing from the Gauls in their manner of living and habit, but
only in their tongues: Of whom the tragical Poets write many strange
fooleries. Moreover, that which lies betwixt the Appenin Hill and the Poe, is
at its entry inhabited by the Ananes, by the Boloniens, by the Eganes, and then
by thee Senogallois: These are they who (borderers to all the rest) have
inhabited near unto the Adriatique Sea.

Behold the principal Nations of all the Gauls which dwelt in Italy, The
Gauls manner of living.
living in Villages without any enclosure, having no furniture for their
houses, but lay upon the bare. They lived of flesh, and made no profession but
of War and Tillage, leading a simple life without Arts or Sciences. Their
wealth was in Gold and Cattle, for that they were things easy to transport
where they pleased, when necessity pressed them. They did all strive to
purchase Friends, for they much esteemed a man that was honored by many. In
the beginning they not only held this Country, but they also drew unto them a
great part of their Neighbors, being terrified with their fury.

Soon after making War against the Romans, they defeated them with their
Allies, Rome taken by the Gauls.
and put them shamefully to flight. Within three days after they took Rome
except the Capitol, and afterward returned to their houses, having concluded
a Peace with them, and restored their City: For that they were forced to
return, by reason of the invasions which the Venetiens made into their
Country. From thencefoorth they began to make War amongst themselves: For
they which dwelt at the Foot of the Mountains, seeing the others to increase
daily in power, made War often against them. In the mean time, the Romans
recovering their Forces, prevailed over the Latins.

Thirty years after the taking of Rome, the Gauls returned with a great Army
to Alba: The Gaults return against the Romans.
But for that the Romans were surprised, and had no leisure to Leuy an Army,
nor to require succors from their Allies, they made no resistance against
them. And when as they returned twelve years after, the Romans being
presently advertised of their coming, and drawing together the succors of
their Allies, marched with great courage to encounter them with an Army,
desiring nothing more than Battle, by the means whereof they should soon
decide who should have the Empire. The Gauls amazed at their Resolution, and
withal there falling a mutiny amongst them, they made their Retreat little
less than a flight, and so continued thirteen years without making War.

But when they saw the Romans power increase daily, they began to treat of
Peace, the which they obtained, and continued thirty years without War. The
Transalpins renewed the War against them. Wherefore fearing to be assailed on
two sides, they entreated them, that for as much as they were of one Nation they
would not be their enemies. Moreover they sent them rich presents, entreating
them to turn the War against the Romans, and that they would assist them
with all their means. Whereunto being easily persuaded, they marched all with
one consent against the Romans by Tuscany (for a great number of the Tuscans
held for them) and having made a great spoil, Pillage made by the Gauls upon
the Romans.
they retired out of the Roman Provinces to their own Houses without loss.
Where as there fell out a great debate upon the division of this great booty,
so as they not only lost a great part of their booty, but also the best part
of their Empire: the which does usually happen to the Gauls, by reason of
their gormondize and drunkenness. Four years after joining with the Samnites
they assailed the Romans, Diverse victories of the Gauls against the Romans.
of whom they made a great slaughter, in the Region of the Camertins. Some few
days after they assailed them again, and had a Battle near unto the Country
of the Sentinates, where they gave them a great defeat, and forced the rest to
recover their Houses.

Ten years after they made a great assembly of men of War, and descending
into Tuscany they besieged Arezo. The Romans coming to succor the Arezins,
fought near unto the Town, and lost the Battle with the Consul Lucius: In
whose place they did choose Marcus Curio, who presently sent an Embassy into
Gaul, to retire the prisoners; who at his coming was slain by them, contrary
to the Law of Nations.

The Romans incensed at so wicked an Act, made a new Leuy of men, and resolved
to enter the Gauls Country. A defeat and ruin of the Senogallois by the
Romans.
But they had not done any great matter, when as the Senogallois went to
encounter them; whom the Romans charged, and slew the greatest part, and those
few which remained were chased out of the Country. They recovered the whole
Country, and re-peopled the Town again, calling it Senogallia, as it had
been formerly, when it was first inhabited by the Gauls. The situation of
Senogallia.
This Town (as we have ^ayd) is situated upon the Adriaticke shore, where as
the points of Italy do end. When the Bolonians saw the Senogallois chased by
the Romans from their Country, they raised an Army to make War against
them, calling all the Tuscans to their aid, fearing least the Romans should
do the like unto them.

Presently after they fought, where most of the Tuscans were ^laine, The
Bolonians defeated by the Romans.
and a few of the Bolonians saved themselves by flight. Yet they fainted not
for this defeat, but the year following drew together all the Forces they
could make, and all the Youth that could bear Arms, and marched against the
Romans, where they were defeated and slain, so as they were in a manner
utterly ruined. Wherefore their pride abated, they made an agreement with them
by Ambassadors. These things happened, three years after the descent of Pyrrhus
into Italy, A defeat of the Gauls in Delphos.
and five years after the Gauls had been defeated in Delphos. Behold how in
that time Fortune (as a mortal plague among the Gauls) persecuted them in all
places. But the Romans made a double profit by the battles which we have
formerly related: For being accustomed to fight with the Gauls, who had been
held very fierce and fearful, they became good Soldiers against Pyrrhus.
Thus by little and little they abated the pride of the Gauls, so as afterward
they were much more assured, first to fight with Pyrrhus for Italy, and
afterward against the Carthaginians for the Sovereignty of Sicily.

The Gauls weakened by the means of the former Battles, lived in peace forty
five years, without any breach of the accord made with the Romans. But after
that the old men, (who had undergone the dangers, and felt so many losses) were
dead, the Youth who were of a harsh and bad disposition, and had not felt the
miseries of former times, grew insolent. These (as it is willingly the nature
of men) began presently to undertake the War, and to be enemies to the
Romans, whatsoever should succeed, and moreover to send to crave succors from
the Transalpins. It is true, that in the beginning the Princes did manage the
affairs without the consent of the people: So as it happened, that when as the
Transalpins were come to Rimeni, King Etas and Gastus slain
the common people of Bolonia, being ignorant of this enterprise, and fearing
this desscent, mutined against their Commanders, and put to death Etas and
Gallus their Kings; then they fought with the Transalpins. The Romans likewise
amazed at this descent of the Transalpins, drew their Men to field: but when
they were advertised of the other defeat of the Gauls, they retired to their
Houses.

Five years after, Marcus Lepidus being Consul, Caeius Flaminius made a Law
for the people, by the which that Region of Gaul, which they call the
Marquisate of Ancona, unto Rimeni, from whence the Senogallois had been
chased, The occasion to renew the War betwixt the Romans and Gauls.
should be divided amongst the ^omane Soldiers. For which cause there
suddenly grew a new War: For most part of the Gauls, especially the
Bolonians, who were neighbors unto the Romans, were much incensed therewith,
thinking that the Romans did not fight for principallity or Glory, but for
pillage and their ruin. Wherefore the Millannois and Bolonians consenting
together, sent suddenly to the other Gauls, which dwell beyond the Mountains
along the River of Rhone, whom they call Gessates, for that they fight for pay,
(for so the word imports) offering to their Kings Congolitan and Aneroeste a
great sum of present money. They acquaint them with the great felicity of the
Romans; and what a benefit it would be if they could vanquish them.

By this means they move them to make War against the Romans; the which was
easy to persuade, considering the former Reason. They promise them also to
make them Companions in this War, reducing to their memory the prowess of
their Predecessors, The Gauls were seven months within Rome.
who had not only defeated the Romans in battle, but after the Victory had
taken the City of Rome with wonderful celerity: Where they had taken great
spoils, and after they had been masters thereof seven months, they restored
them the Empire willingly, and returned into their Country safe with all their
booty. In propounding these things bravely unto them, they encouraged these
Kings and the Gauls, so as there was never descent made out of that Country,
of a greater Army, nor more valliant men, nor better furnished.

When the news thereof came to Rome, Amazement of the Romans for the descent
of the Gauls.
the City was so amazed, as they presently made a new Leuy of men, and began
to make provision of Victuals, leading their Army sometimes unto their
Frontiers, as if the Gauls had been there present; who notwithstanding were
not yet come out of their Country. These things were very beneficial to the
Carthaginians, to augment their Empi^e in Spain. But the Be^^anes considering
that these affairs were more pressing, for that these people were too near
enemies, they were forced to lay aside the affairs of Spain, until they had
pacified Italy. And therefore in renewing the accord with Asdrubal, Lieutenant
General for the Carthaginians, they wholly attended the War against the
Gauls, studying only how they might resist their fury.

When as the Gessates had drawn a great number of men together near unto the
Rhone, they passed the Mountains, A descent of the Transalpins into Italy.
and entered the plain near unto the Poe: Where as the other Gauls eight
years after the yiedling of that Region, and in like manner the Millannois and
Bolonians, joined presently with a great multitude. But the Venetians and
Cenomans pacified by an Embassy from the Romans, preferred their friendship
before the Alliance of the Gauls. Wherefore the Kings for fear of them, left
a part of their Army in Millannois to guard the Country, and marched with the
rest into Tuscany, The number of the Gauls Army.
being about fifty thousand Foot, and twenty thousand Cars and Horsemen. When
as the Romans had news that the Gauls had past the Alps, they sent Lucius
Emilius the Consul with an Army to Rimeni, that being there before the Enemy,
he should stay their passage. They also caused one of the Pretors to march
into Tuscany, for the other Consul Caius Attilius, had in the beginning of his
Consulship past into Sardinia with an Army at Sea.

The City of Rome was heavy, and much troubled, and did not attend this great
attempt of the Gauls without great fear. They then remembered their former
defeates, and feared this Nation, as the ruin of the City of Rome. And
therefore they had long before prepared a great Army: they daily made new
leuies of men, The diligence of the Romans.
and they advertised their Allies to be ready and in Arms. Moreover, they
enjoined them to send unto the Senate the Rolls of the Bands of their Youth,
desiring to know the number of Soldiers of all the Italian Army. They likewise
made provision of Corn and Arms, and of all other things necessary, in
greater abundance than they had done in former times.

The other people of Italy were no less diligent, they were so much amazed at
the descent of the Gauls: so as they did not think to fight for the Romans,
nor for their Empire, but every man for his own safety, for his City, and for
his Country: Wherefore all the Italians did willingly obey the Romans in this
War. The preparation which the Romans made for War.
I will here set down the preparations the Romans made for War, and what
number of men they had in those times, to the end you may plainly see how
great they were, and what forces they had when as Hannibal presumed to assail
them, and with what Troops making War against the Roman power, he brought
the City into so great danger. First, the Consuls went to field with four
Romare Legions, whereof either consisted of five thousand two hundred Foot,
and two thousand Horse. They had moreover by reason of this arming of the
Gauls, raised other Troops. The number of Soldiers which were raised in
Italy.
The Tuscans and Sabins had drawn together three score and ten thousand Foot,
and about four thousand Horse.

As soon as the news came that the Gauls past the Alps of Bolonia, these
were sent into Tuscany, under the command of the Provost of the City. After
these the Vmbrians and Sarsenates inhabiting Mount Appenin, were assembled to
the number of twenty thousand men. The Venetians also, and Cenomans were about
twenty thousand, all which were appointed to keep the Appenin Hills, and to
fall upon the Bolonois when occasion should be offered. Behold the Troops
which at the first they sent against the Gauls. There was moreover another
Army within Rome to guard the City, and to attend the pleasure of the Senate
upon all occasions: whereof there were twenty thousand foot* Romans, and
fifteen hundred Horse, and of their Allies thirty thousand Foot, and two
thousand Horse. Moreover they had the Roll of the Army of the Latins, which
consisted of four score thousand Foot, and five thousand Horse: and of the
Samnites of three score and ten thousand men, and seven thousand Horse. Of the
Lapiges and Mesapiens fifty thousand Foot, and sixeteene thousand Horse, of
Marses, Marruciens, Ferrentins and Vestins, twenty thousand Foot, and four
thousand Horse. Of the Lucains thirty thousand Foot, and three thousand Horse.
There were moreover at that time two Legions in Sicily, and about Tarentum for
the guard of the Country: whereof either was of four thousand two hundred
Foot, and two hundred Horse. Moreover, the multitude of the Romans and
Campanois, was about two hundred and fifty thousand Foot, and three and twenty
thousand Horse. By this means the number of the Troops which were subject to
the Senate and people of Rome, exceeded an hundred and fifty thousand Foot,
and about six thousand Horse. But the whole force of Italy was generally of
seven hundred thousand Foot, and three score and ten thousand Horse.
Against the which Hannibal having but twenty thousand men, durst enter into
Italy. But this shall be for another time.

The Gauls finally passing the Appenin Hills, Tuscany ruined by the Gauls.
entered into Tuscany without any resistance, putting all to fire and sword:
Finally, they marched speedily to Rome. Being come near unto a Town which they
call Cluse, within three days journey of Rome, they had news that the Roman
Army (which as we have said, had been sent to guard Tuscany) was drawn
together and followed them. Wherefore they presently turned head furiously upon
them. And when they were come near unto the other at the Sunsetting, then
they cam^t, leaving some little space betwixt them. Night being come, the
Gauls made fi^es in their Camps after their usual manner, and left their
Horsemen there, The policy of the Gauls.
giving them charge to part at the break of day, and when they should be
discovered by the Enemies to go on their course. In the mean time making show
of a f^^ght, they part with all their Foot, and march directly to Fesula, of
purpose to draw on their Horsemen, and to break the Enemy which followed
them.

The Romans seeing the Gauls Horsemen part at the break of day with great
noise, thinking it was for fear, hasted after them indiscreetly, and drew
near unto them. W^o being joined, the combat in the beginning was furious, A
Victory of the Gauls against the Romans.
for that the Gauls did charge them on all sides according to their
resolution. Finally, the Romans lost six thousand men, for that the Gauls
were more in number and of greater courage. All the ^est of the Army fled,
whereof a great part retired to a little Hill, strong by situation and nature.
The Gauls began to besiege them: But for that they were tired with watching
the Night before, and with the toil of the day, they returned to take their
refection, leaving a strength of Horsemen to keep the Hill, with a resolution
to give an assault with all their forces, if they did not yield within three
days. At that time Lucius Emilius the Consul, who (as we have said) was at
Rimini with an Army, having aduertisment that the Gauls had past Tuscany, and
marched to Rome with all their forces, he used all diligence to come and succor
his companions. When he had past the Appenin Hill, and was lodged near unto
the Enemy, they which had retired to the Hill, knowing the Consuls coming,
which they easily discovered by the fires in the Night, they presently took
courage, and sent some of their men unarmed unto him by the Forest, to let him
understand how things had past.

The Consul seeing that all delays in so great a danger of his companions
were prejudicial, he gave order to the Tribunes of the Soldiers, to march at
the break of day with all the foot: And in the mean time he takes his way
toward the Hill with all the Horsemen. The Commanders of the Gauls doubting
of the Consuls coming by the fires in the Night, assembled to advise what they
had to do. The advice of Ane^oeste.
Then King Aneroeste was of opinion, that it was a folly to lose time with the
Enemy, and to bring their conquest in danger, before they had put so great a
spoil in safety (they had in truth an infinite number of Prisoners, and
abundance of all other things) and therefore they must first return into their
Country, and there leave all the baggage, and then return into Italy if they
think it fit: The retreat of (...) Gauls.
to the end the Soldiers might fight with their Enemies without any
encumbrance. The Gauls liked of this counsel, and the next day drew forth
their Ensigns before the break of day, returning into Gaul along the
Seashore, laden with all sorts of pillage.

When as Lucius Emilius had retired those which had fled to the Hill, The
pursuit of Emilius.
he pursued the Gauls with his Army. Yet he did not hold it fit to present
battle to so great a multitude, but rather resolved to attend some
opportunity, either of time or place, where he might amaze the Enemy, or make
them abandon the booty in some sort. At the same time Caius Attilius tbe other
Consul, who was lately arrived at ^^sa from Sardinia, landed with his whole
Army, and marched directly to Rome by the Seashore before the Gauls. They
were not far from Telamona a Town of Tuscany, when as some of their scouts
fell by surprise into the Romans hands, who discovered unto the Consul that
the Gauls were not far off, Caius Attilius.
and that Lucius Emilius pursued them. These things being understood, Caius
Attilius wondering at this fortune, and hoping partly of the Victory, for that
Fortune seemed to have delivered the Enemy betwixt their two Camps, he gave
the Legions to the Tribunes of the Soldiers, and gave them charge to march
against the Enemy, as much as the opportunity of place would give them leave.

In the mean ttme seeing a little Hill upon the way, very commodious for their
War, to the which the Gauls seemed to tend, he took the Horsemen, and
resolved to get it before them, and to undergo the danger, hoping that if the
Romans had the Victory by this means, they would attribute the honor unto
him. The Gauls ignorant in the beginning of the Consuls coming, and doubting
by the things which they saw, that Lucius ^milius had past before night with
his horsemen, to gain the Country which was aduantagious for the War, they
presently sent all their Horse, and some of their most active men to recover
this Hill. But when they were advertised by the Prisoners that Attilius held
it, they presently caused their Footmen to march, and order their battle in
the Rear, as in the Front, for that they saw Emilius followed them in the
tail, and that the other attended them in front, as they had learned by the
Prisoners, and by the things which had happened. They which were with Emilius,
were not yet confident, although it were a common b^uite that the Army of
Sardinta was arrived at Pisa. But they were assured when as they saw the combat
at the Hill: for the Enemies were very near, and therefore the Emilian Horse
rejoiced much, and took a way by the side of the nearest Hill to go and
succor those which defended it.

Emilius in the mean time marched after the Gauls in the same order he had
been accustomed. When the Gauls saw themselves thus inuolued by the Enemies,
The order of the Gauls battle*
they put upon the Rear the G^ssates and Milannois against Emilius who
followed them, and upon the Front the P^emontois, and those which inhabit
along the Poe, appointing the Bolonians and the Ca^s with all the baggage apart
without the two Battalions, and all the pillage upon a (...) Hill, with some
Horsemen to guard it. When they had thus ordained their Battle with two
fronts, it seemed not only terrible to b^hold, but also of a wonderful
efficacy for the combat. The Bolonians and Millannois, made choice of such as
had Breeches, and were most at ease in their apparel. But the Gessates for
the great courage and wonderful desire of glory which they had, stripped
themselves, and put themselves before the Battalion naked, only with their
Arms, having a conceit that by this means they should be more active and
disposed to fight: For the Bushes (which were thick there) would stay them by
their Clothes and hinder their fighting.

First, the Combat which was at the Hill, was in the sight of both A^mies,
whereas the Horse men charged one another, and fought valiantly. There Cai^s
Attilius was slain, Caius Attilius slain.
fighting too rashly, whose Head was presently carried to the Kings of the
Gauls. Yet the Roman cauallery fainted not, but were the more incensed to
fight; so as in the end they not only defended the Hill, but defeated all the
Gauls Horsemen. The battle of the Footmen.
In the mean time the Foot men approach, and the combat began, the which was
not only horrible and wonderful to behold for those that were present, but
likewise for those which shall hear it spoken of. First considering that the
battle was of three Armies, every man may imagine, that the sight was not
only new and fearful to the assistants, but also their manner of fighting.
Moreover, who will doubt but the Gauls had the worst, being chargd as well in
the Rear as in the Front? Or it may be the better, for that they fought
altogether against the two Armies, and that the two sides repulsed their
Enemies, so as at the same instant they defended one another: And that moreover
they could not pass on, not hope for flight back. ward? There is no doubt but
a Battle with two Fronts has the benefit, that the Soldiers have no means
to fly. In regard of the Romans, they had hope of Victory, for that they saw
their Enemies enclosed, as it were delivered into their hands: On the other
side they feared the fury and order of their Army, the sound of Trumpets and
Clairons was terrible, with the which all the Troop made a great cry and
shoute, so as there was an incredible noise. They could not hear the Trumpets
and Soldiers, and moreover, the neighbor places seemed to ecchoe forth their
cries.

It was a terrible thing to see the forlorn hope march naked. Believe me,
these great naked bodies, with their motions under their Bucklers were
marvelous and fearful. The beauty and riches of their Apparel gave also a
great luster. For the whole Army shined with chains of Gold, and Silks wouen
with purple. The which the Romans observing, they were partly amazed, and
partly encouraged with the hope of spoil. Finally, the tail of the Army which
was armed, was not gauld by the Roman Archers, who do usually march before the
Battalion. But the forlorn hope which fought naked before their Troops, were
contrary to all hope much annoyed: The defeat of the forlorn hope of the
Gauls.
For they could not cover their great naked bodies with their French Bucklers*
And therefore the Arrows fell easily upon them. Finally, when they saw
themselves thus beaten, and could not be revenged of the Archers by reason of
the distance, and for the multitude of Arrows which flew from all parts, they
cast themselves like desperate madmen, some upon their Enemies, where they
were slain: others retired upon their own Troops, who being all bloody,
daunted the courage of the rest, and put them in disorder.

By this means the fierceness of the Gessates, which made the forlorn hope
was abated. Then the Milannois, the Bolonians, and the Turinois maintained the
burden of the battle: where they did not fight a fatre off with their Arrows
and Darts as formerly, but hand to hand with their Speeres and Swords: and the
Combat was as furious as ever any was, for every man performed his duty. The
Arms which the Gauls did use.
It is true, that their Targets and Swords were not equal. For the Gauls
Swords were heavy and blunt, and their Targets weak: The Romans covered
themselves with stronger Targets, and carried short Swords and sharp. And
therefore the Gauls were still defeated in what manner so ever they fought,
whether in troop, or man to man: A defeat of the Gauls Army.
Yet they stood firm in battle, until that the Roman Cauellery came down
from the Hill in great fury: Then they were broken and slain here and there.
The Footmen died in the place where they had their Stations appointed: But the
Horsemen fled. The Gauls lost in this battle forty thousand men; The taking
of King Cong^llitane. The death of King Aneroeste.
there were only taken ten thousand with King Congollitane. Aneroeste, which
was the other King of the Gauls, fled with some few which followed him to a
neighbour-place, who some days after slew themselves.

After this defeat, Lucius Emilius the Consul, sent the Enemies spoils to
Rome, and restored the booty to those to whom it did belong. From thence he
went thorough the Genouois Country into that of B^lonia, making great spoils:
The Bolonians Country spoy^led.
And having in a short time inrich't his Army with all sorts of booty, he
brought it back to Rome, with the Arms, chains and bracelets of gold,
wherewith he did adorn the Capitol: being a kind of ornament of gold, which
the Gauls are accustomed to carry about their wrists and necks: the rest of
the spoils and all the prisoners, went before him in triumph. Behold those
great attempts of the Gauls, which the Romans not only feared, but all Italy
in like manner, came to nothing.

The Romans hoping now to chase the Gauls out of Italy, sent Quintus Fuluius
and Titus Manlius late made Consuls, with a great Army into Gaul. The
Bolonians^ yield to the Romans.
Who at their entry forced the Bolonians to submit themselves to their
obedience. But they could not proceed in the war, but were forced to retire
by reason of the continual Rain and the Plague.

Afterward Publius Furio, and Caius Flaminius being created Consuls, came
again into Gaul with an Army: and after they had received the Ananes into
friendship, which are not far from Marselles, they marched directly into the
Country of Milan with their Legions, where as the River Ada ioynes unto the
Poe. The Milannois had made a great levy to repulse their enemies. By whom
when the Romans had received great loss, not only at the passage of the
River, but also in fortifying their Camp, they parted thence, and took their
way to the Country of the Cenomans* where after they had joined their Army to
theirs, for they were their Allies, they made a new descent into the Milannois
by the higher Country, which looks toward the Alps, ruining all where they
past.

The Princes of Milan hearing the resolution of the Romans to be immutable,
resolved to undergo the hazard and to fight with them. Wherefore after they
had drawn an Army together, and taken the Ensigns of gold which they call
immovable out of Minerva's Temple, and made provision of all other things
necessary, The Army of the Milannois.
they marched against them with great assurance, planting their Camp ^ight
against them, to the number of fifty thousand Men. It is true, the Romans
finding themselves not strong enough, were of advice to call the Gauls to
their aid, with whom they were in league. But for that they feared their
revolt, and they were to fight with men of the same Nation, they held it
dangerous to trust in such men in so great a danger, and especially to put
their safeties in their handsat such a time, and in such an action: Finally,
being near the River, they call the Cenomans, and cause them to pass. When
all were past they brake the Bridge, depriving them at one instant of the
means to join with their Enemies, and leaving their Men no hope of safety but
in the victory.

When this was done they put their men in order, and off^^ battle to the
Milannois. It seems the Romans had ordered this battle discreetly by the
advertisement of the Tribunes, for the means to fight in troop, or man to
man: For when as their men were in battle they took the Pikes from the
Triarij, and gave them to such as were in the Front, giving them charge to
entertain the fury of the Gauls, until their first heat of fighting were
spent: Which being done, leaving their Pikes, they should fly to their Swords;
ordayning it in this manner, for that they had seen by the former Wars, that
the Gauls had a furious point, and afterward their hearts were faint and
effeminate, and that moreover their Swords as we have said, were only fit to
give one blow; The vneasinesse of the Gauls Swords.
but afterward their length grew crooked, and the edge turned by reason of the
breadth: So as if they did not suffer them to set the point to the ground, and
to make them straight again with their Feet, the second blow wrought no
effect.

The Romans following the Command of the Tribunes, charge their enemies with
great blows upon the breast with their Pikes. The Gauls on the other side
employ all their fury to cut them. Then the Romans abandoning their Pikes,
fought hand to hand, breaking by this means the fury of the Gauls: And taking
from them all means to step back, which these people are accustomed to use
in their Charge, for that their Swords are blunt and unprofitable, by reason of
their length, but only to give one blow a far off. But the Romans by means
of their short Swords, wherewith they did not strike like unto them, but thrust
often through the bodies and throats of the Gauls, so as they slew a great
number.

Behold how the providence of the Tribunes prevailed much; without doubt the
Consul had not made choice of a place fit to fight: Considering that in
ordering the battle upon the River side, he had taken from the Romans the
means to march, A Victory of the Romans against the Millannois.
which is usual unto them. Wherefore if during the Combat they had been
forced to retire, they had all fallen into the River by the error of the
Consul. Yet they had a goodly Victory by their own forces, and retired to
Rome with a great multitude of Prisoners and spoil.

The year following the Gauls weakened with so many battles lost, sent an
Embassy to the Romans for a Peace, making them goodly promises. But Marcus
Claudius, and Caius Cornelius chosen Consuls, used all diligence to draw their
Army into their Country, to the end the Senate should not yield unto it. The
Gessates dwell on this side the Rh^ne.
Wherefore the Gauls having no more hope of peace, being as it were in
despair, raised a new Army, and intertayned thirty thousand Gessates, who, as
we have said, dwell on this side the Rhine, having them all ready and in Arms
attending the descent of the Romans. When as the Consuls were entered the
Millannois Country in the Spring, Acerras besieged.
they besieged the Town of Acorras, which lies betwixt the Poe and the Alps.
And although it were not in the power of the Millannois to succor the
besieged, for that the Romans held the passages: Yet their full intent being
to raise the siege, they cause a part of their Army to pass the Poe,
Cl^stidium besieged.
to whom they give charge to besiege Clastidium, a Town belonging to the
Allies of the Romans, hoping by this means the Consuls should be forced to
raise their siege. But presently when they had the news, Marcus Claudius makes
have with the Horsemen, and the most active of the foot, to succor the
besieged. When the Gauls were advertised of the Consuls coming, they
presently raised the siege, and went resolutely to encounter the Romans
offering them battle. At the first the Gauls had the better, for that the
Roman Horsemen were surprised by theirs. A defeat of the Gauls by the Romans.
But being afterward environed by the Roman Cauallery, they were broken and
defeated. Many were drowned having cast themselves into the River, flying the
Enemy: The greatest part were slain, and the rest taken Prisoners.

But when they which were besieged in Acerras, had notice of the defeat of
their men near unto Clastidium, they retired to Millan, the Capital City of
the Country. Acerras taken by Cornelius.
Then Cornelius having go^ten the Town of Acerras well furnished with Corn
and all other Munition, he pursued the Gauls, and planted his Camp near
unto Millan. And for that the Milannois came not out to fight, he drew back
his Army, spoiling the Country. Then the Milannois pursuing them, began to
charge them in the Rear, and make a great sl^ughter: whereof some fled, until
that Cornelius turning head against the Enemy with the Legions, encouraged the
whole Army to sight. Who willingly obeying the Consuls commaundment, fell with
great fury upon the Gauls, who having lately been so often beaten, made no
long resistance, but presently turned head, and recovered the Alps. Cornelius
pursued them, spoiling the whole Country, and from thence he marched to
Millan, which he took by force, and brought it under the Romans obedience.

After all these defeats, the Princes of the Gauls seeing there was no more
hope in their affairs, submitted themselves to the will of the Romans. Thus
ended the War of the Gauls, having never unto this day heard speak nor read
of a greater, be it for the obstinacy of courage, or the resolution of
Soldiers, or the cruelty of battles, or the great slaughter of men, or the
greatness of Armies: Although the counsel, the enterprise, and the daily
advice were vnprofitables For that the Gauls manage their affairs by rage
and fury, not by reason. Of whom we might have considered in how short a time
they have been chased out of their natural Country by the Romans, in leaving
them a small portion within the Alps, we have thought it good to relate
summarily their first attempts, the success of affairs, and finally their
last ruins: For that I hold it fitting for a History, to make such accidents
known to those of future times: to the end that our men for want of knowing
them, may not easily fear the rash descents which Barbarians do often make:
and that they rather try their fortune, than to omit any thing that is
necessary, nor to subject themselves unto them: Certainly such people are
easily and without difficulty broken and defeated, if they resist their first
fury. I imagine that they which have written the Gests of the Persians against
the Grecians, and of the Gauls against the Delphiens, have done a great favor
to the Grecians to fight for the liberty of the Country. There is no doubt but
a man will not be amazed for riches, forces, or the multitude of men, if he
fights for the defense of his Country, if he has before his eyes the actions
of those times, and consider how many thousands of men, what forces and what
Armies, the virtue of Soldiers with valor and reason has vanquished, broken
and defeated. The Grecians terrified by the Gaults.
The Grecians have not only been ^errified by the Gauls in former times, but
also many times in our age: which is the thing which has moved me most to
relate their actions summarily, beginning with the Original. But to return
where we left, after that Asdruball General of the Carthaginians had continued
eight years in Spain, he was in the end traitorously slain in the Night in
his lodging by a Gaul, Asdrubal slain
by reason of some private hatred: He was not only excellent and expert in
the Art of War, but was so eloquent to move the hearts of men, as he much
augmented the Carthaginians Empire. Then they gave the charge of the Army which
was in Spain to Hannibal, being then a young Man, for that he had a good
beginning, and a wonderful great courage for his age. Who at his coming made
declaration that he would be an Enemy to the Romans, the which fell out soon
after. From that time the Romans and the Carthaginians jealous of one another.
To speak the truth, the Carthaginians grew labored secretly to surprise them
for that they had chased them out of Sicily. On the other side the Romans
knowing their intent, gave no great credit unto them: so as it might easily
be conceived the War would soon break out. At the same time the Achaiens
with Phillip King of Macedon, and their Allies, made War against the
Etoliens, which they called the War of the Allies.

As we have related the War which the Romans made against the Carthaginians
in Sicily and in Affricke, and the things which followed, and being now come
according to the order of our preparation, to the beginning of the War
betwixt the Allies, and to the second of the Carthaginians, which they call the
War of Hannibal, seeing we have resolved to begin our course with those
times, it is reasonable we should come to the Gests and Exploits of the
Grecians: to the end that making by this means a preparation of all parts, we
may begin the History which we have resolved on, when as we shall come to the
same end of all things.

As therefore we have not undertaken to write the actions only of one Nation
or another, as other Historiographers have done, as of the Grecians or
Persians, but of all the parts of the world together, which are come to our
knowledge, (for that this present time has been of great use, whereof we will
speak more amply in another place) it shall be fitting to make a summary
mention of the most known Nations and Countries of the whole World, before the
beginning of our work.

In regard of the actions of the Asians and Egyptians, it shall be sufficient
to deliver those of our time: considering that many have written the deeds of
times past, whereof no man is ignorant: Neither is there any thing innouated,
which is not according to the Commentaries of Historiographers. In regard of
the people of Achaia, and the house of Macedon, it is fitting to search out the
times past summarily: As for that which concerns the Macedonians, the proof
will be easy: And as for the Achaiens, there has been made (as we have
formerly said) an augmentation and wonderful accord in our time. All Mor^a
reduced into ^ league.
For when as many labored formerly to reduce Morea to one accord, and could
not effect it, considering that all men aim more at their private profit, than
the liberty of the Country, there has been at this day made so great a
change, as they have not only contracted friendship, and a strict league, but
moreover they use the same Laws, the same weight, the same measure, the same
money, and more, the same Princes, the same Council, and the same Judges: So
as there is no defect in Morea for the making of a Burgess, but that they
dwelt not all in one Town: All the rest was alike and the same thing.

It shall not be therefore unfitting to show how the Name of the Achaiens has
first reigned in Morea. The Name of the Achei^s well entertained in Morea.
You must understand that they which were first so called, had no better
Country, nor more Towns, nor more Wealth, nor more virtue. Without doubt the
Arcadians and Lacedaemonians do far exceed the other people of Morea, both in
number of men and Towns: Neither is there any Nation in Greece which passes
them in prowess and virtue. What is the cause then that these men whom we
have named, and the other people of Morea, have willingly suffered not only the
Comminalty of the Achaiens, but also to take the Name? It were a folly to say
that it was by chance. Wherefore it were better to seek the cause without the
which we cannot finish those things which are done with reason, nor those
which seemne to be done without it. For my part I conceive it was the
equality, and the common liberty which was kept amongst them all, as a certain
president of a true Commonwealth: For there is no City in all Greece, where
there are found better Laws. Behold the cause which has caused the greatest
part of Morea willingly to follow this Commonwealth Some thorough reason and
parswasion, others forced by little and little with the time, and yet they have
presently pacified their discontents. And for that they did no^ from the
beginning leave more to one then to another, but would have all things equal
to all men, it presently brought the Achei^s to this great Authority, using two
means of great efficacy, that is, Equality and Clemency: Behold the cause
which we must imagine, for the which all Morea being of one will and accord,
attained to this prosperity and peace wherein we see it at this day.

It is true, that this manner of living, and means of government of a
Commonwealth was long observed by the Acheins: the which is probable by the
testimony of many witnesses. Yet we will produce but one or two at this time.
You must understand that at what time a Company of the Pythagorians were burnt
for a secret conspiracy in the Region of Italy, The Pythagorians burnt in Italy.
which they then called great Greece: It happened that the Country and the
Towns were much afflicted with murders and sedition, by a strange alteration
of Commonweals whose Princes were wickedly slain. And therefore Ambassadors
came from all parts to pacify their debates. Who leaving all the rest, they
referred themselves in all their quarrels to that which the Acheins should
decree. Soon after they resolved to use their Laws, and to frame their
Commonwealth like unto theirs. Without doubt the Crotoniates, Sybarites, and
Caulonites, after they had ended their quarrels in a friendly manner, edified a
Temple in public, to Jupiter Omarie, where they might assemble the people,
and give them iustructions. Moreover having accepted the Institutions and Laws
of the Acheins, they would only live in them, and erect their Commonwealth.
But the tyranny of Denis of Syracusa and the Gauls, who at that time spoiled
the Country, The Lacedaemonians and Thebains.
hindered them from bringing their enterprise to an end. Moreover, after the
defeat of the Lacedaemonians beyond all hope, before Luctres, and that they of
Thebes had already troubled the Empire of Gre^ce, there was a great mutiny and
a strange combustion throughout all Greece, namely, betwixt the Lacedaemonians
and the Thebains: For that the Lacedaemonians conceived they had been
vanquished, and the others did not think they had gotten the Victory.
Notwithstanding either of them by a common consent made choice of the Acheins
among all the Grecians, to whose judgment they submitted themselves touching
their quarrels, not having so much regard to their forces or power (for in
truth it was the least of all the Provinces of Greece) as to the faith and
justice of the people, which at that time was held great in the opinion of the
World. It is true, they had then but bare virtue, having done nothing worthy of
fame or estimation. Wherefore their comminalty did not increase much for that
they had not any Lord which was worthy to govern them, for that they had been
always kept under by the Empire of the Lacedaemonians or Macedonians.

But after by succession of time they had found Governors worthy of their
estate, they presently purchased honor and glory. They reconciled all Morea,
which was an excellent work: Arate.
whereof no man doubts but Arate the Sicyonien had been the Author and
contriuer: the which Philopomene the Megalopolitein finished, and afterward
confirmed: and that Licerta was the third which amplified and augmented it, and
subsequently all his Companions. Hereafter we will endeavor as much as the
Subject shall require, to relate their deeds, the manner and the time: Yet we
will make a summary mention of the actions of Arate at this time, and
hereafter, for that he has comprehended all things in his Commentaries
according unto truth plainly and amply. But as for others our discourse shall
be something more diligent and more copious.

It is true, that in my opinion, the declaration would be more easy, and the
History more plain to those that desire to know it, if we take it from the
time, when as the Acheins, who had been dispersed into diverse Cities by the
Princes of Macedon, drew themselves again together as it were in one body, and
afterward they augmented in such sort, as they came to this great amplitude
whereof we have hitherto spoken in particular, and which continues unto this
day.

They of Patras and the Dymensorins made a league together, A league betwixt
the Dymensorins and them of Patra.
in the hundred and four and twentieth Olympiade, at such time as Ptolomy the
Son of Lagus, Lysimachus, Seleucus, and Ptolomy Ceraunien dyed, without doubt
they all dyed during this Olimpiade. Behold in what estate the Acheins were in
former times: Tisamenes.
They began to be governed by Kings, at such time as Tysamenes the Son of
H^restes chased from Lacedemonia, after the descent of Heraclites, held the
Country which is about Acheia. After whom Kings governed continually by
succession until the time of Sygus. Sygus.
After whom the Regal power began to be tedious, for that the Children of
Sygus did not govern the Province legally, but by Tyranny. Wherefore they
chased away their Kings, and governed in common: wherein they lived diversely
according to the diversity of the times, until the days of Alexander and
Phillip, yet striving with all their means to govern their Commonweals in a
Comminalty, which contained twelve Towns, who are yet in being, except Olena
and Elix which an Earthquake swallowed up before the Battle of Leuctres. The
alliance of twelve Cities.
Behold the Cities, Patras, Dymes, Phare, Tritee, Leanty, Egire, Pelleue,
Bure, Cerannie, Carynie, Olene and Elix.

But in the time of Alexander, and before the Olimpiade which we have
mentioned, they grew into so great dissension, namely for the Kings of Macedon,
that the Towns thus divided, held it would be a great good unto them to make
War one against another. So as some drew unto them the forces of Demetrius
and Cassander, and soon after those of Antigonus: The others were employed by
the Kings, whereof there were many at that time in Greece. But in the hundred
and four and twentieth Olimpiade, as we have said, they began again to be
reconciled, The beginning of the league.
at such time as Pyrrhus King of Epirus past into Italy.

First, they of Patras, Dymes, Tritee, and Phare, were reconciled, when as
there was no title of common alliance betwixt them. Five years after they of
Egire chased away their Garrison, and joined to the rest: whom the Buriens
followed killing their King: and soon after the Cerauniens.

When as Iseas (who at that time was King of the C^rauniens) saw that they of
Egire had chased away their Garrison, Iseas King.
and they of Bure had slain their King; seeing himself in a manner inuolued
with War, he relinquisht the principallity, leaving the administration of
the Commonweal to the Acheins, after the Covenants concluded with them to
save his life. But why have we brought these things from so far? To the end
first that the World may know by what means, and at what time, and who were
the first among the Acheins, which rectified this comminalty again, the which
at this day we see flourish: And that knowing their order, every man may
easily believe not only our History, but also our actions. Believe me, they
have always observed one course concerning the government of their
Commonwealth, and one reason by the which keeping continually an equallity
among them, and defeating those who of themselves, or by their Kings labored
to take their Country, they have in the end prevailed in all their interprises,
as well by their own forces as by the help of their Allies.

Finally those things which have been since done in this Province, ought to be
attributed to the Acheins, who being companions to the ^omanes in many great
affairs, have not attributed any thing unto themselves of that which was done,
having no other thought but of liberty, and the common accord of Morea. But we
shall see it more plainly by their actions.

All these Cities which we have named, did administer the Commonwealth from
the beginning five and twenty years with the Acheins, making choice of one
Questor and two Captains. Afterward they resolved to have but one, who should
have the charge of their principal affairs. Geryne^.
But Gerynee was the first which had this honor. When his four years were
expired, Arate.
Arate the Sicyonien was chosen at the age of twenty years. Who presently by
his singular Virtue, and great courage, freed the Country from Tyrants, and
restored the Commonwealth of the Acheins, to the which from the beginning he
bare a great affection. Some time after having governed eight years, he was
chosen again: The Fort of Corinthe taken by Arate.
And then he began to think of the means by the which he might take the
Fort of Corinthe, which Antigonus then held. The which after he had effected,
he freed all Morea from great fear: And when as the Corinthians were freed
from Tyranny, he joined them to the Acheins. Some few days after he did the
like to the Megareins.

These things happened the year before the battle of the Carthaginians, by the
which they were forced to abandon S^cily, and to pay tribute unto the Romans.
When as Arate had in a short time finished all his interprises, he spent the
remainder of his life in the government of the Common weal, studying by all
means how to chase the Macedonians out of Morea, to ruin the Kings, and to
preserve the common liberty of the Country. And therefore he resisted the
attempts and practices of Antigonus Gonate, whilst he lived, and the
covetousness of the Etoliens, who with Antigonus grew so audacious and
ouer-we^ning, as they were not ashamed to divide betwixt them by a common
consent the Towns of Acheia. But after the death of Antigonus, and that the
Acheins and Etoliens had made a league, when as Demetrius made War against
them, the dissentions and discords were somewhat pacified, and they contracted
a common and mutual friendship betwixt them.

But after the Death of Demetrius, who Reigned only ten yeare^, and at such
time when as the Romans p^ssed first into Sclauon^a, the Acheins made
themselves wonderful great: For all the Kings which Reigned in Morea fell into
de^paire, as well for the death of Demetrius who was their Commander and
Emperor, as for that they saw Arate strive with all his power, to deprive them
of their C^ownes, propounding to such as shall do it willingly great honors
and dignities, terrifying and using threats to such as should be obstinate and
wilful. Finally he did admonish them all to leave their Crowns, and restoring
the Country to liberty, they should embrace the League of the Acheins.
Wherefore Lysidas Lysidas.
the Megalopolitaine, who during the life of Demetrius, had wisely foreseen
future things, presently lays down his Crown. Aristomacus Aristomacus.
King of the Argiues, Xenon Xenon.
of the Hermionians, and Cleomines Cleomines.
of the Phliasiens, renounced their Royal Principallities, and joined
themselves to the League of the Acheins. But for that their Forces were by this
means grown wonderful great, the Etoliens as men ambitious by nature, The
envy of the Etolien^ against the Acheins.
envied them, and hoping to be able to break the League of the Towns which
were allied, as they had done in the beginning, they promised to Alexander to
share with him those of the Acarnaniens, and to Antigonus those of the Acheins.
By this means they gained under color of the same hope Antigonus then
Governor in Macedony, and left by Philip Tutor to his Son; Antigonus Tutour
to Phi^ips Son.
they also made Cleomines King of the Lacedaemonians. When as they saw that
Antigonus had the government of Macedony, who was a Soldier and an enemy to
the Acheins, for the loss of the Fort of Corinthe, they were of opinion, that
if the Lacedemontans were companions in this War, in assailing the Acheins on
all side they should easily defeat them. The which undoubtedly had happened, if
Arate a man of great Virtue and Courage, (which they did not consider) had not
taken upon him the defense of the others.

They began a most wicked War with all their Forces; wherein they were not only
frustrated in their expectance, but they made Arate more stout and Resolute,
being then Commander of the Acheins and the whole Nation, by his policy and
diligent providence in all things, as we shall see by that which follows. For
when like a man well advised, he had considered that the Etoliens were ashamed
to declare War against the Acheins, for the benefits they had lately received
from them during the War of Demetrius, and that for this cause they had
solicited the Lacedaemonians to attempt it: And that they were transported with
envy against the good Fortune of the Acheins, so as they were nothing incensed
against Cleomines, who had taken from them by stealth Tegea, Mantinea, and
Orthomene, very strong Towns of Etolia, but contrariwise they confirmed them
willingly unto him; and that moreover they sought all occasions of War, only
for a desire they had to Reign, the Acheins having never offended them,
suffering the King to violate his Faith unto them, and that by fraud he had
taken from them such rich Towns, to the end that the forces of Cleomenes
(increased by this means) might with more ease defeat the Comminalty of the
Acheins.

Arate then (as I have said) and the other Captains considering these things,
resolved not to declare any War, but only to resist the attempts of the
Lacedaemonians with all their power. Behold the first Resolution of the
Captains. But soon after when as they saw that Cleomenes built a City
without fear, which afterward was called Athenes, Athenes.
in the Country of the Megalopolitains, and that he declared himself an open
enemy to the Acheins, they make an assembly, where it was resolved to make open
War against the Lacedaemonians, and not by Dissimulation.

This War called Cleominique began thus at that time. The Cleomenique War.
In the which the Acheins began first to resist the Lacedaemonians with their
own Forces, without the help of any other, both for that they held it a
greater honor to defend their Country and Towns themselves then with
assistance of others: And they likewise indeauoured to entertayne their
friendship by all means with Ptolomy, fearing least he should be
discontented, if they should require succors from any others then from him.
But when the War was begun, and that Cleomenes in ruining the Commonweal,
had turned a just Empire into a Tyranny, A good confideration of Arate.
governing the War with Policy and Courage: Arate fore-eeing future things a
far off, as a man who understood the Counsel and presumption of the
Etoliens, was of opinion that they must break their attempts. And considering
that Antigonus was a man of great experience in the Art of War, and more
sound of his Faith then any other: The nature of Kings
Knowing that Kings by nature have neither friend nor Foe, measuring Friendship
and Hatred according to their profit, he resolved to address himself unto
him, and to let him visibly see the event of the War, and finally to make a
League with him. He had many reasons why he should not do it openly: For if
Cleomenes and the Etoliens had been advertised, they would have made greater
preparations for the War, and most of the Acheins would have left him, being
amazed at such an alteration, for that they would have thought, their
Commander would have fled to the enemy for refuge like a man in despair.
Wherefore to avoid these inconveniences, he not only kept these things
secret, but he spoke and did many things contrary to his thought, by the which
he showed the contrary of that which he^ practiced.

Seeing then the Megalopolitains to be more pressed with War then any other,
being neighbors to the Lacedaemonians, and having no hope to obtain succors
from the Acheins, being subject to the same War, and being moreover in League
and friendship with the Mac^donians, for that they had done great pleasures to
Philip the Son of Amyntas, there was no doubt but as soon as Cleomenes
should begin the War against them, they would require succors from Antigonus
and the Macedonians. Finally he declared his secret to Nicophanes and Cercides
Megalopolitains. They had been friends to his Father, Nicophanes.
and seemed fit men to manage this business. By their means he incites the
Megalopolitaines. to send an Embassy to the Acheins, to intrea^e them to
demand succors from Antigonus. The Megalopolitains send Nicophanes and
Cercides Cercides.
to the Acheins, A good invention of Arate.
with Commission after their consent to go to Antigonus, the which the Acheins
did easily allow. This Embassy went to King Antigonus, and let him understand
their Charge: and in regard of the Affairs which concern their Country, they
delivered only those things which were most necessary in few words: But they
made a long Discourse of the whole in general, as A^ate had instructed them.
They laid before him the attempts which the Etoliens and Cleomenes might make,
confessing that this War for the present was of great consequence for the
Acheins. But if the others prevailed in their interprize, it would be much more
dangerous for him. They make no doubt, but the Acheins being assailed at one
instant by these two forces, they would be easily ruined: So there is less
doubt, that if Cleomenes and the Etoliens have the Victory, that they will not
be satisfied therewith: For you must understand that Morea, no nor all Greece
cannot glut the covetousness of the Etoliens. In regard of the ambition of
Cleomenes, although he seems for the present not to affect any thing but the
principallity of Morea, yet if he prevail, he will never cease until he has
Conquered all Greece: Whereunto he can never attain before he has ruined the
principallity of Macedon.

By these reasons and such like, they move the King to think carefully of
things to come, and to consider what may seem fittest for his affairs,
whether to Allie himself to the Acheins and Beociens, and to make War
against Cleomenes touching the Empire of Greece, or leaving the party of so
many people, to have it soon after against the Etoli^ns, Beociens, Acheins,
and Lacedaemonians in Thessaly, for the principallity of Macedony. But if the
Etolie^s be ashamed, to seem to break the accord made with the Acheins,
during the War of Demetrius, and should still make show to persist in
friendship, as they did yet, the Acheins would be too strong to defend
themselves against Cleomenes. And therefore if Fortune favors them, they shall
not need any man's succor. But if contrariwise it should be rather for the
Etoliens, they entreated the King that he would be pleased to give them
succors, and that (not losing the opportunity of the time,) he would preserve
Morea, before it should be utterly ruined.

They said moreover that he had no reason to care at that time for Faith and
Recompense, and that Arate would find the means in the greatest heat of
affairs, to give him satisfaction, and that he would advertise him of the
time when he should need succors. When as Antigonus had heard the Embassy,
he did wonderfully commend the prudence of Arate, and made answer that he
was ready to undergo the danger. Moreover he wrote letters to the
Megalopolitains, by the which he sent them word that he was ready to give them
succors, so as it were with the consent of the Acheins.

This done Nicophanes and Cercides returned to their Country: Where after they
had delivered their Letters, they made report of the Kings good affection. The
Megalopolitains joyful of this news, sent an Embassy again to the Acheins,
entreating them to contract with Antigonus, and that they might rely in him
for all his business. Arate hearing all this by Nicophanes, and the good
affection the King bare unto the Acheins, and to himself, was wonderfully
joyful, both for that he was not frustrated of his hope, but for as much as
An^igon^s, (contrary to the hope of the Etoliens,) did not seem to fly his
friendship. He did not find that reasonable which the Megalopolitains aimed
at, that the Acheins should submit themselves under Antigonus in all this
War: The foresight of Arate.
For he was not of advice to require succors of any man but in extreme
necessity; and if that happened, he would not have it done at his request alone,
but by all the Acheins. In truth he feared that if Antigonus, having the
victory by the defeat of Cleomenes and the Lacedaemonians, should in the end
make any enterprise against the Comminalty of the Acheins, they should not lay
the blame upon him, as if he had indiscreetly given the advice for the drawing
of the King into their Country, who was offended for the taking of the Fort of
Corinthe.

When the Ambassadors of the Megalopolitains came into the Council, and had
made relation of Antigonus his Letters, and of the Kings love and affection,
and had made a remonstrance unto the Acheins for a peace with Antigonus, and
that it seemed the whole assembly found it good, Arate commended the Kings
affection, and the good desire of the whole assembly. Yet he let them
understand by many reasons that they should endeavor to keep their Towns and
Country with their own forces, but if they could not effect it, then they
could not do any thing more commendable and more profitable. But if Fortune
were contrary unto them, that they must first do all that could be possible:
And if there were no more hope, then they should require succors from their
friends. The whole assembly allowed easily of his Council; and it was
resolved, that for the present they should ordain no new thing, and that the
Acheins should manage this war alone.

But when as (during these negotiations) Ptolomy had furnished Cleomenes with
men, and other things necessary for the War, desiring by this means to make
him an enemy to Antigonus, for that he had greater hope to be able to Conquer
the Realm of Macedon by the means of the Lacedaemonians, then of the Acheins,
and that the Acheins were first Defeated by Cleomenes by a surprise near unto
Lyeea, and that afterward they made a great loss near unto the Town of
Megalopolis, and that finally the third time, they were so beaten, Defeated,
and slain, near unto the Town of Dy^ie in a place which they call
Hecatombee, as they were in a manner quite ruined: Diverse defeat^ of the Ach^^^.
Then Arate seeing himself environed with so many miseries, knew it was no
time to Dream, and that he was forced (as he had formerly resolved) to
demand succor from King Antigonus. For the effecting whereof he sent his
Son in Embassy to confirm the Articles of the agreement. Yet he was in
doubt and much troubled, for that he did not hope Antigonus would succor him,
if they did not deliver him for his security the Fort of Corinthe, which they
called Acrocorinthe with the Town: Neither did he see any means to deliver
it to the Macedonians without the consent of the Corinthians. And therefore he
deferred the Council to advise of the means of safety. In the mean time
Cleomenes glorious of his good Fortune, ouer-ran the whole Province, taking
Towns as well by persuasion as by terror. When by this means he had taken
Caphie, Pellene, Phene^, Argos, Phlie, Cleone, Epi^aure, Hermion, and Trizene,
and in the end Corinthe, he seated his Camp near unto the (...) of the
Sicyoniens, and by this means freed the Acheins of that (...) whereof we have
spoken. For when as Arate had the news, that the Corinthians had chased away
the Garrison of the Acheins, Acroc^rinthe yielded to Antigonus.
and ^ent an Embassy to Cleomenes to deliver him the City, having found a
good occasion, he yields unto Antigonus the Fort which the Acheins held. By
this means he repaired the wrong which he had done unto the King, and it
served him for a pledge, and as it were a Fort and retreat for the future
War.

But when as Cleomenes understood the league which the Acheins had made with
Antigonus, and that the Fort had been freely delivered unto him, he presently
raised his Siege, and seated his Camp near unto Isthmus, and rampred
diligently with Pallisadoes and Ditches, the place which lies betwixt the
Fortress and the Mountains, which they of the Country call Onies, as if he
had a hope to make himself Lord of all Morea. Antigonus who had his Army
ready, expected only the opportunity of the time. But when he saw by those
things which had happened, according to the advertisement of Arate, that the
time approached of Cleomenes voyage into Thessaly, he causes his Army to
march toward Isthmus by Beocia, having advertised the Acheins of his affairs:
For the Etoliens being disconted at his descent, sent him word, that he should
not pass within the streights of Thermophiles, and if he undertook it, they
would take Arms to hinder his passage. Thus Antigonus and Cleomenes lodged
their Armies before one another. The one to enter into Morea and the other to
keep his Frontier. And although the Acheins had received great losses, Reuolte
of Aripote of Argos.
yet they fainted not. But being suddenly advertised of the reuolte of
Aristote of Argos against Cleomenes, they relieved him under the conduct of
Timoxene, Argos taken by the Acheins.
and took the Town of Argos, which was of great consequence unto them: For by
this means the fury of Cleomenes was much abated, and the Soldiers hearts
broken, as appeared plainly: For although that Cleomenes Army was much
stronger by reason of the opportunity of places, and abundance of victuals,
having also good and resolute Soldiers, yet there was so great and sudden an
alteration after the taking of Argos, that Cleomenes leaving all, made a
retreat, sauouring of a flight: So much he feared that he should be
enclosed by his cruel Enemies.

From thence he marched directly to Argos, where he made great attempts to
carry it by assault. But for that the Acheins resisted like brave men on the
one side, Acrocorinthe taken by Antigonus.
and the Argiues on the other, for fear of the fault committed, he was
deceived in his hope: And in passing by Mantinia, he led his Army to Sparta.
When as Antigonus was entered into Morea, he took Acrocorinthe. Then he made
haste to go to Argos, where he much commended the Argiues, and settled an
order for the affairs of the City. From thence he returned again into Arcadia
with his Army, and chased away the Garrisons out of those Forts which Cleomenes
had built, the which he restored to the Megalopolitains passing by the Region
Egitane. Then he went to Egia, where he called an assembly of the Acheins: and
made a great discourse of the present affairs, and showed them in few words
the times to come. Finally, being created chief of the whole league, he past
the Winter in the Countries of the Corinthians and Sicyoniens with his Army.
Then in the Spring he went to the field, to whom the Acheins joined, and being
come within three days to the Town of Tegee, he besieged it. The Tegetains
seeing the Macedonians very busy in making of Trenches, Mines, Tegee yielded
unto Antigonus.
and all other preparations to take the Town, they yielded, being void of all
hope: Whereas after he had settled a good order, Antigonus marched suddenly to
Laconice. By this means approaching near unto Cleomenes, who kept upon the
Frontiers, he had some small encounters with the Enemy. In the mean time they
were advertised by their Spies, that there were succors come from Orchomene to
Cleomenes. Wherefore Antigonus turned head to Orchomene, Orchomene taken with
other Towns.
and takes it without resistance. From thence he besieged Mantin^a, which was
also presently yielded. Then he led the Legions to Herca and Telphusa, the
which in like manner were yielded in a short time. After this in the beginning
of Winter, he sent the Macedonians to their houses, and retired with the
mercenaries to Egia, there to consult of the present affairs.

At that times Cleomenes advertised that Antigonus had dismissed his A^my, and
that he stayed at Egi^, which is above three days journey from Megalopolis, a
vast Town, and ill peopled: especially for that the greatest part had been
slain in former battles as we have said, near unto Licea, and La^dicea: and
that moreover at that time it was not carefully kept, by reason of the presence
of Antigonus, he had a hope to surprise it. Wherefore he marched suddenly,
being guided by some Messeniens, who being chased and banished from their
Country, had retired to Megalopolis: and brought them by Night into the City.
But day being come, he was in danger to be defeated with his whole Army,
considering the great resistance the Megalopolitains made: the which happened
unto him three Months before, when he ass^iled a City seated in Colea. It is
true, that in the end he had the Victory, as well by reason of the multitude of
his men, as for that he had formerly gotten the places of advantage.

After he had taken and spoiled the City, and chased away the Megalopolitains,
he razed Megalopolin razed.
it utterly, to the end they should have no more hope to re-edifie it. In my
opinion he did it tending to that which the Lionenses, the Megalopolitains,
and the Stimphal^^ns with other bordering people, conceive, that Traitors, or
those which love reuoltes, are never in safety. Without doubt the wickedness
of one man blemished all the virtue of the Clitoriens: This was Thearce Thearce.
whom with reason the Clitoriens denied to be borne in their Country, saying,
he was of Orchomene, and the Son of some stranger. Moreover, for that there
are some which prefer Philarchus before al others that have written this
History, although that many times he speaks and judges of things contrary to
Arate, I have thought it good, nay rather necessary, not to conceal this: To
the end they may discern truth from falsehood, and the rather for that we have
followed Arate. He has spoken many things throughout the whole History as
Affection has transported him, which are not needful to debate at this
present, holding those things to be delivered by us, which happened at such time
as we Write, that is to say, during the Cleomenique War: For that they would
be more then sufficient to discover the errors and faults of this Author.

First when he labors to set forth the cruelty of Antigonus, and of the
Macedonians, and moreover that of Arate and the Acheins, he said that as soon
as he had Conquered the Mantiniens, they caused them to suffer great outrages
and cruelties, and that the City which was one of the noblest and most
ancient of Arcadia, fell into so great misery and ruin, as it moved all
Greece to weep and lament. And when as afterward he seeks to make the
cruelty seem greater, and to move the Readers hearts, he relates a burning of
Women, their hair scattered up and down, their Paps naked, the tears and
lamentations made by men and women, who dragged after them their little
Children and their Parents broken with age. This he does often throughout his
whole History, to let every man see the agrauating of their miseries. Leaving
then this baseness and effeminacy of his heart, let us seek the things which
are most proper and profitable for the History.

A Historiographer ought not to move the affections of men, The duty of a
Historiographer.
nor seek occasions fit for it, neither let him pursue the miseries of men
(the which belongs to the makers of Tragedies) but let him deliver truly the
sayings and doings of men, although they be not great. Without doubt a History
and a Tragedy, tend not to one and the same end, but rather are quite contrary.
What is required in a Tragedy.
For they must labor in a Tragedy to draw by conjecture the hearts of the
Auditors to Hope, Fear, Care, Pleasure, and such like affections. But in a
History he must employ his whole endeavor to relate truly the sayings and
doings of men. Wherefore things that are likely and coniecturall, are necessary
in the one, to abuse the Assistants, and those which are true in this being
Written for the profit of the Readers.

You must understand likewise that this Historiographer many times does not
yield the cause in his History, nor the reason of things, without the which
they cannot easily move any to pity, or indignation in humane affairs. But
what is he that will not find it strange to see a Citizen whipped: yet if any
one be so by reason of his offense, we find it reasonable. And if any one
strikes a free man to punish and amend him, shall we not hold him an honest
man and praise worthy? Murder in a Citizen is likewise forbidden, and
severely punished: But if any one kills a Thief or an Adulterer, is he not held
for innocent? And if any one kills a Traitor to his Country, or a Tyrant, shall
he not be commended by all the World, held dear and honored? We must
therefore look to the end in all things, and to the intention of the man, not
to that which is acted, but to the causes and Discourses, with consideration of
the differences. The Mantiuiens leaving first the Commonweal of the Acheins,
gave themselves and their Country willingly to the Etoliens, The reuolte of
the Mantiniens.
and soon after to Cleomenes. In the mean time, whilst they lived under the
Lacedaemonians, the Acheins took them again under the Conduct of Arate, four
years before the Descent of Antigonus: where they were so far from being
punished for the offense committed, as this easy and sudden re^vnion of two
people into one Commonwealth, seemed incredible to the whole World.

For as soon as Arate was entered, he forbad his men to touch their good:
Calling the Burgesses afterward together, wishing them not to care, and that
they should enjoy their goods, and be assured to live in peace, as long as they
were under the Acheins Commonweal. The Mantiniens who seemed to be without
hope, The courteous usage of Arate to the Mantinien^.
were wonderfully rejoiced at the words of Arate: Wherefore they presently
changed their opinion, receiving those into their Houses, to whom formerly they
had been deadly enemies, with whom they did communicate their Goods and
Wealth. Finally, they omitted nothing of that which seemed necessary for the
settling of a firm friendship; and in truth it was not without cause. I do
not know if ever any fell into the hands of more gracious enemies, or being
fallen into so great inconveniences, have relieved and raised themselves with so
little loss: the which proceeded from the humanity of Arate and the Acheins.
Afterward seeing a far off the seditions which were renewed amongst them,
and the practice of the Etoliens and Lacedaemonians, they send an Embassy to
the Acheins, to deliver their Town into their protection and to receive a
Garrison. Who presently levied three hundred men, and sent them to Mantinea,
these three hundred men of the Acheins nation, leaving their Country and all
their estates, they remained at Mantinea to preserve their liberty. They had
moreover two hundred Soldiers that were strangers.

Soon after there grew a sedition among the Mantiniens; wherefore they called
the Lacedaemonians, delivering them the Town; The great villainy committed by
the Mantinien^.
and to the end their wickedness might be full and complete, they murdered
all the Acheins; a crime which was most execrable. For seeing they would leave
the party and friendship of the Acheins, they should at the least have sent
back the Garrison safe into their Country. It is a Custom which enemies
observe daily by a Common Law. But to the end they might with more ease show
their affection to Cleomenes and the Lacedemo^ians, there proceeded to this
great cruelty and baseness, who in breaking the Law of Nations would not spare
their Friends. Seeing then they have practiced such great cruelty toward
those, who having lately taken their Town, entreated them like men without
offense, and now defended and kept their Town, of what pains shall we judge
them worthy? What punishment may we ordain for so foul an outrage? Shall
they be sold with their wives and Children? But by the Law of Arms they may
do it to those, which have not committed such crimes nor such cruelties. They
were therefore worthy of a greater punishment, and a more grievous example.
Wherefore if they have suffered no more but that which Philarchus mentioned, we
must believe that the Grecians were not moved to pity, but rather commended
the judgment of the Acheins; who had resolved that so great a cruelty (the
like whereof had never been spoken of) should be grievously punished.

Seeing then the Mantiniens at that time had no other harm, The Mantiniens
sold.
but the loss of their goods, and were sold by their enemies, who will not
hold this Historiographer to be a liar, and moreover to have Written incredible
things: And to the end he might show his ignorance, he has not observed that
the Acheins at the same time did not the like unto the Tegeates, whom they
took in battle: For if the cruelty of the Acheins had been the cause
thereof, there is no doubt but the Tegeates had suffered in like manner. But
seeing that this Rigor fell only upon the Mantiniens, it is apparent that
the cause of their choler was diverse. Moreover, this same Historiographer
tells us, Arist^macus.
that Aristomacus the Argine, of a noble Family, and of an ancient Tyrannical
Race, was Tyrant of Argos, who being taken by Antigonus and the Acheins, and
brought to Cenchrea, he suffered the most unjust Death that ever man endured.

He makes him moreover (as it is his custom) to cast out lamentable cries, the
night that he was strangled: And that the neighbors terrified partly with the
cruelty, and partly desirous to know what it was, some of them wonderfully
incensed ran thither. He also sets down other effeminate things, which we
will leave for the present, being content with that which we have here
related. For my part I conceive that if Aristomacus had done no other thing
against the Acheins, but to turn the Commonweal into ruin, and the liberty
of the Country into Tyranny, that he has worthily deserved very great
punishment. Although that this gentle Historiographer desirous to attribute
great glory unto him, and to beg pity from the Auditors, by a commemoration
of the pains which he endured, he does not once say, that he was a Tyrant, but
that he was descended of a Tyrannical Race. What could he say worse, or more
pernicious? For the very name is the field where all cruelty is sown, and
which imbraceth all the outrages and villainies of men. And admit that
Aristomacus had endured great torments, as Philarchus says, yet he was not
sufficiently punished for that which he committed in one day: for when as Arate
entered into Argos with a Troop of Acheins, without Discovery, laboring to
restore the Argiues to their liberty, he was in the end forced to leave the
Town, for that he found not any man would take Arms, for the fear they had
of this Tyrant.

Wherefore Aristomacus taking his occasion (for that they had consented to the
coming of the Acheins) put to Death fourscore Citizens The cruelty of
Aristomacus.
in the presence of his familiars. Believe me it will be tedious to relate the
cruelty which he committed in his life time: He held it of his Predecessors by
right of inheritance. And therefore we must not think they have done him
wrong, if they have made him serve for an example with torments: For it would
have been much more unworthy, that so wicked a man after the murder of so
many, and after^ many thefts and spoils, should have died unpunished like an
Innocent. Neither can they charge Antigonus nor Arate of cruelty, to have put a
Tyrant to death in Prison, whom they had taken in open War, and whom they
might with reason and honor have taken during a peace, and have put him to a
cruel death. But of what punishment will not you hold him worthy, who besides
all these things brake his accord with the Acheins. A little before he had
relinquisht the tyranny, being destitute of all hope and succors after the
death of Demetrius. At what time the Acheins did not only save him, but
entertain him so courteously and graciously, as they remitted all the wrongs
which he had done during his Reign, and gave him great aduancements in their
Commonwealth. Finally, they made him Chief of the Acheins. But this wicked
man amongst all others, forgetting that great humanity and clemency, began
presently to plot how he might make a league with Cleomenes, retiring himself
in that greatest need soon after to the Enemy: whereby the Acheins were in
great danger. Who some few days after was taken in War, was he not worthy to
dye in the Night in the Prison at Cenchrea, as Philarchus says, Aristo^acus
strangled*
but he should rather have been carried throughout all M^rea, and after that
he^ had suffered infinite torments, to have dyed cruelly. Yet he was only
strangled in Prison, although he had committed all sorts of Villainy.

Moreover, the same Historiographer holds a long discourse of the miseries of
the Mantiniens, as if he thought it were the duty of an Historiographer only
to relate cruel and unjust actions. In regard of the virtue and magnanimity of
the Megalopolitains, which they showed at that time, he makes no mention, as if
the duty of an History were rather to remember the wickedness and vices of
men, than things well and commendably done: Whereas the Readers of Histories
shall reap more profit by deeds which are worthy to be embraced and followed,
than those which are unjust, and to be avoided. Moreover he pursues his
Discourse, how that Cleomenes took the City, and that he sent Letters to
Messena to the Megalopolitains, aduising them to return into their Country
which was whole, and to be of his party: And how the Megalopolitains could not
endure they should finish the reading of the Letters, and could hardly forbear
from doing outrage to the messenger, with many other petty triuiall things, to
show the magnificence and modesty of Cleomenes toward his Enemies. But he
forbeares to tell that which followed, and which was very proper to the
History, which is the praise and memory of things well done. But who hindered
him? If we hold them honest men who in words and will maintain a War for
their Allies, and if we do not only praise with admiration, but also give
thanks with Presents, to those that endure the spoil of their Country with
fire and sieges, The great (...) Megalopolitains
what commendations shall we give then to the Megalopolitains? what affection
shall we bear unto them? Shall it not be great and ample? First, they left
the Province to Clomenes, and abandoned their own ^ountrey, rather than to
break their Faith with the Acheins. Finally, although that contrary to hope,
and the opinion of all the world, they might have returned into their Country
with safety, yet they desired rather to be banished, forsaking their houses,
Sepulchers, Temples and goods, and finally, all their estates, than to be taxed
to have broken their Faith with their Allies. Was there ever any thing done
that was more rare and excellent? Whereunto then should an Historiographer make
his Auditors more attentive? With what examples could he better exhort men to
keep their Faith, and to follow things well done. But Philarchus makes no
mention hereof, and is in my opinion blind, when as brave exploits which are
worthy of memory offer themselves.

He says moreover, The third part of the booty is due to the General.
that the Lacedaemonians made a spoil within Megalopolis of three Millions, and
six hundred thousand Crowns, whereof Cleomenes according to the custom had
twelve hundred thousand. But who will not marvel at the beastliness and
ignorance of this man, touching the Riches and power of Greece: the which are
things which an Historiographer ought to know. Truly, I dare boldly affirm,
that they could not gather together this Sum in all Morea, out of the money
of all their moueables, excepting their persons: I mean not in the time when
it was impouerished by the oppressions of the Kings of Macedony, and by the
diverse Wars which they had amongst themselves, but at such time when as all
the Towns were firmly united together, and when as Fortune seemed to smile on
them. But to show that what we say, proceeds not from ouer-weening or want of
reason, it appears thus. Who knows not that when the Acheins joined to the
Thebeins, made War against the Lacedaemonians, and that they were to raise an
Army of ten thousand men, and another at Sea of an hundred Triremes, and that
they had calculated the charge, it not only emptied their public Cofers, but
also their houses and the whole Province: and that finally, they could hardly
draw together three Millions, and six hundred thousand Crowns, whereof there
wanted an hundred and fifty thousand.

You must not hold that strange which I now affirm of Morea. There is not any
man that dare assure, that the spoil of Megalopolis at that time, did amount
to above ninescore thousand Crowns: and that the people, as well Burgesses as
Slaves retired to Messina. Whereof behold a great argument: For when the
Mantineans were not less strong, nor of meaner estate than the Arcadians, as
this Historiographer says, were environed by a siege, so as when they yielded,
no man could steal away, nor carry away any thing: Yet the whole spoil, The
pillage of Mantinia came to ninescore thousand Crowns.
reckoning it at the uttermost, accompting the bodies, was esteemed but
ninescore thousand Crowns. Moreover, who will not wonder at that which he
says afterward, that an Embassy from Ptolomy came ten days before this
battle, to let Cleomenes understand that he was not resolved to contribute any
longer to the charges of this War, and that he advised him to agree with
Antigonus? The which Cleomenes hearing, he resolved to hazard the battle,
before his Soldiers should hear the news, lest they should mutine, when they
should be out of hope of their pay. But if it were true, that he had lately
gotten three Millions, and six hundred thousand Crowns in Megalopolis, what
need has he of Ptolomyes contribution, seeing that ninescore thousand Crowns
were more then sufficient to defeat Antigonus forces? Is it not a great
weakness in him to say, that Cleomanes did expect pay for his Soldiers from
Ptolomy, and withal, that he had taken so great a booty of money in
Megalopolis? My Discourse should be long if I should pursue the vices wherewith
this good Historiographer does generally abound: but this shall suffice for
this present.

After the taking of Megalopolis, An A^^y levied by Cleomenes.
at such time as Antigonus wintred in the City of Argos, Cleomenes drew his
Army together, as soon as the opportunity of the time would give him leave.
And having preached unto his men, he entered into the Country of Argos. Many
blamed him for this attempt, as being too bold and rash, in regard of the
situation of the Country, which is difficult and strong by Nature. Others
which were of a better Judgment, held it wisely done. For when as he saw that
Antigonus had left the greatest part of his Army in the Country, and had with
him but a small handful of Mercenary Soldiers, he had a conceit, that he
might easily enter the Province without danger: And if he put all unto fire and
Sword, even unto the Walls of the City, the Argiues through necessity would
charge Antigonus, who thorough his baseness must endure such outrages.
Finally, if he be forced to come to fight, moved with the cries of the people,
who shall hinder him to have the Victory, seeing he has a greater Troop of
men? If he does not abandon the City as it is fitting, he can carry back his
men without danger into his Country, after that he has overrun the
Champion: Leaving a great amazement and terror to his Enemies, and assuring
the hearts of his own Soldiers. Antigonus blamed.
The which succeeded according to his project. For when the people saw the
whole Province thus spoiled, they began to blame Antigonus: who notwithstanding
discharging the Duty of a wise and discreet Captain, would not go to field.
Cleomenes in the mean time ouer-ran their whole Country without fear. By
this means he returned safely into his Country, after that he had at
pleasure ruined the Province, and left a great amazement amongst the Argiues,
and made his own men more hardy for the future War.

But when the Spring came, the Macedonians and the Acheins returning from
wintering, The number of Nations which were in Antigonus Army.
went to field: Antigonus marched to Laconice with his Army, consisting of ten
thousand Macedonians, three thousand Archers, three hundred Horse, a thousand
Bowmen, and likewise as many of the Gauls: Moreover, three thousand Foot
which were Mercinaries, with three hundred Horse, and about a thousand
Megalopolitains armed after the manner of the Macedonians, whereof Cerci^es had
the leading. As for the Allies, he had two thousand Foot of Bau^ere, and two
hundred Horse: a thousand Foot of the Epir^tes, and fifty Horse: and as many
of the Acarnanians: and besides all these, a thousand and six hundred
Sclanonians, whereof Demetrius of Phare was Captain. Thus the whole Army
consisted of twenty eight thousand Foot, and twelve hundred Horse. Cleomenes
being advertised by his Spies of the Enemies descent, he placed forces upon
the passages, by the which they might enter into his Country, fortifying them
with Trenches and Trees cut down: And he himself went with his Army to a
passage which they call Sellasia, thinking as it happened, that the Enemy would
take that way. Sellasia.
His Army was about twenty thousand men. There were two Mountains in this
passage, whereof the one is called Eua by the people of the Country, Eua.
and the other Olympus. Olympus.
There is a way betwixt both which runs along a River unto Sparta. When as
Cleomenes had lodged himself in these two Mountains, and had carefully
fortified them with Trenches and Pallisadoes, he put the Soldiers which were
drawn together with the Allies into Eua, Euclide.
whereof his Cozen Euclide had the Command, and stayed himself in that of
Olympus with the Lacedemon^ans and Mercenaries. Moreover, he placed his
Horsemen in the Plain, with some of the Mercenaries, upon the two Banks of
the River.

When as Antigonus was come into those places, and finding the situation of
them, and the wonderful industry of Cleomenes to dispose of his Army, he was
not resolved to fight at that time. And therefore he camped near unto him,
upon the bank of the River of Gorgile: whereas staying some days, Antigonus
Camp seated upon the Banks of Gorgile.
he turned about the Country and the Enemies Camp and sought to draw them to
battle by skirmishes. But when he found nothing without defense, for that the
Providence of Cleomenes had carefully rampired all places, he gave over his
enterprise: But in the end they resolved by a common consent, to make an end of
their War by a battle. Behold how Fortune had drawn together two great
Captains, equal in virtue, Counsel and Wisdom. The order of Antigonus
Battle.
Thus Antigonus opposed in Front to those which held the Mountain of Eua, the
Macedonians with their Targets, and the Scla^onians: and he put the Leginaries
in diverse bands to succor the one and the other: to whom he gave for
Commander, Alexander, the Son of Ameta, and Demetrius of Phare.

After these marched the Acarnanians and they of Candy: Finally, he placed two
thousand Acheins for a supply, to succor them at need. Then he set his
Horsemen near unto the Riuer-side in Front of the Enemies Horse, whereof
Alexander had the charge with two thousand Foote-men. As for Antigonus, he
lodged near unto Mount Olympus with the bands of Adventurers, and the
Macedonians: where he resolved to fight with Cleomenes. When he had put the
Mercenaries into battle, he caused the Battalion of the Mac^donians to march.
The place which was straight, would not suffer them to do otherwise. They had
given charge to the Sctauonians to begin the battle, as soon as they should
see a white cloth, which should be advanced near unto Mount Olimpus, at the
foot whereof they lodged at Night, under the River of Gorgile. The
Megalopolitains also with the Horsemen were to enter the combat, as soon as
they should see a purple Robe, advanced in the Air from the Kings Quarter.

The hour of the battle was now come, the Sclauonians had already discovered
Antigonus sign. They encourage their Companions according to the opportunity
of the time, making no doubt but they had the victory in their hands. Then they
endeavored with wonderful resolution to gain the Mountain. But the
Foote-men which were lightly armed, whom Cleomenes as we have said, left in
the Plain with the Horsemen, seeing that the Bands of the Acheins had not the
courage to second them, charged them upon the Rear, so as they were in great
danger: For on the right hand, and in Front Euclide had the better with his
men: and the Mercenaries on the left hand, fighting obstinately, made a great
spoil upon the Rear. By this means they were suddenly environed with two
Troops of Enemies. When Philopomene the Megalopolitaine saw this disorder, he
suddenly gave good advice to the Captains. But for that he was a young man,
and had never had charge they gave no ear unto him. Wherefore addressing
himself to those of his Nation, Companions says he, the Victory is ours if
you will follow me. And in charging the Enemies Horse, they assailed them with
great courage. Wherefore the Adventurers strangers, who fought in the Rear of
those which assailed the Mountain, hearing a great noise, and seeing the
Combat of the Horsemen, retired to aid and succor them, whereunto they had
been at the first ordained.

The order of the Enemies being by this means broken, the Sclauonians and
Macedonians with others whom Antigonus had appointed, fell upon them with great
violence and fury. So as afterward all the World was of opinion, The courage
of Philopomene is the cause of the Victory.
that the industry and courage of Philopomene had defeated Euclide at that
time. And therefore they say, that when as Antigonus demanded of Alexander why
he had sent the Horsemen against the Enemy, before he had seen the sign,
and that he had answered, it was not he, but a young Megalopolitaine which
had done it without his priuity, he then replied, that this young man had
performed the duty of a good Captain, and Alexander that of a young fool.

But they which kept the top of the Mountain with Eucelide, showed their
baseness, seeing the Enemies ascend: for they should not have attended until
they had gained the top with safety: But relying upon the advantage of the
place, they should have encountered them, and charged them from above: and if
necessity had required, they might have retired safely on the right hand, to
charge the Enemy again. In doing this they had easily broken, defeated and put
the Macedonians to flight. But they did the contrary, as if they had the
Victory certain in their hands; for without moving from the place which the
Cleomenes had appointed them, they stayed expecting the enemy, with hope of a
greater defeat: For that they should be repulsed and beaten from the highest
place of the Mountain. But they soon suffered the penance of their
baseness. For after that the Macedonians had recovered the Mountain, without
any resistance, and were come into the Plain, they fell upon their enemies,
fighting hand to hand with so great sury, as they presently drove them back
into the hollow Caves and inaccessible places.

In the mean time the Combat was cruel among the Horsemen, where it was
worth the sight, to behold with what heat, force, and courage the Acheins
fought, considering they all fought for the liberty of the Country.
Philopomene.
But among all others they made great esteem of Philopomene; for when his
Horse was over thrown with a Pertuisane he fainted not, fighting long on foot
with great courage. Finally in the end he died valliantly, being shot thorough
the shinne-bones with an Arrow. On the other side the Kings had begun the
fight at Mount Olympus with the mercenaries and such as were lightly armed.
They were about five thousand men, who fought sometimes man to man, and
sometimes they tried the Fortune of the whole Troop. There the Victory was
long in suspense, finally they parted equally from the battle.

But when as Cleomees was advertised that Emlide had abandoned the Mountain,
and that the Allies had turned head, and that the Horsemen were in great
despair, and that all trembled for fear, he resolved to go out of his Fort,
and to put his whole Army in Front upon one side of the Camp; and therefore
he caused them to sound a Retreat. By this means when those that were
lightly armed were drawn together, the two Armies charged with their Pikes and
Iauelings. The Combat was cruel, and the charge performed with so great
courage on either side, as the Victory was long doubtful, and the judgment
difficult who deserved the greatest honor: For that sometimes the
Lacedaemonians retired, and again they made the Mace^onians give back.

Finally, The victory of Antigonus against Cl^ome^es.
when as the Lacedaemonians were vanquished and put to flight, they were slain
here and there like sheep. Cleomenes saved himself in Sparta without any
wound, being accompanied by some of the Horsemen. From thence he retired the
night following to Sythia, where he imbarqued in certain ships which lay
long ready for the necessities of the Country, and sailed with his friends to
Alexandria. Lacedemon taken by Antigonus.
When as Antigonus was entered into Lacedemon finding no resistance, he
entreated the Lacedaemonians graciously and courteously in all things; but
especially in suffering them to live and govern their Commonweal after the
Laws of the Country. When he had stayed certain days there, he returned into
Macedony with his Army, having news of the descent of the Sclauonians, and of
the spoil they made. Behold how Fortune disposes of great affairs as she
pleases. There is no doubt but if Cleomenes had deferred the battle a little,
or stayed in Sparta after his defeat, Sparta or Lacedemon.
keeping them in hope, in the end he had prevailed in his affairs after the
retreat of Antigonus. Antigonus came from thence to Tegee; to whom he left
their Commonweal entire. Three days after he arrived at Argos, at such time
as the people were gathered together to celebrate the Nemean games; who
presently went forth to meet him. All the City had their eyes fixed upon him
and beheld him, all the World commended him; all the assembly of Greece, and
every City in particular did him Honor, not only Humane but Divine.

From thence he made have to go into Macedon, where as he found the Sclauonians
spoiling the Country; The Victory of Antigonus against the Sclauonians.
to whom he gave battle, and got the Victory after a long combat. But he
cried so much during the fight, as within few days after he died of a flux
of blood; so as the Grecians lost the great hope they had conceived, not so
much for his skill in War, as for his virtue and royal perfections. He left
the Realm of Macedony to Philip the son of Demetrius. But if you demand of
me why I have held so long a Discourse of this present War, you must know I
have done it of purpose. For as this time concurres with that whereof we mean
to speak, I have held it fit and necessary, to let the World understand,
according to my first resolution, The Death of many great Princes^
what the estate of the Macedonians and Grecians were at that time. At that
time Ptolomy died of sickness; to whom succeeded Ptolomy Philopater. The like
did Seleucus the son of Seleucus, who was surnamed Callinice; and in like
manner Pogon; to whom his brother Antiochus succeeded in the Realm of Syria.

The like in a manner happened to those which held the Kingdoms of Alexander
after his death, as Seleucus, Ptolomy, and Lysimacus; for those died in the
hundredth four and twenteth Olympiade, as we have formerly related; and these
in the hundredth thirty nine. Seeing we have exposed the preparation of all our
History, and sufficiently declared at what time and how, and for what causes
the Romans after the conquest of all Italy assailed foreign Realms, and
what the estate then was of Greece, Macedony, and the Carthaginians. I have
thought it fit to make an end of this Book, with a Commemoration of these
actions, and this alteration of Kingdoms: Seeing that according to our
intention we are come unto the times when as the Grecians made the War of
the Allies; the Romans against Hannibal; and to that when as the Kings of the
lower Asia, fought for the Empire of Syria.

The end of the Second Book of Polybius.
THE THIRD BOOK of the History of POLYBIVS.
We have showed sufficiently in the First Book, how that we have taken for
the beginning and foundation of the Roman actions, the War betwixt the
Allies, that of Hannibal, and that of Syria: We have in like manner set down
the causes, for the which we have been forced (in reducing the beginnings
farther off.) to write the History of the Second Book. Now we will endeavor
to make you understand the Wars themselves, and the causes why they were
undertaken, and dispersed in so many places, having let you understand, in as
few words as possible we may, the attempts of the people of Rome. Seeing that
which we have undertaken to write is but a Work, and as it were a spectacle;
(that is to say,) how, when, and wherefore all the Countries of the World have
been reduced under the obedience of the Romans, and that this has a notorious
beginning, a prefixed time, and the end certain. We have thought it good to
deliver summarily the accidents which happened from the beginning unto the end of
these VVarres: Immagining that they which desire to see our Work, will more
easily come to the knowledge of the whole History. Believe me that our
understanding conceiues many things necessary for a particular History, by the
knowledge of the general; for the understanding whereof, the experience of
particular actions is of no small importance; and if they be both joined
together, so as it may be but one description, they will be wonderful
profitable to the Reader. But as for the contents of our Work, we have
sufficiently spoken thereof in the two first Books. And as for the particular
actions which have happened, they have taken their beginning in the Wars which
we have Related; and there end at the death of the Kings of Macedon. So as from
the beginning unto the end there were fifty years; during the which there were
as great and admirable things performed, as ever were in so short a sp^ce.

To speak whereof, we will begin to write from the hundredth and fortieth
Olympiade, and will observe this order. First we will show the causes for the
which this War, which they call of Hannibal, began betwixt the Romans and
Carthaginians: So as entering into Italy, they reduced the Romans to so great an
extremity, as they suddenly grew in hope to be Lords, not only of the rest of
Italy, but also of the City of Rome. And afterward we will continue our
narration, upon what occasion Philip King of Macedon, after that he had made
War with the Etoliens and pacified Greece, entered into hope with the
Carthaginians. And as for Antiochus, Ptolomy, and Philopater, they in the end
had War together for the lower Syria, after a long dissension. Moreover the
Rhodiens and Prufiens making War against them of Constantinople, forced them
to abandon Pontus. And there ending our Di^course, we will begin to speak of
the manner of living of the Romans, of their Laws and of their Commonweal:
By the which as proper to them, The Countries conquered by the Romans.
they have attained unto such great power, as they have not only made subject
to their obedience, Italy, Sycile, and the Gauls, and likewise Spain in a
short time; but in the end they have undertaken the Empire of the whole World,
after they had vanquished the Carthaginians by Arms. Hi^ron.
Then passing on we will show, how the Kingdom of Hieron of Saragosse was
defeated and ruined. The like we will do of diverse troubles which were in
Egypt. Moreover how after the death of King Ptolomy, Antiochus, The Wars
which Anti^chous and Philip made.
and Philip, being agreed touching the division of the Realm left unto the
Son, began the War. Philip against Egypt and Samos, and Antiochus against
Syria and Phenicea.

And when as we have summarily set down the affairs of Spain, Lybia, and
Sycile, we will presently turn our Discourse to Greece, as the affairs shall
change. For after that we have related the Wars at Sea, Attalus.
which Attalus and the Rhodiens made against Philip: and having set down the
Romans War against him, how and by whom it had been managed, and what
success it had, observing the order of things, we will come to the indignation
of the Etoliens, who proclaimed War against the Romans, and drew Antiochus
out of Asia. And when we have delivered the causes, and related Antiochus
navigations into Europe, we will first show how he fled out of Greece; and being
vanquished by Arms, how he abandoned unto the Romans, all the Coun^ries which
lie on this side Mount Taurus. Mount Taurus
Thirdly, we will show with what power the Romans conquered the Empire of Asia,
after they had wholly defeated the Gauls, who wandered up and down; and how
they freed the whole Country on this side Mount Taurus, from the fear of the
Barbarians; and the insolency of the Gauls. And when we have related the
misfortune of the Etoliens and Cophalins in their Wars, Eumenides. Ariarate.
Morea.
we will make mention of those of Eumenides, of Prshia, and of the Gauls; the
like we will do of that of Ariarate against Pharnace. From thence dispatching
the accords of them of Morea, and the increase of the Rhodien Commonwealth, we
will make an end of our work, setting down in the end the Voyages which
Antiochus surnamed Epiphanes, made into Egypt. And in like manner the Wars
of Persi^ with the ruin of the Kingdom of the Macedonians. These are things
whereby we may easily understand how the Romans in a short submitted the whole
Earth under their obedience, assailing them in particular. And if it were
lawful to discern virtue from vice, by the good or bad success of affairs,
The Conquest of the Romans in 53. years*
or from the praise or dishonor of men, we must of necessity make an end here,
and turn our Relation to things which in the beginning we propounded to set
down; for this has continued fifty three years: during the which the Roman
Empire has gotten so great an increase, as the whole World might well know,
that they must do what their people commanded. But for that such things,
cannot be rightly judged by the good Fortune of affairs, considering that many
times those that seem to be well done, are the cause of great inconueniencies,
if they be not done in time: And contrary-wise they which are fallen into some
disaster, many times turn their misfortunes to good, if they know how to have
patience. We have thought it fitting to add to that which we have Written,
what the nature of the Victors were, what means they held in the government of
their Empire, and how the rest of the Towns, Regions, and Countries yielded
willingly unto them? And moreover what course of life, and what Laws they held
with all the World, as well in particular as generally with all their
Commonwealths.

By this means they which live at this day, shall plainy see, whither it be
good to fly, or voluntarily to submit to the Empire of Rome; and they which
shall come after may judge whither the actions of the Romans be commendable
and worthy of memory, or altogether blameable. Behold, wherein the profit of
our History will consist, as well for the present as the future time. They which
manage a War, and they which undertake to judge of it, do not propound the
Victory for the last end, nor wholly to subject himself. Believe me, a wise man
does not make War with his neighbors, to see the defeat and ruin: Neither
does any man sail in diverse Seas, only to make Voyages; nor pursues many
Sciences and Disciplines, in regard only of them. Without doubt we pursue
these things, for that which follows, seems pleasant, profitable, or decent,
and therefore we may with reason say, that the end of our Work has been to
know the condition of all things, after the Conquest of the World made by the
Romans, until they fell again into new combustions.

Of which troubles I have resolved to write, making as it were, a new
beginning: Polybius has been^ pre^ent at a great part of the things which he
has written.
For that there has been great and memorable things, having not only been
present at the greatest part, but also a comfo^t and assistant.

This trouble grew, when as the Romans made War against the Celtiber^ans, and
the Carthaginians against Massinissa, King of Lybia: and what time Atta^us and
Prusias were at War in Asia. And then Ariarate King of Capadocia expelled his
Realm by Roferne, by the means of Demetrius, was soon after restored by him.
But Demetrius the Son of Seleucus, lost his Realm and life by the conspiracy
of other Kings, Demetrius lost his R^^lme and life by conspiracy.
after he had held Syria twelve years. And the Romans restored the Grecians
to their Cities, whom they had charged to be the Authors of the Persian
War, after they had accepted the excuse of their innocence. Soon after they
made War against the Carthaginians, for the causes which we will specify,
so as they resolved first to transport them, and afterward wholly to ruin
them.

And for that the Macedonians abandoned the part of the Romans, and the
Lacedaemonians the Common weal of the Acheins, there followed the utter ruin
and destruction of all Greece. This shall serve for the Preamble of our Work.
I have need of the favor of Fortune, to the end that by the means of life I
may finish this my resolution, although I hold it for certain, that if a long
life should fail me, The desire and affection of the Author upon the end of
his Book.
yet there would be always some one found among so great a multitude of wise
and learned men, that would finish our Work, and endeavor to bring unto
perfection that, which sudden Death might hinder and prevent in us.

As we have related at large the deeds which seem most memorable, desiring
that our whole work might be known to the Reader, as well in general as
particular, it is now time unto the declaration of our design. The greatest
part of those which have written the deeds of Hannibal, desiring to show the
cause of the War which kindled betwixt the Romans and the Carthaginians, say,
that the siege of Sagonte was the first: and the second, that contrary to the
accord made with the Romans, they had past the River of Ebro.

For my part, I am of opinion that these were the beginnings, but not the
causes; for there is a great difference betwixt the causes and beginning of
things: The beginning of a work and the cause (...).
unless some will say, that the Voyage of Alexander the great into Asia, has
been the cause of the War which he made against the Persians: Or that the
descent which Antiochus made at Demetriade, has been the cause of that which
was begun against the Romans: the which is neither true nor likely.

But what man is so much blinded with ignorance, that will affirm and
maintain, that the preparations which were made partly by Alexander, and
partly by Phillip in his life time, for the War of Persia: Or by the
Etoliens, to make War against the Romans, before the coming of Antiochus
has been the causes of the War? These are the opinions of men, who do not
observe how much the beginnings and the cause differ: and that the causes in
all things are the first, and the beginning are the end of causes. I am of
opinion that the beginnings are called the first works of things which are
resolved and concluded, and that the causes are those which preceed the decree
and resolution, and makes us so to judge: as are the thoughts, the aduices, the
discourses of reason and such other things.

This will be apparent for that which follows: For it will be easy for any
man to see for what cause the War of Persia was made, The eauses of
Alexanders War in Persia.
and whence the beginning came. The first was the return of the Grecians with
Xenophon into their Country, by infinite fierce and barbarous Nations: where
not any one durst make head against him in so long a Voyage.

The second has been the Voyage of Agesilaus King of Lacedemonia into Asia by
Sea. Agesilaus.
Where having found nothing answerable to his forces, nor that presented it
self, he was forced to return into Greece, Phillip.
for the troubles which were kindled there: as if he had triumphed over the
Barbarians. For which causes Phillip King of Macedon, having experience of the
baseness and sloth of the Persians and relying upon the readiness of the
Macedonians in matters of War: being likewise drawn with the hope of great
gain he prepared War against them with all his forces, as soon as he found
himself assured of the amity and friendship of the Grecians: taking his
occasion, that the Persians had used great cruelty against them.

And therefore we must say, that the causes of this War are those which we
have first related, and the occasions are those whereof we now speak: and the
beginning was Alexanders Voyage by Sea into Asia: The cause of the Etoliens
War against the Romans.
And in that which was made against the Romans under the conduct of Antiochus,
the wrath and indignation of the Etoliens was the cause. You must understand
that for the opinion which they had conceived, that the Romans made no account
of them as long as the War of Phillip continued, they not only called
Antiochus unto their Succors, but also resolved to put all in hazard, so great
their spleen and fury was for that which was past.

It is true, the liberty of Greece was the occasion, under hope whereof they
labored by all means to draw the neighbor Cities to their Enterprise: But
the beginning of the War was the Voyage to Sea of Antiochus to Demetriade.
We have been tedious in this Discourse, not to blame any one of the ancient
Historiographers, but for the profit of those which have a desire to learn.
For as Physicians cannot cure their Patients, A good comparison.
if they have not knowledge of the causes of the Diseases wherewith they are
troubled: So they which treat of Histories, are altogether unprofitable, if
the reason of the place, of the time, with the causes and occasions be not
known.

There is therefore nothing more necessary, nor more to be desired, than to
know the causes of all things that happen: For opportunity does many times
rectify great affairs, and it is easy to prevent their beginnings.

It is true that Fabius a Roman Historiographer faith, Fabius.
that the cruelty and inhumanity of Hannibal toward the Sagontins, and the
ambition and insatiable desire of Rule in Asdrubal, have been the causes of
the War betwixt the Romans and Hannibal, General of the Carthaginians. Then
he says that he had much augmented the Carthaginians Empire in Spain, and
that being returned to Carthage, he sought to tirannize the Commonwealth, and
to overthrow their Laws. The which the chief men discovering, they opposed
themselves against Asdrubal. Wherefore leaving Affricke in a rage, he returned
presently into Spain, and afterward managed the affairs according to his
own fancy, and without the authority of the Senate of Carthage. Moreover, he
says, that Hannibal who from his youth had been at the War under him, was
of the same enterprise: and therefore after he was Lord of Spain, he followed
the courses of Asdrubal. So as this War which was made against the Romans,
was begun by him in spite of the Carthaginians, and that there was not any man
in Carthage which loved the Commonwealth, but did much blame the deeds of
Hannibal against the Sagontins. Moreover, he says, that after the taking of
Sagont, there was an Embassy sent from Rome to Carthage, demanding Hannibal
to be punished for the breach of the accord, and if they would not yield unto
it, they should declare War against the Carthaginians.

But if a man should demand of Fabius what could succeed better, nor more
reasonable, and expedient for the Carthaginians, than to deliver upon the
Romans request the author of the offense, and him that had committed the
fault, to punish him: Seeing that as he says, they had dislik't the actions
of Hannibal: and by this means might revenge by another the common Enemy of
the Country, and maintain the estate of their City in peace, chasing away
the author of the war, considering that this might be well effected by a
bare resolution? What can he answer? Nothing without doubt. Contrariwise they
were so far from doing it, The War of Hannibal continued 17. years.
as they maintained the War seventeen years continual against the Romans:
Neither did they cease until destitute of all hope, they not only hazarded
their Country, but also their lives.

Finally, to what end do we use this discourse of Fabius or of his writings?
It is not to cry him down: For his lying writings are apparent to those which
read them. It is only to advertise those which give the credit, not so much to
regard the title of the Author, as the truth of things: For there are men
which do not bear so much respect to the writings, as to him that made them,
and which think that for as much as Fabius lived in those times, and had been
of the Senate, that he could not but speak truth. It is true, and I am of
opinion, that we must give belief and credit unto him in many things, but yet
we may not believe all: for we must consider things as they are, and how they
agree.

Finally, to return to our Discourse, we must not think that the first cause
of the War, The first cause of the War betwixt the Romans and the
Carthaginians.
which the Romans had with the Carthaginians, was the indignation of Amilcar,
surnamed Barca, Father to Hannibal. And we must understand that he was not
vanquished by the Romans, during the War of Sicily; (for he preserved the
Army which was about Erix with great Judgment) but when he saw the
Carthaginians had lost the battle at Sea, The fore sight of Amilcar, Father to
Hannibal.
he thought good to veeld unto the time, and made a peace with the Romans, yet
he left no^ his indignation, so as he expected continually an opportunity to
be revenged of them. And if the Carthaginians had not found themselves troubled
with the mntiny of their Soldiers, he would presently have renewed the War
with all his power: and therefore being hindered by an intestine mischief, he
deserr'd it to another time.

The Romans considering the danger wherein the Carthaginians were by the mutiny
of their Soldiers, threatened them with War. To prevent the which, the
Carthaginians made an accord as we have specified in the former Book, without
which no man can understand that which we have now said, Sardinia abandoned by
the Carthaginians.
nor that which follows. Finally, they quit them Sardinia, as unfurnished both
of counsel and aid: For that the Romans would not otherwise desist from their
Enterprise, and they paid them beside the Sum already accorded, seven
hundred thousand Crowns: which was the second and the greatest cause of the
War which after wards began. The second Cause.


When as all the people of Carthage were entered into the like indignation with
Hannibal, and that Amilcar saw the mutiny of the Soldiers suppressed, and the
affairs of the Country pacified, he began to make War in Spain, seeking
to make use of it, as a preparatiue to lead them against the Romans. The third
Cause.
Behold that which we must imagine for the third cause, that is to say, the
good fortune which the Carthaginians had: For that their hearts grew great, and
therefore they undertook th^s War more boldly. There is proof sufficient,
that Amilcar was the principal cause of the second Punique War, although he
were dead ten years before: but it shall suffice for the present to relate
that which follows: At what time that Hannibal was vanquished by the Romans,
he retired to Antiochus leaving Affricke, the Romans advertised of the Etoliens
attempt, Antiochu san Enemy to the Romans.
sent an Embassy to Antiochus to know his will, and to discover by this means
his preparation for War. But having understood that he held the party of the
Etoliens, and that he was resolved to make War against the Romans, they
frequented daily with Hannibal, seeking by their continual familiarity, to
draw him into suspicion and dislike; wherein they were not deceived: For
Antiochus thinking he had been gained by the Romans, suspected him long. But
it happened on a time when as the King called him to his Council, whereas he
had good liberty to speak. And then after many discourses, in the end as it
were by indignation, he began to use these terms. When as my Father Amilcar
was to pass into Spain with an Army I was about the Age of nine years: and
when as he sacrificed to Jupiter, I was near unto the Altars.

But when as the Sacrifices were ended, Hannibal his speech to Antiochus.
my father caused the rest to retire back; and having called me alone, he
demanded kindly of me, and as it were with imbracings, if I would go the
Voyage. The which when I had not only accepted, but moreover entreated him
like a child; then taking my right hand, and laying it upon the Altar, he
would that touching the things sacrificed, I should swear that presently when
I came to age, I should be an enemy to the Romans. And therefore Sir, as long
as you shall be their enemy, you may rely confidently in me, Hanibal swears
that when he came to age, he would be an enemy to the Romans.
and have no suspicion of Hannibal: but when you shall be reconciled, or that
you shall contract friendship with them, then expect no other accuser, and
have a care to keep your self from me, as from an enemy to the people of
Rome; for I shall be always opposite unto them with all my power.

Antiochus hearing this kind of Speech, and that Hannibal spoke truly and with
affection, in regard of his grief, he presently abandoned all suspicion.
Asdrubal son in Law to Hannibal.
Behold then a manifest testimony of the harred and bad affection of Amilcar
toward the Romans; for he left Asdrubal his son in Law, and his son
Hannibal for their enemies, such as there could be none greater. It is true,
that Death took an order that Asdrubal could not show the hatred he bare
them. But Hannibal had time at will, so as prevailing in his interprize, he
has sufficiently made known the hatred which he held from his Father. A good
consideration, and necessary for all Governors.
And therefore they which have the Government of a Commonweal must carefully
consider this, and ruminate in their understanding to know the humors of
those, with whom they make any accord or friendship; whither it be for the
necessity of the time, or to give over the Wars; to the end they may always
defend themselves from those which seek an opportunity to do evil, and to
make use of those whom they know to be their Subjects or true friends, when
necessity shall require. These causes which we have specified, are those of the
second Punique War, and the beginning of that which we will now relate.

The Carthaginians hardly enduring the loss of Sycile, The causes of the
Carthaginians hatred.
which the Romans had taken from them. It is true that as we have said,
Sardinia which they had surprised by Treason during the mutiny of Affricke, and
this sum of money which they had caused them to pay, did much increase their
hatred. And therefore it was likely that as soon as they should grow great in
Spain, they would transport the War into Italy. But after the death of
Asdrubal, who after the death of Amilcar was General of the Carthaginians,
Never Commander did any thing worthily which was not pleasing to the Soldiers.
they desired to know the will of the Soldiers, before they would place a new
Commander. And when as the news came from the Camp, that Hannibal had bin
chosen Captain by a general consent, they presently assembled, and confirmed
with one accord by the election of the men of War. Hannibal having received
all power, and considering that to linger was of no worth, he marched with his
army to the skirts of the Olcades to ruin them. And therefore he besieged
Carteia, the chief Town of that Country, Carteia taken by assault.
and took it by assault after some days resistance. So as the other Towns
being terrified yielded of themselves to the Carthaginians.

After this Victory the Army retired to winter at Carthagena with great booty:
whereas Hannibal using great bounty, divided it amongst the Soldiers: So as
he gained their hearts wonderfully, leaving them in great hope for the future.
In the Spring he led his Army against the Vacceens, Countries conquered by
Hannibal.
and presently conquered Ermandique: Afterward he took Arbacale by force,
not without great danger, having held it long besieged: For that it had been
well defended by the greatness of the City, and the multitude and courage of
the Inhabitants.

After this, he suddenly fell by chance into a marvelous danger, by a charge
which the Toletains have him, The Toletains.
at his return from the Vacceens with a great booty: For it is a people which
exceeds all the rest of this Province in courage and multitudes of men, with
the which also there joined the Fugitives of Ermandique. Whereunto the banished
men of the Olcades had persuaded them. Without doubt the Carthaginians had
been vanquished and defeated, if they had offered Battle; The river of Tagus.
but Hannibal gave order to the contrary, and striking S^ile to enemy, he
planted himself upon the Bank of the River of Tagus: giving charge unto his
Horse men, that when they should see the Enemies enter into the Water, they
should charge the Battalion of foot. He lodged forty Elephants along the
Banks.

By this means all things succeeded happily, for that he had the river and the
Elephants as it were, for Combattants: For the Barbarians thinking that the
Carthaginians were retired for fear, they cast themselves confusedly into the
River with great cries. Wherefore a great number of them were defeated upon the
Banks of the River by the Elephants which stood there, Hanibals victory upon
the Barbarians.
and flew them at their landing. Some were also sl^ine in the River by the
Horse men, for that the Horsemen being at ease and without Armor, could better
help themselves, and annoy the enemies, who durst not rely upon the Ford.
They which were in the Rear, and might easily recover the Bank, retired,
until in the end the Carthaginians cast themselves into the river with all
their bands and companies, An Army of a hundred thousand men.
and put them to flight. The Toletains army, with the Olcades and Vacceens,
consisted of a hundred thousand men. After which defeat, there were not any
found beyond the river of Ebro, that durst resist the Carthaginians, except the
Sagontins. It is true that Hannibal would not fall upon them, least he should
offer an occasion of War to the Romans, before he had seized upon that
which his Father Amilcar had advised him to do.

In the mean time the Sagontins sent often to Rome, as well for the care of
their own private affairs, An Embassy from the Romans to Hannibal.
as also foreseeing future things, and likewise to advertise them of the good
Fortune of the Carthaginians in Spain. Finally the Romans having thereupon
many and diverse aduertisements, they sent an Embassy into Spain, to discover
the course of Hannibals actions: But he was retired to Winter at Carthagena,
having managed his affairs to his own liking. Being suddenly arrived there,
he calls them and gives them audience, and power to deliver their charge. The
Ambassadors at the first signifies unto him, that he should demand nothing
from the Sagontins, being allied unto the Romans: And moreover that he should
not pass the river of Ebro, for that it had been so concluded by the Treaty
made with Asdruball. The which being heard by Hannibal, like a young man and
greedy of War, and who easily did what he would with the Senate of Carthage, by
the means of the heads of his faction, Hannibals answer to the Roman
Ambassadors.
together with the hatred he bare against the Romans, he answered the
Ambassadors as a friend to the Sagontins, blaming the people of Rome, who when
they had lately received Letters from the Sagontins, for a mutiny which was
grown amongst them, to the end they might send some Embassy to pacify it,
they had wickedly put to death some of the principal of the City: Whereof he
threatens them to take revenge, saying that the Carthaginians had a Custom not
to disdain outrages: On the other side, he sent unto Carthage, to advertise
them of that which they were to do, considering that the Sagontins relying
upon the Alliance with the Romans, had done great outrages to many Towns
subject to the Carthaginians.

Finally as one full of inconstancy and rage, and inflamed with a desire to
make War, he propounded no other valuable reason, pursuing only certain
frivolous and impertinent causes. The which is incident to those, who
transported by their passion forget their duty. But had it not been much
better to say thus? That the Carthaginians do rightfully demand of the
Romans, that they restore unto them Sardinia, and the silver, which for so
many years they had unjustly drawn from them, during their great affairs,
and if they did it not, they will proclaim War against them. Where as
contrariwise it seems now, in leaving the true cause, and supposing a false
one of the Sagontins, they would make it not only without occasion, but also
with great outrage. And although the Ambassadors understood well, that upon
necessity they must enter into War; yet they went unto Carthage, where they
used the like speech.

It is true the Romans meant to Transport it into Spain and not into Italy,
and to have Sagont for a Fort. Wherefore in the interim, they labored first to
pacify the Wars of Sclauonia, as if they intended to make a War that was
long and tedious and far from Italy. It happened at that time, Demetrius: King
of Sclauonia.
that when as Demetrius King of the Sclauonians forgot the many favors which
the Romans had done him, for that he saw them pressed on the one side with the
fear of the Gauls, and on the there by the Carthaginians, and that all his
hope was in the King of Macedon: for that he had bin a pertaker of that War,
which Antigonus made against Cleomenes, ruining the Towns of the Sclauonians
which were subject to the Romans, forcing the City, and exceeding the bounds
limited in the Treaty. The like he did to most parts of the Island of
Cyclades: So as he ruined all like a Tempest, being accompanied with fifty
strong Vessels. Whereof the Romans being advertised, seeing at that time the
Principallity of Macedon to Triumph, they labored with all their present
means to pacify the affairs of Sclauonia, hoping it would prove easy: And
that soon after, they should punish the baseness of the Sclauonians, and the
ingratitude of Demetrius. But matters past otherwise then they expected. For
whilst they employ their time therein, Hannibal takes Sagont much sooner then
they conceived. So as the War grew hot, not in Spain, but against the City
of Rome, and thoroughout all Italy. Yet the Romans pursuing their enterprise,
sent Lucius Emilius into Sclauonia, the first year of the hundred and fifteth
Olympiade, with a very great Army to keep that Province in peace, and from
future danger.

Hannibal parting from Carthagena with his whole Army, goes to Sagont, a Town
situated beyond the River of Ebro, at the foot of the Mountain, The
situation of Sagont.
which deuides Spain from the Celtiberiens, about a mile distant from the Sea.
The people of this Country exceed all the rest of Spain in abundance of
fruits, and in multitudes of men, and they are the most Warlike. Hannibal
entering into these limits with his Army, and having ruined all the Country, he
besiedged it with all manner of Engines, conceiving that the taking thereof
would prove wonderful commodious for his present Affairs. First he
considered that he should deprive the Romans of all hope to make War in
Spain; The discretion of the head of an interprize.
and that moreover he should strike a great terror into the rest; and that by
this means the Towns of Spain reduced already under his obedience, would
keep their faith the better: Besides it was likely, that they which desired to
live still in their liberty, would soon yield: And that thirdly he immagined,
that he might then confidently pursue the Remainder, leaving no enemy behind
him.

He hoped more over, to gather much Treasure for the intertainement of his War;
and that he should gain the hearts of the Soldiers for the booty that every
one should get at the sack of the Town; and that finally he should purchase
the love of the Citizens remaining in Carthage, with presents that he will
send them of the spoils. Being moved with these reasons, he wholly attends
the siege of this Town, and inflames the hearts of the Soldiers, spurring
them on sometimes with rage against the Enemy, sometimes with hope of
Recompense; and sometimes he serves them for an example, as well in making the
Engines, and approaching them to the Walls, as in going sometimes to those
places which were most dangerous. Finally, he performed all things so
extraordinary well, as if he had been but a simple Soldier.

And when he had toiled his Body and mind herein for the space of eight
months, Sagont forced by Hannibal.
in the end he forced Sagont. Whereas after he had made a great booty of gold
and silver, and taken many men, he kept the money for the charges of the War,
as he had formerly resolved, dividing the Prisoners among the Soldiers,
according unto their several dignities, and set the rest of the spoil unto
Carthage. After these things, he was not deceived in his hope, so as things
succeeded according to his desire: for his Soldiers were much more ready to
undergo all dangers: and the Carthaginians much more ready to please him.
Moreover, this booty of money was a great means for the enterprise he had in
hand.

During these actions, Demetrius King of the Sclauonians, discovering the
enterprise and preparation of the Romans, Demetrius fortefied Dimale.
he presently caused the Town of Dimale to be carefully furnished with men
and victuals: and as for the other Towns of Sclauonia, he chased away those
that were of a contrary faction, suffering none but such as held his party.
Then he made choice of six thousand old Soldiers out of his Army, The
arrival of Emilius into Sclauonia.
and put himself into Phare. In the mean time the Consul Emilius arriues
safely in Sclauonia with his Army: where being advertised that the Enemies were
confident and resolute, for that they were in hope, that the descent of the
Romans should not prevail against them, relying much in the situation and
munition of Dimale, he thought good before all things, to do his uttermost
endeavor to take it: thinking (as it afterward happened) that this being
taken, all the rest amazed with fear, would easily yield unto the Romans. And
after that he had made some speeches unto the Soldiers, he planted his
Engines of Battery against the Town, and besieged it: which being forced on
the seventh day, did so much amaze the Enemies, as presently Embassies came
from all the rest of Sclauonia, yielding unto the Romans.

The which being received into Friendship, The Town of Sclauonia reduced to
the Roman obedience.
and having treated with every one according to their condition, he causes
his Army to march directly to Phare, whereas the King of the Sclauonians made
his abode. But for that he found this Town strong by situation, and manned
with the choice of the Army, and moreover, well furnished with Victuals, and
all kinds of munition, he feared the siege would be long and difficult.
Finally, being long in supence, The warlike policy or Emilius.
he takes this counsel. He uses all diligence and labor to gain the Island
in the Night, and does lodge a great part of his Army in the thickest of the
Forest: as for himself, at the break of day, he gains the nearest Port
unto the Town with twenty ships. The Sclauonians seeing the Enemies ships,
and making no account of their number, they go forth with a great Fleet to
hinder the landing of the Romans, where they charged them, and for a time the
Combat was very furious, there coming still Succors unto them from the Town
by files, so as in the end all the City was drawn thither.

Then the Romans who had layne all night in Ambush in the Forest, hearing the
noise, ran with all speed by covered places, and gaining a little Hill which
was strong by nature, within the Town and Port, they took from their Enemies
all means of return. The which the Sclauonians well perceiving, they leave
their first enterprise to repulse the Enemy, and drawing together in one
troop, they encourage one another, as men resolved to go and fight against
those which held the Hill. On the other side the Romans seeing the Sclauonians
approach, put themselves in battle, and charged them, fighting with great
resolution and courage: The other part of the Army at Sea, landed, marched, and
pressed the enemy in the Rear. Wherefore for as much as the Romans charged them
on all sides, and that the Sclauonians were pressed before and behind, the
Combat was long and cruel. Finally, the Romans had the Victory. The greatest
part of the Sclauonians were most miserablely slain, The victory of the Romans
upon the Sclauonians.
some saved themselves within the Town, and the rest fled into the Deserts of
the Island.

Demetrius the Night following saved himself contrary to the opinion of all
the World, by means of certain Vessels which he had appointed in three
places for his safety, the case so happening: and retired to Phillip King of
Macedon, with whom he spent the Remainder of his days. He was a man of great
courage and ouerweening, but of little judgment in Martial affairs. And
therefore he ended according to the life which he had formerly led: Demetrius
a man of great courage and little judgment.
For when as at Phillips desire he had begun to besiege the Town of the
Messenians, he was most shamefully slain by the Enemy, for his great and
ouerweening boldness. But we will speak of these things more particularly,
when we shall come unto that time. When as Emilius had so suddenly gotten
Phare, he razed the Town to the ground. And having within few days reduced
the rest of the Towns of Sclauonia to the Roman obedience, The Town of Phare
razed.
and decided all the affairs of the Province as he had resolved, he returns
to Rome in the beginning of Autumn: where he was received with wonderful
great glory, triumph, and good esteem of all men, to have done not only like
a wise and discreet man, but like a resolute.

But when in the mean time news came to Rome of the razing of Sagont, some
have written, that the Lords of the Roman Council were not of opinion to make
War, and they allege causes and reasons which held them in suspense. But
what can be spoken more unreasonably? How is it likely, that they which the
year before had signified War unto the Carthaginians, if they entered the
Sagontins Country, should now grow doubtful, whether after the taking of
Sagont, they should make War, or not? But is there any thing less worthy of
credit, to say, that the Senate on the one side was wonderfully heavy and
afflicted, as if all had been utterly lost: On the other side that the Fathers
brought all their Children to the Senare, so as they were above twelve years
of age, and that being partakers of the Council, they never revealed, or made
known the secrets to any? Without doubt these things are neither true nor
likely, unless the Romans have that gift of nature, to be wise from their
Cradles.

We have discoursed sufficiently of these writings which are of Cherea and
Solilus: neither have they so much show of a History, as of old wives Tales:
and are like unto those which they usually tell in Barbers shops. The Romans
then after the news of the taking of Sagont, and the murder of their Allies,
sent presently an Embassy to Carthage, to let them understand two things,
whereof the one seemed to be of consequence, for ignomy and loss of the
Carthaginions, and the other had a show to draw their Empire in hazard. For
they demanded, that they should either deliver Hannibal to be punished for
the breach of the public Faith, or else they should hold themselves assured
of War. When as the Ambassadors were come to Carthage, Roman Ambassadors
sent to Carthage.
and that the Senate had given them audience, they delivered their Commission:
which was not without the indignation of of the Carthaginians: who made choice
of Hanno to debate their Right, who at the first made no account of Asdrubals
treaty, Hanno's answer to the Roman Ambassadors.
as having never been made with the Romans: and if it were so, the
Carthaginians were not bound unto it, for that Asdrubal had exceeded his
Commission, and had done it without the authority of the Senate or people of
Carthage. Whereunto he alleged in the like case, that the Romans had been
of opinion, that the accord made in Sicily by the Consul Luctatius should be
broken, for that it had been made without the authority of the people of Rome.

Finally, he insisted still upon this accord whilst his Speech continued, and
read it often, saying, that there was no mention made of Ebro, and that the
Allies of the one and of the other were only reserved: and that moreover, it
did nothing concern the Sagontins, for that at the time of the accord they
were not allied unto the Romans. The Ambassadors repulsed with great words
this contention concerning the right of the accord, as a thing which concerns
the honor of the people of Rome: saying that the quarrels might be decided,
if the Sagontins were in there entire. But now that Sagont is razed, and that
the faith and accords are wickedly broken, they should either deliver the
Author of the Crime to the Romans, to the end that all the World might know,
that Sagont has not been overthrown and ruined with the consent of the
Carthaginians: Or if they will not, but confess that the Town has been
destroyed with their consent, that they should prepare to War. Thus ended
their discourse, which they held more amply and in general.

I have held it most necessary not to pass over this particular in silence, to
the end the truth may not be hidden to those which deal in public affairs,
or which have cause to consider exactly of these things: Or else have a desire
to know whether they err, being deceived by the ignorance and sottishness of
Historiographers, for want of knowledge of the treaties which from the first
Punique War, unto our times have been made betwixt the Romans and the
Carthaginians. The first then was made betwixt these two Nations, immediately
after that the name of King was chased out of Rome, Lucius, Iunius, Brutus, and
Marcus Valerius being Consuls, under whom also a Temple was dedicated to
Jupiter Capitolinus, The Temple of Jupiter Capitolinus.
eight and twenty years before the first voyage of Xerxes into Greece: the
which we have interpreted with the greatest diligence we could possibly.
Believe me, the Roman tongue has been so changed since that time unto our
days, The Roman tongue changed.
as they which are the best instructed in Antiquities, understand not much of
it, but with great difficulty.

This accord contains in a manner thus much: The first accord betwixt the
Romans and the Carthaginians.
The people of Rome, and the Carthaginians shall live in Amity and Friendship:
The like shall their Allies do. The Romans and their Allies shall not sail
beyond the Promontory of Beauty, unless they be forced by storm, or the
violence of their Enemies. If any one takes Port for these causes, he shall
not buy, I conceive that this Promontory is that which they call the Promontory
of Mercure, in Affricke, where as now the City Clipca stands.
nor take anything, but what necessity shall require for Sacrifices and for
Ships. And that within the fifth day they shall set fail for their retreat.
They which shall arrive there for the trade of Merchandise, shall be free,
except the duties which belong unto the Register, and to the City, who shall
give a Certificate of all that which shall be sold in their presence, in Affricke
or Sardinia. If any Roman arriues in Sicily, where the Carthaginians are
Lords, they shall do him no wrong. The Carthaginians shall do no outrage to
the Ardeates, Anciates, Arrentins, Circins, Tarraconnois, nor the other Latins
which are subject to the Romans. And if there be any other City which is not
subject, it is not comprehended. If the Carthaginians take any one, they shall
restore it entire to the Romans, neither shall they build any Fort in Italy.
And if they be entered into the Province as Enemies, they shall not stay a whole
night. Behold in a manner what the first Treaty contained. You must understand
that the Promontory of Beauty, The Promontory of Beauty.
is right against Carthage, having its aspect to the North. Beyond the which
toward the South, the Carthaginians would not suffer the Romans to sail with
any ships of War.

The reason was as it seems, for fear they should come and discover the
places which are about the Banks of Barbary, which the Carthaginians call the
Merchants Country, by reason of the fertility thereof. And therefore if any
one driven by a storm, or pressed by the enemy, cast himself upon that Quarter,
it was not lawful for him to take any thing but what was necessary to repair
his ships, or to sacrifice: Being likewise forced to weigh Anchor, and set
sail the fifth day. As for Carthage and the other Countries of Affricke, which
are on this side the Promontory, and as for Sardinia and Sicily, whereas the
Carthaginians were Lords, it was lawful to sail thither for traffic: For
the effecting whereof the Carthaginians had sworn to observe and keep it.

But it seems that in this treaty, that the Carthaginians make mention of
Affricke and Sardinia, as of their own Provinces, holding other terms of
Sicily, which add the Country wherein they are obeyed. The Romans also do
the like for the Country of the Latins: and as for the rest of Italy, they
make not any mention, for that it was not yet subject unto them. Afterward
there was another treaty made, wherein the Carthaginians comprehended the
Tyrriens and Bisarthins: There was also added to the Cape of Beauty, Mastia,
and Tarseron: Without the which it was not lawful for the Romans to pretend
any Country, nor to purchase or build any new City. Behold the Contents: The
Romans and their Allies, the Carthaginians, Tyrriens, The second Accord.
and Bisarthins, and their Allies, shall live in friendship. The Romans not
their Allies shall not sail beyond the Promontory of Beauty, nor or Mastia, or
Tarseion, to rob and spoil, nor to Traffic, nor to build any Town. If the
Carthaginians take any Town in Italy, which is not subject to the Romans,
they shall have spoil, and restore the Town unto the Romans. If they have
taken any of the free people, which were Allied to the Romans, they shall not
bring them unto any Port which belongs unto the Romans. And if they bring any
one thither, and he be known to the Romans, they shall be set at liberty. The
like shall be done unto the Romans in those Towns which are subject to the
Carthaginians.

If a Roman refreshes himself with Water and Victuals, the Carthaginians shall
do him no wrong, with whom they have concluded a peace and friendship, and if
they do it, the outrage shall be held public. And as for Sardinia and
Affricke, the Romans nor their Allies may not Traffic nor have any Town, or
buy any thing but what is necessary, for Sacrifice or the repairing of their
ships. And if any ship be cast upon that Coast by Tempest, they shall set
Sail within the fifth day. In regard of Sicily, the Romans may Traffic
where the Carthaginians are obeyed: The like they may do at Carthage, and use
the same righ's which the Carthaginians observe. The which in the like case the
Carthaginians may do at Rome. In this Treaty it seems that the Carthaginians
show that Sardinia and Affricke were wholly theirs, and that they would deprive
the Romans of the right of Portage. But as for Sicily of that part only which
they hold.

It was also Articulated, Other Articles past betwixt the Romans and the
Carthaginians.
that the Carthaginians should not make War against the Ardiatins, the
Antiates, the Circins, Tarraconnois, nor against the other Latin Cities which
lie upon the Sea, and comprehends the Latin Region. As for the rest of Italy,
there was no mention made. Since there was a third Accord made, at such time as
Pyrrhus King of the Epirotes past into Italy, The third Accord.
before the beginning of the Punique War. Wherein were comprehended the same
Articles, adding moreover, that if they agreed with Pyrrhus, they should give
succor one unto another in the Country that was assailed: And if either of
them had need of assistance, the Carthaginians should furnish Ships as well for
the passage, as for the Combat, either of them paying their Soldiers. The
Carthaginians should succor the Romans by Sea, and no man should be forced to
Land his men. But as I have understood, the oath of the first Treaties was made
in this manner.

The Carthaginians swear by the gods of their Country: The manner of Swearing
of the Romans and Carthaginians in their treati^s.
And the Romans by the Stone, according to their ancient Custom, calling
thereunto the powers of Mars the Warlike. Behold the manner which they observed
to swear by the Stone. The Herald of Arms, after the Treaty of Peace was
concluded betwixt the two Nations, having the Stone in his hands, used these
Words. I pray unto the gods that all things may come successefully unto me, if
this Accord and Oath which I take, be done justly and without fraud. But if I
do or think otherwise that I may die alone, as this Stone shall fall out of my
hand, all the rest being sound and safe in their own Country, their Laws,
Houses, Temples, and Sepulchers, and without speaking any Word more, he let the
Stone fall out of his hand.

As these things are true, and are at this day to be seen, graven in Tables of
Brass, in the Temple of Jupiter Capitolium, where they are carefully kept by
the Ediles, Phisinus a Historiographer.
Who will not wonder at the Historiographer Philinus, not for that he knew it
not (for without doubt many ancient Romans and Carthaginians, I say of our
time, and which have been very curious of such things, do not know it:) But
for that he has dared to write things quite contrary; saying that in these
Accords was contained that the Romans should quit all Sycily, and the
Carthaginians all Italy? Wherefore the Romans has broken their faith and
promise, at their first Voyage into Sycily. And yet this is not found Written.

Philinus has written this Discourse in the second of his Books, the which
relating lightly in the first Book, we have reserved to this place, to the end
we may debate it in particular: holding it necessary, least some one might
stray from the Truth, following the error of Philinus. It will not be happily
without reason, if some one will hold the Voyage of the Romans into Sycily
worthy of blame, for that they had received the Mamertins into friendship, and
presently sent forces after in their extreme necessity, considering that a
little before they had spoiled Messina and Rhegium with great cruelty, being
two of the richest Towns in Sycily. But this were to judge like an ignorant
man, that in passing into Sycily they had broken their faith and promise. After
that the War of Sycily was ended there was another Accord made, whereof this
is the Tenor. That the Carthaginians should not only void out of Sycily,
Another accord made betwixt the Romans and the Carthaginians.
but out of all the Islands which are betwixt it and Italy. And the Allies of
the one and the other should have no Rule in neither of their Countries; nor
should make any Forts, nor draw forth any Soldiers, nor make Alliance with
either of their Allies; and that the Carthaginians should pay thirteen hundred
and twenty thousand Crowns within ten years: Whereof six hundred thousand
should be presently paid, and that moreover they should deliver all the Roman
Prisoners without ransom.

Besides all this the Romans declaring War unto them, when they were much
troubled and afflicted in Affricke, Another accord.
they forced them to make a new Treaty: Where it was said, that the
Carthaginians should leave Sardinia, and pay (besides the sum agreed upon,)
seven hundred thousand Crowns. After all these Treaties, the last was made in
Spain with Asdrubal, Another accord made with Asdrubal.
where the Carthaginians were forbidden to pass the River of Ebro or Iberus in
Arms. Behold all the Treaties which the people of Rome and Carthage made, from
the first Punique War unto the second, which the Carthaginians managed under
the Conduct of Hannibal. But it is doubtless, that as we have showed that the
Romans did not break their faith when they past into Sycily, as does plainly
appear: So afterward they declared War against the Carthaginians without
reason: when as they made the Treaty for Sardinia: for truly there can be no
reason found therein. Contrariwise we see plainly that besides all the
agreements, the Carthaginians left Sardinia, and paid a greater sum of money,
being forced by the malice of the time. And as for that, wherewith the Romans
shelter themselves, that they were forced thereunto, for that they had outraged
their Merchants at Sea: This had been formerly decided, when as the
Carthaginians delivered the Prisoners without Ransom. These are things whereof
we have spoken, when in the precedent Book we have related that which was to
be said in particular. Let us now come to the causes of the second Punique War,
and let us see which of the two Nations is to be blamed.

The Carthaginians objected those causes which we have related. The causes
propounded by the Romans for the War.
In regard of the Romans they brought none for the present, for the
indignation they had for the razing of Sagont. Yet behold those which they and
others do usually object. First there is no comparison betwixt the Treaty which
Asdrubal made and that of Luctatius, although the Carthaginians will have it
so. For it was said in that of Luctatius, that it should hold good if the
people of Rome consent unto it. And as for that of Asdrubal, there was no such
condition: Where it was expressly said, that the Carthaginians should not pass
beyond Ebro. And it was said in the other, that the Allies of either part
should live in peace: Under which terms were not only comprehended those which
then were not Allied: For it would have been Articulated, that the one nor the
other should make any new Alliance; or that they which should newly enter,
should not be comprehended, whereof there is nothing Written. For with that
whereof formerly they had given order that none of those which should enter
newly into Alliance, should be wronged: Who will believe that either of these
powerful Nations would restrain himself from receiving those he should think
good into Alliance, or to defend those that were received? In truth I conceive
that in making their Treaty, their chief intent was, that their Allies should
live in safety, and that it should not be lawful for them to receive the Allies
of the one and the other into alliance: and it was provided that the new
alliances might not draw Soldiers out of the others Provinces, nor bear any
rule there; and that they should all Line in peace.

Matters standing in these Terms, it is manifest that the Sagontins were
allied unto the Romans long before Hannibal: The Sagontins Allied a long time
with the Romances.
The which is so probable as the Carthaginians cannot deny it. For the
Sagontins for a mutiny which grew in their Town, sent not unto the
Carthaginians although they were their Neighbors, and held the greatest part
of Spain; but retired to the Romans, by whose means the sedition was
pacified and suppressed. If they say that the razing of Sagont has been the
cause of this War, they must likewise confess that the Carthaginians had no
reason to make War against the Romans, as well by the Treaty made with
Luctatius, wherein it was contained that they should do no outrage unto the
Allies, as by that which was made by Asdrubal, by the which the Carthaginians
were restrained from passing the River of Ebro in Arms. Likewise if they will
say, that the Carthaginians had taken this War to heart, for Sardinia which
had been taken from them, and for the sum of money which they had paid: I
make no doubt that they were not to be blamed, if attending the opportunity of
the time they sought to revenge: Yet I conceive there will be some, who not duly
considering hereof, will imagine it idle and to no purpose, that I examine
these reasons so dilligently.

For my part I am of opinion, The opinion of Polybius in the diligence of a
History.
that if a man be so well furnished with all things necessary, as he needs not
any assistance, yet the knowledge of things past will be pleasing unto him, and
it may be necessary. If likewise any one dare not ^relie upon this, as well in
private affairs as public, considering he is a man: and that he knows well
that this present felicity may be lost, considering that the Fortune of men is
frail and without continuance: Then I say that the knowledge of things past is
not only pleasant but necessary. But how may a man find aid and succors to
defend himself, being wronged in his own Country? Or draw all the World
unto his own opinion, making a new enterprise? Or assure the hearts of his men
when Fortune favors him, if he have not a true particular knowledge of the
deeds of his Ancestors? Believe me by this means he shall be ready and
instructed in present affairs to be able to say, and do things, whereby all
enterprises shall be discovered, and the Truth understood. For things that are
done and past, are good instructions for those that shall succeed and come
after, showing us the means, advise, and policies, whereby we may purchase
grace, help, and comfort: Or contrariwise, procure hatred, malice, or
indignation, and so move to Justice and reason. All which are of great
Consequence unto a man, as well for his private affairs, as for the public.

And therefore I am of advice, that Historiographers and they which give
themselves to read Histories, should not so much respect the Actions, as their
Consequence and that which goes before. For if you take from a History which
mentions but the deeds, how, nor wherefore it happened, and what the end was,
that which shall remain will have no instructions, and will be but a kind of
Contention: Although happily it may seem at the first sight something
pleasant, but for the future they shall reap no profit. It is true, some will
say that it is no easy thing to recover such a History, and that they cannot
well find it for the greatness and number of Books. Polybius has made forty
Books.
Believe me, they do not understand how much more easy it is to have, and to
read forty Books made with good order, whereas the deeds and actions of
Italy, Sycily, and Affricke, from the voyage of Pyrrhus into Italy, unto the
taking of Carthage are comprised: And as for those of the other parts of the
World, from the flight of Cleomenes unto the War which the Romans had against
the Acheins, near unto the Isthmus: Then to make provision, or to read so
many Books of so many particular Histories: For as they exceed ours in
greatness and number, so it is a difficult thing to comprehend any thing
certain. First, that all write not of the same things, and omit those which
have been done at the same time: the which if they were conferred together,
would the better discover the truth.

Finally, they cannot attain to that which is necessary to the History, which
are the things which precede the actions, and concern the causes. For our
part, we will consider the War of Antiochus, as having taken its occasion
from that of Phillip, and that of Phillip from the Punique War, and the
Punique from that of Sicily: Whereas all the accidents which have happened in
the mean time, and may be referred to one beginning, are diligently observed.
All which things may be easily understood by him that has written a general
History: the which is impossible by them which speak of particular Wars, as
of the Persique or Phillippique: unless perchance some one holds opinion to be
able to understand a whole War by the knowledge of one Battle: which is
impossible. And therefore our History ought to be more esteemed, than that of
particular Wars, for that it is more excellent to have learned some thing
perfectly, than to have only heard of it.

But to return from whence we strayed, when the Roman Ambassadors saw that
the Carthaginians disguised matters, they spoke no more. But the most ancient
among them taking up the skirt of his Roabe, The Roman Ambassadors signify
War unto the Carthaginians.
and showing it to the Senate, Behold says he, wherein I bring you War or
Peace: take which you please. Whereunto the Chief of the Carthaginians
answered, deliver which you will. And when he had spoken, he delivered them
War, many of the Senate cried out, that they accepted it. Upon this discourse
the Ambassadors and Senate retired. Hannibal wintering at Carthage, had given
leave to his Soldiers to return into their Country, if happily there were
any that desired to see their Kinsfolks and Friends: The order which Hannibal
gave for the defense of Spain.
To the end that having endured so much toil, they might fortify their bodies
and minds, to endure new labor. Moreover, he instructs his brother Asdrubal
by what means (if he were forced to part out of the Province) he should
defend and govern Spain against all the attempts of the Romans. Then he
sends a great Garrison into Affricke of men which he drew out of Spain: for
he had caused Soldiers to come out of Affricke into Spain, making cunningly
this division of his men: to the end that the Affricans being there, and the
Spaniards in Affricke, they should grow better by mutual obligations.

They which past into Affricke, were Thersites, Mastianes, Orites, Spaniards
and Olcades: having appointed the number of them to be twelve hundred Horse,
and thirteen thousand eight hundred and fifty Foot: and besides these eight
hundred and fifty Slingers of Maiorque and Minorque, called Balleares, with
their Island, by reason of the use of the Sling. He commands they should lodge
the greatest part in Affricke, and that the rest should remain at Carthage for
its strength. He does also leauy four thousand Foot, the choice of the youth
within the heart of Spain: the which he causes to march to Carthage, not so
much to fortify it, as to serve for Hostages. He also left in Spain to his
Brother Asdrubal fifty Quinqueremes, The equipage of War as well for Sea as
La^d, left in Spain by Hannibal, to Asdrubal his Brother.
two Quadriremes, five Triremes, and among the Quinqueremes, thirty two armed
and furnished, with the five Triremes. He also left him about four hundred
and fifty Libyphentces, which is a mixed Nation of Phenicians and Affricans: and
three hundred I^ergetois: Eighteen hundred Numidians and Moors, bordering
upon the great Sea: Eleauen thousand eight hundred and fifty Foot, Affricans:
Three hundred Geneuois: Five hundred men of Maiorque and M^norque: and one and
twenty Elephants. No man onght to wonder at our diligence in this description,
If I so observe it in the affairs of Hannibal in Spain, that even they which
practiced it, could hardly observe: Nor blame us for that after the manner of
liars, we relate I know not what petty triuiall things, The number of Hannibals
Army in a Table of Copper seen by Polybius.
the more easily to give credit unto our writing. For when I had seen at
Lauynium a Table of Copper, which Hannibal had left there, when as he ouer-ran
Italy, wherein this number was contained, I thought sit to give credit unto it;
and therefore we have followed it here.

When as Hannibal had provided for Affricke and Spain, he respected the
return of such as he had sent to move the Gauls, by whose Country he was to
pass his Army. You must understand that he had sent men to win them by
Presents, and to view the passages of the Mountain, for that he was advertised
that this Region was very fertile, and very well peopled with resolute men, and
good Soldiers, and mortal Enemies to the Romans, for the War which they
made against the Gauls, expecting that his War should be only in Italy, if
he might pass his Army safely by the streights of the Alps with their help.
After the return of his men, and that he was advertised of the expectance and
desire of the Gauls, and that the passages of the Hills were rough and
painful, not altogether inaccessible, he drew his Army together in the
Spring. It is true, that the news which at the same time he received, of that
which happened at Carthage, inflamed his cholle^ the more against the Romans,
having thereby a confident hope of the fidelity and affection of his Nation.
When as all the Army was drawn together, Hannibal made an Oration, The Oration
which Hannibal made to his Soldiers.
not to any one part, but publickely to all the Soldiers, by diverse means
persuading them to embrace the War against the Romans: and how that he and
the other Captains of Carthage had been demanded of them for to be put to
death, for the taking of Sagont. He acquaints them likewise of the fertility
of the Province whither they made their voyage, making great esteem and
respect of the Friendship and alliance of the Gauls. After which speech,
seeing them all resolute, and that they demanded nothing but to part, he
commended their good will and prowess. And after he had told them the day when
they should trusse up their baggage, he dismissed them. In the mean time, when
he had made all necessary preparations for his Voyage, The number of Horse and
Foot which were in Hannibals Army at his parting from Spain.
he dislodged suddenly, when the day of parting was come, with fourscore and
ten thousand Foot, and twelve thousand Horse, and past the River of Ebro.

Then within few days, he brought under his obedience the Ilergetins, the
Bargusins, the Erinosins, and Andolisiens: the like they did to all other
Towns unto the Pyrenee Mountains, razing some. And as he performed this
sooner than any man could conceive, so he did it not without many cruel
battles, and great loss of men. He settled Hanno Governor of this Country,
and made him likewise Lord of the Bargusins: for that he did not greatly trust
those people, for the Alliance they had with the Romans: and he gave him ten
thousand Foot, The number of men which Hannibal left to Hanno for the guard of
Spain.
and a thousand Horse for the guard of their Country, leaving with him all
their baggage which marched with him. He sent back the like number of
Spaniards to their houses, partly for that he understood they were grieved
with the length of the Journey, and the difficult passages of the Mountains:
and partly to give hope unto others, to return sometimes into their Country:
and that they which he left in their houses, should march more willingly into
Italy, if he needed succors. He marched then with the rest of his Army,
Hannibals Army of 50* thousand Foot and nine thousand Horse.
which amounted unto the number of fifty thousand Foot, and nine thousand
Horse.

And passing the Pyrenee Mountains, he drew near unto the mouth of the River
of Rhone, not so well accompanied with great numbers as good men, who had been
always victorious. But to the end this may not seem too obscure by the
ignorance of places, we have thought it fit to show in few words, from whence
Hannibal parted, and what great Countries he past, and into what parts of
Italy he entered. It is true, we have not set down the names of the places, as
many Historiographers do, thinking that all will the better be understood, if
they have the knowledge thereof: For my part, I am of opinion, that the
relation of the names of places, whereof we have knowledge, are of great
profit, for the more easy understanding, and more certain memory of things.
But where the places are unknown, their names are like unto that manner of
voice, which besides the hearing, signifies nothing. By this means it happens,
that seeing our understanding does not comprehend any thing by the name, and
the which known, cannot breed any great profit, that the relation is
altogether fruitless. And therefore we must find means, by the which
speaking of places that are unknown, we may make the truth to be understood by
the Readers with all our power.

The first and principal knowledge, common to all men, is the Division of this
World wherein we are contained, by the which we know (even Idiots) the East,
West, South and North. The second is by the which attributing to every one of
these parts the parties of the World we come in some sort to the knowledge of
places which we have never seen. But as the round Circle of the Earth consists
of many parts, whereof some are inhabitable, and others in situation opposite
to ours, The division of the World in three parts.
inhabited by the Antipodes: We must for the present speak only of the
situation of the Country which we inhabit. And for that it is divided into
three parts, and has three names, whereof they call the one Asia, the other
Affricke, and the third Europe. It is a division which the Rivers of Tanais and
Nile make, joining to the streights of Hercules Pillars. Asia is seated betwixt
Nile and Tanais, taking its extent toward the East and South. In regard of
Affricke, it is seated betwixt the Nile and the Pillars of Hercules, taking its
extent under the South, and toward the Hiuernall west unto the Equinoxiall,
and to the streights of Gibeltar. Finally, these two parts seem to hold more
the Country under the South, from the East following our Sea then toward the
West.

And as for Europe, it is limited drawing toward the North, and continuing
from the East unto the West: whose greatest extent lies toward the North,
betwixt the River of Tanais and Narbonna, which is not far from the Country
of Marcelles toward the West, and the mouths of the River of Rhone, which
lose themselves in the Sardinian Sea. The Gauls hold all that Country, from
Narbonna unto the Perinee Mountains, the which extend themselves from our Sea
unto the Ocean, and as for the rest of Europe from the Perinee Mountains unto
the West, I mean unto the Pillars of Hercules, it is environed on the one side
by our Sea, and on the other by the maine Ocean. The Country about which our
Sea does flow, unto the Pillars of Hercules, is called Spain. And as for that
which has its aspect to the Ocean, it has not yet any known name that has
come to our knowledge: although it be fully inhabited by Barbarous people, of
whom we will speak particularly when we come to their Rank. For as the Region
which is near unto Ethiopia, whereas Asia and Affricke ioynes, is at this day
unknown, whether it be firm land continued toward the South, or enclosed by
the Sea: So likewise the Country is at this day unknown, which betwixt Tanais
and Narbonna draws toward the North: so as they dream which speak or write
any thing.

It was necessary to make this digression, to the end that the deeds which we
are to relate, might not be altogether obscure to those which know not the
places, and that they might come the knowledge of the truth as much as is
possible, by the Regions of Heaven and Earth. For we have been always
accustomed to turn our face continually to that which they teach us by reason
and example: The understanding must always have regard to those Countries
which are interposed in the relation. Leaving then our discourse, What the
Carthaginians held in Afric.
let us return to the continuance of our speech. The Carthaginians at that
time held all the Affricaine shore, whereas our Sea flows, from the Philonien
Altars, near unto the Banks of Barbary, unto the Pillars of Hercules (this
contains about sixteen thousand Furlongs) and in passing that little Sea
which is betwixt Affricke and Europe they had Conquered all Spain, unto the
Perinee mountains, which divide that Province from Gaul. From the which unto
streights of Gebeltar, where stand the Pillars of Hercules, there is about
eight thousand Furlongs: And from the straight unto the new Town, which some
call Carthage, from whence Hannibal parted to go into Italy, three thousand
furlongs: And from Carthage to Ebro, two thousand six hundred furlongs: From
thence to the Empories, sixteen hundred: And from thence to the mouth of the
River of Rhone sixeteene hundred furlongs. Behold the measure of those places
which the Romans have made with great diligence. From the passage of the
Rhone, following the Banks toward the Spring, unto the passage of the Alps
into Italy, thirteen hundred furlongs; and the passage of the Mountain is
held to be twelve hundred. After which they come into the Champion Country
which is about Poe. And therefore Hannibal was to march nine thousand furlongs,
from Carthage unto the entry of Italy. And if we will observe the way, he had
already past the one half: But if we will consider the difficulty of the
Country, he had the most troublesome task to perform. Hannibal endeavored by
all means to pass the Perinee Mountains, not without some fear of the
Gauls; least knowing the passages, they should interrupt his voyage into Italy.

In the mean time news came to Rome of that which had been spoken and done
at Carthage, by the Ambassadors, and that Hannibal had past the River of Ebro
with his Army, much sooner then they expected, making have to go into Italy;
for the which the great men of Rome were not a little amazed: Co^^iuing that
he would move the Nation of the Gauls against them, A division of the
Provinces to the Consul.
being always desirous of War. Wherefore after the Election of the Consuls,
the divided the Provinces: Whereof Spain was for Publius Cornelius, and
Affricke with Sycily for Tytus Sempronius: To whom they appointed six Legions
for that year, and as many Allies as they should think good; and as great an
Army at Sea as they could make.

Whilst they L^uied men at Rome, and that the Army at Sea and Munitions were
preparing, and all the necessary Equipage for the Sea, they labored to people
their Collonies, which they had lately in Gaul near unto the Poe. There were
Cities newly built, and Citizens enjoined to be there within thirty days, to
either City six thousand men: The building of Plaisance and Cremona.
whereof the one which was on this side the Poe, was called Plaisance, and the
other on the further side Cremona. The Boloniens discontented herewith, and
remembering the ancient quarrels, abandoned the Roman party, The reu^lt of the
Boloniens.
being advertised of the Descent of the Carthaginians, leaving the Hostages
which they had given in the former War, whereof we have made mention in the
last Book: And taking Arms suddenly, they solicited the Milan^^is to do the
like, making a tumultuous hurly-burly in the Country assigned to the
Collonies, so as all the people terrified fled to Modena, Modena besiged by the
Gauls.
with the three Deputies which were come to divide the Land: Whom the Bolonieus
pursued, and besieged the Town. The siege continuing some time, they made a
show to parley of Peace: And when as the Princes of the Gauls had caused some
Ambassadors to come unto them, they stayed them contrary to the Law of
Nations, refusing to send them back, if their Hostages were not delivered.

When the news of this accident was come unto them, Lucius Manlius the Praetor,
who was then present with an Army, inflamed with Rage, A Surprise made by the
Boloniens upon the Romans.
makes have to succor the Besieged, whereof the Boloniens being advertised,
they laid an Ambush in the Forest near the way, and surprising their enemies
at their coming, they slew a great number of the Romans: The rest with great
difficulty recovering the fields, saved themselves: Where although the
Soldiers assured themselves for a time, yet finding that the Boloniens pursued
them in the Rear, they ^^ed to recover the Town of Cannet. When the news
came unto Rome, the Romans fearing that their Army would be endangered by a
long siege, they appointed Attillius the Praetor to succor the Besieged with
the Troops prepared for the new Leuy of the Consul, enioyning him moreover to
make a Leuy of others: The parting of the Roman Armies.
Behold the estate wherein the affairs of the Gauls stood until the coming
of Hannibal. In the mean time the Consulls having made ready all their
necessary Equipage, parted from Rome: whereof Publius Cornelius bent his course
to Spain, with threescore vessels of war, and Sempronius into Affricke with
a hundred and three score Quiqueremes, taking the War so to heart, as he made
so great a preparation at Lylibeum, that it seemed he should presently besiege
Carthage.

As for Cornelius, he took his way by the Country of Tuscany and the Gene^^is;
and arrived on the fifth day at Marcelles, and entered with his Army at the
first mouth of Rhone, for it passes into the Sea by many mouths. And although
he were advertised that Hannibal past the Pyrenee mountains, yet he made his
account that he had a long way to go, as well for the difficulty of the
Country, as for the multitude of the Gauls, those parts being very well
peopled. But Hannibal made have daily to pass the Rhone with his Army, near
unto the shore of the Sardinian Sea, with incredible diligence, after that he
had pacified the Gauls partly with gifts, and partly by fear. The which the
Consul hearing, and believing but in part this sudden arrival; desiring
likewise to know the truth, he Lands, to refresh his Men wearied with a torment
at Sea. Then he acquaints the Tribunes with the places, by the which they must
go to encounter the Enemy, and sends three hundred choice Horse before, under
the Conduct of Pronencials, and some succors of the Gauls, to discover the
Enemies enterprise.

Hannibal being now near the Rhone with his Army, and within four days
journey of the Sea, makes have to pass it with all possible speed. And
therefore he calls all the inhabitants thereabouts, and wins them by Presents,
from whom he buies Skifs and small Boats which they ordinarily use, and
whereof there were at that time a great number, by reason of the Faires for the
Trade of the Sea: And he causes others to be made in making hollow the bodies
of Trees. The which the Soldiers likewise did, being moved with the abundance
of stuff and the facility of the Work: So as in less then two days, there
were so many Boats and Skifs, as they were sufficient to pass: Every man
striving not to be at the mercy of his Companion or Comrade, but to pass
himself and his baggage into his own Skiffe or Boat.

In the mean time there were an infinite number of men drawn together upon
the further Bank of the Rhone, The Gauls endeavor to stop Hannibals passag^
over the Rhone.
to hinder the Carthaginians passage. The which Hannibal perceiving, and
knowing well that he could not pass the River by force, for that the Enemy
held the other Bank, nor stay there long, but he should be environed by the
people of the Country, at the setting of the third Watch of the night the sends
Hann^ son to King Bomilcar with a part of his Army, to whom he gave some
guides of the Country; who mounted up the River two hundred furlongs, staying
above an Island, about the which the Rhone did run: Where by reason of the
Ford it seemed good, for that the River divided it self in two. They suddenly
cut down wood, and made floates sufficient to pass the men, and other things
necessary. By this means they past the Rhone without danger or impeachment.
Afterward they recovered a place strong by nature, where they refresht
themselves a day, for the toil which they had taken, as well for their march by
night, as for the pains they had endured, being all attentive to affect their
enterprise in time.

Hannibal likewise made have to do the like, with the rest of the Army. But he
was troubled to pass the Elephants, being thirty seven in number. Hannibal
causes his Army to pass the Rhone.
The night following, they which had past the Rhone, marching along the River
side, at the break of day approached near unto the Barbarians, who as we have
said were there assembled. Hannibal on the other side, having his men ready,
commands them all to be re^olute to pass, and that they should put the
Horsemen prepared for the Combat in Boats, to the end that being past they
might serve if necessity required: And that the most active and nimblest
footmen should enter into the Skifs. And to the end they might pass with more
ease and safety, and might the better break the vehemence of the Waves, he
placed Boats above the River to break the Violent* and swift course. He also
caused three or four Horses to be tied to the Poope to swim it over, and there
were two men set of either side of the Poope. By this means the greatest part
of the Horses had bin past in the first Voyage.

The which the Barbarians seeing, they came out of their Fort, and run unto
the shore in a great throng and without order, as if they should easily defeat
the Enemies. But after that Hannibal had stayed a little, and seeing his men
approach by the smoke that they cast, according to his appointment, he gave a
sign to his whole Army to pass, the which the Carthaginians seeing, they
labored with all their power to pass the River with great cries, and to
break the Violence of the stream, so as every one labored to pass first.
When as the Carthaginians held the two Banks, and past the river with great
noise, the Gauls endeavoring with great fury to ressist them, crying, and
singing after their manner. The Charge was terrible for the time, and the
Combat horrible to see. All the Gauls were run down unto the River, and had
left their Tents. Hanno arriues presently with his Troop, Hanno charge the
Gauls
whereof one part falls upon their Camp, and the other Charges them in the
rear. The Gauls being amazed at this sudden accident, recover a part of
their Camp, to keep it from the Enemies; the others were no less attentive
in the Combat. When Hannibal saw his enterprise succeed so happily, he
incourageth his Soldiers, putting them in mind of their ancient prowess,
and persuading them to repulse the Enemies courageously. Whereupon they fall
upon them with great fury. Hannibals Victory over the Gauls.
Finally, the Gauls retired into their Villages with a shameful flight, for
that they had begun the battle without order, and had bin terrified by the
surprise which Hanno made with his Legion.

When as Hannibal had at one instant, vanquished the River and his Enemies, he
causes the rest of his Army to pass at leisure. And being all past in a short
time, he planted his Camp without fear of the Gauls, and spent the night in
peace upon the River side. Three days after he was advertised of the entry of
the Roman Consul, with his Army at Sea into the mouths of Rhone. Wherefore he
sent five hundred Numidians, to discover the Enemies, to view their numbers,
and to learn what they resolved. In the mean time he gives order unto the
masters of the Elephants to be careful to pass the Rhone. Remonstrances of
the Gaulish Kings unto the Carthaginian Camp.
And having drawn his men together, he causes the Kings to be called, who
were come unto him from Gaul which lies beyond the Poe. Who speaking unto the
whole Camp by an Interpreter, advised them to pass the Mountains, promising
that both themselves, and the rest of the inhabitants of Gaul should give them
both aid and assistance: That the ways were safe, and well furnished with all
things necessary: And that moreover the mountains were not very difficult to
pass, and they should find the places where they were to go, abounding in
all things. Besides, they should find such Allies, whose Courage in times past
was not a little feared by the Romans. After these or the like words, the Kings
presently retired.

Then Hannibal entering into the Assembly, Hanibals speech unto his Soldiers.
he shows them first their Actions past, wherein following his Council and
opinion, they had bin always Victorious: And that Fortune had never bin auerse
unto them. Moreover he intreates them to be of good courage, being assured that
they had ended the greatest of their Labors, having past so dangerous a River,
considering the good affection of their Allies, who were ready and prepared.
Finally, that they should lay the burden of affairs upon him, showing only
their Obedience, where it should be needful, with a remembrance of his Virtue
and Prowess, which he had performed with so great resolution. His speech being
ended, seeing the joyful Countenance of his men, carrying the show of
resolution, he commended them all. Then having made his prayers unto the gods
according to their manner, he retired, and sent them away to feed, giving them
charge to be ready to part the next day.

The Company was scarce dismissed when as the Numidians, who as we have said,
had been sent to discover, returned, defeated and broken by the Enemy: for as
they encountered near unto their Camp, the Roman Cauallery, whom Scipio had
sent for the same cause, they charged one another with such fury, as there were
slain seven score Horse as well Romans as Gauls, and above two hundred
Numidians. The Romans pursuing the Carthaginians unto their Camp, where having
diligently observed all, A defeat of the Numidians by the Roman Cauallory.
they returned to the Consul, and reported certain news of the Enemy, and of
the Combat they had with the Numidians. Which things being heard, Publius
Cornelins seeing that his stay there, would be of no great moment, imbarkes
his Baggage: and parting with all his Troops along the Banks of Rhone, and
makes haste as if he would give battle to the Enemy.

Three days after that Hannibal had made his Oration to the Soldiers, at the
break of day he sets all his Horsemen upon the Seashore, as it were for a
guard: and causes the Foote-men to march a slow pace, being parted from their
Camp: using the greatest diligence he could possible to pass the Elephants:
For the effecting whereof he took this advice. He made provision of many
floats, and tied two together from the Land unto the River, being fifty foot
broad: The means to pass the Elephants.
to the which they added two others on the side of the Banks: The which they
tied fast unto Trees which were upon the Banks, to the end they might swim
safely: their length being of two hundred foot.

Finally, they tied unto these last two other long floats gently, to the end
they might be easily untied: to the which were fastened certain Cords,
wherewith they might draw the Boats to the other Bank, after they should be
untied from the other floats. Finally, they covered them all with Earth, to the
end that the Elephants might march upon them without fear as upon the Land.
This Equipage being prepared, they brought the Elephants, who had been
accustomed to obey the Indians in all places, but upon the water, by the means
of two Females which marched before upon the floats as upon the firm land,
which after they had past unto the last, which presently were untied, and were
drawn by the Boats without any fear whilst they were all together: But when
as the last floate was separated from the rest, and that they saw themselves
carried upon the water, they made some show of affrightment, for the fear
which they had of all parts, for that the last fled from the water: The fear
of the Elephants upon the Rhone.
yet this fear made them quiet, for that they saw nothing but water about
them. When the first were past, they went to fetch the rest, and past them.
Some of them tormenting themselves with fear, fell into the River, and were
retired safe, although their Masters were slain: For in marching slowly, and
finding always footing, they recovered the other side of the Bank: for that
their weight kept them firm, and by reason of their greatness they had their
Tronks always above the River, wherewith they might cast out the water if they
had drunk any: and so recover their breath.

The Elephants being past, Hannibal marches with them, and all his Cauallery
along the Rhone toward the firm land, The Spring of the River of Rhone.
drawing all his provisions in the mean time from the Sea. The Rhone comes
from three heads of Fountains above the Sea of Venice, taking their course
toward the West, and bending at the foot of the Mountain something toward
the North. Then it enters into the Lake of Geneua, where it is not so violent:
and passing through the midst of it, it tends to the Hyuernall West, dividing
the Gauls in some sort: and then taking its course toward the South, it
enters into the Sardinian Sea. The Valesien Gauls inhabit that part which
tends toward the North: and on the South side is environed with the Mountains
which bend toward the North. And as for the Plains which are about Poe,
whereof we have formerly spoken, the Alps separate them from the Rhone, which
beginning at Marseilles, extend unto the Gulf of Venice. Hannibal passes the
Alps along the Rhone.
The which Hannibal then past about that Country which lies near unto the
Rhone, and came into Italy.

Some Historiographers seeking in this passage to terrify the judgment of
Readers, do not observe that they fall into two strange errors, contrary to
the reason of the History: For they are forced to write lies, and actions quite
contrary: showing Hannibal (whom they will have inimitable, as well for his
knowledge in Martial affairs, as for his great courage) to be wholly void of
sense and reason. And in the end when they cannot free themselves from their
lies, they have recourse unto the gods, for their History made at pleasure. For
in making the passage of the Alps so great and difficult, so as not only the
Horsemen, Baggage, nor Elephants could not pass, neither yet the Foot men
lightly armed; and that moreover, there is so great a Desert, that if God, or
some Angel had not guided the Army, without doubt it had perished in the Caves
and hollow places; they fall directly into two errors. First, where should you
find a Commander more senseless then Hannibal, Polybius his remonstrance
against Historiographers.
who having the charge of so many troops, and of so great an Army, wherein
consisted all his hope to prevail in his enterprise, knew neither the
passages, nor the places, as they say, nor which way he should pass, nor
against whom? For their meaning is, that with so great a hope, and with such a
triumphant Army, he should do that which others after many Combats do not
attempt, but through extreme despair. But what can be spoken more
unreasonable? And whereas they say the places are desert and rough, they show
themselves apparent liars. They do not say how the Gauls inhabiting the banks
of Rhone, The Gauls inhabiting along the Rhone have often past into Italy.
before that time have past into Italy, not once nor twice: Nor how in times
past, they have past the Mountains with a great Army against the Romans, to
succor and help the Cisalphin Gauls: nor how that those Mountains are very
well peopled: But as men ignorant hereof, they say, that I know not what God
appeared to Hannibal, and showed him the way. By this means they seem rather
Tragedians than Historiographers. For even as they which write Tragedies, do
many time their Plays with the gods, or some other invention, for that they
have taken a false and strange beginning: Even so these kind of
Historiographers are in the like pain: For that taking false beginnings, they
are forced to fly to some gods, or Heroes.

But how can it be that from a false beginning the end should be true?
Without doubt Hannibal has not carried himself as they imagine, but
contrariwise like a wise and politic Captain, for he duly considered the
fertility of the Country whither he went, and the hatred of the Inhabitants
against the Romans. And he had to pass the Mountains (which is a hard and
difficult thing) the people of the Country for his guides, Hannibal conducted
by guides at the passage of the Mountains.
whom he had already won against the Romans. This we have learned from those
which were at that time employed in affairs, and we our selves have been
purposely to see the Alps, polybius visited the Alps.
and therefore we have written it the more boldly.

Three days after the Romans departed from the Banks of Rhone, Publius Scipio
the Roman Consul being come to the Enemies Camp with a resolution to fight,
he stood for a time amazed, seeing the place void: For he made his account
that the Enemy should never take that Country to pass into Italy, as well for
the difficulty of the way, as for the multitude of Barbarians which held it.
But after he had well waighed the great courage of the Carthaginians, he
presently recouers his ship, and draws his Army together: Then he sends his
Brother into Spain with part of his men, to the end it should not be
unfurnished of Forces, and himself takes his course toward Italy, to
encounter Hannibal at the descent of the Mountains with more ease and safety.
Four days after Hannibal arrived at Lisle, Lisle made by the (...) of Saone
and Rhone.
a rich and fertile Country: The which was so called, for that the Rivers of
Saone and Rhone falling from the Mountains, embracing a little quantity of
Land, run together and make an Island like in figure and form to another that
is in Egypt, Doltaan Island in Egypt.
called De^^a. It is true, that that in Egypt has on the one side the Sea,
with the which two Rivers join: But this has rough and stony Mountains,
which in a manner are inaccessible. Where Hannibal being arrived, he found two
Brothers in quarrel for the Kingdom, and their Armies fronting one another.
But being called by the eldest, and increased to restore him to his Fathers
inheritance, he obeyed him, thinking it would assist him much in his
Enterprise. And when he had chased away the younger, and put him in possession
of his Realm, he had not only store of victuals, and abundance of all things
for a recompense: But moreover they were furnished with all sorts of Arms and
other furniture, whereof the roughness of the cold Mountains forced him to
make provision. His Army, and himself were likewise conducted safely by the
King and his forces, through the Sauoyards Country unto the Mountains, which
was a great benefit to him.

When he in ten days after his departure from the Rhone had marched labou^ an
hundred miles, he began to ascend the Mountain, where he was in great danger.
It is true, that whilst the Carthaginians past the Plain, the Lords of Sanuoy
suffered them to go on quietly, partly fearing their Horsemen and partly the
Gauls forces, which did accompany them.

But when as they were retired to their houses, and that the Carthaginians
began to ascend the rough and steep Mountains: then they drew together in
great multitudes, and seized upon the passages, by the which Hannibal must of
necessity go. And if they had laid seattering ambushes in the (Valleys), The
Sauyards hindet Hannibal and his Army.
and had charged them suddenly, without doubt they had made a great slaughter
of the Carthaginians. But being discovered by Hannibal, they did not so much
annoy the Enemy as themselves: For when he found that they held all the
passages, he causes his Army to stay, and lodging among the Rocks and hollow
places, he sent some no the Gauls that were with him, to visit the places,
and to discover the Enemies intention and and preparations. Being advertised by
them, that the Enemy stayed there only in the day, and that by night every man
retired to his house, to a Town which was near by, he used this invention. At
the break of day he recouers the Hills with his whole Army, Hannibals policy:
as if he had an intent to force through the Enemy. But when he was near unto
them, he settled his Camp, and fortified himself.

And when he found the Villains of the Mountains had retired themselves from
their Hills, he makes many fires in his Camp, leaving the greatest part of his
Army there, and steals through the streights with the best and ablest men of
his Army, staying upon those Hills which the Enemy formerly held. This done
when the Villains of the Mountains saw, it (...) the break of day, they made
a stand for a time: But finding that the baggage and the multitude of Horsemen
disordered the Army in the streights: thinking likewise that the least
amazement were sufficient to defeated them, they charge them in diverse places
by the inaccessible Rocks. Then the Carthaginians were not so much annoyed by
the Enemy, as by the difficulty of the place: for that the Horses and baggage
made a great spoil of men and goods: They of the Mountains charge the
Carthaginians.
For as the streights were of either side sleep and like a Gulf, many Horses
fell with their burdens a wonderful height. The Horses being struck or hurt,
were wonderfully troubled, the way being narrow, falling partly for fear, and
partly for the grief of their hurts. The which Hannibal seeing, and thatthere
was no hope in flight, after the loss of his baggage, he descends with great
fury from the place where he had remained all night. And although he gave a
great defeat to the Enemy, yet he slew many of his own: For the motion
increasing on either side, Hannibals victory against the Sauoyards.
many fell.

Finally, after that the Sau. yards had been slain, some in fighting, and
some in the route: Hannibal past the rest of his Horse and baggage with great
pain and trouble. And having drawn together the rest of his Army, he marched
to the City from whence the Sauoyards had sallied, the which he took without
resistance, finding no man in it. It was a great relief unto him for all
things necessary, not only for the present but for the future: for he carried
away a great number of Horses and Prisoners; and victualled his Army for three
days with Corn and Cattle: Amazing the other Inhabitants of the mountains,
who durst not make the like attempt: Which was a thing more to be esteemed.

He stayed there one day, and parting with his Army, he marched but little the
two days following, and on the fourth he was again in great danger. He was
come unto a place among the Mountains very well peopled with Inhabitants, who
altogether had Conspired to deceive the Carthaginians. Wherefore they go to
meet Hannibal, carrying Garlands of Flowers: Conspiracy of them of the
Mountains, (...) color of friendship.
which is a sign of friendship and peace among the Barbarians, like unto the
Caducei among the Grecians. Hannibal did not think it fit to give credit
easily unto them, and inquires what their will and intent was: Who answered,
that they did like well of the taking of the Town and the defeat of the
Gauls, who were Enemies unto them: And as for themselves they would obey his
will, and would not do, nor suffer any ourrage; promising to give him Hostages
for the assurance of their promises. And although that Hannibal was long in
suspense what to do, yet he considered that he might happily pacify the
Barbarians, if he accepted these Conditions, and if he refused them, they would
declare themselves his Enemies. Wherefore in giving them a gracious answer, he
makes show to receive their Alliance.

And when they had not only given him Hostages, but furnished him with
abundance of Victuals, The Treason of the Barbarians against Hannibal.
and put themselves into his hands: Hannibal had so great Confidence in them,
as he made no doubt but to make use of them for Guides in difficult places.
When they had marched two days, and were come unto a straight Valley, having
the Mountain on one side, the Carthaginians were in danger to be wholly
defeated: For that the Barbarians fallied from all sides out of their Ambushes.
If Hannibal (who had not yet so great confidence in the Gauls, and who
foresaw future things,) had not put the Elephants and Horsemen in the
foreward, and had followed in the Rear with the force of his footmen, having
an Eye over all. By this supply the loss proou'd the less; yet it was great
both of Men, Horses, and Baggage: for the danger was so great, as Hannibal was
enforced to continue a whole night there with half his Army, without his
Cauallery of Baggage: For that the Enemy held the top of the Mountain, which
was very near unto them, rolling down pieces of the Rock into the Army, and
sometimes casting stones.

The day following, when the Gauls began to grow cold, he recovered the
Mountain, joining with his Horse and Baggage: Then the Gauls presented
themselves no more to Battle, charging like Thieves, sometimes in the
foreward, sometimes in the Rear, as time and place gave them opportunity. The
Elephants were very useful to the Carthaginians; for wheresoever they marched,
the place was assured from Enemies, for that they durst not approach near
them, having not bin accustomed unto them. On the ninth day they came unto the
top of the Alps, and there they planted their Camp two days, partly to
refresh the Soldiers which were weary with toil, and partly to retire those
that were straied. During which time, many Horses freed from their burdens,
and following the Rout of the Army recovered the Camp. Those places were then
full of Snow, for it was in November: Whereby the Soldiers grew in a manner
into despair, being tired and vexed with so many Crosses. The which Hannibal
perceiving, he draws them together, resolving to make a Speech unto them.

For the effecting whereof he had but one occasion, which was to show them
Italy so near, Hanibal makes a Speech unto his soldiers.
and the fertillity thereof. In truth it is so near the foot of the
Mountains, as if it be well observed, the Hills seem to serve as Rampires to
Italy. And therefore he showed it them from a high Hill, from whence they might
see the whole Extent. The like he did of the plains about Poe, lying at the
foot of the Mountains, relating unto them the friendship of the Gauls
inhabiting those Countries, and the Territory of Rome: wherewith he revived
their spirits. Three days after he began to dislodge, the Enemy making no
attempt against them, but after a Theeuing manner: Yet he had no less loss at
the descent of the Mountains by reason of the bad Country, and the coldness
of the Snow, then he had at the ascent by the attempt of his Enemies: For they
which did stumble in any sort, fell presently into a Gulf, considering that
the place was narrow and rough by nature: And all the Country newly covered
with Snow, so as there was no show of any path, neither could they hold their
footing. It is true the men accustomed unto so many miseries, did easily endure
this Trouble.

In the mean time they came to another Rock, where as neither the Elephants
nor Horse could pass: for a late fall of the ground, had straightened the Way
two hundred paces, which had formerly bin as large. Here again the Army began
to be troubled and tormented. Hannibal in the beginning labored to lead his
Army by vncough and unknown places, whereas never soul had bin: But for that
the Snow hindered them that they could not pass, he desisted from his
Enterprise. There had Snow fallen newly this year upon the old, which was yet
whole and entire, upon the which they had firm footing, for that which was
newly fallen was soft and not very thick. But after that it had bin trodden
and beaten by so many men and horses, no man could keep his footing: As it
happens to those which go upon places which are slippery with dirt, where their
footing fails them: For that they marched upon the Ice, and upon the Snow that
was moulten.

Moreover the men (which was more miserable) falling back-wards (for that they
could not keep their footing in those slippery places) tumbled down into the
Caves and hollow places, where they labored to rise upon their Hands and
Knees. The Horses of burden fell sometimes, brake the Ice and could not
stir: for that they were laden and could not retire their feet out of the
Ice. Then Hannibal frustrate of his former hope, for that the men and Horses
labored in vain, planted his Camp upon the top of the Mountain, having
cleansed the place of great difficulty. Then he Commanded them all to leuile
the way unto the Rock where they were to pass: The which was done with much
toil. When as the way was made in one day for the Horses and Sumpters, he
caused them presently to pass, seating his Camp in those places that were
without Snow, and there to feed. In the mean time he gives charge to the
Numidians, to make a way for the Elephants: The which was effected with great
difficulty, they being in a manner dead for hunger; for the tops of the
Mountains are without Grass or Trees, for that they are continually covered
with Snow. It is true, that the Valleys of either side of the Mountains,
having goodly Pastures and Trees, and places which are very well inhabited.

When as Hannibal had drawn all his Troops together, Hannibal goes on his
course.
he began to pursue his course: and having past the Rock above mentioned, in
three days, he came unto the Plain, having lost the greatest part of his
Army, as well by the Enemy and Rivers in his way, as by the roughness of the
Mountain in passing them, and not only men, but also Horses and Carriages.
Finally, having recovered Italy in this manner, five months after his
departure from Carthage, and past the mountains in fifteen days, The number
of men which Hannibal had remaining after he had past the Alps.
he enters boldly into the Countries about Poe and Millan, having yet remaining
about ten thousand, two hundred foot Affricans, eight thousand Spanriards, and
six thousand Horse at the most. This he testifies in a pillar where the whole
number of his Army is set down at Lauynium. At the same time Publius Cornelius
Scipio the Consul, having sent his brother into Spain to make head against
Asdrubal, he sailed to Pysa with few men, taking his way through Tuscany where
he received the Army of the Pretors Manlius and Attilius, which they had
against the Bullonois; and marched directly to the River of Poe, to fight with
the Enemy before he had refresht himself.

Seeing we have turned our Discourse to the War of Italy, and to the
Commanders of these two people, we have thought it good to deliver in few
words some things which are not unfitting for a Historiographer, before we come
to those which have bin acted in that Province. It may be some one will demand
of me how it happens, that seeing we have handled the Affairs of Lybia and
Spain at large; Polybius his Excuse.
yet we have not spoken of Hercules Pillars, nor of that Arm of the Sea which
diuides Affricke from Europe nor in like manner of the great Sea or Ocean, nor
of those things which depend thereon, nor of the Islands of England and
Scotland, nor likewise of the abundance of Tin, Gold, and Silver wherewith
Spain abounds. It is certain, that the ancient Historiographers have spoken
many things and diverse, being of contrary opinions. It is true we have not
omitted them, as thinking that they were not fitting for a History, but we have
done it to the end that our Relation might not be divided, nor divert the
Readers often from the order of the History: Being of opinion that these things
should be delivered with all possible truth, in time and place, and not out of
season. And therefore no man ought to marvel, if in the following Books we
pass on, when we shall come to these passages, for we do it of purpose and for
the reasons above mentioned. If there be any one that desires to hear them at
every passage, he may well be compared to a Glutton, that is invited to a
Feast: for as tasting of all the meats, as soon as he is set at the Table, he
shall receive little pleasure or profit for the future, considering that he
has no perfect taste, and that all being put together into the Stomach, it
hinders digestion. They in like manner which do the like in reading of
Histories, hauenot pleasure for the present, nor profit for the future. It is
apparent, that a History among other things has need to be corrected in this,
as well for other reasons, as for that the ancient Historiographers, who have
labored to describe Countries, and the Nature of Regions to the remotest parts
of the World, have in many places straied from the truth.

Finally, we must speak against them, not by hazard and rashly, but with
reason, nor reprehend their ignorance, but rather to commend them and correct
them: Who no doubt would have repaired their error, if they had lived in these
times. For there are few men found among the Grecians, which in former times
could have gone to search out the extremities of the World, for the danger and
tediousnes of the way: For that there are many, and in a manner innumerable
dangers at Sea; and if any through necessity, or of his own free will, had
gone to the extremities of the World, he could not easily have found out the
situation of places, nor those things which are worthy to be sought after: For
that the greatest part was inhabited by Barbarous nations, and some Desert and
inhabitable: Besides that, for the diversity of Tongues, the enterprise was
much more difficult; for there was no means to inquire, nor to learn, for
want of understanding one another. It was no less difficult to relate truly
those things which they had seen, for that every man was given to augment, and
to make things seem more admirable.

Seeing then it was not only difficult, but in a manner impossible, to have a
true History of these things before this time, we must not blame the ancient
Historiographers, if they have forgotten or committed some Errors; but rather
we ought to wonder and commend them that they have bin able to make any search.
It will be therefore necessary to make a true and diligent search of those
things, which our Predecessors knew not: for that in our times all the passages
are open, as well by Sea as Land, by the means of Alexander of Macedon his
Forces into Asia, and of the Roman Empire over the rest of the World: And
likewise when as people were no more troubled with War, nor with any desire
or ambition of public Affairs: So as they had great opportunity to search
out the truth of these things. For the effecting whereof we will strive by all
means, as soon as we shall find an opportunity. There is nothing that was
more pleasing unto me, then to know that they which desire to understand these
things, come unto the truth by our means, and that we have not taken so much
pains, nor undergone so great dangers, to visit Affricke, Polybius has
visited Affricke Spain and the Gauls.
Spain and the Gauls, by the means of the Ocean, but in repairing the
errors of the ancient Historiographers, and make those Countries known to our
men. Let us now return to our Discourse of the Wars which are in Italy,
betwixt the Romans and the Carthaginians.

We have formerly related the number of men which Hannibal had remaining after
he had past into Italy, who planted his Camp at the foot of the Mountains
to refresh his Army: for it was toiled and wearied, not only with the passage
of the Mountains which was very difficult, but also for want of victuals:
Besides, it was continually afflicted with diseases, misery and poverty: The
greatest part were dead of famine, and their insupportable toil: Miseries
common among Soldiers.
for it was impossible to carry things necessary for so great an Army, in a
Country that was rough and difficult: And if they carried any thing, the
greatest part was lost with the Horses.

By this means it fell out, that although a little before he had parted from
the River of Rhone with thirty eight thousand Foot, and eight thousand Horse,
A decrease of Hannibals Army.
he had scarce then half his Army entire: and yet by the reason of their
continual labor and toil, they were in a manner become wild. The which
Hannibal perceiving, he not only labored to cheer up the bodies and hearts
of the Soldiers, but likewise to refresh their Horses. After which he marched
with his Army, and labored by all means to procure the Friendship of the
Turinois, which was the nearest Nation, and were at that time in War with the
Millanois, and seemed to have no great trust and confidence in the
Carthaginians. Who seeming not much to regard him, he assaults one of their
strongest Towns, the which he takes upon the third day: where putting all
unto the Sword that would not follow his party, he so terrified and amazed the
Barbarians which inhabited there-abouts, as presently they yielded themselves
into the hands of the Carthaginians.

It is true that the other Gauls inhabiting along the River of Poe, would
willingly have joined to Hannibal as they had resolved, if attending an
opportunity to do it, the sudden coming of the Consul had not prevented
them. So as they stirred not, and some of them joined to the Roman Army. The
which Hannibal perceiving, he resolved to make no longer stay, and that he must
attempt some good enterprise, to make the rest more bold to follow his party.
Being careful hereof, he had news that Publius Scipio had past the Poe, and
that he was not far off: the which at the first he seemed not to regard, as a
thing not likely: For he remembered that he had lately left him at the mouth of
Rhone, and understood that the passage from Marseilles unto Tuscany was long
and inaccessible, and the way from the Tuscan Sea which leads to the Alpas
through Italy, was rough, where an Army could not pass. But upon diverse
aduertisements of the certain news he was amazed, wondering, much at the
Consuls industry and diligence. The Consul in like manner wondered no less.
For where as he thought that Hannibal would never presume to pass the
Mountains with an Army consisting of strange Nations: And that if he
attempted it, he would dye by the way, he wondered much at his great courage
and boldness, when as he found that he had not only past safely, but had
also forced some Towns of Italy.

At the same time the Romans were full of affairs. It is true, that the last
news they had received, was of the taking of Sagont: wherefore they called an
assembly and made choice of two Consuls, The Romans advertised of Hannibals
descent into Italy
whereof the one was sent into Affricke to make War against Carthage, and the
other into Spain against Hannibal. But when they had sudden news of the
coming of Hannibals Army, and that he held some Towns of Italy besieged: they
were so amazed, as they presently countermaunded Sempronius from Lybia,
aduertising him of the descent of the Enemy into Italy, and that leaving the
affairs of the Province, he should make have to succor his Country. After
which news, Sempronius presently sends back the Army by Sea, giving them
charge to sail directly to Italy, and he gave the conduct of the Army by Land
to the Tribunes, appointing them a day when they should come to Rimeny. It is a
Town seated upon the Adriatique shore, at the end of the Plains which are
about Poe toward the South. By this means matters being altered, and that all
seemed to fall out contrary to the hope and opinion of the World, every man
used diligence to provide for the future. The two Armies were now opposite one
to another, whereof the Commanders for the time they had, labored to give
courage unto their men.

But Hannibal striving to encourage them used this means, putting into the
midst of the Army assembled together the Prisoners of the Mountains, who
were in Chains: The which by their continual toil, and partly by his
commaundment were grown lean and feeble: for (the better to attain unto his
intention) he had caused them to have great fetters, The policy of Hannibal
for an example to his Soldiers.
and had in a manner starued them, and finally, had commanded that they should
be cruelly beaten naked.

Having drawn them into the midst of his Army, he caused arms to be laid
before them after the manner of the Gauls, and such as Captains use to arm
themselves with when they fight single Combats: he also gave them Horses, and
Cassocks made with great Art. Then he demanded of the Prisoners, which of them
would fight man to man, propounding to the Victor the before said gifts, and to
the vanquished that by death he should be freed from his present miseries. And
as they all cried out that they were ready to fight, Hannibal causes Lots to
be cast, and makes two men to enter the list armed, upon whom the Lot had
fallen. The which the prisoners hearing, they lifted up their hands to Heaven,
praying unto the gods, that they would be pleased to choose them for the
Combat. As soon as the Lot was cast, they upon whom it fell, were wonderfully
joyful, and the rest remained sad and pensive. But when as the Combat was
ended, the other Prisoners did no less commend the fortune of him that was
defeated, then of the Conqueror: Conceiving that he was freed from the great
and many miseries, wherewith they were tormented living. The like thought the
Carthaginians; for in making comparison of the misery of the suruiuours, and of
those who fighting died valiantly, they found the fortune of these men good,
and that of the others moved them to pity.

When as Hannibal saw his Army moved to pity at this spectacle, he presently
came into the midst of the assembly, Hannibals speech to his Soldiers.
saying, that he presented it unto them, to the end they should make use of
the example of another man's fortune, to consider of their own: for that they
were to undergo the same Combat, and that Fortune propounded unto them the
like time, and the like rewards: for they must of necessity live or dye, or
fall into their Enemies hands alive. If they vanquished, their spoil should
be more then a Horse or a Cassocke, being the happiest men in the World, after
they had conquered the good fortune of the Romans. And if in fighting they died
like brave men, they should end their lives with good hope, free from all
miseries and calamities: But withal they must expect all miseries and poverty,
if being vanquished, they should fly, with a desire of a longer life, or with
a resolution to seek some other means to live: and that there is no man so
void of sense, which thinks (if he flies) that his safe return into his
Country is possible, if he will remember the length of the way, with the
multitude of Combats which must be maintained during the Voyage: If he
likewise considers the narrow streights, and so many troublesome Rivers which
were to pass.

Wherefore it was needful for them, that in laying aside all hope of flight,
they should use the like pity to themselves in their affairs, as they have
showed lately in the example of other men's fortunes: For as in the others they
commended the fortune of the Victor and the vanquished, and held those which
remained miserable: so they must judge the like of themselves. And therefore
they must go resolutely to the Combat, to get an unspeakable Victory; or else
to dye like brave men in battle, if auerse fortune deny it them: and that they
must not expect that being vanquished, they should find any means of safety.

Finally, if they march to the field with this resolution, there is no doubt
but the Victory and their safety is in their own hands: for there was never
any man that have fought with this intention, or with a resolute courage, or
forced by necessity, but he has prevailed over his Enemies. And that this is
very easy to do, when as all these things concur together contrary unto the
Enemy, as it happens this Day unto the Romans: For as their flight has a
manifest and an apparent safety in their houses which were near them, so the
courage of desperate men will be found insupportable. And when as after this
Oration (together with the example) the Soldiers hearts were much inflamed to
War, and that their Generals comparison was pleasing unto them, Hannibal
commending them, sent them away, and commanded them to be ready at the break
of day.

But after that the Consul Publiu^s Scipio having past the Poe, had caused his
Army to march to the River of Tesin, he commanded a Bridge to be made by such
as were skillful, and made a Speech unto the assembly according to the
opportunity of the time. In the beginning he spoke many things concerning the
Majesty of the people of Rome, and the prowess of their Ancestors: But
concerning the present affairs, this was the substance. They must of necessity
(said he) hold the victory certain. Scipio his speech to his ^en.
although they had not yet tried their valor with the Enemy: But only for
that they were to fight with the Carthaginians. Neither must they expect that
they would dare to come to Battle against the Romans, having in the last
Wars so often beat them both by Sea and Land, to whom they had also so long
paid tribute: and whose power they had so often tried. And to the end I
forbear to speak of the times past, why should men of judgment doubt of the
future, seeing we have some experience, that they dare not look us in the face?

It is certain that when lately the Roman Horsemen encountered the
Carthaginians in Gaul, on this side the River of Rhone, they not only
returned safe, but they beat them back into their Camp: and that presently,
when as Hannibal and the Carthaginian Army found the Romans to be so near,
they steal away in manner of a flight, and pass the Mountains otherwise then
they had resolved, in fear and amazement. Now behold Hannibal, who in passing
the Alps, has lost two parts of his Forces. And the rest is so tired and
broken with toil, hunger, cold, and poverty, as they can hardly support
themselves: and the remainder of his Horses (if any be escaped) are so worn
with labor, and the tedious ways, as they could not make use of them.
Finally, it sufficed the Romans only to present themselves, and that moreover,
his presence should with reason make them more resolute, seeing that he had not
left the Army at Sea, nor the affairs of Spain, nor had not transported
himself thither with such speed, going so great a circuit both by Sea and
Land, if he had not known it necessary for the Country, and the victory to be
certain. The Army being inflamed with this Speech, and making show of a
resolution to fight, Scipio commending their good will, sent them away, and
gave them charge to feed, and to be ready, and in Arms at the sound of the
Trumpet and Drum.

Three days after, the two Commanders marched with their Army along the River,
on the side of the Mountains. The Romans had the left hand, and the
Carthaginians the right. And when as the day following they were advertised by
their Spies of their approach one unto another, they stayed. The third day
after, the two Commanders fronted one another with all their Horse, Scipio
being moreover accompanied with men that cast Darts, chosen out of the bands of
footmen: The which they did to discover the number of the men, and what they
were.

But when they came to affront one another, and the dust beginning to rise by
reason of the Horses, they presently prepared themselves to Battle: Scipio
puts in Front the Gaulish horsemen, with those that Darts, and appointed the
rest to second them marching a slow pace. In regard of Hannibal, he makes his
point of the strongest of his horsemen, and presents it to the Enemy, casting
the Numidians upon the Wings. But when the two Armies began to enter the Combat
furiously, they had scarce begun the Cry but the Darters fled, without any
fight, A Combat of the Horse betwixt Hannibal and Scipio.
and passing through their supplies, they recovered the Battle. They were in
truth amazed at the violent charge, fearing to be overthrown by the encounter
of the Horsemen. In the mean time the Combat was great betwixt the Horsemen;
for both the one and the other fought with great courage; which made the
Battle to continue long in suspense. There was fighting both on horseback
and on foot, for that many had left their horses in the Battle. And when as
the Numidians in turning about, had fallen upon the rear of the Darters, who
in the beginning had fled from the fury of the Horsemen, they were environed
by them, and defeated in great Troops. They also which fought with the
Carthaginian Horsemen, after they had received great loss of their men, and
slain many of their Enemies, in the end they gave back, for that the
Numidians charged in the rear. Some were dispersed here and there: others
retired to the Camp in a throng, saving the Consul (who was wounded) in the
midst of the Troop, from thence Scipio Commanded his men to follow him
without noise, The retreat of Scipio.
and marches with his Army to the Bridge which he had made upon the Poe, there
to pass without tumult or danger; but when he saw the fields about the Poe so
great and spacious, and that the Carthaginians were stronger in horses, and
being moreover troubled with the Wound which he had received, he held it the
safest course to pass his Army before the Enemy should pursue him.

Hannibal made his account that the Romans would fight sometime with their
footmen, but when he was advertised of their flight, and that abandoning their
Fort they had past the Poe, by a Bridge which they had made, he pursues them
with speed. The end of the Bridge was already broken and the guard was yet
remaining; of the which he presently took about six hundred. Hannibal
advertised that the rest of the Army was not far off, he returns to his
Fort, seeking carefully for a place fit to make a Bridge: The which two days
after he found with great difficulty, and then effected it, joining many floats
together. Afterward he gave the Charge to Asdrubal, to pass the Army, whilst
that he busied himself to hear the Embassy of the Gauls, which were come
unto him from diverse neighbor Countries: For as soon as it was bruted that
the Romans had bin defeated by the Carthaginians, all the neighbor Gauls made
have to join with Hannibal, as they had formerly resolved, and to give him
succors, and to go to the War. After he had given them a good reception, he
past his Army beyond the Poe, and takes his way along the River, hoping more
easily to ouer-take the Enemy. When as Scipio had led his Army to Plaisence,
(which was a Roman Collony) he had a care to cure those that were Wounded, and
think of a place whither he might lead his Army.

The third day after that Hannibal had past the Poe, he puts his men in order
before Plaisence in view of the Enemies, and presented them Battle. And when
as no man offered himself, he Camp'd having found a convenient place within
six miles of them. The Gauls who had come to succor Scipio, The treason of
the Gauls against the Romans.
seeing better hopes with the Carthaginians, resolved among themselves to
abandon the Romans. And when at midnight they found all men asleep, they being
in Arms in their Tents, they part, and killed most of the Romans they met in
their way, cutting off some of their heads. Finally they retired to the
Carthaginians, to the number of two thousand foot, and two hundred Horse. Being
graciously received, and inflamed with hope of good, Hannibal sends them home
to their Houses; to the end they might make those things known, and induce
their Country to seek the Alliance of the Carthaginians. He saw plainly, that
of necessiy they would leave the Roman party, considering the foul crime which
their men had committed. Moreover there was an Embassy come from the
Bolonians, An Embassy from the Bolonians to Hannibal.
delivering unto Hannibal the Triumviry who (as we have formerly said) had bin
sent by the Romans to divide the Lands being taken by Treason.

Hannibal commending their good affection, makes an Alliance with them, and
restores unto them the Triumviry, to serve them as a means to retire their
Hostages, as they had formerly resolved. Scipio being troubled, not so much for
the Treason of the Gauls, and the slaughter of his men, but for that he
foresaw that all the Gauls Country (which had bin a long time Enemy unto the
Romans) would revolt, which made him study how to give order in time for his
Affairs. Wherefore the night following about the break of day, he dislodged
without noise, The River of Trebia.
and seated his Camp near unto the River of Trebia, on the highest Hills of
the Country, relying upon the situation of the place, and the multitude of
their Allies inhabiting thereabouts. Hannibal being advertised of his Enemies
flight, he causes the Numidians to march first, and then all the Cauallery,
and soon after he follows with the rest of his Army.

The Numidians turning to the Camp abandoned by their Enemies, they set it on
fire, to the great benefit of the Romans: For if they had not stayed in the
Camp, they might have pursued them in the Rear, and have made a great
slaughter of the Roman Army. But whilst they loose time in burning the lodging,
the greatest part of the Army past the River in safety: Some of the Reare-ward
were surprised by the Carthaginians, who were either slain or taken Prisoners.
In the mean time Scipio made choice of the Hills, which were near unto the
River, for that they seemed fit to make a ^ort. The which being environed with
a Ditch and a Pallisado, he attended in this distress the return of his
Companion Tyberius from Sycily with an Army: causing his Wounds to be carefully
looked unto, to the end that their assailes being in so great danger, he might
be a pertaker. Hannibal seated his Camp, within five miles of the Enemies
Fort, whom the Gauls did furnish abundantly, not only with Victuals, but with
all other things necessary, and were very ready to undergo any danger with the
Carthaginians.

The news came to Rome of the defeat of their men. And although they would
never have thought it, yet the Romans made no show to be amazed therewith,
disguising the defeat of their Horsemen to have happened, not so much by the
Prow^sse of the Carthaginians, as by the ouer-weening of the Commander, and
the Treason of the Gauls, who had yielded themselves to Hannibal. Finally,
they were in good hope of their War, seeing that the Bands of footmen were
yet entire. Wherefore Sempronius being returned, and passing by Rome, they all
persuaded him publickely to give Battle to the Carthaginians. Sempronius at
his coming unto Rimeny, receives all the Troops which were come from Sycily,
according to his commaundment. From thence marching to Trobia, he ioynes with
his Companion, where he refresht his Army, toiled with the rediousnesse of the
way, having marched forty days together coming from Lylibeum to Rimeny. He
also used diligence to provide all sorts of munition. Moreover he consulted
with Scipio, inquiring of the actions past, and conferring of the future.

At the same time Hannibal took the Town of Clastidium by Treason, corrupting
Brengusin the Captain of the Garrison, Clastidium taken by Hannibal.
where as the Romans had lodged a great quantity of Corn, whereof he made use
in his necessity, and sent away the Soldiers in safety; to the end that by the
fame of his Clemency, others might yield more easily unto the Carthaginians. He
extended his bounty also unto him that betraide it. And being advertised that
the Gauls inhabiting that little Country which lies betwixt Trebia and the
Poe, and had made an Alliance with him, had sought the friendship of the Romans
by Embassy: To the end that during the trouble of these two powerful Nations,
they might have the grace of an uncertain favor: He sends (being moved with
rage and despite) two thousand foot, and about a thousand Numidian Horses,
with some Gauls intermixed, to spoil the Country. The which having performed
and taken a great Booty, the Inhabitants sent presently an Embassy to the
Consul to (...) succors. S^mpronius presently embracing this occasion to give
battle, which he had long desired, sends a great part of his Cauallery, with
a thousand foot with Darts, beyond the River of Trebia, who charging the
Gauls, and surprising them in disorder, The Gauls Repu^^e.
for that they were in contention touching the division of the Booty, they put
them into a great confusion, and forced them to retire, killing and chasing
them into their Fort: Where by the sally of the Troop which guarded the Camp,
the Gauls resuming Courage, they were forced to turn head, and to recover
their Camp. The which (...) perceiving, he sent a simply of all his Horse with
the Darters, and forced the Gauls to retire into their Fort. But for that
Hannibal was not then ready to give battle, he was not of advice to undertake
it without great consideration, nor to hazard all upon all occasions. And
therefore like a well advised Captain, he caused a Retreateto be sounded, and
retires his men into the Fort.

And when as the Romans had skirmished with their enemies in vain, they
returned to their Camp, having lost few of their men, and made great slaughter
of the Carthaginians, Sempronius grown joyful and proud of this good Fortune,
had a will to give Battle only for the desire of glory, whilst that his
Companion was weak and infirm. And therefore he discouers himself to Scipio,
to whom the time did not seem convenient to do it, but rather to defer the
Battle, to the end that the Roman Soldiers being yet fresh and green, might
gain experience, and that in Temporizing, the Gauls as people light and
without faith, might abandon the Carthaginians, and that finally he might be
present, for that his Wound at that time made him unprofitable. Although that
Sempronius knew well that Scipio spoke the truth, yet moved with ambition,
either that Scipio should not be present, or that the War should not be
prolonged until the coming of the other Consuls, for that the time of the
election was come, he resolved to give Battle alone.

Hannibal being of the like opinion with Scipio, was careful how to find an
occasion to fight, whilst the Gauls faith was firm, and the Enemies Soldiers
of little experience, and Scipio unprofitable to undergo the danger: But
especially he feared to loose time: For seeing he led an Army in a strange
Country, and had a great enterprise in hand, there was no other means of
safety, then to keep his Allies. Wherefore seeing the desire of Sempronius, he
prepared himself willingly to Battle.

There was betwixt the two Armies a plain Champaigne, but very convenient to
lay an Ambush; having a deep River, with high Banks, and Thickets and Bushes
round about it: Which Hannibal having viewed, he resolved to lay an Ambush. It
is true, that the Romans fled the Forests, by reason of the Ambushes which the
Gauls often laid for them, trusting only in a Champaigne Country: Being
ignorant that a plain is more fitting then a Forest, for the covering of an
Ambush: A plain is sometimes the occasion of an Ambush.
For they may see the Enemy come far off, and have sometimes fit means and
opportunity to cover themselves, so as when they find a River with low Banks,
the Reeds, Flagges of the Marshes, Bushes, and such like things do cover the
foot, and many times the Horsemen, if they bend down their Helmets which are
apparent. Hannibal after he had acquainted his Brother Mago, with his
resolution to give battle, Mago Brother to Hannibal.
and being both of this advice, he caused him to be called whilst the Soldiers
supped: His brother Mago was a young man, of a brave Spirit and Resolute, and
had bin always bred up in the War. To whom he gave a thousand Horse, and as
many Boot chosen out of the whole Army, whom he called unto his Tent after
supper, and made a speech unto them according to the opportunity of the time,
declaring unto them what he had resolved. Moreover, he gives every one of them
charge, to choose out of all the Troops nine others like themselves, and that
they should repair to a certain place in the Camp. These presently obeyed
the commandment of their General. An Ambush laid by Hannibal for the Romans.
Thus Mago accompanied with a thousand Horse, and as many Foot, and with a
guide, came to the place of his Ambush, being well instructed by Hannibal what
he was to do.

At the break of day Hannibal calls the Numidian Horsemen able to bear
labor: to whom when he had made a speech, and promised great rewards, if they
carried themselves like brave men, he discouers his Enterprise. He gives them
charge to pass the River of Trebia, and to run unto the Gates of the Enemies
Camp, and to draw them forth to fight with their Darts, desiring much to
surprise them in disorder, and to fight with them before they had taken any
repast, the which he did much esteem. He also gives charge to all the other
Captains appointed for the Combat, to feed their men and their horses, and
commands them to be ready armed, attending the sound of the Trumpet. But when
as Sempronius saw the Enemy approach, he first sent out all his Horsemen, and
after them six thousand Darters: Finally, he draws all his Troops to field,
as if he meant that day to make an end of the War: and who (for the good
fortune which two days before he had in fight, together with the great number
of his men) was in hope to get the Victory. It was by chance in Winter, and did
snow that day with a vehement cold. Moreover, the Soldiers were come forth in
confusion with the Horses, and had no great heat, neither had they fed. And
therefore although in the beginning they were ready and resolute, yet being
entered into the River, they came forth wet unto the breast: for that the show
which had fallen in the night, had made the River swell, so as they began to be
so afflicted with cold and hunger, that as the day came on, they were scarce
able to hold their Arms. In the mean time the Carthaginians oiled and warmed
themselves at fires near unto their Tents, having their Horses ready after
they had fed well.

When as Hannibal (who had an eye every where) saw that the Enemies had past
the River, he sets before the Ensigns the stingers of Maiorque and Minorque,
and those that were lightly armed, to the number of eight thousand men, and
puts the rest of his Army in Battalion. Hannibal puts his men in Battle.
When he had marched about a Mile, he sets upon the wings twenty thousand Foot,
Spaniards, Affricans, and Gauls: the like he did of his Horsemen, who with
the Allies that the neighbor Towns of Gaul had sent him, were ten thousand
men. After them on either side were placed the Elephants. Then Sempronius
caused a retreat to be sounded, to call back the Horsemen, lest pursuing the
Nu^idians inconsiderately, they might be suddenly enclosed by them, for their
custom is to fly here and there at the first charge, and to stay suddenly
when they think good, The manner of the Numidions fighting.
recharging the Enemy with incredible courage and resolution. Then he ordered
his Foot men after the manner of the Romans. Among the which there were about
sixteen thousand Romans, Sempronius put^ his men in battle.
and about twenty thousand Latins their Allies: for when they were to undergo
any great War, and that the two Consuls were joined together, the perfect
number of their Army was of so many thousands. Then he placed three thousand
Horsemen upon the wings. When he had thus disposed of his men, he marched in
battle a slow pace, scarce moving.

The two Armies being near one unto the other, those that were lightly armed
began the fight, wherewith the Romans were suddenly oppressed. All things
foretold good unto the Carthaginians: for the bodies of the Roman Foot were
grown feeble with hunger and weariness, and numm'd with cold: Being moreover
slain by the multitude of Darts which the Numidians cast. For their parts they
had abandoned their Darts, as unprofitable by reason of the continual
humidity: The Horsemen suffered the like with the whole Army. Contrariwise the
Carthaginians being in their force, in good order and fresh, were diligent and
ready at need. Wherefore when as they had made way for their forlorn hope to
retire, and that the Armies had charged one another: the Carthaginian Horsemen
fell upon the Enemies wings, and quite defeated them. It is true, the Romans
were weak in their numbers of Horse: and the Soldiers were tired with labor
and hunger.

After the rout of the Horsemen, A defeat of the Roman Horsemen.
the Foot resisted more with the equality of courage then of force: But the
Numidians besides the Ambush which the Army had past without discovering them,
showing themselves upon the Rear, put them in a great amazement, yet the
Battallions stood firm for a time, although they were inuolued with so many
miseries. But in the end when as the two wings were pressed, having the Elephants
in front, and that those which were lightly armed, had compassed them in, they
fled directly to the near River. This done, when as the Romans which fought in
the battle, saw their supplies broken, they were partly environed by them of
the Ambush, and partly defeated and slain: Others past through the Battalion
of the Gauls, where were many Affricans, making a great slaughter of the
Enemies. But when as they could neither succor their men, nor get to their
Fort, as well for the multitude of the Enemies Horse, as for the swelling of
the River and the rain, they recovered Plaisance, to the number of ten
thousand men: the rest for the most part were slain along the River by the
Elephants and Horsemen. Some few Foot and Horse flying dispersed over the
Fields, drew to Plaisance, following the route of the Army. The Carthaginians
having pursued them to the River of Trebeia, The Victory of Mannibal against
the Romans.
returned to the Camp, for that they could not proceed any farther by reason
of the rain: being very joyful of the victory, whereas the loss of Spaniards
and Affricans was small, and that of the Gauls great. But they were so
tormented with rain and cold that all the Elephants except one, and the
greatest part of the carriage-horses, with many men and horses died.

After this action Sempronius desirous to cover and conceal so great a loss,
sent men to Rome, The Romans fear for the loss of the Battle.
to let them understand that the violence of the rain had deprived them of an
absolute Victory: the which the Romans did easily believe. But when as within
few days after, they had news that the Carthaginians held their Army in
strength, and that all the Gauls held for them, abandoning their party, and
withal that their Army kept the Town, for that it was not well assured within
its Fort, and that they drew victuals from the Sea by the River of Poe, they
grew into so great a fear and amazement, as they thought Hannibal would come a
Conqueror to Rome. Wherefore they levied a new Army, A new Army levied by the
Romans both by Sea and Land.
and sent supplies into Sicily and Sardinia, fortifying Tarentum and the other
Towns in Italy. They likewise prepared an Army at Sea of fifty Quinqueremes:
Finally, they were wholly attentive to War.

At that time Cneus Seruilius, and Caius Flami^^ius were chosen Consuls, and a
new levy of men was made, and succors required from the Allies. One of them
led his Troops to Rimeni, and the other into Tuscany. They had resolved to
lead their Armies into Gaul. They had besides sent to Hieron to demand
succors, who sent them five hundred Candiots, and a thousand men which bear
Targets. Without doubt the Romans at that time drew all the F^rces they could
possible against Hannibal: for the fear was not only general, but every man's
in particular.

During these accidents in Italy, Cneus Cornelius Scipio (who as we have
formerly said, Scipio ariucs at Empories, and co^quers unto Ebro.
had been left by his Brother in Gaul with an Army at Sea) parting from the
mouth of Rhone, arrived at Empories. And beginning there, he made all the
Maritime Countrly unto Ebro subject to the Romans, renewing the ancient leagues
with some, and making new with others. When he had pacifi^d the Seacoasts,
and had left Garrisons where need required, he led his Army up into the firm
land. He had now drawn together some Companies of succors from the allied
Towns. By this means he takes some Towns, some by Composition, others by
force. The which Hanno perceiving (whom Hannibal had left for the defense of
Spain) he resolved to encounter the Enemies, Hanno*
and planted himself right against them, near unto a Town which the people
of the Country call Cisse.

Scipio in like manner did not hold it fit to defer the Battle. And
therefore after he had gotten the Victory, and taken the Enemies Fort, he
recovered great store of Treasure: For all they which went to the Wars of
Italy under Hannibal, had left all their wealth with these men, lest the
Baggage should be tedious and troublesome unto them. Afterward Scipio made a
league with all the Inhabitants which were within the River of Ebro, and made
them Allies and Friends. There were two Commanders taken alive, whereof the
one was Hanno, who had the leading of the Carthaginians, and the other Andubal,
King of a Region which lies in the heart of Spain, King Andubal taken.
who had always held the party of the Carthaginians. Asdrubal hearing the
news, passes Ebro, marching with his Army against the Romans: who upon the
way had news that the Soldiers and Seamen wandered the fields up and down,
being confident and careless with the joy of their Victory. Wherefore he
marches thither speedily with eight thousand foot, and a thousand Horse, A
defeat of some Romans by Asdrubal.
where killing a great part, he forced the rest to recover their ships: yet he
durst not stay long, but repast the River of Ebro. And when he had put
Garrisons in necessary places, he went to winter at Carthage. Cneus Scipio
advertised hereof, draws his men suddenly together, and goes unto his
Sea-army, punishing such as had been the cause of the defeat, after the
manner of the Romans. When he had drawn his Army both by Sea and Land
together, he went to winter at Taracona, where he divided the spoil, so as he
purchased the love of them all, making them more resolute for the future War.
Behold the estate of the affairs of Spain.

In the beginning of the Spring Flaminius marching thorough Tuscany, came to
Aretzo. As for Seruilius, he attended (after he had brought his Army to
Rimeni) when the Enemy would dislodge. And whilst that Hannibal spent the
Winter in Gaul, he kept the Romans that were Prisoners straightly fettered,
and poorly fed, entreating the Allies courteously from the beginning: and
afterward causing them to assemble, he made many remonstrances unto them,
telling them that he was not come to make War against them, Hannibals speech
to the Prisoners that were allied to the Romans.
but to fight with the Romans for their liberty: and therefore if they were
wise, they should embrace the alliance and friendship of the Carthaginians: and
that he was there to set the people of Italy at liberty, and to restore those
whom the Romans had outragiously chased from their houses, their Towns, and
Countries. When he had used these, or the like speeches, he sent them all
away without ransom, desiring by this means to win the hearts of all the
people of Italy, and to make them abandon the Romans party, and to encourage
those whom they had deprived of their Towns and Country. It is true, that
whilst he wintred, he was many times in dangers by the Gauls, the which he
prevented by an Affrican trick, for that the Gauls discovered it as lightly
unto him, Hannibals policy to keep himsel^e from killing by treason.
as they had given their consent: so as he caused periwigges of diverse ages to
be made with great art, the which he used, changing his apparel often: so as
he was not only unknown to them which had never seen him, but also to his
familiars. By this means he was in safety, they not knowing whom to assault
for Hannibal. Moreover, when as the Gauls were discontented, that their
Country was made the seat of the War, making a show to be desirous to
fight, to the end it might be transported to some other part, Hannibal resolved
to go the sooner to field, and to lead his Army to the War which he desired.

The Spring time approached, when calling unto him those which knew the ways,
he inquired of the passages, which went into the Enemies Country. And being
advertised that all the ways were long and known to the enemy, they
discovered unto him one that was shorter, but troublesome, which would lead
him through the Marshes of Tuscany, whereby he might pass his Army, unknown
unto the enemy: But when the news came into the Camp of their Voyage by
Marshes, the apprehension discouraged them, The Way and Order which Hannibal
held to pass into Italy.
fearing the Quagmires and Pooles. Yet he took this way with his whole Army,
causing the Spaniards and Affricans to march before, with the ablest of his men
and their Baggage, to the end that if they were forced to plant a Camp, they
should not want things necessary. It is true, that before, he had not resolved
to carry any Baggage, for that he knew well that the Carthaginians should not
want any thing if they were vanquished; and if they won the Country they
should not likewise want. Next he causes the Gauls to march, and in the Rear
the horsemen, whereof he gave the charge to his brother Mago, to the end that
by their help, the Gauls by their baseness should not turn head, being
discontented with the toil. The Spaniards and Affricans marching through the
Marshes, came unto the end without any great toil, as inured to pains, and
accustomed to such miseries. Contrariwise the Gauls went with great
difficulty, as men amazed, falling into the Quagmires of the Moares, and
carrying this misery with grief and discontent, like men unaccustomed to such
calamities, the Horsemen kept them from returning.

Finally the whole Army was in great trouble and pain; and they languished the
more, for that they had watched four days and three nights, going through the
Waters. But amongst all the rest the Gauls were most tormented. Most part of
their carriage Horses falling into the Mire, dyed, serving the tired Soldiers,
to rest themselves upon and the baggage, lying down upon them in the Water, so
as they took their necessary rest some part of the night. Many Horses also
lost their hoofes, by their continual going in the mire. Hannibal could hardly
escape the moares, but that he was carried upon an Elephant which was only
remaining: Hannibal loses an Eye.
Who by a great pain in his eyes, which had happened by the bad condition of the
Air, in the end he lost an eye, for that he had neither time nor place to
prevent it.

After that he had past the Moares contrary to the opinion of all the World,
and was advertised by his Spies, that Flaminius was about the Walls of Aretzo,
he planted himself near unto the Marshes, partly to refresh his army being
tired with so great toil, and likewise to learn the Resolution and forces of
the Enemy, with the situation of the Country and Ways. But being advertised
that among the Regions of Italy, that was very fertile, and that the Champaigne
betwixt Aretzo and Fesula was very rich in Corn, and all other things
necessary; and that moreover the Consul was a proud man, affecting the
applause of the people, but without experience of War, and relying much upon
Fortune, he thought it fit, that in leaving the enemy on the left hand, he
should draw toward Fesula, to spoil the Country of Tuscany: being conceited
that the Consul, for the natural desire he had to purchase the favor the
people, would never suffer the Country to be spoi'd: Nor attend his Companion,
as desiring him not in things well done: But contrariwise would follow him
wheresoever he went without fear, having a desire to fight. By this means he
foresawe good opportunities to give Battle, making therein a wise and
politic discourse of future things. Believe me he is deceived, that thinks
any duty greater in a Captain, The duty of a good Captain.
then to discover the opinion and Nature of the enemy. For as you must observe
in a Combat betwixt man and man the place where you mean to strike, and
consider diligently where he lies open and discovered: So in a great War^e, you
must seek the Enemy, not so much to understand where the the parts of the body
are naked, but by what means you may discover the Nature and proceedings of
the General.

There are many which not only forget the public Affairs by a dullness and
negligence, but also many times those which concern their private Lives.
Others subject to Wine, cannot rest until they be drunk, and some given too
much to women, not only ruin Towns and Commonweals, but also their Lives
with infamy. Moreover, Cowardice and fear in private men is full of Reproach
and disgrace, but in a Commander, it is sometimes the cause of great loss.
Ouerweening rashness, Choler, and vain bragging is prejudicial, and
profitable to the Enemy. Believe me, such kind of men, do easily fall into the
Snares and Ambushes of their Enemies. And therefore if any one having
discovered the Vices of the Enemy, finds some occasion whereby he may
circumvent the General, he may easily prevail over the rest: For as an Enemy
does easily board a Ship when it is without a Governor: So if any one during
the War, defeates a Commander by his Judgment and good advice, he will
soon be master of the rest of the Army.

As Hannibal had made this Discourse of the Roman Consul, so he was not
deceived in his opinion; The Country Spoiled by Hannibal.
for parting with all speed thorough the Fesulans Country, leaving the Enemy
behind, he began to put all Tuscany to fire and Sword. The Consul inflamed
herewith, thinking that the Enemy made no account of him, holding it a great
dishonor to suffer the Goods of their Allies to be thus spoiled and carried
away before his face, could not take any rest. And therefore although that many
advised him not to pursue Hannibal. nor to fight with him, but to keep his
Horse and foot entire, until the coming of his Companion, to the end that
both Armies being joined, they might manage the War by a common Council,
he would not do any thing, giving them no other answer, but that they should
consider what the people of Rome would say, seeing the Enemy Camp'd in the
midst of Italy, and march directly to Rome without resistance, they sleeping
in Tuscany at his back. Having used this Speech, he began to pursue the Enemy,
after that he had suddenly drawn his Troops together, without consideration
either of time or places, desiring only to fight, as if the Victory had been
certain. He had put his whole Army in hope of winning the Battle, so as
there were more which charged themselves with chains and fetters, and such
like things, then with arms to fight.

Hannibal marching directly to Rome, spoiled all the Champaigne Country, which
lies betwixt the Town of Cortone, and the Lake of Perouze, using all manner of
cruelty to draw the enemy to fight. But when he had news of Flaminius pursuit
with his Army, seeing the place convenient to lay his Ambushes, he began to
prepare himself for a battle. There was a large plain environed round about
with high Mountains joined together: having within it a lesser Hill, which was
painful and difficult, and behind lies the Lake of Perouze, betwixt the which
and the Mountains, there is a narrow passage, whereby they enter into the
plain.

Hannibal gains these first Hills, planting his Camp there, and lodges with
the Spaniards and Affricans, An Ambush laid by Hannibal.
laying behind the Mountains, the Soldiers of Maiorque and Minorque, with
others that were lightly armed. He does also place in the straight, the
Horsemen with the Gauls, to the end that as soon as the Romans should be
entered, they should be wholly environed by the Lake and Mountains, opposing the
Horsemen in Front. And having thus disposed of his men in the night, he went
to take his rest. Flaminius pursuing his enemy with great heat, came unto the
Lake before the Sun setting, and the next day early began to lead his Army
through the straight. The day was thick and misty, by reason of a Fogge which
came from the Lake, and the Neighbor mountains. When as Hannibal saw the
greatest part of the Army entered into the Plain, The Romans Surprised and
Defeated.
and that the fore-most approached near unto him, he then gave his men a
sign of battle. Which done, they fall upon them that were nearest. The
Romans were amazed at this sudden surprise, The Battle of Perouze.
for that the mist hindered their sight, and with all the Enemies charged them
on all sides at one instant, so as they could not put themselves into battle,
nor make use of their Arms, nor scarce know what had been done, being
assailed by some in front, by others in the Rear, and likewise upon the
Flanks. So as many holding on their way, they were slain like sheep, for
that they could not succor one another, and they were sooner defeated, then
they could consider what they had to do. Flaminius himself, when there was no
more hope, Flaminius slain in the batta^le.
was environed and slain by certain Gauls. There were slain in this
battle fifteen thousand men, who for the most part stood firm unto the end,
after the manner of the Romans, never abandoning their ranks: The others
enclosed betwixt the Mountains and the Lakes by reason of the narrow passages,
and out of hope, were slain basely or rather miserably: For being forced in
the Lake, some were drowned striving to swim in their Arms: Others going
into the Water as far as they could possibly, continued for a time in that
estate. Finally, when the enemies horse were entered, they were slain without
pity: Although that lifting up their hands, they humbly begged to have their
Lives saved, or taking Courage killed one another. There were about six thousand
of the fore-ward, which forcing through the enemies, escaped this passage:
Although it were in their power to enclose them, and to succor their friends,
yet not knowing what was done behind them, they marched on still, doubting to
make some encounter, before they had gotten the top of the Mountains. And
having made a stand upon a little Hill, and seeing (the Mist being past) the
great slaughter of their Soldiers, they hastily got unto a near Borough,
like men which had no more hope of safety, for that they saw the enemy to hold
the whole Country. The battle being won, Six thousand Romans taken in a
Borough by composition
Hannibal Commands Maherbal to pursue them, who parting with the Spaniards and
the Soldiers that were lightly armed, besieged the Borough. The Romans being
brought to extremity, in the end left their Arms; and after they had concluded
to have their Lives saved, they yielded to this Affrican. Behold how that
famous battle past, which was given betwixt the Romans and the Carthaginians
near unto the Lake of Perouze.

After this Hannibal calls for those which Maherbal had taken, and for all the
rest being above fifteen thousand, telling them at the first that Maherbal had
no power to contract with them for their lives without his consent: And after
he had used proud speeches unto the Romans, he distributed them among the
Soldiers to be carefully kept in chains, sending away the Allies without
Ransom: Telling them that he was not come into Gaul to make War against
the Latin Nation, but with the Romans for their Liberty. Afterward he sent
them home to their Lodgings, and Commands to bury the bodies of those which
were of most note, being about thirty: For he lost of all his Army only
fifteen hundred men, whereof the greatest part were Gauls. He then held a
Council with his Brother and other friends concerning their affairs, who were
grown so glorious for this Victory, as they held nothing impossible.

The News of this great Defeat was now come to Rome, and the Senators could
not long conceal it from the Common people, The great amazement which was at
Rome for the battle lost.
nor dissemble the greatness thereof: So as assembling the Court, they were
forced to relate it unto them in particular. As soon as the Praetor (being set
in his Chair) began to say, we have lost a great battle; the amazement and
trouble grew so great, as they which were at the battle and there present,
report that the terror was greater then in Rome, then it had been in the
fight. And it is likely; for it is not possible that they which for a long time
had not felt any great disaster, neither in Word, nor Deed, should patiently
endure so great a loss. Yet the Senate made a good show, as it was fitting,
aduising what was to be done, and what Commanders they should choose, and with
what Troops they should resist the Carthaginians.

Whilst these things past in Tuscany, the Consul Seruilius advertised that
Hannibal was past, he resolved to join with his companions Army. But for that
it was a difficult thing, to pass so great a number of men together, he sent
Caius Centronius Propraetor before with four thousand Horse, to the end that
if any occasion were offered, they should do that which his Companion should
command him. Hannibal having gotten this Victory, and advertised by his Spies
of the coming of the Enemy, he sends Maherbal to meet them, with the best of
his Foot, A defeat of the Roman Horsemen by Maherbal.
and part of his Horsemen, who being met, they defeated the greatest part at
the first charge: the rest retiring to the first Hill, within three days after
they were taken alive. When as the news of this defeat came to Rome, three
days after the other, wherewith their hearts were much aflicted, then not
only the people, but also the Senators were in so great distress and misery,
as all the City was in tears. Wherefore leaving the Annall Magistrates, A
Dictator created.
they had recourse to the election of a Dictator; for that the condition of the
time, and the affairs then required a Commander, which should have sovereign
power. And although that Hannibal were very glorious for the good success and
fortune of his affairs, yet he did not hold it fit to go unto Rome.
Wherefore putting the Province to fire and sword, Hannibal runs along the Coast
of the Adriatique Sea.
and passing by the Duchy of Spolett^, and the Marquisat of Ancona, he came
within ten days to the Region which is near unto Adriatique Sea, so rich and
abundant in all wealth, as the Army was not able to carry it away.

Finally, he made a great slaughter of men in his journey: for he caused a
Proclamation to be made in his Camp, that they should kill all those that
they found carrying Arms, The cruelty of Hannibal.
as they had commonly done in Towns that were taken by assault. He carried so
great a hatred to the Romans, as there was no cruelty that he omitted. And
after they had found a fit and convenient place along the Coast of the
Adriatique Sea, abounding with all sorts of commodities, he labored by all
means to refresh his men and horses: for both the one and the other were
fallen into diseases and the Scuruy, which they had gotten as well by the
extreme cold in the Winter which they had endured in Gaul, being always in
field, as by the continual toil which they had lately suffered in passing the
Marshes, and the continual sweat and filth, by reason of their harness.

In the mean time he inures the Affricans to carry Arms after the manner of
the Romans, whereof he had gotten abundance, considering the great spoils of
the Enemies. Moreover, he sent news to Carthage of his Victories by Sea. This
was the first time that he approach't near the Sea, since his first coming
into Italy. The Carthaginians being joyful at this news, were wholly
attentive unto the affairs of Italy and Spain. The Romans made choice of
Quintus Fabius for their Dictator, Quintus Fabius chosen Dictator.
a man of so great virtue and prudence, that for his prowess he purchased and
obtained the name of Maximus, the which his family retains unto this day. The
Dictator differs from the Consul in this, The difference betwixt a Dictator
and a C^nsull.
that the Consul has but twelve Axes before him, and the Dictator has four
and twenty. Moreover, the Co^sull must refer many things to the advice of the
Senate: but this other has a sovereign and free power, under whom all other
Magistrates cease, except the Tribunes. But this shall be for a larger
discourse. Moreover, they gave unto the Dictator Marcus Minucius for a
Constable, or master of the Horse, which is a Magistrate subject to the
Dictator, Marcus Minucius Constable.
and supplies his place, when as the necessity of affairs forces him to be
absent.

In the mean time Hannibal marching along the Coast of the Adriatique Sea by
small iournies, fed his Army in a rich and fertile Province, causing the
Horse-feet to be washed with old Wine, whereof there was great abundance, the
better to cure them of their Scabs. He also caused the Soldiers which had
been wounded, to be carefully looked unto, and fortified the rest for future
affairs. Having past the Countries of Pretutian and Adrian, he ruined the
Country of the Marrucins and Franqueuille: Moreover, he bent his course
toward Iapygia, divided into three, whereof some are called Dauniens, Many
Countries ruined by Hannibal.
and the others Messapiens. He first ouer-runnes Daunia beginning by Lucerna,
a Collony of the Romans, thundering over all the Country. Then settling his
Camp at Ibonium, he falls upon the Artins, and utterly ruins all Daunia
without any resistance.

At the same time Quintus Fabius having taken his charge of Dictator, and
performed the accustomed Sacrifices, parts from Rome with the Master of the
Horse, and four Legions levied in haste: And within few days came to Appulia,
whereas receiving the Army from the Consul Cneus Seruilius, being come from
Rimeni, he sent him to Rome with some troops, giving him charge to raise an
Army at Sea at Hostia, and to defend the Coasts of Italy, if the Carthaginians
should attempt any thing by Sea. Finally, he marches with all his troops, and
plants himself in front of the Enemy, near unto Aigues, and within six miles
of them. Hanniball advertised of the coming of Fabius, and meaning to amaze
them suddenly, draws his Army to Field, Hannibal presents Battle to Fabius.
and presents it in the Battle before the Romans Fort: But when he had stayed
some time, he retired to his Camp, seeing that no man came forth to fight.
You must understand that Fabius had resolved from the beginning not to hazard
any thing, nor to fight, thinking it would be very beneficial to the Romans,
if he might defend their Towns from the Enemy. He was constant in his
opinion, The constancy of Fabius.
so as at the end he purchased the reputation of a slack man, and Coward, as
if he fled from danger only for fear.

But soon after he forced the World to confess, that they could not make
choice of a Captain that was more constant, nor wiser to manage the War,
the which appeared soon after in their affairs. Believe me, this wise
Dictator understood well what great difference there was betwixt the
Carthaginians Army, and that of the Romans: Considering that the others had
from their Youth frequented the War, having a Commander which was bred with
them in the Camp, in the rain and wind, and who from his very Cradle had
learned the trade: having gotten so many famous victories both in Spain and
Italy, against the Romans and all their Allies: and who moreover, distrusting
in all things, put their only hope of safety in the Victory: the which would
prove contrary to the Romans. Wherefore he was not resolved to fight, fearing
the Numidians, for that he was too weak in Horse: so as retiring for his
advantage with good consideration, he stayed, and led away his Army. The
advantages which the Romans had, were abundance of munition and victuals, and a
great Army. And therefore he ledit always by the hilly Countries, following
the Enemy near, yet giving him no means to fight, being always well
victualed, and never suffering the Soldiers to go forth, but kept them always
close together. By this means his men were always in safety, and beat the
Enemy, if at any time they went from the Army for pillage, so as many times
there were some taken, and others slain. This he did to the end that by little
and little he might weaken their forces, and encourage the Soldiers by these
petty Victories, being amazed with their former losses, nor to distrust their
Forces, or Fortune. Moreover, they could not persuade him to come to a
Battle. But Marcus Minucius discontent with his temporizing, blamed him of
cowardice and fear. He was a proud and rash man, who found nothing more
tedious and troublesome then to be absent from a Battle.

The Carthaginians after they had ruined the former Countries, and had past the
Appenine Hills, The Carthaginians ^poi^e the Country.
they go to Samnium, which is a very fertile Country of Italy, and which for
a long time had not felt any War: There they found so great abundance of all
things, as they could not consume the Booty, neither in using it moderately
nor wastfully. From thence they spoiled Bene^ent, a Collony of the Romans: They
took the Town of Telesia which had strong walls, was well victualed, and
furnished with all things necessary, the Romans followed the Enemies still
within a days journey or two. When as Hannibal saw that Fabius fled from all
occasions of fighting, and yet did not abandon the field, but followed him
still by the hilly Country, he resolved to go speedily into the Countries of
Capu^ and Falerna, thinking that of necessity one of the two would happen:
either that the Romans would come to a Battle, or that the World would soon
see that the Carthaginians camp't, and that the Romans kept themselves within
their Forts. By this means he did hope that the Towns of the Province being
tertified, they would yield unto the Carthaginians: For unto that day not any
one had fallen unto them, although the Romans had lost two great Battles, and
there were many to whom their persuasions were very unpleasing. Whereby we may
see of what authority and power the majesty of the Roman Commonwealth was
with their Succors and Allies.

Certainly Hannibals conceit was not idle: for the Capuan is an excellent
Country, The description of the Country of Capu^ and its situation.
for abundance of wealth, fertility of land, and the beauty and pleasure of the
place. First, it is seated along the Sea: whither infinite number of people
come from all parts of the World to Italy. Moreover, the noblest Towns of
Italy are situated there: for upon the Borders of the Sea, stand the Switzers,
the Cumans, the Fozolois, the Neop^litans, and at the end the Nucerins.

And toward the North upon the firm land, are the Calleniens and Teanins:
toward the East and South are the Dauniens and Nolains: and in the midst of
the Region Capua stands, the richest of them all, whose Lands are famous
amongst the fabulous Poets, which they call Phlegrees: and it is likely that
the gods have spoken principally of them, by reason of their wonderful beauty
and excellency. Moreover, this situation is strong by nature, and in a manner
impregnable. For on the one side they are enclosed by the Sea, and on the other
they are wholly environed with Mountains. There are only three entries which
are narrow and painful: the one is at Samnium, the second at Eriban, and the
third among the Arpins. The Carthaginians made a show to go into these
Countries, as into a Theater, to amaze them all: and thereby to fly from the
Enemy, and then to camp alone.

Wherefore Hannibal moved with these reasons, leads his Army by Samnium to the
streights of Mount Eriban, and plants his Camp near unto the River of
Vantour, The River of Vantour.
which diuides the said Champaigne from Rome. Then the most pleasant Country
of Italy was ouerrunne, and the Villages put to fire and sword. And although
that these things were very troublesome to Fabius, yet he continued constant in
his resolution. But Marcus Minucius, and all the Tribunes of the Horse, were of
opinion not to temporize any longer, but to fall upon the Carthaginians with
all their strength and forces, not suffering the spoil of so goodly a Country
in the view of the Roman Army. Fabius dislodging more suddenly then he had
been accustomed, seemed to make haste to preserve the Country of Capua from
spoil: But when he came to Falerna, he did but show his Army upon the
Mountains, lest the Allies should think he held not a Camp. Yet he would
never draw down into the field, fearing to fight with the Carthaginians, as
well for the reasons which we have formerly mentioned, as for that he was the
weaker in Cauallery.

When as Hannibal had often attempted in vain, to draw the Enemy to fight, in
the end he studied of a place to winter in, having ruined all parts of the
Country, and taken a wonderful spoil: having no intent to lose his Pillage,
but to transport it to some place where he might pass the Winter: to the end
his Army might not want any thing, The means which Fabius held to stop
Hannibals passage.
as well for the present as the future. Fabius knowing well that the return of
his Enemy would be by the same straight by the which he had entered, he
imagined that this passage would be beneficial to the Romans: and places
about four thousand men within these streights, entreating them to carry
themselves like brave and valiant men, when occasion should require, making use
of the advantage of the place. For his part, he recovered the next Mountain
with the rest of the Army, looking earnestly about him what was to be done, and
from whence and by whom the Enemy should be Charged, holding himself assured
to defeat their whole Army, or at the least to make them abandon the Booty
which they carried. But Hannibal saw that Fabius fought with his own weapons:
and having duly considered thereon, he disappointed his enterprise with an
excellent stratagem, causing many Faggots of dry sticks to be drawn together,
and bound to the horns of Oxen, Hannibals policy against Fabius.
and Bugles, whereof he had to the number of two thousand; and gave charge to
Asdrubal, that in setting fire to the sticks at a certain hour he should
chase the Troop to the next Mountain, which was betwixt the Camp and the
straight they were to pass, and that as soon as they should see a sign which
he would give, they should force the Oxen against the Mountain, until they
had gotten the top. When as all things were ready, he makes them to feed and to
take some rest. About midnight he causes them to march which had the charge
to tie the Torches to the horns of the Oxen. This being suddenly done by
reason of the multitude of assistants, he gives order to kindle them all, and
to chase them to the top of the Mountain. Finally, he gives charge to them
that were lightly Armed, to follow them to a certain place, commanding them
that as soon as the Troop should begin to run furiously through the
Mountains, they should recover the places of advantage, whereby they might
succor his men in passing, The course which Hanibal took i^passing the
straight kept by the Romans.
and annoy the enemy if they encountered any. In the mean time he dislodgeth
with his Army, and marches directly to the streights, ordring in Front the
Soldiers that were best armed, and after them the Horsemen, then the Baggage,
and in the Rear the Gauls and Spaniards.

The Romans which had been appointed to guard these passages, thinking that
Hannibal came where they saw the fire on the top of the Mountains, abandoned
their places, retiring to the highest Hills. And when at the first they
encountered some of these Oxen separated from the rest, they made a stand,
seeing their heads on a flaming fire, wondering as at a miracle. But when the
Soldiers were discovered, they entertained one another with casting of Darts.
And when in the end the Oxen came on, they all made a stand on the top of the
mountains, expecting day with great desire to be more certainly informed of
the business. Fabius advertised of this noise, conceiving it was some Ambush,
and flying the battle as they resolved, kept his men within the Fort. In the
mean time Hannibal (to whom matters succeeded according to his desire) past
his Army by the mountain, and carried away all his Spoils without any
obstacle. Then seeing at the break of day the Romans in front against his men,
and to be stronger in number and in their kind of Arms, he sent them a band
of Spaniards to second them: Who after they had slain about a thousand at the
first Charge, they brought their men safe back unto the Camp. Hannibal being
freed by this policy from the streights of Falerna, from thenceforth he was
more careful to choose a safe place to Camp in, seeking where he might
Winter, greatly terrifying the Towns and people of Italy.

During these actions, many taxed the Dictator of Cowardice, for that he had
suffered the enemy to escape so easily, being enclosed within the streights;
but he continued still constant in his opinion. Some few days after he was
called back to Rome for the Sacrifices, and left the Government of the Army
and all other affairs to the Constable, giving him charge that he should not
study so much to offend the Enemy, as to defend his own men. But Minucius
(whom the Dictator advised in vain) had no other care but to fight.

During these actions in Italy, Asdrubal having repaired thirty good ships,
Asdrubals parting from Carthage to go into Spain.
which he had received from his brother Hannibal, adding thereunto ten others,
parts from Carthage in the beginning of Summer, and gives the charge to
Imilcon, who ran along the Coasts, and Asdrubal led the Army by Land near the
shore, hoping to meet at one instant at the mouth of the River of Ebro, with
the Army by Sea. Cneus Scipio advertised that Asdrubal was gone to field, he
was first of the same opinion, but afterward he resolved to fight rather by
Sea then Land, by reason of the brute of their new succors, and preparation
for war. Wherefore after he had prepared an Army at Sea of five and thirty
Vessels, The Romans Army at Sea.
he made choice of the ablest men of his whole Army, and most active to fight
at Sea. The which being imbarqued, he set sail to encounter the enemy: and
three days after he had sailed from Tarracona, to places near unto Ebro, he
comes unto a Haven ten miles distant from the Enemy. From thence he sends two
Vessels of Marceilles being very swift to discover. This was a people which had
a great League with the Romans, and had held their party, during the time of
the second Punique War. But as soon as these Scouts had made Relation, that
the enemies Army at Sea was in the mouth of the River of Ebro, he weighes
Anchor and sails toward them, being desirous to surprise them unprovided.

Asdrubal had been advertised of the coming of the Roman army, by a sign
which was given him from a Beacon or Watchtower; and therefore after he had
ordered his Army by Land along the shore, and and caused his Rowers to imbarque,
he puts all into arms. When the Romans not only approacht, but also put
their ships in battle, they gave warning to fight. The Carthaginians
assayling them resolutely, had for a time some show of Victory. But afterward
Fortune began to turn, for they which were upon the shore, gave not so much
courage to their men to fight, as hope of safety for those that would fly. And
therefore the Carthaginians got to Land, after that two of their ships had bi^
taken and four sunk. But when as the Romans pursued them with all their
forces, The Romans Victory at Sea, against the Carthaginians.
the Carthaginians fled to shore, abandoning their ships, and retired to their
Army which was there in Battle. Finally having followed them with great
speed, they towed away with Ropes all the Vessels which floated: And after
they had vanquished their Enemies they parted joyfully as being masters of the
Sea: and of the forty ships they took five and twenty. Being therefore proud
of this Victory, they were afterward more careful of the affairs of Spain.

The Carthaginians advertised of this misfortune, sent threescore and ten
Vessels, Rigged sooner then they could imagine, An Army at Sea prepared
su^dainly by the Carthaginians.
understanding well of what consequence it was to be masters of the Sea. Who
sailed first to Sardinia, and afterward to Pisa in Italy, to the end they
might join with Hannibal if it were possible. But when as the Romans were
advertised of the coming of the Carthaginian Army, they so terrified them with
six score Quinqueremes which they sent, as they presently returned to
Sardinia, and from thence to Carthage. Cue^s Seruilius Commander of the Army
at Sea, had them long in chase; The Roman* great Army at Sea.
but when as he heard there was no hope to ouer-take them, he came unto
Lylibeum with his Fleet. From thence soon after he sails unto the Island of
Cercinetes, where taking silver of the Inhabitants not to ruin the Country, he
turns back, and takes the Island of Cossyron in passing: Where after he had
put a Garrison into the Town, he returned to Lylibeum, where lodging his
Vessels in the Port, within few days after he went to the Army at Land.

In the mean time the Senate having news of Cneus Scipio his Victory at Sea
in the mouth of Ebr^, they not only held it fit, but also necessary to pursue
the War in Spain, and to annoy the Carthaginians with all their power both by
Sea and Land. And therefore they presently prepared twenty ships of War, and
sent them to Publius Scipio in Spain, Supplies sent from Rome into Spain.
continuing his authority after his Consulship was ended, to the end that being
joined with his brother Cneus Scipio, all the affairs might be managed by
their common Council. For the thing which the Romans feared most, was, that
the Carthaginians prevailing in Spain, would be masters of the Sea: So as
afterward they might Sail into Italy, and furnish and supply Hannibal easily
with men and Treasure.

Publius Scipio going into Spain, joined with his brother; after which the War
was governed by their common Council. Wherefore presently they past the River
of Ebro, the which before they never durst attempt. Then Fortune began to smile
on the Romans. And after they had made subject those which dwelt in the passage
of Ebro, finding no resistance, they came to Sagont: Where being within five
miles of Cape Decrux, they camped in a place safe from the Enemy, and
convenient to draw Victuals from the Sea. Soon after that their Army at Sea
arrived; whereas this accident happened. You must understand that Hannibal at his
going into Italy, had taken the Children of the noblest Families in Spain, and
had left them in guard at Sagont: For that the place was strong, and they which
kept it, confident to the Carthaginians. There was at time within the Town a
certain Spaniard, whom they called Acedux of a noble house, and as honest a
man as any other Spaniard; and among the rest very loyal to the Carthaginians:
Ac^dux o^ Abilux.
But at that time after the manner of most of the Barbarians, he changed his
faith together with his Fortune. This Spaniard seeing the Romans to prosper in
Spain, had a desire to deliver the Hostages; having a conceit that it would
be a great means to purchase their favor. When he had well considered of all
the means to bring his enterprise to an end, he goes to Bostar Chief of the
Carthaginians. Asdrubal had sent him into Spain, Bosta^ Chief of the
Carthaginians.
to keep the Romans from passing the River. The which not daring to attempt,
he seated his Camp beyond Sagont upon the Banks of the River. He was a mild
man, and (contrary to the nature of the Affricans) not very politic: He
draws him a part, as a man which held his faith assured to the Carthaginians,
and lets him understand the estate of the affairs. The Carthaginians said he,
have held under their obedience unto this day, the people of Spain by cruelty,
for that the Romans were a far off: But now the Enemies Camp has passed Ebro,
so as every man has thereby occasion of a new enterprise. And therefore it is
necessary to bind those by benefits and favors, whom they could not retain by
fear: Moreover, that the Romans were near unto Sagont in Arms, and furnished
with Armies both by Sea and Land, so as the Town was in danger: For this cause
he was of opinion that he should send back all the Hostages to their Towns:
The which if he did, he should first of all frustrate the Romans of their
hope, for that they did chiefly besiedge Sagont to have them: And that
moreover, he should purchase the love and favor of the Spaniards to the
Carthaginians.

He likewise thought that it would be for the safety of the Hostages, and that
if he would give him the charge to carry them back, he would do him no small
service to win their loves, and that he should not only bind their hearts by
the sending back of the Children unto their Parents, but he should set before
their eyes, how much the kindness and Clemency of the Carthaginians was to be
esteemed. Moreover he propounded unto him the expectance he should have of
their gifts and presents, to whom he had sent the Children, and that there was
not any man would forget so great a benefit.

After he had held this kind of Speech and others to the same end, he returned
to Sagont, as soon as he had persuaded Bostar to that which he desired,
appointing a day when he should join with those which should carry back the
Hostages. The night following he goes to the Enemies watch, and having spoken
to some Spanish Soldiers of the Allies, they lead him unto the Captains:
Where having used much speech, what profit it would be for the affairs of
Spain, if the Hostages fell into their hands, in the end he promises to
deliver them. The Romans giving a willing ear unto him, weighing the greatness
of the action, take his faith, and promise him theirs with great rewards. And
after they had advised of the place and day, when they should attend to receive
the Hostages, he returns. Afterward he takes with him such as seemed fit for
this business, and goes to Bostar: Where receiving the Hostages, he goes out
of Sagont as it were to fly the enemies Watch: But having past their Camp a
little, he leads them all into an Ambush which they had prepared, as not
knowing any thing. The Romans gave great rewards to Acedux, and made use of him
to carry back the Hostages to their Towns, Acedux conspires with the Romans.
as he had resolved with Bostar, sending men with him to make them favorable.
Acedux went with them, and by this persuasions caused many to enter into League
with the Romans, by the means of these hostages: laying before their eyes
their mildness and great courage, and detesting the iealousies and cruelty of
the Carthaginians, propounding himself for an example. Bostar after the loss
of the hostages by the advice of a Child repented too late. And then the
season of the year forced both Armies to go and winter, after that fortune
had favored the Romans in this enterprise of the hostages. Behold the present
estate of the affairs of Spain.

Hannibal being advertised by his Spies of the great provision of Corn within
Lucerna and Geryona, and that moreover Geryona was a very good place, he
resolved to winter his Army there. And passing the Mountain of Lyburna, he
draws to those places. Being come to Geryona, five and twenty miles from
Lucerna, he began first to summon the Inhabitants to yield, Geriona taken by
assault.
using fair promises, and assuring them of his faith. But losing his time he
besieged the Town, the which he took presently, and slew all the
Inhabitants, preserving the greatest part of the houses to serve him for
Garners: then he planted his Camp close unto the Town, being well ditched
and pallisadoed. This done, he sends two parts of his Army to gather in the
Corn, and continued in battle with the third part, as well to guard the
Camp, as to prevent all oppression of those which gathered in the Corn. They
brought in daily a wonderful quantity, for that the Region was very large, and
the number of the people in a manner infinite, Marcus Minucius.
and harvest was now at hand. But Marcus Minucius Commander of the Romans* in
the beginning followed the Carthaginians by the Mountains, hoping he should
sometimes encounter the Enemy in some bad passage.

But being advertised that they gathered in the Corn, after the taking of
Geryona, and had seated their Camp near unto it, he goes into the plain and
recouers a high Hill upon the way, where he planted his Camp: and there he
studied by what policy he might fall upon those which were in battle. But
when as Hannibal found the Romans to be so near, he sent only the third
part of his Army for Corn, and kept the two other parts in the Camp.

After which he plants himself nearer unto the Enemy, about two miles from
Geryona, to the end he might seem to be careful to defend those which
gathered the Corn, if they made any attempt against them. In the mean time
there was a little Hill betwixt the two Camps, which was very fit and
convenient for the Carthaginians, if they could take it, and dangerous for the
Romans. Hannibal sent Numidians thither in the Night, who took it. But when as
Minucins at the break of day, saw that they held it, he puts forth those that
were lightly armed, and gives an assault unto the Hill.

The Combat for a time was very fierce and cruel: but in the end the Romans
had the best success, The Cart^aginians def^ated by the Romans upon a Hill.
for they won the Hill by force: whither presently the whole Army retired.
Hannibal continued for some days within his Camp, for that the Romans were
still in front. But soon after necessity forced him to send some to feed the
Horses for the Baggage, and others to the Harvest: to the end that as he had
resolved, he might not consume that which he had gotten, but might draw
together some great quantity of Corn to Winter, having always a great care
the Army should not have need of any thing in that time, especially the Horses
and sumpters, for that all his hope and confidence was in the Cauallery.

Minucius seeing the Enemies dispersed, and wandering up and down, he draws
his men to field, and marching directly against their Camp, puts them in
battle, and sends the Horsemen with the best Foote-men against the
Forragers, The Carthaginians surprised by the Romans.
giving them charge to kill all, and not to receive any to mercy. Hannibal
surprised with this sudden accident, durst not put his men in battle,
neither could he succor those that were disperced. The Roman Horsemen with
those that were lightly armed, made a great slaughter of their Enemies thus
scattred. They likewise which were with Minucius, grew so resolute and
courageous, as they durst in a manner force the Enemies Fort, and besiege them.
Hannibal finding himself destitute of counsel and help, kept himself within
his Fort, which he guarded with great difficulty, when as Asdrubal gathering
the Soldiers together which fled to the place where their Camp had formerly
been, near unto the Walls of Geryona, came to succor him with about four
thousand men. Then resuming a little courage, he comes out of his Fort, saving
his Army from that present danger with great difficulty. Minucius having made a
great slaughter before the Emies Fort, and not much less in the field, he
retired with a wonderful hope for the future. And three days after he lodged
in the Camp abandoned by the Enemies. For Hannibal fearing left the Romans by
night should lodge in the Camp which he had left near unto Geryona, and so
get all the spoils, he returned thither with speed with his whole Army.

After this defeat, the Carthaginians were more wary how to forage and go
for Corn, and contrariwise the Romans more hardy to undergo dangers. In the
mean time the news of the victory was (according to the usual manner) made
far greater then it had been: so as all the World rejoiced. First for that
they imagined that after so many losses, this was the beginning of a better
fortune: and judge thereby, that the slacknesse and cowardice which had seemed
to be in their Army, was not the fault of the Soldiers, but of the Dictator.
And therefore all the World contemned Fabius, and held him to be dull and a
Coward. Contrariwise they did so highly extol and praise Minucius, as they
gave him equal power with the Dictator, the which had not been formerly
seen, hoping that he would soon make an end of the Wars of Italy. Thus
there were two Dictators at one time, and in one Army: Two Dictators at Rome at
one instant.
which was a new thing. Minucius much more proud then it is credible, as well
for his good fortune as the peoples favor, grew so glorious as if the Enemies
were already defeated and vanquished. Fabius fainted not, nor lost his courage,
for the injury they had done unto him, Fabius returns to the Camp.
but returned to the Camp always constant in his opinion. But when he saw
that his Companion was much troubled to find an occasion of fighting, fearing
lest he should commit some folly, he gave him the choice, either that one of
them should for a certain time, or every other day, or for a longer space,
have the Government of the Camp, The division of the Roman Army betwixt the
two Dictators.
or else they should divide the Legions betwixt them after the manner of the
Consuls, and that either of them should do with his Army what he pleased.
Wherefore they parted their Troops, and had their Camps separated about a
Mile and an half distant one from another.

When as Hannibal was advertised not only by the Fugitives, but also of their
actions, of the hatred betwixt the Commanders, and of the ouerweening of
Minucius, thinking that this would further his intention, he sought occasion to
fight with him: hoping he should easily abate his fury and presumption. There
was a little Hill betwixt Minucius Camp, and that of the Carthaginians:
whereon whosoever seized, it would prove very prejudicial to the other, And
when as Hannibal made haste to get it, being certain that Minucius would come
to prevent him, as he had other times done, he used this stratagem. First of
all the whole Plain betwixt them at the first sight seemed unfit to lay an
Ambush, The policy of Hannibal.
being void of woods and bushes: Yet there were about it many turnings and
hollow Rocks, where they might easily hide Soldiers. He sends by Night to
these hollow places, according to the capacity which he knew to be in them,
two hundred, and three hundred, and five hundred Horse together with five
thousand Foot. And to the end they should not be discovered by the Fotragers,
he send at the break of day, some that were lightly armed, to take this Hill.
The which when Minucius perceived, contemning so small a number, he marched with
his Army to repel the Enemy from thence. First he sent those that were
lightly armed, commanding them to charge: then the Horsemen. Finally, he
follows with those that were completely armed, not changing the order which
he had held in other encounters.

The sum was now risen, and all the World looked upon this Hill. The Ambushes
were covered: Hannibal sent succors continually to his men, and afterward
followed with all his Cauallery. Finally, A Combat betwixt the Romans and the
Carthaginians.
the two Armies fought with all their Troops: and in the end the Roman
Foote-men that were lightly armed, were forced by the Horsemen to retire to
their Companions that were better armed. Then the Ambush brake forth, and
charged on all sides with great cries, so as they not only distressed and
aflicted those that were lightly armed, but likewise the whole Army. The which
Fabius perceiving, and fearing that the Roman Army might be wholly defeated,
parts from his Camp and succors his Companion: At whose coming the Romans
rejoiced, Fabius succors Minucius.
and retired presently to their Ensigns, although they were broken and
scattered here and there, with the loss of many Soldiers that were lightly
Armed, and diverse others of the Legions.

Hannibal seeing the Enemies reinforced with Succors, and that they marched
directly toward him, he caused a Retreat to be sounded. Then all the Romans
which were in the fight confessed publicly that the Virtue and Wisdom of
Fabius, The great Reputation of Fabius.
had saved the Roman Empire, which the ouer-weening of Minucius had lost and
ruined. When as the news came to Rome, all the World knew plainly, what
difference there is betwixt the ouer-weening and ignorance of Soldiers, and
the judgment and advice of a wise Captain. From that time the Romans
contented themselves with one Camp, and all obeyed Fabius. The which I find
related after this manner by another Author.

When the two Armies were returned to their own Camps, Minucius having his
Soldiers about him speak unto them in this manner. Minucius his Speech.
I have often heard say, loving Soldiers, that he is most Wise that can give
good Council, and tell what is to be done in his difficult Affairs: And he
is next Wise that can obey him that gives good council; but he that can
neither give good council himself, nor obey other men's council, is of all
others most ignorant and foolish. Seeing that Fortune has denied ^s the first
of these Gifts, let us keep the second, and whilst we learn to Rule, let us
propound unto our selves to obey them that be Wise. Wherefore let us join our
Tents with Fabius, and when as you shall hea^e me salute him as my Protector
and Father, you likewise shall salute his Soldiers as your noble Patrons, by
whose strength and resolution you are preserved this day. Whereupon they
presently removed their Tents, and went to Fabius Camp, whereat he maruailed
much. There Minucius submitted himself and his men to the protection of
Fabius, resigning the authority of the Empire into his hands.

The Carthaginians thought to acco^modate a place to pass the Winter having
environed it with Ditches, betwixt the Hill and their Camp, and fortified the
top of the Hill with men and Pallisadoes: In the mean time the day of the
Election of Consuls was come, where they deposed the Dictators, and made choice
for Consuls of Lucius Emilius, Lucius Emilius and Caius Tarrencius chosen
Consuls.
and Caius Tarrentius Varro. And when as Emilius had created for Pro-Consuls,
the Consuls of the precedent Army, Cneus Seruilius and Marcus Attileus Regulus,
who had been subbrogated in the place of Flaminius, they took the charge of
all the Troops that were in the Camp, mannaging all the Affairs of War.
The Consuls make a new Leuy of men to furnish their Army: and give charge unto
the Pro-Consuls, that they should not dare to fight a Battle with the
Carthaginians, but entertain their Soldiers with light skirmishes, and invre
the Youth to hardness and labor for the time to come: for that they imputed
the defeats past unto the ignorance and slacknesse of the Soldiers. Lucius
Postumus was created Praetor, and sent into Gaul with an Army, Lucius Postumus
Praetor.
to do the like unto those Gauls which were in Hannibals service. They also
provided Rowers for the Vessels which were at Lylibeum: And they sent
whatsoever was necessary to the Captains that were in Spain. During these
actions at Rome, Cneus Seruilius, and his Companion Attilius, following the
Commaundment of the Consuls, did not any thing worthy of memory, but make light
skirmishes, both by reason they were forbidden by the Consuls, and for the
roughness of the Weather: Finally, they managed the affairs wisely and with
great policy. By this means the two Armies wintred in view one of another.

Hannibal dislodged in the beginning of the Spring, and leaving Geryona, (for
that he had resolved so to press the Romans, as they should be forced to come
to a battle,) he takes the Fort of Naples, well furnished with Corn and all
other munition: The Fort of Naples taken by Hannibal.
For the Romans had drawn thither a great quantity of Corn from Canusium, and
other neighbor Countries, wherewith the Camp was usually Victualed. This done
they were in great perplexity, not so much for the loss of the munition, as
for that the whole Country was left in prey to the enemy. They send men to
Rome, to acquaint the Senate therewith, and that they might advise what was to
be done: For that they had resolved to give battle if the Enemy approached:
Seeing there was no means of flight, and that the whole Province was ruined,
and their Allies wauered. The Senate sent them word that they should not
attempt any thing, but expect the coming of the Consuls, whom they afterward
commanded to depart. All the World had their eyes fixed upon Paulus Emilius:
They had their hope in him, as well for his Wisdom, as for that he had in
former times done great exploits against the Sclauonians.

BEing ready to depart, I find it Written that Fabius stayed him for a time,
speaking thus unto him. If thou good Lucius Emilius were matched with a
Companion like unto thy Self, Fabius Speech to Lucius Emilius.
or if thou were like unto thy Fellow, then were my Speech in vain, which I
will now make for you both, for being good Consuls you would work effectually
for the common wealth, although I should be silent. But if you were both bad,
then would you neither hear my words, nor admit of my Council. But knowing
thy integrity, and the conditions of thy Companion, I foresee that thy
goodness shall little avail the Commonwealth, through the folly of thy
Companion: So as the Commonwealth does halt, and is half same; whereby evil
Council shall prevail as well as good. Wherefore to Thee only my Speech
tends, foretelling Thee that Thou shall have as much War with thy fellow
Tarentius, as with Hannibal: Neither do I know which of them will be a more
deadly enemy unto thee. For thou shall not only fight with Hannibal in the
field, but with thy fellow thou shall have continual War in all places, and
at all times. With Hannibal thou shall fight with thy Horses and foote-men, but
Varro will assatle thee with thine own men. I pray thee remember Caius
Flaminius, who being Consul and having his men about him in his Camp, began
to grow mad. This man (before he was made Consul, and now being Consul, even
in the Senate House, before he sees his field or his enemy,) is already mad.
And he that thus talks among the Senators, what think you will he do when
he shall be in the field among a number of fresh young Soldiers, where as one
word speaking, all the matter shall be decided. But in case he make haste to
fight, as he ^aith he will, either I know not what belongs to the War, or
else we are like to suffer greater losses, then we did at Trasimenum.

There is but one way to maintain war against Hannibal, the which I have
foreseen, and none will be found so good to make him weary of Italy. We are
in our own Country, having Cities and faithful Allies ready to assist us at
all times with Horse, Harness, Victuals, and all other necessaries. Hannibal
is in a strange Country among his enemies, far from home, he looks for no
peace both by Sea or Land: He has no Cities to receive him; he has nothing
but what he steals, and takes by rapine: he has scarcely the third part of
his Army left, which he brought over Iberus: more are dead by famine then with
the Sword; and here he can hardly feed those that are living. Wherefore
doubt not but in sitting still, you shall vanquish such an Army, which
decreaseth daily in strength, and cannot have their wants supplied. This is the
only means to dally and deceive your enemy.

Varro desires battle, and Hannibal has the like desire. Wherefore thou
alone must wisely oppose thy self against them both, and regard not what they
speak of thee, let not the vain glory of thy Fellow, nor the false aspertions
which shall be cast upon thee, move thee to the contrary. Suffer thy Self to be
called fearful, slow, and unskillful in the War. It is better to be feared
of thy wise enemy, then to be praised of thy foolish company. My meaning is,
not that thou should do nothing, but whatsoever thou shall attempt, do it
soberly, and according to reason, not rashly, trusting to Fortune; follow not
the occasions that the enemy will give Thee: And be not over hasty; for haste
is blind and works vnsafely.

To these and his other Words the Consul answered little, saying only that
were more true then easy to be followed: But he would profess one thing,
that his desire should always be, to have things succeed well: But in case it
should otherwise happen, he would rather expose himself, to the danger of his
enemies Weapons, then to the exclamations of his angry Citizens. With these
words he parted out of the City, and went to the Camp with his hasty
Companion. It was ordered that the Wars should be managed with eight Legions,
the which had never been done, and that every Legion should consist of five
thousand men. The Romans as we have said, make a complete Army of four
Legions, A Legion of five thousand Men, and the manner how the Romans raise ^n
Army.
every Legion being four thousand foot, and two hundred Horse, or else of
five thousand foot, and three hundred horse, if there be any great necessity.
To the which they add as many foot of these Allies, and thrice as many Horse.
All the Troops are equally divided betwixt the Consuls. Most commonly one
Consul gives battle with two Legions, and with the succors of their Allies.
They seldom fight with all their Troops. But the fear and amazement of the
Romans, was then so great of the Carthaginians, as they thought it fit not to
fight only with four, but with eight Legions together. And therefore after
they had given fair admonitions to the Consuls, and had laid before them the
consequence of the affairs which way soever Fortune should turn, they
Commanded them to go unto the Camp entreating them to do the duties of good
men, in the administration of the War, as the Roman Majesty required.

After the coming of the Consuls to the Camp, they mingled the new Bands to
the old Army, and let many understand the will of the Senate, wishing the
multitude to be of good Courage, considering the season of the time: Wherewith
Emilius made an Oration, whereof this in a manner is the Substance.

THat for losses lately made, they should not faint like men amazed: Paulus
Emilius speech unto the Soldiers.
For the losses in former Battles had not happened for one or two causes, but
for many. And if at this day they be Men of Courage and Resolution, there was
nothing could hinder, but they should obtain a goodly Victory. That never unto
this hour, the two Consuls had fought with all the Legions together, nor with
more warlike Men, nor of greater Experience. And if on the other side they have
made use of young Men, and little acquainted with the Art of war, and who
moreover were so ill advertised of the Enemies enterprises, of the situation
of places, and the nature of the Region, so as many times they have found
themselves in danger, when they had scarce seen the Enemy; which was a matter
of great consequence: For they which were defeated in Gaul, near unto the
River of Trebia, came to fight without reason, never inquiring of the enemies
enterprise, within three days after their arrival from Sicily; and they which
were near unto the Lake of Peronza, were defeated before they could see the
enemy, by reason of a great Fogge.

But now Companion, says he* all things are for us; for we are two Consuls
united in one will, and the same forces, and we have with us those of the last
year. And for your part, you have not only seen the daily combats, the
order which Soldiers observe, and the enemies Troops: But moreover behold the
second year, wherein you have had experience of all this, in practicing your
selves, and fighting continually. Wherefore seeing that things are contrary to
those which happened in former Battles, it is not likely but the end should
prove otherwise. It is not credible, nay I say it is impossible, seeing that
in fighting with the enemy with an equal number in so many incounters, you
have parted Victors, that now you should be vanquished by them with all the
Troops, seeing you have a double Army.

Seeing then Companions that you have the Victory in your own hands, you have
no more need of our Counsel and care. I might make you a longer Speech, if I
did hold it necessary; for this must be expected from those which are
mercenary, or being drawn from the Allies are Commanders of an Army, to whom
nothing is more troublesome then a day of Battle. In regard of those which
are like unto us, whose lives are not only in danger, but their Country,
Wives, and Children, whose remembrances happily should be of more force then
any remonstrance.

What man is he that would not either vanquish in fighting, or die in the
Combat, then to live in misery, and attend so great a storm and poverty?
Courage Companions, consider with your selves what a difference there is
betwixt vanquishing and to be vanquished, and what follows the one and the
other, and prepare your selves to Battle, so as you will remember that it is
not the Roman Army that is in danger, but the Country; and moreover the head
of the World. What shall the Romans have remaining after your defeat? They have
put all their forces and power into your hands, and all their hope is in you. I
entreat you for the honor of the immortal Gods, that you would not frustrate
their expectation. Yield the thanks which you owe unto your Country, let all
the world know, that the losses formerly made, were not by the prowess of the
Carthaginians, more then by the Romans: but for that the Roman Soldiers were
at that time new, and ignorant of the War.

After this Speech or the like, Emilius dismissed the Soldiers. Three days
after the Army marched toward the Enemies Camp, and on the third day they
planted themselves near unto them. But Emilius seeing that the Plain was
large, he was not of opinion to fight with the Enemy: for that he was
stronger in Horsemen, and that they must draw them into some place where the
Foote-men might have the advantage. Contrariwise Varro being of little
experience in the War, was of advice not to defer the battle, lest the
Enemy should escape from them. And therefore these two Consuls were in
contention and debate, Discord betwixt the two Consuls.
which is the worst thing that can happen in a Camp.

That day (for they govern it by days) Varro had the Command: who dislodging
from his Camp, made have to approach near unto the Enemy, notwithstanding
that Emilius opposed himself to the contrary. Hannibal marches against them
with his men lightly armed, and his Horsemen, and assaults them with a fight
more likely to their forerunners, then to a pitched Battle. The Romans
received them valiantly: Finally, the Night parted them. A skirmish betwixt the
Carthaginians and Romans.
The Carthaginians having gotten little, retired to their Camp.

And when as three days after Lucius Emilius had resolved not to fight, and
could nor dissuade the other, he diuides the Army into three, The River of
Fante.
and fortifies two parts on this side the River of Fante, which alone diuides
the Appenine Hills, and bending toward the Sea of Italy, runs into the
Adriatique. The other third part he lodges on this side the River, about two
Miles and an half distant from the other two, and in a manner as much from the
Enemies Camp. When as Hannibal had found out a convenient place for his
Horsemen to fight in, and thinking that the Consuls would come to the Combat,
he began to put his men in Battle: But fearing that the Army was amazed, by
reason of this last Fortune, he resolved to preach unto them. Hannibals Speech
unto his Soldiers*
He draws them together, and commands them to look upon the Country which
was about him, demanding of them what they could desire of the Gods more
beneficial and profitable then the offer of a battle, in those places where
they might make use of their Horsemen which were invincible. And when as all
had confessed it freely, therefore says he, give thanks first unto the
immortal Gods: for in preparing us the Victory, they have brought the Enemy
into this place of advantage for us, and secondly to us, who by our industry
and labor have forced them to come to fight. The Romans cannot fly, nor
avoid the Combat, and therefore the battle and victory is in your hands.

I hold it folly now to persuade you to perform the duties of brave men. It
had been well spoken, when you had no experience of the Roman Forces: the
which at this present time we made known unto you by words and example. But
what preaching can more inflame and encourage your hearts then the works
themselves: seeing you have obtained the Victory in three great several
battles? You have been Masters of the Field in the Combats past, and have
had abundance of all things as we have promised you: So as hitherto I have
never failed of my promise. But the Combat at this day is for Towns and
treasure: if you gain this battle, you shall be Lords of all Italy.

Finally, after so many labors and dangers, being delivered by this alone, you
shall purchase the felicity of the Romans: You shall be the Head and Emperors
of all the World. For the effecting whereof, there is not any need of words,
but of effects. By the will of the Gods before it be long, you shall all see by
experience that I am a man of my promise. After these Remonstrances, (...)
commended their resolution, he planted his Camp upon the Riuer-side, where the
Enemies greatest forces lay. The day following he commands them to treat
themselves well, and to prepare themselves to battle for the day following.
And therefore at the third day he passed the River at the Sunne-rising,
Hannibal puts his men in battle.
and put his men in battle. But Emilius (seeing that his Forces were not
equal in that place, and knowing that Hannibal would dislodge for want of
victuals) came not out of his Fort.

When as Hannibal had stayed some time there, seeing that he had in vain
called the Enemies forth to fight, he retired the rest of his Army to the
Camp, and sent the Numidians to charge those which came from the Romans lesser
Camp to water: which they kept and detained from them, pursuing them with
great cries unto the Fort. Whereat Varro disdaining much, that the Roman Camp
should be annoyed by these men, was the more inflamed and encouraged unto
battle. The whole multitude wished nor desired nothing more, so much the
expectance in all things is tedious.

And as in the mean time the news were come to Rome, that although the Armies
were not lodged in a place to give battle, yet they were one right against
another, and that there were daily encounters, all the World entered into great
heaviness and care. Certainly the Romans having received lately wonderful
great losses, feared much the future. A great amazement at Rome.
Every man fore-casts with him self what the Romans fortune would be, after
the defeat of this Army: All the World poured out threats against the Sybils
Books, they saw nothing in the Temples and private houses but prodigies and
strange signs. And therefore the whole City was addicted to Prayers, to
sacrifices to the Gods, and to Ceremonies: The Romans in old time very
ceremonious.
for the Romans are great obseruers, as well in public as in private, in the
time of War, neither do they let pass any thing out of their rememberance
which in reason they ought to do.

Varro to whom the authority belonged the next day, at the Sunne-rising draws
forth the Armies out of both the Camps without the priuity of his Companion.
Varro offers battle, and the order which he held.
And parting with those which were in the great Fort, he ioynes unto them
those that were in the lesser.

Then putting his men in Battle, he places the Roman Horsemen upon the
right wing, which was nearest unto the River. Next to the which continuing the
order, he disposes of the Foote-men, with the greatest number of Ensigns,
and the closest Bands: and the Horsemen of the Allies were upon the left wing,
and in Front those that were lightly armed. The Roman Army of four score
thousand Foot and six thousand Horse
They were with their Allies, to the number of fourscore thousand Foot, and
about six thousand Horse. Hannibal passing the River at the same time, sends
them of Maiorque and Min^rque with those that were lightly armed before: and
passing the rest of the Army at two places, he plants himself before the
Enemy, ordring the Horsemen of Gaul and Spain near unto the River upon the
left wing against the Roman Horsemen. The order which Hannibal held to put his
men in battle.
After which he sets Foote-men in the midst of the Affricans, who were armed to
proof, and after them the Gauls and Spaniards, and finally the rest of the
Affricans: and on the right wing he lodges his Numidian Horsemen.

When he had put his whole Army in order, he places in the midst the Troops
of Gauls and Spaniards: he ordered them in a crooked form, and a weak
figure, meaning that the Affricans should undergo the danger before them, as a
safeguard to the Battle. The Affricans were armed in such sort, as you would
have taken it for a Roman Battalion, The diversity of Sword, betwixt the Gauls
and Spaniards.
by reason of the Arms which they had gotten at Trebia, and at the Lake of
Perouza. The Gauls and Spaniards carried the like Targets, but their Swords
differed: For the Spaniards were short, and therefore easy, werewith they did
both thrust and strike: Hannibals Army consisted of forty thousand Foot, and
ten thousand Horse.
But the Gauls were long and without points. It was a strange and terrible
thing to see the Gauls naked above the waiste, and the Spaniards attired in
shirts of Linen, wrought with purple after the manner of their own Country.
There were ten thousand Horse, and above forty thousand Foot with the succors
that came from Gaul. Lucius Emilius led the right wing, and Tarrentius Varro
the left: Marcus Attilius, and Cneius Seruilius governed the Battalion in the
midst. And as for the Carthaginian Captains, Asdrubal led the left wing, Hanno
the right, and Hannibal was in the midst with his Brother Mago. The Romans
looked toward the South, and the Carthaginians to the North: but neither of
them were annoyed with the Sun.

After they had given warning to battle, The battle of Canna^.
the encounters and skirmishes were for a time equal. But when as the Gauls
and Spaniards of the left wing, The defeat of the Roman Horsemen by the Gauls
and Spaniards.
had charged the Romans, the Combat was fierce and cruel, so as they did not
charge and recharge, but joining together, they did fight Foot to Foot, and
man to man, after they had left their Horses. There the Carthaginians
vanquished and slew most of the Romans, fighting valiantly, and with great
courage. In regard of the rest, they slew them retiring near the River without
any mercy or compassion: And then the Foote-men received those that were
aduantagiously armed, charging one another. The Spaniards and Gauls resisted
the Romans valiantly for a short time, but being forced, they retired, breaking
their Lunary order. Then the Roman Battalion pursuing with great courage, did
easily disorder the Enemies Ranks: The Gauls Battalion of Foot broken by the
Romans and reunited again.
for that of the Gauls was weak, as having fortified the horns, being in the
midst of the danger. Wherefore the horns and the midst were not equal: so as
the midst of he Gauls Battalion advanced far upon the horns, like an half
Moon, the crookedness turning toward the Enemy.

Finally, the Romans pursuing them, marched thorough without any resistance, so
as at their coming they had upon their Flancks the Affricans that were best
armed, who covering themselves with their Targets, charged their Enemies upon
the sides thrusting with their swords. So as by the providence of Hannibal, the
Romans were enclosed among the Lybians, by the encounter which they had made
against the Gauls. They did not fight by Battalion, but Man to Man, or by
troops, turning against those which charged them upon the Flancks. And
although that Lucius Emilius, Lucius Emilius.
who commanded the right wing, had been in the Combat of the Horsemen, Yet
he was safe and well, meaning therefore that in giving courage, his deeds
should be answerable to his words, seeing that the hope of Victory consisted
in the Footmen, he thrust into the hottest of the Battle, whee in fighting
he gave courage to the Horsemen, Hann^^al.
the which Hannibal did in like manner. In the mean time the Numidians of the
left wing with all their Horsemen, falling upon the right wing of the Romans,
they neither did nor suffered any thing that was worthy of memory, so equal
were the two Troops both in force and courage: yet they made the Romans
unprofitable, scattering them here and there. In the mean time Asdrubal went
to aid and succor the Affricans with the Horsemen of the left wing. Asdrubal.
The which the Horsemen of the Roman Allies perceiving, they presently turned
head. Asdrubal seeing this, performed the duty of a wise and discreet Captain:
and sent the Numidians, (whom he knew were more in number, and terrible to make
a chase,) to pursue them that fled, and went himself speedily with the Footmen
to succor the Affricains: where assailing the Romans in the Rear, he
fortified his own Men, making a great slaughter of the Enemy. Lucius Emilius
having received many wounds, Emilius slain in the Battle.
died in this Battle: He was a Man who unto his death had done good service
unto the Commonwealth. They write that Caius Lentulus a Tribune leading an
empty horse in his hand as he fled, saw Paulus the Consul sitting on a stone,
all covered with blood, to whom he said: Lucius Emili^s whom the Gods should
hold innocent of this cruel slaughter, take this horse, whilst any strength
remains within, and I being thy friend will lift thee up, and keep thee on,
lest thou make this Battle doleful thorough the death of a Consul: without
the which there is cause enough of mourning and weeping. Whereunto the Consul
answered, Emiliu^ speech to Lentu^^s.
Caius Cornelius increase thou in virtue, but beware lest whilst thou do
bewail this accident, thou find little time to escape thy self. Go
therefore and bid the Senate make strong the walls of Rome, and to fortify it
with Succors, before the Conqueror come: and tell Quintus Fabius secretly,
that Lucius Emilius Paulus does constantly remember his precepts, lives in
them, and will die in them. And I pray thee suffer me to pass this life, among
these my dead Knights, lest by longer living, I become an accuser of my
fellow, defending my innocence by the trespass of another, and yet at length
dye being held guilty of this action.

The Romans holding still good in so long and furious a Battle, were in the
end all slain. The Romans lose the Battle.
Among the which died the Consuls of the precedent year, Marcus Attilius and
Cneius Seruilius, brave men, and worthy of the Roman name. At the same time the
Numidians ouertooke the horsemen which fled, whereof they slew a great number,
and dismounted the rest. Some retired to Venusium: among the which was the
Consul Varro, Varro flies with threescore and ten Horse.
whose life was base, and his command unprofitable for his Country. Behold the
end of the Battle of Cannas, so famous as well for the victors as the
vanquished: whereof the reason is, for that of six thousand Roman horse, there
escaped but threescore and ten to Venusium with Varro; and of the Allies
about three hundred scattered here and there, Ten thousand Romans taken alive.
who fled to the Neighbor Towns. And as for the Bands of Foot, the Enemy
took about ten thousand alive, so as there hardly escaped three thousand.
The rest to the number of threescore and ten thousand were slain in the
Battle. Threescore and ten thousand slain in the Battle.
The Carthaginians got not the victory without loss. There were slain about
four thousand Gauls, fifteen hundred Affricains and Spaniards, and two
hundred horse. Hannibals loss.
The Romans which were taken alive were not in the Battle: for Varro had left
ten thousand Men in the Camp, to the end that if Haniball led forth all his
Army to fight, that in assailing the Enemies Camp whilst they were otherwise
busy, they might spoil the Carthaginians Munition. And if Haniball left a
sufficient Garrison for the Camp, then his Forces would be the less, for the
Romans were stronger in numbers of Men. Behold the manner how they were taken.
Haniball had left a sufficient Garrison in his Camp to guard it: But when as
the Romans saw the Battle grow hot, they go unto the Camp as they had
resolved to besiege it. The Carthaginians defended themselves: But for that the
Romans charged them furiously, they were forced to abandon the place. In the
mean time Hannibal having gotten an absolute victory, falls upon those which
assailed his Camp, and put them to flight, shutting them up within their
Forts, of whom he slew two thousand, and took the rest. The Numidians on the
other side brought unto Hannibal the Roman horsemen, who flying, were
dispierced in the Fields. Thus after the Battle ended, neither of them were
deceived in their expectation: Tarent, Capua and Naples reduced under the
obedience of Hannibal.
for presently the Carthaginians were Masters of the Province, which they call
great Greece, so as Tarent, Capua, and Naples, came under their obedience, and
all the Towns wauered for Hannibal, neither was he out of hope to take Rome
speedily.

Finally, the Romans wholly dispairing of the Empire of Italy, were in fear not
only of their own ruin, but also of the whole Country, expecting hourly
their cruel Enemy at the walls of Rome. The City being thus troubled* News
(to the end the measure of their miseries might be full) came from Gaul of the
Defeat of Lucius Postumus the Praetor, Lucius Posthumu^ defeated in Gaul.
with his Army by an Ambush. Yet the Senate inuolued in so many miseries, made
a good show; aduising the people to fortify the City with Men, and to
consider of their affairs with courage and constancy. The which the things
which succeeded afterward did verify, for being now vanquished by the
Carthaginians, and seeming to acquit unto them the glory of Arms, within short
time after, by the constancy of the Commonwealth, and by the Council and
wisdom of the Senate, they came (after they had vanquished and ruined the
Carthaginians) to be Lords not only of Italy, but also of the whole world. And
therefore we will conclude this book, and likewise the actions of Spain and
Italy, which were during the hundredth and fortieth Olimpiade. And when we shall
come to those of Greece, during the same Olimpiade, we will speak more at
large of the Roman Commonwealth: For I hold it not only necessary for the
Reader, for the knowledge of the History, but also profitable, to correct and
govern a Commonwealth.

The end of the Third Book of Polybius.
THE FOVRTH BOOK of the History of POLYBIVS.
WE have in my opinion sufficiently showed the causes of the second punique
war in this last Book, and then the descent of Hannibal into Italy: We have
also related many Combats betwixt the Romans and the Carthaginians, unto the
Battle which was fought near unto the River of Fante, and the Town of
Cannes. Now we will pursue the wars of Greece of the same time, delivering
in few words, the things mentioned by us in the second Book of the preparation
of our work, and especially of the Commonweal of the Acheins: Considering
that their manner of government took a great increase, as well before as in
our time. Tisamenes.
And therefore beginning with the time of Tisamenes (one of the sons of
Orestes) we have said that the Acheins lived from his time unto the Reign of
Gyges, under Kings descending from him: And that having chased them away, the
City being well advised, gave the government unto the Commons: Some few years
after the Towns and Burroughes began to fall into dissension, by the means of
the Lacedemonian Princes. Yet afterward as we have said, the Acheins reunited
themselves, which was the first means that all Morea took the surname of
Acheins. We have moreover delivered their actions in particular, unto the
Defeat of Cleomenes King of the Lacedaemonians. Cleomenes
And there we have concluded our preparation, with the death of Antigonus,
Seleucus, and Ptolomy: The time of the death of Antigonus, Seleucus, and
Ptolomy.
for they all died in one Olimpiade. It rests now, that in writing the
Remainder, we should begin there. The subject seems good: first, for that the
deeds which Arate has written, end at that time, to the end that to continue
the Narration of the Grecians actions, we should prosecute (as we have
promised) those which follow: And for that the times are so united, as one part
has been in our age, Polybius writes nothing but what he has seen, or
received from those which had seen them*
and the other in the time of our Parents. By this means we have seen part,
and heard the rest from those which have seen them. I have not held it fit to
seek things far off, nor to make a relation growing from hearsay or
report, for that I conceive it would not be profitable for the Reader: And
therefore let us begin with the time, when as Fortune seemed to have made a new
world. Philip the lawful son of Demetrius, Philip.
being in his younger years, had taken possession of the Empire of Macedon.
Acheus.
Acheus Lord of all the Province near unto Taurus, had not only the Name of a
King, but also the Forces. Antiochus.
Antiochus surnamed great, succeeded his Brother Seleucus Seleucus.
lately dead, in the Realm of Syria, although he were but young: and
Ariarates had taken the Realm of Capadocia. Ptolomy Philopater.
At the same time also Ptolomy Philopater had gotten the Empire of Egypt: and
soon after Lycurgus Lycurgus.
was chosen King of the Lacedaemonians. The Carthaginians likewise had chosen
Hannibal for their General in the Wars as we have mentioned. And therefore
it seems that there was an alteration, seeing that all the Potentates were
renewed, which is a natural thing, and which happened at one time.

The Romans and Carthaginians made the war which we have mentioned: and
Antiochus and Ptolomy that of Syria. In regard of the Acheins and Philip, The
causes of the war betwixt the Acheins and Philip, against the Etoliens and
Lacedaemonians
they had war against the Etoliens and Lacedaemonians. Whereof see the causes.
The Etoliens being long discontented with peace, were not content to live upon
their own charges, as being accustomed to live upon their Neighbors, for the
necessity of their great expenses, by reason of their Natural arrogancy,
whereunto being subject, they lead a cruel and brutish life, observing no law
of friendship nor alliance: so as all things are of good prize unto them. And
although that during the life of Antigonus, they did not stir, fearing the
forces of the Lacedaemonians: Yet after his death when as Philip had succeeded
him, they began (disdaining his youth) to seek occasions of war with them of
Morea: and namely, for that by an ancient custom of injuries, they had used to
rob and spoil at Sea: And that moreover they held themselves more powerful to
make war then the Acheins.

Being in this humor, soon after they found this occasion, together with the
favor and fortune of their enterprise. Dormiache Triconee was son to
Nicostrates, who violated the affairs of the Pambiotins: who being yet young
and full of arrogancy and pride, an Etolien had been sent by the
Commonwealth to Phigalea: The situation of Phigalea.
It is a Town situated right against the Messenian Mountains, and which by
fortune was then allied to the Etoliens. He let them understand that he had
been sent thither to govern the Town and the Country: Although they had done
it of purpose to discover the estate of Morea. But for that in regard of the
alliance, they could not victual the Pirates, who wandering there abouts,
retired to him to Phigalea for their Munition, and the rather for that the
peace made with Antigonus continued still, he advised them to carry away the
Messeniens Cattle, who were their Friends and Allies. The Etoliens spoil the
Messeniens.
The which they began at the first to chase out of their limits: and afterward
as their obstinacy increased by little and little, to ruin the houses in the
night standing scattered in the Fields, and to spoil and ruin the whole
Country. The Messeniens discontented herewith, send an Embassy to Dorimache,
to complain of the outrages done by the Pirates, who at the first made no
account of it, doing it partly for the benefit of the Pirates, and partly for
his own interest, having a share in the Booty. But being often pressed by
Embassies, by reason of the continuance of the wrongs, he told them that he
would be soon at Messena to do them right, for the complaints they made
against the Etoliens. Being arrived, and that many presented themselves unto
him having bin wronged, he sent some away with scoffs: others with injuries,
and some he terrified with big and outrageous words. During these pursuits at
Messena, The Etoliens take Chiron by Scalado.
the Pirates came in the night to a Borough called Chiron, and took it by
Scalado, and sacking and spoiling it, they slew some of those which were found
in Arms, and carry away the rest Prisoners with the Cattle.

The Messenians being more incensed herewith, considering his Presence, and
finally thinking that they were deluded, they cause him to come before the
Magistrates. By good fortune Schiron, a man of good esteem, and at that time
Governor of the Messeniens, was of opinion, not to suffer Dorimache to part
out of the Town, before he had restored the spoils which the Pirates had
made, and repaired the houses in the Country, and delivered those which had
committed the Murders. And when as all the assembly approved of this Council,
Dorimache inflamed with choler, told them they were fools, and if in doing
that, they thought to wrong Dorimache, and not the Etoliens: And that moreover
they did him great wrong, and that within a short time revenge would be taken.

There was at that time in Messena a man of base condition, called Babyrthe, so
like in face, Babyrthe.
body, lineaments, and voice to Dorimache, that if they had given him his
Crown and Robe, you could hardly have discerned them. This Dorimache knew
well. And when he used proud and audatious words to the Messeniens, Schiron
grew into choler, telling him, think thou that we care for thee or Babyrthe
for this thy rashness. After which words, Dorimache thought good to strike
sail, restoring to the Messeniens all the pillage. And going then to Etolia,
he took this speech of Schiron so to heart, as without any other cause he made
war against the Messeniens. Ariston.
At that time Ariston was chief of the Etoliens, who by reason of the
weakness of his body, grown by a long infirmity, could not manage this
war. Although he were allied to Scope and to Dorimache, yet he gave the
conduct to Dorimache. But he durst not openly incense the Etoliens to make
war against the Messeniens: for that he could no^ propound for a sufficient
cause, as growing only upon choler for an injury spoken to him. And therefore
leaving this advice, he adresseth himself to Scope in private, persuading him
to oppose himself against the Messeniens: being then assured of the
Macedonians, by reason of the minority of their King, for that Philip had not
seauenteene years complete: and that moreover the Lacedaemonians held not the
party of the Messeniens, acquainting him with the Friendship and alliance he
had with the Grecians. Wherefore he found not any man that could hinder his
passage to Messena. Then he propounded unto him with an Etolien persuasion,
the great profit that would redowne thereby: considering that all the Country
lived in assurance, and that they alone had not felt the Cleomenique War: and
that finally the Etoliens would be well pleased, and ready to do them honor
unto the utmost of their ability and power.

As for the Acheins, they would give them occasion of War, if they sought to
hinder their voyage: But if they did not budge, they would pass easily to
Messena: and for that the Messeniens had made a promise to the Acheins and
Macedonians, to enter into their league, they gave sufficient occasion of
War. War attempted by the Eto^liens against Morea.
Having used a long Speech touching this enterprise, he soon moved Scope and
his Friends, as without assembling the people, or attending the will of the
Magistrates, or observing any order o^ ser^u^tice, they made War against the
Messeniens, the Epirotes, Acheins, Acarnaniens, and Macedonians. Wherefore they
presently sent forth many Pirates, who encountered with the royal ship of
Macedony, laden, and carried it to Etolia, where they sold the Pilots and
Mariners, and in the end the ship.

Then they ran along the Empire, spoiling all those which they met, being
assisted by the Cephalonien Vessels, to commit their outrages, taking Towns by
Treason. For in Acarnania they took Orea, and seized upon a Castle which is in
the midst of the Megalopolitains Country, which they call Claire, by men whom
they had secretly sent into Morea: whereof making use afterward for a
retreat, they committed great spoils at Sea. At that time Timoxenes which was
Chief of the Acheins, Taurion taken by assault.
took the Town of Taurion by assault, the which Antigonus had taken in the
time of the War of Morea.

You must understand that King Antigonus held Corinthe with the good liking of
the Acheins, as we have showed heretofore, in speaking of the Cleomenique Wa^:
But he had not restored Orchomenes unto them, the which he had taken by force,
and had made himself Lord thereof, requesting and desiring (as it seems) not
only to have an entry into Morea, but also to keep the heart thereof by
means of the Garrison of Orchomenes.

Dorimache and Scope making great choice of the time, when as Timoxenes had not
no many days to continue and stay in his Magistracy, and that Arate who was to
succeed him, could not execute his office, they assembled the Etoliens near
unto the Mountain of Rhie: and having prepared the Cephalonian ships, they
sailed to Morea: and in passing by the Coasts of the Patrenses, Pharences, and
Tritenses, they march against the Messeniens. It had been forbidden not to do
any outrage to the Acheins. But who can prescribe an order to a multitude, who
spoil all where they come? Coming in the end to Phigalea, and making their
attempt against the Messeniens, without any regard of their ancient Friendship,
and without any fear of God or Men, they overrun and spoil the Country,
putting all to fire and sword. In the mean time the Messeniens finding
themselves too weak, kept themselves close within their Town.

The time of election approaching for the Acheins, they assembled at Egea,
whereas holding their Diet, when as the Ambassadors of Patres on the one side,
and those of Pharos on the other, made their complaints for the outrages done
by the Etoliens, and that on the other side the Messeniens demanded Succors
with great compassion, they were induced, partly by the wrongs done unto their
Allies, and moved partly with pity, which they had of the Messeniens, being
likewise discontented that the Etoliens had past their Army through their
Country without their priuity, they resolved to give succors to the
Messeniens, and thereby to accustom the Acheins to War: and what the
assemblies should ordain, should be observed. Timxenes chief of the Acheins,
who was not yet deposed, fearing to make any attempt, as if there were no other
means but the multitude: for that after the War of Cleomenes, when as all
quarrels were pacified, he knew well that the people of Morea were given to
pleasure, and that making no more account of War, they were grown idle.

Contrariwise, Arate not able to endure the outrage done unto his Allies, and
incensed the presumption of the Etoliens, remembering in like manner their
ancient hatred, he made haste to cause the Acheins to take Arms, and to fight
with the Etoliens. And therefore five days before he should enter into the
Magistracy, he received the Seal from Timoxenes, and wrote unto the Town,
willing them to levy men, and to assemble at Megalopolis. But before we
proceed. I have thought good to speak something of his nature and disposition.

Arate was a man perfect in all things for the Government of a City: for he
spoke well, The disposition of Arate.
and had a good invention; being also diligent, and of execution: There was not
his equal to endure a Civil dissension patiently, nor to contract leagues and
alliances. Finally, he was a wise and discreet man in his Magistracy and
charge, and to lay Ambushes for his Enemy, bringing them unto a good end by his
labor and patience. Whereof there are many proofs and testimonies, but
especially for that he delivered Sicyon and Mantinea to the Acheins: and had
taken Pellene from the Etoliens. he likewise conquered the strong Fort of
Corinthe, which they call Acrocorinthe.

Yet if he were to fight, he was careless to take Council, and faint-hearted
in the fight. The diverse Natures of men.
Wherefore he filled Morea, with the triumph of the spoils taken by him: so as
Nature has not only framed a diversity in men's bodies, but also in their
souls: So as many times the same man does not carry himself only in diverse
things, an able man in some, and slack in others: But also he does many times
in one and the same action make show of extreme heat, and sometimes of
incredible slacknesse: so as sometimes he seems a man of great courage, and
another time very fearful. These are no strange things, but usual, and well
known unto those that do observe them. We likewise see many men in hunting
to be wonderful hardy against the cruellest savage Beasts that can be found:
whom if you lead to the War against the Enemy, would be found Cowards and
faint hearted. You shall likewise find many in the War, which are resolute
to fight man to man, but in pitched Battle are of no esteem.

It is certain that the Horsemen of Thessaly being joined together, The
nature of the Thessalon^^^ans.
are not to be forced in a Battle, but if you charge them by small Troops,
it is easy to cut them in pieces: the which is contrary in the Etoliens. They
of Candy are the most active men in the World, Etoliens.
as well for Combat at Sea and Land, Candiots.
for Ambushes, Robberies, Rapines, surprises in the Night, and for all manner
of deceipts: But in a pitched Battle; they are faint-hearted Cowards, and of
no service. To whom the Acheins and Macedonians are quite contrary. I have
delivered these things in few words, to the end that no man should marvel,
nor give less credit to the History, if sometimes we show that one and the
same man has carried himself diversely in the like affairs. Let us now
return where we left.

After the assembly had been made at Megalapolis, of able men for the War,
The Messeniens seek the alliance of the Acheins.
the Messeniens came again to the Acheins, entreating them to help and assist
them, being so apparently wronged by the Etoliens: and desiring withal if it
were their good pleasure to be received into their league, hereafter to bear
the necessary charges for the preservation thereof. The chief of the Acheins
make answer, that as for the alliance, they could not hearken unto it, for
that it was not in their power and ability to receive or favor any one without
the consent of Philip and the other Allies: For that the accord continued yet
firm, which had been made in the time of the Cleomenique War, under the
command of Antigonus, betwixt the Acheins, Epirotes, Phocenses, Macedonians,
Beociens, Arcadians, and Thessalians. And yet they would willingly give them
succors, so as they will give their Children for hostages unto the Acheins:
promising never to make peace, nor any accord with the Etoliens, without the
consent of the Acheins. It is true, the Lacedaemonians had drawn down an Army
near unto Megalopolis, not so much in regard of their Alliance, as to see the
event of the War.

When as Arate had thus concluded with the Messeniens, he sends an Embassy to
the Etoliens signifying unto them to retire their Army out of the Messeniens
Country, and that hereafter they should do them no wrong, An Embassy sent
from Arate to the Eto^^.
nor touch the Acheins Country: And if they did otherwise, he declared
himself their Enemy. Scope and Dorimache, having heard the Ambassadors
charge, and being advertised of the preparation of the Acheins, thought good to
yield unto Arate. Wherefore they sent Letters presently into Cylene to Aristo,
chief of the Etoliens requiring shipping: and two days after they parted,
causing the Baggage to march before, taking their way toward the Elienses: a
people which had been always faithful to the Etoliens. But Arate thinking
simply they had gone away, as they had resolved, gave leave to all his Bands to
retire unto their houses: and went directly to Patras, accompanied only with
three thousand Foot and three hundred Horse, which were under the charge and
command of Taurion, to cut off the Enemies retreat.

Dorimache being advertised, and fearing they should hinder the passage, he
sent all the booty with a good Conuoy to the ships, giving charge to those
which had the conduct, that they should come and meet him at Rhie, where he
had resolved to imbarke. When he had conducted the booty a little way, he
presently turns head and comes to Olympia. Being there advertised that Taurion
was about Clitoria with his Troops, fearing that he should not be able to
imbarke at Rhie without fighting or danger, he held it best to fight presently
with Arate, who had but small Troops, and was ignorant of his Enterprise. He
conceived that he should make his retreat safely that way which he had
resolved, if he defeated the Enemy, in running the whole Province, before the
Acheins should make a new head: and if they fled the Combat for fear, he
should pass where he pleased without danger. Dorimache moved with these
reasons, seated his Camp near unto Methydrie, which is not far from
Megalopolis. The Acheins advertised of the coming of the Etoliens, made so
little use of those things which were visible, as they forgot nothing that
might augment and increase their folly. First, in leaving Clitoria, they
planted their Camp near unto Caphies.

And when as the Etoliens parting from Methydrie, had pastat Orchomene, the
Acheins marched by the Country of the Caphiens, being enclosed with a River, as
with a Rampire. The Etoliens fearing to fight with the Enemy according to their
first resolution, as well for the difficulty of the places, (for there were
before the River Ditches and inaccessible places) as for the coming of the
Acheins. They marched unto Olig^rte in good order, being loath that any one
should force them to runnne into danger. When as the Bands of Horsemen
followed them upon a Plain near unto them, Arate sent the Footmen that were
lightly armed after the Horsemen, under the conduct of Acarnane, giving them
charge to fight with them, and to try the Fortune wherein he committed a
great error, for seeing he had an intent to fight, he should not have charged
them in the Rear, for that they were not far from the Mountains, but in
front, before they should have gotten the top: By this means the Battle had
been in the Plain. Whereby undoubtedly the Etoliens had been defeated by
reason of their kind of Arms and order. Contrariwise Arate by bad advice left
unto the Enemies the opportunity of the place, and of time which was offered
him. When as the Etoliens saw the Acheins march, they used all diligence to
gain the Mountain, making haste to join with their Foote-men. Arates men not
duly considering what had been done, and being ignorant of the Enemies
enterprise, when they saw the Horsemen run, they sent those that were
lightly armed of two wings, thinking it had been a flight: and give them
charge to succor the Horse and Foot. Then Arate marched with the rest much
discontented, making a long wing. The Etolien Horsemen approaching to the
Foot of the Mountains, began to march a slow pace, and called down their
Foote-men with great cries: who coming suddenly to succor them, and seeing
they were not fewer in number then the Enemy, A fight betwixt the Acheins and
the Etoliens.
they turned head against the Achein Horsemen, and charged them, for that they
had an advantage in the number of men, and the opportunity of the place.

The Combat was fierce on either side, and the victory for a time was in
suspense. Finally, the Achein Horsemen, were repulsed. And when as they which
were lightly armed* which had been sent to succor them, met with them that
fled, they were forced to do the like being amazed with this new accident, and
partly broken by them that fled. So as the defeat was but of five hundred,
whereas the ^light was of above two thousand. The Etoliens seeing plainly what
they had to do, pursued the Acheins with cries and joy. Who thinking to find
their men in Battle where they had left them, retired to Arate. And therefore
their flight in the beginning was honest, and for their safety. A defeat of
the Acheins.
But when as they saw them dislodge, and to come by files, and in disorder,
then some flying here and there, sought for their safety: others marching
directly to their own men, disordred one another without any Enemy: Finally,
they all fly, and save themselves in the neighbor Town^s: for Orchomenes and
Caphies were not far off, otherwise they had been all taken or slain that
day. Thus the Acheins were defeated near unto Caphies.

The Megalopolitains being advertised, that the Etoliens had planted their
Camp near unto Methydrie, they assembled all with one consent, and went to
Field three days after the Battle, to succor the Acheins: but they were
forced to bury those, with whom they did hope to fight against the Enemy. And
therefore they made a great Ditch, wherein they put all the dead Bodies, and
performed their obsequies after the manner of the Country. The Etoliens being
Victors, past through Mroea without fear of danger. At what time after they
had sought diverse ways to gain the Pellenesiens, and had ruined the Country
of the Sicyoniens, in the end they retired by the straight of the Isthmus.
These were the cause of the war of the Allies, whereof we have formerly
spoken: whereof the beginning was by a Decree which was afterward made among
the Allies, and confirmed at Corinthe: where they were all assembled for that
cause: Philip King of Macedon consenting thereunto.

Some few days after, the Acheins being assembled, they blamed Arate both in
public and private, as if he had been the cause of this defeat and loss,
and the Commons were the more inflamed, for that the Enemies league made it to
seem greater. First, it seemed he had committed a great fault, to have seized
upon the Magistracy before his time, and to have made enterprises doing
another man's office: wherein he had many times before been unfortunate. But
it seemed he had done worse, dissoluing the Acheins Army, the Etolien
Commanders being still in the midst of Morea. Thirdly, that being ill
accompanied, he had given Battle without force: considering that he might
easily have retired to the Neighbor Towns, until the Acheins had made a new
head: and then give Battle if he had thought it fit. Finally, that he had
carried himself so inconsiderately, that in leaving the Plains (where without
doubt his Men had been the stronger) he had assailed the Enemy in the
Mountains with Soldiers lightly armed: whereby the Etoliens could have no
greater advantage.

Yet suddenly when as Arate was returned, and (...) into the assembly, and
that he began to deliver the things which he had formerly done for the public
good, and had made known the causes of the last Defeat, and given them to
understand that he was not the cause thereof, as his Enemies had falsely
slaundred him: and that finally he would have craved pardon, letting them know
that if he had committed any fault, the Acheins should not consider the event
of things, so bitterly nor with such rigor, but with favor and mildness, the
opinion of the Commons was suddenly so changed, as where before they seemed to
be wonderfully incensed against Arate, they suddenly turned their choler
against his ill-willers, so as from that time they followed the Council and
opinion of Arate. These things happened in the hundred and nine and thirtieth
Olympiade, and those which follow in the hundred and fortieth.

It was then resolved by the Acheins, to send Embassies to the Epirotes,
Peociens, Phocenses, Acarnaniens, The advice of the Acheins touching the war
against the Eteliens.
and to Philip King of Macedon, to let them understand that the Etoliens had
entered twice into Acheia, contrary to the former accords: and likewise to
demand succors according to the league, and moreover that the Messeniens
might be received: and that the chief of the Acheins might leauie five
thousand Foot, and five hundred Horse, and succor the Messeniens, if the
Etoliens did reassaile them. Finally, that he might agree with the Lacedemnians
and Messeniens, touching the number of Foot and Horse, which they should keep
ready for the common affairs of the league. After these things thus resolved,
the Achiens stomacking the Defeat whereof we have spoken, did not forget the
Messeniens affairs, nor their resolution. The Ambassadors execute their
charge diligently. The chief likewise assemble the youth as it had been
decreed, and agree with the Lacedaemonians and Messeniens, that either of them
should furnish two thousand five hundred Foot, and two hundred and fifty
Horse, to the end that the whole might amount to ten thousand Foot, and a
thousand Horse. The time being come, when as the Etoliens were to hold their
Diet, they assembled the Commons, and consulted how to make a peace with the
Lacedaemonians and Messeniens, and with other people their neighbors, being
forced partly by poverty, and partly weakened by the Acheins Allies. As for the
Acheins, they resolved to contract with them, if they would leave the Alliance
of the Messeniens: But if they would hold it still, they were of advice to make
War against them, which was a most idle and senseless thing. For being
allied to the Acheins and Messeniens, The idleness of the Etoliens*
they declared War against the Acheins, if they contracted any Friendship or
alliance with the Messeniens: and contrariwise a peace was confirmed, if they
held them for their Enemies. And therefore their villainy could not take place,
by reason of the contrariety of their subtle invention.

The Epirotes and Philip having heard the Ambassadors charge, received the
Messeniens into the league: and although they disliked the outrages of the
Etoliens, yet it seemed they made no great account of it: for that they had
done no new action, considering they had been accustomed to such things.
Wherefore they willingly continued a peace with them. Thus sometimes outrages
grown old and continued, are sooner pardoned then those of new date. The
Etoliens using this course of life, in ruining Greece by their incursions, and
making War many times before they declared it, did not vouchsafe to answer to
the complaints: Many times also they made no account, and mocked at those which
demanded satisfaction, for those things which they had done, or would do. And
although that the Lacedaemonians had been lately restored to liberty by
Antigonus, by means of the Acheins, having promised to Philip and the
Macedonians, not to attempt any thing against them, yet they sent an Embassy
secretly to the Etoliens, and confirmed friendship and alliance with them.

When as the Acheins Army was assembled, and the succors of the Lacedaemonians
and Messeniens ready, as it had been decreed: Scerdilaide and Demetrius.
Scerdilaide, and Demetrius sailing from Sclauonia with fourscore and ten
Vessels, past to Lisse, contrary to the accord made with the Romans. And
attempting first to take Pyle, they were shamefully repulsed after some days
siege. Demetrius afterward made a voyage with fifty Sail unto the Cyclades,
and spoils the Islands, taking some by Treason. Scerdilaide with the other
forty, draws toward Naupacte, relying upon the friendship of Amiclas King of
the Atheniens, to whom he was allied. There an accord was made with the
Etoliens, by the means of Agelaus, that in marching with them into Achaia they
should divide the booty by halfes. The descent of Scerdilaide, Agelaus,
Dorimache and Scop^ into Acheia.
The which being concluded betwixt Scerdilaide and Agelaus, Dorimache, and
Scope, they entered into Acheia with an Army of Etoliens and Sclauonians, the
Town of the Sithians being of their party. Ariston chief of the Etoliens
stayed at home, saying that he had peace and no war with the Acheins, as if
he had been ignorant of the Enterprise: which was a simple and idle course.
Is there any thing more foolish, then to think long to cover with words things
that are plain and evident? This done Dorimache comes with his men to Cynethe
with wonderful speed. The Cynethenses were tormented with great divisions and
seditions, having been long time Arcadiens: whereas many murders had been
committed, with Banishments, Rapes, and Spoils: Finally it fell out, that they
which held the Acheins party, had the command of the Town. Wherefore their
chief men, and the guards of their Town were of Acheia. Matters standing in
this estate some years before the descent of the Etoliens, when as the
banished men had sent to them of the Town, entreating them to receive them
into grace and concord, the Governors persuaded by their words, sent an
Embassy to the Acheins, desiring to make this peace and agreement with their
Council and advice. Whereunto the Acheins consented, for that they conceived
that the affection and love of the one and the other, would by this means be
more firm unto them, considering that they which were within had all their
hope in them, and that the banished men would conceive, that they had been
preserved by the benefit of the Acheins: The Cynethenses sent back the
Garrison of the Acheins with their Captain, and called the banished men into
their Town, which were to the number of three hundred, in taking their Faith
with Oaths, whereby men may be most religiously bound.

But presently after they were received into the Town, they resolved among
themselves to betray it, and to be revenged on those which had preserved them,
without any consideration of the cause of this new practice: So as I am of
opinion, that at the time when they sacrificed, and gave their Faith and
Oaths, that even then they resolved to contemn the Gods, and use cruelty
toward those which had saved their lives: for they had scarce set footing
within the Town, but they called the Etoliens to deliver it unto them. The
business was managed in this manner. Some of the banished men, were created
Polemarches: Polemarches.
It is a Magistrate which has charge of shutting of the Gates, and keeping the
keys at night, and in the day time to attend the Guard thereof. The Etoliens
having their ladders and other things necessary, attended the execution of the
enterprise. The Polemarches slew their Companions which were not of their
faction, and opened the Gate. This done, the Etoliens entered, some by the Gate,
some by Ladders. The whole City being troubled by this new accident, ran up
and down full of fear and lamentation: for that they could not run to the
Gate, for that the Enemies cast themselves from the walls, neither could they
go to the walls, for that they came by multitudes in at the Gate. And thus the
Etoliens took the Town presently, Cynethe taken by the Etliens.
where among all the outrages which they committed, they did one act of great
justice, for they slew all the Traitors, and spoiled their goods. The like they
did to others, taking away all their substance. Men were tormented to confess
their Goods, if they had hidden away, and many others slain. Having thus taken
the Town, and after some few days leaving a sufficient Garrison, they marched
with their Army toward Luses. Where approaching near to Diana's Temple, which
is betwixt Clitoria and Cynethe, and is held by the Grecians as a place of
Freedom, they had an intent to carry away the Cattle of the Goddess, and to
ravish all the Treasure of the Temple. But the Lusiates offered them part to
temper their wickedness. The which being received, the Etoliens parting from
thence, planted their Camp near unto Clitoria.

At that time Arate, chief of the Acheins, had sent an Embassy to Philip for
succors, and had assembled the choice of the youth from all parts, and
demanded from the Lacedaemonians and Messeniens, the number of men, which they
were to furnish by the accord. The Clytoriens assaulted by the Etoliens.
The Etoliens began first to persuade the Clytoriens, to leave the alliance of
the Acheins and to embrace their party. The which being refused, they tormented
them with diverse assaults, and scaling the walls, they labored to enter the
Town: But for that the Inhabitants defended themselves courageously, they
raised the Siege, being in despair to take it; and returned to Cynethe,
spoiling the Sheep and Cattle of the Goddess, meaning to deliver the Town
to the Elienses: Upon refusal they resolved to keep it, making Euripides
Captain. But being afterward terrified with the News of the succors of
Macedon* and the preparation of the Acheins, they burnt it, Cynethe burnt by
the Etliens.
and taking their ways again toward Rhie, they resolved to pass there.
Taurion advertised that the Etoliens marched, and of the ruin of Cynethe, and
that Demetrius of Phareh, was come from the Cyclades to Cenchrea, he persuaded
him to succor the Acheins, and to hinder the passage of the Etoliens, in
transporting the ships by the Isthmus.

Demetrius had parted from the Island with profit, but with little honor, for
that the Rhodiens came against him with an Army at Sea, he yielded easily to
Taurion: and the rather for that he furnished the necessary expenses the
transport of the Ships, wherefore after he had transported them, and was
advertised that the Etoliens were past two days before, he sailed again to
Corinthe, after he had spoiled some of the Etoliens Coasts: with whom the
Lacedaemonians having secret intelligence (as we have said) they deferred to
send the succors promised by the accord, sending only some Horse and foot for
a color. Arate made show to his people, that for the present he would
perform the duty of a Citizen, rather then of a Captain without any trouble,
for the remembrance of the loss which he had made, until that Scope and
Dorimache were retired, having ruined the whole Province, and what they
pleased: although it were no difficult thing to defeat them in their rough and
narrow passages. And although the Cynethenses had suffered a wonderful loss
of all their goods, and were in a manner all slain, yet the world held them
worthy of the punishment which they endured.

And for that the people of Arcadia have a certain fame and renown of good
men, The customs of the Arcadians.
not only for their easy kind of life, and their good dispositions, and
great honesty toward all the world, but also for the honor and reverence they
bear unto the Gods. I have thought it good to relate in few words, something
concerning the rudeness of the Cynethenses, and to let the world understand
(seeing they were held to be Arcadians) how they did so much differ from the
other Grecians of that time, in wickedness and cruelty. For my part I think
this has happened, for that they have been the first and the only men which
among all the Arcadians have neglected that which their Ancestors had wisely
invented.

It is certain that Music, Music profitable to all the world.
(I mean true Music) is profitable to all the world, and necessary for the
Arcadians: Neither is that true which Ephorus (speaking without reason) writes
in the Proeme of his Histories, that Music is invented to deceive and abuse
men: Neither must we think that the ancient Candyots and Lacedaemonians, had
without reason, preferred the Flute and Songs before the Trumpet in War:
Neither had the ancient Arcadians Music in so great honor in their
Commonwealth, as they not only caused Children to learn it, but also young
men unto the age of thirty years, who otherwise were rude and uncivil. It is
no unknown thing, that in Arcadia alone, they did accustom their children
from their infancies, to sing praises in Hymns, by the which every one did use
to commend the Angels of his Birth, virtuous Men, and the Gods. And after all
this they do yearly make Games to father (...), with Songs and Dances,
instructed in the Disciplines of Philoxenes, and Tymotheus. And those of
Children, The Games of Children and Youth.
are called the Games of Children, and the others the Games of Youth: Finally,
all their life is adicted to this kind of singing, not so much for the
pleasure they take to hear the Music, as to excite them to sing together.
Moreover, if any one be ignorant in other Arts, it is held no shame: but none
of them may be ignorant of Music: for they learn it by necessity: Neither
may he confess that he understands it not, for that among them is reputed
infamous. Finally, the young men do yearly present Shows and Games in the
Theater to the Burgesses, with Songs and Dances, at the public charge. Which
things (in my opinion) were wisely invented by their Ancestors, Not for
lasciviousness or delights, but for that they see the continual toil of the
people in manuring the land, with a rudeness and brutishness of life, and
moreover with an austeere kind of living, which proceeds from the coldness
and roughness of the Air, to the which of necessity we grow like.

It is apparent that the Region of heaven, made Nations to differ in their
manner of living, in their form and complexion, and in many disciplines.
Seeking then to make Nature pleasing and tractable, which of it self seems
fierce and rude, they first propounded all those things which we have
mentioned, and afterward common assemblies, and many sacrifices, where as men
and women frequented, and finally danced of Virgins and Children. All which
things they have done to the end that that which by Nature was rude in the
hearts of men, might be made mild and pleasing by custom. The occasion of the
ruin of Cynothenses.
But for as much as the Cynethenses, after some tract of time, became to
disdain these things, which were above all things necessary for them,
(inhabiting in the coldest part of Arcadia) they grew in a short time to such a
rudeness of life, as there was not any City in Greece, where there were more
villainies and Murders committed. The testimony of their wicked life is most
manifest, for that the other people of Arcadia detested their manner of living:
For at what time as they sent an Embassy to Sparta, after this great sedition,
in what Town so ever they entered during their voyage, they were chased away
ignominiously, and forbidden to return: and the Mantiniens, after their
departure, purged the City, and all places thereabouts with sacrifices.

We have related these things, to advise the Cities of Arcadia, not to give
over the custom of their Country: and to the end men should not think that
they were so much given to the Music of lasciviousness, and that by this
means no man should mock at their custom: I have also done it for the love
of the Cynethenses: to the end (the Gods permitting it) that in punishing them,
they may lead a better life and love Music, for it is the means by the
which they may leave their natural Rusticitie. Seeing then we have spoken
sufficiently of the Cynethenses manner of living, and of their ruin, let us
return where we left.

The Etoliens having overrun all Morea, and put the Country to fire and
sword, returned to their houses. Finally, Philip King of Macedon, Philip comes
to Corinthe.
came to Corinthe succor the Achiens with an Army. But hearing that all was
past, he sends post to his Allies, aduising them to send men unto him to
Corinthe, to confer of their common affairs. In the mean time he causes
his Army to martch toward Tegee, A mutiny among the Lacedomonians.
for that he was advertised that the Lacedaemonians were in mutiny among
themselves. And for that they had lived long under Kings, and had then
recovered their liberty under the conduct of Antigonus, being subject to no
man, they fell into diverse factions, every man seeking to have authority in the
Commonwealth above his fellow. There were two among the Governors, which held
their Council so secret, as no man could discover it: the rest to the number
of three, carried themselves openly for the Etolien party, being confident that
Philip considering his age, could make no alteration in Morea. But when as
contrary to their hope and expectation, they had news of the flight of
Etoliens in Morea, and of the coming of Philip King of Macedon: These three
Governors of the City, having no confidence in one of the other two, called
Adimant, for that knowing their secrets, he seemed to dislike of their
proceedings, and fearing that at the coming of Philip all would be discovered.
They declared themselves to certain young men, and afterward caused all the
people to assemble in Arms, at Juno's Temple, by the sound of the Trumpet, as
if the Macedonians were come against the Spartains: who suddenly assembled
upon this new accident.

Adimant disliking this, came into the assembly, saying: The Trumpet should
have sounded some days past, and this assembly of men in Arms should have
been made, when as we heard that the Etoliens, Enemies to the Lacedaemonians,
approached their Mountains, not now when as we are advertised, that the
Macedonians our Benefactors and preseruers came with their King. And whilst he
continued this speech, the young men falling upon him, slew him cruelly, with
Sthenelaus, Alcamenes, Thyestes, Byonides, The Murder of the Governors of the
Lacedaemonians.
and diverse others. As for Polyphonte, he retired with his friends to Philip,
having long before foreseen the future.

Things passing in this manner, Ambassadors sent from Lacedemon to Philip.
the Lacedemonian Governors sent an Embassy to the King to lay the wrong upon
them that were slain, and to persuade him to proceed no farther, until that
all the troubles of the City were pacified: Ciuing him to understand, that the
Lacedaemonians kept their faith and friendship with the Macedonians inviolable.
The Ambassadors meeting the King near unto the Mountain of Parthenia,
delivered their charge. Who being heard, Philip advised them to return
speedily, and to advertise the Governors that he would soon return with his
Army to Tegee, and that they should presently send the chief of their City to
Corinthe, to confer of their present affairs.

By this means the Ambassadors being returned, and having acquainted them
with Philips answer, the Governors sent him ten of the chief of the City,
among the which Omias was the first, who coming to Tegee, and entering into the
Kings privy Council, they used disgraceful speeches of Adionant and his
confederates: as if he had bin the cause of this Mutiny. Finally, they omitted
nothing, which they thought fit to purchase the Kings love, promising to do
any thing, whereby it should appear plainly, that they continued constant in
the Kings alliance and friendship.

Having delivered these things, the Lacedaemonians went out of the Council. The
Macedonians were of diverse opinions concerning these affairs: for some being
advertised of the Enterprises, which the Spartains made with the Etoliens,
being also of opinion, that Adimant had been slain for the love he bare unto
the Macedonians, began to counsel the King, to make the Lacedaemonians an
example to others, as Alexander had done the Thebains, Alexander the great.
when he came to be King. The other Senators said, that this kind of
punishment was more rigorous then their deeds deserved, and that they should
only let the offenders know their offense, and deprive them of the government
of the Commonweal, and give it to his friends. All which being heard, the
King delivered his opinion, (if it be credible that it was his own) for it is
not likely that a young man who had scarce attained the age of seauenteene
years, could give judgment in so great affairs. But it becomes a
Historiographer to attribute the resolution taken in Council to Princes, by
whose will all things are governed. So they which read or hear this History,
must conceive that these kind of sentences proceed from those which are the
wisest, and nearest unto Princes: as if they should attribute this to Arate,
who at that time was in great authority with the King*

Philip therefore said, Philips wise and ^w^re^
that if the Allies attempted any thing in particular among themselves, it did
not concern him, but only to warn them by words or letters: But if they
offended their Allies openly, they must receive a public punishment, and that
the Lacedaemonians had not infringed the common alliance in any thing, but
contrariwise had offered to do all things for the Macedonians: and that
moreover he must not study to entreat them worse, considering that it were
against reason, to take revenge on those for a light cause, who being Enemies
his Father had pardoned. The Kings Sentence being confirmed, Petreus a Friend
to Philip, was presently appointed to go to Lacedemon with the Embassy,
having charge to advise the Spartans to live in Friendship, and to take an Oath
for the preservation of their Faith and League.

In the mean time Philip razeth his Camp, and returns to Corinthe, leaving a
great hope in the Allies of his good disposition, having used the Lacedaemonians
so graciously. And having found the Ambassadors of the Allies at Corinthe, who
were assembled there by his command, Complaints of diverse people against the
Etoliens.
they began to hold a Council for the common affairs of Greece, where as all
with one voice, had the actions of the Etoliens in execration. The Beociens
charged them that in the time of peace they had spoiled Minerua's Temple: and
the Phocenses that having planted their Camp near unto Ambryse and Daulia,
they had a resolution to take them. The Epiretes showed that they had put all
their Country to fire and sword: the Acarnanians that they had attempted to
take a very rich Town in the Night by Scaladoe. Finally, the Acheins
propounded, that they had taken Caria belonging to Megalopolis: That they had
ouer-run and spoiled the Bounds of Patras and Phare, and put Cynethe to fire
and sword, and then razed it: And moreover, had spoiled Diana's Temple at
Luses, and besieged the Clitori^ns: and that finally they had made War at Sea
to Pyle, and at Land to Megalopolis, joining with the S^lauonians.

The Council of the Allies hearing these things, all with one consent
concluded to make War against the Etoliens. It was resolved in Conncell,
War concluded against the Etoliens.
that all they should be received into the league, whose Towns of Provinces
had been taken by the Etoliens after the death of Demetrins, who was Father to
Philip. And that moreover they which through the necessity of the time had
been forced to make an alliance with the Etoliens, should be restored to their
former liberty, and it should be lawful for them to live according to the
Laws and customs of their own Countries. Finally, they ordained that the
Amphictions should be restored to their Laws, The Amphictions.
and have the superintendency of the Temple, which at that time the Etoliens
held, who had made themselves Lords. When as these things had been thus
resolved, the first year of the hundred and fortieth Olympiade, suddenly the
War of the Allies was kindled, which took its just beginning from the
outrages done by the Etoliens, whereof we have spoken. They that were in the
assembly, sent presently to the Allies, to advertise them, that according unto
that which had been ordained, every one for his part should make War against
the Etoliens. Moreover, Philip writes unto the Etoliens, that if they would
answer any thing to that they were charged, they should send unto him: And
that they were mad with folly, if spoiling and ruining all the World without
any open War, they which were unjustly wronged, would not seek revenge: and
that in doing so, they would be held to begin the War. The Etoliens having
received these Letters, making no stay for the Kings coming, appointed a day
to go to Rhie, to meet the King. But when as they were advertised of that
which had been concluded in the assembly, they sent a Post unto the King, to
let him understand that they could not resolve any thing concerning the
affairs of the Commonweal, before the Etoliens had called an assembly.

The Acheins having held their Diet at Egia according to their custom, they
confirmed the resolution: and presently signified War to the Etoliens. In the
mean time Philip coming to Egia, used a gracious and friendly Speech unto
them, the Acheins embraced his words with great affection, renewing that ancient
Friendship which they had held with his Predecessors. At that time the day of
the Election was come, and the Etoliens had made choice of Scope for their
Captain, Scope chosen Head of the Etoliens.
who had been the first Author of the former alterations. Whereupon I know not
what to say: for a war managed by a common consent; a spoil committed by
soldiers upon al their neighbors; not to punish such crimes; to advance and
honor the Captains, and Heads of such actions, seems to me an absolute
villainy. For how can we otherwise call this kind of Malice? That which I say,
is manifest herein. Phebidius.
When as Phebidius had violated the Cadmian league, the Lacedaemonians punished
the Author of the Crime, yet they did not withdraw their Garrisons: as on the
other side, it is fit to make satisfaction for the unjust wrongs committed. The
Thebains did otherwise: For when as by a public edict, they had restored the
Towns to their liberty, and to their own Laws, according to the Antalcidan
peace, yet they did not deprive the Magistrates. And when as having a league
with the Mantiniens, they had ruined them, they said they had done them no
wrong, for that they had transported them from one Town into many. He is
simple, and accompanied with Malice, who shutting his own eyes, Envy the cause
of great mischief.
thinks he is not seen. Believe me, Envy has been a great occasion of the
mischief of these two Cities: the which no man of judgment should follow in
his private or public affairs. But when as Philip had received money from
the Acheins, he retired into Macedony with his Army, to levy men, and to make
necessary preparations for the War. Finally, he left a great hope of
Clemency, not only in the Allies, but throughout all Greece, for the
conclusion which was generally confirmed.

These things were done at such time as Hannibal chief of the Carthaginians,
besieged Sagont after that he had conquered all beyond the River of Eb^o. If
then the beginning of Hannibals actions fall out at the same time with those of
Greece, it is apparent that we have not unadvisedly related his valor in the
last Book: considering that we follow the order of time. And for that the
Affairs of Italy, Greece, and Asia, had their proper beginnings, and their
common-ends, it has been necessary to make a particular relation of either of
them, until we come unto the time: when the said affairs being intermixed
together, have begun to draw unto the same end. By this means the relation of
every part is more manifest, and the uniting of all more plain. You must
understand, that they were intermixed and turned to the same end, in the third
year of the hundred and fortieth Olympiade. Wherefore we will relate in common
that which followed. As for that which was before this time, we have delivered
it in particular, every thing in its place in the last Book: to the end that
the time should not only follow, but there should be an union of all things.

Philip wintring in Macedony, made a new levy of men, and necessary provisions
for the War: he fortified the Towns against the attempt of the Barbarians,
which dwelt about Sparta. Afterward he went to Scardilaide, with whom he made
a league, promising him aid and succors to pacify the affairs of Sclauonia:
and in blaming the Etoliens, he persuaded him to what he would: The difference
betwixt a private and public injury.
For a private injury does not differ from a public, but by the number and
greatness of things which happen. It is also an ordinary thing that the
alliance of wicked men is easily broken, if Equity and Justice be not
observed. The which happened at that time to the Etoliens. You must understand,
that when as they had compounded with Scerdilaide, that the Booty should be
equally divided, if he would fall upon the Acheins with them; who giving
credit to their words, marched with them to Cynethe, where after the taking and
razing thereof, the Etoliens carried away great store of Gold, and a great
number of Cattle, dividing the Booty among themselves, whereof they did
frustrate Scerdilaide. Wherefore he grew into choler and indignation: and when
as Philip put him in mind thereof, he suddenly confirmed the alliance under
these Conditions: that he should have twelve thousand Crowns yearly, and
should sail with thirty ships, making War by Sea against the Etoliens.
Behold the things with such like which Philip contrived. In the mean time the
Ambassadors sent unto the Allies arrived, first in Acarnania: whereas letting
them understand what they were enjoined, they presently and freely confirm
what had been decreed, and make War against the Etoliens: although they had
been to be pardoned, if they had forborne longer then the rest: considering
that for their neighborhood, they seemed to have just cause of fear, and that
they had formerly had experience of what consequence the hatred of the Etoliens
was unto them, and for that they alone might be ruined. It is true, and I am of
opinion, that honest men, and such as respect their honor, should hold nothing
more dear, then to give order that their duty may in no sort be forgotten, The
commendation of the Acarnanians.
the which the Acarnanians have always observed above all the Greclans,
although they had but a small beginning: whereby it follows, that no man should
forbear to make this people a Companion in his affairs: for they have
naturally something in them that is generous and noble, and desirous of
liberty. The Epirotes on the other side, after they had heard what the
Ambassadors had in charge, they allowed of the resolution: Yet they made
answer, that they would not make War against the Etoliens, before they were
advertised that Philip had begun it. And afterward they made answer to an
Embassy of the Etoliens, that they had decreed to maintain peace with them,
showing themselves in such affairs fearful and inconstant. For they sent
Ambassadors unto King Ptolomy, to entreat him not to furnish the Etoliens
against Philip and his Allies, with money, victuals, or any other succors.

But the Messeniens (for whose cause this War was kindled) answered the
Ambassadors, Answers to^ Ambassadors.
that they would not make War against the Etoliens, before they had recovered
(by the means of their Allies) the Town of Phigalea, situated in the
Mountains, which then the Etoliens detained from them unjustly. Which advice
was given by Oenes and Nicippus, Governors of the Town, The blame of the
Epirotes.
with the consent of some of the principal, notwithstanding that the Commons
opposed. Wherein I conceive they understood not their Duty, nor the profit of
their Commonwealth. I am of opinion that we should fly and avoid War, but
not in such sort, that we should choose to endure, and suffer all things
rather then to enter into it. But why should we commend an equality in a
Commonwealth, or Faith, or the name of liberty which is so pleasing, if there
were any thing to be preferred to peace? I do not commend the (...)* who in
the time of the War of Media, made choice of it for fear, to free themselves
from the common calamity and danger of all Greece, whereby they were after
ruined. Neither am ^ of the opinion of Pindarus, who in his Poefies exhorts the
Burgesses, that in neglecting all other things, they should only seek for
peace and rest: and having sought for peace, he defines it to be the end of
rest and a clear light. But when as he thought to have spoken with great
persuasions, soon after he delivered a sentence, the most scandalous and
incommodious thing in the World. It is true that peace is a most excellent
thing, if it be just and honest. Yet we may not do an unreasonable act, nor
suffer an infamy to enjoy it. It is certain that the Governors and chief men
of Messene, having a regard to their private profits, were much inclined to
peace, which was not reasonable. Wherefore as often the times were propitious
unto them, according to their desires, and sometime dangerous, they fell
continually into the same inconvenience: so as always having the same
resolution to keep the peace, they many times brought their Country into
great danger. Whereof I conceive the cause was, The Messeniens. always friends
to the Arcadi^ns, and Enemies to the Lacedaemonians.
for that they were Neighbors to two principal Cities of Greece, that is to
say, the Arcadians, to whom they had been always Allies and Friends, and the
Lacedaemonians, to whom they had been continual Enemies, yet they did not
openly carry themselves as Enemies to the Lacedaemonians, or Friends to the
Arcadians: By this means they lived in peace, when as the said Cities made
war betwixt themselves, or with other. But when as the Lacedem^nians (after
they had made a peace with their other enemies) ran upon them, they were forced
to serve them with ignominy: or abandon the Country with their Wives and
Children, to avoid servitude: Considering that they were not able with their
own forces to resist the power of the Lacedaemonians, nor to defend themselves
with the help and succor of the Arcadians, whose Friendship they were not able
to keep. The which has often happened unto them of late years. I pray unto
God if it be his will, that the estate wherein the affairs of Morea now
stands, may be such, as that which we have to say, may not take place. Yet if
there happen any alteration, I see but one hope for the Messeniens and
Megalopolitains, to preserve and defend their Country, if following the
sentence of Epaminondas, they live always well united, and govern their
Councels and Affairs with one consent, whereof they have ancient testimonies
of the truth. The Messeniens as Calistines does report, erected a Pillar in the
Temple of Jupiter of Lyce, in the time of Aristomenes, on the which these
Verses were engraven. Time on a wicked King has vengeance shown,
The Traitor to the Messaine state Jove has made known:
Nor could he shun the most reuengefull fate
Of Jove, who favors the Arcadian state.


You must understand that for as much as they had been chased from their
Country, they wrote these Verses, as meaning to pray unto the Gods for their
second Country. For the which in my conceit they had good reason. For the
Arcadians not only received them into their City, during the War of
Aristomenes, being banished and chased away, making them Burgesses, and
assisting them with Council and Wealth: But they also suffered them to marry
their Daughters unto their Sons. Moreover, having examined the Treason of
King Aristocrates, Aristocrates.
they not only put him cruelly to death, but punished all the Race proceeding
from so wicked a stock. But leaving the times past, let us come to things of a
fresher Date, and are happened since this alliance betwixt the two Cities,
which gave sufficient testimony of that which we have spoken.

You must understand that at what time the Lacedaemonians began (after that
great Victory which the Grecians had near unto Mantinea by the death of
Epaminondas) to enter into hope to make the Messeniens subject, not
comprehending them in the accord, the Megalopolitains and all the Cities of
the league took these things so to heart for the Messeniens, as presently they
received them into their Alliance, and excluded the Lacedaemonians alone of all
the Grecians. Matters standing in this estate, who will not think but we had
reason to say that which we have formerly spoken? We have continued this
discourse of the Arcadians and Messeniens at length, to the end that remembering
the outrages which the Lacedaemonians had many times done them, they should
continue always true and constant in their Faith and Friendship: and that for
no fear of their affairs, nor for any desire of peace, they should never
abandon one another when it concerns their safety. But let us return now to
the discourse where we left.

The Lacedaemonians according to their manner of living, sent back the
Ambassadors of the league without any answer: they were so sottish and
ouer-weening. Wherefore I hold that to be true, which is commonly spoken, that
ouer-weening does many times make men mad, and draws them to ruin. After all
these things, when as the new Megistrates were created, they which in the
beginning made that sedition in the Commonwealth, and were the cause of the
Murders before mentioned, Machate sent Ambassador from the Etoliens to the
Lacedaemonians.
sent to the Etoliens, requiring them to send an Embassy. The which when they
had easily obtained, and that Machate Ambassador for the Etoliens, was come to
Lacedemon, they go presently to the Governors of the City, telling them,
that they must assemble the people to hear this Embassy, and to create
according to the custom of the Country: and that they must no longer suffer
the Empire of the Heraclidis to be lost, contrary to the Laws of the City.
And although the Governors were discontented to see the present estate of
their affairs, yet not able to resist their force, fearing also the young men,
they made answer, that as for Kings they would advise of it afterward, and
presently they would assemble the people to hear Machate.

The assembly being made, they caused (...) enter, who began to persuade them
to embrace the alliance of the Etoliens: blaming the Macedonians much without
reason, and speaking many false things in praise of the Etoliens. Having ended
his speech, there was a long debate among the people, and their opinions were
diverse: for some held it fit to follow the Etolien party, and to embrace their
alliance: others were of a contrary opinion, insisting that they should
preserve the Friendship of the Macedonians. Finally, after that some Senators
were risen, and had put them in mind of the benefits of Antigonus, and of the
Macedonians, and of the loss they had in the time of Carixenes and Timee, when
as the Etoliens entered the Spartains Country, Carixene^. Timee.
and put all to fire and sword, attempting to surprise the Town, restoring the
banished men by force and policy, they caused many to change their opinion: and
in the end the people were persuaded to entertain their Friendship with Philip
and the Macedonians. Matters thus decided, Machate returns into Etolia, having
effected nothing of that for which he came. The Heads of this Mutiny, whereof
we have spoken, being discontented herewith, began to plot a most cruel
Enterprise.

Soon after the Youth were to assemble in Arms, to perform a Sacrifice which
was done yearly, after the manner of the Country in Pallas Temple, where the
Governors of the City had the authority, and continued some days in the
Temple. Wherefore they corrupted some of the Young men which should be there in
Arms with gifts. who at a time appointed amongst them, seeing the Governors
busy at the Sacrifices, should assail them suddenly, and kill them like
Sheep. And although they were in the Temple, the which the Lacedaemonians
honored as a Sanctuary, and where all malefactors, The murder of the
Lacedemonian Governors by the young men.
(although they were condemned to dye) were in safety, yet the insolence of men
was grown to so great a cruelty, as they slew all the Magistrates before the
Altars, and on the Tables of the Goddess. The like they did afterward to the
Senators, which had followed the opinion of Herides. Finally, after they had
chased out of their City those that were opposite to the Etoliens, they
created new Magistrates of their own faction: making a league with the
Etoliens. A league made between the Lacedaemonians and Etoliens.
By this means they declared themselves at one instant Enemies to the Acheins,
and unthankful to the Macedonians. They had a great hope in the love of
Cleomenes, whose coming they expected with great affection. Believe me, the
mildness and courtesy of Princes has so great power, The power of clemoncie
in Princes.
as it leaves in the hearts of men, not only by their presence, but also by
their absence, a general zeal of love and good will toward them.

The Lacedaemonians having the Government of their Commonwealth, almost for the
space of three years, after that Cleomenes had been chased away, they never
thought of choosing a King: But when they had news of his death, they had an
humor to choose one: whereof the first Authors of this practice, were the heads
of the sedition, who had made the league with the Etoliens. Wherefore they
elected (according to their laws and customs) for one of their Kings, one
named Agesipoles, being yet very young, the son of Agesipoles, who was son
to Cleombrotus. It happened that he reigned at such time, as Leonides was
deposed from the Magistracy: for that he was the nearest of that race. And
they gave him for Tutor Cleomenes, the son of Cleombrotus, and brother to
Agesip^les. And although that Archidamus had two sons by the daughter of
Hippomedon, who was son to Eudemides: and Hippomedon living still, who was
son to Agesilaus, and Nephew to E^demides: and that there were many others of
the same blood, yet they made choice for their King, (making no account of the
rest nor of their race) of Licurgus, Licurgus chosen King.
who was of another house, and had no expectance to reign. In truth it was
said, that he was of the race of Hercules, and created King of Sparta, in
giving to every one of the Magistrates six hundred Crowns.

Thus you see that all wicked things have always been set to sail. But it
was not long but the heads of this crime suffered the punishment of their folly
and ouer-weening. Machate advertised of that which had been done at Lacedemon,
returns again to Sparta, and persuades the Kings and Magistrates to make
war against the Acheins, saying, that by this means, the ambition of those
Lacedaemonians which held the contrary party, and fled the alliance of the
Etoliens, might be easily suppressed. Marchate preuailes in his enterprise.
When as the Kings and Magistrates were persuaded by his words, he returned
into Etolia, having done what he desired by the folly of the Lacedaemonians.
Afterward Licurgus leuying mercenary men, and assembling the people of the
City, enters into the limits of the Argiues: whom he assailes unprovided,
expecting no such usage from the Lacedaemonians: Towns taken in Argos by
Licurgus.
And suddenly takes Polychne, Parsie, Le^ce, Cyphas, and some other of their
Burroughes, putting all the Country to fire and sword. These things being
done, the Lacedaemonians declared war against the Acheins. And in the mean
time Mahbate went to the other neighbor Towns, persuading them as he had done
the Lacedaemonians. By this means the Etoliens (to whom all things succeeded
happily) undertook the war boldly. Contrariwise, all things were auerse to
the Aecheins. For King Philip (in whom they chiefly relied) did but then levy
men: the Epirotes had not yet begun the war with the Etoliens, and the
Messeniens lived in peace. The Etoliens having drawn unto them the Elienses,
and Lacedaemonians, pressed the Acheins of all sides. It happened that Arate had
left the government, and his son Arate was chosen chief of the Acheins, and
that Scope was Captain General of the Etolien Army, but he was not to stay
long in it: for the Etoliens at that time made their election, after the
midst of September, and the Acheins about the beginning of May.

Summer being past, when as young Arate had undertaken the government, all the
wars in a manner had one beginning. For Hanibal prepared at that time for the
siege of Sagont: The Romans sent Lucius Emilius into Sclauonia against
Demetrius of Phare: Antiochus began the war in Syria, by the means of
Ptolomais and Antyrus, which were delivered unto him in treason by Theodotus:
and Ptolomy against Antiochus, Licurgus to follow Cleomenes, besieged Athence,
a Town of the Megalopolitains. Philips Army.
The Acheins levied both Horse and Foot. Philip parted from Macedon with his
Army, having about ten thousand Leginaries, and five thousand men armed with
Targets, and about eight hundred Horse. This was the preparation for war at
that time. The Rhodiens made war at the same time against the
Constantinopolitains for some such causes. The situation of Constantinople.
The Constantinopolitains inhabit a City strong by situation, and wonderful
commodious to find all things that may give content unto man: For it is so
well seated upon the Gulf of Pontus, as no Merchant can enter nor go forth,
but at the mercy of Constantinople. And as the Pontique Sea, brings any things
necessary for man, the Constantinopolitains are the Masters: for the Countries
there-abouts supplies them with great abundance of Leather for their common
use, and a great multitude of Stags, and they send to us honey for daintiness,
wax, flesh salted, and such like things: They draw also from us other things
which abound in our Countries, as Oils, and all sorts of Wines: Sometimes they
furnish Wheat, and we do the like to them.

These are the things whereof the Grecians make use, or else the vent would be
unprofitable unto them; whereas the Constantinopolitains should show themselves
malicious in allying themselves to the Gauls, or to any other barbarous
Neighbors: So as the Grecians should be forced to abandon the Pontique Sea,
for the straightness of the places, and the multitude of Barbarians. Wherefore
the Constantinopolitains have great commodities by reason of their situation,
transporting those things whereof they abound, and drawing unto them what they
want without any pain or danger. They are also very profitable to the other
Cities of Greece. And therefore the Grecians did honor and esteem them
worthy, to whom they not only give thanks, but they are bound to give them
Succors against the Barbarians, as doing good to all men. We have thought good
to show the cause, why this City is so happy: for that there are many which
know not the nature and property of the place: and it has been always our
desire, that such things might come to the knowledge of many: and that if it
might be, they might be visible to the eye, if not, yet at the lest as much as
should be possible, they might be comprehended in the understanding.

The Sea then which they call Pontique, The circuit of the Pontique Sea.
has in circuit two and twenty thousand furlongs, or there-abouts, having two
mouths opposite one to the other: whereof the one comes from Propontis, and
the other from the black Sea, the which has in circuit eight thousand
furlongs. But for that diverse great Rivers fall from Asia into it, and more out
of Europe, it sometimes flows into the Pontique Sea by its mouth, and from
thence into Propontis. Bosphorus Cimeriques.
The Mouth of the black Sea is called Bosphorus Cimeriques, and is thirty
furlongs broad, and threescore in length.

As for the mouth of the Pontique Sea, it is called the straight of
Constantinople, whose length is not in every place equal: for from the
Propontis the space betwixt Chalcedon, and Constantinople, contains fourteen
furlongs, and from the Pontique Sea, the which they call Fanum, situated in
Asia (whereas Jason first as they sacrificed to the twelve Gods, returning from
Cholchos) is distant from Europe ten furlongs. Moreover, Two causes why the
black Sea and the Pontique run continually.
they deliver two reasons, why the black Sea and the Pontique run
continually: whereof the one is well known, for that the water increases by
the multitude of Rivers which fall continually into it, and having no other
means to void it, it must of necessity increase, so as it is forced to pass
away by its mouth. The other is, that the bottom is filled with abundance of
sand, which the Rivers bring continually into it: so as the water is forced to
swell, and so to pass away. These are the true causes of their course, which
need not the relation of Merchants to purchase credit, but only of natural
reason, which is the truest testimony that can be found.

But seeing we are fallen upon this discourse, we must not omit any thing,
(as many Historiographers do) to seek out the secrets of Nature: and we must
use (as much as possibly we may) a demonstratiue relation, to the end we may
leave nothing in doubt to those which desire to understand. Neither were it
sitting in these times, (when as all things have been discovered) to seek the
testimony of Poets or fabulous Writers in doubtful things: the which former
Historiographers have done.

By this means, as Heraclides says, they have not propounded testimonies
worthy of credit, in doubtful things, and which are in debate. We therefore
say that the Pontique Sea fills it self continually with sand, which the
Rivers bring into it, and that in time it will be made even with the land. The
like we say of the black Sea, so as the situation of places continue as we
see them at this day, and that the causes of the sand which fall continually
into it cease not. For seeing the time is infinite, and the bottomes whereof
we speak are enclosed with certain limits, it is manifest, that by a long
succession of time, they would be filled up by the descent of that which falls
into them, be it never so little, so as it continues. And for that the sands
which are brought into them, are of no small quantity, but in a manner
infinite, it is apparent that what we say will soon happen: and we see it
partly already, for that the black Sea is in a manner filled up: for, the
greatest depth has not above five fathom, or seven at the most, wherefore
they cannot sail without great Ships, unless the Mariners towe them off by
their Masts. And although in the beginning the black Sea was like unto the
Pontique in taste, as the Ancients confess, Yet it is now a very sweet
Marish: for that the sea has been surmounted by abundance of sands, and the
many sweet Rivers which fall into it. The like will happen to the Pontique,
and begins already: But it cannot be so easily discovered by reason of the
great depth. And yet if we shall observe it well, The Danowe.
we shall find it evident: for there are made within it by the substance
(which by the descent is carried, for that the Danowe enters by many mouths)
hills which the Mariners call Shelfes, a days journey from the shore: The
shelfes in the Sea.
where many times in the night they suffer Shipwreck.

Behold the cause why these Shelfes are rather made far within the Sea, then
near the shore: for the greater force the River has in their course, driving
the waves into the sea, it is necessary that the sand and other substance
should be carried far into it: And whereas the violency of the Rivers cease
by reason of the depth of the Sea, rather then by a natural reason, all the
sands sink and finds a bottom where it stays. Wherefore it happens that the
shelfes of swiftest Rivers are found farthest into the Sea, and their depth
near unto the shore: where as they which have a slow course, are not far
from the mouth. Finally, we must not wonder at the great quantity of wood,
stone, and sand, which is carried into the Pontique Sea: for that many times
we see a torrent or land flood ouerflowe a great Country in a short time,
carrying away earth and stone. So as it sometimes happens, there is such an
alteration made of a great Country, as in seeing it soon after, we do scarce
know it. Wherefore we must not wonder, if so many and such great Rivers fall
continually into the Pontique Sea, in the end fill it up: for this is not only
likely, but also necessary, if we will diligently examine the reason, the
likelihood it should prove so, is great, for as much as the Pontique Sea
differs from ours, for that the black Sea is sweeter. Wherefore it follows,
that when as the Pontique Sea has past as much more time as the black, for
that it is of a greater depth, it will be sweet and moorish like unto it: and
the sooner, for that there are more Rivers, and greater fallen into it. We
have spoken these things for those which think that the Pontique Sea cannot
be filled up, nor become moorish, being now a full Sea. We have likewise done
it, for that Saylors report such variety of lies, to the end that like children
we should not always give credit unto them, for that we have not visited the
places: and that having some knowledge of the truth, we may discover whether
that which they relate be true or false. But let us return to the commodity of
the situation of Constantinople, as the length of the Sea, which ioynes the
Pontique, and the Propontis has six score furlongs, and that Fanum limits the
part which is from the Pontique Sea, and Constantinople.

On the other which is from the Propontis, there stands a Temple betwixt both,
which they call the refuge of Europe, seated upon a Promontory on the mouth of
the Pontique Sea, and is distant from Asia five furlongs. It is situated upon
the greatest straight of the Sea, where as King Darius made a Bridge as they
report, King Darius.
at such time as he made a descent against the Sythians. From the Pontique Sea
unto this place the Waves run equally, for that the shores of either side are
of one distance. The refuge of Europe.
But when it comes to the refuge of Europe, where (as we have said) the Sea is
narrowest, the Water of the Pontique Sea beats violently upon the opposite
Country, and those places of Asia which are right against it: Then it doubles
its course, against the Promontory of Europe near unto the Altars; and then it
falls into the Country which the inhabitants call Ox. The Country of the Ox.
This stands in Asia whereas Io (having past the Sea first) stayed, as fables
report. Yet in the end it takes its course to Constantinople, having bin beaten
back by the Ox. Whereas dispersing it self about the City, it partly diuides
it sylfe, and seperates that place which they call the Horn; and on the other
side it flows again in its own course. Yet this violence cannot pass into
that Country which is right against it, where Calcedon stands: For where as it
makes so many turnings here and there, and that the Gulf is of no small
breadth, it fails in a manner in this place, passing to the opposite part, not
in a direct Line but bending: So as leaving Calcedon, it takes its course by
the Gulf. This draws so many Commodities to the Constantinopolitains, and the
contrary to the Calcedonians. And although it be apparent that the situation
of these two Cities are equally commodious, yet the passage is difficult for
those which will sail to Calcedon. Contrariwise they are carried to
Constantinople by the violence of the Waves: So as it seems that they which
will go from Calcedon to Constantinople, cannot Sail directly thither by
reason of the Violent course of the stream: And therefore they recovered the
Ox, and the Town which they call Chrysopolis, from whence they are afterward
Transported by force unto Constantinople. Chrysopolis.


Finally the Constantinopolitans have a good commodity to Sail any way, The
commodities of Constantinople by the Sea of Abydos and Sestes.
whither they bend to Hellesponte with a Southerly Wind, or else from the
Pontique Sea to Hellesponte. You must understand that the direct and common
course from Constantinople to the streights of Propontis, is by Abydos and
Sestes; and in like manner from the streights to Constantinople. But it falls
out otherwise with the Calcedonians, for the reasons which we have mentioned,
and for the distance of the Region of the Cyziceneins; for it is a difficult
thing for them which Sail from Hellesponte to Calcedon, to keep the Coast of
Europe, and in approaching the Country near unto Constantinople, to turn unto
Calcedon, for the violent course of the stream. And again, it is impossible
to Sail from thence into Thrace, as well for the violence of the Waves, which
go cross, as the contrariety of the Winds, for a Southerly wind is good for
those which enter into the Pontique Sea, and the contrary for such as go
forth; and these two winds only serve to go in, The continual War of the
Constantinopolitains with the Thracians.
and come out. These are the things whereby the Constantinopolitains draw such
great commodities from the Sea.

Now we will show the discommodities which the City is to suffer by reason of
the firm Land. Thrace enuirons the Country of Constantinople in such sort, as
it imbraceth it from Sea to Sea. So as they are in perpetual War with the
Thracians: For although they get a Battle or two against this cruel and
barbarous Nation, yet they cannot quench the Wars, the multitude of people and
Princes is so great: For that after they have gotten Victory over one, there
does suddenly arise three other mighty Princes, who overrun the Country for
spoil: Neither can they do any thing to have an accord, or to pacify the
War by paying of Tribute; for presently they find their Enemies multiplied.
And therefore they are wasted and consumed with a continual and cruel War.
But what can you find more disloyal then a neighbor enemy? Nor a War more
dangerous then with a barbarous Nation? And with all these miseries wherewith
they are oppressed by Land, they are moreover tormented with Tantalus pain, as
the Poets feign: For the Barbarians (considering that they have a fertile
Region) ouer-run the Country and spoil it, after that the Land has bin well
manured, and that the fruit which is very beautiful, and in abundance, is in
Season.

The Constantinopolitains seeing so great a spoil of their goods, and the
loss of their labor and charges, are wonderfully grieved. Yet bearing this
War with the Thracians by a Custom, they always held their ancient accord
with the Gracians. But when as the Gauls began to be their neighbors, under
the Conduct of King Comontoire, they were in great danger. You must understand
that the Gauls which had made War under the leading of Brennus, Brennus
Chief of the Gauls.
and had escaped a great danger at Delphos, past not into Asia when as they
came to Hellesponte: But allured with the commodity of the place, they stayed
near unto Constantinople, whereas after they vanquished the Thracians, and
built Tyle the Royal, The Thracians vanquished by the Gauls.
they made War against them of Constantinople. Who at the beginning pacified
their fury with presents, when as they first assailed them under King
Comontoire, in giving them sometimes thirty thousand, another time fifty
thousand, and sometimes a hundred thousand Crowns, to the end they should not
overrun their Country. An absolute defeat of the ^aules Empire.
Finally, they were forced to give them four score thousand Crowns yearly
until the time of Clyare, at what time the Gauls Empire had an end, and this
Nation was wholly vanquished and extinct by the Thracians. Their Treasure being
at that time exhausted by reason of these Tributes, they sent first an Embassy
into Greece to demand their assistance. But for that most of the Greecians
made no account of it, they resolved to take a Tole upon all these which should
pass into the Black Sea. A Tole imposed upon those that failed into the
Black Sea by Constantinople.
The which all the rest disliking for the nouelty of the thing, they blamed the
Rhodiens for suffering it, as being then Lords of the Sea.

This was the beginning and Fountain of the War which we are now to
describe. The Rhodiens moved, as well with their own loss as with that of
their neighbors, having first called their Allies, sent an Embassy to
Constantinople to abollish the Tole. Who performing their Voyage according to
their Charge, could not persuade the Commons: For that Hecatondore and
Olympiodore Mecatondore and Olympiodore.
(who had then the Government of the Common weal) opposed themselves: So as
they returned without effect. So one after they sent to declare War unto
them for the aforesaid causes. Presently after the Rhodiens sent Ambassadors
to Prusias, Prusias.
to persuade him to make War against the Constantinopolitains: for they knew
well he was offended with them for certain causes. The Constantinopolitains
in like manner solicited Attalus and Acheus by many Embassies, Attalus and
Achens.
to succor them against the Rhodiens. It is true that Attalus was at liberty,
but he was much oppressed with poverty: for that Acheus had forced him to
retire himself within the liberties of his Fathers Empire. Finally Acheus, who
termed himself Lord of all the Country which lies on this side Tauris, and
publishing himself for King, promised succors unto the Constantinopolitains,
which gave them occasion of great hope, and terrified very much the Rhodiens
and Prusias: For Acheus was allied unto Antiochus, who reigned in Syria, and
had attained to this Principallity by such or the like means.

After the death of Seleucus father unto Antichus, and that his Son Seleucus
the eldest of the brethren, had succeeded in the Realm, The means of Acheus
reign.
Acheus past the Mountain of Tauris with him in regard of his kindred, about
two years before the time whereof we now speak. For as soon as Seleucus was
King, and hearing that Attalus had taken the whole Country which lies on this
side Mount Tauris, considering that he must give order to his Affairs,
passes the Mountain with a great Army: Where within few days after he was
slain by Apaturin a Gaul, and Nicanor. Acheus resolving to revenge the death
of his kinsman, kills them presently. And then he gouernes the Army and all
other affairs with great Wisdom and Courage. For when as the opportunity of
the time, and the general consent of all the Soldiers, persuaded him to take
the Crown; yet he would not do it, but kept the Realm for the younger
Brother Antiochus: and governing all other matters careful, he resolved to
subdue the whole Country which is on this side Tauris. But when as all things
had succeeded happily, and that in the end he had left nothing but Pergamus to
Attalus, Acheus causes himself to be called King.
he presently changed his mind, and caused himself to be called their King,
being grown proud with the Victories which he had obtained contrary unto his
Hope. So as it fell out that his name was more feared, by the Inhabitants on
this side Tauris, then of any other King or Prince.

Whereat the Constantinopolitains being moved, they made no difficulty to
undertake a War against the Rhodiens and Prusias: Who accused them, that
when they had promised to set up his Images, yet they afterward forgot it
thorough negligence: And withal, he was much more incensed, for that they had
done what possibly they could to pacify the War which was kindled betwixt
Acheus and Attalus: For that every man knew that their peace was dangerous to
him for many Reasons. Finally, he objected against them, that whereas they had
sent an Embassy to Attalus, at the Games which he had made in the honor of
Minerua, they had not sent any one unto him when he gaues thanks unto the
Gods. For which reasons (being incensed) he willingly embraced the Rhodiens
party against them of Constantinople. And therefore he agreed with their
Ambassadors that they should send forth a very strong Fleet, to assail the
Constantinopolitains by Sea, promising likewise to invade them by Land with no
less forces then they should. This was the the beginning, and the causes of
the War which the Rhodiens made against the Constantinopolitains.

They also at the first entered into it with great Courage, hoping that Acheus
would succor them, according unto his promise. They had also called Thibete of
Macedony, whom they opposed against Prusias: to take from him the means to
make War against another, being much troubled for the defense of his own.
But Prusias parting with great rage and fury against the Constantinopolitains,
he presently took Fanum, Fanum taken by Prusias from the Constantinopolitains.
a place very strong by Nature, and seated upon the mouth of the Pontique Lea,
which they of Constantinople had lately purchased for a great sum of money,
moved with the opportunity of the place: to the end that no man might enter or
go forth of the Pontique Sea but by their favor. Moreover he put all the
Country of Asia (which the Constantinopolitains had long held) to fire and
Sword. On the other side the Rhodiens having made six ships, and taken four
from their Allies, whereof they made Xenophante Commander, they sailed unto
Hellesponte with an Army of ten sail of very strong Ships. And having left
nine near unto Seste, for the defense of the entry into the Pontique Sea, the
Commander having a good VVinde sailed with the tenth unto Constantinople to
view their Countenance: And whither at this first beginning of the War they
would be better advised. But finding them ill affected, he retired unto his
whole Army with the which he returned to Rhodes.

In the mean time the Constantinopolitains sent Embassies, some unto Acheus,
entreating him to hasten his Succors: Others into Macedony to draw down
Thibete; for it seemed that the Realm of Bythinia did as rightly belong to
Thibete as to Prusias, for that he was his Uncle. The Rhodiens being
advertised of the obstinacy of the Constantinopolitains used Wisdom and
Policy: For when they understood that all their Hope was in Acheus, whose
Father Ptolomy kept in Prison at Alexandria, An Embassy sent by the Rhodiens
to Ptolomy*
and that Acheus leaving all other Affairs whatsoever, was careful of his
delivery, they thought good to send an Embassy to Ptolomy, and to entreat him
with great Affection, to deliver unto them the father of Acheus: to the end
that by this means they should make him bound unto them. Ptolomy after he had
heard the Ambassadors, did not seem very willing to deliver Andromochus,
hoping to make use of him at need: for that he was not yet well pacified with
Antiochus, and that Acheus having seized upon the Realm without any
contradiction, and far extended his power: For Andromochus was Father unto
Acheus, and brother to Laodicea Wife to Seleucus. Yet to please the Rhodiens
he delivers him unto them, to restore him unto his Son if they thought good.
The Rhodiens by this means having done according to their own desires, and
reconciling themselves unto Acheus by some other means, they did frustrate the
Constantinopolitains of their principal hope. There fell out also another
accident which troubled them very much: The Death of Thibete.
For Thibete whom they had drawn out of Macedony (as we have said) died
suddenly of sickness. For which accidents the Constantinopolitains began to
faint.

Contrariwise Prusias having a greater hope of his Enterprise, parted from Asia
to make War, and levied men in Thrace, pressing the Constantinopolitains so
near, as they durst not issue or sally out of the Gates, which looked toward
Europe. Wherefore being thus destitute of all hope, and suffering all the
injuries of War, they sought and invented some honest means to be freed. And
therefore when as Canare King of the Gauls approached near unto the City,
laboring by all means to pacify this War, Canare King of the Gauls.
both they and Prusias referred themselves unto him for all their Quarrels.
Whereof the Rhodiens being advertised, and desiring to bring their Resolution
to a final end, they sent Aridix, and Polemocle to Constantinople with three
Triremes, meaning (as they commonly say) to send them peace or War.

After the coming of this Embassy unto Constantinople, there was an Accord
made with the Rhodiens; An accord betwixt the Constantinopotitans and the
Rhodiens.
that the Constantinopolitains should not take Tole of any one that sailed into
the Pontique Sea. The which if they performed, the Rhodiens and their Allies
would make a firm peace with them. And as Prusias they concluded and agreed
upon these Conditions: An accord made with Prusias.
that Prusias and the Constantinopolitains should live in Peace and Amity, and
never hereafter make War one against another. And that Prusias should make
restitution of all the Provinces, Towns, People, and Slaves, without any
recompense, in the like manner he should do of the Ships, and other Booty
which he had taken from them in the beginning of the War. Moreover the
Carpenters Work, Tiles, and remainder of Houses, which he had transported
from Fanum, (for Prusias fearing the coming of Thibete, had razed all the
Burroughes whereinto the Enemy might retire himself:) and that finally he
should bind himself with all the Soldiers of Bythinea, to restore unto the
Inhabitants of Mysia, (which are under the obedience of the
Constantinopolitains) all they had taken from them.

This was the beginning and ending of the War of Prusias and the Rhodiens
against the Constantinopolitains. At that time the Gnosiens sent an Embassy to
the Rhodiens, to draw from them three or four well built Tritemes, with the
which Polemocle had lately made his Voyage, with three other stately Vessels of
War, against those which lately had Revolted against them. The which being
done, when as the Army arrived at Candy, the Eleuterneins doubting that some
few days before Polemocle had slain Timarche their Burgess to please the
Gnosiens, made War against the Rhodiens, after they had made their complain.
A little before the Lyciens had so many several crosses.

Finally all Candy was in Combustion. Candy in a manner reduced all under the
obedience of the Gnosiens and Gortiniens.
The Gnosiens and Gortiniens making War with one Council and consent,
reducing all the Island under their obedience, except the Lyciens Town: For the
taking whereof they did their utmost power and endeavors, thinkking in the end
to rare and ruin it quite: To the end it might serve for an Example to other
Cities, to terrfie them from a Revolt: For that it alone would not receive them
for their Lords. In the beginning all they of Candy made War against the
Lyciens, but they began presently to fall into Discord, upon a very light
cause: The which happens often with that Nation. So as the Polyreneins, the
Certeins, the Lampeins, and moreover the Noreins, and the Arcadians held the
Lyciens party, forsaking the alliance of the Gnosiens. The Gortiniens were in
diverse opinions: The most aged held the Gnosiens party: and the young men that
of the Lyciens. The Gnosiens seeing the will of their Allies thus changed, and
that the Affairs went otherwise then they formerly expected, they drew a
thousand men from Etolia by the right of Alliance. Which being done, the most
aged of the Gortiniens seized suddenly upon the Fort, drawing in the Gnosiens
and Etoliens, and delivered them the Town, chasing away the party of the young
men, and killing some most cruelty.

The Lyciens had by chance at that time made a Road into the Enemies Country,
leaving no forces within the Town, whereof the Gnotiens being advertised by
their Spies, they took it unfurnished of any forces, The Lyciens Town razed
and burnt.
and sent the Women and Children to Gnoson. And when they had burnt and razed
it with fury, they retired. The Lyciens returning, were so amazed when they saw
all in fire and ruin, as no man durst enter into the Town. But going about it
in troops, they lamented their Country and Fortune. From thence turning head,
they returned to the Lampeins, who received them lovingly and with great
affection: Who being Fugitives and strangers, were in one day admitted
Burgesses, and made War against the Gnosiens with the Allies.

Behold how Lycia a Collony of the Lacedaemonians, and the most ancient of
Candy, was suddenly and miserably ruined. The Polyreneins, Lampeins, with all
their other Allies, seeing the Gnosiens to be in League with the Etoliens, and
the Etoliens to be enemies to Philip and the Acheins, sent an Embassy to the
King and the Acheins, to make a League with them, and to draw succors from
them. Who received them, and sent them four hundred Sclauonians, under the
Command of Plator, and about a hundred Phoceins, Plator chief of the
Sclauonians.
who at their arrival did greatly assist the Polyreneins allied to the
Achiens. For within a short time, their forces being increased, they forced the
Eleuterneins, Cydoniates, Aptereins, and diverse others being shut up within
their Walls, to abandon the Gnosiens alliance, and to embrace their party. Which
things being effected, the Polyreneins and their Allies sent five hundred
Candyots to Philip and the Acheins. Not long before the Gnosiens had sent a
thousand to the Etoliens. Thus the War was managed for the love one of
another. The banished men among the Gortiniens surprised the Port of the
Pheastins and that of the Gortiniens, from whence they made many sallies
against them of the Town. And this was the estate of the affairs of Candy.

At the same time Methridates made War against the Synopenses, Mithridates.
which was in a manner the beginning and cause of his misfortune. And when as
they required succors of the Rhodiens, The Rhodiens succor the Synopenses.
they made choice of three men for this business: To whom there was given
four and twenty thousand five hundred pounds, to furnish the Synopenses with
necessary provision for the War. They which had this Commission, made provision
of ten thousand Goat skins filled with Wine, of thirty six thousand pound
weight of Ropes made with Hair, and ten thousand made with sinews, a thousand
Arms complete, three thousand pieces of gold coined, four Merchants ships,
with Crossebowes and other Engines of battery in great number. The Synopenses
having received all this provision, returned to Synope. They were in great
fear least that Methridates should besiege them both by Sea and Land. Synope
is seated on the right side of the Pontique Sea, The Situation of Synope.
where as the River of Phasis enters into the Sea, and likewise upon a Cape
which stretches far into the Sea: The neck whereof is closed in by the
Town, which ioynes unto Asia, and has in length about two Furlongs: The rest
of the Cape aduanceth it self into the Sea, which is a flat Country and the
approaches very easy, and contrariwise very difficult and inaccessible, to
those which come from the Sea, neither has it any passages. The Synopenses
fearing that Methridates should besiege the Town, not only on that side which
ioynes to Asia, but likewise on the other, drawing his Army to Land, they did
carefully fortify that part which is environed by the Sea, leaving a good
Guard there to keep the Enemy from landing: for the place is of a small
Circuit, and requires no great guard. This is all which past at that time in
Synope.

King Philip parting with his Army from Macedony (for there we left our former
Discourse) caused it to march by Thessaly and Epirus, making have to pass by
those Regions into Etolia. Alexander Alexander.
and Dorimache Dorimache.
resolving at the same time to take Egirus, Egyrus.
having drawn together twelve hundred Etoliens at Oeanthy, Oeanthy.
which is one of their Towns, opposite unto that whereof we now speak, and
their ships being ready to pass, they only attended an opportunity to put
their enterprise is Execution. It happened that an Etolian having lived long at
Egire, and finding that the Guard at the Gate kept no good Watch by reason of
their Drunkenness, he acquaints Dorimache therewith, soliciting him to take
the Town by night: he being a man accustomed unto such Actions. The situation
of Egire.
Egire is a Town of Morea, situated near unto the Gulf of Corinthe, betwixt
Egia and Sicyon, upon a certain Hill which is rough and difficult, drawing
toward Par^ase, and about seven Furlongs distant from the Sea. When the time
was come, D^rimache having imbarqued his Army, and provided carefully for all
things necessary, he came before the break of day to a River which runs near
unto the Hill whereon the Town stands.

From thence, he with Alexander and Archidamus the son of Pantaleon,
accompanied with a great number of Etoliens, marched directly unto the Town,
along the way which leads to Egia. The Fugitives was gone before with twenty of
their best foote-men, for the knowledge he had of the places: And had gotten
the Walls by Rocks which seemed inaccessible: Where as entering the Town by a
sincke, he found the Guards a sleep: Who being slain, and having broken the
bars of the Gate without discovery, Egire surprised by the Eto^^ens
they made way for the Etoliens, who entered with great fury, and carried
themselves simply and without discretion, which was an occasion of the Egirates
Victory, and of their defeat and shame. For thinking that all had been lost
for the Egirates, they suddenly Armed, and put themselves in Battle within
the Town, where they stayed for a certain time. But at the break of day
every man thought of his own private profit and gain: And dispersing
themselves throughout the whole Town, they fell upon the Burgesses houses,
and rifled their goods: Finally they had no care at all but of spoil and
Rapine.

The Egirates moved at this strange accident, some fled out of the Town
amazed with fear: whose houses the Enemies had forced, for that the Etoliens
were apparently masters of the Town. But they who hearing the sound of the
Trumpet, An assault given by Dorimache to the Fort of Egire.
were gone forth with their servants to aid and succor the City, retired
unto the Fort: Wherefore their number and force augmented continually, and the
Etoliens grew weaker: For that the Egirates repaired still to the Fort, and the
others dispersed themselves in houses for spoil. And although that Dorimache
saw the apparent danger: yet without any amazement, he assaults the Fort with a
wonderful Resolution, imagining that they which were retired into it, being
amazed at his coming, would presently yield unto the Etoliens. But the
Egirates encouraging one another defended the Fort, with incredible resolution
and assurance.

By this means the Combat was furious of either side. But for that the Fort
was not enclosed with walls, they fought man to man; and the Combat for a time
was furious and equal: For that the one fought for their Country and children,
and the other for their lives. But the Etoliens in the end beganto fly
shamefully: The Etoliens defeated by the Egirates.
whom the Egirate (growing more courageous) pursued: so as a great part of the
Etoliens died in fallying out at the Gate, oppressing one another in the
throng. Alexander was slain fighting valliantly. Dorimache striving to get
forth, died in the press. The rest were presently slain, Alexander slain.
or killed themselves falling into Pits. Dorimache smothered.
There were few saved, who abandoned their Arms, and fled to the ships. By
this means the Egirates by their incredible courage recoueted their Country
in a manner lost by negligence.

At the same time Euripides, (who had been sent by the Etoliens to be Chief
of the Elienses, who after he had ouer-run the Countries of the Dimenses,
Pharences and Tritenses) took his way through the Elienses Country, chasing
before him a great Booty, whereof Micchus of Dime being advertised, who by
chance was at that time subrogated in the place of the Commander of the
Acheins, and following the Enemy upon the retreat, with the help of the
Dimenses, Pharenses, and Tritenses, Micchus defeated.
fell unadvisedly into their Ambushes, and was defeated with the great loss of
his men: whereof there died forty Foot, and there were two hundred taken.
Euripides glorious of this good fortune, The Castle of Mure taken by Euripides.
soon after went again to Field, and took a Castle from the Dimenses, which
was of consequence, the which the people of the Country called Mure: and they
say, that Hercules built it in old time, making War against the Elienses, to
use it as a Fort, and retreat in the time of War.

The Dimenses, Pharenses, and Trite^ses having made this loss, and fearing for
the future by the taking of the Castle by Euripides, they first sent Letters to
the Chief of the Acheins, to advertise them of their misfortune, and to demand
succors against the Etoliens. And afterward they sent some of the Chief of
their Town in Embassy. Arate could not raze any mercenary Soldiers, for that
during the War of Cleomenes, the Acheins had paid them ill, and withal he
managed the affairs fearfully and without consideration. And therefore
Lycurgu^ took Athence, a Town of the Megalopolitains: the like Euripides did
(besides the former prize) to Gorgon and Telphusia. Athence taken by Licurgus.
The Dimenses, Pharences, and Tritenses being frustrate of the hope they had in
the Chief of the Acheins, resolved among themselves not to contribute any more
money, to supply the necessities of their War: And that they would levy at
their own charge about three hundred Foot, and fifty Horse to defend their
Country. Whereby they seemed to have taken good order for their private
affairs, but they had no great respect to the profit of a Comminalty: For they
have given a very bad example to others, to make a new enterprise upon any
occasion: whereof the blame may well be laid upon the Commander, who by his
sloth and negligence had frustrated his men of their expectance.

It is a common course, that all they which are in danger, hold that Friendship
is to be entertained and kept, so long as there is any hope to draw succors
from them: and when that cease, then they are to provide for their own
affairs. And therefore the Dimenses, Pharenses and Tritenses are to be
pardoned, for that in the extreme danger of their Towns, they had levied men,
considering the negligence of the Chief of the Acheins. But whereas they would
not furnish money for the common affairs of the league, that is not excusable:
For as it was not fit to neglect their own affairs, so it was a base and
disgraceful thing to omit that which concerns the preservation of a common
league: seeing they wanted not Victuals according to the common conuentions:
and moreover they had been Authors of the league with the Acheins. And this
was the estate of the affairs of Morea.

King Philip had past Thessaly, Philips Army. and was in Epirus: whereas taking
a number of Epirotes, with the Macedonians he brought with him, and three
hundred Slingers out of Acheia, with a hundred Candiots which had been sent by
the Messeniens, he comes unto the Country of the Ambraciates: whereas if he
had entered presently into the heart of Etolia, the War might have had an end.
But for that he was solicited by the Epirotes to force Ambracia first, he gave
the Etoliens means to resist, and provide that which was necessary for their
defense. But the Epirotes preferring their private interest before the common
profit of the Allies, having a great desire to make Ambracia subject, persuaded
Philip to besiege it, and to take it before he past: For they conceived that
the Town of Ambracia would be very beneficial unto unto them, if they might
take from the Etoliens, and that it would easily fall into their hands. You
must understand that Ambracia is a place strong by nature, well fortified with
double walls, and so environed with Moares and Marshes, as there is but one
narrow passage by Land, The situation ^f Ambracia.
made by Art. Moreover, it looks toward the Town, and the Province of the
Ambraciates. Philip at the persuasion of the Epirotes, plants his Camp near
unto Ambracia, making provision of that which was necessary for the Siege.

At the same time Scope drawing together a great number of Etoliens, and
passing thorough Thessaly, Scope makes an incursion into Mac^dony.
enters into Macedony, and puts all that Region to fire and sword which lies
near unto Mount Pierie, and draws toward Die, making a great spoil. And for
that the Inhabitants of the Country were fled, he ra^ed the houses, and places
for Games: and not content therewith, he set fire on the Cloisters built near
unto the Temple with great charge: moreover, he ruined whatsoever was erected
there for ornament or for use: Finally, he beat in pieces all the Images of
Kings. Thus Scope in the beginning and first fury of the War, having not only
assaulted Men, but even the Gods themselves, returned into Etolia, not as a
Church-robber, or execrable to the immortal Gods, but he was honored as a man
of merit, and a good servant to the Commonwealth: and withal he gave great
hope to the Etoliens for the time to come. For they conceived that by this
means no man durst presume to enter as an enemy into their Country, and
contrariwise they might easily run and spoil not only Morea, as they had
been accustomed, but also Thessaly and Macedony. Philip advertised of these
thing which had been done in Macedony, and suffering for the ignorance and
covetousness of the Epirotes, held Ambracia besieged: Ambracia taken by Philip.
whereas making use of all Engines of Battery, he took it within forty days,
where leaving a garrison, having first taken the oath he satisfied the will of
the Epirotes, to whom Ambracia was delivered.

After these things he raises his Camp, and marches directly by the next
valley, making haste to pass the Gulf of Ambracia, the which is very narrow,
near unto the Temple of Acarna^ia, which they call Antia. The Gulf of
Ambracia.
This Gulf comes from the Sea of Sicily betwixt Epir^^ and Acarnania, with a
very narrow entry, being scarce six hundred paces broad. But when as it
dilates it self toward the Land, it is in a manner a hundred Furlongs broad,
and three hundred in length, beginning at the Sea of Sicily. It diuides Epirus
from Acaruania the one lying directly toward the North, and Acarnania directly
toward the South. Having past this Gulf with his Army, and entering into
Acar^ania, he came to a Town of Etolia which they call Poetia, leading with
him two thousand Foot, Poetia taken by Composition.
and two hundred Horse of Acarnania. And planting his Camp about the Town,
and giving many sharp assaults, he took it the third day after his coming by
composition, and le^t a Garrison of Etoliens therein taking their Oath. The
Night following fifteen hundred Etoliens thinking that all things had been
safe, Fifteen hundred Etoliens defeated by^ Philip.
came to succor their fellows. The King advertised of their coming, laid an
Ambush, and slew the greatest part^ The rest were taken, except some few which
escaped by flight. After this he distributed Wheat to the Soldiers for a
Month, for he had gotten a great quantity in this Town: Then he marches to
the Region of the Strete^ses, and plants his Camp near to the River of
Acheloe, about ten furlongs from the Town: And from thence ouer-running the
Province, he puts all to fire and sword, for that no man durst show himself.

At the same time the Acheins more tormented with the War then the rest, and
advertised that the King was not far off, they sent an Embassy unto him to
demand succors. The Ambassadors met the King at Straton, where acquainting
him with their necessities according to their charge, they entreat him to give
them succors, and persuade him by many reasons, that in passing the Rh^e, he
should take his way thorough the Country of the Eliences. Having heard them,
the King sent them back, promising to consider thereon: who raising his Camp,
marched to Metropolis and Conope. Whereof the Etoliens being advertised, they
abandoned the Town, and retired to the Fort. When as Philip had set fire on
the Town, Metropolis taken and burnt.
proceeding in his course, he drew to Conope. There the Etolien Horsemen had
made a head, to encounter him at the passage of a River, An assembly of the
^rolient to keep the passage of a River.
twenty Furlongs distant from the Town, to stop his passage, or to fight with
him if he past.

Philip advertised of their enterprise, commands those that were armed with
Targets to enter the River first, and that keeping close together, they should
strive to pass in Battle. Having obeyed him, the Etoliens having skirmished
in vain with the first Troop, for that it kept close together, and afterward
with the second and the third, in the end they retired to the Town, despairing
of their Enterprise. From that time the Etoliens Army kept the Towns: but
Philip ouer-running the Province at his pleasure, Ithoria very strong.
spoiled It^oria it self. It was a place seated upon the passage, of great
strength both by Nature and Art: the which the Garrison abandoned upon his
approach. The King razed it to the ground. Finally, he ruined all, reducing
under his obedience many Towns which were strong by situation and
fortification: demollishing all the Castles, whereof there were a great number
in the Country. Then abating his fury, he gave leave unto his men to run where
they pleased for their own gain. After which he led his Army full of wealth
toward the Eniades, and laid Siege to Peania, resolving to take it by
assault: Peania taken by assault.
The which he did after many attempts, for although the Town were not very
big, having but a thousand paces in circuit: yet it was not inferior to the
rest in the strength of Walls, Towers and Houses. He razed the Walls to the
ground, and ruined the Houses, commanding to carry away the Timber and Tiles to
the Eniades by Water.

The Etoliens first began to fortify the Fort of the Ceniades to defend it,
rampring the Walls, making of Ditches, and doing all things necessary for the
fortification of a Town. But being advertised of Philips approach, they fled
for fear. Philip taking this Town without any resistance, led his Army into
Calydonia, to a certain Town which was held very strong, called Claos, the
which was well rampred with Walls, and all manner of fortifications. Attalus
had furnished the Etoliens with munition to defend it. But the Macedonians
taking it by force, they ouer-ran and spoiled all Calydonia, and then returned
unto the Enlades. Whereas Philip considering the opportunity of the place, as
well for other affairs, as for his passage into Morea, resolved to repair the
Walls. For the Eniades are Maritime opposite to Acarnania by the Sea which
ioynes unto the Etoliens, near unto the mouth of the Gulf of Corinthe. It is
a City situated in Morea, right against the Banks of the Dimeens, and
neighbor to the Country near unto Araxis, distant only a hundred Furlongs.
Which things Philip considering, Philip fortifios the Fort of the Eni^des.
he fortified the Fort apart, and joined unto it the Port and Arsenall with a
Wall, making use of the materials which were brought from Peania.

Whilst that Philip was busy about this work, he received Letters from
Macedony, by the which they did advertise him that the Dardanians doubting of
his Voyage into Morea, made hafte to levy men, and to make preparations for
War, to fall suddenly upon Macedony. After which news resolving to succor
it speedily, he sent back the Acheins Ambassadors with this answer, that as
soon as he had given order for his affairs of Macedony, he would have
nothing in so great recommendation, as to come to their aid with all his
forces. After this he returned speedily with his Army by those Countries where
he had formerly past. And as he past the Gulf of Ambracia, parting from
Acarnania to Epirus, Demetrius of Phare (whom the Romans had chased out of
Sclauonia) met him. Whom the King (embracing him with great courtesy) caused
to sail to Corinthe, and from thence to march into Macedony by Thessaly. Where
drawing to Epirus, he presently transported himself into Macedony, to the
Town of Pella. But when the Dardanians were advertised by some fugitive
Thracians of the Kings coming, they presently dissolved their Army, being
terrified with fear, notwithstanding they were near unto Macedony. Philip
advertised of the retreat of the Dardanians, The retreat of the Dard^^iant
without doing any thing.
gave leave unto his Soldiers to gather new Corn, and every man to retire
into his Country. For his part he went into Thessaly, and spent the rest of
the Summer in Larissa.

At the same time Panlus Emilius triumphed at Rome, after his return from
Sclauonia. Hannibal after the taking of Sagont, had sent his Army to winter.
The Romans advertised of the razing of Sagont, sent an Embassy to Carthage,
demanding Hannibal: and made their preparations for War, Publius Cornelius
and Titus Sempronius being then created Consuls: Of which affairs we have
spoken in the precedent Book. But we now make a brief repetition, to refresh
the memory: to the end that (as we have promised) all the actions may be
present to the eyes of the Readers. The first year of this Olympiade is past.
And when as the day of the Election which the Etoliens make, was come, they
made choice of Dorimache for General of the War. Dorimache chosen General
of the Etoliens.
Who being seized of the Magistracy, he drew together a great number of
Soldiers, and falling upon the high Country of Epirus, he made a most cruel
spoil: so as it seemed, he did it rather to ruin the Epirotes, then for his
own profit. Then passing the Temple of Jupiter Dodon^e; he set fire of the
Cloisters, and ruined all its beauty: and finally, he demollished it.

Behold how the Etoliens cannot observe any mean either in peace or war, so
as both in the one and the other they violate the common conversation of men,
and in a manner the Law of Nature. When as Dorimache had committed all these
mischiefs and many greater, he returned into his Country. But whilst that
Winter lasted, and that every man despaired of the coming of Philip by reason
of the roughness of the time, and hardness of the Winter, the King taking
three thousand men with Bucklers, and two thousand with Targets, with three
hundred Candiots, and about four hundred Horse, parted from Larissa: and
taking his way by Thessaly, he came to Negrepont: and from thence passing by
Beocia and Megara, in the midst of December he arrived at Corinthe, making his
voyage so secretly, as no man of Morea discovered it: then keeping the Gates of
Corinthe shut, and setting Watches upon the ways, the day following he sent
to Sisyon for old Arate. He then advertised the Chief of the Acheins and
Towns, of the time and place when they should be ready and in order. These
things thus ordered, he continued his voyage as he had resolved, and seated his
Camp near to Dioscore, a Town of Philiasia.

At the same time Euripides parting from Psophis accompanied with two Legions
of Eliences, Pirates at Sea, and some voluntaries, so as all together made two
thousand two hundred Foot, and about a hundred Horse, took his way by Phenice
and Stymphalia, being ignorant that Philip was in field, and desirous to spoil
the Country of the Sicyoniens. It fell out the Night that Philip camped near
unto Dioscore, that Euripides passing further at the break of day, entered into
the Country of the Sicyoniens, and that some Candiots which were with Philip,
abandoning their Ensigns, and going to forage met him. By whose means
knowing that the Macedonians were near, he drew his army out of the Country,
hoping that after he had past the Country of Stymphalia, he might easily
defeat the Macedonians in places of advantage. Phillip having no
advertisement, raised his Camp the next day at the Sunrising, as he had
resolved, The retreat of Euripides from S^ymphall^.
to take his way under Stymphalia toward the Caphires: for there he had
appointed the Acheins to meet in Arms.

When the Macedonian Scouts were come to the top of the Mountain, which the
Contrymen call Apeaure, about ten Furlongs distant from the Stymphalins
Town, The Mountain of Ape^ure.
it happened by chance that the Scouts of the Eliences arrived there also. The
which Euripides perceiving, and amazed at the disadvantage of the place and
time, he flies with some of them, Thy flight of Euripides.
and recouers Sophis by Groves which lay dispierced. The rest of the Eliences
Troop being amazed, as well for that they were abandoned by their Commander,
as for the newness of the accident, were for a time in suspense what they had
to do. But conceiving afterward that they were Megalopolitains, to see the
manner of their Harness (for the Macedonians carried Helmets) they marched in
Battle, keeping good order for a time without any despair. But when the
Macedonians began to approach, (knowing then the truth) they abandoned their
Arms, and fled. There were about twelve hundred taken alive by the Enemy: A
defeat of the Etoliens.
the rest were slain, some by the Macedonians like Sheep, others falling
down the Rocks, so as there escaped not a hundred. Philip continued his
course, and sent the spoils and Prisoners to Corinthe. This seemed very
strange to them of Morea, to whom the news of the Victory, and of Philips
arrival came at one instant.

When the King had past by Arcadia, having suffered much upon the way by Snow,
and the difficulty of the Country, he arrived at midnight at Caphies on the
third day. Where after he had refresh't himself three days, Arate ioynes
with Philip.
and that Arate the younger had joined with him with his Troops, so as the
whole Army consisted of ten thousand men, he arrived at Psophis, passing by
Cliteria, and made great provision of Darts and Ladders taken out of the Towns
where he past. Psophis is a very ancient Town of the Arcadians, The
situation of Psophis.
situated in the midst of Morea, joining to Arcadia upon the West, and near
to the Couutrey of the Eliences, who at that time had the government. Where
Philip arrived the third day after his departure from Caphies, and seated this
Camp upon the Mountains which are opposite, from whence he might discover the
Town and Country round about without danger. Where viewing the strength, he
was for a time in suspense: for toward the West there ran a swift Torrent
along the walls: the which for the most part of Winter, was not to be waded
thorough, so as no man enters that way. And upon the East it has the River of
Erimanthe, The River of Erimanthe,
which is great and violent: Of which the Poets and Historiographers tell many
tales. Moreover, the Torrent (whereof we have spoken) defends and assures the
third part toward the South. In regard of the fourth which looks toward the
North, it has above it a Mountain which is steep and difficult, and serves
them for a good Fort. By this means the Town is defended on three sides by
water, and on the fourth by the Mountain: And moreover it is environed with
good walls, made with great Art. Finally, there was a Garrison of Elienses,
with that which Euripides had brought with him in his flight.

All these things considered, Philip was partly distasted to force it, for the
difficulty thereof. And partly inflamed to besiege it, for the opportunity of
the place. For he considered that as this Town was an anoyance to the Acheins
and Arcadians (for that it was an assured Fort and safe retreat for War to
the Elienses) so if it might be taken, it would be to them of great
consequence, and a retreat to the Arcadians for the War. Wherefore in the
end following this advice, he sent unto the Macedonians, that they should be
ready the next day in the morning, and in Arms after they had fed. Then
passing the Bridge of Erimanthe without any opposition, considering the
strangeness and greatness of the accident, he came boldly, and log'd at the
foot of the Wall. Whereat Euripides and the Chief of the Town were in great
doubt what to do: for they immagined that the Macedonians had no conceit to
be able to force this strong Town, and that they should not be able to
continue the Siege long during that season. Wherefore when as they saw no
likelihood of any Treason within the Town, the greatest part run to the walls
to defend them.

The Voluntaries of the Elienses made a sally upon the Enemy by the Gate which
looks directly to the Camp. A sally of the Elienses upon the Macedonians.
But when as Philip had appointed men to set up Ladders in three places, and a
sufficient number of Macedonians for either of them, he gave warning for the
assault. Which done, they all fell to fighting with wonderful fury. The
besieged in the beginning defended themselves valiantly, and overthrew many
which labored to scale the walls. But when as their Darts and other munition
failed them, as to men which had run hastily to the walls: and withal the
Macedonians retired not, but after the fall of one the next ascended the
Ladder, in the end they fled, and retired to the Fort. Then the Macedonians of
the Kings Troop recovered the wall. On the other side the Candiots who fought
with those which made their sally from the upper part of the Town, forced them
in the end to fly, abandoning their Arms basely: And pursuing them with great
fury, they slew many upon the way, and entered the Town with them: so as it was
taken in diverse places at one instant. All the Burgesses retired into the Fort
with their Wives and Children. Psoph^ taken by assault.
The like did Euripides, with the rest which had escaped the danger. The
Macedonians being entered, they spoiled both public and private houses, and
afterward kept themselves quiet within the Town. They which held the Fort,
being without victuals and other munition, they began to think of yielding,
foreseeing the future. Whereupon they sent a trumpet to the King: and having
obtained a passe-port for an Embassy, they sent the Princes of the Town with
Euripides to Philip, who compounded with the King, A composition made between
the Citizens of Psophis and Philip.
that in yielding him the place, the Burgesses and strangers might retire in
safety. This done, they returned again to the Fort according to the Kings
command, not to depart before he had retired his Army out of the Town, lest
falling into the Soldiers hands, they might be spoiled. The King stayed some
days there by reason of the roughness of the weather: during the which he
calls together the Acheins which were in the Army, and made a long speech unto
them of the situation of the Town, and of its opportunity for the present War,
putting them in mind of the love he bare them: Finally, he gave them the Town,
to the end they should know plainly, that he was resolved to please them in
all things, and not to forget the affection and diligence which was requisite
in their affairs.

After which Speech, when as the Acheins had given him thanks for his love and
good will, Philip gives forces to the Acheins.
Philip leaves the Company, and drawing his Army presently together, he marched
directly to Lassion. The Psophiens leaving the Fort, came into the Town, and
every man returned to his house. Euripides retired with his men first to
Corinthe, and afterward into Etolia. The Chief of the Acheins which were
there present, gave the guard of the Fort to Proslae a Sycionian with a
sufficient Garrison, and made Pythias Pellenense Governor of the Town. And
this was the end of the Psophiens War.

When the Garrison of Lassion which consisted of Elienses, being (formerly
advertised of that which had happened at Psophis) saw the Macedonians, L^ssion
taken.
they abandoned the Town, as amazed at so strange an accident. So as Philip
took it as soon as he saw it. The which he likewise gave to the Acheins,
according to the love and affection which he bare them. Straton.
He likewise gave Straton to the Telpulsiens, which the Elienses had taken.
This done, the fifth day after he arrived at Olympia: where after he had
sacrificed to the Gods, and made a solemn Banquet to all the Captains, and
refresht his men for the space of three days, he marched, and entering the
Country of the Elienses, he abandoned it to his Soldiers: Then planting his
Camp near to Artimisea, he returned soon after to Dioscoria, bringing a
great Booty from thence. Then making many Roads into the Country, there were a
great number of men taken. Many also retired into the neighbor Towns, and
into places of strength: For the Region of the Elienses is very fertile amongst
the rest of Morea, in people and abundance of wealth: for that the greatest
part of the Country people are given to tillage, employing their time in
labor, unto the second and third generation: And alhtough they be otherwise
rich, yet they enter not into Towns. The which happens, for that the
principal of the Towns have the Laborers in recommendation, and are very
careful that they may not be oppressed with the want of any thing of that
which is requisite and necessary for them, and that no man should do them
wrong. In my opinion the ancients have so ordained it, for that in old time the
multitude was commonly given to tillage; or rather for that they led a holly
and religious life, when as with the consent of all the Grecians, they lived in
safety, free from all inconveniences and trouble of War, for the Combat
which was made at the Olympicke Games. But when by the controversy of the
Arcadians, concerning Lassion and Pisa, they were forced to undertake War for
the defense of their Country, and to leave their first manner of living, they
cared no more to resume that ancient and hereditary liberty given them by the
Grecians, remaining in the same estate, and making a bad discourse of the time
to come. For if any may have from the Grecians (in observing right and justice)
peace and quietness for ever, which is a thing which we all demand of the
immortal Gods, and for the which we endure any thing, and which all the world
confesses to be an undoubted good, and yet they contemn it, and do not
esteem it, or hold some other thing in greater recommendation, are not they to
be held fools and mad men? But some one will say unto me, that they which
shall hold this course of life, shall not be able to defend themselves, when
they shall be oppressed with War, or some other outrage. This without doubt
happens seldom, and if it does, they may be defended and relieved by all the
Grecians. And if it be a particular offense it will be no difficult thing to
levy men with the money which they have gathered together by long peac^ and
rest. But now fearing that which happens seldom, and beyond all humane
consideration, they consume themselves and their Country in continual War
and troubles We have thought good to relate these things of the Elienses; for
there was never time, when as a greater opportunity was offered, to recover this
liberty from all the Grecians, then at this day. The people then as we have
said, dwelt in all assurance. Wherefore there were taken by the Macedonians a
great number of men, although that many were retired in strong places. For
there was assembled a great multitude of men and Cattle, with other wealth in
a near Borough, which they call Thalame: for that the Country about it is
very straight, the approach is difficult, and the Borough very steepy, and in
a manner inaccessible. Thalame.
Philip advertised of this great assembly, and being loath to leave any thing
which he would not undertake, recouers the places of advantage, to enter it
with his Mercenaries: and marches in person by the streights of the Country
with the men which bare Targets, and were lightly armed, leaving the Baggage,
and the greatest part of his Army in the Camp, and came unto the Borough
finding no resistance.

They which were therein, amazed at the greatness of this accident* and ill
furnished for the war, and without experience: having moreover many
unprofitable persons for their age, yielded presently: Among the which were two
hundred Soldiers of diverse nations, Thalame yields.
whereof Amphidamus Chief of the Elienses had the charge. Philip having made
booty of all things, as of five thousand men, and of an infinite number of
Cattle, returned presently to the Camp. And when as afterward the Soldiers
seemed unprofitable unto him for the War, being thus laden with spoils, he
raised his Camp and returned to Olympia.

Appelles was one of the Tutors which was left to Philip in his infancy by
Antigonus, and had then great authority and favor with the King. Appelles
Tutor to Philip.
Who beginning to practice with himself, by what means he might reduce the
Nation of the Acheins, to the same estate wherein the Thessalians were, he
bethought himself of a notable villainy. You must understand that the
Thessalians seemed to live under their own Laws, and to differ much from the
Macedonians, only they endured all things like unto them, and obeyed the will
of the King. Wherefore Appelles tending hereunto, began to try the hearts of
those that were in the Camp. And at the first he commanded the Macedonians,
The malicious policy of Appelles
that if by chance the Acheins should take any place before them, they should
always chase them away, and strip them of their Booty. Afterward he caused
some to be whipped by the hangman for small offenses: And if any one questioned
this kind of outrage, or did succor them that were beaten, they were put in
prison, hoping by this means to accustom the Acheins to endure patiently what
should please the King. Finally, when as some young men Acheins were assembled
and come to Arate, relating unto him the practice of Appelles. Arate
considering that this must be prevented in the beginning, he came to Philip,
and accompanied with these young men, delivered all things in order. Who being
heard, Philip wished him to take no further care, and that hereafter they should
not be so entreated. He gives charge to Appelles not to decree any things
against the Acheins without the advice of their Commander. Philip was held
excellent in Eloquence and sweetness of speech to persuade his Soldiers, The
Nature of Philip.
and of great wisdom and courage in the profession of Arms, not only in the
judgment of Soldiers, but of all Morea: neither was it easy to find a King
which had so many gifts of Nature. He was a man of great diligence, memory, and
of a good aspect, and held him worthy of an Empire, in whom there was a royal
power, a great force, and an incredible courage in actions of War, and as he
laid the foundation of his Empire by so many great virtues, it is hard to say
for what reason he was in the end so perverted, and made an execrable and
wicked Tyrant of a good and just King. Wherefore leaving this to another
season, we will return to our discourse.

Philip parting from Olympia with his Army, came first to Pharia, then to Erea,
where the Booty was sold, whereof we have spoken. He made a Bridge upon
Alphia, meaning to pass from thence into Triphalia. At the same time Dorimache
chief of the Etoliens, sent succors unto the Elienses at their request,
Succors sent to the Elienses by Dorimache.
whilst they ruined their Country: being about six hundred Etoliens under
the command of Philides, who passing by the Country of the Elienses, after
that he had taken about five hundred voluntaries of theirs, and a thousand men
of the City with the Tarentines, he came into Triphalia to succor the Allies.
It is situated in Morea, The situation of Triphalia and i^^ Towns
betwixt the Regions of the Elienses and Messeniens, having drawn its name
from Triphalia in Arcadia. Finally, it tookes toward the Sea of Lybia joining
to Acheia upon the West. Wherein are comprehended the Towns of Samico^,
Lepres, Hygianne, Typanea, Pyrgon, Epion, Bolac, Tyla^gion, and Phrixe. The
which as the Elyences held before, so as they had also taken the Town of the
Alphirences, which formerly did belong to Arcadia, by the means of Alliades
the Megalopolitaine, who delivered it unto them in exchange, at such time as
he was King. As soon as Phylides was entered into Triphalia, he sent the
Eliences to Lepreon, and the Mercenaries to Alphira: and he remained at
Tipanes, having the Etoliens with him.

Philip leaving the Baggage, having past the Bridge of Alphia, The situation
of Alphira.
which runs along the walls of Erea, he came to Alphira, which is seated upon a
certain Mountain full of Caves and Pits round about it, and has above ren
Furlongs in ascent. Finally, it has a Fort upon the top of it, and the Image
of Minerua made of Copper, much differing from others in greatness and beauty:
The Image of Minerua.
The people of the Country know not who made it, nor at whose charge, nor at
what time it has been erected. All the World holds for certain, that it is
the most excellent work among all those which Hecatodorus and Sostrates have
made. The next Morning being clear and bright, Philip commands many Ladders to
be brought, before the which he had Troops of adventurers, and then the
Macedonians, commanding them all at the Sunrising, to make haste to creep up
the Mountains, Philip assailes Alphira.
and to assail the Town. Which being performed, the Alphirenses ran all to a
place where they saw the Macedonians use the greatest force. In the mean time
Philip having with him the choice of all the Troops, was come secretly to the
wall by a difficult Country. And when as the Soldiers assailed the Town of
all sides, and scaled it, Philip commanded to do the like unto the Fort which
was near the Fortress: the which he took suddenly being unfurnished of
Soldiers. When as the Alphirenses saw it on fire from their walls, they were
terrified with this new danger, fearing that if the Macedonians should take the
Fortress, there were no means of safety, they retired suddenly, abandoning
the walls the Macedonians took presently with the Town. Afterward they which
held the Fortress, yielded it to Philip, to have their lives saved, according
to the Composition which they had made with him.

After these actions, the people of Triphalia being amazed, were careful of
their safeties: Philides also parting from Typanea, after he had ransacked and
spoiled some houses, retired to Lopira. Behold the recompense which the
Etoliens at that time made unto their Allies: so as they not only abandoned
them in their greatest extremity, but made them suffer things which were scarce
fit to be endured by an Enemy. The Typaneat^s yeele unto Philip.
The Typaneates yielded the Town presently to Philip: the which they of
Hippane did in like manner. In the mean time the Phialences having news of
that which past in Triphalia, being in Arms, took a place near unto
Polimarche, detesting the alliance of the Etoliens. The Etolien Pirates who by
chance were in that Town in regard of the Messeniens, labored in the
beginning to resist the Phialences. But when they were advertised that the
whole Town was of one accord, they gave over their enterprise, and trussing up
their Baggage, departed. The Phialences sent an Embassy to Philip, The
Phialences y^eld to Philip.
and submitted themselves and their Town under his obedience. This being done,
the Lepreates gaining a place of advantage within their Town, resolved to
chase away the Garrison of Eliences, Etoliens, and Lacedaemonians. Philides in
the beginning was nothing moved herewith, but continued still within the Town.
But when the King had sent Taurion with a part of his Army against him, and
coming in person with the rest to Lepreon, Philides and his Company hearing
the news, began to faint. Contrariwise the Lepreates growing more resolute,
The (...) of the L^preates against the Etoiens,
did an act worthy of memory: For having within their Town a thousand
Eliences, fifteen hundred Etoliens, and two hundred Lacedaemonians,
Voluntaries, holding moreover the Fort, yet their courage was so great, as they
resolved not to forget the safety of their Country in so great a danger.

But when as Philides saw the Lepreates to prosecute what they had begun with
such courage, and the Macedonians to approach near unto the Town, he fled
with the Elienses and Lacedaemonians, having no more hope of safety. So as the
Lacedaemonians taking their way by Messena, returned to their houses, and the
Etoliens went to Samice with their Commander Philides. The Lepreates being
Masters of the Town, (...) yielded to Philip.
sent an Embassy to the King to yield it unto him. Who being heard, the King
sent part of his Army thither, and pursuing Philides for a time, with those
that were lightly armed, he took all the Baggage, and Philides saved himself
within a Castle. There the King planted his Camp, and made show to besiege the
Town, causing the rest of his Army to come from Lepreon: wherewith the
Etoliens and Elienses being amazed, as having nothing wherewith to defend the
Siege but their hands, began to parley for their safeties. Who going forth upon
the Kings word, retired to Elis. The King was presently Lord of Samice.
Afterward diverse others came to submit themselves, so as he took Phrixe,
Towns which yield to Philip.
Ty^angion, Epiron, Bolac, Pyrgon and Epicalion. After which he returned to
Lepreon, having in six days made all Tryphalia subject. There he made
remonstrances to the Lepreates according to the time, and put a sufficient
Garrison into the Fort, he led his Army to Erea, leaving Ladix of (...),
Governor of Tryphalia^ Being arrived there, he divided the spoil among the
Soldiers, and having made provision of victuals, he took his way to
Megalopolis in the heart of Winter.

When as Philip was in Tryphalia, Chylon.
Chylon the Lacedemonian immagining that the Crown of the City belonged unto
him, and being discontented at the insolency of the Magistrates in choosing
Lycurgu^, he began to plot an enterprise of reuolte. Hoping therefore to gain
the love and favor of the people, if doing like unto Cleemenes, he put them in
hope to divide the Lands again, he does his endeavor to bring it to effect.
And communicating his practice to his Friends, he had 200. Confederates of his
enterprise. But knowing that Lycurgus and the Magistrates which had made him
King, would make a great opposition, he studied first how to prevent it. When
as by chance all the Magistrates supt together, he assailes them by surprise,
The Lacedemonian Magistrat^ slain by C^ylon.
and kills them cruelly. Behold how Fortune, prepared a punishment worthy the
deeds which they had committed. Believe me, there is not any man but will say
that they had well deserved to be punished by him, and for the cause for which
they suffered. As soon as Chylon had done this Execution, he transports
himself to Lycurgus house: And although he were there, yet he could not come
at him; for he was preserved by his Household Servants and by his neighbors,
and retired unto Pellene by unknown ways. Chylon frustrated of so great an
opportunity, being wonderfully discontented, was forced to do that which
necessity required; and transporting himself to the place, he seized upon all
his enemies, and gave courage to his friends, laboring to induce the rest to
revolt. But when as he saw no man to like of it, and that the City was in
mutiny against him, fearing what might happen, steals away from thence, and
comes into Acheia alone, being chased out of his Country. The Lacedaemonians
fearing the descent of King Philip, retired with whatsoever they had in the
fields into their Towns: and fortified them with men and all sorts of
munition, razing to the ground Athence of the Megalopolitains: For that it
seemed a very convenient place for the enemy.

It is certain that whilst the Lacedaemonians maintained their good
government, according to the Laws of Lycurgus, they were grown very great
unto the War of Leuctres. The Lacedaemonians were unfortunate after they had
left the Laws of Licurgus.
Since which time they began to feel the crosses of Fortune, and their
government grew worse, being full of many discommodities and intestine
Seditions, with Banishments and ruins until the Tyranny of Nabydane: whose
name they could not endure. These are things which have been related by many
and are well known, since that Cleomenes ruined the government of the
Country, whereof we will speak hereafter when opportunity shall require.
Philip passing by Megalopolis with his Army, drew to Argos by the Country of
Tegetane, and there past the remainder of the Winter: purchasing a wonderful
renown of all the World, as well for his course of life, as for the things
which he had done in this War, beyond the strength of his age. Appelles who
(notwithstanding the Kings Commaundment) desisted not from his dessigne,
Appelles persists in his enterprise.
labored by little and little to make the Acheins subject. And when he found
that Arate and the rest that were with him, were opposite unto his ends, and
that the King had them in great Reputation, especially old Arate, for that he
was in great Authority among the Acheins and Antigonus, and was moreover a good
and discreet man, he began to Traduce him with injuries. Then he inquires
what men there were in Acheia of a contrary saction to Arate, and draws them
unto him. To whom he gives a courteous and gracious reception, drawing them by
persuasions to his friendship, and afterward recommended them in particular to
the King, he gave him to understand that if he favored the party of (...),
he should enjoy the Achei^s, according to the Contrac^ of the League: But if
using his Council he received the others into friendship, he should dispose
of all Morea at his pleasure. Moreover the time of the Election approaching,
he had an intent to cause one of the other Faction to be chosen. Wherefore he
began to solicit the King to be at Egia at the Common Assembly of the
Achei^s, as if he meant to go from thence into the Elienses Country. The King
persuaded by his Words, came unto Egia at the prefixed time: Eperate chosen
chief of the Acheins.
Where Appelles amazing the adverse party, in the end prevailed with great
difficulty. By this means Eperate was chosen Chief of the Acheins, and
Tymoxenes quite rejected, whom Arate had named.

After these things Philip drawing his Army from Egira, and marching by Patres
and Dimes, he went to a Castle, which the Contrymen call Mur, situated in
the Dimenses Country, and lately taken by Euripides, as we have formerly said.
As he hasted with great heated to yield it to the Dimenses, having his Army
ready in Battle, The Castle of Mur yielded to Philip.
the Garrison of Elienses was so amazed, as they presently ye^ded themselves
and the Castle, the which is not great in Circuit, but very strong by
Situation and Walls; For it had but two furlongs in Compass, but the VValls
had not less then seven Fathomes and a half in height. Philip delivering it
to the Dimenses presently, he ouer-ranne the Province to spoil it: After
which he put all to fire and Sword, and returned to Dime, laden with great
spoils. Apelles supposed that he had effected part of his dessigne, for that
the chief had been chosen according to his desire, he charge Arate again,
desiring to him into disgrace with the King; and raises a slander upon him
upon these causes.

Amphidamu^ Chief of the Elienses in the Borough which they call Thalam^,
being taken and sent with the other Prisoners, came to Olympia: And there he
began to seek (by the means of some) to speak unto the King: To whom when
he was brought, he told him that it was in his power to make the Elienses
embrace his Alliance and Friendship. The King persuaded with his Words, let him
go without ransom, with a Charge to tell the Elienses, that if they would
entertain his Alliance, he would deliver all their Prisoners without ransom,
and that he would preserve their Province from danger, suffering them moreover
to live in liberty, and that he would give them no Garrisons, nor pretend any
Tribute, but would suffer them to levy mercenary men where their Affairs
required. The Elienses hearing these offers, would not accept of them, although
they were great and profitable.

Appelles making this the occasion of his slander, The slander of Appelles.
goes to Philip, telling him that Arate and his Confederates kept no true
Friendship with the Macedonians, nor entertained the League sincerely: For it
was certain they had been the cause that the Elienses had not accepted the
Conditions of the Alliance which had been offered them: For at that time when
as he sent Amphidamus to Olympia, they had used speeches secretly unto him,
that it was not for the good and benefit of Morea, that Philip should be Lord
of the Elienses; and by this means the Elienses, disdayning the conditions of
Peace, observed their League with the Etoliens, and endured the Macedonians
War. This Speech being ended, Philip caused Arate with the Acheins to be
called, and Commands Appelles to speak the same Words in their Presence, the
which he performed boldly and without blushing: The accusation of Appelles
against Arate and the Acheins.
Finally, the King speaking not any thing, he said moreover unto them: And for
that Arate the King has found you ungrateful and deceitful, he has
resolved to return into Macedony, having first called the Achei^s, and
acquainted them with the occasion. The Answer of Arate.
Whereunto Arate answered: The King, said he, ought not to believe lightly;
but to consider well of the business, when they speak any thing against his
Allies and Friends, before he give credit to a slander. This is proper for a
King, and very profitable in all things. And therefore in this slander you must
call them that heard the Words, and let Appelles enter with them, and omit
nothing that may be necessary to discover the Truth, before it be revealed to
the Assembly of the Acheins. This answer was pleasing unto the King, saying,
That he would diligently search out the truth, they then departed.

But within few days after, when as Appelles could not find any proof of
those things which he had objected, there was by chance a great testimony
found of Arate his innocence: For whilst that Philip ruined the Province, the
Elienses having some suspicion of Amphidamus, had resolved to take him, and to
send him bound into Etolia, The which Amphidamus discovering, he steals away
secretly, and comes first to Olympia: But having certain news that Philip
stayed at Dyme to divide the Spoil, he went speedily unto him. As soon as
Arate had news of the banishment of Amphidamus from his own Country, he was
wonderful joyful, knowing that he had not committed any thing against the
Macedonians, and goes unto the King, entreating him to call Amphidamus: For he
was the man that could give best satisfaction in those things wherewith he was
charged, to whom the Words had been spoken: And that moreover he would
willingly deliver the truth, seeing that for the love of Philip he had (...)
Banished his Native Country, and that all his hope consisted in him only.

At whose words the King was moved, and calling for Amphidamus he found that
Appelles had falsely slandered him. Wherefore after that day he held Arate in
greater esteem and favor, but disliked the practice of Appelles; although he
were forced to endure this and many other things for the great Authority which
he held. But Appelles changed not his humor: Taurion dispossessed of the
government of Morea.
He deprived Taurion of the government of Morea, not taxing him with any
offense, but commending and holding him worthy to be in the Camp about the
King, for that he desired to put another in his place. The conditions of
Courtiers.
Behold a new invention of slander to wrong any one, not in blaming him but in
commending him. There is also found (but principally among Courtiers) a
malicious diligence accompanied with Envy and fraud, by a mutual Jealousy and
extreme Avarice. Alexande^ Chamberlain to King Antig^nus.


He did likewise endeavor to disappoynt Alexander the Chamberlain, and
affected the care of the Kings Person for himself, and finally to break all
the Order which Antigonus had left. Who had duly performed his duty in the
Government of his Realm and Son during his life: And dying he provided
wisely for the four: For he left a Will, by the which he set down an order
what the Macedonians should do, and what charges they should execute,
laboring to take away all occasions of Ambition and Discord, which might rise
in Court. He appointed Appelles to be Tutour to his Son, who had been at
the War with him: And he made Leonce Chief of the Soldiers which carried
Targets, and Megalee Chancellor, and Taurion Governor of Morea.

It is true, that Appelles at that time held Leonce and Megalee in his
Subjection, and was resolved to chase away Alexander and Taurion: To the end
he might supply their places in Person, or by his Creatures. The which
undoubtedly he had done, if Arate had not prevented it. But now he suffers
the pain of his folly and Covetousness: For within a short time after he
suffered that, which he labored with all his power to do unto others. But
we will forbear at this present to deliver the causes, making an end of this
Book, and we will endeavor in the following Book to set down every thing in
its place. After this Philip came to Argos, where he past the remainder of the
Winter with his friends, and sent back his Army into Macedony.

The end of the Fourth Book of Polybius.
THE FIFTH BOOK OF the History of POLYBIVS.
THe Year of Arate his Government being ended about May (for so the Acheins
measure the time) he left it, Eperate Chief of the Acheins and Dorimach^ of
the Etoliens.
and Epirate took it* And Dorimache was then Chief of the Etoliens. At the
same time Summer beginning, Hannibal was parted from Carthage with his Army,
for that the War grew ho^e betwixt the Romans and the Carthaginians, and made
have (passing Ebro) to go into Italy. Then the Romans sent Titus Sempronius
with an Army into Affricke, and Publius Cornelius into Spain. Antiochus and
Ptolomy having no more hope to decide their Controversy concerning Syria,
neither by Embassies nor meetings, had begun the War. And then King Philip
pressed with want of Victuals and money for his Army, caused the Acheins to
assemble by their Magistrates. But when as the people were met at Egia,
according to the custom of the Country, the King seeing Arate much
discontented for the affront which he had received from Appelles, at the time
of the Election, and that Eperate was disdained of them all, as a man simple by
Nature and sloathfull, and was held as a scorn, knowing also the treachery of
Appelles and Leonce, he began again to turn his affection to Arate. And
after that he had persuaded the Magistrates to refer their Diet to Sicyon,
he spoke courteously to old and young Arate, and persuaded them to continue in
their first affection, charging Appelles with all that had been done.
Whereunto they consenting, he presently after his entry into the Assembly,
obtained by their favor was necessary for his present affairs: for it was
ordered by the Acheins that they should pay unto the King thirty thousand
Crowns: Money and Corn delivered to Philip by the Acheins.
That is to say, three months pay for the Soldiers; and threescore and
eleauen mines of Wheat, (every mine being valued at five Quarters, a Comb and
a Bushel of London measure) and withal as long as Philip should remain in
Morea, he should have six thousand two hundred Crowns monthly. Which being
done* the Acheins returned every man to his Town. But winter being past, and
the Troops returned, the King thought it best to assail the enemy by Sea: for
he saw well that by this means he might enter their Country, and surprise
them on either side, and that they should not be able to succor one another,
as well for the distance that is betwixt them, and for the newness of the War
by Sea, as also for that they should be amazed at the sudden descent of
their Enemies: for at that time he made War against the Etoliens,
Lacedaemonians, and Eliens^s.

After this resolution, he drew together the Acheins Vessels and his own at
Leche, The nature of the Macedonians
a Port of Corinthe: Commanding that in the mean time, they should inure the
Soldiers to the Oar, wherein the Macedonians did him great service. Yo must
understand that they are excellent men at Land in a pitched field, and ready at
Sea in Combats of Surprise. Moreover, they have not their equals to Rampire
and Fortify: and they complain not of their pains in such affairs: Finally,
they are like unto the Eacides, whom Hesiodus brings in rejoicing more for
War then a Banquet. The King stayed at Corinthe with the Macedonians, being
busy in the preparation of the Sea Army. Appelles who could not alter the
Kings humor and disposition, The Conspiracy of Appelles and (...).
nor suffer any abatement in his credit, being full of disdain, he made a
Conspiracy with Leonce and Megal^e, which was, that they being present, should
hinder the Kings enterprises, when opportunity did serve; and that for his part
he would go to Chalcis to stop the Victuals that should come to the Kings
Army. When he had plotted this, he went presently thither, to put it in
practice against the King: wherein he kept his Promise, and forced him to
engage his plate and all the rest of his mooueables.

When as the Army at Sea was drawn together, and the Macedonians accustomed to
the Oa^e, and that the Soldiers had received Corn and Money, Philip set Sail
to Corinthe, and arrived three days after, having six thousand Macedonians,
and twelve Hundred Mercenaries. At what time Dorimache Chief of the Etoliens
sent Ag^laus and Scope unto the Elienses with twelve Hundred Candyets newly
levied. The Elie^ses fearing that Philip would come and besiege Cyllene, levied
Voluntaries with all speed, and likewise made a leuy of men within the City,
The forces which Philip left at Dyme.
doing their endeavors to fortify Cyllene. Philip advertised hereof, he left
at Dime the Mercenaries of the Acheins, and the Candyots which he had with
him, and some Horsemen Gauls, and about two thousand foot of the choice of
the Acheins, for the guard and safety of the place against the assaults and
attempts of the Elienses. And as a little before he had Written unto the
Messeniens, Epirates, Acarnaniens and to Scerdilaide, to meet him in
Cephalenia with their Equipage by Sea, he parts presently from Patres, and
sails directly into Cephalenia to the Borough of Prones. But when he saw it
difficult to besiege, and the Country straight, he past on with his whole
Army, and came to Palea: Where seeing the Region fertile in Corn, and in all
other manner of munition, and fit to feed his Army, he landed his men, and
planted his Camp near unto the Town Walls. He also drew his ships a shore,
and environed them with deep Ditches and strong Pallisadoes, fitting for their
defense. He likewise sent the Macedonians to forage, and himself went to
view the Town: and resolved to set up his Engines, and to make all necessary
preparations to force it, meaning to attend the succors of friends and Allies,
and to make the Town subject to his obedience: As well to deprive the Elienses
of the greatest benefit and commodity they had by Sea (for without doubt they
sailed into Morea by night, with the Cephalenian ships, and spoiled the Sea
Coasts of the Epirotes and Acarnaniens) as also to prepare this Town for his
Allies, as a retreat in the (...) Country.

Now for the Situation of Cephalenia, The situation of Cephalen^^a.
it lies within the shore of the Corinthian Gulf, looking toward the Sea of
Sycily, and bends toward the parts of Morea, which turn toward the North and
West, and likewise toward the Province of the Elienses, and the parts of
Epirus, Etolia, and Acarnania, which have their aspect toward the South and
East. Wherefore he resolved to do what possibly he might, to Conquer this
Island, for the place was very convenient to assemble the Allies, and well
seated to offend the enemies Towns, and for the defense of those of the
League. And when he saw that all the Quarters of the Town were environed,
partly with the Sea, and partly with steepy Rocks, and that there was only a
little plain which looks toward Zacinthe, he was fully resolved to plant
his Battery there, and to prepare and make all things necessary for the siege.

In the mean time there arrived fifteen ships of War sent by
Scerdilaide, saying, that for the present he could not furnish and make ready
any more, by reason of some mutinies and dissentions which had lately happened
in Sclauonia. There also arrived succors and supplies from the Epirotes,
Acarnaniens, and Messeniens, as he had ordained: For the Messeniens maintained
the rest of the War freely, after the taking of the City of Phigalee. When
as the King had prepared and made things necessary for the siege, and the
Engines of Battery were appointed in convenient places, he approaches them to
the Town encouraging and giving heart to his men: By whose means after they
had mined, they presently opened a Quarter of the Wall, the which was
underpropped with great pieces of Timber, so great is the experience and
knowledge of the Macedonians in such affairs. Then Philip approaching nearer
unto the Wall, he began to summon the besieged to yeilde. But upon their
refusal, they suddenly set fire on that part of the Wall, and ouer-threw it.
This being done he sent the Soldiers which carried Targets to make the
point, Leonce Tray^our to Philip.
being under the Charge of Leonce, commanding them to assail it and enter that
way.

Leonce remembering his Conspiracy, and finding an opportunity to put it in
execution, persuaded three young men of his followers, which marched before all
his Troops to the assault of the Town, that they should hinder the taking
thereof, winning the Captains of their acquaintance, and Charging very faintly
as if they were affraide. By this means they were shamefully repulsed and
beaten off from the assault having many Wounded and soar hurt: Although they
might easily have had the Victory, and have come off with a great deal of
honor. The King seeing the fear of the Captains, and the multitude that were
Wounded, raised the siege. And from that time he assembled his Friends and
Allies, holding a Council of that which he had to do for the future.

In the mean time Lycurgus entered into Messenia with an Army: And Dorimache
with half the Et^liens, falls into Thessaly: Ambassadors sent to Philip from
the Messeniens and Acarnaniens.
Wherefore Ambassadors come unto the King from the Acarnaniens and Messeniens.
He of the Acarnaniens entreated him to make a Descent into the Etoliens
Country, to the end he might draw Dorimache from his Enterprise, and that he
would spoil and consume all the Enemies Countries. He of the Messeniens
demanded Succors, showing that it was but a days journey from Cephalenia
unto Messena, a Northerly Wind blowing: And therefore Gorgon said that the
Voyage would be sudden and of great profit and gain. Leonce remembering his
Conspiracy, held for Gorgon, seeing plainly that by this means, Philip
should spend all the Spring in doing nothing: For the Voyage from thence to
Messena was easy, but the return impossible; for the Winds blew still
Northerly.

Wherefore it was apparent that if Philip past with his Army thither, he
should consume the rest of the Spring idly, and in the mean time the
Etoliens ouer-running Thessaly and Epirus, would put all to fire and Sword.
This was the reason why he Councelled this and such like things. But Arate was
of a contrary mind and opinion: For he was of advice that they should sail
into Etolia, and to make War first there: For he immagined that the time was
very fitting and convenient to spoil and ruin the Province, for that the
Etoliens were gone to the War with Dorimache. The King followed no more the
Council of Leonce in any thing, both for that the affairs succeeded ill in
the last siege, as for that he was resolved to embrace that of Arate,
considering the long experience and practice he had of his Wisdom* Wherefore
he wrote unto Eperate Chief of the Acheins that in holding the Legions
suddenly ready, he should succor and aid the Messeniens. And in the mean
time he parts from Cephalenia, and two days after arriues in the middle of the
night with his Army by Sea at Leucade: And from thence holding his course a
long the Sea of Ambracia, the which as we have formerly said, parting from
that of Sycily, extends it self into Etolia. And when he was come unto the
Marshes, he stayed there a little before day, and cause^h his men to feed and
refresh their weary bodies, commanding them to be ready without any Baggage.
Then he called his guides and inquires of the places and Towns, and of all
things else that were necessary.

At the same time Aristophantes arrived with a good Troop of Acarnaniens,
having a great desire to revenge the great and many outrages, which the
Etoliens had done them in former times. Wherefore receiving the Macedonians
willingly, they drew to Arms, not they only which were bound by the Law, but
even many old men. The Epirotes had no less desire to do the like for many
reasons: But they could not assemble in time for the great extent of the
Province, and the sudden coming of Philip, Dorimache, as we have formerly
said, had half the Etoliens with him, and left the rest in several parts of
the Country to be ready, if any new accident should happen.

The King parting after noone from the Fenns, and having left sufficient force
to guard the Baggage, when he had marched about three score Furlong^, he
planted his Camp. Where after he had stayed some certain space, and had
caused his Soldiers to feed, and refresh themselves being formerly wearied,
he continued his course: So as marching all night, The River of Acheloe.
he arrived before day at the River of Acheloe, betwixt Conope and Strate,
seeking to surprise Ther^e by a way which they did not regard. Leonce and
Megalee foresaw for two reasons that the King would prevail in his
enterprise, and that the Etoliens would have the worst. The one was, that the
Macedonians descent was sudden, and much more speedy then they could
immagiue: The other, that the Etoliens fearing not that Philip passing by those
rough and difficult Countries, would be unprovided. Wherefore considering these
things, and mindful of their Conspiracy, they advised Philip that in seating
of his Camp near to the River of Acheloe, he should refresh his Army for the
last nights labor: Hoping that by this means the Etoliens should have time to
seek for succors, from their friends and Allies.

But Arate holding the time very precious to effect the Kings Resolution, and
that Leonce and Megalee like Traitors sought how to stop and prevent his
passage, he intreates Philip not to loose so fair an opportunity. Following
whose advise, the King beginning to be discontented with Leonce and Megalee,
he proceeded in his journey: And passing the River of Acheloe he marched
directly unto Therme with his whole Army, putting all to fire and Sword: On the
left hand he, left the Towns of Strate, Agrinia, and Testia: And upon the
right hand he left Conope, Lysimachia, Tryconia, and Philea. Being come to the
Town of Methape, which lies betwixt Tryconia and the Fenns, about threescore
furlongs distant from Therme, the Etoliens fled. Wherefore he took it, and
put into it a Garrison of five hundred men, Methape taken by Philip.
to the end he might make use of it for a Retreat, as well in his passage as in
his return by those streights: For the Country especially about the Fennes is
Mountainous, difficult, and environed with thick Forests.

By this means the way is very troublesome, and in a manner inaccessible. Then
he put the Voluntaries in the foreward, and after them the Sclanonians: The
order which Philip held to pass the streights of Therme.
Then followed the Targeteers and the Leginaries, and in this manner he marched
thorough the streights, having the Candy^^^ in the Rear, and the Thraciens on
the right Wing for a support. In regard of the left side, the Fennes did
fortify them about thirty Furlongs in length or rather more. When he had
speedily past the streights, and taken the Borough of Pamphia, and had put a
Garrison into it, he proceeded toward Therme, which is not only difficult and
inaccessible, but has also deep Valleys round about it: so as in some places
the way is dangerous and narrow, with an Assent about thirty furlongs high. The
which having soon past, for that the Macedonians had carried themselves like
brave men, Therme spoiled by the Macedonians.
he came in the dead of the night unto Therme, a very rich and likewise a
fair Town: Where planting his Camp, he abandoned the Country and the
Houses of Therme to the spoil of the Soldiers, the which were furnished not
only with Corn, and all other manner of munition, but with the richest
mooueables of the Etolieus: For every man carried thither the richest stuff
he had, for that yearly they kept Faires and Feasts there, and they made
their Election: And withal they held this place for the safest and most surest
of all the rest, whereunto no man durst approach; being such by Nature, as it
seemed to be the Fort of all Etolia.

Wherefore the Houses (considering their long peace) were full of all Wealth,
not only those that were near unto the Temple, but in all other places. They
rested this night within the Town, being inricht with spoils. The next day
they made choice of the best, and set fire of the rest. They also took the
best Arms, which hung up in their Cloisters or Galleries, and changed some,
setting fire of the rest, being above fifteen thousand. You must understand
that hitherto they managed the War justly, and according to its Laws. But I
know not what to say of that which follows: For they ruined all the Cloisters
and stately Houses, and ouer-threw all the ornaments which had been made with
great care and Charge, calling to mind that which the Etoliens had done, at
the Temple of Jupiter Dodonee. They not only consumed the building by fire,
but they ruined all the Walls: And withal they ouer-threw and beat in pieces
above two thousand Images, yet they would not touch those which had the figure
or inscription of one God. They had graven upon the Walls* when as the
dexterity of Same, the son of Chrisogone (who had been nursed with the same
milk that the King) began to show it self, This vulgar Verse: Thou scest
the God, which will terrify him with his Dart.

The King and his Friends thought they had done well, and that by means they
had revenged with the like recompense the execration which the Etoliens had
made unto God. But for my own part, I am of another opinion; and every man may
judge whither I have reason, calling unto mind the example of Kings of the
same Line, and not of other Races. The prudence of Antigonus toward the
Lacedaemonians:
When as Antigonus had chased away Cleomenes King of the Lacedaemonians and was
Lord of Sparta, he forbear to use any outrage or cruelty to the Lacedaemonians,
and carried himself not only like a moderate and temperate man, but was also
gracious unto his Enemies: And returned into his Country leaving the
Lacedaemonians in their full liberty, doing them many favors, both in general
and particular. So as they not only termed him at that time their Benefactor,
but likewise after his Death they called him their Savior: So as he not only
purchased Praise and immortal glory with the Lacedaemonians, but likewise
withal other Nations, Moreover Philip who first enlarged the Realm of
Macedony, and made the name of his Race great, he did not win the Athenians
(after that he had Vanquished them in Cheronia) so much by Arms, as by his
mild course of living, and the sweetness and gentleness of his Nature.

It is true, that he Vanquished those that came against him to Battle: and
had won the Athenians and their City: Not by a continuance of his Choler
and indignation against the Vanquished, but in fighting with his Enemies until
occasion were offered to show his mildness and Virtue: The ^urtesie of Philip
the father of Alexander to the Athenians*
For he sent unto the Athenians (who had done him many wrongs) their Prisoners
free, and caused such as had been slain in the Battle to be interred,
soliciting the Athenians afterward, to carry away the bones unto the
Sepulchers of their Ancestors. And afterward sending back the said bones,
and many slaves freed, being lightly attired with Antipater, he decided a
great business by his industry: So as the untamed hearts of the Athenians,
being Vanquished by his magnanimity, they were always after obedient unto him,
and ready to satisfy his desires. What did Alexander, Alexander the Great.
whose Choler was so great against the Thebanes, as he made all the Citizens
slaves: and razed their City unto the ground, reducing some of their Princes
into servitude, sending others into Banishment, and taking all their Wealth?
Yet his rage and fury did not so far exceed, as to force and violate the
Temples of the immortal Gods, using all possible diligence, to keep his men
from committing any disorder and villainy. And when he past into Asia, to
revenge the outrages which the Persians had done unto the Grecians, he
punished the men which had committed them, according to their deserts: but he
touched not the Temples: Although the Persians had most wronged the Grecians
therein.

This Philip should have considered to the end he should not be so much
esteemed, The blame of Philip.
the Heir of the afore-sayd Kings in their Sovereignty, as in life and
Conversation. He did what possibly he could in his life time, to show
himself to be of the blood of Alexander and Philip: But he did not care to
imitate them, nor to do as they had done. Wherefore leading another course of
life, he also left another opinion of him with all Nations. For as he
labored to yield the like unto the Etoliens for their outrages, and to purge
evil by evil, he thought not to offend. Calling to mind the outrages which
Scope and Dorimache had done unto the Temple of Jupiter Dedonee, he did not
perceive that he committed the like error, straying wonderfully from reason.
The Laws of War.
It is true that the Laws of War, permit to use cruelty against enemies, and
to ruin and spoil their Castles, and Gardens, Towns, and Burroughes,
Ships, Fruits, and such like: To the end that their forces may be weakened,
and his own fortified and augmented. But it is the Act of a furious and mad
man, to ruin those things that are neither any way profitable or commodious
unto himself, nor hurtful unto his enemy: As Temples, Cloisters, Images, and
such like.

It is not sitting that a good and virtuous man, should persecute his Enemy to
his total ruin. It suffices only that the faults of Delinquents may be
purged and Corrected; and not to ruin with the unjust those things which have
not offended, nor to seek to destroy and pull down with the Enemy that which
has committed no outrage. The practice of a Tyrant.
It is the practice of a cruel Tyrant, to Reign in doing evil, forcing his
people thorough fear, and living in mutual hatred with his Subjects. The Duty
of a King.
But the duty of a King is to do good unto all men, governing his people
without fear, with bounty and Clemency: And living with his Citizens in
mutual love and friendship. But we shall see more plainly the great error
which Philip committed, if we shall truly consider the opinion which the
Etoliens might have had of him, if he had not ruined the Cloisters and Images,
nor carried away the Ornaments of the Temple. I conceive that being culpable
of the things, which had been committed at the Temple of Jupiter Dedonee, they
might have seen plainly that Philip could have done the like, and yet it had
been cruelty, the which notwithstanding in show he had done with reason: And
that he would not imitate and follow their Wickedness in regard of his Bounty
and Magnanimity, they would undoubtedly have condemned themselves for their
faults, in commending and approouing Philip with great admiration, for that
like a magnanimous King, he had carried a respect unto the Gods, and executed
his Choler upon them.

There is no doubt, To vanquish an enemy by mildness.
but it is better to vanquish an Enemy by mildness and Clemency, then by force
and might: For by Arms necessity forces men to obedience; but mildness
draws them to it willingly. By the one faults are corrected with loss: And by
the other offenders amend and reform themselves without damage. Moreover in
the one the Soldiers attribute unto themselves the greatest part of the glory,
which is a great matter: But in courtesy, gentleness, and mildness, all the
Victory is given unto the Commander. So as happily considering his age, they
will not attribute to Philip the greatest part of those things which he had
done, but to those that were in the War with him, of which number were Arate
and Demetrius of Phare. The which would be easy to say unto him, although he
had not been there present, and that this outrage done unto the Gods, had
been by the advice of one of them. It is true, that this was done contrary to
the course of Arates life, during the which he never did any thing rashly, nor
without consideration: whereas Demetrius did always the contrary. There are
likewise particular presumptions thereof, whereof we will speak when it shall
be fit.

Philip then (returning to out discourse) parts from Therme, laden with all
spoils: and returns the same way he came, causing the Baggage to go before,
with those that were best armed: and placing the Acarnaniens in Rearward with
the Mercenaries, he made haste to pass the streights. He feared that the
Enemies relying upon the advantage of the place, might charge him in the Rear.
The which was presently put in practice, for that the Etoliens having drawn
together three thousand men, never approaching near unto Philip, whilst he
held the high Country, made their Ambushes in scattred places under the
command of Alexander. But when the Rearward began to march, they entered into
Therme, charging them upon the Tail. The Etoliens charge Philips Rearward.
When as the allarum was given, the Etoliens relying much upon the advantage of
places, pursued them with great courage. But Philip having wisely provided for
the future, had left the Sclauonians in Ambush under a certain Hill, with many
others that were armed with Targets. Who seeing the pursuit of the Etoliens,
they marched against him with great fury, and presently slew six or seven
score, and took as many: the rest saved themselves by infamous and shameful
flight.

The Acarnanians and Mercenaries, after they had gotten the victory, Paphia
burri^.
they presently set fire on Paphia: and when they had past the streights with
great speed, they found the Macedonians. Phillip seated his Camp near unto
Methape, staying for his men. Methape razed by Philip.
And parting from thence after he had razed it, he comes to a Town called
Atres. Then continuing his way for three days together, he wasted the whole
Country: The day following he planted his Camp near unto Conope, where he
stayed the next day. After which he marched at the break of day toward
Strate, where he past the River of Acheloe, and lodged within a Bows shoot
of the Town, drawing the Inhabitants often to skirmish. For he had been
advertised, that there were three thousand Etolien foot within it, and about
four hundred Horse, with five hundred Candiots. When as no man durst come
forth, he raised his Camp again, and at the first took his way toward the
Fenns, to recover his ships. But when as the Rear of his Army began to pass
the Town, The Etoliens made a sally out of Strate.
a number of Etolien Horsemen make a sally and charge them. They were
presently followed by a Troop of Candiots, and many Etoliens came to succor
their Horsemen, the Acarnaniens being in danger, turned head against the
Enemy, and the Combat began betwixt them. The Victory was long in suspense:
Finally, Philip sent the Sclanonians to succor the Mercenaries. Wherefore the
Etoliens being vanquished, fled of all sides. Those which the King had sent,
pursued the greatest part of them to the Gates and walls of the Town, whereof
there were a hundred slain in the chase: the rest durst no more show
themselves in Field. By this means the Kings Army retired without danger to
their ships.

After which Philip planted his Camp, and gave thanks unto the Gods for the
good fortune which he had obtained according to his desire: And making a
Banquet, he invited all the Captains. It seemed true, that he had past by
dangerous places, into the which no man before him durst lead an Army. But he
not only past them, but did what he would, and returned without loss or
danger. Moreover, Megalee and Leonce (discontented at the Kings good fortune
having sworn to Appelles to hinder all his enterprises: which they could not
effect, for that all things succeeded happily to Philip) were present at this
Supper sad and pensive: so as they discovered easily unto the King, and to the
other assistants what their hearts were. But when the Tables were taken away,
and they were well inflamed with their free drinking, they returned to their
Tents, seeking for Arate. Whom when they met upon the way, Megalee and Leonce
do outrage to Arate.
they used many injurious speeches against him, and began to assault him with
stones. But for that much people came of either side to succor them, there
grew a great mutiny in the Camp. Philip hearing the Trumpet, sent men to
inquire, and to pacify this tumult. To whom Arate declaring the business as
it had past, and referring himself to the testimony of those that were
present, he returned presently unto his Tent. Leonce retired secretly out of
the press. Philip causes Megalee and Crinon to be called, with whom he was
much offended. And when as they answered him proudly, that they would never
cease until they had been revenged of Arate: Megalee and Crinon condemned by
the King in 12000. Crowns.
The King incensed therewith, condemned them presently in twelve thousand
Crowns, and to be committed to Prison. Three days after he calls for Arate,
and intreates him not to care, promising him to give order for all things when
as opportunity shall serve. Leonce advertised of the imprisonment of Megalee,
came with force to the Kings Tent: immagining that Philip (considering his
youth) would alter his sentence for fear. Being come before the King, he
demanded what man was so hardy to lay hand on Megalee, and who had committed
him to Prison. But when as the King answered boldly, that he had done it,
Leonce went away amazed, and in a manner sighing.

Philip setting sail with his Fleet, came presently to Leucade: where after
he had appointed men to divide the spoil, he called all his friends to judge
Megalee. There Arate laid before them the outrages of Leonce, the great wrongs
he suffered in the time of Antigonus, the Conspiracy he made with Appelles, and
the hinderance he gave at Palea: To all which things he produced witnesses.
Whereunto when Megalee nor Crinon could not answer any thing, The condemnation
of Magalee and Crinon.
they were condemned by all the assembly. Whereupon Crinon remained a Prisoner:
But Megalee was delivered upon Leonces caution. This was the estate of Appelles
and his Confederates: whose Fortune was not such as they expected: For hoping
to tertifie Arate, and to do what they would with the King, and by this means
to prevail in their wills, all things succeeded contrary.

In the mean time Licurgus retires out of the Messeniens Country, having done
nothing worthy of memory. Afterward parting from Lacedemon with an Army,
Licurgus takes the Town of Elea.
he took the Town of Elea, and besieged the Fort, whereinto the Citizens
were retired: where after he had stayed there some time, and seeing his labor
lost, he returned again to Sparta. And when as the Esienses over ran the
Country of the Dimenses, some Horse men which were in Ambush, and come to
succor them, put them easily to flight, and slew a good number of Gauls,
taking Prisoners those of the Towns of Polymede of Egia, Agisipolis and Diode
of Dime. Dorimache was gone in the beginning with an Army only of Etoliens,
thinking that he might safely ouer-run Thessaly, and by this means draw Philip
to raise his Siege from Palea. But being advertised of the preparation of
Chrysogones and Petrea to come and ^ight with him, he durst not enter into the
Plain, but always kept the top of the Mountains with his Army. And when he
had news of the coming of the Macedonians into (...), ^e l^aues Thessaly
presently to go and succor his Country: where being advertised of the Kings
retreat, not knowing what to do, and disappointed in all his enterprises, he
remained sad and discontented.

The King at his departure from Lencade with his Fleet, having spoiled and
wasted the Seacoasts, landed at Corinthe with his Army, Philip comes to
Corinthe.
leaving his ships at Leche. Then he sent Letters to all the allied Towns of
Morea, to advertise them of the day when they should come in Arms to Tegee.
Which things being thus ordered, without making any long stay at Corinthe, he
parted with his Army: and passing by the Country of Argos, three days after
his departure, he came to Tegee: whereas after he had received the Acheins
which were there assembled, he proceeded in his course, passing secretly by the
Mountains, he labored to enter the Country of Sparta, before the
Lacedaemonians should be advertised. Where having marched four days by the
Deserts of the Mountains, he came to those which were right against the City:
Then leaving Menelaie on the right hand, he drew to Amycle. The Lacedaemonians
seeing the Army pass by their City, Menelaie.
they wondered at this strange accident, Amycle.
and being terrified with this sudden fear, they knew not what to do: For
they were amazed at the valiant exploits which they said Philip had lately done
at Therme, and throughout all Etolia. And there was a certain brute amongst
them, that Lic^rgus was sent to succor the Etoliens. As for Philips sudden
descent into the Country of Sparta, no man had ever thought of it, and the
rather for that his age seemed worthy of some contempt. Wherefore matters
succeeding contrary to all hope, The great diligence of Philip.
the world had reason to fear: for Philip mannaging the War with greater
courage and policy then his age did bear, he terrified his Enemies. And namely
(as we have said) he parted from Etolia, and p^ssing the Gulf of Ambracia in
one night, he came to Leucade, where staying two days, and parting the third
early in the morning, he arrived two days after at Corinthe, having spoiled
the Sea coasts of Etolia, and from thence continuing his course, he came within
nine days to the Mountains which are right against Sparta, near unto
Menelaie: so as they could hardly believe it when they saw him. The
Lacedaemonians then terrified with the greatness and newness of this accident,
knew not what Counceli to take, nor to whom to have recourse.

The day following Philip camps near unto Amycle. It is a place in the
Spartains Country, The situation of Amycle. The Temple of Apollo.
abounding with all sorts of Trees and wealth, twenty Furlongs from Lacedemon:
Where the Temple of Apollo stands, being the most excellent of all the rest of
the Province, as well for Art as wealth, being seated in that part of the Town
which locks toward the Sea. Three days after when he had spoiled the whole
Country, he went to the Castle of Pyrhus, where he stayed two days, and
wasting the whole Country, he put all to fire and sword, and planted his Camp
near unto Carnia. From whence he suddenly marched to Assina, from whence
(after he had attempted in vain to take it by affault) he raised the Si^ge,
and wasted all the rest of the Country, marching directly to Tenare: From
thence ^^^ning his way* he draws to the Lacedaemonians Haven, The Port of
Gythia.
which they call Gythia: where there is a safe Port, about thirty Furlongs from
the City. The leaving it on the right hand, he planted his Camp near to
Elea: which is (if we consider it well) the greatest and best Country of the
Spartains: The which he abandoned to the Soldiers, who put it to fire and
sword. He also spoiled the Acriens and Lenques, and the whole Country of the
Boys.

The Messeniens having received Letters from Philip, were no less diligent
then the other Allies, who levied men presently within their Towns, and sent
the most able unto the King, to the number of two thousand Foot and two
hundred Horse. But the length of the way was the cause they came not to Tegee
before the Kings departure. And therefore doubting in the beginning what they
should do, fearing likewise that it would seem, they had willingly made this
delay for the suspicion they had of them in the beginning, they resolved to
enter the Spartains Country, to the end they might join speedily with the
King. The Castle of Olympes.
Being come unto the Castle of Olympes, which is seated near unto the
Mountains of the Argiues and Lacedaemonians, and had set themselves down
foolishly and without consideration: for they did not fortify themselves
neither with Ditches nor Pallisadoes, neither did they choose a convenient
place: But relying on the good will of the Inhabitants, they lodged simply
near unto the Walls. Licurgus advertised of their coming, takes the
Mercenaries, and part of the Lacedaemonians, and goes directly to the Enemy.
Where ar^iuing at the break of day, he marches in Battle against the
Messeniens: who perceiving him, abandoned all, The Messeniens surprised by
Licurgus.
and fled by heaps into this Castle. Licurgus recovered the greatest part of
their Horses and Baggage, but he took not a man: he only slew eight
Horsemen. The Messeniens after this defeat returned by the Argiues Country.
Lycurgus proud of this good fortune, being returned to Sparta, uses all speed
to levy men, and to prepare all things necessary for the War, laboring that
Philip might not return by the Spartains Country without a Battle or
danger. The King parts with his Army from Elia, spoiling all as he passes,
Philip parts from Elia spoiling all as he passes.
and brought all back on the fourth day to Amycle. Licurgus having resolved
with his Friends and Captains to give Battle to the Macedonians, goes out of
the City, and recouers the places about Menelaie with about two thousand
Foot, commanding them of the City to be watchful, and when they should see a
sign, they should speedily make sallies by diverse places, taking their way
toward Eurota, which is a River near unto the City. These were the actions
of Lieurgus and the Lacedaemonians at that time.

But to the end that what we say, may not seem obscure by the ignorance of
places, we must declare the nature and situation: The which we will endeavor
to do throughout our whole work, always joining places known to the
unknown: For the difference of Countries do many times deceive in War, as
well by Sea as Land. Our desire is, that all men should know not only the
things, but how they were done. And therefore the description of places is
necessary in all things, but especially in War: neither may we blame the use
of Fe^s, Seas, and Islands for signs: and sometimes of Temples, Mountains,
Towns, and certain Countries: nor finally the difference of circumstances:
For these are things common to all men. It is also the means to advertise the
Reader of things unknown, as we have said. The situation of places whereof we
speak is this. Although that Lacedemon seems to stand in a plain, yet it
has here and there rough and hilly places: Near unto which toward the East,
passes this River which they call Erota, The River of Erota.
the which for the most part of the year is not to be waded thorough, by
reason of its great depth. The Mountains wherein Menelaie stands, are on the
other side of the River toward the City, which look toward the Winters
East: the which are tough and difficult and wonderful high: And bend over the
Plain which lies betwixt the River and the City, by the which it takes its
course along the foot of the Mountains. The King was of necessity to pass
that way, having the City on the left hand, and the Lacedaemonians ready and in
Arms: And on the right hand the River, and those which were in the Mountains
with Licurgus.

Matters standing in this estate, the Lacedaemonians bethought themselves of a
stratagem, by the which in breaking of a Damme, they should drown all the
Plain betwixt the City and the foot of the Mountains, so as neither Horse nor
Foot should be able to pass. By this means they saw the King should be
forced to lead his Army by the foot of the Mountains: the which he could not
do without great danger: for that he should be forced to extend his Army in
length, and not united and close, and to march a slow pace. Philip seeing this,
assembles his Friends, and was of opinion, that he must first chase away
Licurgus from the places which he held. Wherefore he takes in his company the
Mercenaries, the Targeteers, and the Sclauonians, and began to march directly
toward the Mountains to pass the River. Licurgus understanding of the Kings
resolution, put his men in Battle, and persuades them to do their duties in
fighting, and withal he makes a sign to them of the City, as he had
promised. Which done, the Soldiers presently sally forth, putting the
Horsemen on the right wing. When Philip came near unto Licurgus, he sent the
Mercenaries to give the first charge, of whom the Lacedaemonians had the better
at the first, by reason of the advantage of the place and the manner of their
Arms. But when as he had sent the Targeteers with the Sclauonians to succor
the Mercenaries, there was so great an alteration, as the Mercenaries seemed to
have the victory in their hands: The ^light of the Lacedaemonians.
And the Lacedaemonians amazed at the fury of them that were well armed, fled
presently, as despairing of their safety. There died about a hundred men: and
some few more taken: the rest recovered the City.

Licurgus taking his way by inaccessible woods, arrived the night following at
the City. When as Philip had put a sufficient strength of Sclauonians into the
Mountains, he returned with them that were lightly armed, and the Targeteers
to his Army. At the same time Arate bringing back the Army from Amycle, was not
far from the City* with whom the King (passing the River) joined, and appointed
them that were well armed to make head against the Horsemen at the foot of the
Mountain. When as the Lacedemonian Horsemen had charged the Macedonians, and
the targeteers had fought valiantly, and withal the King had performed his duty
well, they were in the end repulsed shamefully to the gates of the City.
Afterward the King past Eurota safely, and was forced to settle his Camp in
the night, at his coming forth of the streights, in a place which was very
strong by nature. Finally, the King had an humor to ouer-run the Country
near to Lacedemon. In the beginning of the said streights upon the approaches
from Teges by the firm Land to Lacedemon, there is a place about two Furlongs
distant from the City, under the which the River has its course: the which
imbraceth the City and the side of the River, with a steep and inaccessible
Mountain. The foot of this Mountain is a slimy and watery Plain, as well
for the entry as the going forth of an Army: so as whosoever plants his Camp
there, in seazing upon the Hill, seems to camp safely, and to be in a sure
place, in regard of the Town which is opposite, having under its power the
entry and issue of the streights. Philip having seated his Camp there, he
causes the Baggage to march the next day, and draws his Army into the Plain,
in view of the Town. Where after he had stayed some time, he wheels about
like a Bow, and takes his way toward Tegea. And when he came into the
Country where that famous Battle was fought betwixt Antigonus and Cleomenes,
he planted his Camp there.

Three days after when the places were well viewed, and the Sacrifices
performed in two Mountains, whereof the one is called Olympe, and the other
Eua, he went on his way, and came to Tegea, where he stayed some time to divide
the spoil: Then suddenly he returned to Corinthe with his Army. Thither came
Ambassadors from Rhodes and Chios to the King, Ambassadors from Rhodes to
Chios.
to mediate a peace betwixt him and the Etoliens. To whom the King giving a
gracious reception, he told them that he had long, and at that present was
ready to embrace a peace if the Etoliens held it fit, and that they should go
unto them, and consider of the means thereof. From thence he went to Leche, and
prepared himself to imbarke, desiring to decide some pressing affairs at
Phocis.

At the same time Leonce, Megalee, and Ptolomy thinking yet to terrify the
King, and by that means to repair their errors, calls the Targeteers, and
those whom the Macedonians term, the Kings Troop: whom they inform that they
are daily in great danger without any recompense, or any share in the spoil,
according to the ancient custom approved by all men. By means whereof they
persuade these young men to assail and spoil the Lodgings of the Kings
principal Minions, and that falling upon the Kings own Lodging, they should
overthrow the Gates and covering. The which when they had done, A mutiny
against philip and his men.
there grew a great mutiny in the Town. Philip hearing the noise, makes haste
to return from the Port: And drawing the Macedonians together, he pacifieth
them partly with words, and blaming them for the things which they had done.
And when as the fury increased, and that some were of opinion to chase out of
the Town those that had been the cause of the mutiny, others saying that this
fury of the Commons ought to be pacified without any greater punishment, the
King dissembled his conceit for the present: And being as it were persuaded by
them, he returned to the Haven, after he had given them many admonitions,
knowing well the heads of this villainy: But he thought good to defer it to a
more convenient time. Leonce and his Faction despairing, Leonce and his Faction
retired to Appelles.
for that none of their enterprises succeeded, retired to Appelles, and caused
him to come from Cal^is, giving him to understand that they could not do any
thing without him, for that the King crossed them in all things. Appalles had
carried himself in Calcis with greater liberty then was fit: for he gave them
to understand that the King was young, under his Guard and without any power,
terming himself Lord, and sole Governor of all things. Wherefore all the
Princes of Macedony and Thessaly adrest themselves to him in all affairs.
Within a short time likewise all the Cities of Gre^ce had forgotten the King
in their elections, honors, and offices: Only Appelles managed all affairs.
The King being long before advertised thereof, was much discontented and
incensed: whereunto Arate spurd him on continually, although he dissembled his
conceit so well, as no man could discover it. Appelles ignorant of the Kings
resolution, and thinking to obtain any thing when he should present himself
unto him, came from Calcis to Corinthe. When he came near the Town, Leonce,
Ptolomy, and Megalee Chief of the Targeteers, and other Soldiers that were
best armed, gave him a great reception, persuading the youth to go and mere
him. He came then to the Kings lodging in pomp, being attended on by the
Captains and Soldiers. When as he sought (as he was wont) to enter suddenly,
a certain Usher told him, that he must have patience, for that the King was
busy for the present. Appelles wondering at this new manner of proceeding,
remained pensive for a time, after which he departed discontented, and without
judgment: all the rest likewise abandoned him, so as he returned alone to his
lodging, having no other Company but his own Family. O how suddenly are men
advanced to great honors, The misery of Courtiers.
and in as short time reduced to greater miseries: especially such as frequent
Princes Courts. They are like unto Lots, which they usually give in public
Counsels. For as those which a little before were were given in Copper, are
suddenly turned into Gold, according to the will of those that dispose of
them: So they which follow the Courts of Princes, are according to the Kings
will and pleasure, happy one day, and miserable the next. When Megalee knew
that he had sought the assistance of Appelles in vain, he trembled for fear,
and intended to fly. After that day Appelles was called to Banquets and other
honors that were done: but he never entered into the privy Council, nor
assisted at the ordinary resolutions which were taken for affairs.

Soon after the King returned to Phocis, leading Appelles with him: Whereas
having speedily effected his will, he returned again to Elatia. During this,
The flight of Megalee.
Megalee flies to Athens, leaving Leonce caution for him for twelve thousand
Crowns. And when as the Chief of the Atheniens would not receive him, he
returned to Thebes. The King being parted from the Country which lies about
Circe, he sailed to the Port of Sicyonia with the Targeteers and his Guard.
From whence coming suddenly to the Town, he preferred the lodging of Arate
before the other Princes, making his continual abode with him, commanding
Appelles to sail to Corinthe. When as news came in the mean time of the
flight of Megalee, he sent Taurion with the Targeteers whom Leonce had under
his charge to Triphalia, as if he had been forced thereunto by some great
affairs. After whose departure, he causes Leonce to be apprehended. The
taking of Leonce.
The Targeteers advertised hereof, sent an Embassy to the King to entreat him
that if Leonce had been taken for any other thing then for the caution, that
the judgment might not be given before their return: Otherwise they should
think themselves contemned, and in disgrace with the King. The King pricked
forward by the importunity of the Soldiers, he put Leonce to death sooner then
he had resolved.

During the which, the Ambassadors of Rhodes and Chios returned from Etolia,
having agreed upon a Months truce: and saying that the Etoliens were ready to
treat a peace with the Knig, appointing moreover a day when he should meet
with them near unto Rhie: Being confident that they would do whatsoever he
pleased to have a peace. The The King accepting the truce, sent Letters to the
Allies, willing them to send Ambassadors to Patres, to confer with him on
the conditions of the peace. Then he parts from Leche, and arriues two days
after at Patres. At the same time they bring unto him Letters from Phocis,
which Megalee himself had written unto the Etoliens: by the which he solicits
them to maintain the War courageously, for that the King could not long
continue it for want of victuals and other munition. Moreover, they contained
many scandalous and opprobrious speeches against the King. The which being
read, the King conceiving that Appelles had been the cause and the beginning
of these practices, Appelles taken Prisoner.
causes him to be taken and brought to Corinthe, with his Son and Concubine:
And he sent Alexander to Thebes, giving him charge to bring Megalee, Megalee
kills himself.
to the end his caution might be discharged. But when as Alexander thought to
execute his charge, Megalee prevented him, and slew himself. In a manner at
the same time, Appelles, his Son, and his Concubine were put to death, The
death of Appelles and his Son.
receiving the worthy punishment of their wicked lives, and namely for the
outrage done by them to Arate.

Although the Etoliens desired peace, being discontented with the long War,
and seeing their affairs to succeed otherwise then they expected: for that
conceiving they had to deal with a Child (considering that the King had
neither age nor experience) they found him by his deeds to be a man excellent
in Council and Execution, and themselves to be Children, as well in their
particular as public affairs: Yet advertised of the mutiny of the
Targeteers, and of the death of Appelles, from whom they expected some great
alteration in the Kings Court, they came not to Rhie at the day appointed.
Philip holding this a good occasion to entertain the War, solicites the
Ambassadors of the Allies which were there assembled, not unto peace (for the
which they had been called) but to War. Then parting from thence with his
Fleet, Philip sails to Corinthe.
he came to Corinthe, and sent all the Macedonians to winter in their houses.
Parting from Corinthe, he sailed by the Euripe to Demetriade: there he put
Ptolomy to death, (who only remained of the Conspiracy of Appelles and Leonce)
by the judgment of the Macedonians.

At the same time Hannibal had past the Alps, and was in Italy, and had
planted his Camp near to the River of Poe, not far from that of the Romans.
Antiochus after he had conquered many places in Syrria, had brought back his
Army to winter. Licurgus King of the Lacedaemonians fearing the Magistrates, The
flight of Licurgus into Etolia.
had fled into Etolia: for the Magistrates hearing a false report, that he
would attempt some reuolte, came in the Night to his house with a Troop of
Youth: whereof being formerly advertised, he fled with his servants. When as
Philip in the depth of Winter had retired into Macedony, and that Eperate
Chief of the Achei^s was made a scorn to the Youth of the Town, and to the
Mercenaries, and was not obeyed, nor made any preparation for the defense of
the Country, Pyrrhee (whom the Etoliens had sent to the Elienses for their
Captain, accompanied with thirteen hundred Etoliens, and a thousand Foot, as
well Soldiers as Burgesses of the Elienses, and with two hundred Horse, being
in all about three thousand men) advertised thereof, spoiled not only the
Countries of the Dimenses and Pharenses, but also of Patres: Finally, The
Mountain Panachaique.
he pitched his Camp near unto the Mountain Panachaique. which looks
toward Patres, and wasted all the neighbor Region. The Towns thus vexed,
being no was succored, they paid the Tax and charge unwillingly: The
Soldiers would not be drawn to succor them, for that their pay was delayed.
By this mutual trouble the Acheins affairs were in bad case: And the
Mercenaries retired by little and little: the which happened by the negligence
of the Commander. And when the affairs of Acheia stood in this estate, and
that the time of the Election was come, Old Arate made Chief of the Acheins.
Eperate left the government, and the Acheins in the Spring made choice of old
Arate. Thus past the Affairs in Europe.

But seeing that in the distinction of times, and the order of actions, we have
found a convenient place for this Subject, let us pass to the Wars of Asia
under the same Olympiade: Relating first (as we have promised in the beginning
of our work) the War of Syrria, which was betwixt Antiochus and Ptolomy. And
for that I know well that this War was not ended at such time as I left to
treat of the Actions of Greece, The Au^hou^s good intention
and being resolved to follow this perfection and distribution, to the end the
Readers may not be deceived in the true knowledge of every time: I hope to
leave a sufficient instruction for those which desire to know it, in setting
down at what time in this present Olympiade, and of the deeds of the Grecians,
the beginning and ending of other actions happened: Moreover, we esteem
nothing better nor more honorable in this Olympiade, then not to confound
things, to the end the discourse of the History may be plain and easy: And
that distinguishing matters by order as much as may be possible, until that
coming to other Olympiades, we may yield to every year its actions according
to order. And for that we have not resolved to write them all, nor the actions
of all places, and that we have undertaken with greater affection to write
Histories then our predecessors have done; it is fitting we should be
careful to express them in order, and that the general work of the History
may with its parts be plain and apparent. Wherefore we will now write the
Reigns of Anti^chus and Ptolomy, reducing things from far, and pursuing our
discourse from a beginning which may be notorious, and which squares with that
which we have to say.

For those ancients which have said, that the beginning is a moiety of the
whole, they have undoubtedly taught us, that in all things we should use great
diligence, An order required in all things.
that the beginnings may be well ordered. And although some think they have
used a high Style, yet in my opinion they do not seem to speak with truth.
Without doubt you may boldly say, that the beginning is not only a moiety of
the whole, but has also a regard to the end. Tell me, how can thou make a
good beginning, if thou have not first comprehended in thy understanding the
end of thy Enterprise? And if thou know not in what part, to what purpose,
and the cause why thou will make it? For how can a History have order, if at
the beginning or entrance thou do not deliver plainly, from whence, and
how, or wherefore thou art come unto the relation which thou do presently
make of actions? Wherefore they which will have things heard and understood
fully, think that the beginnings do not only serve for the one half, but
also for the end: wherein they employ themselves with great care and industry:
the which I will carefully endeavor to do. Although that I am certain that
many of the ancient Historiographers have bin confident to have done the like,
when as they pretended to write all generally, and to have written a longer
History then their predecessors: of whom I will forbear to speak much, or to
name them: Among the which I excuse Ephorus, the first and only man which has
attempted to write a general History. But I will use no longer discourse, nor
name any of the rest: But I will say that some Historiographers of our time,
comprehending the War betwixt the Romans and Carthaginians, in three or four
small Pages, brag publicly that they have written all. It is certain that
for as much as there has been many and great exploits performed in Spain,
Affricke, Stoily and Italy, and that the War of H^nnibal has been the
greatest and longest, except that of Sicily. We must also understand, that the
excellency of this war has been the cause that we have all cast our eyes
upon it: and the rather for that we were in doubt of the end. This is a War
which every man (be he never so dull and simple) knows. Yet some of those
which have handled the History, writing only superficially the actions of some
times, yet they imagine they have comprehended the deeds of the Grecians and
Barbarians. Whereof the cause is, for that it is an easy thing to promise many
great things by mouth, but it is not easy to bring a great enterprise to an
end. And therefore this other is common, and (as a man may say) in the hands of
all men, so as they have courage: But the last is rare, and few men attain
unto it. Finally, the arrogance of some, which glorify themselves too much,
and commend their Writings, has caused me to make this digression. But now I
return unto my enterprise.

When Ptolomy, surnamed Philopater, had seized upon the Empire of Egypt, after
the death of his Father, Ptolomy King of Egypt.
and had made away his Brother with his adherents, (thinking there was no more
cause of fear in his Family, for the before said crime:) and that for
strangers, Fortune had in good time assured all things, considering the death
of Antigonus and Seleucus: to whose Realms Antiochus and Philip had succeeded,
who were scarce eighteen years old) he abandoned himself to pleasures, whose
example the whole Country followed. For this cause his own people made no
esteem of him. And not only his subjects, but also the rest which managed
the affairs both within and without Egypt. The Lords of the lower Syrria, and
of Cypres, have made War against the Kings of Syria, as well by Sea as Land.
They also which hold the chief Cities, places, and Ports which are along the
Seacoasts, from Pamphilia unto Hellespont, and the Country of Lysimachia,
confined with the Principalities of Asia and the Islands. And as for Thracia and
Macedony, the Princes of Enos and Maronia, and of Towns that were more remote,
had always an eye over them. Wherefore employing their forces, to assail
foreign Princes, far from their Realms, they were not troubled for the
Empire of Egypt. Their chief care then was for the Wars of foreign
Countries. In regard of this King of whom we speak, there were many in a
short time, who for his infamous loves, and ordinary excess in drinking, had
an eye upon him and his Realm. The enterprise of Cleomenes upon Ptolomy.
Amongst the which Cleomenes of Lacedemon was the first. He made no alteration
whilst that the other King lived, who was surnamed Benefactor: as if he were
persuaded, that during his life he should want no means to reconquer his
Realm.

But when as after his death, the affairs required his presence, Antigonus
being also dead: And that the Acheins with the Macedonians made War against
the Lacedaemonians, which they maintain according unto that which he had
advised them in the beginning, being allied to the Etoliens: Then he was
forced to think of his departure from Alexandria. Wherefore he first
solicited the King to send them back with an Army and sufficient munition. And
when as the King would not give ear unto it, he entreated him at the least to
suffer him to depart with his family, for the time was now come, when as great
opportunities were offered to recover his Fathers Realm. The King neither
considering the present, nor foreseeing the future, for the causes above
specified, like an ouer-weening man, and without judgment, never made any
esteem of Cleomenes. But Sosibius (who chiefly governed all the affairs of
the Kingdom at that present) holding a Council with his Friends, was not of
advice to suffer Cleomenes to go with an Army at Sea, and munition, disdaining
foreign affairs, and holding this charge lost, considering the death of
Antigonus: fearing likewise that this death being so fresh, the way might be
made easy to stir up some War: And there being no man found to resist
Cleomenes, he would soon make himself Lord of all the Cities in Greece.
Finally, they feared he would become their Enemy, considering the present: in
regard of the Kings manner of life, which was well known unto them. With this
disadvantage, that Sosibius saw the Provinces of the Realm to lie one far
from another, and to have great opportunities of reuolte. An Army near unto
Ephesus.
For there was near unto Samos a good number of Vessels, and great Troops of
Soldiers near unto Ephesus. Wherefore he did not hold it fit to send back
Cleomenes with an Army for the afore-sayd reasons. But when they considered
that it would not be profitable for their Commonwealth, to let go so great a
personage, who afterward might prove their open Enemy, there was no prevention
but to retain him by force. The which notwithstanding the rest disliked,
conceiving that there would be great danger to keep the Lion and Sheep in one
fold. Sosibius was of the same opinion for that or the like cause.

At such time as they resolved to take Mega and Beronice, Mega. Beronice.
and that they feared to bring their enterprise to a good end, in regard of the
fierceness of Beronice, they were forced to draw together all those which
followed the Court, and to make them great promises if they prevailed. Then
Sosibius knowing that Cleomenes wanted the Kings fuccours to recover his
fathers Realm, and that he had found him by experience to be wise and
politic in great affairs, he discovered his whole secrets unto him,
propounding unto him great hopes. Cleomenes seeing him pensive, and fearing the
strangers and Mercenaries, persuaded him not to care: promising him that the
Soldiers should not trouble him, and that moreover they should give him great
assistance to bring his enterprise to an end. And when as the other stood in
admiration, do thou not see said Cleomenes, that there are about three
thousand men of Morea, and a thousand Candyots, all which will bring us where
we please? Having these, whom else do thou fear? What? The Companions of
the War of Syrria and Caria? And when as Sosibius liked of his words, he
entered more boldly into the Action. And afterward considering of the Kings
soolery and negligence, he often called to mind this Speech, and had always
before his eyes the Courage of Cleomenes, and the affection the Soldiers bare
him. Wherefore considering this, at the same time he gave the King and his
other familiars to understand, that he must seize upon him, and keep him
close and private. For the working and effecting whereof, he used this means.

There was one Nicagorus a Messenien, a friend to the father of Archidamus,
King of the Lacedaemonians, betwixt whom there had formerly been some
friendship. But at such time as Archidamus was chased from Sparta for fear of
Cleomenes, and fled to Messena, he not only gave him a good reception into
his House with his friends at his first coming, but he always lived with him
afterward during his flight, so as there grew a great and strict familiarity
betwixt them. When as after these things Cleomenes made show of some hope of
reconciliation with Archidamus, Nicagorus began to treat of the Conditions
of peace. When the accord had been made, and that Nicagorus had taken the
faith of Cleomenes, Archidamus returned to Sparta, assuring himself of the
conuentions of Nicagorus, whom Cleomenes meeting upon the way slew, Archidamus
^layne by Cleomenes.
suffering Nicagorus and his company to pass away. In regard of Nicagorus, he
carried the countenance of a very thankful man, for that he had saved his
life: But he was vexed in his Soul, and incensed for the deed, for that he
seemed to have given the occasion.

This Nicagorus had failed unto Alexandria some little time before with Horses:
whereas going out of the ship, he met with Cleomenes, Panthee, and Hippite,
walking upon the strande: whom Cleomenes perceiving, saluted courteously,
demanding what business had brought him thither: To whom he answered, that he
had brought Horses. I had rather said Cleomenes, thou had brought Concubines
and Bawds: for these are the things wherein the King at this day takes his
chief delight. Then Nicagores held his peace smiling. When as within few
days after he discoursed by chance with Sosibius by reason of the Horses, he
related unto him that which Cleomenes had arrogantly spoken of the King. And
seeing Sosibius to hear him willingly, Nicagorus (...) seth Cleomenes.
he acquainted him with the cause of the ^pleene he bare him. When as Sosibius
knew him to be wonderfully incensed against Cleomenes, he did him great
courtesies for the present, and promised him great favors hereafter: Finally
he wrought so, that imbarquing he left Letters concerning Cleomenes, which a
servant of his brought after his departure, as sent from him. The which
Nicagorus performing, the servant used speed to go unto the King, assuring him
that Nicagorus had given him the Letters to carry to Sosibius. The Tenor
whereof was, That if Cleomenes were not soon dispatched with an Army at Sea and
munition, he would raise some troubles within the Realm. Sosibius embracing
this occasion, Cleomenes taken Prisoner, and put in Guard.
gave the King and his Council to understand, that this must not be heard with
a deaf ear, and that he must seize upon Cleomenes and give him a Guard. The
which being put in execution, they gave him a spacious House, where he lived
with Guards, differing therein from other Prisoners, for that he had a larger
Prison.

Cleomenes considering this, and having little hope for the future, resolved to
hazard all, and yet without hope to effect any thing, and being in extreme
despair, but desiring to make an honorable Death, and not to suffer any thing
that might seem unfitting for the greatness of his Courage. I immagine
likewise that he had an humor, and had propounded to himself that, which
commonly great Spirits do in these Terms: That in dishonor I do not basely
fall,
Courage my heart, let us bravely venture all.


When as he had observed the Voyage which the King made to the Town of
Canope, The bold enterprise of Cleomenes.
he caused it to be bruited among his Guards, that he should be soon set at
liberty. Wherefore he made a Banquet to his people, and sent offering and
Garlands of Flowers to the Guards. And moreover store of Wine. Whilst they
made good cheer, and were all drunk, he goes out of the House with his
Friends and Servants, their Swords in their hands in the open day, the which
the Guard never perceived. And when as marching in this manner, they met with
Ptolomy in the Market place, Ptolomy ^layne by Cleomenes.
they ouer-threw him from his Chariot and slew him: Whereat all those that did
accompany him were amazed at the greatness of the fact. Finally they began
to cry Liberty unto the people. But when as no man stirred, considering the
greatness of the Crime, they turned head and assailed the Fortress, as if the
Gate had been ouer-throwne by the Treason of the Soldiers, and that they
should presently take it. But for that the Guards (foreseeing the danger,) had
Rampred up the Gate: in the end they slew themselves being frustrated of their
hope, and dyed an honorable Death, worthy of a Spartaine Courage. Behold the
end of Cleomenes a man of great Eloquence in speaking, and of great Resolution
in War: Who it seems wanted nothing that did savor of a King but a Realm.

After Cleomenes, Theodote borne in Etolia, and Governor of base Syrria, soon
after resolved to have intelligence with Antiochus, and to deliver him the
Towns of his government: For that he partly contemned the King for his
negligence and idleness, and partly the Courtiers, growing distrustful, for
that a little before he had propounded a good advice unto the King, The^odote.
as well for other things as to resist Antigonus, seeking to make War against
Syrria: Wherein he was not only distasteful, but they caused him to come to
Alexandria, where he was in danger of his life. Antiochus accepting this offer
gladly, the matter came to effect. But to the end we may withal declare this
Race, seeking out the Empire of Antiochus, let us make our entry summarily from
those times, to come unto the War whereof we mean to Treat.

You must understand that Antiochus the younger was Son unto Seleucus
surnamed Callinice. Who after the death of his Father, Antiochus So^ to
Seleucus.
when the Realm fell to Seleucus his elder Brother, lived in the beginning
privately in his House, in the high Country of the Realm: But his Brother
being slain in Treason (as we have said) after he had past Mount Tauris with
an Army, he took the Empire and Reigned, giving the government of all the
Province, which lies on this side Tauris, to Acheus and Molon: And to his
brother Alexander, the high Countries of his Realm: So as Molon should have
Media, and his brother Persida. These contemning the King for his Age (for he
was scarce fifteen years old) and hoping to draw Acheus to their Conspiracy,
fearing moreover the cruelty and Treachery of Hermes, who then had the
Government of the whole Realm, resolved to abandon the King, and to change the
Estate of the Provinces which they held. Hermes was borne in Caria, to whom
Seleucus the Kings brother had given the government of the Realm, relying in
him from the time they past Mount Tauris. Wherefore being advanced to this
supreme Authority, he enuled all those which had any power in Court, being
outrageous and cruel by Nature, condemning innocents at his pleasure: and
favoring wicked men and Liars.

Finally, he was cruel and rough in his judgments. But among other things he
watched an opportunity to kill Epigene, who was Lieutenant General of Seleucus
his Army: For that he found him a man of great Eloquence and great execution,
having favor and Authority in the Army. And although he plotted this in his
mind continually, yet he kept it secret, seeking some occasion to effect his
enterprise. Finally when as the Council was assembled to confer upon Melo^s
Rebellion, and that the King had commanded every man to deliver (...) opinion,
and that Epigene beginning first had said, that this business was not to be
held of small importance, and that it was necessary the King should approach
the Country, holding himself ready when time should require, and that by this
means Molon would give over his enterprise, the King being near with a great
Army, or if he did persist in that which he had begun, the people would
deliver all the Traitors into the Kings hands. The Speech of Hermes against
Epigene.
Then Hermes enraged, said unto him^ Epigene having long concealed thy Treason,
thy disloyalty has in the end been discovered in this Council: Laboring to
deliue^ the Kings person into the hands of Traitors. Having spoken thus, and in
some sort showed his slander, he left Epige^e. Finally showing a countenance
rather of importune indignation, then of any manifest hatred, he persisted in
his opinion not to lead an Army against Molon, fearing the danger: For that
the Soldiers were not inv^ed to War, and that they should use all diligence
to make War against Ptolomy, holding that sure by reason of the Kings
negligence and idleness. By this means when he had stopped the mouths of all
that were in the Assembly for fear, he sent Xenon, Theodote, and Hermioly with
an Army against Molon: Giving King Antiochus to understand, that he should
presently undertake the War of Syrria: Thinking by this means, that if the
King were roundly beset with War, he should never be punished for the
offenses which he had formerly committed: Neither should he loose his
Authority for the necessity and continual dangers wherein the King should be
daily.

Wherefore in the end he brought a counterfeite Letter, as sent from Acheus to
the King. The Tenor whereof was, that Ptolomy had solicited him to enter into
War, to get the Principallity, and that he would furnish him with money and
munition, if he would take the Crown upon him, and that it was apparent to all
the World that he pretended to be a King: The which in truth he seemed to
be, but he did not yet enjoy the name of a King, nor wear a Crown, for the
envy which Fortune procured him. Antiochus giving credit to these Letters,
resolved to make a descent into Syrria: But whilst he stayed in S^leucia, and
was careful to bring his enterprise unto a good end; Diognet Chief of the
Army at Sea, arrived from Cappadocia, which is ^eere unto the Euxine Sea,
bringing with him Laodicea, the Daughter of Methrid^^es, who was promised to
Antio^hus. This is that Methridates, who bragged that he was descended from
one of the seven Wise men of Persia. She was received with royal pomp,
Antiochus marries L^^dicea.
and Antiochus married her presently: From thence he went to Antiochus, leaving
the Queen Regent of the Realm: and applied himself wholly to raise his Army.

At that time M^l^n seeing the people ready to do what he pleased, Mol^n goes
to field with an Army.
as well for the hope of the gain which he propounded unto them, as for that
their Commanders were terrified by the Kings false and counterfeite Letters:
Having also his brother Alexander for a Companion in this War: After that he
had gotten all the neighbor Towns by the corruption of their Governors, he
goes to field with a great Army, and plants himself near unto the Camp of
the Kings Lieutenants. At whose coming Xenon, and Theodote being terrified,
they retired to the next Towns. Molon being Lord of all the plain of
Appolonia, and running where he pleased, the whole Province brought him great
store of Victuals and munition. He was before terrible in regard of his great
power: Neither had he any will to loose the occasion, for that that all the
Kings Races for Horses were in Media, with infinite store of Wheat and Cattle.
In regard of the force, height and Wealth of that Region, we cannot speak
sufficient. Media lies about the midst of a Asia: It excels in greatness and
height all the other Regions about it. It is very powerful in people, The
Situation of Media.
being discovered toward the East, by the Desert Countries, which lie betwixt
Persida and Parasia. It ioynes and commands the Ports of the Caspien Sea: So
does it in the Mountains called Tapyreins, which are not far from the
Hyrcanien Sea. But as for the Southern Regions, it looks to Messopotamia, and
Appolonia, joining unto Persida, which lies before Mount Sagre, which has a
passage of a hundred Furlongs long: The which having many enclosures, is
divided by Valleys and certain Plains, with the Cossees, Corbrenes, Carchins,
with diverse other Barbarous Nations inhabit, being excellent in matters of
War. Finally it ioynes to the Satrapiens upon the West, who differ not much
from those which inhabit Pontus Euxinus. And as for the part toward the
North, it has the Elimees, Ariaraces, then the Caddusiens and Mantianes.
Finally, it is situated above the Countries which near unto the Black Sea
join to Pontus. It is separated from Nusia by a multitude of Mountains upon
the West: and yet there is a plain well furnished with Towns and Burroughes.

When as Molon was Lord of this Region, having a kind of a Realm, and was
terrible even before this Rebellion, in regard of the great power of the
Country, he showed himself then more intolerable toward the Asiens: For
that at his arrival the Kings Lieutenants had abandoned their Camp, and that
matters did not succeed in the beginning according to their hopes. Wherefore
in passing Tygris, Molon indeauoured to besiege Seleucia. But when as Zeux^^
had stopped the Passage, by staying all the Boats, he retired: The Army being
at Ctesiphon, he made provision of all things necessary to pass the winter.
The King advertised of Molons Army, and of the flight of his Lieutenants,
resolved to lead his Army against him, leaving Ptolomy. But Hermes remembering
his enterprise, sent Xenoete an Achaian, with an Army against Molon, saying
that Lieutenants must fight with Rebels, and the King with Kings in person.
Keeping the King thus in awe by reason of his Age, he went to Apamia: where
he drew together an Army, and from thence marched suddenly to Laodicea. From
whence the King parting with all his Troops, and having past a Desert, he
came into a place which the Inhabitants of the Country called Marsia, Liban.
seated betwixt the two Promontories of Liban and Antiliban, Antili^ban.
which restrain it, and in the narrowest straight is miry and moorish: where
also grow the Arromaticall Canes.

Moreover there ioynes to the one side of the said streights a Town, The Town
of Br^ches^
which they call Broches, and on the other that of Gerre: Betwixt the which
there is a rough and difficult way. The King marching for some days by these
streights, came in the end to Gerre: Whereas when he saw that Theodote of
Etolia had taken it, and Broches, and that he had sortified all that part of
the streights, which were near unto the Fens, with Ditches, and Pallisadoes,
and men for the defense thereof, he labored at the first to assail them. But
when it seemed he lost more then he got, by reason of the disadvantage of the
place, and that Theodote made a show to be of Ptolomies party, he gave over
the enterprise. And when he had news of the retreat of Xenoete, and of the
attempt of Molon, he resolved to part from thence, and to give order for his
own affairs.

Xenoete being (as we have said) sent General against Molon, he had a
greater power then was immagined, and used his friends with great arrogance,
and his enemies with too much cruelty. When he took his way to Seleucia with
his Army, calling unto him Diogene Governor of the Country of Susian, and
Pythias of the red Sea, he marched against the enemies, and planted his Camp
near unto theirs, the River of Tygris being betwixt them. During the which
there were many came swimming from Molons Camp, aduertising him that the
greatest part of his Army would yield unto him, if he past the River, for that
they hated him, and loved and affected the King. Xenoete persuaded by their
words, prepares himself to pass Tygris; and making show that he would make
his passage at a certain place, where as the Water makes an Island, he made no
show of any preparation. Whereupon whilst that Molon made no account of his
enterprise, he prepared Boats speedily, and taking the best of his Horsemen,
and the Chief of all the Footmen of his Army^ he left Zeuxis and Pythias for
the Guard of the Camp; and past his Army safely in the night by Boat
fourscore furlongs beneath Molons Camp: During the which he seated his Camp
in a safe place, which was environed by the River for the greatest part, and
the rest assured by Fens and Moors adjoining.

When as Molon was advertised hereof, he sent his Horsemen before to hinder
their passage, or to defeat them that were past. Who approaching near to
Xenoete, they annoyed themselves more (for that they knew not the places) then
they did the enemy: For entering into those Moorish Fens, they could do no
service, and many perished. Xenoete hoping that if he approached near unto
Molon, he should draw many of his men unto him, marched a slow pace a long the
river side, setting down near unto the enemy. At what time Molon leaving his
Baggage in the Camp, retired by night, doing it either by policy or for some
distrust he had of his men: The Retreat of Molon.
and takes his way toward Media. Xenoete thinking the enemy had been fled,
terrified with his coming, and ill assured of his Soldiers, gains first the
enemies Camp, and calls unto him all his Horsemen, and the rest which he had
left with Zeuxis. Then calling them all together, he persuades them to be of
good hope for the future, considering the flight and despair of Molon.

This propose ended, he commanded them to go to their Repast, and to be ready
in morning to pursue their enemies: But all the soldiers hearts puffed up with
the present success, and stuffed with all sorts of Booty, betook themselves
wholly to gormundizing and drunkenness, and in the same sort of sloathfulnesse
and negligence, that by custom begets such things, passed the night. Now as
Molon had gained an aduantagious place, and that he had refreshed his men also,
he advanced against the enemies, and finding them overcome and ^^^zed on by
sleep and Wine, he assaulted their Camp with extreme fury, even in the
break of day.

Xenoete astonished with so great and unlooked for a business, could by no
means awake his people for their drunkenness, but they were killed by the
enemies resisting by small Companies; and so the greatest part were defeated
within the Camp drowned in sleep, the rest throwing themselves into the
River, striving to pass it by swimming: but the most of them perished for all
that in the end. Xenoete his Army defeated and spoiled.
It was a pitiful thing to see men so affrighted, for all without any regard
or consideration throwing themselves into the mercy of the Waves, and to pass
therein, and drive before them the Carriages and Baggage, as if they thought by
the aid of the Water, they could gain or save their Camp, but it came to
pass that in one self same time, Sumpter horses, Arms, and dead bodies were
borne by the River, as if also a Vanquisher, a thing both fearful to relate,
and also horrible to behold.

After that Molon had thus suddenly gained the Camp of the enemies, and had
passed the River without danger, because there was none to hinder his passage,
and that Zeuxis had taken flight, as it were, before the enemies approached,
he took also the Fort which was there on the River. After this good fortune,
he came into Seleucia with his Army: the which he took suddenly, in respect
that those who were with Z^^xis were astonished at his coming, having
abandoned the Town with Diomedon Governor of Seleucia: And after having ran
over all the Province, he brought under his obedience all the Towns of the
high Country without finding resistance: and from thence having Conquered the
Empire of all the Country of Babylon, and all the Country about the Red Sea,
he arrived unto Susa, taking the Town upon his first arrival, and after he
had given many assaults to the Fortress because Diogene was there retired, and
that he could not force^, he desisted from his enterprise and raised the
siege, he returned into Seleucia with his Army: and there, after he ha^
Garrisoned his men of War for some time, and had encouraged them unto the
Wars, he with a great heart undertook to lead them out of the Country, and
to Conquer in a small time all the Province that i^ from Tygris unto the Town
of Europe and Mesopotamia, even unto Dura.

Antioch having (as we have heretofore said) these news, were in fantasy to
leave the War in Syrria, and to provide for this other Country with an
extreme diligence: they Assembled therefore those of their Counsel, and as
they had commanded that every one should freely give his advice touching the
War of Molon, and that Epigone should be made fit, saying that long sithence
things should have been considered and looked unto, because the enemies should
not have their courages so great to undertake such things, because of their
good success: To whom nevertheless they ought ^ow to give order with all
their endeavor and study, for some speedy course to preue^^ all future danger.

Then Hermes incensed again, began to use proud and injurious speeches without
reason: He invented false slanders against Epigene, beseeching the King not to
leave the War of Syrria so inconsiderately. Finally he grew into such a rage,
as he offended many and discontented Antiochus. They could hardly pracifie his
fury, although the King used what means he could to reconcile them. In the
end when the advice of Epigene seemed the best unto the assistants, it was
resolved in Council that the Army should march against Molon, and that there
they should make the War.

Hermes seeming presently to have altered his advice, said that all the World
must observe that which the Council had decreed, and performed his duty to
make provision of all necessary things for the managing of War. When the
Troops were assembled at Apamia, and that there was a munity and a great
discord grown amongst the common Souldies: A mutiny in Antiochus his Camp.
Hermes finding the King amazed and much troubled, he assured him to pacify
the rage and discontent of the Soldiers, and to divide and share the Corn
quietly among them, if he would promise him never to carry Epigene with him in
any exploits of War: For that they could not perform any thing of importance
in an Army, being at so much difference and so incensed one against another.
And although the King disliked this, and was very much discontented at his
motion, for that he knew by experience that Epigone was a man of Council, and
active in Affairs of War, yet to prevent the present, he sent him suddenly
away: doubting that being circumuented by the promises of Hermes, he should
not be master of himself. Which being done, all the rest of the Kings
Council grew into great fear. The Troops also receiving what Corn they
desired, changed their affection, and followed Hermes, except the Cyrrastres:
Who being six thousand men, mutined and abandoned the Kings service: Who
afterward did him many affronts in his War at several times. Yet in the end
they were defeated by a certain Captain of the Kings party, and the greatest
part of them slain: the rest yielded afterward unto the King.

Hermes having made the Kings friends his own by fear, and the Soldiers by
his bounty, The practice of Molon against ^pigene.
he marched with him and his Army. He laid a plot agianst Epigene, with the
help and consent of Alexis, who at that time was Captain of Apamia; and
writing letters, as if they had bin sent from Molon to Epigene, he corrupted
one of Alexis servants with great promises: who went to Epigene, to thrust
these Letters secretly among his other Writings. Which when he had done, Alexis
came suddenly to Epigene, demanding of him, if he had received any Letters
from Molon: and when he affirmed no, the other was confident that he would
find some. Wherefore entering into the House to search, he found the Letters,
and taking this occasion slew him. These things happening thus, the King
thought that he was justly slain. And although the rest of the Court and of
his friends were much grieved at this sudden disaster, yet they dissembled
their sorrow for fear.

When as Antiochus was come unto Euphrates, he marched with his army unto
Antiochia, and stayed at Michdionia about the midst of Dec^mber, desiring to
pass the ^oughnesse of the Winter there: where staying about forty days, he
went unto Liba, where he called a Council. And when as they consulted of the
way which they should hold to find Molon, and from whence and how they might
recover Victuals, (for at that time he made his abode in Babylon) Hermes was
of opinion that they should keep their way upon this side the River of
Tygris, and along the Banks; doubting and not a little fearing the Rivers of
Luque and Capre. Zeuxis was of another opinion; but he durst not speak nor
declare his mind plainly, remembering still the death of Epigene.

But when as the ignorance of Hermes seemed apparent to all the assistants, he
with some difficulty delivered his advice, that they must pass Tygris, as well
for many other difficulties which are on this side, as for that they must of
necessity, after they had past certain places in marching six days journey
by a Desert Country, came unto a Region which they call Diorex, where the
passage was not safe, for that the enemy had seized thereon: And that moreover
the return would be dangerous, especially for want of victuals. If the King
likewise did pass Tygris, all the people of Appolonia, transported with joy
would come unto him, who at this day obeyed Molon, not for any affection, but
through necessity and fear: And withal they should have abundance of
victuals, by reason of the fertility of the Country; and the passage of Media
would be shut up for Molon, so as of necessity he should be forced to come and
fight: Or if he fled, his Troops would soon yield unto the King. When the
advice of Zeuxis had been allowed in Council, they presently past the whole
Army with the baggage in three places. And marching from thence unto D^re, they
raised the siege, (for one of Molons Captains had some few days before
besieged it) and afterward continuing on their way, and having past the
Mountains which they of the Country call Orie, in eight days they came into
Apolonia.

At the same time Molon having news of the Kings coming, and not holding
himself assured of the S^sians and Babilonians, being lately made subject
unto him and by surprise, fearing moreover that the passage of Media was stopped,
he afterward resolved to pass by the River Tygris speedily with his whole
Army, making haste to gain the Woods which bend toward the playnes of
Apolonia, for that he had great confidence in his Slingers, whom they call
Cyrtles. When he approached near these places, from the which the King
parting with his Army from Apolonia was not far, it happened that the
forerunners of either side, lightly armed, met upon a Hill, where they
skirmished. But upon the approach of both Armies, they began to retire, and the
two Camps lodged within forty furlongs one of another.

When night came, Molon considering that a battle by day with the King would
be dangerous for him, not relying much upon his men, he resolved to assail
Antiochus at midnight. Wherefore he made choice of the ablest men of his
whole Army, and takes his way by unknown places, resolving to charge the enemy
from the higher part: But being advertised upon the way, that ten of his
Soldiers had stolen away in the night, and retired unto Antiochus, he gave
over his enterprise. So as taking another way, he returned to the Camp at the
break of day, the which was the chief cause of great trouble in his Army: For
they awaking with this sudden and short return of their Companions, they
were so terrified and amazed, as they were in a manner ready to fly and
abandon their Camp. Molon when the truth was known and well perceived,
pacified this terror and amazement what he could, in so short a space,
although it in some part increased still.

The King being ready to fight, draws his Army to field at the break of day,
Antiochus puts his Army in Battle.
and on the right Wing he sets the Lances, under the Command of Ardis, a man
of great experience in the War. To whom he gave for a supply the Candyots
his Allies, and after them the Gauls and Rhigosages: who were followed by the
Soldiers of Greece, and finally by a great battalion of Foote-men. In regard
of the left Wing, he gave it to the Allies, which were all on horseback. He
likewise set the Elephants in Front betwixt the two Wings, being ten in
number. In regard of the supplies of Horse and Foot distributed on either
Wing, he gives them charge to wheel about, and to compass in the enemy, as
soon as the Battle should begin to charge.

After all this he encourages the Soldiers, telling them in few words what
was necessary for the present: And he gives to Hermes and Zeuxis the leading of
the left Wing, and takes the right unto himself. On the other side Molon
draws his Army to Field with great difficulty; and puts it but ill in
Battle, by reason of the disorder which had happened in the night. Yet he
divided his Horsemen in two wings, thinking the enemy had done the like,
placing the Targetteers and the Gauls with others that were of most apt
courage, great experience and best Armed in the midst of the Horsemen: The
order of Molons battle.
putting the Archers and Slingers upon the two Wings, without the Troop of
Horsemen, and in Front were placed all the Carriages and Bill-men. He gave the
leading of the left Wing unto his brother Neolaus, and him self takes the
right.

This done, the two Armies marched: Molons right Wing was loyal and faithful
unto him, charging Zeuxi^ with great Courage and fury. But when as the left
Wing drew somewhat near unto the King, it retired to the enemy. This
happening, Molons Troops fainted suddenly: And the Kings Army grew more sto^
and courageous. But when as Molon saw and well perceived himself thus
betrayed, and environed by the enemy, thinking and immagining of the Torments
which he must endure, The death of Molon.
if he fell alive into their hands, he slew himself. The like the rest did
which had been Traitors unto the King, who recovering their Houses by flight,
slew themselves.

When as Neolaus had escaped from the Battle, and was retired unto Alexander
Brother to Molon in Persis, he slew the mother of Molon and his Children:
After whose death he slew himself, persuading Alexander to do the like. When
as the King had spoiled the enemies Camp, he commanded that the body of
Molon should be hanged upon a Cross, Molon Crus^c^fled.
in the most eminent place of Media, the which was suddenly performed by them
which had the Charge: who after they had carried it to Callonite, crucified it
near unto the Town of Zagre.

When he had given great admonitions to Molons Army, and pardoned them, he sent
men to Conduct them into Media, and to give order for the affairs of that
Province. As for himself, he retired to Seleucia. Hermes continuing still in
his resolution, condemned the Seleucenses in six hundred thousand Crowns for
that they had revolted, banishing the Diganes: and put many to death in Prison
by the Sword. But the King pacifying his rage, entreated the Burgesses
courteously, and drew from them for a punishment of their reuolte, only
fourscore and ten thousand Crowns. These things thus pacified, he made
Diogene his Lieutenant General in Media, and Apolodorus in the Province of
Sus^s; and sent the Chancellor Tychon Lieutenant of his Army, into the
several Countries of the Red Sea, there to lie in Garrison upon any sudden
occasion which should happen. This was the end of Molons reuolte, and of the
War which followed.

The King glorious of this good fortune, and desirous to terrify the Barbarous
Princes his Neighbors, to the end they should not presume hereafter to succor
his Rebels with men and Victuals, marches against them with his Army: Antiochus
goes against Artabazanes.
And first against Artabazenes, who was more powerful then any of the other
Princes, and nearer to his Cities. At the same time Hermes feared to enter
into the high Country for the eminent danger, and desired (as he had from the
beginning) to lead the Army against Ptolomy. But when as certain news came of
the birth of the Kings son, Antiochus has a Son.
he found this Voyage profitable for him, if Antiochus should chance to be
slain by the Barbariains: For that being left Tutour unto the son, he
should be Lord of the whole Realm. All being thus resolved, they past Mount
Zagre, and ouerranne the Province of Artabazanes, which ioynes to Media, being
separated from it by a Mountain, and on some parts comes to the Pontique Sea
on that side of the Country which is about Phasi^: joining also to the
Hyrcanien Sea. Moreover it abounds in all things necessary for the War. It
happened that the Persians kept this Principality, when in the time of King
Alexander, they made no account or esteem of it.

Artabazen^s being amazed at the Kings coming, Artabaza^es makes an accord
with Antioch^^.
and broken with Age, thought good to yeilde unto Fortune, and to agree with
the King, upon such conditions as he pleased. When the accord was made,
Apolophanes the Physician, whom the King loved much, seeing Hermes abuse his
Authority too arrogantly, was very careful for the King, and in great fear
for those which were about him.

Wherefore after he had expected the opportunity of time, he comes to
Antiochus, and intreates him to prevent the presumption and impudency of
Hermes, and not to suffer it any longer, least he fall into his brothers
inconvenience: Apol^phanes advice to Antiochus.
for it was not far off. Finally, that he should speedily provide for his
safety, and for that of his friends. Antiochus liked well of his Counsel, for
that he hated and feared Hermes. The King thanked him, for that he had not
feared to speak unto him of things which concerned his safety. Apolophan^s
also seeing that he had not been deceived in the opinion which he had
conceived of the King, grew afterward more bold and hardy. For the rest,
Antiochus Counseled him to be advised for his own good, and his friends, not
only by words, but also by effect: And as he said, he was ready to do all they
advised to that end: He made show that the King had a great disease in his
eyes, and must endure the pain some days: until that time he had gotten
leisure to make ready their enterprise. They used also power to go and advise
with their friends touching this Affair, under the shadow of visitation:
During which time, they made ready the most apt for the execution, and were
willingly obeyed for the hate they bare to Hermes, and were ready to execute
the Massacre. The Physicians likewise put themselves forward, that it was
behoouefull that Antiochus should go take the Air in the morning to refresh
himself.

Hermes came to the King in the mean time, as has been said, together with
the Allies which were participant of the enterprise, the rest remained in the
Camp, as if they knew nothing of the Voyage. The others drawing then Antigonus
out of the Camp, they led him into some by place, where at his only sign
they killed Hermes. Behold now how he dyed, of whom always the punishment was
never sufficient for his wickedness. The King returned to his Lodging,
delivered from a great distress and fear, with a praise reaching to the
Heavens by all the Province, of his Counsel and of his works, especially when
they heard news of the death of Hermes. In the same time, the Women of Apam^^
killed his Wife, and the Children, his. After that Antiochus was arrived in his
lodging, he sent his Army to wi^^er in the Garrisons, and a^ Ambassador to
Acheus, and first complaining of that, that he had taken the Crown, and
likewise ^urst accept the name of King: And that on the other side, he durst
openly declare himself to hold the party of Ptolo^^. Now we must understand,
that in the time the King led the War to Artabazenes, Acheus thinking that
he should dye in the Country there, or if he dyed not, that he should without
any hindrance draw the War into Syrria, before his return. Seeing and well
perc^iuing the longnesse of the way, and the Conquering of the Kingdom,
suddenly by the aid of Cyrrastes, that not long since had abandoned the King,
and parted from Lydia with a great Army.

And as he was arrived in Laodicea, which is in Phrigia; he seized on the
Crown, taking also the ambition to be called King, and to write to the Towns
to do so, being earnestly solicited by a Fugitive, called Synires. And as he
then continued his voyage, and was not far from Lycaonia, the Men of War
began to mutiny against him, being sorry that they led an Army against the
first King: Wherefore Acheus seeing their fancies, turned him from the way he
had begun, as if he would make them understand, that he drew not in the
beginning to Syrria; but turned his way to Pisidique, pillaging all the
Country, and distributing to the Men of War a ma^uailous ^ooty; so he gained
them, and returned to his house: The King then well advertised of all these
things, (...) (as we have said) an Ambassador to Acheus, making ready in the
mean while all that seemed to be necessary, to bring the War upon Ptolomy.
And after that all the Army was near to Apamia, in the beginning of the
Spring, he called his Friends to Council, requiring of every one their advice
what they thought fit to be done for the War. Apolophanes adui^^ to ^n^iochus.
When as many had counseled him diverse things concerning the places and
preparat^on, and to make an Army by Sea, Apolophanes (of whom we have spoken)
being borne in Seleucia, stood up and overthrew all the Opinions which had
been formerly given, saying, that it was a solly to draw the War into base
Syrria, and to suffer ^^olomy to hold S^^encia, for that it was the sourse and
cause of their Principality: That besides the disgrace he should do unto his
Reign^, (considering that the force of the Kings of Egypt had always kept it)
it had moreover great commodities for the mannaging of the War. For whilst
the Enemies shall hold it, it would be very prejudicial to all his
Enterprises. For there must be no less care used to defend himself from this
City, then to assail the Enemy. And if he held it, he should not only be
able to preserve his own with safety, but also to undertake some good action
both by Sea and Land, for the great opportunity of the place.

The whole Assembly allowed of Apoloph^^es advice, and resolved to take the
City first, for then S^l^ucia was held by the Kings of Egypt, from the time
that Pt^lomy reigned, who was surnamed the B^nefactor. Ptolomy the B^nefactor.
He conquered it at such time, that for the ruin of Beronic^, and the rage he
had concelued in his he^^t, he made a descent into base Syrria with an Army.
Antiochus after Apolophanes advice was approved, he commanded Diogone General
of the Army at Sea, to fail speedily to Seleuci^. And in the mean time
parting from Apamia with his Army, he lodges within five Furlongs of
Hippodrome. He likewise sends away The^^ore Hermioly with a sufficient Army
for Syrria, to the end he might gain the streights, and provide for the
affairs of that Province.

This is the situation of Seleucia, and the places about it; The situation of
Se^euci^.
that as the City is seated upon the Sea-shoare, betwixt Cil^cia and Phenicia,
so it has under i^ a wonderful great Mountain, which they call Coryphes,
whose side toward the West, is washed with the Sea, which is betwixt Cipres
and Phen^^ia, and the other which looks to the East, ioynes to the Regions of
the Antiochiens and Seleucen^es. Seleucia situated on the South, and separated
by a deep and inaccessible Valley, which extends to the Sea, being environed
with great Rocks and Caves: And on that side which looks to the Sea, it has
steps and Suburbs enclosed with walls. The City also is fortified with a good
wall, and beautified with Temples, and fair buildings. It has but one
approach toward the sea, the which is difficult, and made by hand: for they
must ascend unto it by Ladders. The river of Or^nte enters into the Sea near
unto it, taking its sourse and beginning at Liban and Antiliban, and passes by
Antiochia: whereas running continually, it carries away by its swift course all
the filth of the people. Finally, it enters into the Sea near unto Seleucia.
Antiochus in the beginning sent to the Governors of the City, off^ring them
money with great hopes, if without fighting they would deliver it unto him.
Antiochus corrupts the Captains of Seleuoia.
But when he could not win them, he corrupts some of the inferior Captains:
with whom having agreed, he puts his men in Battle, as if he meant to assail
the Town with his Army at Sea, and at Land on that side which looks toward
Epirus. Dividing then his Army in three, after that he had inflamed the hearts
of the Soldiers, promising them great rewards, he appointed Zeuxi^ with his
Company to be at the Gate which goes to Antiochia, and he gave to Hermogenes
the places by which they go to Dioscoria, and gives charge to Ard^^ and
Diogene to assail the Suburbs and Arsenall: for it had been so agreed with
the Traitors, Seleucia assaulted.
that as soon as the Suburbs were taken, they should deliver him the City.
When as the King had given the ^igne for an assault, they all did their
endeavors. But among the rest they which were with Ard^^ and Diogene, carried
themselves valiantly: For they could not assault no^ scale the other places.
But in regard of the Arsenall and Suburbs, they might assault and scale them.

Wherefore whilst that the Army at Sea fell upon the Arsenall, and Ardis
Troops upon the Suburbs, scaling the Walls, and that they of the Town could
not succor them, for that they were environed on all sides by the Enemy, it
fell out that the Suburb was suddenly taken. Which done, the petty Captains
corrupted by the King, ran to Leonce, who at that time was Governor of the
City, persuading him to send to Antiochus before the City were forced. And
although that Leonce were ignorant of the Treason, he sent presently to
Antiochus, (being troubled with the amazement of his people) to yield them the
City upon condition to have the lives of all the Inhabitants saved. The King
accepting the condition, promised to save the lives of all Freemen, which were
about six thousand: But when he was entered, he not only pardoned the
Burgesses, but also called home the banished men of Seleucia, and restored unto
them the government of their public affairs, and all their goods, and put a
good Garrison into the Haven and Port.

Whilst Antiochus stayed at Seleucia, he received Letters from Theodote, by
the which he solicited him to go speedily into base Syrria. The King was long
in suspense what council he should take, and was pensive and troubled with the
course he should take in this action* you must understand, that Theodote borne
in Etolia, had done great services for the Realm of Ptolomy, (whereof we have
formerly made mention) and many times put his life in danger. At such time as
Antiochus made War against Molon, he took in person (disdaining the King,
and distrusting his Courtiers) Ptolemais and Tyrus by Paneteole, and suddenly
called in Antiochus. The King having taken Acheus to heart, and laying aside
all other affairs, he returns with his Army the same way he came. When he was
come to a place which the Country people call Marsia, he camped near the
streights which are about Gerre, which is not far from the Fens, lying in the
midst of that Country. There being advertised that Nicholas Lieutenant
General to Ptolomy, held Ptolomais besieged, in the which Theodote was, he
left those that were best armed, and gave charge to besiege the Town of
Broches, lying upon the Fenns, The Town of Broc^es besieged.
making haste to go and raise the Siege.

Nicholas advertised by his Spies of the Kings coming, retired, and sent
Lagore of Candy, and Dorimene of Etolia, to gain the streights which are near
unto Beryta: Where the King planted his Camp, after that he had fought with
them, and put them to flight. And when he had drawn together the rest of his
Army in the same place, he makes an Oration to his Soldiers, and marches away
with great courage. There Theodote and Paneteole met with him with their
Friends, to whom he gave a good and gracious reception, Tyrus and pt^l^mais
taken.
and he took Tyrus and Ptolemais with all their preparation of War. There
were in these Towns forty ships, whereof twenty were for the War, well armed
and furnished with all things necessary, all which were Quinqueremes or
Quadriremes: the rest were Triremes, Biremes, and of one bank. All which he
gave to Diogene, Captain of the Sea-army. When as news came unto him of the
secret flight of Ptolomy to Caire, and that his whole Army assembled together
at Damiette, and that they sought to cut off the waters from him, he gave over
his enterprise to assail^ Da^^^tte: and ouer-running the Country, he labored
to win the Towns partly by force, partly by love. Whereof some being
destitute of Garrisons, and fearing the Kings power, yielded suddenly to the
Enemy: Others relying upon their strength of their situation, maintained his
assaults.

As for Ptolomy being so apparently betraide, he did not endeavor by reason
of his weakness, to give that speedy order to his affairs that was sitting,
so little account he had made of that which concerns the preparations of
War. Wherefore Agathocles and Sosibius (who at that time governed all the
a^^aires of the Kingdom) bethought themselves (as much as possibly they might)
of that which was most necessary. They resolved to prepare for the War,
sending in the mean time an Embassy to entreat Antiochus, The policy of
Agathocles and Sosibius.
by way of dissembling, to debate Ptolomy's right: who as not daring to make
War, and having advertised and persuaded his Friends, was retired into base
Syrria. When as Agathocles and Sosibius had thus resolved, and given order
according to their power, they speedily sent Ambassadors to Antiochus, and
likewise to the Rhodiens, Constantinopolitains, Cizicins, and E^oliens, to
persuade them to send Embassies to Antiochus to mediate a peace. When as these
had sent to both the Kings, they gave them great means to provide in the mean
time things necessary for the War, for Ptotomy receiving the Ambassadors
graciously, with those of Antiochus, in the mean time he drew together the
Mercenary Soldiers to Alexandria, which lay dispersed in other Towns, and
sent others to levy men without the Province, making provision of victuals.
Finally, he was careful day and night to prepare for the War. For the which
he sent continually men to Alexandria, An Army raised by Pto^omy.
to give order there should not be any thing wanting that was necessary. He
had also given charge to Echecrate of Thessaly, and to Phoxid^ of Mil, to make
provision of Arms, and to choose men, and to muster them: The like he did to
Eurilochus Magnes, and to Socrates of Beocia: with whom also was Cn^pias
Alorite. For he held them for men of judgment in such affairs: For that he
esteemed them of great experience in the War, having served long under
Demetrius and Antigon^^.

These drew many soldiers together, providing wisely, and like honest men for
all things. First they delivered Arms to the Companions according to their
fashion and age, distributing to every one those which he could best manage,
and disliking those which they had formerly used. Then they instructed them in
particular for the future, and trained them continually, not by words only,
but accustoming them to Combats made for pleasure. After that they drew them
together, and by remonstrances and persuasions put courage into them for the
War to come. Wherein Andromachus Aspondin, and Polycrates the Argiue, who were
lately come from Arges, were very powerful. These were men accustomed to the
War, and much esteemed by reason of their Country, and the excellency of
their lives: especially Polycrates, for the antiquity of his race, and the
glory of his Father Muasias. These instructing the Bands publicly and in
private, gave courage to the Soldiers for the future War. The distribution of
Ptolomes Army to his Captains.
Moreover, every one had his particular charge in the Army according to their
experience. Euriloch^^ Magnes had the command of three thousand men, which the
Kings call the furious Troop. Socrates of Beocia, was Chief of two thousand
armed with Targets. Phoxide the Achaian, and Ptolomy of Thras^^, and with them
Andromachus Aspondin, led the great Battaillion, and the Mercenaries: So as
Adromachus and Ptolomy were Captains of the great Battaillion, and Phoxide of
the Mercenaries. The Phalange or great Battaillion contained about five and
twenty thousand men. The Mercenaries were eight thousand. Polycrates had
trained and instructed the Gentlemen of the Kings house, being seven hundred
Horse, over whom he was Captain, and likewise of those which were come for
Lybia, and had been levied in the Province. All which made the number of three
thousand men.

In regard of the Grecian Cauallery, and those which were in pay, Echecrates of
Thessaly, a man of service, instructed them carefully, to the number of two
thousand* being as diligent as any other to have a care of the Soldiers. C^opy
had the command of all the Candiots, being three thousand in number: Among the
which there was a thousand Soldiers newly levied, of which he gave the charge
to Philon of Gnosie. There were moreover three thousand Affricans, armed after
the the Macedonian manner, over whom Ammonin Barcee was Captain. There were
also about two thousand Egyptians under the command of Sosibius Finally, four
thousand Thraces and Gauls, which had long served in the War: and two
thousand newly levied, whereof De^^ of Thrace had the charge. This was Ptolomes
Army at that same time.

When as Antiochus had besieged the Town of Dure, and saw that he could not
prevail, as well for its fortification, as for the defense of Nicholas: in the
beginning of Winter he concluded a truce with Ptolomes Ambassador, and
promised him willingly and freely, to go out of the Province, and to do him
all the pleasure he could, although he had another intent: for he made haste
to lead his Army to winter in Seleucia, for that Acheus made show to be of
his side, although in truth he held Ptolomes party. After the truce concluded,
Antiochus sent presently an Ambassador, An Embassy sent from Antiochus to
Ptolomy.
giving him charge to advertise him speedily of Ptolomes intention, and that
he should come unto him to Seleucia. Then leaving sufficient Garrison in
necessary places, and the charge of all to Theodote, he led his Army to
Seleucia: from whence he sent them to winter in Garrisons, and from that time
he began to neglect all care in exercising his Soldiers, thinking he should
have no more occasion of fighting: For that he held many places in base Syrria
and Phenicea, hoping that the rest would be soon reduced to his obedience:
considering that Ptolomy durst not come to fight. His Ambassadors thought no
less, for that Sosibius had given them fair and courteous words at Caire: And
not any one of those which had been sent to Antiochus, knew the preparation of
War which was made in Alexandria: so as Sosibius dismissing the Ambassadors,
was continually careful of the War. It is true, that Antiochus used great
care to make his just quarrel known to the Ambassadors, when they should
enter into discourse.

Finally, being come to Sele^cia, and falling into private speech of the peace,
according unto that which Sosibius had given them in charge, the King did not
hold the outrage which he had done by open War, Reasons of the war
propounded by Antiochus.
in seazing upon the places of base Syrria to be unjust or unreasonable: and
that he had done nothing but by a just title. For he said, that Antigonus with
one eye, and Seleucus, who first had conquered those places, were the true and
lawful Lords. Wherefore the Realm of base Syrria belonged unto him, as it
were by right of inheritance, and not to Ptolomy: For that Ptolomy had fought
against Antigonus, not for his own right, but to conquer those Countries for
Seleucus. Moreover, he propounded the mutual accord betwixt the Kings, for at
such time as Antigonus was defeated, when as Cassander, Lysimachus and Seleucus
would divide the Realm betwixt them, they adjudged all Syrria to Seleucus.
This was all that Antiochus alleged. The answer of Ptolomes Ambassadors to
Antiochus.
Contrariwise Ptolomes Ambassadors labored to produce their reasons, making
this present outrage far greater then it had bin: saying that the accord had
bin broken as well by the treason of Theodote, as by the descent which Antiochus
had made with an Army into Syrria. Moreover, they pretended Ptolomes
possession, saying, that he had made War with Seleucus against Antigonus, to
the end he might conquer all the Empire of Asia for Seleucus, and make Syrria
and Phenicea his own. These difficulties with diverse others, were many times
debated betwixt them: but they could not conclude any thing, although matters
were solicited by their common Friends: for that the party of Acheus bred a
great controversy and debate betwixt them: For that Ptolomy sought to
comprehend him in the accord, and Antiochus would not hear him spoken of:
holding it a strange thing, that Ptolomy should presume to make mention of
those who through Treason abandoned their King. Finally, the Ambassadors
departed without any effect.

In the Spring Antiochus uses all diligence to levy men, A levy of Armies by
Antiochus and Ptolomy.
with an intent to assail Syrria both by Sea and Land, and to make subject all
the other Countries of that Province. But Ptolomy did no less to reenforce the
Army of Nicholas: so as he sent him store of victuals out of the Countries
near unto Gaza, furnishing him moreover with Soldiers both by Sea and Land,
with other things necessary. By means whereof Nicholas resuming courage, went
boldly to Field with the help of Perigene, Commander of the Army at Sea, being
sent by Ptolomy with thirty ships of War, and about four hundred Merchants
Vessels. This Nicholas was borne in Etolia, as able and resolute a Soldier as
any that served Ptolomy: who after he had formerly gotten with a part of his
Army, the streights which lie near unto Platane, and marching with the rest to
Porphirrion, he shut up the passage of the Province from the King with the
help of the Sea-army. Embass^dours from the Arcadi^ns to Antiochus.
Antiochus being come to Marache, and Ambassadors arriving from the Arcadians,
to confer of the conditions of their Alliance, he not only received them
courteously, but freed the discord which had been long betwixt them, in
reconciling the Arcadians which dwelt in the Island, with those that lived in
Epirus. This done he comes to Berite, entering into the ^rouince by a place
which the Contrymen call, the Face of God: in passing he took the Town of
Botre, setting fire upon Triere and Calame. From thence he sent Nicarche and
Theodote before, giving them charge to gain the streights which are near unto
the River of Dyce: And with the rest of his Army he plants himself near unto
the River of Damure, from whence Diogene Chief of the Army at Sea, was not
far.

Then again he takes those that were lightly armed, whom he had sent before
with Nicarche and Theodote, and goes to discover the streights which Nicholas
had formerly taken: so as after he had well viewed the places, he returned to
his Camp. Where the next day he left those that were best armed, under the
charge of Nicarche, and marched with the rest against the Enemy. And for that
Mount Liban does much restrain those places toward the Sea-shoare, the way
must of necessity be narrow, difficult, and almost inaccessible: leaving a
straight and short passage toward the Sea. Whereas Nicholas having then built
his Fort, he did hope he should be well able to repulse Antiochus: For that he
had put him self into it with a good number of Soldiers: and had also
fortified it with Engines and other defenses.

The King divided his Army into three Troops, Antiochus his Army divided into
three.
whereof he gave the leading of the one to Theodote, giving him charge to fall
upon the Enemies which defended the way of the Mountain. He gave another to
Menedemus, whom he commanded to strive to get up the Mountain: And the third
he placed on the Sea-shoare, under the leading of Diocles. He put himself
among the Baggage to see all, and to succor where need should require. At the
same time Diogenet and Perigene began to fight at Sea, approaching as near to
Land as possibly they could: so as they might see the Combats by Land and Sea
with one view. A Combat at Sea and Land.
The Trumpets sounding to the charge, the fight was long equal at Sea: so as
the Victory inclined to neither side: for that the two Armies were equal in
number of men and preparation of War. In regard of the fight at Land,
Nicholas had the better in the beginning, for that he had the advantage of the
place. But when as they which were with Theodote, came upon them from the top
of the Mountain, and charged them with great fury, Nicholas and his men fled
shamefully. There were two thousand slain in the chase: the rest saved
themselves in Sydon. And although that Perigene in show had good hope of the
^ight at Sea, yet seeing the defeat of the Army at Land, he retired. Antiochus
drew his men together, and went and planted his Camp near unto Sydon: yet he
did not hold it fit to attempt the taking thereof at that time, as well for the
abundance of munition and victuals that were in it, as for the multitude of
men, as well Inhabitants, as such as were retired into it after the Battle.
Wherefore he dislodged, and went to Philotere, sending word to Diogenet, Chief
of the Army at Sea, to sail to Tire. You must understand, that Philotere is
seated near unto a Fenne, into the which the River which they call Jordan,
passes: then takes its course by the Country of that Town which is called
Scithes. After the sudden taking of these two Towns, he enters into great
hope for the future, for that their Fields were sufficient to furnish his Army
with all kind of victuals, and other munitions for the war. There he placed
sufficient Garrisons, and passing the Mountains, he came to the Tow^e of
Atabyre, situated upon the Mountain of Mastodia, which has fifteen Furlongs
in ascent. There laying an Ambush near the Town, he began to draw the
Inhabitants forth to fight, who following his men who seemed to retire, were in
a manner all slain, they turning head: And for that the Ambush charged them in
the Rear, he pursued the rest, and took them and their Town. At the same
time Cere^ being one of Ptolomes Commander, left it. By the means whereof
Antiochus gained many other Captains. For soon after Hippolochus of Thessaly
came to yield himself to him with three hundred horse. And when he had put a
Garrison into A^tabyre, he proceeded in his journey, Diverse Towns taken by
Antioc^us.
pursuing his enterprise, and in passing the Country, took Pelle, Came, and
Gepre. In the mean time the people of of Arabia agreeing together, followed
his party. Autiochus growing into greater hope, and drawing victuals from them,
went farther into the Country: and presently took Gallate with the Garrison of
the Abillatins, of whom Nicie a Kinsman and Allie to Nemne, was Commander. And
although that Gadare, which at that time seemed impregnable for its situation,
held out, yet he took it suddenly in besieging it, and setting up his
Engines. And having news afterward that a good number of Enemies were drawn
together into Rabatamassane a Town of Arabia, and spoiled all the Arabians
Country which held his party, he went suddenly thither with his Army, and
planted his Camp near unto the Mountains among the which the Town is
situated. And when upon a view he had discovered that it was not to be forced
but in two places, he set up his Engines, and other things necessary to force a
Town, whereof he gave the charge to Nicarchus and Theodote: and in the mean
time attends his other affairs.

These men careful of the Battery, striued with emulation who should first
overthrow the Wall, whereupon a great part fell sooner then they could imagine.
This done, they fought continually day and night, striving to lose no time. And
although the Siege continued long, yet they could not prevail, in regard of
the multitude of men which defended it: until that a Prisoner showed them a
little River, where the besieged fetch their water, the which they stopped up
with Pallisadoes^ stones, and such like things. Then being out of hope of
water, they yielded to the Enemies. R^batamassana yielded to Antiochu^.
By this means the King having it in his hands, he gave it in guard to
Nicarchus with a sufficient strength: and he sent Hippolichus and Ceree (who as
we have said, had abandoned Ptolomy) into the Country of Samaria, with five
thousand Foot: giving them charge to continue there for the defense thereof,
and to preserve all the people which were under his obedience. From thence he
parts with his whole Army, and comes to Ptolomais to pass the Winter there.

When the Pednelissenses had been the same Summer besieged by the Selgenses,
The Pednelissenses besieged.
and were in great danger; they sent to demand succors from Ac^eus. When he
had heard them willingly, and promised to do it, they endured the Siege with
great courage, growing more resolute by the hope of succors. Finally, Acheus
sent G^rsyere with six thousand Foot, and five hundred Horse: giving him
charge to use all diligence to succor the Pednelassenses. The Selgenses
advertised by the Spies of his coming, recovered the streights which are about
a place which they call, Eschelle, with the greatest part of their Army, and
stop up all the passages. Garsyere entering by force into Myliade, and planting
his Camp near unto a Town called Candois, he used this stratagem, seeing
that he could not pass, for that the Selgenses kept all the passages. He began
to raise his Camp, and to retire, making show that it was impossible for him
to succor the Pednelissenses: for that the streights of the Country were held
by the Enemy.

The Selgenses thinking they had been gone, as men despairing to be able to
succor them, The policy of Garsyere.
retired, some to the Camp, the rest returned to the City to recover
Victuals. But Garsyere comes suddainiy back to the streights, whereas finding
them abandoned, he set men to guard them under the command of Captain Phayle:
and from thence he comes with his forces to Perge, whereas staying some time,
he sent Ambassadors to Pamphilia, and the other Towns, to acquaint them with
the insolency of the Selgenses, and to solicit them to enter into league with
Ache^s, and to succor the Pednelissenses. The Sc^genses at the same time sent
a Captain with an Army, hoping to chase Phayle from the streights. But for
that matters succeeded otherwise then they expected, and lost many of their men
in fighting, they gave over their Enterprise: yet for all this they did not
raise their Siege, but were more attentive then before, to set up their Engines.

In the mean time the Ettenenses which inhabit the Mountains above Side,
sent eight thousand men armed to Garsyere: and the Aspendiens four thousand.
The Sydetes made no show to send any succors: for that they were Friends to
Antiochus, and hated the Aspendiens. Garsyere came to ednelisse, accompanied
with the Troops of the Allies, thinking at his coming to raise the Siege. But
when he saw that the Selgenses were nothing amazed, he set himself down near
unto them. The Pednelissenses were so oppressed with want of Victuals, as they
could no longer endure the hunger, wherefore Garsyere seeing it necessary to
use diligence, prepared two thousand men, every one laden with a Mine of Wheat,
and sent them by night to the Town. A M^^e is about two of our (...), weighing
an hundred and ten pounds.
The Selgenses advertised hereof, charged them presently, and slew the greatest
part of them, and took all the Wheat. Wherewith they grew so glorious, as
they not only besieged the Town, but they attempted the Enemies Camp. It is
the custom of the Selgenses to be always bold and audatious. Wherefore in
leaving sufficient forces in their Camp, they suddenly assailed the Enemy in
diverse place. And when the Alarm grew hot, so as the Camp was forced in some
places, Garsyere amazed at this great and sudden accident, and having no
great hope, he caused the Horsemen to go forth by a certain place which was
not guarded: whom the Selgenses (thinking they had fled for fear of being
defeated) did not pursue, nor made any account of them. These Horsemen turning
a little about, charged the Enemy suddenly in the Rear, fighting with great
fury. Then Garsyeres Footmen, who seemed to waver, turned head, being
reunited, and fell upon the Enemy* By this means the Selgenses being thus
environed, in the end fled. The Pednelissenses taking courage hereat, made a
sally, The Victory of Garsyere against the Selgenses.
and beat them out of the Camp which had the guard. In the chase Garsyere
made a great ^laughter: for there were above ten thousand men slain: of those
which remained, the Allies retired to their houses, and the Selgenses to their
Country, taking their way by the Mountains.

The next day Garsyere parts with his Army, and makes haste to pass the
Mountains, and to approach the Town, before that the Selgenses (being amazed
with this fresh flight) should provide for any thing. Who being full of
heaviness and fear, as well for the little hope they had of succors from
their Allies, considering the loss they had made with them* and amazed with
this fresh misfortune, were in great doubt of safety, either for themselves or
their Country. Logbase sent Ambassador by the Selgenses.
Wherefore they assembled the Counsel, to resolve to send one of their
Citizens called Logbase, in Embassy: who had had great Friendship and
familiarity with Antiochus, which died in Thrace: And moreover he had bred up
Laodicea the wife of Acheus, and his own Daughter, whom they had given him in
her infancy to instruct. They sent him therefore as their Ambassador, thinking
him sufficient for that business. But being come to Garsyere, he was so far
from doing that which he had in charge, and which the duty of a good Citizen
required, that contrariwise he solicited him to write to Acheus, that he
promised to deliver him the Town.

Garsyere giving a willing ^are upon hope of taking it, sent men to Acheus to
solicit him, and to let him understand how matters had past. Finally he makes
a truce with the Selgenses, A truce made with the Selgenses.
delaying still to make an absolute accord with him, under color that he would
consider better thereon, to the end that in the mean time he might expect
Acheus, and give Logbase opportunity to finish the Enterprise. But whilst they
in the mean time conf^rred together, Communication with an E^y is dange^ous.
the Soldiers by a kind of familiarity, went freely into the Town to fetch
Victuals, which is many times the cause of a great Defeat. So as in my opinion
there is not any Creature amongst all the rest, more simple then man, or that
has less sense and judgment: whom notwithstanding the greatest part of the
World hold for the wisest. But how many Armies? How many Forts? How many and
what Cities have fallen into the Enemies hands thereby? And although these be
things which daily happen, and that all the world sees, yet we show our selves
(I know not how) new and Apprentizes. This happens, for that we do not
consider the fortunes which have happened to our Ancestors in former times: and
that we busy ourselves with toil and charge, to make provision of Corn,
Silver, Fo^tifications, and Arms. Moreover, we make no esteem of that which
is of great profit in great dangers, but disdain it, although it be in our
power to learn it in the time of peace, by the Histories and Commentaries of
former actions, and as it were to practice them. But to the end we may return
to the discourse from whence we parted, Acheus came at the day appointed. The
S^lgenses going to meet him, had great hope and confidence in his bounty.

In the mean time Logbase having drawn into his house a good number of those
which came into the City for Victuals, he began to persuade the Citizens,
not to lose any time: and that considering the good will which Acheus bare
them, they should think of their affairs, and that in assembling the people,
they should consider of the conditions of peace. These things being propounded,
they presently assembled, to confer of their present affairs, calling those
which were deputed for the guard of the City. Logbase making a sign unto the
Enemy, as he had promised; suddenly arms all those which were in his house,
doing the like himself with his Children, to undergo the danger. On the other
side Acheus came to the Town with half the army. Garsyere marched with the
rest to C^sbedia. This is a Temple of Jupiter* so well situated above the
Town, as it seems like a Fort.

When as by chance some one saw the Enemy approach, he ran suddenly to
acquaint the Assembly, whereupon there was so great an amazement among the
peole, as leaving the Company, some ran to Cesbedia, others to the places where
they were set in Guard, and the Commons ran to the house of Logbase: Loghbae
and his Children slain.
where discovering the treason, some in fury got to the housetop, others
forced the Gate, and slew Logbase, his Children, and all the partners of the
Conspiracy. This done, they proclaimed liberty to al Bondmen by the sound of the
Trumpet, and encouraged one another to succor and defend the City, running to
all places necessary. When Garsyere saw Cesbedia seized on by the Burgesses, he
changed his resolution, and Acheus seeking to force the Gates, the Se^genses
made a sally, killing seven hundred of his men, and repulsed the rest from the
Town. This done, Acheus and Garsyere returned to their Camp with shame and
disgrace. The Selgenses afterward fearing the sedition of the Town, and the
presence of the Enemy, they sent their most ancient Citizens to demand a
peace. A peace concluded betwixt (...) and the Se^genses.
Who being come to Acheus, they agreed upon these conditions: that Acheus and
the Selgenses should live in peace, and that they should pay unto him presently
two hundred and forty thousand Crowns. That they should ^estore the Prisoners
of the Pednelissenses, and that at a certain time prefixed, they should pay
moreover nine score thousand. Thus the Selgenses (who by the Treason of Logbase
were in danger of their Country and Liberties) defended themselves valiantly
and with great courage: and neither lost their Liberties, nor that honor which
they derived from the Lacedaemonians.

When as Acheus had reduced under his obedience the Meliades, and the greatest
part of Pamphilia, and had brought his Army to Sardis, he made War against
Atta^us. All the Inhabitants on this side Tauris, feared him wonderfully. At
the same time when he made War against the Selgenses. Attalus accompanied with
the Eg^s^ges, Galates, ouer-ran Eolia, and the neighbor Towns, who for fear
had yielded to Acheus. Whereof the greatest part submitted themselves willingly
under his obedience: the rest were forced. Cyme, Smirne, and Phocea, were the
first that yielded unto him. Afterward the Egenses and Lemnites fearing a
Siege, yielded in like manner. There came likewise Ambassadors from Th^ia and
Colophon, submitting themselves and their Towns unto him. Which being received
according to the ancient accord, and hostages taken, he made great account of
the Smirniens, for that they had kept their faith best. Afterward continuing
his course, he past the River of Lyce, and went first to the Mysiens, and then
to the Carsees, whom he terrified: The like he did to the Guards of the double
walls, and took them and their Garrisons, For that Themistocles (whom Acheus
had left there for Governor) delivered them unto him. And parting presently,
ruining the Country of Apia, he past the Mountain of Pelecas, and planted
himself near unto a great River: where the Moon falling into an Eclipse, and
the Galates discontented with the tediousnes of the way, having a train of
women and children in their Wagons, observing the Eclipse* protested that they
would pass no farther. And although that King Attalus drew no service from
them, yet fearing that if he left them, as it were in disdain, they would
retire to Acheus, and that thereby he should purchase an ill fame, as if
through ingratitude he had abandoned those who with great affection had
followed him into Asia, he entreated them to endure a little toil of the way,
and that he would soon bring them to a good place, where they should rest: And
withal he would do for them whatsoever they should desire according to his
power, and as reason should require. Attalus therefore gave Hellespont to the
Egosages for their abode: and after he had entreated the Lampsacenes, the
Alexandrians, and Ilienses courteously, for that they had kept their faith, he
went to P^rg^mo with his Army.

In the beginning of the Spring, The Army of Ptolomy.
when Antiochus and Ptolomy had made their preparations for the War, they
made haste to draw their Armies to Field. Ptolomy parts from Alexandria with
above three score and ten thousand Foot, and five thousand Horse, with three
score and thirteen Elephants. Antiochus having news of their coming, he
suddenly draws his men together. His Army consisted of five thousand Dains,
Carmaniens, The Army of Antiochus.
and Ciliciens lightly armed, under the leading of Bittace a Macedonian: and of
twenty thousand men after the Macedonian manner, whereof the greatest part were
Argyraspides, who were levied throughout the Realm, under the command of
Theodote of Etolia, who committed the Treason. The number of the great
Battaillion was about twenty thousand, of whom Nicarchus and Theodote surnamed
Hemiolia, had the leading. Moreover there were two thousand Agreens and
Persians, Archers and Slingers: with whom were a thousand Thracians, over whom
Menedemus Alabandeus was Captain. Moreover, five thousand Medians, Cissiens,
Cadyssiens, and Carmains: which Accius the Son of Aspasian of Media had under
his charge.

In regard of the Arabians, and their neighbors, they were under the command
of Zabdibel, to the number of ten thousand men or more. On the other side
Hippulochus of Thessaly, had the leading of five thousand Grecians Mercenaries:
and Eurilochus of fifteen hundred Candyots. Zelysgorgyne had a thousand
Candyots newly levied, to the which were joined five hundred Lydiens with
Slings. Lysimachus the Gaul, had a thousand Cardaces. Finally, the whole
Cauallery amounted to six thousand Horse, of which Antipater the Kings Nephew,
had the charge of four thousand, and Themison of the rest. By this means
Antiochus his Army consisted of three score and two thousand Foot, six
thousand Horse, and a hundred and two Elephants. Ptolomy taking his way by
Damietta, he made that Town subject unto him at his entrance: From whence
after a plentiful distribution of Corn among the Soldiers, he parted, and
passes Cassia and Bathra, coming by the desert Countries. Being come to Gaza,
and having assembled his Army, he marched slowly in the Country: planting
himself on the fifth day, within fifty Furlongs of Raphia, which is a Town
situated behind Rhinococure, and first of those of Syrria which looks toward
Egypt.

At the same time Antiochus armed with his Army, and passing that Town by
night, he planted his Army within ten furlongs of his Enemy. In the beginning
they kept themselves distant so far one from another. But some few days after,
Antiochus desiring to get some place of advantage, and to give courage to his
men, he lodged nearer unto the enemy, so as there were but five Furlongs
betwixt the two Camps: So as going to forage and to Water, there were many
encounters: on the other side, sometimes the Foote-men, and sometimes the
Horsemen skirmished betwixt the two Camps, trying the Fortune of the War.
The hardy attempt of Theodote.
At the same time Theodote showed the great courage of a true Etol^en: For
being by long experience acquainted with the Kings manner of living, he entered
at the break of day into the enemies Camp, and could not be discovered by his
Countenance, for that it was yet dark: Neither did he differ much from them
in his Apparel, for that they used diverse fashions of habits. Having formerly
observed the place where the Kings Tent was planted, for that they had fought
often near unto the Camp, he went directly to it. When he had past
unknown, and was come secretly to the Tent, in the which the King did usually
eat and drink: Where casting his looks carefully about him, he saw him not,
(for he was lodged in a place retired behind it) so as he wounded two that
were lodged there, Andrew the Kings ^hysitia^ sla^e.
and killing Andrew the Kings Physician, he retired without danger to his
Camp, bringing his enterprise to an end by his hardy courage: But deceived in
his foresight, for that he had not well observed the place where as Ptolomy
did usually lie.

When the Kings had continued in Camp five days together, one before the
other, they resolved in the end to give Battle. Ptolomy beginning to draw his
Army out of his Fort, Antiochus suddenly did the like: And they planted their
two chief Battalions in Front one against the other, The order of Ptolomes
Army in Battle.
armed after the Macedonian manner. Behold the order which Ptolomy held for the
two Wings: Polycrates was in the right Wing, with the Horsemen that were under
his charge: Betwixt the which and the great Battalion, were the Candyots placed
near unto the Horsemen. After which was the Kings battalion, and subsequently
those that were armed with Targets, whereof Socrates had the Command: And
finally the Lybians armed after the Macedonian manner. Upon the right Wing was
Echecrates of Thessaly, having with him his Troop of Horses After which were
appointed the Galates and Thracians; and then Phoxide with the Mercenaries of
Greece; being followed by the great Battalion of the Egyptians. He had also
placed forty Elephants on the left Wing, with the which Ptolomy were before the
right Wing, near unto the horsemen that were hired. Antiochus on the other
side, placed on the right Wing (with the which he was resolved to fight in
Battle against Ptolomy) threescore Elephants: The order of Antiochus his
Battle*
Of which his companion Philip had the Charge. After these he orders two
thousand Horse under the leading of Antipater, and sets the Candyots in Front,
near unto the Horsemen: Then he appoints the Mercenaries of Greec^, and
after then were five thousand men, who armed after the Macedonian manner, had
Byttice for their Captain. As for the left Wing, he placed two thousand
horses in Front, under the Command of Temison: Near unto which he sets the
Cardaces and Lydien Horsemen, and after them three Thousand men lightly armed,
under the charge of Menedemus: in whose Rear were the Cissiens, Mediens, and
Carmaniens: And after them the Arabians were joined to the great Battalion.
Finally, he sets before the left Wing the rest of the Elephants, giving them
for their Guide one Myisce a Household servant to the King.

The two Armies being thus in battle, the Kings began to encourage their
Troops, being accompanied with their Captains and friends, commending the
valor of the Soldiers both in general and particular: And having great hope
of their Battalions, they propounded great benefits which would redowne by the
Victory. Ptolomy had with him his sister Arsinoe, with Andromachus and
So^ibius, who encouraged the Soldiers: And Theodote and Nicarchus were with
Antiochus, for that of either side they were the Commanders of the two great
Battalions. They were both of one humor to make Speeches unto their men, and
yet neither of them had done any thing worthy of fame or praise to be
propounded, for that they were newly come unto their Principallities. Wherefore
they labored to encourage their Troops, in reducing to their memory the glory
and prowess of their Ancestors: And propounding moreover a hope of themselves
for the future, they entreated and solicited the Captains to fight, and to
undergo the danger resolutely and with courage. These were the speeches or
such like, which they used in person, or by their Interpreters.

This done, the two Kings marched one against the other, a slow pace. Ptolomy
was in the left Wing, A Battle be^twixt Ptolomy and Antiochus.
and Antiochus in the right with his royal Battalion. Then the Trumpets sounded
to Battle, whereof the first Charge was made by the Elephants. Few of
Ptolomes held good against those of the Enemy, whose Soldiers fought
valliantly, casting of Darts, Pertwisans, and plummets of lead, wounding one
another. But the Elephants made a stronger War; The Combat of the Elephants.
beating their Heads furiously together: For such is the manner of their fight,
assailing one another with their teeth, and standing firm they repulse one
another with great Violence: But if they once turn their sides they wound with
their Teeth, as Bulls do with their Horns. But the greatest part of Ptolomes
feared the Combat: The Elephants of Lybia fear them of India.
the which does usually happen to the Elephants of Lybia: For they cannot
endure the sent, not hear the cry of those of India. So as fearing (as it
seems) their greatness and force, they fly them, as it happened at that
time, for that flying suddenly they brake the ranks of their own men, and
made a great slaughter in Ptolomes great Battallion.

The which Antiochus perceiving, he presently charge Polycrates Horsemen
with the Elephants. The Grecians about his great Battallion fell upon Ptolomes
Targetteers. Wherefore when the Elephants had broken them, his left Wing
began to turn head. When Echecrates Commander of the right Wing, (expecting
still the Combat of the said Wings) saw the Dust rise in the Air, and that
his Elephants durst not charge the Enemies, he sends to Phoxide Captain of the
Mercenaries to charge those which he had in Front: The which he did likewise,
marching a slow pace with the Horsemen and the Elephants. There the Combat
was long and furious: yet Echecrates being freed from the danger of the
Elephants, and making a great slaughter of the Horsemen, and withal Phoxide
pressing the Arabians and Medes. In the end Antiochus his left wing was put to
flight. By this means Antiochus right wing vanquished, and the left fled. The
two great Battalions stood firm and untouched, being in doubt of the end. And
when as Ptolomy in the mean time had recovered his great Troop by his speedy
running, and was in the midst of them, he amazed his Enemies, and gave great
courage unto his own Captains and Soldiers.

In the mean time King Antiochus being young and of small experience in the
War, seeing himself Victorious of the one side, thought the like of the
rest, and pursued the Chase of the Enemy with great eagerness. But when as one
of his old Soldiers called him back, and showed him the Dust which a great
Troop had raisde in his Fort, he then knew what it meant: and turning head he
labored to recover his Camp. But when he found that all his Army was in
Rout, Ptolomes Victory against Antiochus.
then wanting good Counsel he fled to Raphia, immagining that it was not his
fault he had not obtained a glorious and Triumphant Victory, and that the
baseness and sloth of his men had been the cause of his defeat. Ptolomy
having the Victory by the means of his chief Battalion, and having lost many
of his Horsemen and Soldiers of the right Wing, he returned to his Camp,
and refresht his Army. The next day, he caused his men to be sought out among
the Dead, and buried.

From thence (after they had stripped the Enemies that were slain) he marched
with his Army to Raphia. And although that Antiochus (gathering together his
men that fled) had a desire to keep his Camp, and to leave the Town, yet he
was forced to go to Raphia: For that the greatest part of his Soldiers were
retired thither. The next day early in the morning, he parts with that small
Army, which he had remaining after so great a defeat, and went to Gaza: Where
planting his Camp, he sent men to demand the dead bodies, and to interre
them. Antiochus lost above ten Thousand foot, and three hundred Horse. There
were about four thousand foote-men taken alive. In regard of the Elephants,
there were three slain upon the field, and two wounded which dyed afterward:
most of the rest were taken. This was the end of that famous battle, where
as two powerful and might Kings fought for the Empire of Syrria, near unto
Raphia.

When as Antiochus had buried the dead, he returned into his Country with his
Army. As for Ptolomy, he presently recovered Raphia, with the other Cities,
so as the people contended who should prevent his neighbor, in yiedling first
unto the King. In such events every man strives to apply himself unto the
time. It is true, that the people of that Country are borne and inclined to
embrace the fa^^our of the present time. But for as much as the people had a
special devotion to the Kings of Alexandria, what they then did was held just
and reasonable. The people of base Syrria have always affected this royal
House. And therefore they honored Ptolomy, with Flowers, Sacrifices, Altars,
and such like things. When as Antiochus was come to the City, Antiochus sends
Ambassadors to Ptolomy.
which is called by his own name, he presently sent his Nephew Antipater with
Theodote Hermioly in Embassi^ to Ptolomy, to demand a peace of him: For
without doubt he feared his forces, neither did he much rely upon his own
soldiers, considering the loss which he had lately made. He likewise
doubted that Acheus might move War against him, considering the opportunity
of the time and occasion.

As for Ptolomy, he thought not of all this: But being joyful of so great a
Fortune, which he expected not, holding himself happy to enjoy all Syrria,
he refused not the conditions of peace. So as being lulled a sleep with this
base kind of life, which he had always used, his heart was much inclined
thereunto. When the Ambassadors presented themselves unto him, he granted them
a peace for a yearl, after that he used some proud speeches against Antiochus.
To whom he sent Sosibius with them to confirm the Accord. An Accord made
betwixt Ptolomy and Antiochus.
And after he had stayed about some three months in Syrria and Ph^nicea, and
had given order for the Cities, leaving the charge of all those places to
Andromachus Aspendius, he returned with his sister and Friends to Alexandria.
On the other side Antiochus (after he had confirmed the Accord with Sosibius,
and pacified all things to his liking) began to make preparation for War
against Ache^s, according to his first Resolution and determination. This was
the estate of Asia at that same present.

At the same time the Rhodiens taking their occasion from an Earthquake, which
a little before had befalne them, An Earthquake at Rhodes.
in the which the great Collossus, with a great part of the Pipes and Arsenals
were ruined, they carried themselves so discreetly and wisely, as this ruin
did not seem prejudicial unto them, but very profitable. Ignorance and
simplicity differs so much from Prudence and Industry, not only in a private
life, but also in public Affairs, that ease and plenty seem to procure
loss and prejudice to the one, and adversities excuse the faults and errors
of the other. The Rhodiens made these things great and ruinous, and laboring
to sent Ambassadors to all places, they did so move the Cities and likewise
Kings, as they not only drew great gifts from them, but they had them in such
sort, as they which gave them held themselves beholding unto them. Pres^nts
made to the Rhodiens by many Cities.


Hieron and Gelon did not only give them five and forty Thousand Crowns, to
repair the place ordained for all Exercises (one part to be paid presently
and the rest soon after:) but they also gave them Cald^ons of silver, with
their Treuets, and pots for water. Moreover six thousand Crowns to perform
the Sacrifices: And others six thousand to relieve the Burgesses: So as the
whole present amounted to threescore thousand Crowns. Moreover all that sailed
to Rhodes were free from Tribute. They gave them likewise fifty Slings or
Warlike Engines: Finally they advanced Images in the most eminent places of
Rhodes, as if they were beholding unto them; where the people of Rhodes were
Crowned with that of Sarragosse. Ptolomy hi^pre^ sent to the Rhodiens.
Ptolomy promised them nine score thousand Crowns: A million of Artabes of
Wheat, which is a measure of Media: Timber to make six Quinqueremes, and ten
Triremes, and about forty thousand Fathomes of Rope, and three thousand Masts
and Sails, and to repair the Collossus nine score thousand Crowns, a hundred
Architects, three hundred and fifty workmen, and for their Victuals seven
Thousand and four hundred Crowns by the year. Twelve thousand Artabes of
Wheat, for those which should make the Combats in their Games and Sacrifices:
And twenty Thousand Artabes for the victualling of ten Triremes. Of which
things he delivered the greatest part of them presently, with the third part of
the money.

Moreover Antigonus gave them Timber from eight unto fifteen Fathom, The ^ist
of A^ti^onus to the Rhodiens.
with five thousand plankes above twelve foot long, and two hundred three
score and ten thousand weight of Iron, four score and ten thousand pound
weight of Rossine, and a thousand bushels of pitch: And withal he promised
them three score thousand Crowns overplus. Chrysea (who was a woman) gave them
a hundred Thousand Bushels of Wheat, Chryseas gi^t.
with two hundred three score and ten Thousand pound weight of Lead. Seleucus
his pr^sent.
Seleucus father to Antiochus, sent them ten Quinqueremes Armed and furnished,
and that they which failed to Rhodes should be free: He gave them likewise two
hundred Bushels of Corn with Timber and Pitch, and ten thousand Fathomes of
Cord made with hair, and six hundred thousand Crowns. Prustas and
Mithridates did the like: So did all the Princes of Asia, as Lysannius,
Olympiquus, Lymnius and others. Finally we cannot number the Towns which gave
presents to the Rhodiens, every one according to their power. And if any man
will observe the time and the beginning, when as this City was first
Inhabited, he will wonder much, that in so short a time it is so much augmented
both in private and Public. But when we consider the Commodity of the place,
and the great felicity which does grow from Forreiners, and their plentiful
reuenew; there is no more any cause of admiration: Being certain that this
getting of Wealth is made with reason and judgment. We have thought it fit to
relate these things.

First, for the love of the Rhodiens, to the end that their industry and care
for the Affairs of their Commonwealth might be known to all the World, for
in truth they are worthy of commendation and love. Secondly, for the avarice of
our Kings at this day, and the wretchedness of people and Towns: Who when
they have given two or three thousand Crowns, immagine they have made a great
stately Present, and look for such thanks and honors as were given to the
Ancient Kings of Greece* Or let the Towns remember the great bounty of the
ancient presents, least they loose those great honors in making such petty
gi^ts, and let them strive to preserve their dignity: To the end that the
people and inhabitants of Greece may differ from other men.

When in the beginning of Summer, Agote being then Chief of the Etoliens, and
the time of Epirates Government over the Acheins being expired, (in my opinion
this is the passage, where we last turned from the War of the Allies)
Lycurgus the Lacedemonian returned from Etolia: Lycurgus called home*
For the Magistrates called him home as soon as they found the accusation, for
the which he was banished to be false. He was then sent to Pyrrhie the
Etolian, who at that time was Captain of the Eliences, against the Messeniens.
Arate found the trained men of Acheia ill disciplined, and the Towns careless
of the duties of War: For that Epirate, who before him had the Government, had
(as we have said) carried himself idly and carelessly in all things. But when
he had acquainted the Acheins therewith, and received their order, he applied
himself wholly to the preparation of the War. Arate prepares for the War.
Their Decree was, that they should not leuy less then eight thousand
Adventurers, and five hundred Horse: They should also make three thousand Foot
Acheins, and three hundred Horse: Among the which the Megalopolitains should
march, armed with Targets of Copper, to the number of five hundred foot and
fifty Horse, and as many Argiues. It was also ordered that they should prepare
three Ships in the Gulf of Argos, and as many near unto Patres and Dyme.
Arate was then careful to leuy men, and to make ready the Army. Lycurgus and
Pyrrhie after they had appointed a day for their departure, took their way to
Messene: Whereof the Chief of the Acheins being advertised, he came to
Megalopolis with the Adventurers, and some of those of the Election, to succor
the Messeniens.

Lycurgus on the other side entering the Messeniens Country, Calames taken in
Treason by Lycurgus.
took the Town of Calames by Treason: And from thence going on his course,
he made have to join with the Etoliens. When as Pyrrhie came to Elis ill
accompanied, to assail the Messeniens, he turned head presently, being
repulsed by the Cyparisseins. Wherefore Lycurgus took his way to Sparta,
having done nothing worthy of memory, for that he could not join with
Pyrrhie, neither was he strong enough to manage the War alone. Arate seeing
the Enemies frustrated of their hope, and thereby foreseeing the future, he
commanded Taurion to prepare fifty Horse, and five hundred foot, and that the
Messeniens should send as many, meaning with this force to defend the
Megalopolitains, Tegeates, and Argiues, from the incursions of their Enemies:
For that those Countries lie more in danger of the Lacedaemonians during the
War, joining upon the Spartains Country. Finally, he resolved to Guard
Acheia, with the Acheins and Mercenaries, from the danger of the Elyences and
Etoliens. This done, he pacified the Discord, which was grown among the
Megalopolitains, according unto that which the Acheins had ordered.

For you must understand that the Megalopolitains, being a little before
chased out of their own Country by Cleomenes, had need of many things which
were wanting: And although they still maintained their authority, A Mutiny
among the Megalopolitains.
yet they had neither victuals nor necessary expenses, either for the public
or private: So as all was full of mutiny, rage, and malice. The which does
usual fall out in Commonweals, and among private persons, when as victuals
fail. First they were in debate among themselves concerning the walls of the
City, some being of opinion that that they should not make the enclosure
greater, then their power would then bear, and keep it with so small a number
of men, considering it had bin the cause of their former danger, for that it
was greater and more spacious then the power of the Inhabitants was able to
defend. Moreover, they were of advice, that such as had Lands, should
contribute the third part, to the end they might people the City: Others said,
that they must not give a less circuit to the City, nor contribute the third
part of their possession: But their chiefest contention was concerning the Laws
written by Pritanides, an excellent man among the Peripatetiques, whom
Antigonus had given them for a Lawgiver. The City being in these combustions,
Arate pacified them, and quenched the quarrels which were inflamed among the
Megalopolitains, as well public as private. Finally they have graven the
Articles agreed upon on a Pillar seated in the Omarie, at the Altar of Vesta.
After the reconciliation of the Megalopolitains, Arate parting from thence,
retired presently to an Assembly of the Acheins, leaving the Adventurers with
Selcuous of Phare.

The Elienses incensed against Pirrhie, as if he had not discharged his duty,
they called Euripides from Etolia to be their Captain. Who considering that
the Acheins held their Diet, took six hundred Horse, and two thousand Foot,
and went suddenly to Field, where he spoild the whole Country unto Egia: And
when he had taken a great booty, he made haste to return to Leonce. Lyce
hearing this, went to meet them, and encountered them suddenly: when they came
to fight, he slew four hundred, and took two hundred Prisoners: Lyce
defeate^ Euripides.
Among the which were found Phissias, Antanor, Glearcus, Euanorides,
Aristogites, Nicasippus, and Aspasias, men of note: and withal he had all
their Arms and Baggage.

At the same time the Captain of the Sea-army for the Acheins came to
Molicria, and parting thence suddenly, he turned his way to Calcea: chalcea
spoild by the Achei^^ Fleet.
where when as the Townes-men came out against him, he took two Galleys armed,
and furnished with all things necessary, with many other smaller vessels.
Moreover, he took great spoils both by Sea and Land, and drew victuals from
thence, with other munition: wherewith he made the Soldiers more hardy and
resolute for the future. On the other side the Cities were in better hope, for
that they were not forced to furnish victuals for the Soldiers. In the mean
time Scerdilaide holding himself wronged by the King, for that he had not
given him his full pay, as he had articulated with Philip, sent fifteen
Vessels under a counterfeite show of carrying Merchandises, the which at their
first arrival to Leucade, were kindly entertained, as Friends in regard of
the League with the King. And when they could do no worse, they too^e Agatin
and Cassander of Corinthe, Agatin and Cassander taken by Scordilaide*
who as Friends were entered into the same Port with four ships: Being thus
taken with their Vessels, they sent them presently to Scerdilaide. This done,
they weighed Anchor from Leucade, bending their course toward Maleu, spoiling
all the Merchants. In the beginning of Summer, when the Soldiers of Ta^rion
were negligent in the guard of the said Cities, Arate having with him the
choice of the Army, came into the Country of Argos to get victuals. On the
other side Euripides going to Field with a good number of Etoliens, wasted the
Country of the Tritenses. Lyceus and Demodochus particular Captains of the
Acheins, advertised of the descent of the Etoliens, drew together the Dimenses,
Patrenses, and Pharenses, with the Adventurers, and ouer-ran the Country of the
Etoliens. Being come to a place which they call Phixia, they sent their
Footmen that were lightly armed, with their Horsemen to ouer-run the
Champaigne Country, and log'd their men that were best armed in Ambush
thereabouts. When the Elienses came to charge them without order to succor
their people, passing the Ambush, Lyceus Company fell upon them: A defeat of
the Elienses by Lyceus.
whose fury they being unable to resist, fled, so as there were about two
hundred slain, and four score taken Prisoners with all the Booty.

At the same time the Commander of the Acheins Sea-army, having sailed often to
Calidon and Naupacte, spoiled the whole Country, and chased the Enemy twice.
He also took Cleonice of Naupacte, who for that he was a friend to the
Acheins, had no harm: but within few days after was freed without ransom. At
the same time Agete Chief of the Etoliens, assembled a Troop of them, putting
the Country of the Acarnanians to fire and sword, and spoiled the Country of
Epirus. This done, he returns home, giving leave to the Soldiers to retire to
their houses. Afterward the Acarnanians made a descent into the Country of
Strate: where being repulsed by the Enemy, they made a shameful retreat, yet
without any loss; for that the Stratenses durst not pursue them, fearing an
Ambush. At the same time there was a Treason practiced in the Country of the
Phanotenses after this manner. Alexander Governor of Phosis for Philip, laid
a plot for the Etoliens by a certain man called Jason, to whom he had given
the government of the Phanotenses. He was sent to Agete Chief of the Etoliens,
promising to deliver the Fortress of Phanotenses unto him: whereupon they
agree and swear together.

When the day appointed was come, Agete comes in the Night with the Etoliens:
when he had laid his Troop in Ambush, he made choice of a hundred men, The
Etoliens circumuented by a Stratagem.
whom he sent to the Fort. Jason having Alexander ready with him, with a
sufficient number of Souldies, receives the companions into the Fortress,
according to the accord: whom Alexander charged with his Company, and took all
the Etoliens. But when day was come, Agete assured of the fact, carried back
his Army into his Country, having worthily deserved this deceit, for that he
had many times practiced the like. Bylazon taken.
At the same time Philip took Bylazon, which is a great Town in Peonia, and
in a good situation for the entry from Dardania into Macedony.

By this means he freed them from all fear of the Dardanians, who could not
make any incursions into Macedony, the entry being stopped by the taking of the
said Town: whereas placing a good Garrison, he sent Chrysagonus with great
speed into high Macedony, to make anew levy of men. As for himself he took
some men and went into Beocia, and Amphaxate, and came to Edesa: where
expecting Chrysogonus with the Macedonians, he parted presently after with the
whole Army, and came to Larissa on the sixth day: And pursuing his course from
thence all night, he arrived at Melitea, the which he indeauoured to take by
Scalado, and if the Ladders had not been something too short, without doubt he
had prevailed in his Enterprise: wherein the Commanders are chiefly to be
blamed. For when some of them make haste rashly and inconsiderately to take
Towns, The indiscretion of Co^manders blamed.
without any foresight or consideration of the walls, valleys and such like,
by the which they attempt the taking by an assault, who will not blame them?
And although they have duly considered of all things, yet who will not tax
them to give the charge to the first man they meet, to prepare ladders, and
such like instruments, as a thing of small consequence? Finally, in such
actions they must do that which is necessary, or else fall into danger. For
the loss does often follow the despair, and in many kinds: First the ablest
men are in danger of the attempt, especially upon the retreat, when they begin
to disdain them Whereof there are many examples. And you shall find in such
attempts many frustrated, some defeated, others to have bin in extreme danger:
And they they which have saved themselves, have bin subject for the future to
distrust and hatred: and some have served for an example, to all others to be
vigilant, giving not only to such as were present at the danger, but also to
them that hear of it, some kind of admonishment to be careful of themselves.
Wherefore they must never make use of such advice rashly: In regard of the
means to use it well, it is secure if they follow reason.

We must now return to our discourse, and speak thereon hereafter, when
occasion shall be offered, and that it is not possible to fail in such
enterprises. Philip prevented in his enterprises, plants his Camp near unto
the River of Empe, and sent his men to Larissa, and other Towns, whom he had
levied in the winter for the Siege: For all his design was to take Thebes. It
is a Town situated near to the Sea, The situation of Thebes.
ans about 300. Furlongs from Larissa. It confines fitly with Magnesia and
Thessaly: To the one side called Demetriade: And to Thessaly on that part where
the Pharsaliens and Pherenses dwell. This City does much annoy the Pharsaliens
and Demetriens: For that the Etoliens held it at that time: The like they did
to them of Larissa: for the Etoliens made many incursions into the Country
which the Inhabitants call Namirice. Wherefore Philip considering that such
things ought not to be neglected, and left behind, he sought all means to take
it. Wherefore he provided a hundred slings and five and twenty great
Cros-bowes, and approached the City of Thebes with his Army, the which he
divided into three Troops, and besieged it on three sides: whereof he placed
the one near unto Scopia, Thebes besieged by Philip.
the other at Heliotropia, and the third near unto the Mountain which looks
into the City: Fortifying the spaces in the Field with Ditches and double
Pallisadoes. Moreover he built Towers of wood in every space of two Acres of
ground with sufficient guards.

Then he draws together all the preparation for the War, and begins to plant
his Engines of Battery against the Fort. Yet the three first days he could not
make his approaches to set up his Engines, so great was the courage and
resolution of those which fought upon the walls. But after that by the combat,
and by the multitude of Darts, part of the Burgesses were slain, and others
wounded, and that the besieged ceased for a time, the Macedonians began to
mine: where working continually, although the ground were bad, they approached
unto the wall on the ninth day.

From that time they were continually employed in battering the City: so as
the Slings and great Cros-bowes ^euer ceased day nor night: And within three
days they made a breach of four score Fathomes in the wall. And when the
supporters made unto the wall, were not able to bear the burden, they fell,
and brought the wall down with them, before the Macedonians had set them on
fire. This being done, when as their courages increased, and that they made
show to enter, Thebes yielded to Philip.
and begin an assault, the Thebins being amazed, yielded themselves and their
City. When as Philip had by this means assured the Countries of Magnesia and
Thessaly, he took the best of the Etoliens goods, and thrust the ancient
Inhabitants out of the town, re-peopling it with Macedonians, and changing its
name of Thebes, he called it Philiopolis. Whilst that Philip stayed in this
City, there came Ambassadors from Chios, Rhodes, Constantinople, and from King
Ptolomy. Whom when he had answered, Ambassadors come to Philip.
as he had formerly done, (that he had been always willing to hearken to a
peace) he sent them away, giving them charge to understand the will of the
Etoliens. For his part he made no reckoning of peace, being resolved to
continue his attempts. Wherefore being advertised, that the Vessels of
Scerdilaide spoild all the Coast of Malea, and that he entreated the Merchants
as Enemies, and that moreover he had taken (breaking the accord) some ships at
Leucade, he arms twelve Vessels covered, and eight open, and sails by the
Euripus, having likewise thirty Merchants Vessels, hoping to take the
Sclauonians: neither did he neglect the Etolien War, for that he was not yet
advertised of the actions which had past in Italy. For at such time as Philip
held Thebes besieged, the Romans had been vanquished by Hannibal in Tuscany:
But the news were not yet come into Greece.

When Philip had taken the Sclauonian Vessels, and for this cause had sailed
into Cenchrea, he caused the ships that were covered to run along the Coasts of
Malea toward Egia and Patres, and stays the rest of the Vessels in the Port
of Leche. Then he makes haste to go to the Nemeen Game, and arrived at Argos.
Being at the sight, he had letters from Macedony to advertise him that the
Romans had bin vanquished by Hannibal with a wonderful defeat, and that they
were masters of their Camp. He presently shows it only to Demetrius, charging
him to keep it secret. Who taking his occasion thereby, began to entreat the
King that in dispatching the Etolien War speedily, he would attend that of the
Sclauonians, for that al Greece then obeyed him: The which they would do
hereafter: For that the Acheins affected him, and the Etoliens feared his
forces, considering the losses they had made during this War: and that as for
Italy, the voyage which he should make, would be a beginning to conquer the
Monarchy, the which did more justly belong to him then to any other, and that
moreover the opportunity was great for the present, considering the great
defeat of the Romans which Han^ibal had made. Demetrius using these means,
persuaded the King, who was but young, and of a high spirit, and too desirous
of rule.

Afterward Philip called his Council, and began to advise touching a peace
with the Etoliens. To the which Arate would willingly have assisted: the King
presently sent Cleomice from Naupacte to the Etoliens, not expecting the
Ambassadors, to propound publicly the Conditions of a Peace: For he found
Arate after the taking of Thebes, attending the Diet of the Acheins. In the
mean time he took ships at Corinthe, with the Bands of Foot men, and came to
Egia, and from thence to Lassion, whereafter he had taken a Tower in the
Peripes, he made show to enter into the Elienses Country: to the end they
should not think that he much affected a peace. And when as Cleomice had
returned twice or thrice, and that the Etoliens entreated the King to go unto
them, he willingly yielded thereunto. Then sending Letters speedily to all the
Towns of the Allies, the great fire of the War being now quenched, he
advertised them to send Ambassadors to compound and make a peace with the
Etoliens. And in the interim he transports his Army, and planted his Camp
near unto Panormus, which is a Port of Morea right against Naupacte, expecting
the Ambassadors of the Allies. Whilst they assembled, he went to Zacynthe,
and pacified the differences of that Island, then suddenly he returned to the
same place. When the Ambassadors were met, he sent Arate and Taurion with some
others to the Etoliens, who being come unto them (for they were assembled at
Neupacte) they had some conference: where understanding the desire they had of
peace, they returned speedily to Philip, and advertised him thereof. The
Etoliens desiring it wonderfully, sent an Embassy with them unto the King,
entreating him to come unto them with his Army, to the end their differences
might be the better and sooner decided. Philip wone by their entreaties, sailed
with his forces to a place twenty furlongs from Naupacte. There landing with
his men, after he had fortified his Camp and ships with Ditches and
Pallisadoes, he stayed the coming of the Etoliens. Who came unto the King
without Arms: And making a stand two Furlongs from his Camp, they presently
sent men to confer of the differences which they had at that time. The King
sent first unto them all those which were there present for the allied Cities,
A peace betwixt Philip and the Eloliens
giving them charge to conclude a peace with them, upon condition, that
hereafter every man should keep that which he presently held. And when they
had so concluded, they afterward sent many Messages for the particular actions
of either side. Of which things we have willingly omitted the greatest part,
for that there is nothing seems worthy of memory yet I have thought good to
relate in few words the remonstrances which Agelaus of Naupacte made to the
King and the Allies.

When he was allowed to speak, The Speech of Agelaus.
and that all men were attentive to hear him: It is needful (says he) the
Grecians should have no War among themselves, and they should give thanks
unto the Gods, if all with one accord (like unto those which pass the Rivers
holding hands) may be able to repulse the attempts of the Barbarians, and
defend themselves and their Cities: and if this cannot be continually
entertained, yet at the least they should at this day apply themselves unto it,
for that Greece was never in great danger: saying that he considered the great
Armies, and the great War which would soon follow: making no doubt* that if
the Carthaginians did vanquish the Romans in Italy, or the Romans them, neither
the one nor the other would content themselves with the Empire of Sicily or
Italy: But the Victors would presently extend themselves farther then were fit,
and would pass toward the East.

Wherefore they must all provide for it, and especially Philip. The which he
can no otherwise do, but in quenching this present War, and cease to torment
the Cities of Greece: And that contrariwise he have a care of all, as of one
Body, and study for the safety thereof in general as his own, and subject
unto him. Doing which all the Grecians will love him, and sight with him like
good men in his future Wars: And finally the Barbarians fearing the loyalty
of the Grecians toward him, will not attempt any thing against his Empire. The
which if he had a desire to enlarge, he must attempt against the Western
Countries, and consider in what estare the affairs of Italy now stand, and
that moreover the time was come, when he might easily hope for the Empire of
all the world. To effect the which he should be the less troubled, for that
the Romans had been defeated by Hannibal at the Lake of Perousa. Finally, he
persuades the King to exchange the War and Discords of Greece into Peace and
Concord, and that he should strive with all his power to keep himself at
liberty for the future, that he might be able to make Peace and War when he
pleased. Moreover, he said, that if he suffered this Cloud which they saw
arising toward the West, of a cruel and mortal War once to approach near
the Countries of Greece, he feared much that these Quarrels and Contentions
which were amongst them, would be found so far out of their power, as they
would not be able to pray unto the Gods to have means to make War or Peace at
their pleasure.

When as Agelaus had ended his Speech, he inflamed the hearts of the Allies to
peace, and especially Philip: for that moved by the words of Demetrius, he had
fixed his mind upon it. Wherefore they all with one accord made a peace with
the Etoliens. The which being confirmed, they retired all into their Countries.
These things were done in the third year of the hundred and fortieth
Olympiade: I mean that Battle which the Romans gave in Tuscany, with the
war of Antiochus in Syrria, and the peace made betwixt the Etoliens, Philip
and the Acheins. Behold the time wherein the Wars of Greece, Italy, and Asia
were first intermixed. For after that day neither Philip, nor the other Princes
of Greece attempted any thing either for War or Peace, but had their eyes
wholly fixed upon Italy. Soon after the Islands of Asia did the like, and all
they which were either Enemies unto Philip, or any way opposite unto Attalus,
retired not to Antiochus, nor unto Ptolomy, nor to the Southern or Eastern
parts, but all unto the West. Some solicited the Carthaginians, other did the
like to the Romans by continual Embassies. The Romans likewise fearing the
power and courage of Phillip, sent Ambassadors into Greece. And as we have
according to our first resolution, plainly set down, as I conceive, when and
how, and for what causes the Affairs of Greece are intermixed with the Italians
and Lybians, as it were in one body: we must now pursue the Actions of Greece,
until we come to the time when as the Romans were vanquished and defeated near
unto Cannes by the Carthaginians: For there we have left the actions of Italy,
and have written in this Book and the precedent, the proceeding of the same
time in Greece and Asia.

The War being ended, Tymoxines Chief of the Acheins.
when the Acheins had made choice of Tymoxines for their head and Governor,
resuming their ancient kind of living, they gave order by little and little for
their Commonwealth: The like did the other Cities of Morea: So as they
labored their lands and restored their Games and Sacrifices to the Gods. All
which things were in a manner forgotten by reason of the continual war. It
is certain that as they of Morea among all other men are inclined to a mild
and courteous kind of life, the which in precedent times they did not enjoy:
Being as Euripides says, always tormented by their neighbors, and without
rest. Yet it seems reasonable for, for all they which tend to a
Principallity, and have their liberty in recommendation, have continual
quarrels amongst them, they tending to a superintendency. The Athenians freed
from the fear of the Macedonians, seemed to live in great Liberty: but
following the besenesse of their Commanders Euriclides and Micion, they paid
Tribute in a manner to all Kings, and namely to Ptolomy, who soon after that
time made War against the Egyptians. The Athenians abandon Ptolomy.
For as he had been assisted in the War against Antiochus, they presently
abandoned him: For that grown proud with the Battle given near unto Raphia,
they would no more obey the King, seeking only a Commander, as if they had
been able of themselves to manage the War: the which was soon after done.

Antiochus during Winter had levied a great Army, Antiochus passes Mount
Tauris.
and the Summer following past Mount Tauris: where making a League with King
Attalus, he renewed the War against Acheus. And although the Etoliens found
the peace good in the beginning, for that the War had taken a better end then
they expected: Having chosen Agelaus of Naupacte for their Chief Commanded,
by whose means the peace had ensued: yet after some time they blamed him much,
The Etoliens blame Agelaut for making of the peace.
complaining that by his means they had lost the great profits they had drawn
from Foreign parts: For that he had made a peace, not only with some
Provinces, but generally with all Greece. But Agelaus bearing their blame with
patience abated their fury: And so they were forced contrary to their nature to
pacify their Choler.

Scerdilaide under color of money due unto him, The Exploits of Scerdilaide.
had spoild all those he met, and (as we have said) had taken ships of
Leucade, and had rifled a Town in Pelagonia, which they call Pissea, with
diverse other Cities of Dassarete, as Antipatria, Chrissndion, and Gertonte:
Having moreover gained a good part of Macedony, as well by persuasions, as by
force.

Philip after the peace concluded, having imbarqued himself and his Army to
sail thither, and to encounter Scerdilaide, he took land being wholly bent to
recover the said Towns. Finally, when he had fully resolved to make War
against Scerdilaide, holding it necessary to Conquer Sclanouia, Demetrius his
advice to Philip.
as well for other Enterprises, as chiefly for his passage into Italy. The
which is an advice, whereof Demetrius labored to make him susceptible, saying
that he had seen Philip do so in a Dream. He did not press this for any love
he bare him, but for the hatred he had to the Romans: Thinking by this means
to recover the Country about Pharos, from whence he had been expelled. Philip
recovered all the said Towns, approaching near them with his Army: For in
Dassarate, he took Creone and Geronte, and near unto the Fennes of Lychnide,
Enchelane, Cerece, Sation, and Boys: and Bantia in the Province of the
Calicenins: and toward the Pissantins, and Orgysse. This done, he sent his
Army to Winter. It was the same Winter when as Hannibal had spoiled the best
Countries of Italy, and past his Winter in Da^nia, and the Romans making their
Election, created Gaius Terrentius, and Lucius Emilius Consuls.

Whilst that Philip spent the Winter, he drew together a hundred Vessels,
(which never King of Macedony had done before him) thinking it necessary to
make provision: Not so much for the Combat at Sea, (for that he did not hold
himself equal in forces to answer the Romans) as to pass his Army into
Italy. Summer being come, and the Macedonians in-vred to the Oar, he parts
with his Army. At the same time likewise Antiochus past Mount Tanris. Philip
then passing by the Euripus and Malea, Philips enterprise against Sclauonia.
came unto the Countries which are about Cephalenia and Leucade. Where planting
his Camp, he fortified it with Ditches and Pallisadoes, for he feared much
the Sea Army of the Romans. But when he was advertised by his Spies, that it
was near unto Lylibeum, his Courage increased, and he proceeded in his
Enterprise, taking his course directly to Apolonia. When as he was near those
Countries which are about the River of Loia, which passes near to Apolonia,
he fell into the same fear which does many times befall Armies at Land: For
some of his Vessels which followed in the Rear, and had sailed toward an
Island called Sason, lying at the mouth of the Ionian gulf, came by night to
Philip, telling him that they had spoken with some of the Sycillian Sea, who
advertised them, that they had left the Roman Quinqueremes about Rhegium,
bending their course to Apolonia and Scerdilaide. Philip leaves his Enterprise
for fear.
Philip immagining that the Army was not far off, was amazed: And weighing
Anchor retired with great fear and disorder, he came the next day to
Cephalenia, sailing continually by night: Where assuring himself he stayed
some time, making show that his return was for some pressing affairs in Morea.

It happened that this was a false Allarum: For you must understand that
Scerdilaide advertised of the great multitude of Vessels which Philip had
drawn together in Winter, and fearing his coming by Sea, had obtained
succors from the Romans by his Ambassadors: Succors sent by the Romans to
Scerdilaide.
So as they sent him ten ships out of their Fleet which was at Lilybeum, the
which passing near unto Rhegium were discovered. If the King had not been
amazed without reason, he might well have vanquished them, and performed his
Enterprise against Sclauonia: And the rather for that the Romans had received a
wonderful loss near unto Cannes against Hannibal, where they were in a
manner quite ruined. But being then terrified without cause, he made a safe
flight into Macedony, and remained infamous.

At the same time Prusias did an Act worthy of memory: For when as the Gauls
whom Attalus had drawn out of Europe into Asia for the War of Acheus, had
abandoned him for the causes above mentioned, they spoiled all the Towns of
Hellespont with too much avarice and cruelty. And when in the end they had
besieged the Towns of the Elienses, then they of Alexandria near unto Troade,
performed an Act worthy of memory: for sending Themiste against them with four
thousand men, they not only raised the siege of the Elienses, but chaste all
the Gauls from Troade, as well cutting off their Victuals, as disappointing
their dessignes. The Gauls having taken the Town of Arisbe in the Country of
the Abideniens, sought to surprise all their Neighbors. Against whom Prusias
was sent with an Army, Prusias defeat^ the Gauls.
and giving them Battle he defeated them, killing women and Children, without
any regard of Age or Sex, and abandoned the spoil of their Camp to his
Soldiers. By this means Hellesponte was freed from great fear, leaving for
the future a good example to Barbarians, not to pass so easily out of Europe
into Asia. These things were done at that time in Greece and Asia.

In regard of Italy, many Towns yielded to the Carthaginians, after the defeat
of the Romans at the Battle of Cannes. Finally, we will make an end here of
the Histories of that time, seeing we have sufficiently showed in what Estate
Asia and Greece were in the hundred and fortieth Olympiade. And having briefly
related them in the following Book, we will turn our Discourse to the
Government of the Romans, as we had resolved in the beginning.

The end of the Fifth Book of Polybius.
THE SIXTH BOOK OF the History of POLYBIVS.
Concerning the diverse Forms of Government.
THe Declaration has been easy, by the which the Actions past are related,
and the judgment given of the future, touching the frequent increase of the
Grecians Commonweals, and how again they have many times felt a total
alteration. We may without any trouble deliver things known, and easily
conjecture of the future by the precedent. In regard of the Romans, it is
difficult to judge of the present, for the variety of their Government: Or to
foretell the future, for the ignorance of the Actions, which (as proper to
that Nation) have been in old time decided in public and in private.
Wherefore if any one will exactly know the diversities, he had need of an
excellent judgment and consideration of Actions. It is true, that they which
by instruction would make us know things, propound three kinds of Government:
Calling the first a Royalty, the second Aristocracia, and the third Democracia.
A division of Government.
Yet in my opinion we may with reason doubt of these things, whither they
propound them unto us soly, or better then the other: For it seems they are
ignorant of either. It is apparent that, that Government should be held the
best, which is composed of all the afore-sayd properties; whereof we have made
proof not only by reasons, but also in effect: For that Lycurgus has first
established the Lacedaemonians Commonwealth in that manner. Neither must we
think that these Governments are alone: For we have seen some Monarchiall
and Tyrrannous, who although they differ much from a Royal, yet they seem to
have something common with them: the which our Monarchs imagine, usurping with
all their power the name of King. Moreover the Olygarchicall Commonweals,
which have been in great number, seem to have some correspondency with the
Aristocraticall; although they differ much. The like we must judge of a
Democracy. And to prove it true, it will be apparent hereby.

We must not hold a Monarchy for a Reign: but only that which is voluntary, A
true Monarchy.
and governed more by a Common consent then by fear and violence. Neither must
we hold every Olygarchy for Aristocracy; but that only which according to the
Election is managed by the wifest and best men, A true Aristocracy.
neither must that be allowed for a Democracy, where as all the Commons have
power to do what they will and please^ but where as the ancient custom and use
is to honor the Gods, to do good unto their Parents, to reverence old men, and
to obey the Laws. Then they will call a Commonweal Democraticall, A
Democracy.
when as the Commons shall accept of that which many allow of. Wherefore we
must say that there are six kinds of Governments: We have already spoken of
three Common to all the World: The other three are near unto them, Six kinds
of Governments.
that is to say a Monarchy, Olygarchy, and Ochlocracy. The first whereof is a
Monarchy, rising naturally without any establishment. From whence does grow a
Royal Government, A Monarchical Government of one alone by fear.
by order and good direction. But when the Royal changes into its neighbor
vices, as into Tyranny, then by the abollishing thereof an Aristocracy takes
its being: the which naturally changes into Olygarchia. And when the Commons
revenge with fury the Governors injustice, then grows a Democracia. For the
outrages and iniquities whereof, in time it proves an Ochlocracia.

A man may understand that these things plainly which I have said, are true,
Ochlocracia is a Government of the mutiny of the people.
if he knows the beginning and the change of every Government according to the
course of Nature. For whosoever shall consider either of them a part, and how
they grow, may also judge of their increase, force, and alteration; and when
and how the one ends in the other. I have been of opinion that this kind of
Disputation and Exposition agreed well with the Roman Government: For that by a
certain course of Nature, it has taken from the beginning its institution and
increase. Peradventure these alterations and changes of Government from the
one to the other, are more exactly handled by Plato, and some other
Philosophers. But for that they are disputed by them in many and diverse
manners, it happens that few men understand them, Wherefore we will endeavor
to comprehend them, and set them down by certain Articles, so as (according
to our opinion) they may be of consequence for the profit of the History, and
all men's understanding. And if there be found for the present some defect in
regard of the general and Universal declaration, the reasons which shall be
hereafter delivered in particular, will repair it. What Principles then shall
I assign for government? From whence shall I say they take their first growth
and being? When mortallity fell upon mankind by inundation of Waters, The
beginning of gouernements.
or by pestifferous Calamities, or by barrenness of the Land, or by other such
like causes (as we have understood has been, and in reason may often be
hereafter) all Institutions and Arts were then lost: And when again the
multitude of men has by succession of time taken increase, as it were from
some remainder of seed; and that in regard of the weakness of their Natures
they gathered together, even as of Custom (as it is reasonable) other
creatures do according to their kinds, it is then necessary that he obtain
the Principallity and Empire which is of greatest force of body, and of most
understanding. The which we see happen in other kinds of brute Beasts,
(which we must hold for a most certain work of nature) among the which we
see the strongest and of most spirit march before, as Bulls, Stags, Cocks, and
such like.

It is therefore likely that a principallity is of that kind, and that the
course of men's lives is so governed, assembling together after the manner of
Beasts, and following those which are the most strong and powerful, to whom
force is the end of their Principallity, Principallity or Monarchy.
which we may with reason call Monarchy. But when as with Time there grows
from these Assemblies a Company and Custom, A Royalty.
then a Royalty takes her Birth: And then Men begin to think of Honesty and
Justice, and of their contraries: Such is the manner of the beginning and
fountain of the said Governments. As all men have a desire of a mutual and
natural Conjunction, and that from thence proceeds the generation of
Children, it is manifest that when any one of those which has been bred and
brought up, does not acknowledge nor yield the like to those which have bred
them, but contrariwise presume to do them outrage in word or deed, then they
which are present are offended: as knowing their care, trouble, and pains
which have engendered them, and with what diligence they have bred up their
Children. For as Mankind is more excellent then all other Creatures, to whom
is given understanding and Reason, it is not fit to pass over the said
disorder, after the manner of other Creatures: And that contrariwise the
assistants ought to observe and reprehend such an Action; foreseeing the
future, and making their account that the like may happen unto themselves.

Moreover, if at any time he which has received comfort and aid from any one
in his Adversity, does not acknowledge his Benefactor, but seeks to prejudice
him in any sort, it is manifest that they which shall see it, will be grieved
and discontented: So as their Neighbor shall move them to pity, thinking of
themselves as of their Neighbor. Wherefore then does rise a certain thought
of Virtue, and a consideration of the duty which every man must observe, which
is the beginning and end of Justice. In like manner if any one amongst the rest
takes revenge upon the most furious Beasts, withstanding their force, it is
reasonable that such a one, should purchase among the people an acknowledgment
of affection and Command: And he that should do the contrary should both
wrong his honor and good reputation. Whence again the consideration of infamy
and honesty, and of their difference takes it birth: Whereof the one merrits
(as commodious and profitable) to be loved and followed, and the other to be
shunned and avoided. When as any one having the principallity and the greatest
power, uses the afore-sayd things by the advice of many, and that he seemed
to impart them to the Subjects, according unto every man's merit: Then fearing
no more any violence, and having a good opinion of him, they submit themselves
voluntary unto his obedience, and defend his Government: And if he proves in
all respects worthy of honor, with one accord they take revenge and fight
against those which are Enemies to his power.

By this means by little and little, he makes himself King of a Monarch, when
as reason succeedes in the Empire, in steed of rage and force. This is the
first Contemplation for men, according unto nature of Honesty and Justice, and
of their contraries; it is the true beginning and fountain of a Royalty. They
do not only maintain their Principallity and government, but many times
leave it to their posterity, hoping that their Children bred up under such men
will be of the same will and disposition. But if it happens at any time that
the posterity of former Kings displeases them, then they make an Election of
Princes and Kings, without any respect of corporal forces, aiming only at the
differences of judgment and reason, making trial of the diversity of both by
the works themselves.

Wherefore leaving the ancient custom, they which have once seized upon the
Crown, and have gotten this power, they fortify certain places with walls,
and possess the Country as well for the safety, as to supply their Subjects
necessities abundantly. Whilst that Kings were careful of these things, they
were free from slander and envy: For that they differed not much from others
in their Apparel or Diet, observing a course of life conformable to others,
with a conversation and familiarity common to many. But when as they (who by
succession and a prerogative of race, are come unto the government) have
already the preparations which serve for safety, and those which are more then
necessary for food: then following their appetites, by reason of the great
abundance of all things, they think it fitting for Princes to be more richly
attired then their Subjects, and to be entreated more de^icately with diversity
of meats, and to converse without contradiction with other women then their
own. Hence springs envy and scandal with hatred and implacable rage: Finally
the royalty changes into Tyranny.

The beginning of this ruin, and the conspiracy which is made against Princes,
Tyranny.
grows not from the wicked, but is practiced by the best and most resolute
men, who cannot endure such outrages and insolences of Princes. And withal
the Commons having found a head to make resistance, join with him for the
aforesaid causes against their Prince: and then the former of a Royalty and a
Monarchy is wholly ruined, so as by consequence an Aristocracia must take its
beginning and sourse. Aristocracia.
Then the people as it were by a thankful acknowledgment, ordain these
suppressors of Tyrants to be their Heads and Commanders, and they submit
themselves unto them. When as they have with good zeal embraced the charge of
this government, they have nothing in so great recommendation, as that which
concerns the public good: providing with great care and diligence for any
thing that may touch the peoples profit, as well private as public. But when
the Children enjoy the same power from their Fathers, and have not experience
of adversities, nor of the equality and politic liberty, being withal bred
up from their youth in the authority and prerogative of their Fathers, they
change an Aristocracy into Olygarchia, some abandoning themselves to a vicious
and insatiable desire of couerousnesse and getting: Olygarchia.
Others to drunkenness, and by consequence to excess in Banquets: some to
Adulteries, and forcing of Boys: Finally, having done unto the people that
which we have formerly spoken of, it is reason they should conceive the like
ruin in the end that did befall the Tyrants.

Believe me, if any one observes the envy and hatred which the Citizens bear
them, or dare say or do any thing against the chief Commanders, he shall
presently have all the people ready to give him aid and assistance in his
Enterprise. And when they have murdered those, they dare not choose a new
King, fearing the injustice of the former, neither dare they trust their
Commonweal in the government of many, the memory being yet so fresh of the
baseness of the precedent: so as their only hope resting in themselves, they
retire, changing the Olygarchicall government into a Democracia, and taking
upon themselves Democracia,
the care and charge of the Commonweal. It is true that in the mean time
some of those have escaped, which had tasted of the pre-eminence and power: who
taking delight and pleasure in the present estate of the Commonweal, make
great esteem of equality and liberty.

But when as young men succeed, and that the Democracia is delivered to
posterity, (they strive in making little account of equality and liberty) to be
greater then the rest: whereinto they chiefly fall which have great wealth.
When as they affect command, and cannot attain unto it of themselves, they
begin to dispose of their riches, and to corrupt the Commons with that bait. A
great number being corrupted by their bounty, by reason of a silly
Covetousness of presents, then a Democracia is ruined and changed into
violence, and a seditious estate of policy. For the Commons having been
accustomed to live by the goods of their Neighbors, make a mutiny, taking a
resolute and audacious man to be their Head, who for his poverty cannot in
reason aspire to the honors of the Commonweal, and then they assemble
together, and fall to murders and ruins, and to spoil and divide the Land
amongst them, until their fury being pacified, they find again a new Lord
and Monarch. Behold the revolution of Governments, and the providence of
Nature, according unto which the estate of the Commonwealth, changes and
re-changeth, and makes the same return. Which things if any one knows not
plainly, he will be ignorant of the time in foretelling the future Estate of
the Common. But he will err often, for that a Government increases and
decreaseth where into it is so transferred, if without great judgment he gives
his advice. We will likewise come to the knowledge of the Institution,
increase, and vigor, and likewise of the future change of things in the Roman
Commonwealth, according to this knowledge.

And if it happen that any other Government has (as we have already said)
from its beginning this Institution and increase, by the course of Nature it
will be changed into its contrary: The which may be well observed by that which
follows. We will deliver in few words the Nemothesia of Lycurgus, which shall
not be impertinent to our Discourse. Wherefore when he had considered all
decent things, and how they are necessarily perfect by a certain Nature, he
has also observed how every form of Government is variable, which is
established simply according unto a power, so as suddenly it degenerates into
its neighbor Vice, and consequently by Nature. For as rust consumes Iron, and
worms Wood, being natural unto them, so as although they can preserve
themselves from all exterior outrages, yet they are corrupted by these, as
borne with them: So as according to Nature there is a certain malice growing
and adhering unto every Commonwealth: As to a Royalty there is a Monarchy:
Chirocracia a Government by the mut^ny o^ the people.
To an Aristocracy an Olygarchia; and to a Democracia, a Chirocracia: So as it
must needs follow, that in succession of time all the fore-sayd change by the
said means.

Lycurgus having foreseen these things, has ordained a Commonwealth, which
was neither simple, nor under the absolute power of one man: uniting all the
Virtues and properties of the most commendable Governments, to the end that
nothing in it should take a greater increase then was needful; nor degenerate
into the nearest vice: And that their forces by a mutual restraint should not
bend or decline to any part, nor any thing therein ruined: Finally, that the
Commonweal should remain of an equal weight for ever, according to reason
and equallity, and that by this means Loyalty should be restrained from
Arrogance, by the fear of the people, for that a just portion of the
Commonweal was allotted unto them. And again, the Commons durst not disdain
the Kings, for the respect of the most aged: Who being chosen by the Grauest,
addicted themselves continually to equity: So as the weakest party was
maintained in its Customs, and was strong and to be feared by the Succor and
aid of the Senators. The Commonweal being thus established, he has
preserved the liberty of the Lacedaemonians longer then has come to our
knowledge. When he had foreseen the Fountain and sourse of all of them; and
what did usually happen, he established the said Commonwealth with out danger.

In regard of the Romans, they have done the like in the Institution of their
Commonwealth, The Romans.
not by one reason, but as choosing that which seemed best unto them, being
made wise by the event of things, by many Combats and alterations: And by this
means they have attained unto the same end which Lycurgus prescribed: settling
a better form of a Commonwealth then we have in Greece. Finally, he that
will judge of Writers with reason, does not judge of matters as they are
omitted, but according to those which are mentioned. And if he finds any thing
false, he must conceive that omission has been by ignorance: but if all which
they have spoken be true, let him then grant that what they have omitted, has
been done for some cause, and not through ignorance.

These three parts, (whereof we have formerly spoken,) ruled in that
Commonwealth. They were all established and ordered so equally, and
proportionably by them, as no man, no not the inhabitants themselves, could
ever say whether this Commonweal were Aristocraticall, Democraticall, or
Monarchical. The which has not happened without reason: For if we observe the
power of the Consuls, it appears plainly to be Monarchical and Royal: and
if that of the S^nators, it seems to be Aristocraticall: But if we duly
consider the popular power which consists in many, it is apparently
Democraticall. In like manner, no man can say by what part the form of the
Commonwealth was then guided and governed, except in some things.

The Consuls being present at Rome, have the Government of all the public
Affairs, The Office of the Consuls.
before they draw the Army to field. To whom all the other Princes obey and
are subject, (except the Tribunes of the people) appointing Lieutenants in the
Senate, from whom they demand advice in pressing Affairs: moreover they have
the Charge and power to make Edicts. Finally, they have the care of all that
which concerns the public Affairs, which the Commons are to decide. It is
their duty to call the people together, and to pronounce their Edicts, and to
judge of the plurality of Voices. Finally, they have the power and Authority to
prepare for War, and generally of all the Government which is under the
Heavens, to conclude, they have in a manner a most stately and Royal
authority. It is lawful for them to dispose of their Allies in what they shall
think fitting for matters of War. To appoint and ordain Captains of
Thousands, to leuy an Army, and to choose the most able and sufficient. It is
also in their power to punish all their Subjects wheresoever they remain: and
to dispose of the public Treasure as they shall think good, being to that end
followed by the Questor: who presently obeyes their Commaundment: So as he
which shall consider this part of the Commonweal, he will say with reason
that it is Monarchical and most Royal.

Finally, if it happen that any of things which we have spoken, or shall
speak, shall change presently or hereafter, they may not in any sort derogate
from our opinion. Next after, the Senate has the ouer-sight of the public
Treasure: For they may dispose of the Revenues and Expenses. The duty of the
Senate.
It is not in the power of the Questors to employ money, no not in particular
Affairs, without their order, but for the Consuls. Finally, the greatest and
heauiest expense, as that which many times the Questors are accustomed to
employ, at the return of the Quinquinall, or space of five years for the
repairing of public Buildings, the Senate decrees: And whatsoever is allowed
the Censors, depends thereon. Of all offenses committed throughout Italy which
deserve a public punishment, as Treason, Conspiracy, Poisoning, and Murders
by secret practices, the punishment belongs unto the Senate.

And moreover if any private person, or any City has need of thanks or
blame, or of succors and assistants, the Senate has the whole charge.
Finally, if they be to send an Embassy into any part out of Italy; to
reconcile some, or to admonish them, be it to Command any thing, or to declare
War, the Senate has the power. In like manner when as Ambassadors come to
Rome, the Senate gives order for their entertainment, and what answer shall be
made. Finally, the Commons have no hand in all that which we have said: So as
whatsoever thou shall see done in the absence of the Consul, will seem to be
an Aristocraticall government: The which many Grecians and Kings imagine, for
that in a manner all their affairs are under the Authority of the Senate,
without any contradiction whatsoever. For this cause some one will demand with
reason, what portion of the Commonweal remains to the people? Seeing that
the Senate has the Government of things, which we have delivered in
particular, and that it disposes (which is much more) of the Revenues and
public expenses: And that moreover the Consuls making War without the
City, have a Royal power over the preparations, and all other affairs which
are in the Camp. And yet there is a part reserved for the people, the which is
of greater esteem. The authority of the people.
For they have the authority of honors and punishments: wherein is contained
the power and government, and finally the general life of men.

Believe me, there is nothing that concerns the Subjects, that can be ordered
by reason, by such as have not the knowledge of this difference, or having it
do abuse it. What reason were there that the Wicked should be equal in Honor
with the Good? The people therefore judge and many times diversely, when as the
injustice which they are to punish is of great consequence, and namely in those
which have had great and Honorable charges. They alone condemn to death:
Wherein there are some actions past worthy of praise and memory: For usually
they suffer those that are accused of a Capital or heinous crime, to retire in
the sight of all the World, although there remain an opinion in some which
confirms the judgment and Sentence, by the which a free and Voluntary
Banishment is taken quite away.

Fugitives are in safety in the Towns of Naples, Towns for the retreat of such
as are voluntarily Banished.
Preneste, Tiuoly, and in other Confederates. Finally, the people give
Principalities to the most sufficient: which in a Commonwealth is a goodly
reward of honesty. They have also Authority to confirm the Laws: and Peace
and War lies in their will: Judging of the Succors, Reconcilliation, and
Accords of their Allies. Finally, the people confirm these things in
approouing or disannulling them: So as now some may justly say, that the
greatest part of the Commonweal is in the peoples hands, and that it is
Democraticall.

We have delivered how the diverse forms of Commonweals, The mutual knitting
together of three Commonweals.
are divided among them: We must now show how they may assist and give comfort
one unto another. When the Consul has received his power, and drawn an Army
to Field, he seems a King, yet he has need of the people and Senate, to
bring his resolutions to an end, without the which he cannot possibly finish
his Affairs. It is certain that he has need to furnish and provide
Victuals, pay, and munition for the Armies. But it is not possible to furnish
him with Corn, Apparel, nor pay, without the will of the Senate: So as the
attempts of the Consulls are of necessity made fruitless, if the Senate does
willingly fail him or hinder him.

By this means it is in the resolution of the Senate to make the Enterprises
of the Commanders effectual or not. It is also in their power to send another
Commander when the year is past, or continue his Authority that does enjoy
it. Moreover the Senate may make his Exploits seem great and admirable, and
augment and increase his Actions, in like manner they may blemish and disgrace
them. In regard of that which they call Triumphs, by the which a certain
visible show of their Actions is brought by the Consulls to the view of the
people, they dare not attempt them, as it is fitting, neither (to speak
plainly) bring them to an end, unless the Senate allow of them, and furnish
the charge. The consent of the people is wonderful necessary, be they never so
far off, for it rests in them, (as were have formerly said) to confirm or
disannull all Accords and Leagues. But behold another case: For after their
Government is ended, they are forced to yield and submit their actions unto
the judgment of the Common people, so as they ought not to be careless of
the love and good liking of the Senate and vulgar sort.

Although the power of the Senate be very great, yet they must of force have
respect unto the multitude of public affairs, and draw them to their ends
and intentions: Neither can they put general and great doubts in Execution,
nor punish crimes committed against the Commonweal, if what the Court
ordaynes be not confirmed by the Common people. Matters which concern the
Senate it self, are of the same condition. For if any one propounds a Law, by
the which it does in any sort abridge the Authority and power of the Senate,
or ouer-throwes their Prerogative and Honor, or pursues them in their lives,
all these things are to be done by the power of the people.

It is likewise certain that the Senate cannot execute any of their
resolutions, not hold a Council, nor assemble themselves, if any one Tribune
of the Commons opposes. The Tribunes must always do according to the opinion
of the people, and observe their will. In regard of these things the Senate
fears the people, and observes them: In like manner the people are bound unto
the Senate, and forced to win them: For as there are many Farms which the
Censors dispose of throughout all Italy, for the great multitude of public
repairations, and many places of Rivers, Pooles, Gardens, and Mines, and
finally all other things of that nature, which are under the Roman Empire: they
are all managed by the people, hiring all the Rents and profits which grow
thereby.

Some take their Leases from the Censors, to whom others associate themselves,
others become suerties for the Farmers: and some bring the Inuentory of the
goods into the Treasury. Of all which things the Senate has the knowledge For
it rests in them to prolong the Term, and to grant some abatement, if there
has been any loss: Finally, to remit the whole Debt, if there has happened
any impossibility. There are infinite cases wherein the Senate may help, or
hurt, but those much, which hire the public Rents, whereof the Senate has
the charge. They also name the Judges in most of their Conuentions as well
public as private, as far as the greatness of the cause shall require.
Wherefore relying upon their wisdom, and fearing the uncertainty of their
aaffaires, they carefully observe the instances and oppositions of the Senates
advice. They do not willingly oppose against the attempts of the Consuls: For
that all in general (wheresoever the Roman, ^mpire does extend) are under
their Command, as well in private as in public. As therefore the power of
either of these is such, as they may mutually bring profit or prejudice, yet
they are so fitly united against all crosses and disasters, as we cannot find
a better form of a Commonwealth.

For when as any common terror shall present it self, and that they are
forced to succor one another the forces of this Commonwealth are so great, as
there is not any thing wanting, neither does any man fail, in his Charge, but
all tend jointly to bring to a good end that which has been resolved: and
that whatsoever has been ordained, may not be delayed beyond the opportunity
of time. Finally, all employ themselves as well in public as in private to
finish the Enterprise. Wherefore they have this peculiar unto them, that their
force is irresistable, and they accomplish whatsoever they resolve. Again, if
(freed from the public fear of Strangers) they abandon themselves ^o
prosperity and abundance of wealth, which they enjoy by means of their good
fortunes, then usually they grow insolent and proud, allured by flatteries, and
given to delights and idleness. Then may they easily see how the Commonwealth
studies to help it self: For when as any one of the parts will be Mistress,
and rule more then is fitting, it (...) manifest, that neither of them being
newly erected, according to our discourse, the Enterprise of either of them may
be mutually restrained and hindered, so as none of them can fly off, nor advance
it self, either of them continue in their charge, as well by an oppositit on
to their Enterprise, as through a present fear of punishment.

A Parcel of the Sixth Book touching the Order of the Roman Armies.
WHen the Romans have chosen the Consuls, they appoint the Tribunes of the
Soldiers: that is to say, fourteen of those which have followed the Wars
five years, and ten others which have continued ten years. Among the which
there are four on Horseback, and six on Foot: who must of necessity go
until they come to the Age of six and forty years: except such whose estate
does not amount to above seven pounds sterling: For those they leave and
reserve them for the Sea. But if the affairs be urgent and pressing, the
Foote-men are bound to serve twenty years. In regard of the Citty-magistrate,
no man can execute it before he has served ten years.

When the Consuls ordain a levy, they make Proclamation by the Trumper, on
what day all the the Romans of sufficient age to bear Arms, to meet; the
which they do yearly. When the prefixed day is come, and that all the able
men are come into the City, and assembled before the Capitole, the youngest
Tribunes divide themselves into four parts, as the People and Consuls have
ordained: For that they make the general and first division of their Bands
into four Legions. Then the four first chosen are appointed to the first
Legion, the three following to the second, the four subsequent to the third,
and the three last to the fourth. They ordain the two first of the most
ancient to the first Legion, the three next to them of the second, the two
following to the third, and to the fourth the three last of the most ancient.
When the division of the Tribunes has been thus made, so as all the Legions
have their Captains equally, they cast lots upon every Race, being set apart
one from another, right against either Legion: And they call their Company,
most commonly fallen by lot: out of which they choose four Young men of like
constitution. The manner of the Tribunes in the choice of the Legion^
After which the Tribunes of the first Legion make the first choice: Then the
second, the third, and the fourth last of all. And again, upon the presenting
of other four, they of the second choose first, and so the rest in order: They
of the first begin the last. Then of the four which are presented after these,
the Tribunes of the third Legion choose the first, and they of the second are
the last. By this means making always this election by porrion, and as it
were by a kind of circulation, it falls out that to every Legion the men are
equally divided.

When they have chosen this number, (the which they do to the end that every
Legion may consist sometimes of four thousand two hundred Foot, sometimes of
five thousand if the danger seems great) and that the division is thus made,
they were wont to muster their Hors-men after the Leginaries. At this day they
are the first, by an election of the richest made by the Censor, of which they
appoint three hundred to every Legion. The levy being thus made, every Tribune
draws together his Legion, and in choosing one of the most sufficient, they
take an Oath from him to obey his Captains faithfully, and to execute their
Commandments: Then the rest swear particularly in passing, testifying by
asigne, that they are ready to do all things as their first man had done.

At the same instant the Consul aduertiseth the Governors of Towns allied in
Italy, from whom they think good to draw succors, acquainting them with the
number of men, the day and the place when they should meet which should be
levied. Who after they have made their levy accordingly, they send them having
taken an Oath, and given them a Commander and a Treasurer. But when the
Tribunes at Rome have taken the Oath of the Soldiers, they send them back,
appointing a day and a place to every Legion when they ought to come without
Arms. The diulsion of Soldiers in every Legion.
When they are drawn together on the day appointed, they make choice of the
youngest amongst them, and weakest in their estates, to carry Iauelings or
Darts: Then such as are more advanced in years, they carry Arms which they
call forked Darts or Iauelings: And they which are strong of Body and more
aged, are made principals: But the Triarij are chosen out of the most ancient.
So many differences of Names and Ages are among the Romans, and likewise of
Arms in every Legion. They divide them in such sort, as the Triarij are the
most ancient, to the number of six hundred: The principals twelve hundred, to
whom the forked Iauelings are equal: The rest which are younger, are light
Iauelings. If the Legion consists of a great number, they divide it
proportionably, except the Triarij, whose number is always the same.

They youngest are bound to carry a Sword, The form of a Buckler.
a light Iaueling, and a Buckler. This Buckler is firm as well for its art, as
for the greatness, sufficient to defend the body. It is round, having three
foot in Diameter. The Soldiers have moreover a light Head piece, whereon does
hang a Wolves skin, or some such thing, which serves for a covering and mark,
to the end that every one may be known by his Captain being in fight, The
light Iaueling.
doing his duty or not. The light Iaueling is most commonly three foot long,
of the bigness of a man's finger, with an Iron head a good spanne long, and is
so slender and sharp, that upon the first cast it must of necessity bend, and
so is made unprofitable to cast again: Otherwise they will serve the one as
well as the other. Then they command those which are more aged, whom they call
forked Iauelings to be armed.

The Romans Arms are first a Target two foot and a half broad, The form of
a Target.
and bending upon the superficies, and four foot in length: The greatest has
four fingers more, and is made of two boards glued together with Oxe-glew: And
is covered with a Calves skin, or that of a Goat, or some such like Beast.
All the circumference has a hoope of Iron, the better to bear off the blows
of a Sword, and that leaving it on the ground, it may not wear. In the midst
there is a Bosse of Iron, which bears off all blows, and the violence of
Stones; of long Pertwisans, and of all manner of Darts be they never so
violent. The Sword which they call Spanish, The Spanish Sword.
and has two edges with a very sharp point, hangs commodiously with the
Target upon his thigh. It charge home for that it is strong and stiff.
Moreover, they have two spits, a head-peece of Brass, and greaues for the
defense of their legs, amongst the which spits, some are great, others
slender: The strongest which are long and round, have three inches in Diameter:
Those which are square, have the sides equal: The slendrest are like unto the
lesser forked Darts, which they carry with the said Arms: The staff whereof
does not much exceed the length of four foot and a half: and they arm them
with a head of Iron, equal in length to the staff, the which they join so
close with so many ligatures and crosse-nailes, as they never dissolve until
the Iron break: although at the nether end it be a finger and a half thick,
where it ioynes unto the staff, so careful they are in setting them together.

Besides all these things, they are adorned with a Crown of feathers, with
three red or black feathers standing right up almost a foot and a half, the
which set upon the top of the head, together with his other Arms, make a man
seem twice as big, and by this means of a goodly appearance, and terrible to
the Enemy. Others taking a piece of Brass a span broad, which they lay upon
their stomachs, which they term the guard of their hearts, are completely
armed. But they which are held to have above a hundred and fifty pounds
sterling in their estates, take for the defense of their body, with their other
Arms, shirts of maile. The Principals have the same kind of Arms, and in like
manner the Triarij, but in stead of spits, they carry forked Iauelings. They
choose the heads of Bands our of all these sorts, except the youngest) to the
number of ten, of the most ablest men: Besides the which they make another
Election of ten others, whom they call head of Ordonance. Among the which the
first chosen is admitted to Council. The manner of choosing the heads of Bands.
These again choose as many Lieurents, These things done, they divide with the
Captains every age into ten parts, except the light Iauelings: appointing to
every Band two Captains and two Lieutenants of those which have been chosen.
In regard of the light Iauelings or Darts which remain, they distribute them
equally throughout all the Bands: which Bands they have called Orders, Troops,
and Ensigns: and their Captains Centurions and Heads of Bands. These choose
out of every Troop two strong and resolute men to carry the Ensigns. They
make two Captains to every Troop, and with reason: For as it is certain what
either of them can do or suffer, and that the actions of War have no excuse,
they will never have the Troop remain without a Commander or Governor. If
they be both present, the first chosen leads the right wing of the Troop, and
the second those which are upon the left wing of the Ensign. If one
miscarries, he that is present gouernes all. Finally, they desire not so much
valor nor disdain of death in their Commanders, Government, Constancy, and
good Counsel required in a Captain.
as government, constancy, and good counsel: and not to engage themselves
first in the fight, nor to begin it: But being vanquished and pressed, they
should stand firm, and rather dye then to abandon their place. They have also
divided their Cauallery into ten Troops, drawing from every one of them three
Captains: who likewise made choice of three Lieutenants, of which the first is
Chief of the Troop, and the rest hold the rank of Dizeniers or Commanders of
ten, and so they are called. The second holds the place of the first in his
absence.

The Arms of the Horsemen are at this day very like to those of the Grecians.
Formerly they had no Guyrasses, being in danger by reason of their Linen
breeches, The Roman Cauallery armed after the Greek manner
with the which they were more active to mount on Horseback lightly, but they
found themselves in great danger in fight, being in a manner naked. Moreover,
their forked Iauelings were unprofitable for two respects: For first they made
them slender and fit to dart, so as they could not take their aim, and many
times they were broken before the point could stick, for that they were
continually shaken with the trotting of the Horses: and withal they were of no
use but to thrust forward, being unarmed at the other end. In truth they were
of no service after they were broken. They had also Targets made of the hydes
of Oxen, like unto puffed up ^akes, which they usually make at Sacrifices: The
which they could not well use in fight, for that they were not firm, but
swelled with rain. By this means they grew unprofitable, Wherefore as the use
did not seem good, they presently changed, embracing the fashion of the
Grecians Arms, in the which the thrust with a Iaueling is sudden and
certain, neither is it without effect, for that it shakes not, but is firm.
Moreover, in turning the point behind, the use is firm and violent: Their
Target is the like, for both in defending and assailing it, it is firm,
strong, and profitable. The docility of the Romans.
The which when they had seen, they presently followed it: for the Romans are
as apt as any others to embrace the best course of life. When the Tribunes have
made their division, and the orders concerning Arms, they send them back to
their houses. The day coming whereon they have sworn to come to the place
appointed by the Consul, (for that every one does assign it apart unto his
Legion, considering that most commonly they ordain to every one apart, (...)
has one certain length joining to the way, being 100. foot long. They study
often to make the depth equal, except unto the Allies. But if their Army be
greater, they add both to the length and depth. And as the lodgings of the
Hors-men answer to the middle of the Tribunes Tents, there is a certain way
made crossing the before said straight line, and the void place before the
Tribunes. The passages are like unto streets. For as of either side the troops
are lodged all along, but after the Hors-men of the said two Legions, they
lodged the Triarij in the same form, joining troops to every Ensign, so as
the figures touch one another, hauuing their aspect to the other side contrary
to the Horsemen, reducing the depth to half the length in every form: For
that they are most commonly but half so many in number as the other troops.
Wherefore as the number of men is often found unequal, it happens that the
parts are always made equal in length, for that they differ in depth. Then
they lodge the Principals 50. foot distant, and opposite to the Triarij. These
being turned against the said spaces, the two streets are complete, taking
their beginning from the same straight line, with such approaches as the
Horsemen have, that is to say, of 100. foot distance, which is before the
Tribunes, and ending on the contrary side: The which formerly we have
propounded to be opposite to all the form of the Camp. After the Principals
they lodge the forked Iauelings behind in an opposite aspect, the figures being
joined. And as by the first division all the parties have ten Ensigns, so the
streets are alike and equal behind, as well in length as in separation, upon
the sides opposite to the Rampire and Pallisadoe* where turning the last
Ensigns, they camp Then after the forked Iauelings leaving a space of eight
fathom and two foot, against them they lodge the Horsemen of the Allies,
taking their beginning at the same straight line, and ending on the same side.
The number of the Allies Footmen is equal to the Roman Legions, only excepted
extraordinaries, but the Hors-men are double in number, from whom a third part
is drawn for extraordinaries. The Commanders of Bands take the first lodgings
in every quarter: placing on every side the sixth Band after the fifth, they
retire eight fathom and two foot, the like they do with the Bands of
Footmen: so as there is another passage made through the Legions, and cross
the streets: the which is a way equally distant from the Tribunes Tents, which
they call the fifth, for that it is drawn after the fifty five Bands. The place
which remains behind the Tribunes Tents, and which of either side ioynes to
the Consults Pauillions, serves partly for the Marketplace, and partly for the
Questor and his munition. In regard of the two last Pauillions, of either side
of the Tribunes, some choice Horsemen and other voluntaries following the
Camp for the love of the Consul are lodged there, toward the sides crossing
the Rampires, some looking toward the Questors munition, and some to the
Marketplace, with an order bending toward the Tents of the extraordinaries.
It often falls out that these men are not only lodged near the Consul, but
they also do their duties about him and the Questor, when the Army marches,
and in their other affairs.

To these are joined Foot men looking to the Rampire, who do the like service:
after which they leave a space of 16. Fathom and 4. foot broad, equally
distant from the Tribunes Tents, besides the Market place, the Pretorium and
the Questory, extending throughout all the parts of the Rampire: At the upper
end whereof the extraordinary. Hors-men of the Allies Camp, looking toward
the Praetor and Questor. In the midst of their Pauillions, there is left a way
to the Praetors place, of 8. fathom and 2. foot, drawing to the further end of
the Camp. After these are lodged the extraordinary Foote-men of the Allies,
turning their backs to them, and looking toward the Rampire and the further
end of the whole Camp. In regard of the void place remaining of either side of
the crossing flanks, it is for strangers and new comers. Matters being thus
disposed, the whole form of the Camp remains square with equal sides. As
for particular figures as well of separation of streets, as of other
ordinances, they are much like a Town. They cast up the Rampire 33. fathom
and 2. foot from the Tents: for that this void space profits them much. For
it is commodious for the clensing of the Camp, so as every man goes forth,
into that place by the street which is nearest to him without crossing (...)
another. There they also keep their Cattle safely in the night, and the ^ooty
which they have taken from the Enemy. And it is of great benefit, for if the
Enemy assailes them by night, neither Fire nor Darts can touch them, or very
little, and without any offense, considering the great distance and the Tents
about them. It is then easy for a man to judge how spacious this Camp is,
whether they give it a multitude of Foot and Horse, or they make the Legion of
four or five thousand men, with the length, depth, and great number of
quarters: adding thereunto the spaces of ways with all other things. If at any
time the number of the Allies be great, whether that they followed the Camp
from the beginning, or came afterward upon some occasion, they fill up the
places which are about the Pretorium, with such as are new come, and they draw
the marketplace and the Questory into one, for the necessity of the time. Also
if the number of those which are come to Field with the Army be great, they
add on either side of the Roman Legions a street toward the crossing Flanks.
And if all the four Legions and both the Consuls be joined in one Camp, we
must conceive that they are two Armies, equally camped and joined back to
back, the lodgings of their extraordinaries touching one another, the figure
being somewhat long, and twice as spacious, with a circumference half as big
again. The Consuls being in one Camp, they do always thus: But if they be
separated, they observe the first order? In regard of the Marketplace, the
Pretorium and Questory, they place them in the midst of the two Armies. But
when they are encampt, the Tribunes assemble, taking a particular Oath of all
men, be they free or bond, who swear not to steal any thing in the Camp, and
if they find any thing to bring it to them. Then they dispose of the Ensigns,
and depute out of the two Legions two of the Principals and of the forked
Iauelings, for the guard of the place which is before them. For thither the
greatest part of the Romans repair daily: and therefore they have the charge
it should be kept clean. Every Tribune chooses three out of the other two and
twenty Ensigns which remain. According to the said division, there are so
many Ensigns of Principals and forked Iauelings in every Legion. There are
six Tribunes which govern in their turns, and particularly three Ensigns,
the which set up the Tent in the place appointed for him that has the
government, pauing the place which is about it. Moreover they have charge to
fortify if it be needful, for the guard of the Baggage. They also appoint two
Watches, The order of two Watches.
either of them consisting of four men whereof some are before the Tent, and
others behind near unto the Horses. As every Tribune has three Ensigns, and
above a hundred men in either of them, except the Triarij and light Iauelings
(which are not bound to that service) the charge is found light: for that the
Watch falls to every Ensign but the fourth day. Finally, as for these duties,
the necessary Command, with the honor and obedience is due unto the Tribunes.
The Ensigns of the Triarij are freed from the Tribunes charge, but they serve
daily among the Troops of Horse men, as they are lodged near them: and they
have a care of the Horses, lest they should entangle and hurt themselves, and
so be made unserviceable: or being untied fight together, whereby an Alarm
might grow in the Camp* Moreover, one out of every Ensign keeps a guard
daily before the Consul, whereby he is in safety from Treason, being the most
honorable Magistrate. The Allies have the charge of either side of the Ditch
and Pallisadoe, where every one of their Troop is nearest, and the Romans of
the other two, and every Legion has one. And as every flank is distributed by
the Ensigns, the Captains of the Bands are present at the particular guard,
but in general two of the Tribunes had the oversight, who in like manner had
the charge of the rest of the Legion. For For their division being made by two,
they govern by their turns two Months in six, and they (to whom the lot is
fallen) have the prehemiuence of all the affairs. The same manner of
government is observed among the Commanders of the Allies. The Horsemen and
Captains of Bands, come at Sunrising to the Tribunes Tents, and the Tribunes
to the Consul, to whom he gives order for pressing affairs: They likewise to
the horsemen and Captains, who command the Troop in time convenient. As for
the watch word by Night, they give it safely thus: A man is chosen both of the
Horse and Foot of the tenth Ensign, which camps behind upon the extremity of
the streets, The Romans manner in giving the word.
who is not bound to watch, but comes only every day at the Suns setting to the
Tribunes Pauillion, and when he has received the word, (which is written
down) he returns, and being come unto his Ensign, he delivers it with the
word unto the Commander of the next Ensign in the presence of witnesses. The
like he does unto the next, and so consequently of all the rest until it come
unto the first Ensigns which are lodged near unto the Tribunes. They must
bring back this Paper to the Tribunes before night: and if all those which
have bin delivered be returned, they know that the word has bin given to all
in general, having past through them all. If there be any fault, the Tribune
enquires presently of the cause, and knows by the inscription from what quarter
the Paper came, and when the error is discovered, they presently condemn him
to a certain Fine. Moreover, they appoint their guards after this manner: An
Ensign watches about the Consuls Tent: the like do the Deputies of every
Ensign about the Tribunes and the Troops of Horse men. Thus they of every
Band dispose of themselves, and the Consuls of the other guards. There are most
commonly three guards, one about the Questor, and two tohers about the
Lieutenants and Counselors. But the light Iauelings remain without the Camp,
making a guard by day about the Pallisadoe, for it is their charge: Of which
there are ten appointed for the guard of every Gate.

The Lieutenant of every Ensign brings in the Evening unto the Tribune those
that are appointed for the first watch: to either of which the Tribune gives
little Talleys, having Characters: After the receipt whereof they retire to the
places assigned them. Concerning the survey of the Watch, To whom the survey of
the watch belongs.
they trust Horsemen; for the chief Captain of the Band must give order to
one of his Lieutenants to carry this Commandment to every Legion: That is to
say, to four young men of his Band before dinner, that the charge belongs to
them, to visit the Watch the Night following. This being done, the like
command must be given to the Captain of the next Band, that it belongs to his
charge to make the Round the day following. This being heard, the day following
he does the like to othres, and so consequently of the rest: Finally, they
which have bin chosen by the Lieutenants of the first Band, to whom the Watch
is fallen, repair unto the Tribunes, and take in writing what portion, and how
many Watches they are to visit, which done, they remain in the guard near
unto the first Ensign of the Triarij, of the which the Captain of the Band
has the charge, to the end the Trumpet may sound in fit time for the Watch.
The time being come, he that has the charge to make the Round, does it to the
first Watch. He not only visits the places near the Pallisadoe and streets,
but altogether going about the Ensigns and Troops: and if he finds the Watch
of the first guard waking, he takes their Talley: But if he finds any one
sleeping, or the place abandoned, he departs, taking witness of them that are
near. The like also they do which afterward go the Round. The charge to
cause him to sound to the Watch, belongs to the Captains of Bands of the first
Ensigns of the Triarij of every Legion, who serve as visiters for the guard.
Either of which in the morning brings the Paper to the Tribune, and if they
have brought all they return. If any one brings less then the number of the
guards, they search by the Character where the fault was committed. This being
known, they call the Captain of the Band, who brings those whom they had
appointed for the Watch. These debate it with the Visiter: And if the fault be
in the Watch, the Visiter delivers it presently with the testimony of those
that were near: The manner how they punish such as fail in the Watch.
For he is bound to do it: But if he has erred himself, the blame is laid
upon him, and they make his process presently before the Tribune, in the
presence of the assembly: if he be condemned, they whip him. This is their
punishment: The Tribune when he has scarce touch^ the condemned with the rod
all the Soldiers of the Camp fall upon them with rods, and kill them for the
most part, and if any escape, yet they are not preserved: for how were it
possible, seeing that the return into their Country is forbidden, neither
have they Friends or Kinsmen that dare receive them into their houses.
Wherefore they which fall into this Calamity, perish totally. To the like
punishmen are also subject the Lieutenant and Captain of the Band, if they
have failed in their Command, the one as Vissiter, and the other as Captain of
the Band, who must show himself in time convenient, wherefore as the
punishment is severe and irremissible, the watch never commits any fault. The
Soldiers must obey the Tribunes, and they the Consuls. It is true the Tribunes
have power to condemn in a Fine, to absolve and to whip. The Captains have
the like privilege over the Allies. If any one has stolen any thing in the
Camp, he is whipped: so is a false witness, or any one that is apprehended
abusing the flower of the youth. Moreover, if any one has bin thrice
reprehended for one and the same crime, they punish him afterward grievously
as a depraved person. They hold these crimes infamous and base in a Soldier,
as if any one has bragged falsely to the Tribune of his prowess to win
honor: Or if any appointed to the guard of a place, abandon it cowardly, or
leaves any of his Arms for fear in fight. Wherefore some having apparent
death before them in the place where they are set, as being environed by a
great Troop, will never abandon the station where they have bin once
appointed, fearing the punishment due to their offense. Some in the like
dangers losing by chance their Bucklers and Swords, or some other Arms, thrust
themselves among their Enemies, hoping to recover that which they have lost by
force: or enduring some unfortunate accident, to fly a manifest infamy and
reproach of their Companions. If these things happen to many, and that some
Ensigns have by a general consent abandoned their place, they held it not fit
to whip them, nor to kill them all, but they have another expedient which is
profitable and terrible: for after they have drawn the Army together, the
Tribunes bring them into the midst of it, accusing them with big words.
Finally, he draws forth by lot five or eight, sometimes twenty, having regard
unto the Troop, so as there be the tenth part of the delinquents, whom they
whip as has bin said, without any remission. Moreover, he commands the rest to
lodge without the Rampires and Pallisadoes of the Camp, delivering them Barley
for Wheat. By the apparent danger and fear of the lot equally incident to them
all, seeing the event is uncertain, with the example of the Munition which
they give them of Barley, concerns them all, and serves for a terror and
restraint from offenses. Moreover, they encourage young men to undergo danger:
For when necessity requires it, and that any one of them has performed an act
of valor, the Consul assembles the Army, where they are presented which have
done any memorable act: There he commends every man in particular, laying open
what they have valiantly performed, The manner of recompencing the Soldiers
valor.
or any other thing that has bin worthy of memory, during the whole course of
their lives: Finally, he gives a gaulish Dart to him that has wounded the
Enemy: To a Footman which has overthrown a Horseman and stripped him, a
vessel of Gold: To a Horseman the Furniture of a Horse. In former time they
had none but the gaulish Dart: which are gifts which they receive, which in
skirmishes and such like actions have done valiantly and courageously, where
without any necessity they enter voluntarily, and fight man to man in single
Combat, not he which in Battle or the taking of a Town has wounded or
stripped an Enemy. It is true they give a Crown of Gold to those which have
first ascended the wall: The Consul in like manner makes show of such as have
defended and preserved any Citizens or Allies, and makes them honorable by
gift. Moreover the Tribunes compel those which have been preserved, if they
do it not willingly, to crown their preserver, to whom they bear a reverence
and respect during their lives, as to their Fathers, to whom they yield the
like duty. By these inticements they not only encourage the assistants to
fight, and by their example to undergo danger: but likewise the Inhabitants
which remain in the City. For they which have obtained these gifts, besides
the glory and esteem of the Soldiers, the fame flying to their family, they
have solemn pomps made for them, being returned into their Country with great
honor and dignity, for that they to whom the Captains have done such honors,
are only worthy to be so magnified and esteemed. They also set up in the most
apparent places of their City the spoils, as marks and testimonies of their
virtue. As they are thus curious and diligent in the Camp, for honors and
punishment, it is reasonable and fitting the events of War should prove
prosperous and honorable.

The Foote-men have by the day fourteen Deneers, the Captains of Bands two
Sous and four, The pay or entertainment of Foot and Horse.
the Horsemen have three Sous and six, a Foote-man has monthly almost four
Bushels of Wheat, a Horseman has by the month three Septiers and a Mine of
Barley and a Septier of Wheat. As for the Allies, the Foote-men have the same,
the Horseman has eight Bushels of Wheat, A Septier is two Mines, and a Mine
two London bushels.
and two Septiers and a Mine of Barley, which are things done in favor to the
Allies. The Questor deducts a certain portion of the Romans pay, for the
Wheat, Apparel, or Arms, if any of them have need. They march in Battle
after this manner, when the first warning is given, they pack up their Tents
and Baggage. The which no man may take down, or set up, before those of the
Tribunes and Consuls be ordered. At the second sound of the Trumpet, The order
of the Camp in marching.
they lay the Baggage upon the Sumpters. But at the third the first must march,
and all the Camp must move: whereas sometimes the extraordinaries march first,
being followed by the right wing of the Allies, with their Baggage in the
Rear. After these march the first Roman Legion, with their stuff after them.
Then follows the second with their carriages, following the Army close.

It is true, the left wing of the Allies makes the Reareward when the Army
marches. Sometimes the Horse men follow in the Rear, every one to his
Quarter: where they are upon the wings of the Baggage, to assist them for their
safeties. But if there be any doubt of the Reareward, all march in one order,
except the extraordinaries of the Allies, who are brought to the front of the
Reareward, and every other day the same Legion and wings make the point. Then
again they follow behind, to the end that all may be partakers of Forage and
water, changing their order daily, to the end every one may be first in his
turn. They observe another kind of march in dangerous times, and in a plain
Champaigne. They make three Battalions in equal distance, consisting of forked
Iauelings, Principals and Triarij's, putting before the Baggage of those
Ensigns which march first. After the first those that are second: and then
does march the Baggage of the third, and they order their Baggage and Ensigns
by this proportion alternatiuely. Marching in this order, if there happens any
great affairs, they cause the Ensigns to march thorough the Baggage,
sometimes presenting their Targets, sometimes their Iauelings to the Enemy. And
in one instant and the same march, the Soldiers put themselves in order of
Battle, unless it be when as your forked Iauelings fetch a compass: For
then the Baggage with their attendants, stealing behind the Soldiers,
recouers some place of safety.

But when in marching they are near to plant their Camp, the Tribunes and
they which are usually appointed to that charge, go before: who after they
have viewed the place fit for the Camp, they first mark out the place for the
Consuls Tent, (as has been said) and upon what aspect and flank of the
square thus marked out, the Legions should be lodgd. Then they measure out a
plot for the Pretorium: after which a straight line, whereupon are joined the
Tribunes Pauillions: Then a line equally distant, after which are lodgd the
Legions. In like manner they measure on the other side of the Pretorium, the
places whereof we have lately spoken in particular. This is soon done, for
that the measures are easy, the spaces being certain and ordinary) they set
down a mark, and first of all that where the Consuls Pauillion must stand:
Then the second on the side which is chosen: The third to the line in the
midst, to the which the Tribunes set their Tents: The fourth where the Legions
are lodgd. Of which these last are red, and the Consuls white. As for the other
side, there they sometimes fasten forked Darts, or other marks of diverse
colors. This done, they consequently make the streets: At every one they
fasten a forked Dart, to the end that all things might be known more
commodiously to them that approach to the Army, and to the view of the Camp,
by a conjecture and consideration of the Praetors mark.

Wherefore every man knowing plainly in what street and in what part his Tent
is, for that they always hold one place in the Camp. It falls out in like
manner as when an Army enters into its own City, which is well known. Every
man from the Gate turning, marches presently and comes to his own lodging
without wandering, for that all in general and particular know in what quarter
of the City their dwellings are. It happens likewise in the Romans Camp,
wherein they seem (following this custom) to take a contrary course to the
Grecians in regard thereof. The Grecians make great account of the strength of
a Camp, and seek it principally, flying partly the labor of ditching,
imagining that fortifications made by hand, are not so effectual and good as
those of nature, wherefore they are forced in Camping, wholly to change their
forms according to the situation on of places: so as all men's lodgings are
uncertain. In regard of the Romans, they desire rather to endure the labor of
rampring, and to do all other things necessary for their ease, and to have the
knowledge of every one in the Camp. These are the general parts of the
contemplation of an Army, and the situation of a Camp.

A Parcel of the Sixth Book of Potentates, and which is the most excellent.
ALL Historiographers in a manner have in their writings made great esteem of
the Excellency of these kind of Commonweals, as the Lacedaemonians, Candiots,
Mantiniens, and Carthaginians: Some likewise have mentioned the Athenians and
Thebeins. For my part, I differ from the rest: in regard of the Athenians and
Thebeins. I do not hold it needful to use many words of them; for that they
have had no great increase, nor any firm forces, neither are they fallen into
any moderate alteration: But as they seemed to be in vigor and force by a
certain new temporal Fortune, so they have felt a contrary change. The
Thebeins have purchased an esteem of virtue among the Grecians by the fault of
the Lacedaemonians, The Thebeins.
and the hatred of those which were of their League, adding thereunto the
excellency of one or two in regard of the afore-sayd things. That the virtue of
Governors, and not the estate of the Common weal has been the cause of the
Thebeins felicity, the sudden following Fortune has made manifest. Their
power has been augmented and confirmed, and again ruined during the lives of
Epaminundas and Pelopidas. Wherefore we must conceive that these Men and not
the Commonweal, have been the cause that the City of Thebes has purchased
so much honor whilst it was in esteem. We must likewise for the same reason
judge the like of the Athenians: the which has many times, The Athenians.
especially by the virtue of Themistocles, made it self glorious, but has
presently tried a contrary change by the disorder of its nature.

It has always happened to the Athenians, like unto ships unfurnished of
Pilots. For when the Company resolve to agree, and to obey the Governor of the
ship, either for fear of Enemies, or for the danger of a storm, they perform
their duties cheerfully. But when through arrogance they begin to disdain
their Governors, and to mutine, for that the same things do not please all
men: so as some have a will to fail, others to force the Pilot to go to
harbor, and that some lay hold of the Oars, and call upon him to set sail:
this causes an infamous spectacle to those which behold it, by reason of the
mutual discord and mutiny. The humor of those which are Companions in the
Navigations, has no stay: wherefore flying many times the great depth of the
Sea, and great storms which do usually arise, they sail along the shore. The
like has often happened to the Athenians. For as they have some times repelled
by the virtue of their people and Commanders, great and greiuous calamities,
yet they have erred wonderfully by their great rashness and indiscretion,
having a prosperous gale and all things successful. Wherefore it is not
needful to hold any longer discourse, neither of it nor of the Thebeins: where
the Commons attempt all things according to their own humors, the first being
brutish and rude, and this other accustomed to violence and fury.

Coming then to that of the Candyotts, it is fit to know two things, why the
most learned among the ancient writers, as Ephorus, Xenophon, Callisthenes, and
Plato, say first that it is like and the same with that of the Lacedaemonians,
and secondly that it is commendable: For neither of them seems true in my
opinion: The which may be conceived by that which follows, showing first
that it differs; they say that the Lacedaemonians have this proper; that it is
not lawful for one man to have more land then another, being necessary for
every Burgess to have an equal portion of lands in the City. Secondly that
he is to be amerced as a wicked man, that has greater possessions then the
rest: By this means ambition is wholly or in part rooted out of this
Commonweal. Thirdly, their Kings enjoy the Crown for ever: and they only for
life, whom they call ancients: By whom and with whom all the affairs of the
Commonweal are managed. The Lacedemonian Commonweal.
In regard of the Candiots, all the things are governed by contrary means. For
the Laws allow them to possess what Lands they can get: by this means
Excellency is in esteem amongst them, The Common weal of Candy
so as the possession of Lands is not only held necessary, but also most
honest.

Finally, the desire of infamous and auaritious gain is so powerful amongst
them, that among all mortal men only the Candiots find no kind of gain
worthy of blame: Although that in that which concerns their principality, they
have an Annall and Democraticall government: so as we are in doubt, and wonder
often, how Writers have delivered them unto us to be familiar and as it were
Germans, seeing they have so contrary a Nature: Neither have they without
doting ordained so many differences, not lightly, but with a great show of
words: saying that only Licurgus among the Ancients, had aimed at firm and
solid things: And that as there are two means for the preservation of every
Commonweal, which are force against the Enemy, and mutual concord and
agreement among themselves: that in chasing auatice, he had withal taken away
all civil discord and mutiny: and that by this means the Lacedaemonians being
freed from these mischiefs, have better then any other Grecians governed their
Commonweal, and with greater union. And although the Candyotts be of this
advice parralelling themselves, Yet they think it concerns them nothing,
living in many public mutinies, murders and civil war by their natural
avarice, presuming to say that these two Governments are alike. Ephorus
speaking of these two Commonweals, uses the like speech, except their names:
If any one does not observe the propper names, who can discern whereof he
speaks. These are the causes for the which in my opinion they differ.

We will now show the reasons for the which the Candyotts Commonwealth, does
not seem commendable nor worthy to be immitated. I conceive that of every
Commonwealth their are two Principles, for the which their estate and power is
desired or detested: Which are their manner of living and their Laws. Two
principles of every Commonweal.
That is to be desired and the best, by the which the life of men in private
is made religious and honest, and the common course of living in the City
gracious and just. Finally that is to be detested and avoided, where they do
the contrary. And as we judge confidently that the men of a Commonwealth apply
themselves to virtue, when we see their course of life, and the laws to savor
of honesty in some of them: So we may with reason say, that a Commonweal is
altogether depraved, as well by the laws, as by their course of living, when we
see any given to covetousness, and the public Arts unjust.

Moreover you shall not find any lives in private more cunning and crafty, nor
enterprises more unjust then among the Candiotts, except some few. Whereof we
approve it by this comparison, the reason why we hold their Commonwealth not
to be like the Lacedaemonians, nor to be chosen, or worthy to be followed. I say
moreover that Platoes Commonweal is not to be preferred. Although that some
of our Philosophers make great esteem. Platoes Commonweal is to be rejected.
As we do not receive among handicraftsmen, nor wrestlers, those which have
not excercised their bodies, nor been accustomed to wrestling, So we may not
receive this: So as compared with the former, we may not bring it in
compedition, before we see some effects. I will for the present only propound
this: If we must esteem and parralell it to the Commonweals of Lacedemon,
Rome, and Carthage, it were even as if a man should propound an Image, to be
compared with men that are living and animated. For although he deserves
commendation of his Art, yet the comparison of things which be dead, with the
living, seem to the eye poor and obscure. Leaving them therefore, let us
return to the Lacedemonian Commonweal. Licurgus without doubt, seems to
have made the law, and well provided that the Burgesses might agree together,
for the preservation of Lacedemon, and the maintenance of their liberty: So as
his consideration seems more divine then humane. An equality of possessions,
with a simple and common course of living, should cause a modest life in
private, and make a City quiet and peaceable. Finally, exercise in labor, and
to endure all toil, was to make men strong and valiant. Being certain that
these two which are magnanimity and temperance, concurring together in a
private person or a City, malice can hardly creep in amongst them, or be
drawn from their neighbors. By these means the Commonwealth being settled,
it has procured safety to all the Country of Lacedemon, and a very durable
liberty. But as for that which concerns the conquest, and principallity over
their neighbors, and finally the enterprise of a war, it seems he never
thought of it: but only that they should bring in a certain friendship or
resolution, by the which the common course of living of the City, should rest
contented with their moderate estate, even as their lives in private were
modest, and contented with their choice. And although he had instituted in
such sort, as they were freed from ambition, and were very wise as well in
private as in the common course of their living in the City: yet he has left
them toward the other Grecians more then ambitious, and of an insatiable
desire to reign, with an extreme avarice: So as it is partly notorious, that
first in a manner among the Grecians, greedily desiring the countries of their
neighbors, they made war against the Messeniens, to draw them into
subjection: It is also partly manifest, that they had obstinately sworn
amongst themselves, not to raise the siege, before they had forced the City of
the Messeniens. It is also notorious that for the great desire they had to rule
over the Grecians, they had again submitted themselves to the yoke of those
whom they had vanquished in battle, So as they had patiently obeyed their
commandments.

They had vanquished the Persians making a descent, in fighting for the
preservation of the Grecian liberty: to whom notwithstanding being returned and
fled, they have delivered the Greek Towns which were restored, according to
the peace made by Antalcides: to the end that having money* they might fortify
themselves against the Grecians. At what time the establishment of their law
seemed to decline: for whilst it gap't after the command of their neighbor,
and finally of Morea, they helped themselves with content, by the means which
Lacedemon did furnish, having necessary preparations speedily, and making a
sudden return unto their houses: But when they began to put an Army to Sea,
and to march out of Morea with forces by land, it is certain that their Iron
money, nor the trocking of their A^nall fruits, could not supply their
necessities according to the laws of Licurgus. Their enterprise required
current money, and traffic with strangers for victuals: so as they were
forced to have recourse unto the Percians, to impose a tribute upon the
Ilanders, and to exact money from all the Grecians: knowing it impossible
(according to the laws of Licurgus) to hold the principallity of the Grecians,
nor to be able to keep their own Commonwealth. But why have I wandered so
far in this discourse. To the end it may really appear, that the institution
of Licurgus laws, is only sufficient for every man to preserve his own, and
to maintain his liberty: And we must confess to those which respect a
Commonwealth to this end, that there is nothing more to be desired, then the
estate and order of the Lacedaemonians. But as any one tends to greater matters,
and thinks of the command of the Empire, and Signuiy over many, their hope in
him and his favor toward them, to be more specious and magnificent, The Roman
Co^mon-weale more excellent than the Lacedemonian.
we must then confess, that the Lacedemonian Commonwealth is defective, and
that the Romans is more excellent, and of a more powerful foundation. The
which experience shows plainly.

For when the Lacedaemonians labored to conquer the principality of the
Grecians, they suddenly brought their own liberty into danger: whereas the
Romans after they had reduced Italy under their obedience, within a short time
they subdued the whole world, being sufficiently supplied with abundance of all
things, and provision of munition and victuals to effect their Enterprise. The
Carthaginian Commonweal.
In regard of the Carthaginian, it seems to have been well instituted since
its beginning, according to all differences. They had Kings, and an
Aristocraticall power of Senators: The Commons also had their prerogative in
matters which belonged unto them. Finally, in that which concerns their
general assembly, it was like unto that of the Romans and Lacedaemonians. It is
true, that in the time of Hannibals War, that of the Carthaginians was less,
and that of the Romans better. In every Commonweal and action there is a
certain natural increase and vigor, and consequently a diminution: so as all
things are perfect in their vigor. Moreover these Commonweals were at that
time different: For the greater the Carthaginians were in the beginning, having
had many better fortunes then the Romans, the more they have been weakened. In
regard of Rome, It flourished then even in order and policy. And as the people
of Carthage took great authority upon them in Council, so the Senate had
great power among the Romans. Wherefore as in public resolutions the Commons
in the one gave their advice, A Comparison betwixt the Roman and Carthaginian
Commonweals.
and the best men in the other: so the Romans have been more excellent in
their public affairs: where if they have been in danger of their whole
estate, yet using good Council, they have in the end vanquished the
Carthaginians.

But for that which concerns a sudden preparation to War, the
Carthaginians are more active at Sea, and prepare their Fleets better: For that
this practice is hereditary and ancient unto them, and they traffic more by
Sea then any other men. But as for the Footmen, the Romans make better use
then the Carthaginians, for that they wholly addict themselves unto it. In
regard of the Carthaginians, they are careless of Footmen: As for Horsemen
they take some good order. The reason is, for that they employ foreign forces
which are Mercenaries: and the Romans their own Nation and Burgesses.
Wherefore this Commonwealth is more commendable then the other, the which
commits the hope of their liberty to the prowess of mercenary men: and the
Romans to their own virtue and the succor of the Allies. Wherefore if at any
time the Romans have made loss in their Principalities, they resist with all
their forces. The Carthaginians on the other side, fighting for their Country
and Children, cannot abate their fury, maintaining the Combat unto the last
gasp, until they have vanquished the Enemy. Wherefore although the Romans be
(as I have said) inferior unto them in Sea Fights, yet they exceed them in the
bounty of their Soldiers. And although that in dangers at Sea, the experience
of nauall combats be of no small importance, yet the prowess of Soldiers at
Sea, is of great profit for the Victory.

The Italians in truth are of a more excellent disposition then the Pheniciens
or Lybans, as well in force of body as in courage: whereunto they usually
incite their Youth. I will tell you one thing which may serve for a great
presumption, of the diligence of this Commonweal, ordained to breed up such
men as will endure any thing, to the end they may purchase praise, virtue, and
same unto their Country. The pomp of the Romans to an honorable person.
If at any time a man of great fame and note, dies, they bring him with great
pomp to the place which they terms for valiant men, where he is sometimes
upon his feet, but seldom laid along. When as all the people are assembled,
if there be any Son of his of sufficient age, he goes into the Chair of
Orations: if not, some other of his Race, who sets forth the virtue and valor
often he deceased. Hence it grows that many, not only of his Companions in
valor, but also others being admonished, and seeing visibly the deeds, have so
great compassion, as the misfortune seems not only proper to those which
undertake the danger, but common to the people. Finally, after they have
interred him and performed likewise his obsequies, they set his Image upon the
most apparent place in the house, building about it a Chapel of Ioyners
work. The proportion of his face is carefully wrought to the life, according
to the form and lineaments. Which Images being shown in public Sacrifices,
they adorn honorably. When a man of some excellent Race is dead, they make
his obsequies, and they being about him which seem to be of the same height,
stature, and proportion, they put on a garment bordered with purple, if he had
been a Consul, or General of an Army: or else a Roabe of Purple, if a
Censor; Or of cloth of Gold, if he has triumphed, or done any such like thing.
These march in a Chariot in this order: Before the which go the bundels of
Rods and Maces, and other things accustomed to honorable persons, according to
every man's authority, with the which during his life he has been honored in
the Commonwealth. Being come to the place of interment, they are all set in
Chaires of Iuory according to their order: so as a young man that thirsts after
glory and fame, can behold nothing more beautiful. For who would not be
encouraged, to see the Images of men whom they honor in regard of virtue, and
as it were alive? What other spectacle can we find more beautiful? Moreover,
he that makes the Funeral Oration, begins to speak of his other Kinsmen there
present, and first of all the most ancient, relating the deeds and employments
of either of them. So as it falls out that by the Commendation of good men,
many times remembered by their virtue, their glory is immortal which have
performed any honorable action: and their honor which have served their
Country well, is made known to many, and multiplied to posterity. Moreover,
young men are encouraged to that resolution, that they are ready to endure any
thing that presents it self for the public good, to the end they might
purchase the renown which accompanies good men. Many Romans for this cause
have fought man to man, to get an estimation among the people: Others have
chosen an apparent death: some to save others in Battle: Others to the end
they might procure a safety in peace to the Commonwealth. Some also having the
command of an Army, have contrary to all custom and law, slain their own
Children, having more regard to the good of the Country, then to the natural
alliance of those which were nearest unto them. They write diverse other things
of many Romans: but it shall suffice at this time to produce one for an example
and proof.

They report of Horatius Cocles, that when he fought against two, right against
the Bridge of Tiber before the City, and seeing a multitude of Enemies come to
succor them, fearing left they should force the City, he retired to those
that were at his back, crying out unto them that they should break the
Bridge, and in the mean time maintained the sight with great courage and
resolution, receiving many wounds, and stayed the fury of the Enemies: so as
they wondered not so much at his forces, as at his resolution and courage. When
by the breaking of the Bridge the Enemies enterprise was disappointed, Cocles
casting himself armed into the River, died according to his resolution,
esteeming more the preservation of his Country, and his future glory, then his
present life, or that which he had remaining to live. It is likely that by
such courses young men were inflamed with a desire to honest actions.

As for that which concerns gain, the custom and proceeding of the Romans is
much more excellent then that of the Carthaginians, to whom nothing is infamous
that brings profit: where there is nothing more vile and base among the Romans,
then to be corrupted with gifts, and to wrest from another man contrary to
duty. The more honorable they esteem a benefit gotten from a great and
powerful man, the more they blame and condemn as infamous abundance purchased
by unlawful means. For proof where of, among the Carthaginians they attain
unto the government which have openly given presents: whereas among the Romans
that corruption is punished with death if it be discovered. Wherefore as the
rewards of virtue are contrary among them. It is apparent that the institution
of these Commonwealths is unequal in these things. Finally, it seems that
concerning the opinion of the Gods, the Roman Commonwealth follows not the
best. And I imagine that all the world holds it a dishonor that this is found
among their actions. I speak of their superstition. It is in truth preached
among them for so excellent, and so anchored in men, as well in private as
public, as they cannot add any thing, the which in truth will seem
admirable. I am of opinion they have done it for the common sort. For if the
Commonweal could have assembled wise men, this course happily had not been
necessary. But for that the multitude is light and inconstant, and subject to
disordred affections, and to unreasonable distempers of fury and violence, it
was fit to restrain them by a disguised fear, and by this kind of strange
language. Wherefore the Ancients did not without reason invre the Common sort
with the knowledge of the Gods, and with Tales of Hell, which some at this day
oppose foolishly and without consideration.

Wherefore in passing over with silence other which govern Commonweals, if a
man lends to Grecians but six hundred Crowns, they cannot keep their Faith,
although he has ten promises, and as many Signatures, and twice as many
Witnesses. In regard of the Romans, in all their Commands, they which manage
great affairs and wealth, perform their duties according to the Faith of
their Oaths: whereas in other states you shall find few men careful and
sparing of the public good, and performing the duty of an honest man: so it
is a rare thing among the Romans, to find any one accused of such a Crime. All
things subject to corruption.
That there is corruption and alteration in all things, it is not needful to
to speak: For the necessity of Nature will give sufficient proof. And as
there are two menaes by the which every Commonwealth is usually overthrown,
whereof the one is exterior, and the other of it self: That which is
exterior is in its consideration inconstant: But as for the order within it
self, we have formerly delivered what kind the first is, what the second, and
how it ends in a third Commonwealth: so as they which can appropriate the
beginning of this present Subject to the end, may also fore tell the future:
the which in my opinion is manifest.

For when a Commonweal has gotten (after many and great dangers avoided) an
excellency and irresistable power, it is apparent, that growing (as of custom)
to abundance of wealth, the expenses are more sumptuous, and men grow more
quarrelsome touching Governments and other Enterprises. By the continuance
whereof begins a change to worse, as to ambition which is a kind of ignomy:
Moreover, an arrogant kind of living and sumptuousness. The people will leave
this Title of change, when as grown proud with ambition, sweetened with their
good words which seek to gain them by covetousness. For then being furious,
and mannaging all things with rage, they will no more obey their Princes, nor
be equal to their Governors, but most commonly will have all the power. This
done, the Commonweal will change its name into a goodly show of liberty and a
Democracia: but in effect to a most wicked Orchlocracia. Finally, as we have
declared the establishing, increase, with the vigor and disposition of the
Commonwealth, and the difference from others, and what is good or bad in it,
we will here make an end of this Discourse.

Resuming then the parts which cohere with the time of the History, from whence
we strayed, we will in few words make a brief relation of an action: to the
end that not only inspeech, but also in effect, after the manner of a good
workman, we may plainly show the vigor and power of the Commonwealth, as it
was at that time, propounding some excellent action. When as Hannibal had won
the Battle of Cannes against the Romans, Hannibals proceeding after the
Battail^ of Cannes.
he took eight thousand men Prisoners, which had bin appointed for the guard
of the Fort or Camp: suffering them all to send to their houses for their
Ransom and safety. He sent tonne, of the most apparent to Rome, upon their
Faith to return again. Whenas one of them being out of the Fort, was
returned, saying that he had forgotten something, and having taken that which
he had left, he went on his way, thinking by this return to have kept his
Faith, and to have made his Oath void and unprofitable. When they were come to
Rome, they entreat the Senate not to hinder the delivery of the Prisoners, and
that they would suffer them to pay thirteen Livers for a man, and that they
might return safely to their Families. They said that Hannibal had so agreed,
and that moreover they were worthy to be preserved, for that they had not played
the Cowards in the Battle, nor done any act unworthy of the Roman name: But
being left to guard the Camp, all the rest being slain in Battle, they had
been suddenly environed and brought under the Enemies subjection. But when
the Romans (having made great losses during the Wars, and being in a manner
abandoned by all their Allies, so as they seemed to be in great danger for
their Country) had heard this speech, they were not careless of their honor,
to yield unto their misery: neither did they disdain any thing that was
needful to be done. But considering Hannibals intention, who thought by this
practice to draw away their Treasure, and withal to dis^inhearten and
discourage his enemies in battle, showing covertly that the vanquished had
yet some hope remaining and were so far from yielding to that which was
required, as they were neither moved to pity the Prisoners, nor made any
account of the future faule of men: making it known (in refusing to redeem
their men) that the conceit and hope which Hannibal had in them was vain.
Finally, they have enjoined their Soldiers by a law, to vnquish in fighting or
to die, for that being vanquished there remained no hope of safety. After which
things decreed, they sent back the nine Ambassadors, who willingly returned
according to their promise, delivering him who had thought cunningly to break
his Faith to the Enemy, bound hand and foot: so as Hannibal was not so glad of
the Battle won against the Romans, as sorrowful, wondering at the constancy
and magnamity of these men in their resolutions.

A PARCEL OF the Seventh Book of the History of POLYBIVS, concerning the
Accord made betwixt the Carthaginians and Messeniens, with the taking of the
City of the Sardines by Antiochus.
THe City of the Leontins is wholly situated toward the North: In the midst
whereof is a great place, where there are Palaces built, Seats of Justice,
and a Market place for all Commodities. Upon every side of the place is a Hill,
with a thick Rock, and the plain of these Hills upon the top, is filled with
houses and Temples. Finally, this City has two Gates: whereof the one is
toward the South, at the end of the place above mentioned, going to Saragosse:
and the other bends to the North, toward the Leontine Plains and the errable
Land. But under one of the Rocks which looks toward the West, there flows a
River which they call Lisson: The River of Lisson.
where there are houses built one against another, and many others under the
Rock, betwixt the which this River passes. Behold the accord sworn, which
was made by Hannibal the Commander, Mago, Mercane, Barmocare, and all the
Carthaginian Senators which were then with Hannibal, An accord made betwixt tho
Carthaginians, Macedonians, and Grecians.
and the Carthaginian Army which he had under his command, with Zenophanes the
Son of Cleomachus, Ambassador for the Athenians, whom King Philip the Son of
Demetrius sent unto them as well for himself as for the Macedonians and their
Allies: And that before Jupiter, Juno and Apollo: And before the Gods of the
Carthaginians, Hercules and Iolae, Mars, Triton, and Neptune: And before the
Gods of their Army, the Sun Moon, and Earth: And the Rivers, Gods, and Waves,
and finally before all the Gods which possess Carthage, and all those which
hold Macedony and the rest of Greece, and in the presence of all other Gods
which are not comprehended in this Oath. Captain Hannibal with the Senators of
Carthage which were with him and the whole Army, have said: according to your
good pleasure and ours, we Friends, Allies, and Brethren, shall give order to
this Accord sworn, concerning the Friendship and good intelligence, so as the
Lords of Carthage, Captain Hannibal and his men, with the other Carthaginian
Princes, which live under the same Laws, and likewise the Bisartins, with all
the Cities and Nations subject to the Carthaginians, Soldiers and Allies, and
all Cities and people with whom we have any league or friendship, as well in
Italy and Spain, as in the Country of Genoua, and if there be any others in
this Region with whom we have any friendship or league, shall be guarded and
defended by King Philip and the Macedonians, and all other Grecians which are
in league with them.

In like manner King Philip and the Macedonians with the Allies of the other
Grecians, shall be guarded and defended by the Carthaginians, making War with
them, and by the Bisartins, and by all the Cities and Nations acknowledging the
Empire of Carthage, with their Allies and Soldiers, and all Nations and
Cities which are in Italy, Spain, and Genoua, and all other Allies which are
in other Countries of Italy. Neither the one nor the other shall have any
practices, nor plot any War by devices, being of good affection and
intelligence, without fraud or deceit, Enemies to those which shall make War
against the Carthaginians, except the Towns, Cities, and Ports, with whom
they have a sworn league. We likewise shall be Enemies to those which shall
make War against King Philip, except the Cities and Nations with whom we
have sworn friendship. Finaly, you shall maintain our party, in giving aid
and comfort according to the necessity of our affairs, in the War begun
betwixt us and the Romans, until that by the grace of the Gods you and we may
have a good end. And if by the help of the Gods you and we shall consent to to
treat of friendship with the Romans touching the War we have with them, we
will treat it in such sort, as you shall be partakers, so as it shall be never
lawful for them to make War against you: Neither may the Romans rule over
the Cercyreins or Apolliniates, or Epidamnes, or over Phaire, or Demale, the
Parthins, and the Antintanica* And moreover they shall restore to Demetrius of
Phaire all his Subjects, whom they have received for Burgesses. And if it
happen that the Romans make War against us or you, we shall succor one
another as the common necessity shall require. The like also we will do, if
others make War against us, except the Kings and Nations with whom we are in
league. Moreover, we will add or diminish what we shall think good of this
accord sworn by a common consent.

During these things Philip taking the Bowels of the Sacrifices, the which
according to the custom were brought unto him, and bending himself a little,
he presented them to Arate, demanding of him what those Sacrifices signified,
and whether they would abandon that Fort or keep it still. Then Demetrius as
the most aged, said: If thou have the judgment of a Soothsayer, we will leave it
suddenly, but if the vnderstandiug of a warlike King, we will keep it. And
not to abandon it, thou shall consider of another necessary occasion: For by
this means in laying hold of the Oxes horns, thou shall have it wholly in thy
subjection. By the horns he meant Isthomate, and the Acrocorinthe: and by the
Ox, Morea.

Then Philip returning to Arate, art thou of this advice? And when as Arate
spoke nothing, he entreated him to deliver his opinion: who after he had
considered thereon, answered, thou may keep it, if thou can provide in
such sort that the accord with the Atheniens may not be infringed. If in taking
it thou puts a Garrison, thou shall loose all the Fort, and the Garrison it
self (meaning his faith) which thou have received from Antigonus, in giving
the Guards to the Allies. Consider whether it be now better, that in putting me
forth, thou loosest this fidelity, and that by this means thou setlest
Garrisons over the Messeniens, and other Allies. But Philip had a great desire
to break the accord: the which his following actions made manifest. And when
he had a little before been sharply reprehended by young Arate for the
defeat of some men, and that the elder (having spoke freely and with
authority) had entreated him not to give an easy ear to such speeches as
should be used unto him, shame restrained him: and taking his right hand, well
said he, let us follow the same course.

In regard of the City of the Sardins, there were continually combats and
dangerous encounters. For the soldiers of either side studied day and night to
frustrate one another policies by new inventions: to write all which in
particular would be no less unprofitable then tedious. And when as the siege
had continued full two years, Lagoras of Candy, a man well experienced in the
art of war, having considered with himself, that many times strong Cities
fall easily into the Enemies hands, by the negligence of the inhabitants, who
relying upon their fortifications made as well by nature as art, assure
themselves and grow idle: And knowing likewise how they are accustomed to set
guards in strong places, which might make heads against the Enemies attemps:
Seeing likewise according to his conceit the despair of them all, that they
should not be able to take the Sardins Fort by this means; and that want of
victuals and munition, remained for their last hope to take it: The more he
considers thereon, and studies by what means he might find some occasion to
surprise the City. And when as afterward he found that the courting of the
place, A sign of the Sardins negligence.
which they call Serie (it is that which ioynes the City with the Fort) was
without guard, it happened that according to his hope and opinion, he
discovered the negligence of the guard by his presumption.

This place was very rough and steep, having a valley near unto it, into the
which they of the City cast their dead carrion: Whither reforted a great number
of vulture and other ravening Birds. When this man saw that these Birds after
they were full gorged, perch daily upon the top of the valley, and on the
wall, he knew thereby, that of necessity this courtine was abandoned, and for
the most part without guard. Then approaching wisely in the night, he sought
means to get up. And when he found that in a certain place of the valley they
might ascend, he advertised the King. Who conceiving a good hope, persuaded
Lagoras to continue his enterprise, promising to do what possibly he could.
Lagoras entreats the King, to give him for companions Theodote the Etolien, and
Denis Captain of his guard, and that he would command them to bear him
company to lay this Ambush: For they seemed to be able men and sufficient for
this enterprise. And when the King had satisfied his demand, they agree
together, and by a common consent make choice of a night, when as part of the
morning had no moone-light. After which the day before at Sunne-setting, they
make choice of fifteen strong and resolute men, to mount up the ladders with
them, and to gain the wall, who in this hardy enterprise should be their
companions.

Then they chose thirty other, to lie a little distant of in Ambush: to the end
that when they had recovered the wall, they should fall upon the next gate, and
strive to break the hinges and joints, and the others within the bars and
locks. They also appoint two thousand men in the rear of these, who entering
with them should recover the place of the Theater: The which was made so
conveniently, as it was opposite to the approaches of those of the Forts and
those of the City. Moreover to avoid the suspicion of the truth, in regard of
the choice of these men, he gave order that the Etoliens should give an assault
unto the City by a certain valley: And therefore it was needful that these
should second them, according to a sign which should be given them. When as
all things were ready, and the Moon grown dark they which were Lagoras,
taking the ladders, approacht closely to the top of the valley, and hid
themselves under the rock.

When at the break of day they had relieved the watch which was on that side,
and the King had sent (as of custom) others to second them, and had appointed
a good number for a place where they run their horses, no man suspected any
thing of the enterprise: But when as the two ladders were set up against the
wall, where Denis on the one, and Lagoras on the other mounted first unto the
top, their grew a great noise, and alteration in the Camp. It so fell out that
they which mounted the ladders, could not be discovered by them of the City,
nor by the rest which were in the Fort under Acheus, by reason of the Rock
which advanced over the valley. But their courage which ascended the wall and
assailed the City, was apparent to the Army. Wherefore some wondered at there
incredible resolution, others foreseeing the future, and fearing, remained
partly amazed, and partly joyful. Wherefore the King seeing the alteration in
his Camp, desiring also to divert this fancy, as well from his own men, as
from those of the City, he led forth his Army, and besieged the two Gates,
which they call Persides, On the other side Acheus, seeing the Enemies
alteration more then of custom, was in great doubt, being ignorant of the
present cause, and could not understand the practice, Yet he sent men to the
Gate, which succors came somewhat late, for that they descended by straights
and hollow places. Aribaze who was Captain of the City, went simply to the
Gates, which he had seen Antiochus assail: appoynting some to go unto the
wall, others to make sallies by the Gate, to keep the Enemy from approaching,
and to fight with them. In the mean time Lagoras, Theodote, and Denis, with
their troop, having recovered the walls, came to the Gate underneath, whereof
some maintained the charge which the Inhabitants gave them, others brake the
bars and bolt of the Gates. The like did they without which were appointed to
that Quarter. When as the gate was opened, the other two thousand entered the
City, and seize upon the place of the Theater. This done, all they which had
run to the walls, and to the Gate which they call Perside, who had been sent
by Aribaze to defend it, against the Enemies assault, came running thither.
After which retreat, the Gate was opened, so as some of the Kings troop
pursuing those which abandoned it, entered pell mell. When they had taken the
Gate by force, some entered the City, others forced the next Gates. They that
were of Aribazes band, with all the Citizens, recovered the Fort by flight,
after they had made some little resistance. After this route, Legoras and
Thodotes band stood firm in the place of the Theater, serving as a Fort to all
the rest. Finally the rest of the Army charging of all sides took the City.
The City of the Sardins taken by assault.
By this means, the City was wholly sacked and ruined, some killing those they
encountered, others setting fire of the houses, and some gaping after spoil for
their private profit. And thus Antiochus vanquished the Sardins.

A PARCEL OF the Eighth Book of the History of POLYBIVS, concerning the
Difference of a Particular and General History.
NO man can justly say, if they to whom these kinds of Calamities and
disasters have befalne, ought to be blamed or censured, or held worthy of
pardon and pity in regard thereof: For that it falls and happens to many (to
whom all things have been done conformable and agreeable unto reason) to be
subject to those which transgress with great desire, the things which are just
and reasonable before men. Yet we may not be silent here, being necessary
(having regard to the time and circumstance of accidents) to blame some
Captains, and to pardon others: The which will appear plainly by this. When
Archidamus King of the Lacedaemonians suspected that Cleomenes aspired to the
Crown, he fled from Lacedemon. Who soon after being again persuaded, put
himself into his hands. Being therefore by this means stripped of Crown and
Life, he has left no excuse to posterity, of those things which he has
suffered. For what color is there, the cause being still the same, and
Cleomenes power increasing, but he should suffer the things which we have
spoken, having put himself into their hands, from whom he formerly had fled,
giving order for his safety contrary to all hope? Although that Pelopidas of
Thebes had been the cause of King Alexanders iniquity, and that he knew well,
that all Tyrants are capital Enemies to those which defend liberty, yet he
persuaded Epaminundas to be Governor not only of the popular Commonweal of
the Thebeins, but also of the Grecians. And as he was an Enemy to Thessaly, to
the end he might ruin the Monarchy of Alexander, yet he presumed to go the
second time in Embassy unto him. Wherefore when he fell into the hands of his
Enemies, he was the cause of great prejudice to the Thebeins, and the ruin of
their glory, which until that time they had preserved: for the confidence he
had in those, whom he should not have trusted.

The like happened to Cheius Chief of the Romans, during the War of Sycily,
for that he had indiscreetly thrust himself into the Enemies power. Diverse
others have suffered the like. Wherefore they are worthy of blame, who without
great consideration, submit themselves unto their Enemies, and not they who
(as much as in them lies) managed their Affairs discreetly: for in truth no
man can govern them well, relying upon another. If thou do them by certain
occasions, which are conformable to reason, thou shall be blameless. The most
likely causes of this kind are, an Oath, Children, Wife, and for the most
certain, the fore-passed life. And if it happens that under color of these
things, thou falst into an inconvenience, the fault shall not be thine in
suffering, but theirs who commit the wrong. Wherefore we must seek such
Arguments and assurances, as in regard thereof, he in whom you trust, may not
break the faith which he has given. But for that there are few such, the
best will be to have a care of those which are conformable to reason: so as if
we be decelued therein, we may not loose our excuse with strangers: the which
has happened to many of our Predecessors.

It is a thing much more manifest in those times whereof we have made mention,
and of a later date, in that which has befaene Acheus: who fell into his
Enemies hands, although he omitted nothing that might be done for his safety,
providing for all things as much as Humane sense could effect. Wherefore the
event has caused commisseration and pardon, in him which has suffered with
strangers, and blame and hatred to those which have done the outrage. Moreover,
I do not find it strange to my Enterprise and first intention, to advertise the
Readers of the greatness of these things, and of the ambitious desire of the
Roman and Carthaginian Commonweals. Who will not hold it fit to be
considered, how the Governors of such great Cities, not being ignorant of the
things which had happened in Italy and Spain, having moreover of either side
an equal hope of the future, and a present danger of the War, have not been
contented with this apparent discommodity, but contended for Sardinia and
Sycily, embracing the whole, not only in hope, but with Expenses and
Preparations of War, which will move any man to wonder, that shall observe
it all in particular? The Romans had two sufficient Armies in Italy with their
Consuls for their preseruations: And two others in Spain, where Gneius had the
leading of that by Land, and Publius of the other by Sea. These are things
which happened to the Carthaginians. Moreover they sent an Army by Sea, to
cross the attempts of Philip in Greece: In the which Marcus Valerius
commanded first, then Publius Sulpicius, with whom Appius likewise joined with
a hundred Quinqueremes. Moreover Marcus Claudius furnished with an Army at
Land, had assailed Sycily: The like Amilcar had done being sent by the
Carthaginians.

By the which things I am confident, (the which I have often spoken in the
beginning of this Work) to find a certain assurance by the accidents which
consist in this, that it is not possible for those which Write particular
Histories, to be able to observe the general disposition of things: For how is
it possible, that he which does barely read the Exploits of Sycily and Spain,
can know or conceive the greatness and continuance of Actions, nor in what
sort or form of a Commonweal, Fortune has brought it to an end? The which
is very admirable to us, for that all the Countries of the World, which are
come to the knowledge of men, are subject to one Empire and Power, the which
has not formerly been.

It is true, that it is not impossible to understand in some sort by particular
Histories, how the Romans have Conquered Sycily and Spain: But it is a
difficult thing to know in what sort they have attained to this Universal
power and Command: Nor to what use particular Actions have served to their
general Enterprise, nor with what succors, nor at what time they have
attempted it, without a full and general History of the proceedings: neither
will it be easy for the same causes, to consider the greatness of Actions,
nor the power of this Commonweal. For in that the Romans have Conquered
Sycily and Spain, and have made War there both by Sea and Land, it is no
wonder if one man deliver it in particular. But if we consider that when these
things happened, this powerful Commonwealth had ended many others, and at the
same time, and how it was effected, and with what calamities and War, they
were afflicted in their own Region, which performed these Exploits at that
time, finally their deeds will be held glorious and admirable; and then the
knowledge of these things will square well. This Discourse shall be directed
unto those, who by particular Commentaries, think they are able to attain
unto the knowledge of a general History.

Marcus furnished with an Army of threescore Quinqueremes, sailed to
Achrandine, either of which were armed with men, carrying Bows, Slings, and
Darts to repulse those which should defend the Forts. He had also eight
Quinqueremes furnished with Pallisadoes, as well on the right as left side: with
the which being joined together with two thin enclosures, they approacht unto
the Wall, by means of the Pallisado set without the enclosure, The order of
the Engines of Battery.
and they call them Sambuques. The manner of ordring the same Engines was in
this sort. They had within the Ship a Ladder of four foot broad, to the end
that at the Descent it might come to the top of the Wall: Upon the sides
thereof they made stays, and armed them with a covering for defense, setting
them cross the enclosures, which kept the Ships united together, so as they
did pass much beyond the Prow or forepart of the Ship. There were pullies
fastened with Cords to the top of the Masts: and when as necessity required,
they drew those which were at the poope or hinder part by the pulleys, with
Cords tied to the top of the ladder. The others which were at the Prowe,
assured the Engine with stays: and finally they approacht it to the wall,
drawing near to Land by the navigations of the ships, which was done by the
means of two Pallisadoes which are placed without. On the top of the ladder
there was a planke, which covered three superficies with Persian Targets, to
the which four Soldiers mounted, and fought against those which from the
Forts sought to hinder the approach of the Sambuques. When by the joining of
the ladder they have gained the wall, in disarming the sides of their Targets,
they mount to the Forts or Towers. The rest follow them by the Sambuques, by
means of the transport of the ladder from Vessel to Vessel by ropes.
Finally, this Engine was not unfitly so called. For being finished and set up,
the figure of the ship and ladder reduced into one, make it like unto a
Sambuque. They imagined to come close unto the Wall with this Engine.

But Archimides having made provision of Engines fit for all distances,
troubled them at Sea much, and thrust them into despair, annoying them a far
off with casting Engines which were strong and great. But if they went beyond
them, he used lesser Engines, according to the distance, which disappointed and
hindered their Enterprise and navigations: until that Marcus being much
perplexed, was forced to make his approaches covertly in the Night. When they
had recovered Land, and were out of the Battery, he made another kind of Engine
against those which were to fight by Sea. For he made many holes in the Wall
without, the height of a man, and of the bigness of a man's hand, where he
appointed within casters of Darts, and of Engines to repulse, making by the
means thereof the Enemies attempts in their mounting unprofitable.

By this means he not only repulsed them far off, and prevented their
attempts near, but also slew many of them. And whereas they made use of their
Sambuques, he likewise set up Engines, to pull them over the Wall: and kept
them always hidden until necessity required, setting them upon the Walls
within, to pass forth and fall upon the sayle-yards: some of them cast Stones,
or Lead of twelve hundred weight. And when as the Sambuques approach sometimes
in turning, they cast from the top of the Engines with a Tower, Stones against
them as necessity required. So as not only the Sambuque has been broken, but
also the Vessel: and all they that were within it in great danger. Again, some
Engines cast lesser Stones upon the Enemy, coming to the assault covered with
Targets, to the end they might not be annoyed with the Darts and other
Weapons, which they cast from the Wall, that they which fought in the Prowe
might be repulsed. They likewise let down a hand of Iron tied to a Chain,
the which laying hold of him which governed the top, drew the Prowe within
the Walls with the tail of the Engine. And if at any time in raising the
Prowe, he set the Ship upon its Poope, he held it firm and immovable by
his instrument, then by a kind of favor he let slip the hand and the chain by
the Engine. By this means some fell upon their sides, others were overthrown,
a great part of them (the Prow falling from the top to the bottom) were
drowned with great confusion. Marcus discontented with Archimides repulses,
seeing likewise his men prevented in their attempts, to his prejudice and
disgrace, said (although he were grieved with his misfortune) in scoffing at
the deeds of Archimides, that he used his ships as they do pots, to draw water
out of the Sea, and that being battred and beaten, they were as disloyal
fallen infamously. This was the eud of the Siege at Sea. In regard of those
which were with Appius, they ceased from their attempts, having endured the
like affronts and losses. For although they were a good distance from the Wall,
yet they were hurt and slain with their casting of Stones and Darts.

In truth the Art, the number and the effect of all manner of Engines, whereof
King Hieron had made good provision, was admirable, the which Archimides had
forged and made, being the Architect and Engineere. And when as they approacht
the City, some of them (as we have said) were slain with their Arrows, and
continually repulsed from their app^oaches: Others covered with Targets, and
therefore assailing with greater force, were overthrown, and slain with
Stones and the bodies of Trees: A good number likewise were slain by the hands
descending from the Engines as we have said: For they cast down men being
raised up on high with their Arms. Wherefore they of Appius Army retiring to
their Camp, and holding a Council with the Captains, were all of one
opinion, and resolved to try all manner of hope, to take Saragosse by siege:
the which in the end they did. For when they had besieged this City for the
space of eight Months, they ceased not daily to make brave and valiant
enterprises of War: But they never durst attempt to take it by force.

By this means a man with good fortune seemed to bring to an end great and
admirable things, when as they are fitly joined together in great affairs.
Finally, the Romans having such great Armies both by Sea and Land, attended to
take the Town speedily, if they could get an old man out of Saragosse, not
daring to approach it, whilst that Archimides were present and could defend it.
Wherefore conceiving that Saragosse might be taken for want of victuals and
munition, considering the great multitude which was in the City, they relied
upon this hope: and hindered by an Army at Sea that nothing might approach, and
by that at Land, that no succors might come. Moreover, the Commanders being
loath to spend the time in vain, during the siege of Saragosse, but withal to
undertake some good thing beside the siege, they divided their Army in such
sort, as two parts should remain with Appius for the siege of the City: And
that Marcus with the third part should assail the Carthaginians, who sent an
Army into Sicily.

Finally, Philip having made the Messeniens his mortal Enemies, could in
nothing offend them that was worthy of fame: Although he had assailed their
Country to torment them, using great indignities to his best Friends. Philip
causes Arate to be poisoned.
For soon after he caused old Arate to be poisoned in Messene, for that he
was discontented with his course of life: The like he did to Taurion, who had
served him in Morea. Wherefore these his Actions were presently divulged and
made known to strangers. His power over those whom he then defeated was not
new, but long before used, and practiced by custom: neither was Arate ignorant
of this mischief, the which was discovered by this means. And as he had
concealed it from all others, yet he did not hide it from Cephalon one of his
familiar Friends: But declared unto him his infirmity, the which appeared by
the bloody spittle against the wall, saying: Behold Cephalon, the recompense
we reap by Philips Friendship.

Truly, Mediocrity is so great and honest, as he which suffers, is more
ashamed of the deed, then he that has committed it. But such rewards they
reap of Friendship, that have been Companions in such great Actions, and done
service to Philip. Finally, Arate after his death received sufficient honors,
Honors done to Arate after his death.
both in his Country and the Common weal of the Acheins, as well for the
government which he had often in charge, as for the many favors he did unto
that Nation. They decreed him Oblations and Heroyicke honors, and finally, all
things which serve to perpetuate the memory: so as if the Dead have any sense,
it is likely he commends the acknowledgement done unto him, and the
communication of affliction and dangers which have happened in his life time.

As Philip had long devised how to take Lisse, and its Fort, desiring to reduce
those places under his obedience, he drew thither with his Army. Having marched
two days, and past the streights, he campt near unto the River of Ardaxana,
near unto the City. And when he had viewed the situation of Lisse,
excellently well fortified both by nature and industry, as well toward the Sea
as Land: And likewise the Fort joining near unto it, the which in show was
impregnable to all the World by force, as well for its extent upwards, as for
the other fortification, he despaired to take it, yet he did not wholly
despair to take the Town. Considering therefore that the space betwixt the
Town and the Mount of the Fort, was reasonable to besiege the Town, he
thought good to make a Skirmish there with his Archers, which was then his
manner of proceeding. Suffering then the Macedovians to rest a day, whom he
advertised of things necessary, he laid an Ambush in the Night of a great part,
and the ablest of his men, in certain woody Valleys, and near unto a
Mediterranian place, lying above the place whereof we have spoken: and retaining
for the day following those that were armed with Targets, and the rest of the
nimblest Soldiers, he takes his way forthwith toward the City, marching of
either side toward the Sea.

When he had past beyond it, and had made a stand there, it was apparent that
he meant to assail the City in that place. As this coming of Philip was not
unknown, so a great number out of Sclauonia were come into Lisse. It is true
that for the great confidence they had in the fortification of the Fortress,
they sent but a mean Garrison. Wherefore when the Macedonians approacht, the
Inhabitants presently made a sally, A sally made by them of Lisse.
relying in their multitude and the force of the place. The King ordered the
Targetteers in the plain, commanding the most active to recover the hills, and
to fight valiantly with the Enemy. The which they performing, the danger seemed
something equal. But in the end Philips men retired, for the difficulty of the
place and the multitude of their Enemies. And as they retired to them that were
armed with Targets, they of the City pursuing them with a kind of disdain into
the Plain, fought with the Targetteers. They likewise whi^^ had the guard of
the Fort, seeing Philip retire by little and little with his Troops, and
imagining that he was going away, came running couetely, trusting in the nature
of the place: Then leaving few men within the Fort, they came by unknown ways
into the Plain, as if they were to take the spoils of their flying Enemies.

But in the mean time they which were in Ambush, rise suddenly and gave a
furious charge with the Targetteers upon the Enemies. The multitude was
herewith so amazed, as the Lissiens retired for their safety to the City. In
regard of those which had abandoned the Fort, their return was cut off by the
Ambush. Whereby it happened that whereas before there was no hope, now the Fort
was presently taken, and without danger, Lisse taken by Ph^l^p.
and Lisse the next day by the valor of the Macedonians, and by their rough
and terrible assaults Philip having conquered the said places contrary to his
hope, he made all the Neighbors thereabouts subject unto him, so as a great
part of Sclauonia, offered to submit their Towns to his protection. It is true,
there were no Forts that could endure the violence of Philip: neither any
safety for those which resisted, after the taking of the said Forts by assault.

Bolis Bolis.
was a man borne in Candy, who had long frequented the Court, and was advanced
to the prime dignity. He seemed to be very wise and resolute, with no less
experience in the War. Whom when Sosibius had gained, and made affectionate
unto him, he commanded him (after a long speech) to put a business in
execution, telling him, that there was not any thing at that time, could be
more pleasing unto the King, then to find means to save Acheius. The which
Bolis having heard, and promised to consider thereon, he retired. Two or three
days after, when he had thought of this Discourse, he came to Sosibius, and
undertook to effect it: saying, that he had long held the party of the
Sardins, and had good knowledge of the Country: Adding moreover, that Cambyle,
Combyle.
Captain of the Candiots which are in pay with Antiochus, was not only a
Burgess, but also his kinsman and friend. It happened that Cambyle and the
Candiots that were under his charge, had the guard of the backpart of the
Fortress, which was not fortifi^d, but it was guarded by a multitude of
Cambyles Soldiers. When as Sosibius found this advice good, studying how he
might free Acheus from calamity, or whether it were better to attempt it by
some other man then Bolis, but his humor concurring with Bolis, the business
took this effect. Sosibius delivered money presently, to the end nothing
should be wanting for the Enterprise, promising great rewards if it succeeded
well. So promising the Kings favor, and that of Acheus if he might be
preserved, he fed Bolis with great hopes.

This man being ready to undertake the Enterprise, without any longer
expectance imbarkes: and having Letters of Recommendation and credit, he goes
to Nicomache at Rhodes, who seemed to be affected to Acheus, as well for his
Fathers love, as for particular Friendship: And likewise to Melancome in
Ephesus. These in truth were the men, of whose means Acheus had formerly made
use, as well coming to Ptolomy, as in other foreign and remote places

Being come to Rhodes, and afterward to Ephesus, having acquainted them with
this business, and finding them ready in any thing he desired, he sent Arian
(being one of those that were under his charge) to Cambyle, saying that he had
been sent from Alexandria, to leuy foreign Soldiers, and that he had a great
desire to conserre with him concerning matters of importance: And therefore he
desired to appoint a time and place where they might meet unknown to the
World. Arian came to Cambyle, discovering unto him his charge: whereunto he
gave ear, being ready to do that whereunto they pressed him, appointing a day
and place known to them both: whither being come in the Night, he sent back
Arian?

As Bolis was a Candiot, and cunning by Nature, he studied of the resolution
inquiring of all things. Finally, according to the agreement of Arian, he goes
to Cambyle, and delivers him the Letters: whereon they advise and consult after
the manner of Candiots. A Treason practiced against Acheus by Cambyle and Bolis.
For they had no care to succor Acheus being in danger, but only to provide
for their own safety and commodity. And as they were both Candiots, they were
soon of one opinion as follows: That the ten Talents which Sosibius had
delivered, should be equally divided betwixt them: and then they should
discover the business to Antiochus, to make use of him, and promise to deliver
Acheus into his hands, in giving them money, and hopes worthy of their attempt.
These things being thus concluded, Cambyle undertakes that which concerns
Antiochus: Bolis on the other side resolves within certain days to send Arian
to Acheus with Letters of recommendation from Nicomache and Melancome. But
concerning the means how Arian might enter safely into the Fort and return,
he gives him charge to do his duty. If this were done, and that Acheus made
answer to those things which concern Nicomache and Melancome, Bolis held
himself assured, that he might well deliver him into the hands of Cambyle.

After this resolution they part, either of them striving to effect that which
they had concluded. Cambile embracing the first occasion, discovered the
business unto the King. As this promise pleased Antiochus, which offered it
self contrary unto his hope, so he took it partly joyfully, promising great
matters: partly distrusting, he considered of either of their opinions and
resolutions, But in the end giving credit, thinking that this Enterprise came
Divinely unto him, he often entreated Cambyle to bring it to an end. Bolis
wrought in like manner with Nicomache and Melancome. Who thinking these things
to be guided by God, they suddenly prepare Letters from Arian, directing them
to Acheus, Written by their Common sent, as they had bbin accustomed: And in
sending them they persuaded Acheus, togiue^ credit to those things which Bolis
and Cambyle should do. They were written in such fort, as being surprised they
could not be understood.

Arian enters the Fort by the help of Cambyle, and delivers the Letter to
those that were with Acheus: and instructs him dilligently of euerything, as
one who from the beginning had been present at that which was practiced. And
although he answered oftener for Sosibius and Bolis, then of Nicomache and
Melancome, and likewise for Cambyle, so he often maintained by his own
invention, the Arguments which they made: And the rather being ignorant of that
which had been resolved betwixt Cambyle and Bolis. Acheus giving credit,
as well in regard of Arians answers, as of the Letters of Nicomache and
Melancome, made an answer, and sent Arian presently back. And as this
business was handled often of either side, in the end Acheus people sent word
of themselves to Nicomache, that there was no more hope of safety remaining:
And advise him to send away Bolis with Arian at midnight, as it were to take
them. The resolution of Acheus was, that first he would fly the present
danger, and then recover Syria.

Finally, he was in a wonderful hope, that if suddenly and contrary to all
hope he showed himself to the Inhabitants of Syria, Antiochus being yet tied
at Sardainy, he should cause a great alteration, purchasing great praise,
as well with the Antiocheins, as with the inhabitants of base Syria, and
Phenicca. Acheus being in this hope and conceit, expected the coming of
Bolis. In regard of Melancomes peoples, after the coming of Arian, and the
Letters read, they presently send away Bolis with all speed, making him great
remonstrances, and putting him in great hope, if he effected his Enterprise.
Bolis sending Arian before, advertised Cambyle of his coming, and came by
night to the place appointed. And when they had agreed on the day, and had
resolved how to bring all to an end, they entered the Camp at night. This was
their resolution: If it happened that Acheus came out of the Fort alone, or
accompanied with some one with Bolis and Arian, he might be taken with an
Ambush as abandoned. But if he came forth well accompanied, the business
would prove difficult, to those to whom they had given the charge. Finally,
they thought to take him alive, knowing that by this means they should do
great pleasure to Antiochus. Wherefore they gave charge unto Arian to march
before, when he should draw forth Acheus, for that he knew the turnings, by the
which he had often entered and comeforth. Bolis was to follow the rest behind,
to the end that being come unto the place, where the Ambush should be ready by
Cambyle, he might seize upon Acheus and stay him, fearing that through the
Allarum in the night, he might save himself through the Forest, or being in
Despair, he might cast himself into some pit: and contrary to their
Resolution, fall alive into the Enemies hands.

These things being thus concluded, when Bolis came to Cambyle, he was the same
night brought by him to Antiochus being alone. And when the King had received
him graciously, and had assured them of his promises, making remonstrances to
either of them, not to be negligent in the business, they then returned to
their Camp. In the morning Bolis accompanied with Arian ascend, and at night
they enter the Fort. Acheus receiving him with great affection and love,
demanded many things of him dilligently. And as he observed as well the
countenance, as the familiar speech wherewith Bolis assured the plot, he showed
partly a joyful countenance, for the hope of his safety: So he partly
languished, for the apprehension of the future danger. But for that he was a
man of a great Spirit and great Experience, he did not hold it fit to rely
wholly upon Bolis. And therefore he used this Speech unto him: That for the
present he could not go forth; and that he would send three or four of his
friends with him, and that after conferrence with Melancome he would be ready.
Acheus in truth did all that could be done: But he was ignorant of the common
Proverb: That he must Candize with the Candyots. To Candize with the Candyots.
Bolis likewise had foreseen all things which concerned this business.

But when the night came, in the which he said he would send his friends,
sending Arian and Bolis before out of the Fort, he commanded them to attend
until the coming of those which should go with them. Whereunto obeying, in
the mean time he conferres with his Wife. Laodicea the wife of Acheius*
But for that he had amazed Laodicea, with a business not foreseen, he
stayed sometime until he had pacified her, and brought her to an expectance of
good hope. Then making the fifth, he attired the others meanly, and himself
puts on an old and simple Robe, showing himself to be a man of a base
condition: and so he goes forth. He had given charge to one of his Friends to
answer Arian continually to all that he should propound, and that he should
learn of him whither they went, and should speak of the rest as of
Barbarians. When they were come to Arian, he went before for the knowledge he
had of the way.

In regard of Bolis he followed behind, according to the first resolution,
being doubtful of that which was offered. For although he were a Candyot, and
did diue into all things nearly, yet he could not know Acheus, by reason of
the darkness of the night, nor yet whither he was there. And as the descent
was rough, and for the most part uneasy, and in some place unsafe and
dangerous for the steepness, and being come unto a certain place, where as
some held Acheus and others received him, (at that time in truth they could
not wholly forbear to yield him their accustomed reverence) then Bolis
suddenly knew which was Acheus. When he came to the place appointed to
Cambyle, and that Bolis had given them a sign by his whistle, they of the
Ambush issue forth and take the rest: But Bolis seized upon Acheus, having his
hands wrapped up in his Robe, fearing that in discovering the Ambush, he should
attempt to kill himself: for he had a Sword ready. Being thus suddenly
environed, he fell into the hands of his Enemies, Acheus taken and brought to
Antiochus.
and was presently led to Antiochus with his friends. The King remaining in
suspense, expecting what would become of it, he was alone in his Tent waking
accompanied only with two or three of his guard. But when as Cambyles Company
was arrived, and had laid Acheus bound upon the ground, his Speech failed him
for so strange an accident; so as he continued long without speaking: And in
the end touched with Commisseration and pity, the tears came into his eyes:
the which in my opinion happened by a Consideration, that those things which
Fortune brings, are inevitable and uncertain.

Acheus was son to Andromachus, brother unto Laodicea the Wife of Seleucus,
The Race of Acheus.
and he had married Laodicea daughter to King Methridate, and withal he was
Lord of all the Region on this side Mount Tauris. As he was then held to live
in a place of his own wonderful strong for the Enemy, so he was now set upon
the ground bound and mannacled in their hands: Neither was there any man that
knew of the fact, but those which had the Execution. But when the day was come,
and that the friends (according to the custom) were come unto the Tent, and
saw this accident, it happened unto them as it had done formerly unto the King.
For in wondering at the business, they were in doubt of those things which they
saw. When the Council was assembled, they spoke many things of him touching
his defeat. First they decreed that his hands and feet should be cut off, The
condemnation and death of Acheus.
and then having taken of his Head it should be sowed to an Asses skin, and
the rest of his body hanged upon a Cross. Which being Executed and the Army
hearing thereof, the fury and alteration was so great in the Camp, as
Laodicea, who knew nothing but the departure of her Husband, looking from the
Fort, coniectured of that which had happened by the trouble and alteration in
the Camp.

A Herald was presently sent unto Laodicea, who advertised her of those things
which had befalne Acheus, commanding to consider of Her estate, and to leave
the Fort. At the first they which held it made so great cries and lamentations,
as they could give no answer: Not so much for the affection they bare to
Acheus, as for the accident which seemed to them all unlooked for and not
foreseen. Finally, they were in great doubt what they should do. Antiochus
after the ruin of Acheus, pressed the besieged more violently, persuading
himself that in the end he should have means to take it by the Soldiers
themselves: the which happened accordingly. For they being divided among
themselves, The strong fort yielded to Antiochus.
they parted into Troops, some holding for Ariobaze, others for Laodicea.
After which, both parties yielded for their mutual distrust, and delivered the
place.

To conclude, as Acheus had done what he could in reason, (being vanquished by
the wickedness of those which assured him) lost his life, serving for a
profitable Example to posterity for two causes. First, that no man should rely
simply upon any: And next, that no man should mistake himself for his good
Fortune, but be prepared for all accidents, which may happen to man. And
therefore in the beginning they go forth, as it were to take some spoils, and
come by night to the Carthaginians Camp: Others held the close way, staying at
a certain place full of Woods. He (...) to the Carthagininians.
But Philimene and Nicon approacht the Camp: Whom the Watch led Prisoners to
Hannibal, they never discovering of whence nor what they were: making only a
sign that they would speak with the General.

Being then brought unto Hannibal, they told him that they would speak with
him in secret. Who giving them Audience with great affection, they excuse
themselves and their Country, accusing the Romans in many sorts, to the end
they should not seem to be come forth about this business without cause.
Wherefore Hannibal commended them much, and entertained them courteously:
Finally, he sent them back to return speedily to confer with him, ordering
for the present that these men should be let go: when they were out of the
Camp, and in the mean time he would consider what should be most safe. This
he did to have conference with these young men, and to inquire of their
affairs: Ta^^ium betrayde to Hannibal.
And to the end they should keep their credit with the Citizens, as if by the
Captains leave they had made incursions for spoil.

When as Nicon had Executed his Charge, Hannibal was very well satisfied and
joyful: For that he might have means to effect his Enterprise which was then
difficult. Phil^mene on the other side aff^cted the business propounded, for
that they had given him a safe access to speak, and he had found Hannibal
very attentive, promising him to give store of Victuals to the Citizens. Then
they not only got credit with the Tarentins, but moreover they had a good
Train, as well for the accord made, as for the Victuals whereof they had
sufficient. Afterward making a second incursion, and putting every thing in
Execution, they assured Hannibal: and were likewise assured by him, (that is to
say,) that the Carthaginians should leave the Tarentin^ in their Liberty, not
oppressing them with any Subside or Tribute, nor with any other impost: Being
also lawful for them, after they had Conquered the City, to ruin the Romans
Houses. Finally they agreed, that when they should come unto the Camp, the
Watch should presently take them.

Which things being concluded, they had power to come and speak often with
Hannibal: parting from the City sometimes to get spoil, and sometimes to
Hunt. These things being thus agreed upon for the future, most of them had a
care of the occasion. In regard of Philim^ne, Philim^^^ appointed for Hunting.
they appointed him for Hunting. For as he was much inclined to it, they
thought he could do no other thing but to attend it. Wherefore they gave him
this Charge, to the end he might take wild beasts, first to win Caius Lybius
Governor of the City, and afterward those which kept the Gates, which are
called T^menides. Embracing this Commission, he took some Beasts in Hunting,
others were prepared for him by Hannibal. For his part he continually brought
(...) prize, whereof he shared part to Caius and to the Guards of the gates to
the end they might speedily open the Gate called Rhinopile. He entered and went
forth often in the night by this Gate, under color of fear of the Enemy, but
in the mean time he made use of it for his Enterprise.

When Philimene had obtained this course with the Guards, so as without
suspicion approaching to the Wall, if he whistled, they opened unto him the
Gate Rhinopile: And withal observing that the Roman Governor of the Gate,
should be on a certain day with great Company at Musea near the Market place,
they appointed that day to Hannibal. He had long before invented this fiction,
as if he were sick, to the end the Romans should not hold it strange, that he
stayed so long there; and then he feined himself to be more sick. He had not
been in the Camp for the space of three days upon the approaches of
Tarentum. The day being come, he makes choice of a thousand of the ablest and
resolutest men, both Horse and Foot: to whom he gives charge to carry Victuals
for four days. Finally he marched speedily, remoouing his Camp at the break
of day. He gave command to foure^score Numidian Horses to marched thirty
Furlongs before the Camp, and that they should run of either side of the
Country, to the end that no man might discover the whole Camp, but taking some
of them that fled, the rest which escaped might advertise the City of the
Numidians courses. When as the Numidians were about twenty Furlongs off, they
set down to Supper near unto a certain River, in a Rock which was not easy
to discover.

Then Hannibal drawing the Captains together, he discouers his Enterprise unto
them; and persuades them, that first of all they should carry themselves like
brave men: for that there were never such great rewards propounded unto them:
And that secondly every man should keep his Soldiers in obedience during the
Voyage, and punish those severely, that should abandon their places thorough
Disobedience. Finally, they should have a care of those things which should be
Commanded, and that they should not attempt any thing of their own fancy,
contrary to his Commandment. This Speech being delivered in the presence of
the Captains, he marched, (being yet night) meaning to come unto the Walls
about midnight. He had Philimene for his Guide, to whom he gave Synagrie for
a Companion in that same Action.

When as Calus Lybius with his Company were in the day time at Musea,
according to the conception of the Youth, they advertised him that the
Numidians ouer-ran the Country toward the West, when as their desire of
drinking increased. Yet thinking to stay them, he called for the Captains,
giving them charge to go forth at the break of day with half the Horsemen,
and repulse the Enemy which spoythe Country. This was all the conceit he had
of the business. As for those which kept Company with Nicon and Tragisque,
assembling suddenly within the City, they looked for the return of Caius.
And being suddenly ready, for that they had drunk in the day time, some
retiring to certain places stayed there: Others among the Youth go to meet
Caius, sporting and playing among themselves, making show to bring them back
which should be found at the Banquet, and moreover as it were, transported by
reason of the Drunkenness of Lybius Company, as soon as they met they fell to
laughter and immoderate sport of either side: then turning head they Conducted
Caius unto his House. He laid him down to rest as a man soundly drunk, after
the manner of those which drink daily, having nothing in his brain that
troubled him: finally, he was full of joy and negligence. But Nicon and
Tragisque; having assembled the Youth, divided themselves into three Band: and
after advice, they seized upon the most commodious approaches to the Market
place, to the end that nothing might be unknown unto them, of that which was
practiced, as well within the City as without.

They also approached near unto Caius House, being resolved that if he should
have any suspicion of the Enterprise, to kill him first: And that whatsoever
they did they should begin with him. As it often times happens at the return
from Banquets, when as the Tumult was suddenly past, and that the multitude
was laid down and a sleep, and by the advancement of the night, the hope of
the Enterprise remained entire, then altogether attend the Execution. The Youth
had articulated and agreed with the Carthaginians, An accord made by the youth
of Tarentum with the Carthaginians.
that Hannibal coming to the City, near unto Musacee on the East, and to the
Gates which they call Temenides, he should make a fire upon a little Hill, the
which some call the Hill of Hyacinthe, and others of Apollo Hyacinthe. And that
when Tragisques Company should see it, they should answer him by the like
sign of fire: This done, Hannibal should quench the fire which he had made
without the City, and then approach with a slow pace.

These things thus concluded, the Youth of the City having past the inhabited
part, they came to the Monuments of the Deceased. The Eastern part of the
City of Tarentum, was full of Monuments: For that all the dead are buried
within the Walls of the City, according to a certain old Oracle. They say
that God gave the Tarentins to understand by an Oracle, that it would be best
for them when they had most Inhabitants. For their parts they thought, that
they should have a good dwelling according unto the Oracle, if they retained
the dead within their City. For this cause they interre them within their
walls. When as the Youth of the City was come to the Pithyonique Hill, they
expected what would succeed. Hannibal approaching did what had been
concluded: and the Company of Nicon and Tragisque seeing the fire, they took
courage, and kindled another fire. Again seeing Hannibals fire quenched, they
made have and ran unto the Gate, meaning to prevent Hannibals men in killing
the Guards: for that the Carthaginians preparing to enter marched slowly. When
they had prevailed in their Enterprise, and the Guards being surprised, some
slew them, others brake the Bolts. The Gates being suddenly opened, Hannibals
men came with such a measured March, as without any delay they assailed the
City. When they had made their entry safely and without Tumult, Tarentum taken
by Hannibal.
thinking they had done the greatest part of their business, they entered the
Market place boldly, on that side which ioines to the Sea. In regard of the
Horsemen, they leave no less then two Thousand within the Walls for their
supply, as well for the accidents which might happen without, as for other
expected things which do usually chance.

When they were come unto the places near unto the Market, the Army made a
stand. Philimene likewise being much troubled, how he might execute his Charge,
stayed without. For when they made the fire, they ran not to that Gate: and
they had sent him with a wild Boar, and about a Thousand Lybians with him to
the next Gate, meaning to execute their Enterprise, not by one means only but
by many. When as Philimene was according to his Custom come unto the Walls,
the Guards suddenly were ready descending to Rhinopile. When as he called unto
them to open the Gate, for that having a Boar, he was soar laden, the Guard
hearing those words open speedily, expecting to have a share of Philimenes
prize, as formerly he had done to others.

Philimene being the first of this Battalion enters, accompanied by another,
wearing a Numidian Habit, as if he had been of that Country: after whom
followed two others, carrying Venison. When there were four entered, they slew
him which opened the Gate, running simply and without fear, They kill the
po^^er.
to handle the Boar, there entered to the number of Thirty Lybians by the
little Wicket, which followed them a slow pace and secretly. This being done,
some brake the Hinges, others slew the Guards at the Gate, and others called
the Lybians by signs being yet without, leading them to the Market place, as
it had been ordered. Hannibal joyful of the adiunction of these men, for that
matters succeeded according to his desire, he was attentive to that which he
had begun. He therefore draws two Thousand Gauls a part: and dividing them
into three Bands, he appoints to either of them two of the Youth which had
managed this Enterprise, with some of his Captains, giving them charge, that
they should gain the most commodious approaches to go unto the Market place.
After which they should receive the Youth of the City, and have a care to
preserve the Citizens, and that they should cry out to the Tarentins, to stay
in the place which was assigned them for their safety. Finally, he Commands
the Captains of the Carthaginians and Celts, that they should kill all the
Romans they should encounter. Dividing them selves one from another, they
dispatch that which they had in charge. The Enemies entry being known to the
Tarentins, the City was full of cries and unexpected Trouble.

When as Caius was advertised of the Enemies entry, thinking that he should not
be able to prevent the danger, by reason of his drunkenness, Caius saues
himself.
he gets suddenly out of his lodging with his family: And when he was come to
the Gate which leads unto the Port, and that the Guard had opened the
Rhinopile, he escapes that way, and imbarques with his people in a little Cock
boat which lay in the Port, and was carried to the Fort. Afterward Philimene
makes provision of Roman Trumpets, whereof some founded near unto the Theater,
as they had usually done. And when the Romans ran in Arms according to their
Custom to the Fortress, the Enterpize was dispatched to the liking of the
Carthaginians. But they which being dispersed and without order entered into
those places, some fell into the hands of the Carthaginians, others among
Celts: Who by this same means slew a great number.

The day approaching, the Tarentins rested in their Houses, not able to prevent
this inconvenience. For they thought by reason of the founding of the Trumpets,
that this combustion had been made by the Romans; for that they made no spoil
in the City. But when they saw some of their men slain in the place, and some
of the Gauls stripping the dead bodies of the Romans, they began to think
of the coming of the Carthaginians. When as Hannibal had drawn his Army into
the market place, and that the Romans were retired to the Fort, the which they
held before with their Garrison, he causes a Proclamation forth with to be
made and proclaimed, that all the Tarentins should come unto the Market place
without Arms. In regard of the Youth, they went up and down the City crying
liberty, aduising and persuading the Citizens to rest assured that the
Carthaginians were there for their good. But all the Tarentins which held the
Romans party, being advertised of this Action, retired to the Fort: The rest
assembled without Arms at the sound of the Trumpet. To whom Hannibal spoke
graciously.

When the Tarentins had generally conceived by his Speech, and unexpected hope,
he sent many of them away, giving them charge at their return, to be careful
to Write the name of the Tarentins upon their doors: And if by fortune or
chance any one did it to a Romans House, he should be punished with Death.
Wherefore he made choice of men accustomed unto this charge, and sends them
presently to spoil the Romans Houses, willing them to hold and maintain the
Tarentins lodgings for Enemies, which had not the mark of a Tarentine.
Finally, he kept the rest in battle to succor the others. When he had
drawn together great store of goods by this spoil, and that the commodities
answering the conceived hope of the Tarentins, came to good, they then returned
to Arms.

The day following Hannibal holding a Council with the Tarentins, decreed to
separate the City from the Fort, and to fortify it, to the end they should be
no more in fear of the Romans holding the Fort. Wherefore he began first to
fortify the City with pallisadoes, right against the Walls of the Hill which
is before the Fort. And knowing that the Enemies would stir and make some
attempt, he appointed sufficient Forces: Thinking that for the future, there
would be nothing more necessary, to amaze the Romans, and to assure the
Tarentins. When as they began to set up their impalement, and that the Romans
assailed their Enemies with great confidence, courage and resolution, Hannibal
fighting with them a little, provoked them to the Combat. A skirmish betwixt
the Romans and Carthaginians.
But when as many of them past beyond the Hill, he giving courage to his men
encounters the Enemy. When the Combat grew hot, as much as might be in a
straight place environed with Walls, the Romans in the end being roughly
repulsed gave back, so as many of them fell into the Numidians hands: Finally
the greatest part being repulsed, and falling into the ditches, dyed.

After this, Hannibal fortified the City with Pallisadoes without danger, and
having done all things to his liking he was at quiet. He likewise forced the
Enemies to remain shut up in their Fort, in fear not only of themselves, but
also of the Fort. In regard of the Citizens, he has so puffed up their Courage,
as they held themselves able to resist the Romans, without the help of the
Carthaginians. Afterward Hannibal leaving some little space, from the
pallisadoe toward the City, he made a Ditch answering the Pallisadoe and the
wall of the Fort, from whence some time there were Soldiers drawn unto the
wall of the City. Moreover having Pallisadoed this Ditch, this fortification
proved not less strong then a Wall. Besides the which within toward the
City (leaving a reasonable space) he began a Wall from that part which
they call the Savior, unto that which they call Deep: So as without any
Garrison, these Fortifications would be sufficient to cause the Tarentins to
dwell in safety. Leaving then a sufficient Garrison of Horse for the Guard of
the City and wall, The River of Erota.
he planted his Camp forty furlongs from the City, near the River which
some call Gallea, others Erota, which name it has taken from that other River,
passing near unto Lacedemon, which they likewise call Erota.

The Tarentins in truth have many such, as well in the Country as in the
City, for that undoubtedly they have taken their Collony and Race from the
Lacedaemonians. The wall being finished and ended, as well by the diligence and
industry of the Tarentins, as the help and assistance of the Carthaginians,
Hannibal resolves to ouer-throw the Fort. And when he had prepared and made
all things ready for the siege, the Romans having received into the Fort
succors by Sea, from Metaponcia, they were something refresht and comforted,
and in the night assailed Hannibals Engines, ruining them all with their
preparations. This made Hannibal to despair of the siege of the Fort.

And when the City walls were made perfect, he assembles the Tarentins, and
lets them understand, that it was very necessary for them to be masters of the
Sea, Hannibals Remonstrance to the Tarentins.
against the discommodities of the present time. But as the mouth of the Port
was in the Command of the Fort, it was not in their power to help themselves
with ships at their pleasure, or go out of the Port: Where as the Romans
had all necessaries brought unto them safely. So as the City should never
enjoy a perfect freedom and liberty. Hannibal considering this, he let the
Tarentins understand, that if they which held the Fort, lost the hope of the
comodity of the Sea, they would presently yield it to them. The which the
Tarentins hearing, they allowed of his Speech, but they could not at that time
effect it, unless they were assisted by the Carthaginians Army: The which
could not then be done. Wherefore they could not conceive whereto Hannibal
tended, propounding these things.

And when he maintained that they might well be masters of the Sea without the
help of the Carthaginians, they wondered more, not being able to understand his
conception. When he had viewed the place within the Walls, from the Port unto
the outward Sea, he was of opinion that the Ships might sail close unto the
Wall toward the South. When he had given this advice unto the Tarentins, they
not only embraced it suddenly, but commended Hannibal wonderfully. Presently
after they had made Wheels, they prepared a way for ships, which was sooner
done then spoken, for that affection and the multitude of Worke-men prevailed
much. By this means the Tarentins past their ships into the open Sea, and
safely besieged those of the Fort, who received their succors from abroad. In
regard of Hannibal, leaving the City he raised his Camp, and returning three
days after, to the Pallisadoe which he had made in the beginning, he stayed
to spend the rest of the Winter.

A PARCEL OF the Ninth Book of the History of POLYBIVS.
BEhold the most renowned and excellent Actions, comprehended under the
aforesaid Olympiade, and within the space of four Years which it contains:
Of which we will endeavor to speak of in two Books. I am not ignorant that
our Commentaries have been something rough, and that they are pleasing to a
certain kind of Auditors, and blamed by others. In truth other
Historiographers, and in a manner all, or the greatest part, helping themselves
with all the parts of a History, draw many men to the reading of their
Commentaries. The manner to Discourse of Genealogies causes a desire to hear:
That also which speaks of Collonies, Voyages, Possessions, and Races, which
please a curious man of little judgment, as that of Ephorus. And to a civil
man, that wherein they Discourse of the Actions of Nations, Cities, and
Potentates, whereunto applying our selves plainly, and disposing all our Treaty
to these things, we direct and guide our selves by a certain kind of
Discourse, as we have formerly promised.

It is true, we direct most Readers to that which is not much pleasing and
delightful. Finally, we have at large delivered the cause, why in reproouing
the other parts of a History, we will thus write the Actions. There is no
hinderance that for the better expressing and declaration, we should not
briefly advertise the Reader hereof. But as many of these things are related
in diverse manners, of Genealogies, Fables, and Collonies, and moreover of
Races, Alliances, and Possessions, it will be necessary for him that would
Write, to speak consequently of strange things as proper, which were an
infamous thing: Or if he will not, he must labor in vain, in promising
publicly to pursue and Comment of those things, which have bin sufficiently
declared, and delivered to posterity by the ancient.

For this cause, and for many others we have left them, receiving a relation of
Actions: For that first, that as many new things offer themselves often, so it
is very necessary to use a new kind of Discourse: The which happens not in the
beginning of the Relation, so as we deliver the subsequent Actions. And
secondly, for that this kind has been before, and is most profitable, by the
which the experience of things and Policies, have so much prevailed with us, as
they which have a desire to know the Actions, may help themselves by an easy
way, in all that which happens by the course of time. Wherefore having no such
regard to the pleasure and delight of those which shall read and peruse our
Commentaries, as to the profit of the Hearers, we have (leaving the other
parts) fixed upon this. Finally, they which shall diligently consider of our
Commentaries, will be more certain witnesses.

When as Hannibal had enclosed the Camp of Appius Claudius, Appius besieged by
Hannibal.
being at the siege of Capoua, at the first he used skirmishes, seeking to
draw the Enemy to Battle. But when as no man presented himself, in the end
he besieged them, which was an Enterprise wherein he was frustrated as well as
of the first, although the Horsemen of the Wings assailed them in Troops,
casting Darts into their Camp, with great cries: And the foote-men charge them
by Bands, laboring to break the Pallisado. Yet they could not divert the
Romans from their former resolution, repulsing those which assailed the
Pallisadoe with great strength and Courage: And being well armed, they went not
out of the Camp with their Ensigns. Hannibal bearing these things
impatiently, and the rather for that the Romans could not any way be annoyed
from the Town, studied what order he might take for the present Affairs. For
my part, I think that the case falling out thus, seems to have made not only
the Carthaginians to doubt, but all other men to whom the knowledge thereof
has come.

Who will not wonder, hearing how the Romans have often been vanquished by the
Carthaginians, and durst not present themselves, nor fight with them, have not
abandoned their Fort being in the open field? It is certain that in times
past, they had always Camped only at the bottom or foot of Mountains
against the Enemies: But now being in a fair Plain, and in the openest place
of all Italy, besieging a strong Town, they were assailed by them of all
sides, against whom they durst not once think or immagine to make head, being
so much disheartened. And although the Carthaginians prevailed continually
fighting, yet they were no less annoyed by the vanquished* Finally, I hold
this to be the cause, that they consider the Enterprise one of another: That is
to say, that the Troops of Hannibals Horsemen, purchased the Victory to the
Carthaginians, and a defeat to the Romans: Wherefore the vanquished made
sudden sallies after the fight. They also lodged their Troops in such a
place, as the Horsemen could not annoy them. The case falling out thus near
unto Capoua, was common to them both. The Romans in truth durst not come
forth to fight, being terrified with the Enemies horse. They kept themselves
within their Fort, knowing well that the Cauallery vanquishing them in fight,
they could not annoy them.

The Carthaginians likewise could not with reason stay long with so great a
number of Horses: For that the Romans had for that ^ause wasted the whole
Country: Neither could they give order to have Hay and Barley brought on
Horseback so great a way unto their Cauallery and Sumpters: Neither durst the
Carthaginians besiege the Enemy without Horse, being fortified with Ditches and
Pallisadoes: Against the which in fighting without Wings upon an equal
danger, they should hazard an uncertain Fortune. They feared likewise that the
Roman Subjects, would join with them and succor them, and that cutting of
their necessary Victuals, they would draw him into great distress.

Hannibal considering these things, having opinion that they could not raise
the siege directly, A wise Consideration of Hannibal.
he takes another advice. Finally, he makes his reckoning, that if in stealing
away suddenly, he should show himself about Rome, he might do something that
might be profitable for the Carthaginians affairs, the inhabitants being
amazed with such a new accident: Or if that did not succeed, he should force
Appius Army to raise the s^ege to succor and supply their Country, or else
foorth-with divide themselves, so as they which should succor the Country, and
they which remained at the siege would be easy to vanquish. Considering these
things, he sent a certain Lybian messenger to Capoua, persuading him to
retire to the Romans, and so into the City, providing wisely by this means,
that his Letters might be safely carried. He feared much, that the Capouans
seeing his departure would yeilde, following the Romans party, as destitute of
hope. For this cause he acquaints them with his intention by Letters, for the
which he sends the Lybian, after the departure of his Army, to the end that
knowing his resolution and dislodging, they should maintain the siege
courageously.

When as they which besieged Capoua, had entreated the people of Rome for
assistance, that Hannibal held them besieged, they were all in great doubt and
fear, for that the present Affairs required a final end, and therefore they
sought by frequent Embassies and attempts to assist that party concerning the
General. The Capouans on the other side (after they had received the Letters
by the Lybian, and known the Carthaginians advice) hold good against the
Enemy, resolving to adventure and try their Fortune. Wherefore Hannibal having
fed his Army the fifth day after his coming, and leaving fires burning, he
raised his Camp, so as he was not discovered by the Enemy. Taking then the
difficult way by the Saunitide, discovering and gaining by his Cauallery the
nearest places to his way, he past the River of Annion secretly, whilst that
the Inhabitants of Rome were in suspense for Capoua and that War: Approaching
in such sort, as he planted his Camp within forty Furlongs of Rome. Hannibal
within 40. furlongs of Rome.
And as he assailed it by this means, it happened that they of the City were
troubled and dismayed with fear, for that this accident came suddenly and
contrary to their hope, and that Hannibal had not formerly besieged the City so
near. They had also a conceit, that he approaching so near the City, their
Army besieging Capoua, must of necessity be defeated. The amazement of the
Romans.
The men fly to the Walls, and out of the City to places of advantage. The
Women on the other side make professions about the Temples, washing the
pauement with their hair. The superstition of the Roman Dames.
It was a thing they were accustomed to do, if at any time the Country were
in great danger.

When as Hannibal was thus incampt, thinking to assail the City the day
following, there happened an admirable and casual accident, working for the
preservation of the Romans. Caius and Publius had taken an Oath of the
Soldiers which had been levied, to come to Rome the the same day in Arms.
They also made another Levy: so as at a certain time a great number of men of
War transported themselves suddenly to Rome. With the which the Captains
made a bold sally: and planting their Camp before the City, they restrained
Hannibals fury. The Carthaginians in truth at the first made such an attempt,
as they despaired not to take the City by assault. But seeing the Enemies to
hold a Camp, and advertised by a Prisoner of that which had happened, they
desisted from their Enterprise to take the Town, falling to spoil the
Country, The Carthaginians waste the Country about Rome.
and to fire their houses: so as at the first they brought a wonderful booty
unto their Camp, as being come to this kind of hunting, to the which never
Enemy thought to attain. And when as afterward the Consuls taking courage,
had planted themselves within Eleven Furlongs of the Enemies Camp, The Romans
is Field.
Hannibal lost all hope of taking the City, notwithstanding the great spoils
which he had made; and which is more, he parts at the break of day with his
Army, keeping a good reckoning of days, in the which according to his advice
taken from the beginning, he was in hope that Appius advertised of the danger
of the City, would wholly raise the siege, and that he would succor Rome; or
leaving some portion of the Army, and taking the greatest part, he would make
haste to succor his Country: either of which happening, his affairs would
succeed well. But Publius breaking the Bridges of the said River, forced him to
pass his Army at a Fourde, being always in the tail of him, and annoying him
much.

It is true, he could not defeat him for the great number of Horses, and the
dexterity of the Numidians fit for all purposes: yet he retired to his Fort,
having recovered a great part of the booty, and taken about three hundred men.
Afterward imagining that the Carthaginians hastened their retreat for scare,
he pursued them in the Rear by Skirmishes. In the beginning Hannibal made
haste pursuing his design. But when as on the fifth day he had been advertised
that Appius continued still at the siege of Capoua, he stayed: then suddenly
receiving those which pursued him, A defeat of the Romans by Night.
he charged them in the Night, making a great slaughter, and chasing the rest
out of their Fort. When as the day following he saw the Romans retired to a
certain Hill, strong by situation, and rampred, he despaires to take them:
Yet making his voyage by Daunia and Brette, he assailes the neighbor places
to Rhegium so suddenly, as he had in a manner taken the City: yet he surprised
all those that were straggling in the Fields, with a great number of the
Rheginois at his coming. In my opinion we ought with reason to observe at that
time the virtue and envy of the Romans and the Carthaginians in the conduct of
the War.

For as all the World wonders at Epaminundas, General of the Thebeins in this,
that when he was come with the Allies of the War to Tegee, and was advertised
that the Lacedaemonians were with their league at Mantinea, assembling there to
give Battle to the Thebeins, he gave order to his Troops to feed
presently: By this means he causes his Army to march in the Evening,
Lacedemon taken by Epaminundas.
as it were to recover some convenient places to put them in Battle. When he
had drawn many into this conceit, he parts to assail the City of Lacedemon.
Where entering about three hours in the Night, contrary to all hope, and
finding it naked and destitute of help, he took it, and kept it on that side
which was paued to the River. As this disaster happened with a great
alteration, and that a certain Fugitive flying to Mantinea, had advertised
King Agesilaus of that which happened, and that they of the league made haste
to succor Lacedemon, he was out of hope to be able to keep it. But when he
had fed near unto the River of Erota, and had drawn his Army together, after
that he had suffered many miseries and dangers, he returns to Mantinea, taking
the same way, with hope to find it destitue and unfurnished of Lacedaemonians
and their league, as being gone to succor Lacedemon: the which succeeded
accordingly. Wherefore giving courage to the Thebeins, and marching in the
Night with great labor and toil, he arrived by noone at Mantinea, being
destitute and void of succors. It is true that the Athenians who at that time
held the party of the Lacedaemonians, against the Thebeins, were come to their
succors. When the foreward of the Thebeins, arrived at the Temple of Possidon,
standing seven Furlongs from the Town, it happened as a thing forecast, that
at the same instant the Atheniens showed themselves upon a Hill near to
Mantinea, who being discovered by them which remained in the Town, they went
to the Wales, taking courage to repulse the Thebeins attempts.
Historiographers therefore have reason to complain of the said actions,
saying, that the Commander had done all that was fitting for a wiser and more
excellent Captain then the Enemies were, and that Epaminundas was vanquished
by Fortune. Epaminundas vanquished by Fortune.
Some others likewise may say with reason, that the like happened unto Hannibal.

For who will not wonder at this Commander, in observing that he endeavored
to raise the siege, in assailing the Enemy by Skirmishes: And when he was
therein frustrated in his attempts, he assailed Rome it self: And when this
Enterprise did not succeed, for the casual events, he again endeavored
(turning head with his Army) to charge the Enemy, and to try if he might
trouble those which besieged Capoua: And when in the end he prevailed not in
his Enterprise, he resolved to annoy the Enemy in ruining them of Rhegium. It
is true that some one will happily judge that at this day the Romans are to be
preferred before the Lacedaemonians. Who upon the first aduertisment parting
together, delivered Lacedemon, yet losing Mantinea for their parts: But the
Romans preserved their Country without raising the siege from before Capoua,
growing constantly obstinate in their Enterprise, and have in the end assailed
the Capouans resolutely. I have propounded this Discourse not so much to praise
the Romans or Carthaginians, (for we have many times showed them to be
excellent) as well for their present Captains, and for those which hereafter
shall have the government of these two Commonweals: to the end that
remembering them, and having these things before their eyes with a desire of
imitation, they may take courage, not of a desperate and dangerous rashness,
but of a politic resolution, with an admirable industry and good discourse,
which shall never be subject to forgetfulness, retaining still in memory
actions well managed; and Enterprises without reason.

For this cause the Romans have decreed to set a part, and to carry into their
Country the things we have spoken of, not omitting any thing. If this be well
done and profitable to them, or otherwise, it requires a longer discourse: And
moreover whether it has been in former times, or is only necessary at this
day. If considering these things, they had instructed their men, it is certain
that according to reason they had transported to their use the things for the
which they had grown great: But if leading a simple life, they fly abundance
and sumptuousness, and yet they vanquish those which many times have store of
such good things, why should not their actions be turned to vice? Some one may
confidently say, that they err which have left the Victors course of life, to
follow that of the vanquished, and having incurred envy, a Companion of such
things: which is a case much to be feared in Great men. Doubtless a man thus
possessed, will never hold them happy which possess another, and bears them
envy. Moreover, who will take compassion of those which degenerating lose
their principalities? If Fortune smiles, and if a man draws together all the
wealth of another, and moreover, inuites in some sort the dispossessed to see it,
he sins doubly. First the Spectators have no compassion, but are admonished
as of their own miseries: whereby not only envy but also choler inflames
them against the fortunate. The remembrance of their own calamities is as it
were a stirring up to hatred against the Authors. It is true, that it may be
there is some show of reason for the drawing of Gold and Silver. For they could
not have attained to the Empire, if they had not gotten the power taken from
others.

In regard of those things which concern not power, they might leave them with
the envy in those places where they were before, and make their Country of
better fame, in beautifying it with honesty and magnanimity, not with Images
and figures. I hold this Discourse for those which Potentates always usurp,
to the end that in sacking Cities they may not conceive that the miseries of
other men, are the glory and beautifying of their Country. Finally, it is
necessary that the accidents which happen in the Art of War, be diligently
considered of* It may happen they shall duly foresee every thing, if any one
does execute speedily that which is propounded.

If any man will know that executions done openly with violence, are of less
consequence then actions of policy and time, he may easily judge by the
actions past. It would be no difficult thing to understand by the events, that
in matters which are done by time, there are more found executed through
errors then by reason; For no man doubts that many faults are committed
through the ignorance and dullness of Commanders. Wherefore we must consider
the reason of this kind. It is not fit to hold for good service the accidents
which without foresight happen in the profession of War, but rather for
events and casual accidents: and we must leave them, for that they are not
governed by reason, whereas those should be apparent which are done with a
settled resolution whereof we now speak. But for that every action has time,
space, and a determinate place, and has need of secrecy, and of confident
resolutions: and that it does import by whom, with whom, and by what means
they shall execute them: it is apparent that he which shall duly consider every
one of these things apart, shall not stray from reason: if he omits any one of
them, he shall be defrauded of his whole resolution. Nature in truth makes one
of all the parts, and every one of them (although vulgar) suffices to cause a
disaster of advice if it be forgotten: Finally all the parts do scarce
suffice, although they be employed to bring any work to a good end. Wherefore
Commanders should not omit any thing of this kind.

Silence is the chief of those things which we have spoken of: to the end that
through joy if any unexpected hope presents it self, or for fear and
amazement, The duty of a Commander.
they do not through familiarity or friendship, communicate their enterprise to
any stranger, but only to those without whom they cannot execute their
resolutions: nor yet to them, but so far forth as necessity shall force them.
He must be secret not only in words but also in his affections. For it happens
to many to discover by signs, and sometime by their actions, their resolutions
which the tongue has kept silent. Secondly, it is necessary not to be ignorant
of the ways both by day and night, and the means to pass them as well by Sea
as Land. The third point, and the most exquisite, is to know the opportunity of
times by the circumstances, and to be able to conjecture it with judgment. He
must make no little esteem of the manner how to execute it. For many times
thereby things which seem impossible, prove possible, and those which usually
have been possible, are made impossible. Finally, he must not disdain the
Accords and Articles annexed, nor the choice of things by the which, and with
whom that which has bin resolved, is brought to an end. Of these things some
are considered by the exercise, others by Histories, and some by the course and
reason of experience. The knowledge likewise of the ways, and whither he
means to go, and its nature would be very fitting^: and consequently by whom
and against whom they make War, and carefully to consider of the business,
and not to trust all men. It is true that they which are led and governed, must
always in such affairs give credit to those that lead them. Moreover,
Commanders may happily learn these things and other such like from a simple
Soldier: some by their own industry, and others by History, in considering
the actions experience. It is also necessary to understand the Mathematiques,
and the Theorique, especially of Astrology and Geometry, the Art whereof is not
very necessary in this trade: yet the use may help much in the alteration of
things. Their chief necessity consists in the consideration of the Day and
Night. If they had been always equal, there would be no difficulty therein,
and the knowledge would be common to all.

But as the aforesaid things have a difference not only betwixt them, but
also in themselves, it is most necessary to know what be their augmentations
and diminutions. How can the course and perfections of the Day and Night be
known without the consideration of the said difference? No man can without
their experience attain unto those things which concerns a competency of
time, being otherwise forced to work sooner or later then is needful. Haste
in these affairs is more defective then the delay of an Enterprise. He that
exceeds the time appointed, is frustrated of his hope: But he may repair it
in giving good order, knowing after what time it may be done: whereas he that
preuents the opportunity of the approaching time, and being discovered, not
only fails of his Enterprise, but is in danger to be wholly defeated.
Occasion is the Mistress of all humane affairs, and especially in the Art of
War.

A Commander therefore of an Army must have knowledge of the So^stice of Summer,
and of the Equinoctials, and of the intermixed increases and decreases of Days
and Nights. The knowledge of the diversities of Days necessary for Captains.
By this only means he may hold a mean in things which are to be effected,
as well by Sea as Land. Moreover, he must know every point of the Day and
Night, to the end that he may understand the time when to plant his Camp and
to raise it. It is not possible that he shall attain to a good end which does
not consider the beginning. It is not impossible to see the hours of the Sun
by the shadows whilst he makes his course, and the distances which are made
by it in this world: In regard of those of the Night, it is a difficult thing,
unless some do follow and observe the Stars after the disposition of the
Heaven, and the order of the twelve Signs in the Zodiac. It is in truth
easy for those which diligently observe the Celestial Stars. For although
the Nights be unequal, yet in every one of them six of the twelve Signs do
move, so as it is necessary that to every part of the Night an equal portion
of the Zodiac be turned, and as daily it is apparent what part the Sun drives
behind, which is that which it separates from the Diameter: it is necessary
that accordingly there should be so much consumed of the Night, that after this
part it appears elevated from the rest of the Zodiac. The Signs of the
Zodiac being known as well for their number as greatness, it falls out
afterward that they show themselves such all times of the Night. But when the
Nights are cloudy, we must observe the Moon: for her greatness, her light
appears universal in what part of the world soever she be. And we must
sometimes search by the times and places of the East, and sometimes of the
West: for that in this part there is a knowledge, so as she follows the
Diurnall differences of the East. There is also in this knowledge a manner of
easy consideration. There is likewise the same end almost within a figure, and
all are of Sense. Homer.
For this cause they justly commend the Poet, who brings in Ulysses an
excellent Prince, taking conjecture of the Stars, not only to direct a
Navigations, but also to manage War at Land. We may in truth exactly
foresee unexpected chances, although that many times they be of great
preplexity, as inundations by Rain and Rivers, Snows and violent Frosts, and
finally Fogs and Clouds, with such like things. Shall we not with reason be
destitute and void of many things by our own fault, if we disdain those
which we may fore see? We may not therefore contemn or despise any of these
things, lest we fall into such a consideration which they say has happened
unto many others: Concerning which we must now speak by way of Example.

Arate Chief of the Acheins, laboring to surprise the City of Cynethe, The
error of Arate.
appointed a day to them of the Town which had the same intelligence: who
coming by Night to the River which falls to Cynethe, he was to stay there with
his Army: and they of the Town taking their occasion about Noone, should send
forth one of them secretly out at the Gate, covered with a Cloak, and should
command him to stay before the Gate upon a Dunghill: and in the mean time the
rest should take the chief men sleeping, who were accustomed to guard the Gate
about Noone. Which being done, coming out of their Ambush, they should plant
their Battalion against the Gate. These things thus concluded, Arate came at
the time appointed, and keeping the accord, he laid his Ambush near unto the
River. But about five of the Clock, a man having weak Sheep of those which
are accustomed to feed about the Town, came forth of the Gate in a Cloak, as
it was needful; who according to the reason of the time, enquired of the life
of the Shepherd: And staying upon the said Hill, looked where he was* Arate
thinking they had given him the Sign, makes haste to gain the Town with his
men. But when the Gate was suddenly shut by the Guards that were present, for
that they within had nothing ready, it happened that Arate was not only
frustrated of his purpose and intention, but was the cause of extreme
calamities to the Burgesses, with whom he had intelligence. For being
apprehended, they were presently chased away or slain. What shall we think
to be the cause of this accident? Doubtless for that this Commander had
executed this agreement with more lightness then was fit, who being young had
not an exquisite knowledge of these two accords, nor of the things annexed. The
affairs of War have an alteration in a moment, wavering from one side to
another in the Events. When as likewise Cleomenes the Lacedemonian, had
resolved to take the City of Megalopolis by practice, he agreed with the Guards
of the Walls, The error of Cleomenes.
that he should come in the Night with his Army to the Gate which they call
Pholee, at the third renewing of the Watch. For they which held his party, had
then the guard of the Wall. But when he had not foreseen, that the Nights were
shorter at the rising of the Pleiades, he parting from Lacedemon with his Army
at Sun setting, and as he could not come thither in time, arriving when the
Sun was up, he was repulsed, making his attempts in vain and without reason,
with a great and shameful loss of his men, and in danger to lose all: Whereas
if he had aimed truly at the time appointed by the agreement, and had brought
his Army when as his Confederates had power to let him in, he had not failed in
his Enterprise.

In like manner Philip (as we have formerly said) having plotted a secret
surprise of the City of the Meliteens, failed doubly. The error of Philip.
He brought not Ladders of a sufficient length, as the business required,
neither did he observe the time. For having resolved to arrive at Midnight,
when as all the World slept, he dislodged before the time from Larisse with
his Army, and came too soon into the Meliteens Country. For this cause as he
could not stay, fearing to be discovered by the Citizens, nor yet steal away,
he gave an assault to the City, the Inhabitants being yet awake. So as it was
not in his power to get to the top of the Walls by his Ladders, for that they
were not of a just length, neither could he enter by the Gate, for that the
Confederates which he had in the City, could not succor him being excluded by
the time. And as he had incensed the Citizens, and made a great loss of his
men, he returned with shame and disgrace, it being a warning and caueate unto
all others, not to put any trust or confidence in him hereafter.

As likewise Nicias which was Chief of the Athenians, might have preserved the
Army which he had near unto Saragosse, The error of Nicias.
and had taken a fit occasion in the Night to lay an Ambush, to the end he
might not be discovered by the Enemy, he retired into a safe place:
Afterward he removed not his Camp through superstition, for that the Moon
was Eclipsed, as if she had foretold some ensuing danger and misfortune. But
it happened unto all, as ^ell to the Army as Captains, to fall into the hands
of the Saragossins, when as the Night following Nicias raised his Camp, being
discovered by the Enemies. Notwithstanding he might in such affairs have
been made wise by such as have had experience, that the commodity of time
ought not to be neglected for such things, making the ignorance of the Enemy
his comfort. Ignorance in truth gives a great help to men of experience, to
bring their affairs to a good end. We must then for the aforesaid things
have recourse to Astrology, in regard of the measure of ladders, the manner is
as follows. If any one of the Conspirators have given the height of the Wall,
they may presently know of what length the ladder shall be: As if the Wall be
ten foot high in some places, What a Ladder for the War ought to be.
the ladders must be twelve foot long. Finally, they must give unto the ladder
good footing, according to the proportion of the staves: left burthening it too
much, it break not easily by reason of the multitude: and again set up
straight, it will be very dangerous unto them. If there be no means to take
the measure, nor to approach the Wall, let them take the greatness of those
things which are elevated on the Plain, by the space of all the height, which
is a kind of measure not only possible, but also easy for those which study
to learn the Mathematiques.

Wherefore it is necessary for them that will aim truly in their resolutions
of the course of War, to know the use of Geometry: If not perfectly, yet at
the least that they have the knowledge of proportions, and consideration of
Similitudes. It is not only necessary for this, Geometry necessary for the
War.
but also for the comprehension of Designs in the situation of a Camp: to
the end that when as we sometimes change its general disposition, we may
observe the same proportion of things which are there comprehended: And if
sometimes we retain the same Designs of Camps, we may extend the place
comprehended by them, or straighten it; according to the reason of things
before decreed, or set apart: the which we have declared more exactly in our
Commentaries for the ordring of Battles. I do not believe there is any man
that will be discontented with our study, for that we charge the profession of
War with many things, commanding those that love it, not to disdain
Astrology nor Geometry. For my part, I strive especially, and with great desire
to command things necessary, as I do reprove and blame the excess of vain
and superfluous things, in regard of the subtilties and dreams in every
Science: So do we those which are out of necessary use. It is strange thing
that they which practice Dancing, or playing of the Flute, take the
preparatiues which concerns the accords and Music: And likewise Wrestling,
for that this kind of Art seems behoouefull to bring this exercise to an end:
And yet they which term themselves Soldiers, are discontented if they must
allow of any other Studies: So as they which practice Mecanique Arts, The
carelesnes of Soldiers for the Sciences.
are more careful and studious then those which challenge an Excellency in
things which are of great honor and glory: the which no man of Sense will
deny. But we have spoken enough of this Subject.

Many conjecture the greatness of things by the Circui^e: to whom
notwithstanding it seems incredible, that although the City of Megalopolis be
contained within the Circuit of fifty Furlongs, and that of Lacedemon within
forty eight, The circuit of Megalopolis and Lacedemon.
yet it is twice as great as that of Megalopolis. And if any one (meaning to
make this doubt greater) says, it is possible that a City, or the Pallisadoe
of a Camp, having the Circuit of forty Furlongs, may be more ample and
complete then that of a hundred, this will seem unto them a mad and
extrauagant speech: the cause is, for that we remember not the things which
inhumane Disciplines are delivered unto us by Geometry. This is the cause why I
have undertaken this Discourse. For that not only many people, but also some
of those which govern the Commonweal, and likewise Commanders and Captains
are amazed and wonder how it can be possible, that the City of Lacedemon should
be greater then that of Megalopolis, seeing the circuit is less: and that
consequently they conjecture the number of men by the circuit of the Camp.

There is another such like error which they commit in the description of
Towns. For many conceive, that Cities contain more houses which are crooked
and hilly, then those which are in a flat Country. But this is not true, for
that the houses are not of a good building in a declining Street, but in a
plain Country, for the which it happens that the Hills yield: the which may
appear by that which is apparent in a Plain. If thou do consider the
houses which are built high, and set upon the declining of a Hill, so as they
are all of an equal hight, it is apparent that their tops being level, the
distance is equal, as well of those which are built under the Hills, as those
which are seated on the Plain near unto the foundations of the Wall. It
suffices at this time to have spoken to those which (desiring the pre-eminence
over others, and to govern Commonweals) are ignorant of these things, being
amazed and wonder at this relation. The City of Agragas is not only more
excellent among many other Cities, but also for the force of its Rampire, The
City of Agragas.
and for the grace and building. It is built eighteen Furlongs from the Sea,
so as every man may be partaker of her commodities, the Walls are excellently
fortified by their situation and the industry of man. The Wall is seated upon
a hard and inaccessible Rock, as well by Nature as by Art. It is environed
with Rivers. For toward the South runs a River of the Towns name, and on the
Western part toward the Winter Solstice, passes the River of Hypse. The
Fortress is seated upon the side of the Summers East. The which has without
an inaccessible valley and within it one approach to the City. On the top is
built the Temple of Minerua, and of Jupiter A^abarin, like as at Rhodes. For as
Agragas has been peopled by Rhodiens, their God with good reason has the
same name, as at Rhodes. Finally the City is stately adorned with Temples and
Porches. In regard of the Temple of Jupiter Olympian, it is none of the most
sumptuous: But likewise it seems not less in its height and greatness then
any other of Grecce.

The Oration of Chlenee, Ambassador for the Etoliens to the Lacedaemonians.
IT is so true my Masters of Lacedemon, that your power has been the
beginning of Servitude to the Grecians, the which I hold so certain, as no man
at this day will say the contrary. We may judge of it in this manner. For what
a multitude of Grecians are there in Thrace, whereof the Athenians and
Calsidonians have planted Collonies? What City has had a greater estate and
power then that of the Olynthiens? The which when as Philip had made Captive,
and ordained to serve for an Example, he has not only been Lord of all the
Cities of Thrace, Philip subdued the Thessalians.
but has moreover made subject the Thessalians, being terrified with fear.
And when as afterward he had subdued the Athenians by Arms, he used his
Fortune nobly, not so much for the good of the Athenians (for there wanted
much) but to the end that by the same of his benefits toward them, he might
draw others to a voluntary obedience.

In regard of the authority of your City, it seemed for a time to favor the
other Grecians. Wherefore propounding what he thought good, he went to Field
with an Army, and in spoiling the Country, he has ruined and sacked your
houses, and finally your Country, distributing part to the Argiues, part to
the Tegeates, some to the Megalopolitains, and the rest to the Messeniens:
seeking without reason to benefit others, to the end he might endammage and and
annoy you. Alexander has since taken upon him the power and command. Who
thinking that there was yet remaining some comfort for Greece in the City of
Thebes, Alexander ruined Thebes.
I conceive you all know how he has ruined it. But what need is there to
relate in particular the Deeds of those which have succeeded them, and how ill
they have entreated Greece? There is no man so negligent of the actions of
War, which does not know how Antipater (the Grecians being vanquished near
unto Lamiai) did most wickedly entreat the miserable Athenians and others:
Antipater.
To whom he was so outrageous and unjust, as he sent Inquisiters for
Fugitues, and sent to the Cities, against those which had contradicted him, or
in any fort offended the honor of the Macedonians. Whereof some being
violently drawn out of the Temple, and others from the Altars themselves, have
been miserably defeated and slain: the other Fugitives have been chased out
of Greece. There was no freedom but only in the Nation of the Etoliens. In
regard of the executions done by Cassander, Demetrius, and Antigonus, Gonas,
who is ignorant of them? The knowledge has been manifest, seeing they have
been done without any disguising. Some of them placed Garrisons in Towns,
others settled Tyrants: By which means there has not been any City free from
the name of this kind of servitude.

But leaving this Discourse, I come in the end to Antigonus: to the end that
none of you considering plainly my intent, Antigonus.
may think himself beholding to the favor of the Macedonians. Antigonus in
truth has not made War against you for the preservation of the Acheins:
neither for that he was offended with the Tyranny of Cleomenes, he desired to
set the Lacedaemonians at liberty (it were too great a folly, if you were of
this opinion) but for that he saw his power was not assured, if the
principality of Morea were under your gonernment, and withal he saw the
industry of Cleomenes, and that Fortune smiled upon you, the which he feared
with envy. He came not to give succors to Morea, but to ravish your hopes,
and abate your greatness. Wherefore the Macedonians are not so much worthy of
love, Lording it over this City which they have ruined, as to be held for
Enemies and odious, seeing he has always hindered you, when you had means to
command all Greece. In regard of the iniquity of Philip, what need is there to
use any long discourse? His execration toward the Gods, The blame of Philip.
for the outrages committed in the Temple of Thermes is plainly declared: And
as for his cruelty to men, it is fully expressed by this preuarication, and the
accord violated with the Messeniens. Finally, the Etoliens have alone among the
Grecians made head against Antipater in the view of all the World: so as they
lived in safty which were outragiously afflicted. They have also withstood the
attempt of Brennus and the Barbarians which accompanied him: And they alone
being called, have endeavored with you to set the principality of Greece at
liberty. But it is enough of this Subject: We must now advise in some sort,
and take order touching this present Council, as with them that resolve for
the War. We must consider it according to the truth.

I am also of opinion that as the Acheins as the weaker, should not only
forbear to spoil your Country, but also give great thanks unto the Gods if
they may preserve their own: The Eliences and Messeniens will make War
against them for the league they have with us, the like you will do. As I
understand, Philip will desist from his Enterprise, being assailed by the
Etoliens at Land, and by the Romans and Attalus by Sea. It is moreover easy to
judge of the future by the actions past. For making War only against the
Etoliens, he could never subdue them, how then will he support this present
Watre? Take these words according to my first proposition: that it may be
notorious to all men, that you ought not by a rash and unadvised Council, but
by a mature and settled deliberation rather give succors to the Etoliens the
Macedonians. And if you have formerly prevented, and given order for those,
what means can there remain? If you have granted us present succors, before
you have received the benefits of Antigonus, we must with reason enquire, if
it be fit that in yiedling to the succeeding benefits, you should contemn the
precedent which you have enjoyed. How this liberty and safety being published
has been consumed by Antigonus, there are some which reproach it unto you,
and turn these things to evil, demanding often whither you should follow the
party of the Etoliens or Macedonians: You would enter League with us in many
things, to whom in these affairs you have given your faith, and you have it
mutually from us, having managed the former Wars with us against the
Macedonians. Who can doubt justly of these things.

It is certain that the Affairs which you have with Antigonus and Philip, is
palliated under the Title of courtesy. Finally, what need is there to declare
that, which since has been done unto you? Either in regard of the outrage of
the Etoliens, or the bounty of the Macedonians, or for any other thing which
has been available unto them? How can you being now changed, confirm the
Accords and Oaths with them, (which are great Testimonies and Ties among men)
to whom formerly you had wisely resolved not to obey?

When as Chlenee had Discoursed of these things, and had spoken in such sort,
as he thought no man could contradict him, he made an end of his Speech.
After whom Lucisque Ambassador for the Acarnanians, entering, contained
himself at the first, seeing many discoursing of the aforesaid things: But
when silence was made, he began in these Terms.

The Oration of Lucisque Ambassador of the Acarnanians to the Lacedaemonians.
YOu Masters of Lacedemon, we are come hither, as sent by the Commonweal of
the Acarnanians. We conceive that this our Embassy, is common to Us and the
Macedonians: For that in a manner daily, they and we are Companions in the
same hope. And as in dangers we involued together, by reason of their
excellency and the greatness of their Virtue, to the end that by their forces
we may live in safety: In like manner the commodity of the Acarnanians, is
according to the care of the Ambassadors, contained in the right of the
Macedonians. Wherefore you have no cause to wonder, if we make a long discourse
of Phillip and the Macedonians. Chlenee making an end of his Oration, adds a
brief recapitulation of the right by the which you were bound unto them: For
he has said, if their be nothing which has been done Since by the
Etoliens, which does hurt or discontent, after the Succors granted unto them:
or any courtesy done by the Macedonians, this present deliberation, is of a
just consideration. If likewise they have not committed, in producing the
things which concern Antigonus, the which formerly have been allowed by you,
I am of opinion that you are the simplest men in the World, if you renew the
Oaths and Accords. For my part, I say you are the simplest men in the World,
and take the vainest resolution, if when as there has been nothing done
according unto his Speech, and the Grecians Affairs remain such as they were
before, when you made the League with the Etoliens.

But if this cause has a very different disposition, as I will show in
continuing my Discourse, I think it will appear plainly, that I say something
which will be commodious unto you, being unknown by Chlenee. We are come
hither to that end, being persuaded that we are to speak it, to make it
known. Wherefore it is necessary, if it may be done, that when you have heard
the calamities which hangs over all Greece, you should resolve on that which
may be honest and fit, and to enter into League with us in the same hope. If
this cannot be done, but at this present you will rest your selves. Yet I hold
it necessary, that in Discoursing in few words of this Subject, (for that the
others have presumed to accuse the House of the Macedonians) we should clear
the ignorance of those, which have given credit to their Speeches.

Chlenee has said that Philip the son of Amyntas, Conquered the
Principallity of Thessaly by the ruin of the Olyntbiens. Contrariwise I am of
opinion, that not only the Thessaliens, but the rest of the Grecians have
been preserved by Philip. Who is there among you, that knows not that at such
time as Nomarche and Philomale, going to Delphos, The blame of Nomarche, and
Philomale.
had usurped the Government unjustly, and ravished the Treasure of the Gods
execrably, what great forces they then raised, against the which none of the
Grecians durst once open his mouth publickely. As they were wicked toward God,
so they labored for to usurp the Principallity of all Greece. At what time
Philip employing his forces willingly, defeated the Tyrants, and restored the
things safely which belonged to the Temple: Delivering withal unto the
Grecians anoccasion of liberty, as the effect does testify to Posterity. The
Grecians did not make choice of Philip to be their Commander, both at Sea and
Land, as having offended the Thessaliens, as this man has presumed to say, but
as a Benefactor unto Greece: Which dignity no man before had ever received. It
is true, he came to Lacedemon with an Army. This was not by his own advice,
as you know: But being called and often pressed by his Friends and Allies of
Morea, whom he obeyed unwillingly. And when he arrived there, consider
Chlenee how he carried himself. When it was in his power to make use of the
fury of their neighbors, as well in the spoil of the Lacedemonian Region, as
in debasing the City; whereby he should purchase their favor, but he would
not follow this advice: But terrified both the one and the other, and forced
them to make an end of their Quarrel, for their common good and profit.
Neither did he Constitute himself a Judge in this Contention, but established
men chosen throughout all Greece.

Is this an Act worthy of reproach and reprehension? Thou have likewise made
the same reproach to Alexander, as if he had wrongfully afflicted the
Thebeins: But thou have made no mention of the punishment which he inflicted
upon the Persians, to revenge the common outrage done to all the Grecians: Nor
how he delivered you from great miseries, reducing the Barbarians into
servitude, and defeating their Succors, with the which they ruined Greece,
making War sometimes against the Athenians, and their Ancestors, sometimes
against the Thebeins: and that in the end he made Asia subject to the Grecians.
As for his Successors, how dares he presume to speak? They have been
themselves many times the cause of good to some, and of hurt to others, during
the Calamities of their time: Against whom some happily may have cause to
remember outrages: But it becomes not you, from whom they never diuerted any
good, but contrariwise preserved you many times from harm. Who are they which
have called Antigonus the son of Demetrius to subvert the Acheins? Who are
they moreover which have made a League, and sworn it with Alexander the
Epirote to ruin Acarnania, and to divide it: Have not you done it? Alexander
the Epirote.
Who has sent such Commanders contrary unto the public good, as you have
done? Who were not ashamed to infringe the liberties.

How has Tymeus sacked the Temple of Neptune in Tasmare, that of Artimedes at
Luses? In regard of Phariques, he has ruined the Temple of Juno in Argos. And
Polycrates that of Neptune in Mantinea. What has Lattabe and Nicostrates done?
Have they not infringed the Accords of the Pambiolates with Panegyre, and
practiced the cruelty of Sytheans, and Gallatians, or Gauls, so as nothing
has been done by the Successors? And when you could not excuse them, you
hold it a glory that you have broken the attempts of the Barbarians, falling
upon Delphos: Saying moreover that for this cause the Grecians ought to give
you thanks. And if they must acknowledge this commodity from the Etoliens,
what honor do not the Macedonians deserve, who employ the greatest part of
their lives continually, to maintain the safety of the Grecians against the
Barbarians? What is he that does not know that the Grecians have been
continually subject to great dangers, if the Macedonians and the bounty of
their Kings had not served them for a Rampire? Whereof behold a great
Argument: For when as the Gauls disdaining the Macedonians, had vanquished
Ptolomy surnamed Ceraune, they came presently into Greece with Brennus Army:
The which had often happened, if the Macedonians had not had the charge. And
although I could hold a long Discourse of ancient deeds, yet I think these
presents will suffice. But for that which among other things Philip has done,
he turns to cruelty the ruin of the Temple: But he does not add their
outrage and insolency, which they have committed in the Temples and Oratories
of the Gods, which are in Die and Dodone, the which he should have spoken
first. You relate the wrongs and miseries you have endured, and make a greater
show then is needful, passing over in silence, those which you have formerly
committed in great numbers: For you know, that every outrage and wrong that is
done, is by all men rejected upon those, who have first done the wrong unjustly.

As for the deeds of Antigonus, I will only make mention, to the end his
Actions may not seem to you worthy of contempt: neither must you lightly
regard a deed of great esteem. I do not think there were ever so great a
benefit seen, as that which he has imparted unto you. It seems unto me so
excellent, as there cannot be a greater: The which may appear by this.
Antigonus made War against you, then in giving you Battle, he vanquished
you by Arms: He was in the end Lord of the Country and City, he might by
the Law of Arms have entreated you roughly: But he was so far from offering
you any outrage, as beside other Benefits, he has (chasing the Tyrant)
restored your Laws and proper rights. For which Fact ordaining a Testimony to
the Grecians by public praises, you have called him Antigonus your Benefactor
and Savior. What should you then do? I will tell you, seeing there is hope
of your good Audience: The which I will do, and not without reason, not to
charge you with reproaches, but for that the quallity of matters forces me,
to speak that which is necessary in public. What shall I then say? That in
the former War you should have embraced the League of the Macedonians, and
not of the Etoliens: And that at this day you should rather reunite your selves
with Philip, seeing he calls you then with them.

You answer, that in doing so, you shall break your Accords. But tell me, if
you shall commit a greater mischief, in leaving the Accord which you have made
in particular with the Etoliens, then in Transgressing those which concerning
all the Grecians, are graven and Consecrated upon a Pillar? Why do you so
superstitiously fly the disdain of those, from whom you never received any
benefit: And bear no respect to Philip, nor to the Macedonians: from whom you
have the power to hold this Council? Think you that right and equity, ought
to be preserved to Friends? Yet the Sanctity is not so great to observe the
Faith reduced in Writings, as the sin is profane and execrable in bearing
Hatred, and making War against a public body. What the Etoliens require now
of you? But we have spoken enough of this Subject, the which would be held by
the Envious, not to concern the present business. I return therefore to the
Continuation and Discourse of the cause which consists in this. If the Affairs
be at this day a like, as when you made an Alliance of War with them, the
election of things propounded in the beginning must remain in you. If they be
altogether changed, it is fit you should consider iudiciously upon that which
they require.

I demand of you Cleonice and Chlenee, what allies had you when as you called
these men to a Common war. Had you all the Grecians? With whom at this day
have you communication of your hope? Or to what league do you inuit these
men? Is it not of Barbarians? Think you this present war is like unto the
precedent, and not different? You contended then with the Acheins, and your
kinsmen the Macedonians, and with Philip, for principality and glory: And now
the war is made by strangers against Greece for its servitude, whom you
think to draw against Philip. Are you ignorant that their forces are called in
against your selves and all Greece? Like unto those which during a war retire
into their City a greater Garrison then their own forces for their own
safety, make themselves subject to their friends, as soon as they are freed
from the fear of their Enemy: The Etoliens think the same at this day. Whilst
they desire to vanquish Philip, and to humble the Macedonians, they do not
observe how they blind themselves with a western fogge, the which happily may
bring some darkness to the Macedonians, and in the end be the cause of great
miseries to all the Grecians. It is therefore necessary for all Greece, to
provide for the threatenings of this time, and especially for the Macedonians.
Otherwise what cause think you my Masters of Lacedemon; had your Ancestors,
when as Xerxes demanded by an Ambassador which he sent unto you Water and
Earth, they cast him that was sent into a Well, and cast Earth upon him: Then
taking him out again, they gave him charge to tell Xerxes that he had Water
and Earth in Lacedemon? Moreover, for what reason did the Company which was
slain with Leonides, cast themselves upon the Enemy in view of all the World?
Was it not to the end they might see them undergo the danger, not only for
their own liberty, but also for the rest of Greece? Consider now, if it be
decent and fitting for their posterity, to take Arms, and to make War with
the Barbarians, in allying themselves with them, against the Epirotes, Acheins,
Acarnanians, Beocians, Thessaliens, and in a manner against all the Grecians,
holding nothing infamous, so as it were profitable. What must they attend that
do such unlawful things?

As the Romans have been united to them, so the others have endeavored
(having the said comfort and aid from the Sclauonians) to make the war by Sea,
and to break the Accord at Pyles: And have by Land besieged the City of the
Clitoriens, ruining that of the Cynetheins. It is true, they first made an
Accord with Antigonus, in regard of the Acheins and Acarnanians. But at this
day they are Confederate with the Romans against Greece in general. These
things understood, who does not suspect the coming of the Romans, and detest
the sottishness of the Etoliens, who presumed to enter into such a League?
They spoil the Vines, and the Island of Acarnania, and have already taken the
City of the Tallaneins and Anticyra, which they with the Romans have ruined,
who carry away their VViues and Children, suffering (as it seems) the common
accidents of those which fall into the hands of strangers in regard of the
soil of these miserable people, the Etoliens enjoy it. It were without doubt a
very honest and pleasing thing that the Lacedaemonians should embrace this
League, who would have the Thebeins alone among the Grecians live in peace,
when the Persians descended: and have resolved to make vows unto the Gods to
vanquish the Barbarians.

Your duty and Honor, my Masters of Lacedemon, depends thereon, to the end
that having recourse unto your Ancestors, and fearing the coming of the
Romans, and suspecting the bad intent of the Etoliens, and putting you in mind
of the deeds of Antigonus, you may detest the League of the wicked, and fly
the amity of the Etoliens, allying your selves by a common hope with the
Acheins and Macedonians. And if some of the chief yield not unto it, at the
least budge not, neither make your selves Companions of their Outrages. It is
true, that affection to friends is very profitable, if it be commodiously
made: But if it be forced, and finally slow and defective, it has no comfort:
and therefore you must observe, if only in words, or else in actions they will
keep their League with you.

A parcel of the River of Euphrates.
Evphrates takes its sourse and beginning in Armenia, running its course by
Syria, drawing toward Babylon, and falls as it seems, into the Red Sea;
whereof the sign is. It loses it self in hollow places under ground made in
that Region, before it falls into the Sea. Wherefore it has a different
nature to other Rivers. The course of others augment as they pass by many
places, and are very high in VVinter, and low in Summer. But Euphrates grows
very high at the rising of the Canicular, especially in Syria, and continuing
its course decreaseth. The cause is for that it is not augmented by the
concurrence of the winter rain, but by the melting of the Snow: It decreaseth
likewise for that it extends upon the plain, and is dispersed for the watring
of the Land. Then the transport of Armies is slowly made, for that the ships
stay in regard of the burden, the River being low; and finally the swift
course of the water is some hinderance unto the Navigations.

A PARCEL OF the Tenth Book of the History of POLYBIVS.
AS from thence unto the Sea, and from the City of Rhegium unto Tarentum, The
Coast of Tarentum.
there be above two Thousand Furlongs, yet the Coast of Italy has no Ports,
except those which are at Tarentum. That Coast turns to the Sicylian Sea, and
bends toward Greece. It is much peopled with Barbarians: So there are very
famous Grecian Cities. For the Brucians, Lucain, and some Countries of the
Samnites, and moreover the Calabriens, and many other nations inhabit this
Country: Even as among the Grecians, lies Rhegium, Caulone, Locres, and Croton.
Moreover the Metapontins, and Thurins, possess this Maritine Region. And
therefore they which come from Sycily and Greece, are (when as they sail unto
any of the said places) by necessity carried to the Ports of Tarentum: And are
forced to Traffic with their Merchandises in that City, with all the
inhabitants of that Coast. Some happily may conjecture, that the Commodity of
this place, proceeds from the abundance and fertillitie of the Crotoniates.
And although they have some Summer stations of small reuenew, The Crotoniates.
yet it seems they will challenge to themselves a great fertillitie, and from
no other thing but from the fruitefulnesse of the place, which is not to be
compared to the Ports and Region of the Tarentins. There is also a Commodity
from this place to the Adriaticke Ports, at this day great, but in former times
greater. All they which sailed from high Pouille unto Sipuntes in Front, and
were carried into Italy, landed at Tarentum, and made use of this City for
their Commerce and Traffic, as in affairs. Then the City of the Br^tensins
was not yet built. Wherefore Fabius much esteeming this abode, was addicted
unto it, leaving all other things. All others hold him for a very fortunate
man, and that many times, and for the most part, he ended his Enterprises
without reason and accidentally: holding this kind of men to be more, divine
and admirable, then those which attempt all things by a discourse of reason:
Being ignorant withal, that by these words the actions of the one are worthy
of Commendations, Understanding more commendable then Fortune.
and those of the other happy and fortunate. Moreover, the one is common unto
the people: But the other is proper to wise and judicious men, whom we must
hold divine and beloved of the Gods.

For my part Fabius seems to me to have a Nature and disposition like unto
Lycurgus, the Lawgiver of the Lacedaemonians. We must not think that Lycurgus
had been so superstitious, as obeying Pitheas, he had established the
Lacedemonian Commonwealth: Nor likewise Publius Scipio moved with Dreams and
Diuinations, had purchased so great a power in the Country. But for that the
one and the other saw many men not greatly to affect doubtful affairs, not
likewise to presume to undertake matters that were grave and dangerous without
the hope of the Gods: For this cause Lycurgus making use of the same drawn
from Pytheas in his opinion, he made them more pleasing and certain. Publius
Scipio in like manner had made an impression in many of a conceit of him, that
he executed his Enterprises by a certain Divine Council: By this means he
made his men more assured, and willing to attempt difficult things. That he
has brought every thing to an end by sufficient reason and wisdom, and that
for this cause all his actions have had an end concurret to reason, will
appear manifest and plain by the Discourse which I shall hold concerning him.

It is certain he was bountiful and generous: The disposition of Publius
Scipio.
But as for his industry, sobriety, and vigilance in his resolutions, no man
can conceive them, but such as have lived with him, and have exactly searched
the depth of his disposition: amongst the which was Lelyus, who had been his
Companion from his Infancy in all his actions and discourses unto his Death:
for that he seems to speak likely things, and conformable to his actions.
First he reports this Noble deed of Publius, when as his Father had resolved
to fight with Hannibal near unto the River of Poe. For at that time being as
it seems but seventeen years old, going into the Field, he had received
from his Father a Troop of the best and strongest men for his defense and
guard.

And when he saw his Father in danger, and environed by the Enemy, accompanied
only with two or three Horse, hauining received a dangerous wound, he began at
the first to encourage his company to succor his Father: But when they
wauered, for the great multitude of the Enemies, The courage of Publius.
he cast himself desperafely as it seems, and charged them courageously.
Afterward when the rest were forced to fight, the Enemies amazed with fear,
ceased the Combare. Old Publius being thus preserved contrary to all hope, he
was the first who (in hearing of them all) called him his Savior. When by this
action the fame of his prowess and dexterity began, he afterward engaged
himself in greater dangers, whenever the supreme hope of the Country
required it by necessity: This was not with a courage relying in Fortime, but
of a judicious Captain.

Afterward Lucius his elder Brother, aspiring to the Dignity of Edile, the
which among the Romans was the Noblest command of the Youth, and that by
custom they made choice of two Ediles among the Paricij, and that there were
many at that time which aimed at it, he was long before he durst demand it of
his Brother. When the Election grew near, and that he had made a conjecture by
the humor of the multiude, that his Brother would hardly obtain it, seeing
himself on the other side in great favor with the people, and might attain
unto his attempt, if with their consent he undertook the cause, he fell into
this conceit. When he saw his Mother visit the Temples, and sacrifice unto the
Gods for his Brother, and that she entertained a great hope of the future,
which she had in singular recommendation, and that his Father being then
Commander of the Army in the said War, had sailed into Spain, he told his
Mother that he had one dream twice, and that it seemed unto him that he
returned being made Edile with his Brother, from the place to go unto their
house: And that running unto the door, she had saluted them with imbracings.
When he had ended this Speech, the Mother being very passionate with an
effeminate affection, and answering I know not what, she added; Oh that I
might see that Day: will you says he, that we make a trial? Whereunto
consenting, for that she did not think he would dare to attempt so great a
matter, considering that he was very young, she required (as it were in sport)
that he should presently provide him a long Cloak. For they which stand for
government, are accustomed to be so attired. In regard of his Mother, she had
no eonfidence in his words.

Publius when he had this brave Robe, went suddenly to the place, his Mother
being yet asleep. When the Multitude had received him with amazement, Publius
Scipio and his Brother created Ediles.
as well for this nouelty contrary to all hope, as for the love and affection
they had formerly borne him, and afterward drawing to the place appointed, he
was near unto his Brother, many adiudg'd this government not only to Publius,
but also to his Brother for the love of him: and being both of them created
Ediles in this manner, they returned to their house. When the Mother had
received the news, she ran unto the Gate, and with affection and love saluted
them. Wherefore although that Publius disdained Dreams, yet it seemed by this
action to all those which have heard speak of it, that he had speech with the
Gods, not only sleeping, but much more in the day waking. But for that he was
bountiful and pleasing in his words, and had well observed the affection of
the Commons toward him, and had accommodated the time to the people and his
Mother, he not only perfected his Enterprise, but also seemed to have
dispatched in by some Divine inspirarinn. They without doubt which cannot duly
consider the occasions, nor the causes and dispositions of every thing by the
vice of Nature, or ignorance and dullness, refer unto the Gods and Fortune
the causes of things which are decided by industry and discreet reason. These
things I speak for the Readers, to the end that falling through error into
the vulgar opinions of this man, they should not leave good and commendable
graces that were in him, that is to say, his Dextity and Industry. In regard of
that which I speak of him, it will appear manifest by his actions.

Publius Scipio being then General of the Army in Spain, calling his Troops
together, he advised them not to be amazed for the adventures and disgraces
past. For the Romans had never been vanquished by the prowess of the
Carthaginians, A^emonstrance of Publius Scipio to his Army.
but by the treason of the Celtiberians: And the rashness of the Commanders
separated one from another, for that they trusted in them: which are things he
said were then among the Enemies. For besides that they made War being far
distant one from another, they offered outrages to their Allies, and made them
Enemies: And that for this cause some were already sent home: and the rest will
speedily (when they shall be assured) come when you have once past the River,
not so much for the good will they bear you, as to seek a revenge for the
wrongs received by the Carthaginians. But moreover the Captains are in
dissension among themselves, and will not willingly join together to fight
with you: And being thus divided, they would be defeated, and fall easily into
their hands. Wherefore he persuaded them, that considering these things they
should pass the River boldly, promising to give good order for the rest. When
he had used this speech unto the other Captains, he left his colleague Marcus
upon the passage of the River, accompanied with three thousand Foot and five
hundred Horse, to the end he might succor his Companions being in the River:
he himself past with the rest of his Army, holding his intention secret from
all the World. He resolved things which he did not impart to many men. His
resolution was to lay siege to the City of Carthage scitnate in Spain, by the
way of course: The which every man might understand, and that it is an
excellent presumption of his esteem, whereof of I have formerly spoken. For as
he was but seven and twenty years old, he gave himself first to things which
in the judgment of the World seemed desperate, for the great precedent dangers
and misfortunes: leaving all things that were vulgar and easy: and resolved
and attempted those which seemed impossible unto the Enemy, every one of which
required an exact wisdom, knowledge, and understanding.

In the beginning being yet at Rome, when he had considered by himself, and
eniquired diligently of the treason of the Celtiberians, and of the division in
the Armies, what might happen, and what fortune had befalne his Father, he was
nothing amazed at the Carthaginians, neither did he faint as many usually do.
But after that he understood that the Allies on this side the River of Ebro,
continued constant in their Friendship, and that the Commanders of the
Carthaginians were in discord, and oppressed the Subjects, he affected the War
with an assured courage, having no confidence in Fortune, but in wise Council.
When he arrived in Spain, he moved them all, and having enquired of the
Enemies actions, he understood that the Carthaginians Armies were divided into
three: and that Mago made his abode within the Pillars of Hercules, at certain
places called Conies: And that Asdrubal the Son of Scone, was near the mouth
of a River by Portugale; the other Asdrubal in the Carpentins Country held a
City besieged: Either of which places were many days journey distant from the
City of the Ceneteins. Studying then whether he should resolve to give Battle
unto the Enemy, if it were against all their forces, he should be in danger to
be defeated, as well in regard of that which had befalne his Predecessors, as
for that their Armies were great. If likewise he labourd to fight with the one,
it was to be feared that in flying the Battle, the other Armies would come,
and by this means he should be enclosed, falling into the like Disasters,
whereunto his Uncle Caius and his Father Publius had been subject.

Wherefore leaving this advice, when he understood that Carthage was a great
ease unto the Enemies, and would be a great annoyance to him in this War, he
considere of every thing, wintring among the Eilotes. When he was advertised in
the beginning that it had Ports which might contain all the Sea-army of
Spain: having likewise a Maritine situation, spacious and commodious for the
Carthaginians, for the Navigations which comes from Lybia: and likewise for that
the Treasure and Baggage for the Army, with all the hostages of Spain, were
kept there: adding thereunto the great advantage, for that the Fort had not
above a thousand Soldiers in Garrison, for that they never suspected that any
man would presume to besiege it, the Carthaginians being in a manner Masters
of all Spain: and that finally the rest of the people are in great number, yet
they were Artizans, Mech annickes and Fishermen, who had no great experience in
the War: He imagined that his coming to this City would be unexpected with
amazement. He was not ignorant of the situation of the Town, nor of its
fortification, nor likewise of the disposition of the Poole: which things he
had learned from Fishermen which had frequented the place: This Poole was
generally muddy, and yet wadeable for the most part: and withal the water
retired daily about Sunsetting. Wherefore concluding that if he prevailed in
his Enterprise, he should not only annoy the Enemy, but it would be a great
benefit for the War: And if his advice and council succeeded well, he might
preserve his Subjects as Master of the Sea, if he might once fortify and
strengthen his Army. The which was easy: for that the Enemies were far off.
Leaving therefore all other resolutions, he attends this during Winter.

And when he had once resolved, being of the age we have mentioned, he
concealed his resolution from all the World, (except to Caius Lelyus) until he
thought it fit to manifest it. Although that Historiographers give testimony of
this resolution, yet when they come to the end of the action, they attribute
this excellent work to the Gods and to Fortune, and not to him nor his
wisdom; without any probable arguments, and the testimony of those which
lived with him: for that Scipio himself declares plainly in an Epistle which
he had written to Philip, that making use of the advice which we have
mentioned, he had undertaken the War of Spain, and the siege of Carthage.
Moreover, commanding Lelyus secretly touching the Army at Sea, he gave him
charge to sail above the City. He alone was privy to his design, as I have
said. Himself taking the Troops of Foote-men, marched speedily. There were in
the Army at Land about five and twenty thousand Foot, and two thousand five
hundred Horse. The number of Scipio's Army at Land.
Being come unto the City on the seventh Day, he planted his Camp on the
North part, Carthage besieged.
and fortified it without with a double Rampire and Ditches from one Sea unto
the other, without doing any thing toward the City. The Nature of the place
had fortification enough.

To understand well how this City has been besieged and taken, I hold it
necessary in some sort to describe the neighbor Countries and its situation.
The situation of Carthage.
It is seated in Spain about the middle of the Maritine Region, in the Gulf
which has its aspect toward Affricke: whose depth is about twenty furlongs,
and the breadth at the entrance about ten: All this Gulf makes a kind of Port,
where there lies an I and at the mouth of it, leaving on either side a little
entrance. And when the Sea is troubled with any torment, then all the Gulf is
calm, but when the Western Winds of the Winter Solstice, beating upon the two
entrances, cause the storm: But as for other Winds it is not troubled, by
reason of the firm Land which enuirons it. Behind the Gulf there rises a
Cape, whereon the City is situated, environed with the Sea toward the East
and South, and with a Lake upon the West and North, so as the space which
remains from one Sea to another, by the which the City is joined to the firm
Land, is not above two Furlongs.

In regard of the City, one moiety of it is concaue: and toward the South it
has the approach of the full Sea: Finally, it is full of Hills, whereof two
are rough and difficult: the other three are very low, but strong and hard to
pass, whereof the highest bends toward the East, advancing to the Sea: There
the Temple of Asclepie is built. Right against the which is another of the same
situation, whereon stands a sumptuous royal Palace, the which some say had
been built by Asdrubal affecting a Regal power. The rest of the lesser Hills
have their tops toward the North. That of the three which looks directly
toward the East, is called Phoste: to the which is joined that of Alete. It
seems that Pheste has been the inuentor of Silver metals, and for this
cause purchased divine honors, The third is called Croue. In regard of the
Lake joining to the Sea: it has taken its course by the work of man, for the
benefit of Fishermen, and others trafficking by Sea. But at the breach of the
Bank by the which the Lake and Sea are divided, they have made a Bridge, to
the end that Sumpters and Carts might bring things necessary from the Country.

This was the situation of those places, the Romans Camp was fortified in
Front, without any provision as well by the Lake, as Sea on either side. In
regard of the space which ioynes the City to the firm Land, he did not
fortify it, for that it was in the midst of his Camp: to the end he might
amaze the Citizens, and make use of it for Skirmishes, and to sally forth and
retire to his Camp. The Walls in the beginning had not above twenty Furlongs:
Although that many have given it forty: which is not true. We spoke not by
hearsay, but upon a certain knowledge, for that we have seen the places:
and at this day they contain no more.

Scipio having drawn his Army together with that at Sea, began to make
remonstrances unto them, without using any other arguments and reasons, then
simply to propound the things whereof we have partly spoken, and showing them
that this attempt was feazable: and in relating in particular things done by
prowess, he extenuated that of his affairs. Finally, he promised Crowns of
Gold to those which should first ascend the Wall: and the accustomed rewards to
others which should carry themselves openly like brave and valiant men. And in
the mean time he affirms that Neptune had appeared unto him in sleep, and
had showed him this kind of attempt to assail the City: And consequently
promised, that during the assault, he would work so apparently, as the
efficacy of his Succors should be manifest to the whole Army. By his
remonstrances and evident reasons, together with the promise of Crowns of
Gold, and moreover by the providence of God, he imprinted a vehement desire and
courage in the Youth.

The next day he drew his ships into the Maritine places, furnished with
diverse Engines to cast, whereof he gave the charge to Caius Lelyus: And taking
at Land two thousand able men with those that carried Ladders, he began the
assault three hours after. Mago on the other side who had the guard of the
City, dividing his Battalion of a thousand men, leaving the one half within
the Fort, and plants himself on the Hill which looks toward the East: and
appoints about two thousand strong men, furnished with Arms which were in the
City, to the Gate which draws to the Isthmus, and the Enemies Camp:
Commanding the rest to run up and down the Walls, and to defend them with
all their power. When as Publius Scipio had caused the Trumpet to found to the
assault, The beginning of the fight for Carthagena.
Mago caused a sally to be made by the Gate, hoping to terrify the Enemies,
and to frustrate their attempt. As they fought valiantly with those that came
marching in Battle toward the Isthmus, there was a brave Combat, every man
giving courage to his Companion. But the attempt was not equal, for that their
Succors were not alike: For that the Carthaginians came running forth but by
one Gate, within the space of two Furlongs: whereas the Romans came suddenly
and from many places. Scipio restrained his men near the Camp, to draw the
Enemy far from the City, being confident that if he defeated this Battalion
of Commons, he should subsequently defeare the rest, and that no man would dare
to make a sally. It fell our that the Combat was for a time equal: for that
on either side they had made choice of their ablest men to make the point. The
Carthaginians repulsed.
But in the end the Carthaginians being repulsed by the force of those which
came running from the Camp, turn head: so as many were slain during the
Combat and retreat. There were many likewise slain at the Gate.

After this all the people of the City were so amazed, as they which were on
the Walls fled: and the Romans had like to have entered with the Run-awayes.
Moreover, they set up the Ladders diligently, Carthage assaulted by the Romans.
whereas Scipio undertook the danger: the which he did wisely. He was
accompanied with three men carrying Targets, (the which covering Scipio,
hindered the fight from the top of the Wall) defended him thus covered. By this
means striving upon the flanks and difficult places, he was of great use in
taking this City. When he saw what was done, being also discovered to all the
Soldiers fighting, he gave them great courage, so as no danger was avoided:
and he employed himself cheerfully with the rest (as it was reasonable) in
every occasion that was offered to purpose. When the first ascended the Ladders
resolutely, the multitude of Defendants did not make the assault so dangerous,
as the height of the Walls. For this cause they which defended it, were more
assured seeing the difficult which happened. For some of the Ladders brake by
reason of the multitudes which mounted on them. They also which ascended first,
were so dazeled with the height of the Ladders, as if the resistance and
defense had been any thing, they must have cast themselves down headlong: And
when as any such accident happened, striving to get over the Wall, they were
overthrown to the ground. And although such things happened, yet they could
not repulse the Romans from their assault: so as when the first were fallen,
their next neighbors stepped into their places.

But as the day was far spent, and the Soldiers tired with the toil of the
assault, the Commander caused a retreat to be sounded. Wherefore they of the
City rejoiced as if they had repulsed the danger. But Scipio attending the time
when the Tide should retire, appointed five hundred men for the Lake with
Ladders. In regard of the Gate and Isthmus, he set fresh men: and after that he
had preached unto them, he delivered them more Ladders then formerly, to the end
they might mount upon the Walls more thick. A second assault given to
Carthage by the Romans.
When they had sounded to the assault, and that the Soldiers went up the
Ladders with great courage, there grew a great trouble and alteration in the
City. For when they thought they had been free, they saw the danger renewed by
another assault. But when they found themselves destitute of Darts, and were
heavy for the great number of those which perished, they were discontented at
that which happened, yet defending themselves no less valiantly. Finally, the
ebbing of the Sea began during the Combat of the Ladders: The height of the
Poole was much diminished, by the ebbing of the Tide, the which was great,
falling by the mouth into the Sea, so as it seemed incredible to those which
saw it without consideration.

Scipio having his guides ready, commands those which he had appointed, to
enter and to carry themselves valianty. He was as fit and industrious as any
man, to put courage into his Soldiers, and to make them resolute to whom he
preached. When they obeyed him, and striued thorough the mud, all the Army held
that which happened to be done by some Divine providence. Wherefore remembering
those things which they had heard, and the prowess of Scipio, they were so
inflamed, as they drew to the Gate close and with a violent course, and seek
to break it open with Hatchets and Axes. The others approaching the VValls
through the mud, and finding the top nakeed of men, they set up their Ladders
not only without danger, but they past the Walls without difficulty. The
Citizens in truth were drawn to other places, neither did they think that the
Enemy would ever assail the Wall by the Lake. Moreover by reason of the
extreme cry and the confused noise, they could neither see nor hear any
thing that was done.

The Romans having gotten the Wall, seek first under color of making the
round, Carthagena tsken by assault.
how they might draw the Enemies unto them. For the effecting whereof their
Arms was of great service. Finally, they come to the Gate, where as some going
down cut the bars, others entered from without. In regard of those which
made their attempts at the Isthmus with Ladders, after they had defeated them
which defended the VValls, they lept over, and by this means the Wall was
gotten. As for the Hill situated toward the East, they which entered by the
Gate recovered it, chasing away the Guards. When as Scipio saw that there was
a sufficient number entered into the City, he sent many of them according to
the Custom, against the Citizens, giving them charge to kill all they met
without taking any to mercy, and not to busy themselves with spoil until
they had a sign given them. The Romans do this to terrify them. And
therefore we often see, that when they take Cities by force, they do not
only kill the men, but they cut their Dogs in pieces, and dismember their
other Cattle. Many such things happened in that City, by reason of the
multitude of Prisoners.

Finally Publius Scipio accompanied with a Thousand men assailes the Fort:
Scipio assailes the fort.
whereunto making his approaches, Mago at the first strives to defend it: Mago
delivers the fort.
But when he understood the Truth of the taking of the City, he sends men to
parley for his safety, and by this means he delivers the Fort. This done, a
sign being given, the massacre ceased, and they fell to spoil. And when as
night approached, some remained in the Camp ordained for that end: And the
General spent the night in the Fort, accompanied with a Thousand men:
Appointing the rest being retired from the Houses, by the Captains of
Thousands, to carry the booty to the Ensigns in the market place. In regard of
them that were lightly armed, called from the Camp on the Hill, he sent them
to the Eastern parts. The Romans took Carthage in Spain after this manner.
The day following after they had carried the baggage of the Carthaginian
Soldiers, and the substance of the Burgesses and Artizans to the place, the
Captains of Thousands according to Custom, divided it among their Bands.

Among the Romans this order is observed touching Cities taken. The order of
the Roman^ in the division of the spoil of a Town.
Sometimes to every day they number the men, and distributing them according to
the greatness of the City, sometimes they divide them by Ensigns. They never
appoint above half the Army for this business. The rest remain in Battle
for the Guard, sometimes they are without, and sometimes within the City, unto
the end they may be always ready. The Army being divided for the most part in
two of Romans, and two of Allies, they which are deputed for the division, do
every man bring his booty unto the Camp. This done, the Millaneers or
Captains of Thousands divide it equally to them all: Not only to those which
remain in Battle, but also to the Guards of the Tents, to the sick, and
unto all those which are ordained for any public service.

When they are together in Camp to go unto the War, The Soldiers Oath
touching the pillage.
they swear not to commit any fraud in the pillage, and that they keep their
faith according unto the oath which they have taken. But we have spoken
sufficiently here of in Discoursing of their policy. Finally when an Army is
thus divided, one part attending the Booty, and the rest standing in Battle
for their Guards, yet the Romans had never any difference through
Covetousness. For when as none of them are frustrated for the Hope of gain,
and that in the mean time some follow the spoil, and the others remaining in
Battle guard them, no man abandons his Ensign: The which many times is the
cause of great loss and danger to others. Many suffer loss, and are in danger
in regard of gain: For it is apparent, that they which remain in Camp, or
are in Battle, contain themselves unwillingly: for that most commonly all
the spoil under his Command and power which rules, if he be an absolute
Monarch: And if he be a Commander, every man holds that his own, which may be
hidden and purloin'd, although that all things be carefully brought together.
And for that most part of men desire booty, and for this cause are in danger,
having no means to obtain an absolute Victory, it falls out that they are in
danger to lose all. The which happens to many, who although they have prevailed
in their Enterprise, whether they have cast themselves into the Enemies Camp,
or have taken a City, yet they have not only been repulsed, but moreover had
lost all, and for no other cause but that above mentioned. Whereefor Co^manders
ought to have nothing in greater recommendation and care, then that where of
we speak: which is, that (as much as may be possible) this hope may remain
to the greatest part: that if such an accident happens, the division may be
equal to them all. Then the Captains of Thousands gave order ^o the Booty:
and the Roman Commander having drawn together the^ Prisoners, (which were
little less then a thousand) he commands them first to separate the Citizens
with their Wives and Children, and then the handy-crafts-men. This done, he
advises the Citizens to embrace the Friendship of the Romans, Scipio's
providence concerning the Prisoners.
and to remember the favor which they received, and then he sent them back
to their houses. Whereof some weeping, and others joyful for their unexpected
safety, they retire, having done their duties to the General.

In regard of the Worke-men and Artizans, he told them, that for the present
they were public Servants to the City of Rome: But if every one did his duty
cheerfully and willingly, he promised them liberty, if the War undertaken
against the Carthaginians had a good end. Then he gave charge to the Questor to
take the Names of these men, and that he should appoint thirty Roman
Commissaries, for the whole multitude contained in a manner two thousand. He
also made choice of the strongest, and the most flourishing in age and form,
to furnish the Troops: and filled the captive ships with all the Mariners,
exceeding the former one half: so as every ship had in a manner twice as many
men. The number of ships that were taken.
There were eighteen captive ships, and in the beginning they had been five
and thirty. To whom he promised liberty if they showed themselves friends and
valiant, and that if in this War he should happen to vanquish the
Carthaginians. When he had declared himself in this manner, he made the
Burgesses affectionate and loyal, as well to himself as to the Roman
Commonweal: The Worke-men and Artizans are in like manner joyful upon the
hope of liberty.

But when he had by this supply much augmented the Troops, in the end he
separates Mago and the Carthaginians. For he had two Senators and fifteen
Counselors: whom he gave in charge to Caius Lelyus, commanding him to have a
special care. Moreover, he calls all the hostages unto him, which were above
three hundred. Then he makes much of the Children, willing them to rejoice, and
that within few days they should see their Parents. In like manner he
persuades the rest to be of good hope, and to write unto their Cities and
Friends, that first of all they had their lives saved, and were well entreated:
And that secondly the Romans would send them all home to their houses in
safety, if their Friends could embrace their alliance. This Speech being ended,
he gave the most commodious spoils of the Army to every one according to his
Race and age, as to Children Feathers and Bracelets, and to young men Swords.
When as among the Captives the Wife of Mandonin, The Wife of Mandonin.
the Brother of Andobale, King of the Lecheteins, had cast her self at his
feet, demanding with tears that he would have a better respect to her honesty
then the Carthaginians had had, being moved with compassion, he demanded of her
what necessary things she wanted. She was an aged woman, and carried the show
of some great Dignity. And when she held her peace, he calls for those which
had the charge of the women, who presenting themselves, and affirming that the
Carthaginians had furnished the Women with all things necessary: she touching
his knees again, repeared the same words. Scipio viewing her, and thinking
that they unto whom he had then given the charge, showed themselves liars
through negligence, commanded the Women not to be discontented, and that he
would give order to place other Commissaries, to the end nothing should be
wanting that was needful for them. Then staying a little, Captain she said,
thou mistakest my words, if thou do think that I require thy assistance to
content the belly.

Then Scipio hearing her conceit, and observing in her face the vigor of
Andobales daughters, and of many other Potentates, was forced to weep; for that
this Lady discovered her Calamity in few words. Wherefore when it appeared
that he understood her conceit, taking her by the Hand, as he did the rest,
willing them to rejoice: promising to have them in as great recommendation, as
his own sisters and children: and that according to his promise, he would
appoint trusty and confident men to have the Charge over them. Finally, having
delivered unto the Questors all the Wealth found in the public Treasure of
the Carthaginians, which amounted to above eighteen hundred Thousand Crowns:
So as joining them unto other twelve hundred Thousand, which the Questor of
Rome had, the whole sum would be above three millions.

At the same time certain Young men having taken a Virgin, passing in the
flower of her age, and the beauty of her body all the rest of the Women,
knowing that Scipio took delight in it, they came unto him bringing this
Virgin, and staying him, told him that they presented her unto him. Publius
amazed and-wondring at her beauty: if I were (says he) a private person, there
is no gift could be more pleasing unto me: The chaste answer of Scipio.
But being a great Commander, there is nothing less in my affection: Letting
them understand (as it feemes by this answer) that in time of rest and
idleness, the use of such things is pleasing to young men: But when affairs
do press, it ingenders in them which use them, great hindrances both in body
and mind. Finally he thankt the young men: And calling for the father of the
Virgin, he restored her unto him, giving him charge to marry her as he thought
good, to some Citizen. By this means having made show of the Chastity and
modesty of his Heart, he became very pleasing to the Subjects. These things
being thus ordained, and the rest of the Prisoners delivered to the Captains
of Thousands, he sent Caius Lelyus to Rome to the five Years Sacrifices, with
the Carthaginians and the other prisoners of note, to make known in their
Country, the accidents which had happened.

Many in truth which despaired of the War in Spain, applied themselves unto
the present in diverse manners, resuming Courage again, where as the news was
directed publicly. Scipio staying some time at Carthage, practiced the Army at
Sea continually: And he taught the Captains of Thousands this kind of
Exercise for the Foote-men. He appointed the Soldiers to run thirty furlongs
armed on the first day: And on the second they should all furbush and cleanse
their arms: And on the third they should rest: Exercises appointed by Scipio
for his Army both at Sen and Land.
But on the fourth they should fight with Swords of Wood covered with Leather,
and with plummets, teaching them to cast Darts: And on the fifth to fall to
their running, as in the beginning. In like manner he solicited the Artizans
and Workmen carefully, to the end that nothing should be wanting in the true
Exercises of Arms. He also appointed part of the Commissaries to this Work,
and went up and down daily, soliciting every man unto that which was necessary.

Finally, whilst the Army at Land practiced often before the City, the
Mariners used their Exercises at Sea, with their turnings and returnings. And
they which should be in the City, should Furbush, Forge, and Work: and that
all should be carefully employed to prepare Arms. There is no man but would
have held the City for a shop of War, according to the saying of Xenophon,
if he had seen it then. As all things seemed good unto him, and conveniently
dispatched for necessary use, and that consequently he had put a Garrison into
the City, and rampred the Walls, he dislodgeth with his Army, as bending both
by Sea and Land toward Tarragone, having the Hostages with him. He marched with
his Army, as in his judgment such marches are requisite in all occasions. In
the which he must always accustom the Horsemen, as to manage a Horse, to
handle a Iauelin, and moreover to bound and gallop, and to turn on the right
hand or the left. Sometimes they disbanded the Commanders of ten out of the
midst of the Army, and they which commanded twenty upon the two wings: and
sometimes they drew them together, and stayed them according to the troops of
horsemen upon the wings: or else they made an extent of two wings by an
interposition, or by the policy of the Captains of the reareward. In regard
of their exercise in a throng, he said it was not necessary, as having one
course upon the way.

They must in all alarums be accustomed to charge the enemy, and to make their
retreat, that they should always approach as nimbly as they could, marching
united and in the same order. They must moreover observe the spaces betwixt the
bands, for if the horsemen undergoing the danger break their ranks, there was
nothing so dangerous nor prejudicial. When he had taught them all these
things, especially to the Captains, he enters into Cities, to inquire first
if most of them obeyed the things which had been commanded them, and finally
if they which had the government of Cities, were sufficient to execute the
constitutions with judgment: holding nothing more necessary then the Prudence
of Governors. These things being thus ordered, he assembles the horsemen of
Cities in a certain place, and himself making certain bounds and Curuets,
he taught them all the managing of Arms. He did not march in the head of the
army, as Captains usually do at this day, thinking the first place to belong
unto them. This without doubt takes away the co^manders experience, and draws
him into danger It is true that he is seen by them all, but sees not any. The
duty of the Commander of an Army.
It is necessary that the Commander of an Army show example, not by a Military
authority, but by experience of a Captain, and his prowess in Arms, marching
sometimes with the fore-ward, and sometimes with the reare-ward, and sometimes
in the Battle: the which this man did, riding and considering them all, who
being doubtful he taught, correcting their errors in the beginning: the
which seldom happened by reason of the precedent diligence. Demetrius
Phalerius has showed it, saying, that as in buildings where the houses are
comprehended under one Roof and ligature, it happens that the continuance is
the stronger: So a whole Army is made more firm, in the which all is
diligently pursued in particular, and by the Chambers. That which is done at
this day, is very like to the government and order of a Battle. Light things
and those which are most usual in an Army, many times perish wholly in it. In
regard of the Role of those which disband, and are armed with advantage, the
Battalion contains them. Now the Etoliens fight like a forlorn hope: So do
they of Morea their Allies: whereas the Romans make head holding the order of a
Battalion. And if the others be repulst, and returning from the Combat
perish, the Romans retire without loss: and if they vanquish, which God
forbid) they will make all the rest of Greece subject.

A Parcel of Media.
MEdia according to the Circuit of the Country, is the most defencible among
all the Potentates of Asia, in regard of the multitude and valor of the men,
and likewise of the Horses. It does furnish in a manner all Asia with this
kind of Cattle: so as the Royal Races which are bred and entertained there,
are of great benefit to the Medians. It is also inhabited with Grecian Cities,
the which Alexander caused to be built for the guard thereof, by reason of the
neighborhood of the Barbarians: except the Erbatanes, whose City is built
upon the Northerly marches of Media. Yet it is near the parts of Asia which
confine upon the black Sea and the Euxine.

In the beginning the Royal City of the Medians was amongst all the rest the
most excellent in riches and sumptuous buildings. It is situated under the
Mountain Countries, and neighbors to Oronte without Walls, having only a
Fort that is well furnished and fortified with great Art. Under which is
situated the royal City of the Persians. It is a question whether we should
speak of it in particular, The Royal City of the Persians.
or be silent. Believe me, it gives a strong argument to those whose intention
and custom is to relate rare and admirable things, and to speak some adding
much unto them: which breeds a doubt in those which wisely receive all that
which is out of common fancy.

This royal City has in greatness and circuit almost seven Furlongs, and
the sumptuousness of every building such, as it shows a great abundance of
wealth in those that first founded them. For as all the Carpenters work is of
Cedar or Cipresse, yet they have not left one cloud, but have lined the Ioists,
Wainscot, and Pillars with the vaults of the Galleries, with plates of Gold and
Silver: and in regard of the Vessel it was all of Silver. Yet the greatest
part was carried away at the coming of Alexander and the Macedonians: and the
rest under the government of Antigonus, and of Seleucus Nicanor, and likewise
at the coming of Antiochus, when as the Temple of Enee had about it many
Pillars gilt, and a great quantity of Silver vessels, and finally, there were
some small number of Tiles of Gold, but many more of Silver. Moreover, there
was a great heap of Silver within the Royal City, coined of the aforesaid
things, to the number of about two Millions and four hundred thousand Crowns*

A Parcel of Antiochus, and of his Army into Hyrcania.
ANtiochus hopes to come unto those places. Arsaces like wise thinks that he
dare not pass the Deserts there confining with so great an Army, especially
for the want of Water. It is true that in the said places the Water shows it
self upon the superficies, and that there are many Ditches having deep Wells,
but unknown to those which did not frequent them. Of which they have a Tale in
the Country: that at such time as the Persians enjoyed Asia, this Country had
in certain places (In the which formerly there was no Water) five Springs or
Fountains. And therefore as Tauris has many great Rivers, they employed great
labor and cost to fill the Ditches from far, Many Rivers comes out of Tauris.
the which succeeded: neither do they know which use these Waters, the Spring
of these Ditches, nor whence they come. When as Arsaces saw him take the way by
the Desert, he resolved to shut up the Wells and to corrupt them. The King
having this news, he dispatched some from Nicomedia with a thousand Horse, who
finding Arsaces gone with his Army, leaving some Horsemen to fill up the
Ditches. To whom suddenly after their coming they gave the chase, and then
returned to Antiochus. The Deserts being past, Hecatomphilon.
the King arrived at a City called Hecatomphilon, situated in the midst of
Parthyene. It has taken its name for that all the passages of the neighbor
Countries join there: Here he refresht his Army, and made his reckoning that
if Arsaces had been able to join Battle with him, he would not have
retired leaving his Country, nor sought other places more commodious for his
Army to fight in, then those which are about Hecatomphilon. By his departure
therefore it is manifest to him that will consider this action, that he had
taken another resolution. Wherefore Antiochus resolved to take his way to
Hyrcania.

But when he was come to Tages, and had notice of the difficulty of the places
by those of the Country, the which he was to pass unto the tops of the
Mountains which bend to Hyrcania, and that the Barbarians held the most
difficult places, he resolved to take a good number of the ablest men, and to
separate their Captains, and to inform every one of them how to perform the
way, and likewise he appointed Pyoners, marching with them to level the way
for the Soldiers, Leginaries, and Baggage. This being concluded, he gave the
first Battalion to Diogenes, adding thereunto the Archers and Slingers, who
from the Mountains might cast their Darts and Stones: the which held no order
of Battle, but came always in time to the place of danger, and were of great
service in difficult places. He accompanied them with about two thousand
Candiots armed with Targets, of which Polixenides had the charge. In the
Reareward he ordaines the armed men and the Targeteers: The Commanders whereof
were Nicomedes of Chio, and Nicolas the Etolien.

As these men march before, it fell out that the roughness and streights of
the passage were found more difficult then the King had conceived. All the
length of the ascent was about three hundred Furlongs, and for the most part by
the deep Fourd of a Torrent, into the which were fallen from the high Rocks
Stones and Trees which made the passage inaccessible. To the which the
Barbarians gave great assistance: casting continually Trees which were cut
down, and gathered together great heaps of Stones: and seized (keeping
withal the length of all the Valley) on the Hills of advantage, which might
serve them for defense: so as if they had not been frustrated, Antiochus had
given over his Enterprise as destitute of his forces. For as it was necessary
for the Enemies to take their way, and to ascend by that Valley, they seized on
the said places and fortified them. But they did not observe that it was
impossible for the Leginaries to pass there with their Baggage until the way
were made: for these could not approach or come near the Confines of the
Mountains.

They that were lightly armed and the valiant men, could not ascend the
Leucopetres. For this cause the Ordonance changed when they were joined unto
the first Guard of Diogenes Troops who ascended out of the Torrent. Suddenly
the Combat began as the accident showed: Diogenes Troop marching slowly
through the Country, Diogenes fights with the Barbarians.
gave a rough charge to the Enemy: And in throwing of Darts and Stones pressed
the Barbarians, annoying them much with their Slings which they cast from their
Pallisadoe. Having chased the first, and had taken their place, they gave
charge to the Pyoners to make the passage even, the which was presently
performed by reason of their great number.

By this means when the Slingers, Archers, and Darters had marched to the
higher places, scattred here and there, and sometimes together, seazing on the
most commodious places, and the Targeteers held the lower Country, marching in
Battle a flow pace along the Torrent: The Barbarians stayed not, but
abandoning the place, they drew together on the top of the Mountains. In
regard of Antiochus Troops, it past the difficult passages safely after this
manner: But slowly and with great difficulty: They could hardly eight in a
Rank recover the top of the near Mountains. And when the Barbarians were
there assembled, having an humor they should be able to keep the Enemies
from gaining the top, there fell out a brave Combat. By these reasons the
Enemies were repulsed, who reuniting themselves fought against the Leginaries,
and made head against them with great courage and valor.

In the Night the brauest of them turning about recovered the top, and the
places lying behind. The which the Barbarians seeing, and suddenly amazed,
they turned head. The King is very careful to restrain the fury of his
Soldiers pursuing the Enemy, causing a retreat to be sounded, desiring they
should enter into Hyrcania united and in good order. The City of Tambrace.
This kind of march being ordained according to his will, he comes to the
City of Tambrace, destitute of Walls, yet having a royal and large Palace:
where he campt and besieged it. B^t when as many, as well Soldiers as of the
Country had retired to the City of Syringe, (it was not far from Tambrace,
and was as it were the Capital of Hyrcania, as well for its fortification as
for its wealth) he resolved to ruin it by force.

Marching therefore with his power, and planting his Camp about it, Syringe
besieged by Antiochus.
he besieged the City. The greatest part of his work was to make platformes
in the fashion of a Tortoise. The Ditches were triple, being about seven
Fathom and a half broad, and four deep. Upon either bank there was a
double Pallisadoe with a strong outwall. There were continual Skirmishes
whilst they wrought: from whence they carried from either side men slain and
hurt: for that they fought very valiantly, not only upon the ground, but also
under it in the Mines. But by reason of the multitude of Pyoners and the Kings
diligence, it happened that the Ditches were suddenly filled up, and the
Walls fell being shaken with the Mines. This done, the Barbarians being
confounded, and much terrified and amazed with fear, they kill the Grecians
which were in the City, and taking their richest stuff retire by Night. The
King seeing this, sends Hyparbase with the Mercenaries: with whom the
Barbarians fighting, Syringe taken by Antiochus.
and in the end abandoning the Baggage, retire again into the City. But when
the Targeteers pressed them valiantly, not able to bear the burden being so
grievous, they presently yield having no more hope.

The Commanders of the Army being desirous to see the Enemies A defect in the
Text.
Troops environed on the Hill, they command those which were in the Pallisadoe
not to budge: in regard of themselves they go to view the places, being
accompanied with two Troops of Horse, and some Footmen lightly armed, with
thirty executioners of Justice. Certain Numidians accustomed to Darts, coming
out of the Enemies Fort to lie in Ambush, they had by chance stolen from the
Hills: who having notice given them by a Spy, that some were on the top of the
Hill higher then they, they prepare themselves and march cross the Hill, and
casting themselves betwixt them and their Camp, they shut them in and take
them. Claudius Marcellus wounded and taken.
Claudius Marcellus the Consul was at the first charge wounded, and taken with
some others, forcing the rest being wounded to fly into Caves and Pits. The
which they of the Camp seeing, they could not relieve them in this danger. For
whilst they cried out and wondered at this accident, and that some bridled
their Horses, and others armed themselves, the Execution was ended. The Son
of Claudius saved himself with difficulty, and contrary to all hope being
wounded. Finally, Claudius fell into these dangers more through simplicity then
by any true judgment of a Captain.

For my part I am forced to admonish the Reader of these kind of adventures
through the whole tract of our Work, where I see not only ordinary Soldiers,
but even Captains themselves to have erred by manifest ignorance. What profit
can a Prince or Commander reap, which has not the knowledge of dangers which
he must avoid, lest the whole Army perish with him? Who knows not that if
necessity does force them to attempt a thing, that a great part of the Troops
must perish before the Commanders feel it? The trial must be suddenly made
not by the Commander. Common excuses of ignorance and negligence.
That which they usually say, I did not think it: and who would ever have
thought that should have happened? Seems to be a great argument of ignorance,
and of a weak judgment in the Commander.

For this cause I hold Hannibal among the good Captains for many reasons, and
which may herein be commended, who has employed much time in the profession of
Arms, and who making use of judgment in many and diverse occasions, has many
times by his industry frustrated the Enemies in particular encounters, and was
never circumuented in such great Battles: who as it appears has preserved
himself with great providence. And that with good reason. For the Commander
being safe, although all the rest perish. Fortune produces many occasions by
the which the damages received by those miserable accidents may be repaired:
But if he perish like unto a Pilot in a ship, there grows no profit, although
that Fortune give the Victory to the rest against the Enemy: For that the hope
of all depends upon the Commander. I speak these things against those who by a
glorious presumption, or a youthful humor, or by stupidity, or disdain, fall
into this inconsideration. One of the said things must of necessity be the
cause of these misfortunes.

Of Publius Scipio and of the War of the Romans against the Carthaginians.
AS Publius Scipio General of the Romans in Spain, being in the Region of
Tarracona, had first drawn the Spaniards to his Friendship, and made them
faithful, for that he had restored them their hostages, he had in this action
Edecon, a powerful Prince for a voluntary assistance: who suddenly after the
taking of Carthage, and his Wife and Children reduced under the power of
Publius, considering the alteration of the Spaniards toward him, he resolved
in the beginning to be the Author, believing confidently that by this means
he might recover his Wife and Children, and that he should seem to join unto
the Romans willingly, and not through necessity: The which succeeded
accordingly. For when the Army had been newly sent to winter, he came to
Tarracona accompanied with his Friends.

Being admitted to the speech of Publius, A Remonstrance of Edecon to Publius.
he said, that he was wonderfully bound unto the Gods, that before all the
Princes and Potentates of the Country, he had retired himself unto him: and
that of the rest, some sent and depended on the Carthaginians, and in the mean
time they sued unto the Romans with joined hands: and that for his part he was
come not only to yield himself but also his Friends. Wherefore if he received
him into his Friendship and alliance, he was confident that he should be able,
not only for the present, but also for the future to do him great service.
For as soon as the Spaniards should see him admitted to his Friendship, and to
have obtained his demands, they will likewise come all to recover their
Friends, and to purchase the alliance of the Romans: and that for the future
they would employ themselves with emulation in his other affairs, if their
hearts were once possessed with this honor and humanity. He required to have his
Wife and Children, and that being admitted into Friendship, he might return to
his house, where having found some good occasion, he might show his affection,
and that of his Friends toward him and the Roman Commonweal. This Speech
being ended. Edecon was silent. As Publius had long expected this, and
considered of Edecons reasons, he delivered him his Wife and Children, granting
the alliance. Moreover during his presence, he draws the Spaniard by many
means to his Devotion, and imprinted in his followers a great hope for the
future, sending him back to his House. When this accident was divulged, all
the Spaniards inhabiting within the River (being formerly no friends to the
Romans) followed their party in a manner with one accord. These things fell out
to the content of Publius Scipio. After their departure he sent back the
maritine Bands, seeing no show of danger at Sea. Yet he made choice of those
that were most serviceable, and diuides them among the Ensigns, to the end he
might make the Bands of footmen the more complete.

Andomale and Mandonin, men at that time of great power among the Spaniards,
Andomale and Mandonin.
attended a fit occasion, having long carried a secret hatred in their hearts
against the Carthaginians, although they held them for their trusty and
confident friends: For that Asdrubals men (making show to have no great
confidence in them) they had exacted a great sum of money, and their Wives
and Children for Hostages, whereof we have formerly spoken. When as then they
immagined they had found a fit opportunity, they retire their Bands from the
Carthaginian Camp, and in the Night recovered certain places of great
strength, where they might remain free from all danger. This done, many other
Spaniards abandoned Asdrubal, having been long discontented with the pride of
the Carthaginians: Asdrubal abandoned by many Spaniards.
Having recovered this first occasion to show what friendship they bare them:
the which many others had done.

You must understand that the Execution of great matters, and a Victory gotten
by force upon the Enemy, be of great consequence, yet there is required great
prudence and Wisdom, to make good use of things decided by Arms. So as there
are more that enjoy Prerogatives, then they which use them well: The which
happened to the Carthaginians. For after they had defeated the Roman forces,
and slain Publius and ^aius Scipio, father and Uncle of this Publius, of whom
we now Treat, thinking that Spain was then in no more danger of War, they
entreated the Inhabitants roughly. For this cause in steed of friends and
Allies, their Subjects were incensed and deadly Enemies. The which fell out
justly. They had an humor that the means to Conquer Principallities, diffred
from that of preserving them. They were ignorant that they keep their
pre-eminence well, which observe the same will and humor, wherewith
principallities have been first Conquered.

It is manifest and observed in many, that men are of that Nature, that whereas
prosperity offers it self, they show themselves kind to their Neighbors,
promising hopeful things. But when they have attained to their desires, then
they deal wickedly, and reign over their Subjects as over flaues. Wherefore
not without reason the affections of Subjects, change with the alteration of
their Princes: The which happened to the Carthaginians. Asdrubal takes much
advice upon this accident for the event of things. The retreat of Andomale
troubled him. So did the hatred and abandoning of the other Commanders.
Finally, he was discontented at the coming of Publius, whom he still
expected to come against him with his Army. When he saw himself abandoned by
the Spaniards, and that all in one League retired to the Romans, The advice of
Asdrubal for the War.
he took this advice. He resolved that in making preparation of a good Army,
he would fight with the Enemy. If thorough the favor of Fortune he had the
Victory, he would then consider safely and wisely of the rest, but if it should
be auerse unto him in fighting, he would retire into Gaul with the remainders
of the Battle, and from thence with a multitude of Barbarians draw into
Italy, and join with his brother Hannibal under the same hope. Asdrubal being
of this advise prepares himself. Publius having received Caius Lelyus, and
understood the decrees of the Senate, marches, having retired his Army out of
the Garrisons: To whom the Spaniards come at the passage, and march with him
with willing and joyful hearts. Andobale had before sent unto Publius, but
when he approached near unto this Country, he came unto him accompanied with
his friends: Where after he had spoken unto him, he concluded the League of
friendship which he formerly had with the Carthaginians, Andobale speaks to
Publius Scipio.
giving him to understand what service and loyalty he had observed toward
him; and finally he exposes the outrages and injuries which he and his had
suffered, entreating him to be the Judge of that which he said: And if he
seemed to accuse the Carthaginians unjustly, he might certainly know that he
would never keep his faith to the Romans: If being forced for the necessary
respect of many iuiuries, he had desisted from his affection, yet he had good
hope that joining to the Romans to keep his faith firm with them. After he had
used many such Speeches, he made an end.

To whom Publius answering, said, that he beliued it* and had understood the
outrages of the Carthaginians, publiu^ answer to Andobale.
which they had used to other Spaniards, and their lasciviousness toward
their Wives and daughters. Of whom notwithstanding he having taken many,
reduced rather into the estate of Captives and slaves, then Hostages, he has
kept them with such honesty, as the Parents themselves could not have done. And
when as Andobale and his Company confessed it, and making an obeisance unto him,
they saluted him as King, the assistants observed those words. Publius saluted
King.
Publius blushing, commands them to be of good hope, promising them they should
find courtesy and favor with the Romans, and presently delivers them their
Daughters: and the day following makes an accord with them. The principal
Articles of their Accord was, The Spaniards join with the Romans.
that they should follow the Roman Princes and obey them willingly.

These things thus concluded, they return unto their Camp, and come with
their Army to that of Publius, and making War with the Romans, they march
with them against Asdrubal. The Commander of the Carthaginians staying near
to Catol^gne, fast by the City of Babylis, and near unto the Mines of Gold and
Silver, he changed his Camp when he was advertised of the coming of the
Romans, so as he had the river at his back in manner of a Rampire: and in
front and on the sides a Pallisadoe with a sufficient depth for the
Fortification: there was finally a length in the Valleys sufficient to put them
in battle. And as for the side of the Hill there were usually men. When as
Publius approacht, he was ready to hazard the Combat: although he were in
doubt seeing the advantage and force of the places, where the Enemy lay in
Camp. But when he had contained himself two days, and was in fear that Mago
and Asdrubal the son of Gescon coming, he might be environed round, he
resolved to fight and to hazard a battle: Making therefore another Army, he
labors to gain the Pallisado. In regard of those that were lightly armed and
the choice footmen, he sends them to the side of a Hill, giving them charge to
assail, and to view the Enemies forces.

And when that this was done with great Courage, the Commander of the
Carthaginians attends the event from the beginning. But when he saw his men
pressed, and in danger by the courage of the Romans, he draws his Army into the
field, and plants in near the side of the Hill, relying upon the opportunity
of the place. At the same time Publius sends his brauest men to succor those
that were in danger; and stayed the rest ready: He takes the one half and
assailes the Hill upon the left side of the Enemy, fighting against the
Carthaginians: And delivers the rest to Lelyus, giving him charge to assail
the Enemy on the right hand. When this was done, Asdrubal draws his Army out
of the Fort. The Carthaginians assailed by the Romans.
He had hitherto kept it, relying upon the fortified places, having an opinion
that the Enemies durst not assail him. But for that this charge of the Romans
came unexpected, he puts his Army into Battle later then was needful.

The Romans undergoing the danger of the fight, whilst that the Enemies were
not yet upon the Wings, they not only assailed the Hill without danger, but in
approaching slew those which crossed them, whilst that the Enemies made ready
their battle: forcing those to turn which prepared themselves and made head
against them. When as Asdrubal, according to his first resolution, saw his Army
give back and shamefully repulsed, he had no will to fight unto the last
gasp. Taking therefore the Treasure and the Elephants, The defeat of Asdrubal.
and all those he could draw together in the flight, he retires to the River
of Tagus, and to the Hills of the Perinee Mountains, and to the Gauls
inhabiting there. Scipio held it not fit to pursue the Victory suddenly,
doubting the coming of the other Commanders: Finally, he gave the booty of
the Fort to the Soldiers.

The day following, he draws together all the Prisoners, whereof there were
ten Thousand foot, and two Thousand horse, to dispose of them. Scipio saluted
King of the Spaniards.
All the Spaniards of that Country which were allied unto the Carthaginians,
come and submit themselves to the favor of the Romans. And when he had given
them audience, they saluted Scipio as King. The which Edecon began when he
did his obeisance; and after him Andobale with his friends. Scipio at that time
regarded not their words but was silent: But when after the Battle all
saluted him as King, he was moved therewith, so as he forbad it. Drawing all
the Spaniards together, he told them that he would be truly Royal, and so
held; but he would not be called a King by no man living. This done, he
ordained they should call him Chief or Commander. It is not without cause,
The Commendation of Publius Cornclius Scipio.
that we may justly commend the magnanimity of this man: By the which being yet
young, having the favor of Fortune such, as all the Subjects had him in so
great esteem, as they saluted him by so excellent a name, yet he was always
so continent, as he would not accept of this will and humor of the Subjects.
But he will wonder much more at the excellency of his magnanimity, if he
looks to the last days of his life: when besides the valiant exploits which
he has done in Spain, he has ruined the Carthaginians, and made subject
unto the Romans many good Countries in Lybia, from the Philenin Altars, to the
pillars of Hercules. He has also ruined Asia, and the Assirian Kings.
Finally, he has reduced to the obedience of the Romans the best and greatest
part of the World. And therefore if he had pleased he might well have
embraced the opportunity to usurp a royal power, in these Countries which he
has invaded and taken. The disdain of such things (as Scipio has wisely
done) surpasses not only humane nature, but a divine. This magnanimity does
so much excel other men, as no man would demand of the Gods a greater favor:
I mean then a Crown, the which he has so often refused, being delivered
unto him by fortune, and has had his Country in more esteem, and his own
honor then the great command of a royal power. He gave leave to all the
Spaniards, being set a part, to return into their Country without ransom,
except three hundred horse whereof he gave the choice to Andobale, giving the
rest to those which had not any. Finally, being now seized on the Carthaginians
Camp, he stayed there in regard of the firtility of the Country, expecting
the Carthaginian Commanders which were remaining: he also sent forces to the
topps of the Perenee Mountains to watch Asdruball, and then when the season
was come he retired to Tarracona, to winter his Army there.

He returns to the History of the Grecians.
AS the Etoliens lifted up their horns for the new hope and confidence they
had in the Romans, and the arrival of Attalus, they amazed all the world,
making War by Land as Attalus and Publius did by Sea, for this cause the
Acheins entreat Phillip to succor them, for in truth they not only feared
the Etoliens, but also Machains, for that he had seaz'd upon the Argiue
Mountains with an Army, the Beocians fearing the enemies Army at Sea, require
a commander and succors. The Negrepontins demanded instantly some provision
against the enemy, the like did the Acarnanians, there was also an Ambassador
from the Epirotes, they said likewise that Scerdilaide and Plaurate assembled
their Armies, and that moreover the Thracians, who confine upon Macedony would
endeavor to assail it if the King should retire from thence, in regard of the
Etoliens, they had seized upon the straights of Thermopiles, and fortified them
with Ditches, Pallisadoes, and a great Garrison, hoping they should be able to
keep in Philip, and wholly to stop up the passage in succouring his Allies
within Pyles.

These adventures seems worthy of Consideration,) and not without reason) by
the Readers, in the which is the true Experience and practice of Princes
according unto their Corporal power. For as in Hunting Beasts are moved with
their Forces and Power, when they are engaged in an apparent danger, so it
befalls Princes: the which they might then discover in Philip. He dismisseth
all the Ambassadors, Attalus against Philip by Sea.
promising them to do what possibly he could. His whole inclination was the
War, expecting by what means and against whom he should first begin. But
when the forces of Attalus were come against him, and had assailed the Island of
Peparethon, he sends men to guard the City: And dispatcheth Polyphantes with
a small Army toward Phocea and Beocia, and Menippus to Chalcis, and the other
Negrepont, with a thousand Targetteers, and five hundred Agrians. In regard of
himself, he went to Scotuse, whether he Commanded the Macedonians to repair.

When he had news that Attalus Army had taken the route of Nicea, and that the
Chief of the Etoliens assembled at Heraclea, to confer of the Affairs of
the War, he parts from Scotuse with his Army, and made have to dissolve
their Assembly. He arrived too late, yet he wasted their Corn, and after
that he had spoiled the Inhabitants about the Gulf of Enee, he returned,
leaving his Army at Scotuse, and taking his way to the Demetriade: With his
ablest men and the royal Wing, he stayed there expecting the coming of the
Enemy. And to the end nothing should be unknown unto him, he sends to the
Peparethiens, and Phociens, and likewise to the Negrepontins, giving them
charge to make him a sign by fire of all things that should be done, upon the
Tisee which is a Mountain in Thessaly, which in regard of the places is very
commodiously situated. But as this manner of sign by fire, is of great
commodity for the War, and has formerly not been used, I do not hold it
good to pass it, but in this passage to make some reasonable mention. No man
is ignorant that opportunity and occasion are the principal parts in all
things: But much more in the profession of War, to bring enterprises to an
end: But among those things which are useful, Aduertisements by fire.
fires are of great efficacy. They use them at this day, and are the cause of
some opportunities, to be able to advertise him who has the care of that which
is done, although it be three or four days distant, or more: To the end that
by the sign of fire, they may suddenly give succors unto them that demand
it, although that in former times they have held it of small moment, for that
the most part knew not how to use it. But the use ought to be ordered and
settled upon certain and determinate agreements. But whereas things which they
will signify are not resolutely set down, they cannot make use of these
fires, as those are whereof we will speak.

If the Army at Sea were come to Orea, or Peparethon, or Chalcis, they might
signify it to those, with whom this has been resolved. But if any of the
Citizens will turn their Coats, or practice a Treason or Murder within the
City, or any such thing as has usually happened, and yet cannot be diuined
(matters which happen suddenly and unlooked for, have need according to the
occasion, of Counsel and aid) yet it may be signified by fire. For of those
which consideration cannot prevent, they cannot make any Conclusion. Eneas
seeking to correct this kind of doubt and perplexity, The advice of Eneas
touching signs by fire.
has in few words made the Commentaries, of the institution of the heads: And
has abundantly comprehended for the understanding, the sum of those things
which are required; the which may easily be discovered by this speech, saying:
That they which will give notice by the advertisement of fire of any of great
and pressing business, must make provision of pots of earth, whose breadth and
depth must be equal, and they must have three foot in depth, and one and a
half in breadth: Then he must make slender Corkes in the mouth of it; in the
midst whereof he must tie them in equal parts of three fingers distant; and
in every part a great Circumference, in the which are also painted the most
vulgar and general things which happen in the profession of War. As by the
first, that Horsemen are suddenly entered the Country: In the second, that
foote-men armed; in the third, that men lightly armed: And consequently in
others, that foot and Horsemen, or an Army at Sea, and that there is Corn.
You must in this sort paint the things which do usually happen in Regions,
according to the providence and time of the motions of War.

This being done he Commands to observe dilligently the pots of the one and
the other, so as the pipes may be equal and run equally: And when the pots
shall be full of Water, they must put in the Corkes with sticks; and then let
the pipes run together. This happening it is apparent, that all being equal,
the Corkes of necessity abate as the Water runs, and the sticks hide
themselves in the Vessels. When these things are equally ordered, and they are
to use them, then they must transport them to the places, where the one and the
other are to observe the fires, and then must set them on either side upon the
Vessels. Finally, in what thing soever that any portraite of the stick shall
fall, he ordaines they should set up a light which must continue until the
Deputies answer him with the same. And when both fires are discovered, then
he must take them away and suffer the pipes to run. But as for the falling
of the Cork and the stick, that which of the Images shall approach unto the
brinke of the pot which we will let you see, he orders that they shall set up
a light: and that they should stop the pipes, and see what image of those
which are figured upon the stick, comes to the brinke.

This may be done when as all the things which they manifest, are of either
side moved with the same diligence. The which may be in some sort by a light
set up by agreement to serve for an advertisement, unless they be
undetermined: For it is impossible to see future things, or that that be
figured upon the stick which we foresee. Finally if by Fortune any unexpected
accident happens, it is certain that it cannot be declared by this invention:
Nor any thing of that which is figured in the stick be determined. They cannot
give advertisement of the number of Horsemen or of foot, or of ships, nor of
the quantity of Corn. For we cannot dispose of things, whereof the knowledge
cannot be made before they be done. And by consequence how can any man resolve
of succors, if he knows not the multitude of the Enemies, Another kinds of
advertisement by fire invented by Cleomenes and Democrites.
and the place where they are? How can a man work safely, or otherwise? Or how
can he plot any Enterprise, which knows not the number of the Enemies, nor
the quantity of Corn which is come unto them from their Allies?

A latter kind has been invented by Cleomenes and Democrites. In regard of
that which is vulgar and of ready use, we have determined: the which may
advertise exactly all that which is necessary to be known. The use whereof
requires diligence, and an exact observation; and it is in this manner. You
must divide the Letters according to their order in five parts, every one
consisting of five: But in the end there shall want one, which is no matter of
Consequence. And when as they which shall make use of lights for an
advertisement, shall prepare five little Tables, and write upon either of them
the parties according to their order, and then they agree together, that he
which gives the advertisement, shall set up the first lights and two together,
which shall not be taken away until the other has answered in like manner.
This serves to the end that by this light they may understand, that they are
discovered. These others being taken away, they must show the first which are
on the left hand, and declare by the Table the things whereunto they must have
a care. As if the first Table he lifted up, it signifies one: if the second
two; and so consequently. They must also lift up those which are on the right
hand, after the same manner, to advertise what letters he shall write that
takes the light. When they which have agreed together upon these matter, come
unto the place, they must first have a Dioptre, having two Cauels: to the end
that he that is to lift up the light right against it, may see the place both
on the right hand and left.

The Tables must be fixed straight and by order, near unto the Dioptre, and
the places on the right hand and the left must be separated ten foot, and the
height of a man. Moreover they must be careful that the lights may be visible
when they set them up, and likewise hidden when they take them down. These
things being thus prepared on either side, and that they have an intent to give
some aduertisment, as that a hundred Soldiers are retired to the Enemy, they
must first use the Dictions which by the small Letters may signify that which
we have said; (...).
as that a hundred (Candyots) have abandoned us. The letters now are less, and
yet that is signified. This which is written in the Table will show it self
thus. The first letter is thus x, the which is in the second part and second
Table: they must also set up the lights upon the left hand, to the end that he
which has the charge, may understand that he must look to the other Table.
Then on the right hand he must set up fire, to let him know that thisx is the
fifth Letter on the right hand, the which he which observes the lights, must
write in the Table. Then p. r.
p wherefore he must lift up two on the right hand, which signifies the second
of the fourth part: For this cause he that observes the Lights, writes the
letter* p. r.
and so consequently of the rest. By this means whatsoever happens, it may be
certainly known, following this invention. Moreover they must have many
lights, for that there must be two to every Letter. And if any one does duly
observe these things, which serve to this use, that which is required may be
done. Moreover, they which make use of these two inventions, must give order
when as they will use them, to be able to give full and certain signs.
Whosoever pleases, may easily know in many kinds how great soever the
difference of the said things make show of, and which they have been
accustomed to observe. For many things not only difficult, but which seem
impossible having gotten the succession of time and custom, become most easy.

There are many and diverse examples which deserve credit; but the most
excellent is that which happens in the Art of reading. If any one instructs a
man without Experience, and not accustomed to read, although he be
industrious, and that finally he produces an infant bred up to it, and that a
Book being given him he appoints him to read the Contents, it is manifest
that the other will not believe, that he can know first how he may by the
looking of it read every letter, know their powers, and how they ought to be
joined; forth at either of the said things require much time. Wherefore when he
has not artained this Art, and sees this little Boy continue with one breath
five or six lines, he would never easily believe, but that he has formerly
read the Book. And if moreover he has a good pronunciation, and observes the
points, aspirations, and pauses, he will not be persuaded and believe no more:

Wherefore we must not disdain any thing that is profitable, in regard of the
evident difficulty: But we must apply our selves to that which makes all good
things comprehensible to men, and namely in those wherein most commonly the
supreme safety does consist. We have undertaken to speak these things,
according unto that which we have promised in the beginning. For we have said
that all Speculations have so prevailed with us, as for the most part they are
methodicall Sciences. Wherefore it is a very profitable portion of a well
composed History.

Of Antiochus.
THe Aspasiens dwell betwixt Oxus and Tanais: Of which Rivers, the one falls
into the Hyrcanian Sea, and Tanais into the Lake of Meotis. They are Nauigable
for their greatness: So it seems wonderful how the Tartarians passing Oxus
as well by foot as Horseback, come into Hyrcania. There are two opinions
conceived: The one is credible, the other strange although possible. Oxus
draws his Springs from Mount Coucasus, but augmented much in Bactria by the
descent of smaller Rivers, it passes by a violent Course by the Country of
Ped^a. There it falls into a Desert, and runs with a violent stream, thorough
certain Rocks and Pits, for the great number and vehement beating of the
places lying under it, so as its violence ouer-flowes the Rock in the lower
Countries above a Furlong. By this place near unto the Rock the Aspasiens, as
they say, passing the River both on Foot and Horseback, descend into
Hyrcania. The other opinion has a more propable reason, saying, that for that
place has great Ditches, into the which this River falls with its force, she
makes hollow and opens the bottom by the violence of her Course: And by this
means the River takes its course under ground, for a small space, and then
rises again. The Barbarians having experience hereof, pass there on
Horseback into Hyrcania.

When as Antiochus was advertised, that Euthideme was about Tagure with an
Army, and that a thousand Horse kept the passage of the River of Aria, he
proceeds and resolves to besiege it, having no more confidence in his
resolution. And when he was within three days journey of the River, he marched
the two first slowly: And on the third having fed his men, he causes his Camp
to march at the break of day: Then taking the Horsemen and his strongest
soldiers, with a thousand Targetteers, he makes have in the night. He had
understood that the enemies Cauallery was at the guard of the River in the day
time, but at night they retired to a City some twenty Furlongs off. When he
had performed the rest of the way in the night (for those Countries were
convenient for Horsemen) he past the River at the break of day with the
greatest part of his Army. The Bactrian Horsemen being advertised by their
Scouts, cry out and fight with the Enemy upon the way.

The King seeing that he was to maintain their first Charge, gives Courage to
those which had been accustomed to accompany him in such encounters, which
were two thousand Horse: and commands the rest to cast themselves betwixt both,
with their Troops put into battle as of custom. Finally, he fights with
the Bactrian Horse which presented themselves. A skirmish of the Bactreans with
Antiochus.
Antiochus seemed in this danger to have fought more valiantly then his men: so
as many perished on either side. Yet the Kings men defeated the first troop of
Horse: But when the second and the third charged them, they were repulsed
turning their heads basely. But when as Etole had given charge to the great
power of the Horse to march in Battle, he freed the King and his Company,
terrifying the Bactrians who were in disorder, and put them to flight.
Wherefore when they were charged by all the Etoliens, they ceased not to fly
until having make a great loss they were joined unto Euthideme. And when as
the Kings Horsemen had made a great slaughter, and taken many in the City,
they presently retired, and planted their Camp near the River. It happened
that in this same Combat Menippe was wounded and dyed, loosing some of his
Teeth with a blow: Finally, he purchased a renown of Valor. After this
Comba^e Euthideme retired with his Army to Zariaspe a City of the Bactrians.

A PARCEL OF the Eleventh Book of the History of POLYBIVS.
ASdrubal did not allow of any of these things. But (seeing the Enemies march
in Battle) when as matters changed not, he caused the Spaniards and Gauls
that were with him to fight. Setting the Elephants in Front, being ten in
number, and after he had joined the Battalions close, united, and in length,
and had put all the Army in battle in a short time, casting himself in the
midst of the Ordonance near to the Elephants, he assailes the Enemy upon
the left flancke, having resolved to die in that battle. The Lybian presents
himself with great Courage to the enemy, and in charging fights valiantly with
his troops. Claudius Nero one of the Consuls, appointed for the right side
could not join with the enemy, nor yet enclose them, for the unevenness of
the ground: A Battle betwixt Asdrubal and the Romans in Italy.
wherein Asdrubal trusting, he had charged the enemy on the left hand.
Wherefore as he was perplexed and in doubt, for that he lost time, he learned
what he had to do. Taking therefore the Soldiers of the right wing, he goes
beyond his Camp near unto a passage behind the Battle and on the left hand,
and gives a charge unto the Carthaginians, near unto the wing where the
Elephants had their station. At that time the Victory wauered. For in truth the
danger was equal of both sides, considering that neither Romans, Spaniards,
nor Carthaginians had any hope of safety remaining, if they were frustrated of
their intention. Finally, the Elephants were of use to both of them in the
fight: For when they were enclosed in the midst, and assailed with Darts they
as well brake the ranks of the Spaniards, as of the Romans. But when as
Claudius Troop had charged the enemy in the rear, the Combat was unequal,
for the charge given unto the Spaniards both in Front and behind. So as it
happened that in the beginning of the Combat, there was a great laughter made
of Spaniards: So likewise there were six Elephants su^ine by the force of the
men they carried: the other four brake their^ r^nckes: being alone and
destitute of their Indians they were taken*

And when as Asdrubal had been formerly and unto his end an able man,
Asdrubal brother to Hannibal slain.
he lost in fighting valiantly his life, worthy to be commended. He was
brother to Hannibal, who undertaking the Voyage of Italy, gave him the Conduct
of the Wars of Spain. And afterward being practiced by many encounters
against the Romans, he has endured many and variable Fortunes: And in this
also that the Carthaginians sent Commanders to succeed him, he always
carried himself like a man worthy of his Father Barca, bearing unto the end
like a man of Courage all disgraces and losses. We have declared these things
in regard of the precedent. But now we will decide the last Combats, in that
which seems worthy of Consideration.

Seeing before our eyes many Kings and Commanders which having great Combats
concerning their whole estates, have always cast their eyes upon the most
excellent Actions, and of Consequence; and who often enquire and Discourse how
they shall help themselves in every good Fortune: And who moreover care not
for mischances, not consider of the means, nor that which they are to do in
every action and event: For that this other is in their hands, and this
requires a great preparation. And therefore many having been vanquished, carry
themselves poorly by their baseness and inconsiderations: Although that the
Soldiers have many times sought valiantly, and with good direction: And have
by this means dishonored their precedent actions, making the rest of their
Lives infamous. It is an easy thing for him that will know how many
Commanders fail, and are frustrated herein, and that there is much
difference betwixt man and man. Precedent times have affoorded many examples in
these things. In regard of Asdrubal he was no less provident in dangers, then
for his safety, whilst he had any hope conformable to reason, to be able to do
any thing worthy of his Predecessors. But when as Fortune had deprived him of
all hope for the future, and had concluded him to his last end: omitting
nothing for the Victory, nor that which concerned the preparation and danger,
he carried himself like a man of providence: And although that all was in
danger, yet he obeyed the present time, neither did he suffer any thing
unworthy of his Predecessors. Behold the reason which I have delivered
concerning those which apply themselves to the mannaging of War: to the end
that undertaking dangers rashly, they draw not them into despair which are
under their Charge, nor by desire of an infamous life, they make their deaths
dishonorable and blame worthy.

The Romans having gotten the Victory by force, presently break the Pallisadoe
of the Enemy, and kill like Sacrifices many Celts sleeping in Drunkenness upon
their Mattresses, The Celts slain sleeping.
and assemble together the rest of the Prisoners: By the which there did accrue
nine score thousand Crowns to the Commonweal. There died in this Battle as
well of Carthaginians as Gauls, near ten thousand men, The number of the dead.
and about two thousand Romans. Some Nobles among the Carthaginians were taken,
the rest were slain. When this News came to Rome, they were scarce believed
for that they desired wonderfully to see it done, but as there came many men
declaring not only what had been done, but every thing in particular, then
the City entered into an immoderate joy: all the Temples were adorned, and
filled with Sacrifices and Oblations: Finally, they grew so confident and
assured, as at that time they did not think that Hannibal (whom they had
formerly so much feared) was in Italy.

An Oration to the Etoliens of the Wars of Greece.
MY Masters the Etoliens, I think it is very manifest that King Ptolomy, the
Citizens of Rhodes and Constantinople, with those of Chio and Miteline make no
great account of your League. It is not the first nor the second time that we
have treated with you of Peace: But even at that time when you moved War,
applying your self unto it, and embracing all occasions, we have not ceased
to admonish you. Now we conjecture the ruin of your selves and the
Macedonians, and for the future we are in care for your health and for all
Greece. As fire thrust into a Forest is no more in his power that has kindled
it, but consumes all that it encounters: Being moreover governed by the Winds,
and by the consumption of the Forest, and that many times it sweepes away
suddenly the Incendiary himself: so the War being once inflamed by some,
ruins them first: Then it runs without reason, destroying all things it
encounters, agitated by rashness, and the beastliness of those which kindle
it, as it were driven by the Winds. Wherefore my Masters the Etoliens, seeing
that the Ilanders, and the Grecians which inhabit Asia, do often sue unto
you, that disdaining War, you would make choice of Peace, for that the case
concerns you: resume your senses, consenting with those who with reverence
admonish you. If with some good fortune you did manage a War which were
profitable, commodious, and glorious (it is that undoubtedly which they expect
most therein) according to your first intention and design of events, they
might with reason pardon you as men of great courage. This War is altogether
infamous, full of ignominy, and cursed, is it not necessary to stay and defer
it? Advice without doubt should be freely given, you will hear (if you be
wise) my words patiently. It is much better for you to be preserved with a
commodious reprehention, then in hearing pleasing words, to perish the first
soon after: and then subsequently the rest of Greece, set your ignorance
before your eyes. You say you make War against Philip for Greece, to the end
that being preserved they should not obey his Commandments: But in truth you
make War to its ruin and defeat. An accord betwixt the Romans and the
Etoliens.
It is that which your accord with the Romans declare, the which in the
beginning consisted in writing, but now they are seen in actions. The letters
were then dishonorable unto you, but at this day they are visible to the eye,
and manifest by your works. Finally, Philip carries the Name, and is made the
color of this War: although he suffers nothing that is grievous: But as he
has many Allies in Morea, as the Beocians, Negrepontins, Phociens, Locrines,
Thessalians and Epirotes, you have concluded against them under conditions,
that the bodies and moveable goods should belong to the Romans, and the Cities
and Countries to the Etoliens.

But as you are Lords of this City, you would not endure they should offend any
Freeman, nor set fire of your City, holding such actions cruel and barbarous:
and yet you have made a League, according to the which you have delivered the
rest of Greece to Barbarians as your own by gift, by an outrage and a most
ignominious injustice. These are the things which in the beginning you
understood not: But at this day you are made manifest unto the World by the
misery of the poor Oretins and Eginetes, for that Fortune has of purpose
raised your ignorance upon a Theater. The beginning of this War and of the
actions which happen are such. But what can we expect more, if in the end all
things succeed according to your desire: shall it not be a beginning of great
miseries to all the Grecians? Believe me, that after the Romans have ended the
War in Italy (the which will soon happen, Hannibal being shut up in a Corner
of Brutia) they will employ all their forces against Greece, under color to
give succors to the Etoliens against Philip, but the truth is to make all
Greece subject: the which will soon be manifest. For whether they are resolved
to carry themselves like honest and honorable persons, having the Victory, the
thanks shall be theirs: If otherwise they shall have the profits of the
Defeates, and the power over them that escape. Then you will call upon the
Gods, when as none of them or any man will offer to assist you. You should then
in the beginning foresee all things: This was lawful for you. But as many
future things are out of humane providence, now at the least you should take a
better advice, having seen the event of this War. I entreat you and exhort
you not to envy your own safety and liberty, nor that of the rest of Greece.

And when by his Speech (as he conceived) somewhat moved the opinions of many,
Philips Ambassador entered: who leaving the things which might be spoken in
particular, he said, that he had two points in charge: That if the Etoliens
brake the peace, he was ready to appeal unto the Gods, and to the Grecian
Ambassadors there present, that they were to be held for the Authors of those
things which hereafter should fall upon Greece, and not Philip. Glory says he,
does much amaze the Enemy, but a reasonable preparation of Arms is of greater
service for necessity. Then they should do that which is necessry, if they
transfer the diligence and care which they have at this day for their
apparel, to the preparation of their Arms, observing in their apparel the
ancient negligence. For by this means they may give order for their private
course of life, and preserve their Commonwealth. And therefore (says he) it
is not needful that he which gives himself to Arms, and to the profession of
War, should look when he puts on his Boots, whether they be handsome, and if
his strops and pantables be brave: nor whether his Cloak and Iacket be rich,
when he must put on a Head-peece. Believe me, the danger is manifest which they
must expect, which have an exterior show in more recommendation then things
necessary. Finally, it were fit they should consider, that this curiosity in
habits sauoured of a woman, I mean that is not much chaste: where as the
charges in Arms and severity, restrain a good man, desiring to preserve
himself and his Country.

All the assistants found this Speech so good, in wondering at the advice of
this remonstrance, that after they were gone out of the Court, they pointed at
those that were richly clad, forcing some to leave the place: and finally, they
prepared themselves to Arms and to make War accordingly. Behold how one sole
Oration pronounced by a man of esteem and in season, not only retires men
from great vices, but also incites them to great Enterprises. But if he which
gives good advice, leads a life answerable to his words, it is necessary that
his council should purchase credit: the which happened in this man. He was
sober and simple in his apparel and living, and in the usage of his body.
Finally, he was of a pleasing speech without envy and rancour. He studied
wonderfully to be found veritable in all his life, and therefore when he used
any ordinary speech, the Auditors gave him great credit. And as his life served
for an example in all things, so the Auditors had no great need of any long
Discourse. Wherefore he has often in few words, by his credit and knowledge in
things, overthrown the long speeches which seemed to have been delivered
sufficiently by the Enemies. When the Council was ended, every man retired to
his Country: And in commending as well the man as his words, they had a
conceit that they could not do amiss under his government.

Finally, Philopemen went speedily to the Cities to make preparation for the
War. Then he trained up a multitude assembled: and when he had not employed
eight Months in the preparation of these forces, Phylopemen makes War
against Machanides, Tyrant of Lacedemon.
he leads his Army to Mantinea to fight with the Tyrant for the liberty of all
Morea. Machanides likewise taking courage, and thinking to prevail over the
Acheins at his pleasure, gives the Lacedaemonians to understand the things that
were then necessary, as soon as he was advertised of the assembly of the
Tegeans at Mantinia: Then suddenly the next day at Sunrising he takes his
way toward Mantinia, marching on the right wing with the Legionaries, and
placing the Mercenaries on the right and left, going a slow pace in the
beginning of his voyage: He adds moreover Chariots carrying a great abundance
of instruments of War and Cros-bowes.

At the same time Philopomen having divided his Army into three, he caused the
Sclauonians and Corslets to go forth by the Gate which tends to the Temple of
Neptune, The order of Philopomens Battle.
and withal the strangers and strong men: then by that which looks to the
West, the Legionaries: and the Horsemen of the City by the next. Moreover, he
seized (with the best of his adventurers) of a little Hill lying right against
the City, the which extends upon the way of strangers and the Temple of
Neptune. And joining the Corslets, he lodges them on the South, ordring the
Sclauonians in a place near unto them. Then casting the Legionaries behind
them in a round, he lodges them in the space near the Ditch which draws to
Neptunes Temple, by the midst of the Mantinians Plain, and ioynes upon the
Mountains near unto Elisfasiens. He orders moreover upon the right wing the
Acheian Horsemen, of which Aristonete of Dymce had the leading: and upon the he
had all the Strangers, having their distinct Ordonance amongst them.

When the Enemies Army approacht, he comes to the Legionaries, admonishing them
in few words, but with the efficacy of the present danger. But most part of his
words were not heard: for the multitude pressed the cause so much for the
affection they bare him, and the impetuosity of the people, that the Army as it
were moved with a certain divine fury, persuaded him to work without fear.
Finally, he endeavored (if time would have permitted him) to declare unto them
diligently, The order of Machanides Army.
how this present danger concerned some in regard of infamy and a base
servitude, and others in regard of liberty always memorable and glorious.
Moreover, Machanides instructs first the Battalion of the Legionaries which
they call Orthie, that it should fight with the right wing of the Enemies. Then
he marches, and after he had gained a mean space, makes the form of a
Snaile, and draws his Army in length, putting his right wing in Front to the
left of the Acheins. In regard of the Targetteers, he places them before the
whole Army with some space.

Philopomen seeing his attempt, who thought by the Targeteers to give a Charge
to the Legionary Bands which offended the Soldiers, and caused a great alarm
in the Army, so as he delayed no longer, making use in effect of the
Tarrentins at the beginning of the Combat near to Neptunes Temple, upon the
Plain which was commodious for Horsemen. Machanides seeing this, is forced to
do the like, and to cause the Tarrentins (which were with him) to march.
Finally, they fought valiantly in the beginning. But when those that were
lightly armed, prevailed something over them that were weaker, it fell out in a
short time that the Combat began of either side betwixt the foreign
Soldiers. And when as they had joined together, and had fought long like brave
men, the danger was equal, so as the rest of the Armies, expecting the issue
of the Battle, could not fight there, for that many times both the one and
the other in fighting, exceeded their first station. Yet the Tyrants soldiers
had for a time the better, considering their multitude and dexterity, with
their Arms and Experience. The which did not happen without cause. For as the
multitude in Comminalties, is more cheerful in Combats in War, then the
Subjects which are Enemies to Tyrants, so strange Soldiers taking pay of
Monarchs, excel those of Commonweals. And as some Subjects fight for
liberty, and some are in danger of servitude, some also of the Mercenaries
fight for a certain profit, others for the defense of their Lives. But a
popular power puts not her liberty into the hands of Mercenaries, after they
have defeated their Enemies: Whereas a Tyrant the greater Enterprise he makes,
the more soldiers he has need off. For as he does more outrages, so he has
more watchers over his life.

The safety then of Monarchs consists in the good affection, and forces of his
foreign Soldiers. The safety of Monarchs.
Wherefore then it happened that the foreign Soldiers fought with such great
Courage and Resolution, as the Sclauonians and Horacites being in front of them
could not endure their Charge: flying all as repulsed toward Mantinia, seven
Furlongs distant. Then that which some men held in doubt was made plain and
certain. It is manifest that many actions in War breed Experience of things,
so do they ignorance. It is a great matter for him that has purchased
Authority in the beginning, to extend it farther: But it is a far greater
matter to fix upon him whose first attempts have not been successful: and
to consider the indiscretion of the unfortunate, and to observe their faults.

You shall oftentimes see that they which seem to have the better, are within
a short space frustrated of all in general: And again, they which at the
first were beaten, have by their industry restored all: the which appeared then
betwixt these two Princes. For when the bands of Soldiers which the Acheins
had wauered, and that the left wing was broken, Machanides leaving his good
Fortune and the Victory of those of the Wing, and to assail the others in
Front, and finally to attend the Victory, he did nothing of all this, but
scattred with the Mercenaries, without order like a young man, he pursued the
Chase, as if fear had not been able to pursue those which fled unto the
Gates. The Chief of the Acheins employed all his power to stay the Mercenaries
with cries and persuasions, calling to the rest of their Commanders. But when
he saw them forcibly repulsed, he was not amazed if they turned head, or
despairing, abandoned the place, but he withdrew the Wing which charged and
pursued them. And when the place where the danger was, was abandoned, he sent
presently to the first Legionaries, that they should cover themselves with
their Targets; and in keeping order he went speedily before. Being come
suddenly to the place abandoned, he defeated the pursuers, having great
advantage upon the Enemies battailion. He likewise persuaded the Legionaries
to have a good Courage and resolution, and not to budge, until he gave them
order to march close in Battle against the Enemy. And as for Polybius the
Megalopolitaine, having gathered together the remainder of the Sclauonians
which had turned Head, with the armed men and the Strangers, he enioynes him to
have a great care to keep the Battallion in good order, and to look to those
which were retired from the Chase. The Lacedaemonians likewise resuming Courage
and strength, for that they were esteemed the most valiant, charged the Enemies
with their Iauelings without Command.

And as in this pursuit they were come unto the brinke of the Ditch, and had
no more time to return, for that they were in the Enemies hands, and that
finally they forsook and disdained the Ditch, for that it had many descents,
and was dry and without Trees, they ran into it without any discretion. As
this occasion offers it self against the Enemy, Phylopomen having foreseen
it long before, he then Commanded all the Legionaries to advance with their
Iauelings. And when as all the Acheins with one resolution had cast themselves
upon the Enemies with horrible cries, having formerly broken the battalion of
the Lacedaemonians, descending into the Ditch, they turn Head with great
Courage against the Enemy which held the higher ground. It is true, that a
great part was defeated as well by the Acheins as their own men. That which I
have spoken happens not by chance, but by the providence of the Commander, who
had suddenly made this Ditch. Philopomen fled not from the Battle as some
had conceived: But considering and aduising dilligently like a good Commander
of all things in particular, that if Machanides should lead his Army thither,
it would happen that by ignorance of the Ditch, he would fall into danger with
his Battalion, as it succeeded in Effect. And if considering the difficulty of
the Ditch, he should seem to fear and turn Head, he should then be
wonderfully frustrated of his Enterprise and Design, for that he should have
the Victory without fight, Machanides being defeated by a unfortunate
disaster. It had happened to many which had undertaken a Battle, that finding
themselves insufficient to join with the Enemy, some in regard of the
disadvantage of places, others for the multitude, and some for other causes,
and by this same means showing and expressing themselves in their flight to
be of little Experience, some hoping to be stronger upon the Rear, and others
that they might escape the Enemy safely. Among the which were these Commanders.

But Philopomen was not deceived in his foresight: by whose endeavor it
happened, that the Lacedaemonians made a speedy flight. And when he saw his
Legions to vanquish, he labored to bring that unto an end which remained of
an absolute Victory. Which was, that Machanides should not escape, and
therefore knowing him to be at the pursuit of the Chase, on that side of the
Ditch which lay toward the City with his Mercenaries, had not been retired
and with drawn, he attends his coming. But when as Machanides flying after
the Chase, saw his Army turn head, and hearing that all hope was lost for him,
he labored with his foreign Soldiers in turning head, to escape thorough the
Enemies dispersed, and scattred in their Chase. Whereunto they likewise having
regard, stayed with him in the beginning, feeding themselves with the same hope
of safety. But when as at their coming they saw the Acheins keep the Bridge
upon the Ditch, then all amazed they abandon him and fled, every man looking to
his own preservation. And when the Tyrant despaired of the passage of the
Bridge, he went directly to the Ditch, and endeauours to find a passage.

Philopomen knowing the Tyrant by his purple Robe, and the caparrisson of his
Horse, leaves Polybius there, and gives him charge to keep the passage
carefully, not sparing any of the Mercenaries, for that most commonly they
favor and support the Tyrant of Lacedemon. In regard of himself, he takes
Polyene, Cypariss^e, and Simie, of whom he then made use, marching against the
Tyrant and his Company on the other side of the Ditch. Machanides had at that
time two men with him, that is to say, Anaxidamus and a strange Soldier: When
he pressed his Horse to take a certain commodious passage of the Ditch,
Philopomen doubling upon him, gave him a mortal wound with a Iaueling, and
soon after another, Machanides slain.
killing the Tyrant valiantly. The like happened to Anaxidamus by the Horsemen
which marched with him. The third man despairing of the passage, Anaxidamus
slain.
escaped the danger by flight, whilst they slew the other two. After their
death Simies Company stripped them, and brought away the Head and Arms of the
Tyrant, to make his death known unto the Troops: whereby they might with more
diligence pursue the Enemies into their City: the which served much to move the
Commons. For by this means they reduced the City of Tegea under their
obedience: Tegea taken*
after which prize they camped near unto the River of Erota, after they had
made themselves Masters of the Champion Country. And as they could not chase
the Enemy out of their Country for a long time, they then wasted all the
Lacedemonian Provinces without fear, having lost few men in Battle, and the
Lacedaemonians above four thousand, besides many Prisoners, and the taking of
all their Baggage and Arms.

Of Hannibal and the Carthaginians.
ANd therefore who will not wonder at the government, The exellency of Hannibal.
virtue and power of this man, in his valiant exploits of War decided in Field,
having regard to the length of time, and knowing Hannibal as well in Battles
as encounters, as in sieges of Towns, alterations, and events of times, and in
the fullness of all the Enterprises and resolutions, according to the which he
has made War in Italy against the Romans for the space of seventeen years,
and having never broken up his Camp, but kept it still entire as under a good
Leader, and commanded so great a multitude either without mutiny toward him or
among themselves, although he did not employ in his Army men of one Nation, not
of one Race. Diverse Nations under the leading of Hannibal.
He had under his command Lybians, Spaniards, Phenicians, Italians, and
Grecians: among the which the Laws nor customs, nor the Language had any
thing common. But the industry of the Commander made this great multitude of
different Nations obedient to the Commandments of one man, according to his
desire: although the Events were not always answerable, but diverse: and that
many times Fortune smiled upon him, and was sometimes opposite. These things
considered, you may safely say (in wondering at the virtue of this Commander, in
that which concerns this point) that if he had first assailed the other
Countries of the World, and then the Romans, he would have prevailed in all
that he had attempted. But seeing at this day he has begun the War against
those which he should have assailed last, he has made both the beginning and
the ending.

Asdrubal having drawn together the Soldiers from those places where they had
wintred, prepares for his voyage, and camps near unto a City called Elinge,
Asdrubal camps near to Elinge.
building a Pallisadoe on the side of the Mountain, with plain spaces before,
fit for skirmishes and encounters. He had three score and ten thousand Foot,
four thousand Horse, and two and thirty Elephants. Publius Scipio on the other
side sends Marcus Iunius to Lochis to receive the Bands which he had leiued:
Publius Scipio draws his Army together.
being three thousand Foot and five hundred Horse. In regard of the other
Allies, he accompanies them, taking his way to the place appointed.

When he was come to Catalongne, and to the places which were about Becyle,
and had joined his Army with Marcus, and with the Troops of Colichante, he
fell into a great perplexity for the apparent dangers. For in truth he had not
a sufficient Roman Army without the forces of the Allies to hazard a Battle.
It seemed an unsafe thing, foolish, and rash for those which put their hope in
the forces of their Allies to hazard a Battle. But as he was for a time in
suspense, and that the affairs concluded that he must use the Allies, he came
to fight with the Spaniards: to the end that by this means he might make the
Enemy imagine that he fought with his whole Army.

This being resolved, he marches with all his Troops, being forty five thousand
Foot, and about three thousand Horse. And when he was near the Carthaginians,
so as he might well be discovered, he camps about certain little Hills right
against the Enemy. Asdrubal charge the Romans.
Asdrubal thinking to have found a fit time to charge the Romans in Camping, he
fell upon their Camp with the greatest part of his Horsemen, and Massanissa
with the Numades, having a conceit to surprise Scipio suddenly. But he having
formerly foreseen the future, he laid an Ambush of Horsemen behind a
certain Hill, A sudden charge of the Romans against the Carthaginians.
equal in number to those of the Carthaginians: who charging by surprise, many
in the beginning turning head, in regard of this unexpected Charge of the
Romans, fell from their Horses, others affronting the Enemies fought valiantly.
But for the dexterity of the Roman Horsemen in fighting, the Carthaginians
being troubled and discontented, after some little resistance gave back,
retiring in the beginning in good order: But when the Romans pursued them, they
took their flight under the Camp. This done, the Romans assure themselves the
more to undergo the danger: and the Carthaginians did the contrary. The days
following they draw their Armies into the Plain which lay betwixt them, and
making skirmishes as well of Horsemen, as of their most valiant Foot, and
trying one another they resolved to Battle.

It seemed then that Scipio had practiced a double stratagem. For when he saw
Asdrubal slow in ordring of his forces, and to put the Lybians in the midst,
and the Elephants upon the two wings: Then as he was accustomed to observe the
opportunity of the time, The double policy of Scipio.
and to make head against the Lybians by Romans, and to mingle the Spaniards
upon the wings, on the day which he resolved to fight, he does now the
contrary, giving by this means great comfort to his forces for the Victory,
and weakening the Enemy. Presently at the Sunne-rising he gives all the
Soldiers notice by men appointed, that all they which were to fight armed,
should stand before the Pallisadoe. This done, when they had obeyed him
cheerfully, for the hope they had conceived for the future, he sends the
Horsemen before, and the ablest Soldiers, giving them charge to approach the
Enemies Camp, and that in skirmishing courageously they should begin the
Battle. For his part, he marches at Sunrising with the Footmen. And being
come into the midst of the field, he drew his Army in Battle after another
form then he had bin accustomed. Scipio puts his men in battle
For he put the Spaniards in the midst, and the Romans upon the wings. When as
the Horsemen approacht the Pallisadoe, and that the rest of the Army was in
sight and ready, the Carthaginians had scarce time to arm.

Asdrubal being then forced to draw the valiantest of his men to field against
the Romans, Asdrubal puts his men in Battle.
being yet fasting without preparation and in haste both the Footmen and
Horsemen: and to plant his Army of Footmen not far from the Mountains, and
the Ordonance in the Plain as they had been accustomed. The Romans stayed
some time: but for that the day was well advanced, and that the Combat of
either side was uncertain and equal, and that there was danger that they
which should be pressed, turning head, would retire upon their Battalions, then
Scipio retiring the Skirmishers by the space betwixt the Ensigns, he diuides
them upon the wings after those which had been formerly appointed. Then he
gives order to assail the Enemy in Front, first to the Iauelings, and then
with Horsemen: and being a Furlong from the Enemy, he commands the Spaniards
which were in Battle, to march in the same order, and that they should turn
the Ensigns upon the right hand, and they of the left doing the contrary. And
when he began on the right side, Lacius Marcus and Marcus Iunius led three
brave Troops of Horsemen on the left hand, and before were those which were
lightly armed and accustomed to the War, with three Bands of Footmen (the
Romans call a Band of Footmen a Cohort) to whom the Targetteers joined on the
one side, and the Archers on the other.

In this sort they marched against the Enemy, making by this means an attempt
with effect, considering the continual repair of those which joined with them
by files. As by chance these men were not far from the Enemy, and that the
Spaniards which were on the wing were farther off, as they which matched a slow
pace, they make an attempt upon the two Battalions of the Enemy, drawn in
length with the Roman forces, according to that which had been resolved in the
beginning. The following alterations (by the means whereof it happened that
they which followed, joined with the former, encountering the Enemies in a
direct line, had betwixt them diverse orders) so as the right Battalion had on
the left side the Footmen mingled with the Horse. For the Horsemen which were
on the right wing, mingling with the Iauelings of the Foot lightly armed,
labored to enclose the Enemies. The Footmen on the other side covered
themselves with their Targets. They which on the left hand were in the Troops
charged with their Iauelings, and the Hors-men accompanied with the Archers
with their full speed. By this motion there was a left wing made of the right
wing of the Horsemen, and of the most valiant Soldiers of the two Battalions:
But the Commander made no great account, being more careful to vanquish the
enemy with the other Battalion: wherein he had good judgment. We must know
things as they are done, and use a fit observation according to the occasion
offered.

By the charge of these men the Elephants assailed by the Archers, A disorder
by the Elephants.
and the Horsemen with Darts and Iauelings, and tormented of all sides were
wounded, making as great a spoil of their Friends as of their Enemies. For
they ran up and down and ouer-threw men of all sides, breaking the
Carthaginian Battalions. In regard of that of the Lybians which held the middle
part, and was of great service, it stood idle unto the end. For not able to
succor those which on the wings abandoned the place, by reason of the
Spaniards charge: nor remaining in their station, do that which necessity
required: for that the Enemies which they had in Front, did not give them
Battle.

It is true that the wings fought for a time valiantly: Considering that all
was in danger. And as the hear was vehement, the Carthaginians brake, seeing
that the end of the Combat succeeded not according to their desire, and that
their chiefest preparation was hindered: The Romans on the other side had the
advantage both in force and courage: and in that principally, that by the
providence of the General the best furnished among the Carthaginians were made
unprofitable. Wherefore Asdrubal being thus pressed, retired in the beginning
with a slow pace from the Battle: Then turning in Troop, he recovered the
neighbor Mountains. And when as the Romans pursued them near, they posted to
their Pallisadoe. If some God had not preserved them, they had suddenly lost
their Fort. But for that the disposition of the Air changed, and the rain
fell continually with violence, the Romans could hardly recover their Fort.

And although that Publius Scipio had sufficient experience of the War, A
defect in the Text.
yet he never fell into so great a doubt and perplexity, the which happened not
without reason. For as we may foresee and prevent exterior causes and
discommodities of the Body, A good Comparison.
as cold, heat, labor, and wounds, before they happen: and cure them when
they come: being on the other side difficult to foresee those which proceed
from the Body, and are hardly cureable when they happen: we must judge the same
of policies and Armies. It is true, there is a speedy means and help to
prevent the Wars and Ambushes of Strangers when they are contrived: But
against those which the Enemy does practice in the State, as seditions and
mutinies, the Physic is difficult, and requires a great dexterity and
singular industry in the government of affairs. But in my opinion one advice
is necessary for all Armies, Cities, and bodies politic: which is, that in
that which concerns the things above mentioned, they never suffer too much
sloth and idleness: especially in time of prosperity, and the abundance of all
things necessary.

Scipio as a man of excellent diligence, The wisdom of Scipio.
and consequently industrious and active to manage great affairs, propounded
a certain course to decide the present combustions, after he had assembled the
Captains of thousands. He gave order that they should promise unto the
Soldiers the restitution of the victuals and taxes: and to give credit to his
promise, they should levy the ordinary taxes ordained in Cities diligently and
openly for the relief of the whole Army, to the end it might be apparent that
this preparation was made for the institution of their Victuals. And that
moreover, the Milleniers should command the Commissaries of the Victuals, and
admonish them to have a care, and to take charge of the Victuals: and that
conferring among themselves, they should make known, if part of them or
altogether would undertake it. He said, that they must consider of that which
was to be done. The others thinking of the same things, had a care of the
Treasure. And when as the Milleniers had made known the things which had been
ordained, Scipio being advertised, imparted unto the Council that which was to
be done. They concluded that they should resolve on the day when they were to
appear: So as the people should be sent back, and the Authors severely
punished: who were to the number of five and thirty.

And when the Day was come, and the Rebels there present, as well to obtain
pardon, as for their Victuals, Scipio secretly commands the Captains
Milleniers, that they should go and meet with the Rebels, and in choosing
five of the chief of the Mutiny (every man carrying himself courteously at
their encounter) they should bring them to his Pauillion: if this could not be
done, yet at the least they should convey them to the Banquet, and to this kind
of assembly. And as for the Army which was with him, he gave them notice three
days before, to make provision of Victuals for a long time: as if Marcus
should go to Andobale to fight: whereof the Rebels being aduertized, they were
the more assured. They expected to enjoy a great power, if (the rest of the
Army being separated) they were admitted about a Commander, when they approacht
near the City, he commands the other Soldiers, that being prepared the day
following, they should come forth at the break of day. In regard of the
Milleniers and Captains, he gives them charge that after their coming forth
of the City, they should stay the Soldiers in Arms at the Gate, having first
lodged the Baggage: and that afterward they should divide themselves by the
Gates, and have a care that none of the Rebels should escape. They which were
appointed to receive them, joining to those which came unto them, entertained
the offenders courteously according unto that which had been enjoined them.
Their charge was to seize upon these men, at such time as they should be set at
the Banquet, and to keep them bound: So as not any of the Company being within
should go forth, but only he that should aduertize the Commander what had
been done, Wherefore when the Milleniers had performed their Charge, the
General seeing in the Morning following those to be assembled in the place
which were arrived, he causes an Assembly to be called. Publius Scipio
assembles his Army.
When the advertisement was given, they all came running as of custom, whether
it were with a desire to see the Commander, or to hear those things which were
to be spoken of the present affairs. Scipio sends to the Milleniers which were
at the Gates, and commands them to bring the Soldiers that were armed, and to
enuiron the whole assembly: Then marching forth, he amazeth them all at the
first sight. A great number in truth thought that he was not well disposed: But
when contrary unto their opinions they found him sound and safe, they were
amazed at his presence. Finally, he used this Speech unto them, saying, that
he wondered for what cause some of them were offended, or under what color
they were moved to attempt a Rebellion.

There are three causes for the which men presume to fall into a mutiny against
their Princes and Country: Which are, Three causes of the peoples mutiny
against Princes.
when as they blame their Governor, and endure them unwillingly; or when they
are offended with the present Government; or upon a conception in their
opinions of a greater and better hope. I demand of you, says he, which of
these three has moved you. Are you angry with me that I have not delivered
you Victuals? It is not my fault. For you have not wanted any Victuals under
my Leading. It is the error of the Romans which have not yielded that unto you
now, which has been formerly due unto you? Should you then accuse your
Country, so as you should Rebel and become its Enemy, then being present to
speak unto me, and to entreat your friends to assist you? The which in my
opinion had been much better. It is true, a pardon may be given unto
Mercenaries, if they abandon those from whom they receive pay: But it is not
fit to pardon such as carry Arms for themselves, their Wives, and their
Children. For it is even like as a man should come unto his Father, and charge
him that he had villanously cozened him in matters of money, and kill him from
whom he holds his life. Have I oppressed you more with toiles and dangers then
the rest, giving them more Commodities and profits then unto you? In truth
you dare not speak it, neither can you convince me although you durst attempt
it.

I cannot conjecture the cause for the which being incensed against me, you
have attempted this Rebellion. I would understand the occasion from your
selves. I think there is not any man among you that can allege or pretend any
thing. You cannot, in truth, be sad for the present. When was there ever
greater abundance of all things, nor more prerogatives of the City of Rome?
When was there ever greater hope for Soldiers then there is at this day?
Peradventure some one of these desperate men will think that at this day the
profits are greater in show, and the Hope better and more firm with the Enemy.
Which are they? Is it Andobale and Mandonin? Which of you does not know that as
they first falsified their Faith with the Carthaginians coming to us? And that
now again they declared themselves our Enemies, inviolating their oath and
Faith? Were it not an honest and commendable thing, that in giving them your
Faith, you should become Enemies to your own Country? And yet you have no hope
in them to enjoy Spain. You were not sufficient being joined to Andobale to
fight with us, neither yet alone. Whereto then did you aym^?

I would know it from your selves, if you have put your confidence in the
Experience and Virtue of the Captains which now are appointed you, or in the
Rods and Maces which march before them, whereof of there is no honesty to use
any longer Discourse. But in truth there is nothing of all this; neither can
you invent any thing against me nor your Country. Wherefore I will answer for
Rome and my self, propounding those things which seem reasonable to all men,
which is this, the People and all the Commons are such as such as they are
easily deceived and moved to any thing. The inconstancy of the people.
Wherefore it happens to them as to the Sea. For as the Sea of it self is
without offense, and safe to those which make use of it: And if it be tormented
with the violence of the Winds, it is such unto Sailors as are the Winds
wherewith it is beaten: The Commons in like manner are made like unto those
which govern them, which are their Commanders and Counselors. And therefore
now I suffer all your Leaders unpunished, promising that hereafter I will quit
all revenge: But as for those which have been the Authors of the Rebellion, I
bear them an implacable hatred: for this cause we will punish them
conveniently for the crimes which they have committed against their Country
and us.

And when he had used this Speech, the Soldiers that were in Arms and round
about, made a great noise with their Swords in the Proches, and presently the
Authors of the mutiny were brought in naked and bound. Finally, the multitude
grew into a great amazement for the horror of the Executions which were done in
their sight: A punishment of the Mutines.
so as when as some were whipped, and others executed, they moved not an eye, nor
any man spoke a word, remaining all amazed and terrified by these accidents.
The Authors of these mischiefs being whipped and slain, and drawn through the
midst of them: the rest were assured in common by the Commander and Princes,
that no man hereafter should be punished by any man for the remembrance of this
fact. Wherefore they came all to the Milleniers, and swear absolutely to obey
the Commandments of the Princes, and not to consent to any thing against the
City of Rome.

When as Scipio had corrected the Mischief newly grown, Scipio's Speech to
his Army.
he settles his Army in its former estate. Then suddenly drawing it together
within Carthage, he made his complaints of the rashness and wickedness of
Andobale toward them: and after he had made a long speech of his disloyalty,
he incensed the hearts of many against the said Potentate. Finally, he put them
in mind of their encounters against the Spaniards and Carthaginians, whilst
they were under the Carthaginian Commanders: Of whom (as they had been always
victorious) there was no cause he said, to be in doubt or fear, but that
coming again to fight with the Spaniards under Andobale, they would be
defeated. Wherefore he said he would make no more use of the Spaniards to
fight, and that he would undergo the danger with the Romans alone: to the end
it may be manifest to all the world, that we have not chased the Carthaginians
out of Spain with the help of Spaniards: but by a Roman virtue, and that by
our own dexterity we have vanquished them with the Celtiberians.

This Speech being ended, he persuaded them to live in Concord, and that they
would undertake this present danger, if ever they undertook any with great
assurance. In regard of the means of the victory, he assures them that with
the help of the Gods he will take order. The Commons conceived so great a
courage and confidence, as all of them carried a countenance like unto those
which behold their Enemies, and prepare to fight. His words being ended, he
sent back the assembly. The next day he raises his Camp and marches: and
being come on the tenth day to a River, he passes it four days after: Scipio
lays a bait for the Enemy.
then he plants himself before the Enemies, having recovered a certain Plain
betwixt his Camp and theirs. The day following he sent forth toward the Enemy
upon the Plain, some Cattle which followed the Army: and commands Caius to
keep certain Horsemen in a readiness, and to the Chief of the Milleniers,
to prepare Archers and Slingers.

When the Spaniards had fallen suddenly upon the Cattle, he sent certain
Soldiers that were Archers. The Combat beginning, and the Soldiers running
unto it on either side in good numbers, there grew a great Skirmish of Footmen
near unto the Plain. When a fit occasion was offered to assail the Enemy, and
that Caius had his Horsemen ready as he had commanded him, he charge the
Footmen, and repulseth them from the Plain, to the places near unto the
Mountains, to the end they might be scattred, and slain in great numbers.
When this happened, the Barbarians were moved, fearing that being vanquished in
skirmish before they came to the Battle, The Spaniards put themselves in
Battle.
they should seem to have fainted, wherefore at the Sunrising they drew their
Army in good order to Field, preparing for the Battle. Publius Scipio was
ready to give it: But when he saw the Spaniards descend without reason into
the Plain, and not only to put their Hors-men in order, but also their Foot,
he stayed, to the end that a greater number might assemble in this order of
Battle, having confidence in his Cauallery, and much more in his Footmen,
for that they should come to an equal Combat, and fight hand to hand: and that
the Arms and men which he had, were more excellent then the Spaniards. But for
that it seems necessity pressed him, he directed his Army against those which
were in Battle against the Mountain: The order of Scipio's Battle*
drawing four Cohorts out of the Camp toward those that were descended into
the Plain.

Finally, Caius Lelyus led his Horsemen against the Enemy, by the Hills which
come from the Camp unto the Plain, and charge the Spaniards Horse in the
Rear, and in fighting stays them, to the end they should not succor their
Foot. The Enemies Foot being destitute of the help of their Cauallery, in whom
having put their trust, they had descended into the Plain, were forced and
annoyed in the Combat; the which likewise happened to the Horsemen. For when
as (enclosed in the straight) they could not fight at ease, their defeat was
greater then that of the Enemy: for that their Footmen were on the side, and
their Enemies in Front, and their Horsemen were charged in the Rear. The
Combat being after this manner, they which descended were in a manner all
defeated: They which were joining unto the Mountain fled. They were the most
valiant and the third part of the Army: with whom Andobale escaped, recovering
a certain Fort. Scipio having ended the Wars of Spain, drew to Tarracona,
to carry a great triumph of joy, A defeat of the Spaniards.
and a glorious Victory to his Country. Desiring them to be present at the
Creation of Consuls, he sails to Rome being accompanied by Caius, delivering
the Army to Iunius and Marcus, having given order for all the affairs of
Spain.

Of King Antiochus.
IT was in truth Ewthydemes Magnes to whom he answered, saying that Antiochus
labored to chase him out of his Kingdom unjustly: and that he had not
rebelled, to the end he might enjoy the Principality of the Bactrians. And when
he had used a long speech tending to that end, he entreated Teleus that by his
means he might obtain a truce, and that he would inform Antiochus, that he
did not envy his royal Name: For that if he did not yield to his accords,
neither of them should live in safety. For there was a great descent of
Tartariens, which would be dangerous to either of them: and if they entered the
Region, it would undoubtedly be reduced under the subjection of Barbarians.
These words being ended, he sends Teleus to King Antiochus. When the King had
long ruminated to what end this business would tend, he heard the proposition
which was made by Teleus concerning a truce.

When Teleus was returned, going and coming often from the one to the other,
Euthydemes in the end sent his Son Demetrius to confirm the Accord. Whom
when the King had received graciously, and holding the Young man worthy to
reign, as well for his outward show as for his excellent dexterity of
Eloquence, he first promises to give him one of his Daughters, and to his
Father the Name of King: Finally, after he had past in writing the Pactions
and Accords sworn, he raises his Camp, and sends Victuals freely to his Army.

When he had received the Elephants which Euthydemes had sent, he passes
Mount Caucasus: and after that he came into India, he renewed the League with
Sophasine King of the Indies: where after he had received an hundred and fifty
Elephants, and had again given Victuals to all his Army, he marches with all
his forces. Moreover, he sends Androsthenes the Cyzecenien to receive Gaza,
which by the accord was delivered unto him by the King. And when he had past
Arachosia, and the River of Erymanthus, he arrived in Carmania by Dratigene:
where he wintred, for that Winter approached. This was the end of Antiochus
Voyage which he made by the high Countries, by the which he drew to his
obedience not only the Satrapes and Governors of the high Countries, but also
the Marritine Cities, and the Potentates inhabiting near unto Tauris: Finally,
he has assured his Reign, making by his confidence and good industry all his
Subjects amazed. For he seemed by this Voyage worthy to reign not only over
the Asiatiques, but also over the Europians.

A PARCEL OF the Twelfth Book of the History of POLYBIVS.
WHo will wholly commend the Excellency of this Region. In regard of Tymeus,
thou may with reason term him ignorant, not only of things concerning
Lybia: but also a Child and without understanding, and also subject to a
foolish ancient report, according to the which we have heard that Lybia is all
sandy, dry, and deserts. The like they said of Creatures: And yet it has so
great abundance of Horses, Sheep, and Goats, as I know not where we may find
the like in the World: For that many people of Lybia make no use of the fruits
which proceed from the hands of man, but live with Mares Milk. The manner of
the Lybians living.
Moreover who does not know the multitude and force of Elephants, Lions, and
Panthers, and consequently the beauty of Bugles or wild Oxen, and the
greatness of Ostridges? whereof there are none in Europe, and yet Lybia is
full of such things: whereof Tymeus being wholly ignorant, he delivers as it
were of purpose things contrary to truth.

As he has lied in matters concerning Lybia, so has he done the like of the
Island of Cyrnon. Whereof making mention in his Second Book, The Island of
Cyruon not well known by Tymeus.
he says, that it abounds in Goats, Sheep, and wild Oxen, and moreover in
Stage, Hares, and Wolves, with some other Beasts: and that the men are much
given to Venery, and spend their whole lives therein. When as in the said Island
there is neither wild Goat, Ox, Hare, Wolf, nor Stagge, nor any such kind
of Beast: Except Foxes, Conies, and wild Geese. It is true, that a Coney seen
a far off, seems like unto a Leueret: But when they hold it, it differs
much, as well in sight as in taste. It breeds and lives most commonly in the
ground. For this cause all the Beasts of this Island seem wild, for that the
Keepers cannot follow them, in regard this Island is woody, hilly, and steep:
But when they will draw them together, staying in commodious places, they call
them by a Trumpet, and every one runs to his own. Finally, if sometimes they
which come into the Island, see Goats or Oxen feeding alone, and seek to take
them, they will not come at them, but fly from them as strangers: and when the
Keepers discovering those which come from the ships, sounds his Trumpe, they
make haste and run unto him: which put ignorant men in conceit, that the
Beasts of this Island are wild, whereof Tymeus has made dreams, writing
impertinently*

It is no great wonder, that they obey the sound of the Trumpe. For they which
breed Swine in Italy, have no Hogheards which follow them after the manner of
Greece: The manner of breeding Swine in Italy.
but going before them a little space, they sound their Trumpes, and the Swine
follow them behind, running after the sound. These Beasts are so accustomed
every one to his Trumpe, as it is a wonder and in a manner incredible to those
that shall hear speak of it. For it happens that for the abundance of Swine,
and other things necessary, the troops are in such great numbers in It^ly:
especially in the ancient and among the Tyrrbeins and Gauls: so as of one
breeding there are sometimes above a thousand. Wherefore they send them
generally according to the age by troops in the Night: So as many being sent
together, they cannot keep them according to their kind, and they mingle as
well going and passing, as in their return.

For this cause they have invented the sound of the Trumpe, to the end that
when the Swine mingle, they may separate them without difficulty. When as the
Hogheards march one way, and the other another, in sounding the Trumpe, the
Swine part of themselves* every one following his own Trumpe with such great
heat, as it is impossible to stay them, or to hinder their course. But when in
Greece they mingle, hunting and running after Fruits, he that has the
greatest number and retires soonest, carries with his own the next, and
sometimes steals them, he that has the charge not knowing how he has lost
them: for that the Swine stray far from their Hogheards whilst they run
greedily after the Fruits of Trees, when as they begin newly to fall. But we
have spoken sufficiently.

It has often been my chance to go to the City of the Locrines, and to
deliver them that which was necessary. The City of the Locrines.
I have made them free from the War of Spain and Dolmacia: to the which by
accord they were subject by Sea to the Romans. Wherefore they have done us all
honor and courtesy, in acknowledging to be freed from this trouble, danger,
and charge. Wherefore I am more bound to praise the Locrines, then to do the
contrary. Finally, I have not omitted to deliver and write the History of the
Collony, which has given us to understand, that Aristotle is more veritable
then that which Tymeus reports. The Collony of the Locrines according unto
Aristotle.
I am of their opinion which maintain the renown of this Collony to be
ancient according to the saying of Aristotle, and not of Tymeus: for the which
they produce these arguments: First that all things which have been famous
among them for their Predecessors, are come from women and not from men: so as
(by way of example) they are held amongst them for noble, which have taken
their name from a hundred Families. These are the Families which the Locrines
made choice of, before they went to make a Collony: whereby it might happen,
that by Oracles they cast Lots upon the Virgins to send them to Troy: Whereof
some went in Collony, and their posterity was to be held Noble, and termed of
the hundred Families.

Again, for that which concerns him whom they call Philephore, they have made
this report: That when as they chased the Sicilians, who then inhabited that
part of Italy, the Nobles and Chief men then honored the Sacrifices, and
took many of the customs of the Country: so as they hold nothing of their
Paternall, in observing that from them: and in correcting they have ordained
that they should not make any of their Sons Philephore, but only a Virgin,
in regard of the Nobility which came from Women. There was not, neither is it
said, that their has been any pactions or accords made betwixt the Locrines
and the Grecians. In regard of the Sicilians, they had all that we have made
mention of. They say, that when they came first into Sicily, they which then
held that Region where they now dwell, being amazed and receiving them with
fear, made an accord with them: which was, that they should maintain
Friendship, and enjoy the Country in common as long as they should tread upon
the Earth, and carry a head upon their shoulders. And when this kind of Oath
was made, they say, that the Locrines did put earth into their shoes, and
secretly hid the heads of Garlic: and having thus sworn, and finally cast
the Earth out of their shoes, and likewise the heads of Garlic, soon after
they chaste away the Sicilians out of the Country. This the Locrines did say.

As a Rule although it has less length and breadth, A defect in the Text.
yet it retains still the Name, if it has that which is proper to a Rule: So
they say, if it be not straight and having the property of a Rule, it must
rather be called by some other name then a Rule: In like manner they hold that
if the Commentaries of Historiographers which failing either in Diction or use,
or in any other of the parts which are proper unto them, observe the truth,
they deserve the name of a History: But if that fails, they are no more worthy
of that name. For my part, I confess, that such Commentaries are to be held
for true: and I am of this opinion in every part of our Work, when I say, that
even as when the Bones are separated from a living Creature, it is made
vn-vsefull, so is a History: For if thou take away the truth, the rest will
be but a vain Narration. We have said, that there were two kinds of lies, the
one through ignorance, Two kinds of untruth.
the other which is delivered wittingly. The pardon is easy for those which
through ignorance stray from the truth, and they are to be hated deadly which
lie willingly. As men of judgment resolving to revenge their enemies, do not
first observe what their Neighbor deserves, but rather what they must do: the
like we must think concerning dotracters, not caring for that which the
Enemies ought to hear, but to observe carefully what it is fit to speak. They
which measure all things according to their choler and envy, must of necessity
fail in all, and stray from reason, when they speak otherwise then is
fitting. Wherefore we do not seem unjustly to reprove the speeches which
Tymeus has held against Demochares. In truth, he neither deserves pardon nor
credit with any man, Tymeus reprehensible.
for that in wronging him openly, he straies from reason, in regard of his
natural bitterness. Neither do the injuries against Agathocles please me,
although he were the most cruel man living. I speak of those whereof he
makes mention in the end of his History, Agathocles cruel.
saying, that Agathocles had been a public Sodomite in his younger years,
and abandoned to all infamous and vild persons: and so to other foul villainies
which he adds.

Moreover, he says, that after his death his Wife lamented him in this
manner: Why have not I thee, nor thou me? In regard of the speeches which he
has held of Demochares, some will not only cry out, but wonder with reason at
his excessive Rage. That Agathocles had necessarily by Nature a great
prerogative, it is manifest by the Discourse which Tymeus has held. He came
to Sarragosse, flying the Wheel, Smoke, and Clay, being eighteen years old:
And when he was come for this cause, sometime after he was Lord of all Sicily:
He also drew the Carthaginians into great extremities, and ended his life with
the Name of a King, after that he had grown old in this government. It is not
then necessary to say, that there had some things happened to Agathocles which
were great and excellent, and that he had had great power, and great forces to
execute all these things: And that a Historiographer must not only deliver
unto posterity those things which concern the blame, and show the accusation,
but also those which touch the praise of the man. This is the property of a
History. But this Child blinded with his own rancor, in his relation augments
through hatred his offenses, omitting wholly the virtues: being ignorant that it
is no less blame worthy then a lie in those which write the Histories of
Actions.

It happened says he, A parcel corrupted.
that as two young men contended for a Servant, that he was somewhat long with
a Friend: And when as the other two days before came out of the Country, in
the absence of the Master the Servant retired speedily into the house: and that
afterward the other knowing he came thither, seazing on him, brought him into
Question, saying, that the Master of the house ought to give Caution. For the
Law of Zaleucus was, Zaleucus the Lawgiver.
that he deserved a suite to whom he had made the retreat. And when as the
other said, that according to the same Law he had also made the retreat, for
that the Body was parted to come unto the Potentate: he says, that the Princes
were in doubt upon this business, and called Cosmopole, Cosmopole.
referring themselves to him in this cause. Who interpreted this Law, saying
that the retreat has always been to him who had the last, or for a time
possessed the thing debated without contradiction. But if any one spoild
another by force, and had retired it, and that subsequently he which first
enjoyed it, terms himself the master, this is no true possession. And when
as the Young man discontented at this sentence, said, that it was not the sense
of the Law, Cosmopole protested, and offered the Condition, if there were any
man that would speak any thing touching the sentence or sense of the Law
established by Laleuens. The which is such, that the Captains Milleniers being
there appointed with Halters to hang men, A severe sentence.
they consulted upon the sense of the Law: if any one drew the sentence of the
Law to a bad sense, he was strangled in the presence of the Milleniers. This
Speech being propounded by Cosmopole, the Young man answered, that the
Condition was unjust: for that Cosmopole had not above two or three years to
live, (for he was about fourscore and ten years old) and that he according
to reason had the greatest part of his life remaining. A wit^^nswer of a Young
man.
For which witty and pleasant Speech he escaped the severity of the judgment:
and the Princes judged according to the advice of Cosmopole.

We will make mention of a certain expedition of War, Of the Voyage of
Alexander against Darius Gal^sthenes
which has been very famous, and decided in a very short time: In the
relation whereof Galisthenes has ert'd in that which does most import: I
speak of that which Alexander made into Cilicia against Darius. In the which
he says that Alexander had past the streights, which they call the Ports of
Cilicia; and that Darius took his way by the Ports which they call Menides,
and drew with his Army toward Cilicia. And when he understood by the
Inhabitants, that Alexander took his course toward Syria, he followed him:
and when he approached unto the streights, he Camped near unto the River of
Pyre. Finally, that the compass of that place was not above fourteen
Furlongs from thence, and from the Sea unto the hilly Countries, and that the
said River falls into the Sea, traversing the said places: First by the sides
of the Mountain ending at the Plain, and then by the Field having his Banks
rough and not easy to come unto.

These things supposed, he said, that when as Alexander turning head, came
near unto Darius, his advice and that of his Princes was to order his Battle
within his Camp as he had formerly done, and to help himself with this
River as with a Rampire, for that it ran near unto his Camp. Finally, he
ordered his Horsemen upon the Sea-shoare, and upon their Rear the Mercenaries:
so as near unto the River they were joined in one, and the Targetteers were
placed in the Mountains. It is a difficult thing to consider how he ordered
these before the Battalion: The reprehension of Calisthenes.
seeing that the River past near unto the Camp, the multitude likewise being
so great. They were as Calisthenes says, thirty thousand Horse and as many
Mercenaries.

It is an easy thing to know what space will contain these. For they order
their Ranks according to the true use of eight in a great Troop of Horse,
every one requiring a space in Front, to the end they may turn easily. To
eight hundred of which a Furlong suffices, and ten to eight Thousand, and
four to three Thousand five hundred: So as this space of fourteen furlongs,
is filled with twelve Thousand Horse. If then he has ordered all this Troop of
Horse in Battle, it wants not much but being tripled, the order has been
made without any space betwixt. In what place then has he ordered the
multitude of Soldiers, but in the Rear of the Horsemen? But he will say no,
and that they fought with the Macedonians at their first coming. Of necessity
there must be an uniting made, seeing that the order of the Horsemen held the
moiety of the place toward the Sea, the other toward the Mountains being
kept by the Mercenaries. Hereby we may infer, how close the Horse men were
united, and what space there must be from the River unto the Camp. Then he
says, that when the Enemies approached, Darius being in the midst of his
Army, called unto him the Mercenaries and their Wing. But we may doubt how
this is spoken. For it is necessary that the Horsemen and Mercenaries should
be joined about the midst of this same place. When as Darius was in the
midst of his Mercenaries, how has he called them? Finally he says, that
the Horsemen of the right Wing fought with Alexander at his first coming: and
that he received them valliantly, and fought with them in front, and that the
Combat of either side was very furious.

In regard of that which was spoken by him that the River was in the midst
(as a little before we have delivered) he has forgotten himself. Finally, he
writes things of Alexander like unto these. He says that he past into Asia,
accompanied with forty Thousand foot, and four Thousand five hundred Horse.
And as he would have advanced, there came unto him out of Macedony other five
Thousand foot, and eight hundred Horse: And although that for the affairs of
his long absence, he had left three thousand foot, and three hundred Horse,
yet he had forty two thousand remaining. These things presupposed, he says
that Alexander was advertised of Darius descent into Sicilia, so he was not
above a hundred furlongs from him, and that he had already past the streights
of the Country, and for this cause turning head he repast them again, putting
the great Battalion in Front, then the Horsemen, and after all the rest of the
baggage of the Army.

And when he came afterward into the plain, that all the baggage being packt
up, he commanded that being mingled with the Battalion, they should make
their ranks, containing first about two and thirty in number, then of
sixteen, and of eight near the Enemy. These Speeches have less reason then
the former. For as the furlong contains in these spaces sixteen hundred men,
when a rank is of eighteen men, so as they be every one separated a Fathom,
it is manifest and does plainly appear that the ten will contain sixteen
Thousand men, and twenty double the number. The which may easily appear, for
that when as Alexander ordered his Army by sixeteene men in a rank, it was
very necessary that the place should be of twenty Furlongs, and yet all the
Cauallerie remained and ten thousand Foot. Finally, he says, that he led
his whole Army in Front against the Enemies, being yet forty Furlongs off. But
that is so strange, as we can hardly imagine any thing more insensible. Where
shall we find such spaces in the Champion Country even in Cilicia, that a
Battle set in order, holding twenty Furlongs in breadth, and forty in length,
may march in the Front? There are so many hindrances to order this form of
Battle, as they can hardly be numbered. Moreover, ^he sayings of Calisthenes
give no sufficient arguments to purchase credit. For he says, that the
Torrents which fall from the Mountains, make so many and such great Moors and
Fenns, as he assures us that a great number of Persians perished there in the
flight. But would Darius suddenly show himself against the Enemy? Is there
nothing more easy then a Battalion broken and scattred in Front? But how much
more easy is it to order a Battle in a convenient passage, then to lead an
Army directly to fight, being broken and scattred in woody and crooked places?
And therefore it were better to lead in Army close and united, and double
rather then Quadruple.

By this means it would not be impossible to find the means to pass, and to
put the Battle in order, and with ease, if he might by his Scouts discover
the coming of the Enemy. But Calisthenes besides the rest, orders not the
Horse men in Battle, when he led the Army in Field, being in Front, ordring
the Foote-men equally. It is also a strange thing when he says, that
Alexander being near the Enemy, comprehended the order of his Battalion of
eight for a Rank: So it is manifest that necessarily the length of this
Battalion contained the space of about forty Furlongs. But if they have been
(as the Poet said) close together, so as they have been joined one to another:
Yet it would be necessary, that the place should contain Twenty Furlongs. And
yet he says, there were but fourteen: and that in such sort, as one part was
toward the Sea, and a moiety of the Army upon the right hand: and that
moreover all the armed men had place sufficient on the side of the Mountains,
to the end they might not be suppressed by the Enemy holding the borders of the
Hills.

We know well that he makes a crooked order within: But we also leave out ten
thousand Foot, which exceeds the means which he has given: So as the length
of this Battalion according to Calisthenes, has want of above twelve Furlongs,
in the which it is necessary that thirty two thousand men, containing a
restraint of thirty in a Rank being joined, have been there comprehended. He
says, that this Battalion was ordered after the Rate of eight in a Rank. These
errors doubtless cannot be defended, for that which is impossible in it
self, is not worthy of credit. As often as we have respect unto the spaces
due unto every man, and to the length of all the place, and to the number of
men, the lie were no excusable. It were loss of time to repeat all his
fooleries.

He says, that Alexander thirsted after a Battle against Darius, and that
Darius was of the same opinion in the beginning, and afterward changed his
resolution. He does not show how they knew one another, nor what order they
observed in their Army, nor whether Darius, past: Neither finally, how the
Battalions came to the River side, seeing it was crooked and hight. Without
doubt we cannot believe that Alexander committed so gross an error: seeing
that from his Infancy he had gotten so great experience and practice in the
Art of War. An excuse of Alexander upon Calisthenes.
We must rather think that the Historiographer could not through ignorance
discern things possible from the impossible in these affairs. But we have
spoken sufficient at this time of Ephorus and Calisthenes.

First he is of Opinion, that they must advertise those of the Council, that
the Trumpets awakes sleepers during the War, and Birds in the time of Peace.
Finally, he says, that Hercules instituted the Olympicke Combats, and the
truce and abstinence from War: and that by this means he has showed a
sign of his will. In regard of those against whom he made War, he annoyed
them all through necessity, and for Command: but he was never willingly the
Author of any harm to man. He consequently brings in Inpiter angry with
Mars, and saying, Most sure thou owe to me the least good will
of all the Gods that haunt Olympus Hill:
Thou take no pleasure but to war and fight,
In brawles and quarrels is thy chief delight.


He Writes likewise, that the Wisest of the Divine Gods says thus, Bad
Citizens who will not when they may,
Stop civil strife: fall often to decay.


And that Euripides is of the same Opinion with this Poet, when he says,
Blessed Peace, the best of Goddesses that be,
Oh how much in my heart I honor thee.
If thou deny thy presence by delay,
I fear grim Death will snatch me hence away,
Haste then that I may futurely be blessed
With sports and renels that adorn a Feast.


He says moreover, that War is very like unto a Disease, and Peace to
Health. The War like unto a Disease.
The which does comfort and recreate the sick: whereas in the other the sound
perish. Finally, that old men are buried by young according to the order of
Nature: But in the War the contrary happens. And that it is strange thing,
that there is no

A PARCEL OF the Thirteenth Book of the History of POLYBIVS.
AS the desires of such as are troubled with the Dropsy are never satisfied,
not taken away by any exterior humor, if the interior disposition of the
Body be not cured: So the concupiscence to have much is never satisfied, if the
vice which lies in the heart be not by some reason corrected. There falls out
something like in the Desire of fraud, which no man living will confess to be
royal: although that some at this day hold it necessary to manage affairs by
deceit for to reign. The Acheins auolde it much. For they were estranged from
deceipts toward their Friends to advance their power, The Acheins free from
fraud
as they would not vanquish their Enemies: holding it neither noble nor firm,
if they did not vanquish by prowess and in open fight. Wherefore they ordained
among themselves, that no man should make use of hidden Arms, thinking that an
open Combat hand to hand was the true determining of War. Finally, they
declared themselves unto their Enemies, and and signified the War, when they
are once resolved to undergo the danger of a Battle; the like they did of
the places where they would decide it.

But at this day they say, he is no good Commander that executes any
enterprise of War openly. There is yet remaining in the Romans some Relics
of the ancient humor in such affairs. They signify it before, and they
seldom use any Ambushes, fighting readily hand to hand. Let these words be
spoken against the affection which is much more ready, then is needful, in
malicious practices, policies and ambushes among Princes, as well in affairs
of War as Policy.

Of Philip.
PHilip had instructed and commanded Heraclides to consider how he might annoy
and ruin the Rhodien ships, and had sent an Ambassador to the Candiots to
draw them and to incense them to make War against them. Heraclides malicious.
Heraclides was a man fit for malicious practices, thinking likewise that
Philips Commandment being accepted would be gainefull, soon after when he had
considered thereon, The vices of Heraclides.
he sailed against the Rhodiens. This Heraclides was borne at Tarentum, issued
from a Race of Artizans, but wonderfully given to villainies and malice. First
he prostituted his Body publickely in his younger years: and as he afterward
grew subtle, he had the charge of the Register, being to the poor severe and
audacious, and toward Great men a flattering Courtier. Yet he was chaste out
of his Country, as if he had sought secretly to deliver the City of Tarentum
to the Romans, when he had no power in the government: He was an Architect,
and by reason of some building of the Walls, he had in his hands the Keys of
a Gate which bends to the Mediterranian Coast. But when he was retired to the
Romans, and had again written to Tarentum to Hannibal, and had sent thither,
he fled to Philip being discovered, and foreseeing what would succeed: with
whom he had so much credit and authority, as he was in a manner the Author of
the subversion of a great Kingdom. The force of truth.
But the nature of the greatest of the Goddesses seems to show the truth unto
men, and to give them great forces: so as although she be opposed by all men,
and that sometimes all kind of persuasions accompanied with lies be armed
against her, yet she slips I know not how of her self into the fantasies of
men, so as sometimes she suddenly raises her forces: and sometimes after she
has been long hidden, she comes to light and discouers untruth.

When as Nabis Tyrant of the Lacedaemonians, Nabis Tyrant of the Lacedaemonians.
had three years enjoyed the Principality of Lacedemon, he had not attempted
any thing, neither durst he make trial: For that lately Machanides had been
slain by the Acheins: But he laid the first foundations of a long and
grievous tyranny. He utterly ruined some of the Lacedaemonians, banishing those
which were Noble or Rich, or had any honor from their Ancestors, giving their
substance and Wives to other Noble men, and to Mercenaries. Who were
Murderers, Thieves, Robbers, and breakers of houses. Finally, this kind of men
(to whom the Country was forbidden, in regard of their wickedness and
villainies) were by him carefully drawn together from all the parts of the
Earth, of whom he held himself Prince and King. He had Lanciers for the guarde
of his Body, by whom it plainly appeared that his wickedness and power would
be of long continuance. Besides the said things he was not satisfied with the
banishmens of Citizens, but moreover he left not any place safe for Fugitives,
not any certain refuge. He slew some upon the way, sending after them, and
killed others in their return. Finally, in Cities (where the Fugitives did
remain) he hired houses near unto them by men not suspected, sending Candiots
thither: who making holes in the Wall, slew them with Arrows, or at the
Windows, the Fugitives standing there, or else being at their Meare in their
houses: so as these miserable Lacedaemonians had no place of refuge, nor time
assured.

He has by this means ruined many. He dressed up an Engine, if it may be so
termed: It was the Image of a Woman richly attired, the form whereof was like
unto the Wife of Nabis, and very well painted. When he called any Citizens,
meaning to exact money from them, at their first entrance he used courteous and
mild speeches, speaking of the fear of the Acheins near unto the City and
Region: He likewise declared the multitude of Soldiers which he entertained
for their safety, and finally the charges he was at for the Gods, and the
public good of the City. If by this Speech he persuaded them, then he had
them ready at his devotion; but if any one refusing would not give care unto
him, he added these words: peradventure thou can not persuade thy self:
Apege the Wife of Nabis.
Yet I think this Apege (which was the Name of his Wife) will do it. After
this speech, the Image was presented: and when he rise out of his Chair, he
embraced it as his Wife, and approacht it near unto his bosom. This Image had
the Elbowes and Hands full of Nails under the garment, and likewise near the
Papps, and when he touched the back of the Image with his hand, he extended it
unto the breast, and led it by the handling of Instruments: and by this means
he forced the Image in a short time, to pronounce any kind of voice. Upon this
occasion he ruined many of those which refuse to obey him.

A PARCEL OF the Fourteenth Book of the History of POLYBIVS.
THe Consuls were careful of these affairs. Publius Scipio wintred in
Affricke, who being advertised that the Carthaginians prepared an Army to Sea,
Vtica besieged by Scipio.
he did the like, yet omitting nothing concerning the Siege of Bysarthe:
neither did he wholly despair of Sophax or Syphax, sending often unto him, for
that their Armies were not far distant, persuading himself that he might
retire him from the alliance of the Carthaginians. He despaired not but that
he was now glutted with Pedisca, for whose sake he held the Carthaginians
party: Pedisca the wife of Syphax,
and in like manner of the friendship which he had with the Phenicians, as well
for their natural discontent against the Numidians, as for their preuarication
both against God and Men. Whilst he ruminated of many things with a variable
hope for the future, for that he feared a danger by Strangers, knowing that
the Enemy increased much, he resolved in the end upon this occasion. Some of
those which he had sent to Syphax, related unto him, that the Carthaginians
besides their Winter-tents, had their Lodgings made of Wood and Leaves, and
among the Numidians, the Princes had them of Reeds, and they of the Cities
there assembled of Leaves: Some being of the Ditch and Pallisadoe, and others
without.

Scipio having a conceire, that if he assailed their Camp by fire, it would
be a surprise unexpected by the Enemy, and of great effect for him, inclined
unto it. In regard of Syphax, he intended by his Embassies which he sent unto
Scipio, to settle a Peace, so as the Carthaginians should leave Italy, and the
Romans Affricke: and that either of them should enjoy that which they held:
which things being formerly heard, he had not accepted: but at that time he
advertised the Numidian by an Embassy in few words, that the proposition made
by him was not impossible. So as Syphax having great hope, solicited a parley
often. This done, there were many and frequent Embassies.

It happened that sometimes they met without Guards, and Scipio always sent
men of great judgment with his Ambassadors: for whom he had prepared
Military habits, which were base, poor, and servile, to discover and view the
entries and issues of the two Camps. The Camp of Asdrubal of 30000. Foot and
3000. Horse.
There were in truth two: the one of Asdrubal, containing thirty thousand
Foot, and three thousand Horse: the other which was ten Furlongs off, was of
Numidians, having ten thousand Horse, and about fifty thousand Foot. These had
the approach more easy, The Camp of Syphax of 10000 Horse, and 50000. Foot.
and the Lodgings more fit to burn: for that the Numidians used no Timber nor
Earth, but only Reeds and Canes to make their Lodgings.

And for that the Spring was come, Scipio having inquired of all the
preparations of the Enemy, he causes his ships to flote, and puts Engines
into them as it were to besiege Bysarthe by Sea. Moreover, he seized upon a
Hill near unto the City with about two thousand Foot, to the end he might
put a conceit into the Enemy, that all this was done for the Siege: Yet in
truth he made this Guard, until he might have an opportunity to execute his
Enterprise, to the end that the Armies being out of their Camps, the Garrison
of the City should not dare to sally forth, nor assail the Pallisadoe being
near, nor besiege those which were there in the Guard.

This preparation being ready, he sent to Syphax, to demand of him if he
would conclude the Articles, and whether the Carthaginians did like of them:
and that he should propound nothing more concerning the accord, giving also
charge to the Ambassadors not to return without answer upon these
Differences. Being come unto the Numidian, their charge being heard, he
consented, for that Scipio was ready to conclude this Accord: and withal the
Ambassadors told him, that they would not depart before they carried back an
Answer from him.

But being in great fear and doubt that the Carthaginians would not give
consent, he sent with all speed unto Asdrubal, aduertising him of that which
was treated, with many persuasions to accept of the Peace. Syphax was negligent
and careless, and suffered the Numidians which he had drawn together, to
lodge without the Camp.

This Scipio did in show, but he was careful of the preparations. And when as
the Carthaginians had advertised Syphax to conclude the accord, rejoicing
thereat, he signified it presently to the Ambassadors: who being returned to
their Camp, acquainted Scipio with that which the King had done. These things
being heard, he presently sends back an Embassy to Syphax, to tell him, that
he liked well of the accord, and desired a peace: but the Senate and Council
were not of that Opinion, saying, that they would pursue their Enterprise. The
Embassy came to Syphax, and declared these things unto him. Scipio had sent
these Ambassadors, to the end he should not seem to have broken the accord,
if during a parley of Peace, he should attempt any Enterprise of an Enemy:
conceiving that having signified this unto the Enemy, whatsoever he should do
would be blameless. Syphax was much discontented with this news, considering
the hope he had of a Peace: He goes to Asdrubal, acquainting him with that
which the Romans had signified unto him: whereupon doubting, they consulted how
they should carry themselves, but they were far from knowing the resolution
and design of the future accidents. As for standing upon their guard, or to
believe that any disaster or misfortune were at their Gates, they had no
thought thereof.

It is true, their whole intent was to draw the Enemy into the Plain. Scipio
gave many presumptions by his preparation and summation, that he had some
Enterprise against Bysarthe, Finally, about Noone he sends for the Captains
Milleniers, whom he held for his loyal Friends, and acquaints them with his
intent, giving them charge, that an hour after Dinner they should put the Army
in Battle before the Pallisadoe, when as all the Trumpets according to
custom had given the Sign. A custom of the Romans during their repast.
The Romans have a custom, that during the repast, all the Trumpets and
Clairons sound before the Generals Tent: to the end that during that time they
should set watches in convenient places. When he had retired his Spies which
he had sent unto the Enemies Camp, he conferres and examines the Reports of
the Ambassadors, and considers of the approaches of the Camp, Massanissa.
making use therein of the advice and council of Massanissa for the knowledge
of the places. And when as all things were ready for the Execution, Scipio
draws to the Enemies Camp.
he marches with his Army directly toward the Enemy, the first Watch being
changed, leaving a sufficient number to guard the Camp. They were threescore
Furlongs off.

And when they were come unto them about the end of the third Watch, he
delivers half the Army to Caius Lelyus, with all the Numidians, giving them
charge to assail Syphax Camp, and persuading them to carry themselves like
brave men, and not to attempt any thing rashly, holding for certain that the
more their sight is hindered by darkness, the more courage and confidence they
should have to finish Nocturnall assaults. Finally, he assailes Asdrubal with
the rest of the Army. Yet his purpose and resolution was not to put it into
execution, before that Lelius had first set fire of the Enemies. Lelius
assailes Syphax his Camp by fire.
Being thus resolved, he marches a flow pace. Lelius on the other side
dividing his Army in two, assailes the Enemies suddenly. But as the lodgings
were built in such sort, as if they had of purpose been destinated for the
fire, where the first had cast the fire, and consumed all the first Tents, it
fell out so as they could not succor this Disaster: Both for that the lodgings
stood close together, and for the abundance of stuff wherewith they were
built. Lelius stood still in Battle: But Massanissa knowing the Country,
placed Soldiers upon the passages, by the which they which fled from the fire,
must retire. Not any of the Numidians understood that which was done, nor
Syphax himself, thinking this fire had been accidental. Wherefore they go
rashly out of their lodgings and Tents, some being yet asleep, and others
drinking: So as many were crushed in pieces by them at the sally of the
Pallisadoe, and and many were burnt: In regard of those which fled the flames,
they were all slain, falling into the Enemies hands, not knowing what should
befall them, nor what to do.

When at the same time the Carthaginians saw this great fire and high flames,
thinking the Numidians Pallisadoe was on fire, some went presently to help
them: all the rest ran out of the Camp without Arms, standing before their
Pallisadoe amazed, they expected what the end would be. Scipio sets Asdrubals
Camp on fire.
When as things succeeded according to Scipio's intent, he falls upon those
which were come out of the Camp, and pursuing others into it, he presently
sets fire on their lodgings. The like happened to the Phenicians, as well by
fire as by other miseries and misfortunes, where with the Numidans were
afflicted.

But when as Asdrubal had discovered by the event, that this fire of the
Numidians was not accidental, but by the policy and courage of the Enemy, he
ceased suddenly from giving Succors, making haste to save himself, for that
there was little hope remaining. The fire suddenly wasted and consumed all:
There were no more passages for Horses, Sumpters, and men, among the which some
were half dead, and burnt with the fire, others were terrified and amazed, so
as they which made preparation to defend themselves valiantly, were hindered,
neither was there any means of hope, by reason of the trouble and confusion.

The like happened to Syphax and to the other Commanders. But either of them
escaped with some few Horses: the rest of the Troops of Men, Horses, and
Sumpters, perished miserably by this fire. Some were ignominiously slain by
the Enemy after they had fled the violence of the fire, and defeated not only
without Arms, but naked and without apparel. Finally, all the place of these
Camps was full of howling, horrible cries, fear, and unusual noise: and
moreover with a violent flaming fire: Either of the which had been sufficient
to amaze and terrify humane Nature, and the rather for that these things
happened contrary unto all hope. Wherefore it is not possible for any man
living to imagine this accident, considering the greatness: for that it has
exceeded the policy of all precedent actions. And although that Scipio has
performed many deeds of prowess and valor, yet this seems to be the most
excellent and hardy of them all. At the break of day the Enemies being some
defeated, and others fled with amazement, he gave charge to the Commanders to
pursue the Chase.

The Chief of the Carthaginians budg'd not in the beginning, although he were
advertised by many: The which he did, relying upon the fortification of the
City. But when he saw the Mutiny of the Inhabitants among themselves, The
flight of Asdrubal.
he fled, accompanied with those which had escaped with him, fearing the
coming of Scipio. He had five hundred Horse, and about two thousand Foot.
The Inhabitants being agreed, yielded themselves to the Romans. Whom Scipio
pardoned, abandoning the spoil of two Neighbor Cities to the Soldiers. These
things being thus decided, he returned to his first Camp. The Carthaginians
were discontented, that the hope which they had conceived in the beginning, had
succeeded so contrary. They expected to have besieged the Romans (enclosed
within the Fort of Bysarthe, where they had wintred) as well by Sea as Land.
And when they had all their preparations ready, they were not only destitute
of their Camps, so inconsiderately delivered to their Enemies, but it seemed
they should all perish with their Country: For this cause they were amazed
with great fear and faintness of heart.

And when as the affairs pressed them to consider prudently of the future and
eminent danger, the Senate was full of doubt, and of diverse confused thoughts:
Some said, they must send to Hannibal, and call him out of Italy, The
Carthaginian Senate ho^^^ ^ Council.
for that all their hope consisted in that Commander, and the Army which he
had: Others were of advice they should send to Scipio to obtain a truce, and
to parley of an accord and agreement: some would have them to be of good
courage, and to levy an Army, and finally to send to Syphax. He was fled far
unto Abbe, drawing together those which escaped from the danger: which advice
was resolved. Wherefore they levy men, and send to Asdrubal to that end, and
likewise to Syphax, entreating him to give them Succors, and to observe the
conuentions according to their first purpose, promising him that their
Commander should presently join with his Army.

The Roman General follows the Siege of Bysarthe the which he did the
rather, for that he was advertised that Syphax continued in his first
resolution, Scipio attends the Siege of Bysarthe.
and that the Carthaginians levied a new Army. For this cause he raised his
Camp and besieged Bysarthe. When he had divided the spoil, he chased away
the Merchants upon good advice. For the Soldiers careless of the present
commodity of goods: for that the hope of profits which grew by their good
fortune was apparent, they had intelligence with the Merchants.

It seemed very fit to the King of Numidia and his Friends at the first sight,
that they should retire to their houses: But when the Celtiberians arrived
near unto Abbe, 4000. Celtiberians come to succor the Carthaginians.
who being entertained, were above four thousand men, the Carthaginians grew
assured, and by little and little recovered their spirits, relying upon these
Troops. Moreover, when as Pedisca the Daughter of Asdrubal, and Wife to
Syphax, (of whom we have spoken) entreated him with all affection that he would
not abandon the Carthaginians for the present: The Numidian yielded to her
entreaties. The Celtiberians put no small hope into the Carthaginians. For
although they were but four thousand, yet they said, they were ten thousand.
Finally, they promised to be insupportable in the fight, as well for their
courage as their Arms. The Carthaginians grown proud with this common brute,
were more confident to recover their Camps.

Finally, they set up their Pallisadoe within thirty days near unto the
Plain called the Great, and there they planted their Camp, accompanied with
the Numidians and Celtiberians, being in number thirty thousand men. When the
news came unto the Romans Camp, Scipio presently prepared to part. And when
he had sent to those which held the Siege before Bysarthe, and to the others
which were at Sea, informing them what they were to do, he marched toward the
Enemy, having all his Bands furnished with the most valiant men. Scipio draws
toward the Enemy.
Being come on the fifth Day to this great Plain, and approaching near the
Enemy, he camped the first Day upon a Hill, thirty Furlongs distant from them,
the Day following he descends into the Plain, sending the Horsemen before
within seven Furlongs, and there settles his Camp again.

After two Days expectance, when they had skirmished of either side to come to
a Battle, either of them in the end drew to Field, and put their men in
order. Scipio first of all places in Front his forlorn hope, The order of
Battle of the Romans Army.
according to their custom: After which he appoints the Principals, and in the
third place the Triarij in the Reareward. As for the Horsemen, he orders the
Italians on the right hand, and Massanissa with the Numidians on the left. The
order which Syphax and Asdrubal held.
Syphax and Asdrubal set the Celtiberians in the midst, against the Romans
Bands, the Numidians on the left hand, and the Carthaginians on the right.
Suddenly when the Combat began, The beginning of the Battle.
the Numidians were repulsed by the Roman Horsemen, and the Carthaginians (as
they had often before) losing courage, were overthrown by Massanissa's
Company. Yet the Celtiberians fought valiantly against the Romans: for they had
no hope of safety remaining for the ignorance of the places, neither yet if
they were taken, considering their unjust War. For seeing that Scipio during
the War of Spain, had not offended them, it seemed against reason, and a
disloyalty to give succors to the Carthaginians. But when the Wings began to
give back, they were in a manner all slain, being enclosed by the Principals
and the Triarij. Thus the Celtiberians perished, The defeat of the
Celtiberians.
who were a great help to the Carthaginians, not only in the fight, but also
in the flight, for if they had not entertained the Romans, and that the Chase
had been suddenly followed, few of the Enemies had escaped: but as their
resistance caused the stay, Syphax retired safely with his Horsemen into his
Country, and Asdrubal to Carthage, Syphax retires in safety.
with the rest which escaped. When as the Roman General had given order for
the spoils and Prisoners, The adulec of the Romans.
calling a Counsel, he consulted what there was to do. Whereupon it was
thought fit that Scipio should with part of the Army assail the Towns, and
Lelyus with Massinissa accompanied by the Numidians and part of the Roman Army
pursues Syphax, The pursuit of the Romans after Syphax.
and not give him leisure to make any new preparations. These things thus
resolved they separate themselves, and some go against Syphax with their
Soldiers, and the General against the Cities: whereof some yielded to the
Romans for fear, and others being forced by siege. At that time the whole
Region wauered and were ready to revolt, having been cruelly tormented and
vexed during the length of the Wars of Spain.

In regard of Carthage, as formerly there was great inconstancy, so now there
was greater trouble and combustion, for that having heard and seen this Wound
the second time, they grew desperate in themselves. It is true that they among
the Councillors which seemed to have greatest Courage, Diverse opinions of the
Carthaginians concerning their War.
commanded that they should sail against those which laid siege to Bysarthe,
and to make a trial if they might raise the siege, and to fight with the Enemy
at Sea, as being ill furnished. They required also that they should send for
Hannibal, and rely upon that hope: and that there was reasonable occasions of
safety by these two attempts. Some said, that the time would not allow it, and
that they must fortify and furnish the City for a siege: And that being of
one consent, the accident would minister occasions. Some also advise to make an
Accord and League, whereby they should free themselves of the eminent dangers.

As there were many opinions upon this business, they confirm them all
together. Wherefore this was their Resolution, they that were to sail into
Italy, parting from the Senate should go presently to Sea: The Pylots likewise
should prepare that which concerns the ships: And the rest for the safety of
the City, having a daily care for particular things. But when as the Roman
Army was inricht with booty, and that no man made any resistance, Scipio
resolves to send the greatest part of the booty to the first baggage: And
taking the ablest and most active Bands to seek to force the Enemies
pallisadoe, He therefore (having a good courage) seated his Camp in view of
the Carthaginians. He had a conceit that by this means he should amaze and
terrify them.

The Carthaginians having in few days given order for all the Equipage,
Victuals, and munition of their Ships, they meant to weigh Anchor, and to
execute their Resolution. Tunie taken by Scipio.
Scipio came to Tunis: and although that they which had fled thither kept the
approaches, yet he took it. Tunis is distant from Carthage six score
Furlongs, and is to be seen in a manner by all the City: Moreover it is
strong as well by Nature as by Art: The Carthaginians embarked, and came to
Bys^rthe.

Scipio seeing the Enemies Army at Sea, was troubled, fearing least his should
fall into some inconnenience, having not suspected it, neither was it ready nor
prepared for that which might happen. Wherefore turning head, he raised his
Camp, seeking to give order for his affairs.

When he perceived his covered ships, well provided to carry the
instruments, and conveniently to raise the siege, but ill appointed for a
Combat at Sea, and that those of the Enemies had been during the Winter
instructed and prepared; he was out of hope to make head against them, and to
come to fight: Yet he prepared the covered Vessel, and environed them with
three or four ranckes of Merchants ships.

The remainder is wanting.

A PARCEL OF the Fifteenth Book of the History of POLYBIVS.
SCipio was impatient, that the means to get Victuals was not only taken from
him, but there was plenty with the Enemy: But he seemed to be much more grieved
that the Carthaginians had broken their Oath and Accord, making War again.
Wherefore he made choice for Ambassadors of Lucius Servinus, Lucius Citinus,
Lucius Ser uinus Lucius Citinus, and Lucius Fabius sent Em^^ssadour^ to
Carthage.
and Lucius Fabius, and sent them to speak unto the Carthaginians upon this
late Action, and also to signify unto them, that the people of Rome had
confirmed their Accords, for they had lately brought Letters unto Scipio
containing the said Articles. When the Ambassadors were come to Carthage, they
were first brought unto the Senate, and afterward to many others, A
remonstrance of the Roman Ambassadors to the Carthaginians.
where they discoursed freely of the present Affairs. First they put them in
mind, how their Ambassadors being arrived at Tunis, and were come into the
assembly of the Council, they had not only Sacrificed to the Gods, in bending
down to the ground, as other men are accustomed to do: But moreover
(prostrating themselves humbly) they had kissed their feet: And when they were
risen again, had acknowledged their fault to have broken the Accord concluded
in the beginning with the Romans, and that for this cause they confessed, that
they were not ignorant, that they were lustly tormented and that they entreated
that by the Fortune of Humanes, they might not be forced to suffer things that
were not to be repaired, and that by this means their indiscretion and
rashness would make the Romans bounty Commendable. The Ambassadors say, that
at the repetition of these things, the Chief and Counselors which were then
present in Counsel, were amazed and wondered, with what impudence they forgot
things that were then spoken, and durst in manner break the Covenants sworn.
It is in a manner manifest, that upon the confidence they had in Hannibal and
his forces, they had presumed to do these things, but inconsiderately. Finally,
it was apparent to all the World, that flying the last year out of all Italy,
and being shut up through their faintness in the Country of Lacinium, and in
a manner besieged, they are fallen at this day to that as they are hardly in
safety: And although that as Victors they would present themselves, and try
with us the fortune of the War, who have vanquished you in two following
Battles, yet they must not hold the future for certain: Nor yet think of
the Victory, but rather fear to be frustrated again. And if that happened, to
what Gods would they make their prayers and vows? In what Language would they
speak, to move the Victors to a Commiseration of their calamity? Seeing that
with reason all hope would be taken away, as well with the Gods as men. These
things thus propounded, the Ambassadors foorth-with depart.

Some of the Carthaginians were of opinion that the Accord should not be
broken: The greatest part as well of Burgesses as Senators, disliked that to the
Accord there were some grieuances added, and they were much discontented at the
hard reprehension of the Ambassadors. Moreover they could not restore the
ships which had been broken, nor repay the Charges. They were likewise fed
with no small hope of Hannibals Victory. One part of them were of opinion to
send away the Roman Ambassadors without answer. The Burgesses (whose intention
was howsoever to renew the Warn) consulting among themselves practiced in this
manner. We must (said they) give order that the Ambassadors may be safely sent
back to their Camp. Wherefore they presently prepare two Galleys for their
return. But they aduertize Asdrubal Chief of their Army at Sea, A Conspiracy
of the Carthaginians against the Roman Ambassadors.
entreating him to keep some vessels ready near unto the Romans Camp: to
the end that when the Mariners should abandon the Ambassadors, these other
should board them, and cast them into the Sea. The Army at Sea had joined to
the Romans upon the flat near unto Bysarthe.

When they had acquainted Asdrubal with these things they dismiss the Romans:
And give charge unto the Mariners of the Galleys, that when they had past the
River of Macre, they should suffer the Romans to Sail toward the Mountain;
for from thence they might visibly discover the Enemies Camp. When the
Mariners had Conducted the Ambassadors, and according to their charge had
crossed the River, they turn head, having bid the Romans farewell. Lucius in
truth suspected no harm, but thinking to be thus left at Sea by the Mariners
through disdain, he was much incensed. Whilst they sailed alone, the
Carthaginians present themselves with three Galleys, which assail the Roman
Quinquereme, not able to annoy it nor board it, through the great resistance
which they made: And that fighting in Front and upon the flancke, they annoyed
the Soldiers with great slaughter of them: until being seen by those which
spoiling the Maritine Country, came running from their Camp to the Sea shore,
they ran the Galley a shore. It is true, many of the Company were slain, but
the Ambassadors escaped beyond all hope.

These things happening, the Wary was again renewed with greater violence and
cruelty then before. The Romans intended with great Courage to vanquish the
Carthaginians, seeing the faith violated. The Carthaginians likewise fearing
themselves guilty of that which they had committed, were careful not to fall
into the Enemies subjection. Their courages being such, it was apparent that
this must be decided by a Battle: For this cause not only Italy and Affricke,
but also Spain Sicily and Sardinia, were troubled and ravished in their
judgments, attending the end. And when at the same time Hannibal was destitute
of Horses, he sent to one Tycheus a Numidian allied to Syphas, who seemed to
have the most valliant of all the Affricane horse, persuading him to give him
succors, and he should be a sharer in the Action, Hannibal sends to Tycheus.
knowing that if the Carthaginians vanquished, his Principallity would remain
safe and entire. But if the Romans prevailed, his life it self will be in
danger, in regard of the ambition of Massanissa. Being thus persuaded, he
comes unto Hannibal with about two Thousand Horse.

When as Scipio had fortified his Fleet at Sea, and left Bobias for
Lieutenant, he spoiled the Cities, refusing to receive any that offered
themselves willingly, making them slaves, Athia Lieutenant at Sea for Scipio.
and showing the indignation which he had conceived against the Enemies in
regard of the faith broken by the Carthaginians. Finally, he sends continually
to Massanissa, letting him understand how the Carthaginians had broken the
Accords, entreating him to assemble the greatest Army that possibly he could,
and to join with him, according unto their conuentions. Massanissa after the
conclusion of the Accord, was gone with an Army accompanied with ten Ensigns
of Romans, as well Horse as foot, not only to recover his own Country, but
also to seize upon those of Syphax with the help of the Romans. Finally it
happened that the Ambassadors sent back from Rome Landed at that time at the
maritine Pallisado of the Romans, The Carthaginian Ambassadors stayed by
Ethias.
Suddenly Bebias sends his men to Scipio, and retains the Carthaginians,
being sad and supposing to be in wonderful danger.

When as they were aduertized of the cruelty of the Carthaginians toward the
Roman Ambassadors, they held not themselves secure from punishment. When as
Scipio understood what had been done, that the Senate and people of Rome had
confirmed the agreement which he had made with the Carthaginians, and that they
were ready to do that which he advised them, he was wonderful glad. Moreover,
he commands Bebias to send back the Carthaginian Ambassadors to their Houses
with all favor and courtesy: Using therein a good advice (in my opinion) with
a wise consideration in what great esteem his Country held their faith with
Ambassadors. He made his reckoning that the punishment deserved by the
Carthaginians did not merit so great a respect, then that which the honor of
the Romans required to be done. Wherefore refrayning his Choler and
indignation, conceived for the offense of the Carthaginians, he labored to
observe that which they say in the Proverb, That we must cleave unto the
duties of our Elders. By this means he won the hearts of all the
Carthaginians, and surmounted Hannibal and their madness by his Loyalty.

When as the Carthaginians saw their Towns forced, The Carthaginians pre^^e
Hannibal.
they sent to Hannibal that he should delay no longer, but present himself
unto the Enemy, and decide their affairs by a battle. Hannibal hearing these
things, made answer to those that came unto him, that he would consider
thereon, and make choice of a fit time, to the end he might not seem
negligent. Some days after he raises his Camp from Adrumetum, and marching
he Camps near unto Zama, which is a City five days journey from Carthage
toward the West. From thence he sent three Spies, The Clemency of Scipio, unto
Hannibals spies.
desirous to know where the Romans campt, and how they govern things which
concern the Situation of a camp. When these Spies were brought to Scipio
General of the Romans, he was so fa^re from punishing them, as others usually
do, as contrariwise he gave charge to a Captain Milleniere, to show them
plainly what soever was done in the Camp. Which being done, he demands, if
the Commissary had showed them all things carefully. The which when they had
confessed, he sent them back with Victuals and Guides, commanding them to
relate carefully unto Hannibal what they had seen.

This Action causing Hannibal to wonder at the magnanimity and confidence of
the man, he conceived an humor to parley with Scipio. The which when he had
resolved, he sent a Trumpet, saying that he desired to Treat with him
concerning all their differences. Scipio having heard this from the Trumpet,
consented, saying, that he would signify unto him the place and the hour,
when and where he would parley. These things being heard by the Trumpet he
returns unto his Camp. The day following Massanissa arriues with six
Thousand foot, The coming of Massanissa to Scipio's Camp.
and almost as many Horse: Whom when as Scipio had entertained courteonsly, and
showed him great signs of favor, for that he had made all those subject
which had formerly obeyed Syphax, he foorth-with raises his Camp: And when
he came unto the City of Margara, and had found a commodious place, and had
appointed the warring within a Bows shot, he planted his Camp there: And from
thence he gave notice (by certain convenient Messengers) unto the Chief of
the Carthaginians, that he was ready to parley about their differences.

The which Hannibal hearing, he presently marches with his camp, and
approaches so near, as he was within thirty furlongs of the Romans: Sitting
down upon a certain Hill, which besides the Watring, was for all other things
commodious and sufficient enough: In truth it was something far, and
therefore troublesome unto the Soldiers. The day following the two Commanders,
accompanied with some few Horsemen go out of their Camps, The enterview of
Hannibal and Scipio.
and again they separate themselves from their Companies, meeting alone in an
indifferent place with an Interpreter. Hannibal began first in these terms. I
wish said he, the Romans had never desired any thing out of Italy, nor the
Carthaginians out of the limits of Affricke: either of them no doubt have great
bounds, and as it were limited by Nature Hannibals Speech to Scipio.
And as we have made War, first for the difference of Sicily, then again
for Spain: and that finally, Fortune being auerse against us, our Country
has been in danger, and we are now in peril: The question is, whether there
be any means to end this present difference after we have pacified the Gods.

For my part I am ready, having made trial how inconstant Fortune is, and how
by little and little she inclines sometimes to the one, and sometimes to the
other, as if she were governed by Children. I am in doubt in regard of thee, as
well for thy great youth, as for that all things have succeeded according to
thy desire, as well in Affricke as in Spain, having never yet felt the
violence and fury of Fortune, so as happily thou do give no credit to my
words although they be true. Yet consider the condition of these things, which
not only concern our Ancestors, but even our selves. I am that Hannibal, who
after the Battle near unto Cannes, being Lord in a manner of all Italy,
approached near unto Rome, and planted my Camp within forty Furlongs,
studying what I should do with you and your Country.

Now I come into Affricke to thee a Roman, to confer with thee of my lafety,
and of that of the Carthaginians. I pray thee consider this, and grow not
proud, but courteously confer of the present affairs: that is, that thou
would choose of good things the greatest, and of bad the least. What man of
judgment will make choice of the danger which is near him, if he observe it
well? For the which if thou obtainest the Victory, thou shall much increase thy
glory, and that of thy Country: whereas if thou be vanquished, thou shall
utterly lose through thine own fault all thy pomp and magnificence, and
precedent commodity.

But to what end do I use these words? To this, that all that for the which
we have formerly contended, may remain to the Romans, as Sicily, Sardinia,
and Spain, and that the Carthaginians in regard thereof may never make War
against them. The like also to be done of the other Islands which lie betwixt
Italy and Affricke, and let them belong to the Romans. I believe confidently,
that these accords and agreements will hereafter bring safety to the
Carthaginians, and to thee and the Romans great glory and honor. Thus much
spoke Hannibal.

Scipio answering to these things, Scipio's answer to Hannibal.
the Romans said, they have not been the Authors, but the Carthaginians, of
the War which has past for Sicily, nor of that of Spain: whereof they must
know that Hannibal had been the chief Author, and that the Gods are
witnesses, whom I pray to impart the virtue, not to those which are the Authors
of outrages, but to those that defend themselves. Yet I consider what the
Nature of Fortune is, and with all my power have searched into humane affairs.
If before the Romans passage into Affricke, and that parting out of Italy thou
had propounded these accords, I am of Opinion thou had not been frustrated
of thy hope. But now thou have abandoned Italy against thy will, and that being
in Affricke, we have held our Camp in the open Plain, it is manifest that
matters are much changed. Withal (which is a great matter) we are come hither,
thy Citizens being partly vanquished, and suing for a peace, we have past in
writing the accords that were sworn, in the which (besides that which thou now
propoundest) these Articles were comprehended: that the Carthaginians should
have no covered vessels, that they should pay three Millions of Gold, restore
the Captives without Ransom, Articles comprehended, in the Accords past
betwixt Scipio and the Carthaginians.
and give hostages. These were the accords which past betwixt us: for the which
we and they came to the Senate and to our people. We have protested that that
these accords thus reduced to Writing seemed good unto us: The Carthaginians
entreated that they might enjoy the said agreements: The Senate obeyed, and the
people in like manner gave their consent thereunto.

The Carthaginians after they had obtained what they had demanded, have
transgressed and broken the accords. What remains now to be done? Be thou in
my place and judge. Shall we take the grieuances out of the conditions, to the
end you may suffer no punishments for the transgression, and that you may be
taught hereafter to preuaricare against your benefactors? Or else having
obtained that which you demand you should not be bound unto us? But what? When
thy people now in suing had obtained their request, they presently entreated us
as Enemies, after they had conceived some little hope of thee. If the burdens
had been too heavy, they might have required an abatement from the people: and
if they had remitted any Articles of the accord, the Senate doubtless would
have made no long delay. But to what end tend our words? Submit your selves and
your Country to our protection, or vanquish fighting. Hannibal and Scipio
having discoursed after this manner, being of contrary opinions retire.

The day following at Sunne-rising, they put their Armies into Battle,
whereof the Carthaginians were to fight for their safety and for Affricke, and
the Romans for the universal Empire. What is he who considering these things
can without compassion hear the relation? No man shall ever find more warlike
Armies, nor more fortunate Commanders, nor more excellent Wrestlers in the
Stratagems of War, nor greater rewards propounded unto them by Fortune. For
they which should obtain the Victory, should not only be Lords of Affricke
and Asia, but also of all the other parts of the World which are at this time
mentioned in Histories: the which soon after succeeded, Scipio put his Army in
Battle after this manner. First he ordered those that were lightly armed by
certain spaces: The order of Scipio's Battle.
after whom he placed the Bands of the Principals, and not according to the
spaces of the first Ensigns, as the Romans had been accustomed, but distant
one from another, in regard of the multitude of the Enemies Elephants: and upon
the Rear he appoints the Triarij. As for the Wings, he gave charge of the
left to Caius Lelyus with the Italian Horsemen: and the right to Massanissa
with all the Numidians that were under his charge. Finally, he filled the
spaces of the first Ensigns with forked Iauelings: to whom he commanded to
begin the Skirmish: and if they were repulsed and forced to give back by the
violence of the Elephants, that they which should be separated, should retire
by the straight spaces to the Rear of the Army: and they which should be
environed, should retire to the Ensigns by the cross spaces.

These things being thus ordered, Scipio's Speech to his Army.
he makes an Oration in few words to his Army, and yet proper for the event of
the affairs. He entreats them to remember their precedent Battles, and to
behave themselves like brave men, worthy of the Roman Name, setting before
their eyes, that having the Victory they should not only be Lords of all
Affricke, but moreover they should purchase the Empire and government of the
rest of the World. If the fortune of the War succeeded otherwise, thee which
dyed fighting valiantly, should have an honorable grave, having died for their
Country: whereas they that should turn head, should live the remainder of
their days in great ignominy and misery, for there is no place in Afric that
can shelter them in their flight, finally if they fall into the Carthaginians
hands, they which have any judgment understand well what the event will be:
and God forbid that any of you should make trial of it, when as fortune
propounds unto us great rewards of every side, shall we not be the most
simple Idiotts in the world, if when of good things they present the best unto
us, we choose with a desire of life the worst of bad? wherefore in propounding
these two, either to vanquish or dye, he incourageth them to match against the
enemy, for being in this humor, they must with a despair of life, always
vanquish their enemies in making head. Scipio inflamed the hearts of his
Soldiers after this manner. The order of Hannibal his Battle.


In regard of Hannibal, he placed his Elephants before the whole Army, being
above four score: and then about twelve thousand Mercenaries, which were
Gen^uois, Maiorquins, Minorquins, and Maurusiens: After which he placed the
Inhabitants of Affricke and the Carthaginians. After all which he orders those
which he had brought our of Italy, and feparates them from the rest above a
Furlong. He fortified the Wings with Horsemen, ordring the Numidians on the
right, and the Carthaginians on the left. He commanded every Leader to
encourage his Soldiers, to the end they might put their trust in him, and the
Troops which he had brought out of Italy. He likewise commands the
Carthaginian Captains to acquaint their men with the miseries which would
befall their Wives and Children, if this Battle succeeded otherwise then they
desired. The which they effected. Hannibal likewise came to them which he had
brought with him, and intreates them with a long speech to remember their
mutual and common life, for the space of seventeen Years: That they should
think of the many Battles which they had fought with the Romans, in the
which they had been always Victors, and had never left them any hope of
Victory. But he entreated them chiefly, that amidst the encounter they should
set before their eyes the infinite prerogatives: Namely, the Battle which
they gained, fighting against the Father of this present Roman Commander, near
unto Trebia: Then that which was against Flaminius: and also toward Cannes
against Emilius: the which he said, were neither for the number and multitude
of men, nor according unto their forces worthy to be compared to the present
danger.

When he had used this Speech, he commands them to look upon the Enemies in
Battle, telling them that they were not only fewer in number, but they were
scarce the least part of those which then fought against them, and that they
could not compare with them in forces. And as the others were before
invincible, they had fought cheerfully and stoutly, and that of these some
were the Children of men, and the others the Relics of such as had been
often defeated in Italy, and had so many times showed them their heels.
Wherefore he was of advice that they should not do any thing to the prejudice
of their glory and fame, nor of their Commander: But in fighting courageously,
confirm the opinion which was conceived of them to be invincible. Behold the
Speeches or such like which they held unto their Armies. The beginning of the
Battle by the Elephants.
When as all things necessary were ready for the Combat, and that the Numidian
Horsemen had skirmished long: Hannibal commanded those which were mounted upon
the Elephants to charge the Enemy.

But when the Trumpets and Clairons sounded, some of them being amazed, turned
head, and went violently against the Numidians, which were come to succor the
Carthaginians. Finally, the left Wing of the Carthaginians was left bare by
Massanissa's Company. The rest of the Elephants fighting with the Iauelings in
the midst of the Battalions, without doubt endured much, so likewise they
annoyed the Enemies: until that being amazed, some going forth by the spaces
were taken, as the General had given order: Others flying on the right hand,
and wounded by the Horsemen, pass in the end the place of the Battle. And
when the Elephants were thus dismayed, Lelyus charging the Carthaginian
Horsemen, repulseth them in such sort, as they soon turned head, the Chase
being pursued by him.

The like did Massanissa. The strength of the Battle.
Whilst these things are in action, the two Battalions come to fight with a
slow pace, and wonderful great courage, except those which were come out of
Italy, who budge not out of their place. When they came to affront one another,
the Romans crying after their Country manner, and making their Targets sound
with their Swords, fought with their Enemies. The Mercenaries of the
Carthaginians cast forth diverse confused cries, for it was not the same sound,
nor the same voice; but diverse languages: for they were men drawn from diverse
Countries. And when as this Battle was fought with great courage, and man to
man, for that the Combattants could not help themselves with their Iauelings
nor Swords, the Mercenaries fought in the beginning with great courage and
dexterity, and wounded many Romans. The Romans also trusting in their good
order and Arms, labored much to go on.

And when as they which were in the Rear of the Romans, gave courage to the
first in following them, and the Carthaginians not coming on to succor their
Soldiers, but staying behind basely and for want of courage, the Barbarians
declined. Wherefore when they saw themselves abandoned by their Companions, in
retiring they fell upon those which stood still and slew them: the which forced
many Carthaginians to dye valiantly. For when they were slain by the
Mercenaries, they fought boldly as well against their own men as against the
Romans: In which combat (as they fought after a horrible manner like furious
men) they made no less slaughter of their own then of the Enemies. By this
means they fell confusedly upon the Troops that were lightly armed. The
Captains of the Principals seeing this accident, charged their Battalions. The
greatest part of the Carthaginians and Mercenaries were slain, as well by them
as by those that were lightly armed.

In regard of such as escaped and fled, Hannibal would not suffer them to
mingle with the Battalions, commanding their Captains to rank^ them before,
and forbidding moreover to receive such as approacht: wherefore they were
forced to retire upon the Wings, and without them. But for that the place
betwixt the two Armies was full of blood and dead bodies, this put the
Carthaginian General into great difficulty, and was a great let for him to
charge again. For the instability of the dead which were bloody and fallen upon
heaps, with the confusion of Arms which were fallen among the dead, they were
to have a troublesome passage which marched in Battle. Yet the wounded being
carried back, and a retreat being sounded by the Trumpets which followed
those that were lightly armed, he puts his men before the fight in the midst
of the Enemy: In regard of the Principals and Triarij, he gives order that
being closely joined, they should march cross the dead bodies upon the two
Wings.

When they were equal with those that were lightly armed, the Battalions
charged one another with great violence and courage. The great fury of the
fight.
It happened that for the multitude, courage, and equal Arms of either side,
the Combat was long doubtful. They that were slain, dyed every man in his
Rank with a brave emulation, until that Massanissa and Lelyus returning from
the chase of the Horsemen, had by good fortune rallied their men together:
with whom charging upon the Rear of those which were with Hannibal, a great
number of them were defeated in Battle; and few of them escaped which fled:
For the Horsemen were dispersed of all sides, The victory of the Romans
against the Carthaginians.
and the Country was plain and Champion. There died above fifteen hundred
Romans, and twenty thousand Carthaginians: The Prisoners were not much less.
This Battle in the which they fought for the Empire, and which by the said
Commanders was judged the universal victory to the Romans, had this end. And
when as after the fight, Scipio pursuing the Carthaginians, Hannibal flies to
Adrumetum.
had overthrown their Pallisadoe, he returned to his Camp. Hannibal
recovered Adrumetum, still running with some few Horses. He had done his duty
in this Battle, not omitting that which was requisite for a good an expert
Captain.

For first he labored to divert the eminent danger by a parley with Scipio.
Hannibal vanquished by fortune.
It is the duty of a man which does not wholly rely upon valor, but
distrusting Fortune, to foresee things which contrary to all opinions do
usually happen in a Battle. And afterward coming to the Combat, he so
carried himself, as the Battle could not be better ordered against the
Romans by him that shall use the like Arms, then Hannibal had then disposed
it. For when the Army and order of the Romans was divided, it fell out that all
of them might fight together, or by Troops against any open attempt, by a
certain order of the Battalion: for that always two Ensigns were joined
near together when it was needful, and that moreover their Arms served the
Soldiers for a covering and assurance, considering the greatness of their
Targets, and the firmness of their Swords to strike, so as for these reasons
it seemed a difficult thing to defeat them. Yet Hannibal gave so good order
for all these things, as he showed his industry. For he had suddenly prepared
this multitude of Elephants, and placed them before his Battalions, to the end
they might break the Enemies Ranks. Secondly, he ordered the Mercenaries in
Front, after which he caused the Carthaginians to march, to the end they might
^ite the bodies of the Enemies, and make the vigor of their Arms
unprofitable, by reason of the number of the Dead, and that withal he should
force the Carthaginians, (as placed in the midst) to stand in Battle, and to
fight until that forced by necessity he should come to combat. In regard of
the valiant men, he mingled them by spaces: foreseeing that which does
usually happen, to the end that remaining undaunted both in body and courage, he
might make use of their forces at need. He deserves pardon in this, that having
omitted nothing that might serve to vanquish, yet he has been frustrated,
seeing that before he had been invincible. It happens sometimes that some
actions resist the attempts of good men: and sometimes it happens that a good
man is prevented of his desire by him that is better: the which may then be
said to have happened by Hannibal.

It is true that when as things which exceed the common custom and manner of
living of some, A defect of the (...)
perish of themselves for the greatness of the accidents, they deserve
commiseration with those that are present and hear it: The unusual nouelty of
things move us. But if that such an accident happens by deceit and Hypocrisy
it mooues none to pity, but to Choler and Hatred: The which then happened to
the Carthaginian Ambassadors.

Scipio beginning in few words, let them understand that he was not to show
them any courtesy or favor, seeing they confessed they had begun the War
against the Romans, and against the conuentions had spoiled the City of the
Zachantiens, Zachantia spoiled by the Carthaginians.
and first Transgressed the Accords, Oaths, and Agreements reduced to Writing:
And yet the Romans have resolved to show them grace, and (in regard of Fortune
and humane adventures,) to use Clemency and Magnanimity in their present
Affairs. The which should be manifest unto them, if they consider what was
offered. Finally they must not take it ill if for the present they imposed upon
them things, which they must do, or suffer, or deliver: But they should wonder
and hold it strange, if they obtain any mercy: Seeing that Fortune
dis-fauouring them for their injustice, had (in denying mercy and pardon) made
them subject unto their Enemies.

This Speech being ended, he promised them Clemency and Favor: Teaching them
withal what they were to endure: The which is comprehended in these Articles.
The Articles of Accord, propounded by Scipio to the Carthaginians.
That they should leave unto the Carthaginians the Cities which they had in
Affricke before this last War attempted against the Romans, and the Countries
which anciently they held, and finally their Cattle, Bodies, and other Wealth.
Moreover it was granted them, that from that day they might live free without
any let or hinderance of their Laws and Customs. This was that which was
granted them of grace. Again they added these contrary Articles: That the
Carthaginians should make restitution, of the unjust spoils which they had
committed against the Romans during the Truce: That they should restore all the
Captives and Fugitives, which they had had during the War: They should
deliver all their long Vessels except ten Galleys: And in like manner the
Elephants: not to attempt to make any War out of Affricke, nor in Affricke it
self without the consent of the Romans: To restore unto King Massanissa, the
Houses, fields, Cities, and whatsoever had belonged to him or his Predecessors,
within the limits that should be set down: That they should nourish the Army
for three months, and pay them until the answer were returned from Rome: And
according unto the Accord pay six Millions of Gold, within fifty Years, after
the rate of sixscore thousand Crowns yearly: That they should give in Hostage
for the assurance of their faith, a hundred young men, as the Commander should
appoint, which should not be under the Age of fourteen Years, nor above
thirty.

The Roman General propounded these things unto the Carthaginian Ambassadors,
Hanibal forces a Citizen.
who made have to make their Report They say, that when as a certain Senator,
labored to contradict the said Articles in the Senate, Hannibal stepping
forth drew him out of his Seat: And when as the rest were discontented, for
that he had done against the Custom of the City: Hannibal steps up again
and says, (as it is reported) that if he had committed any thing against their
Custom and course of living, he was to be pardoned: For they knew well that
being a young Boy of nine years of age, he had gone out of the Country, and
returned again at the age of five and forty: For this cause he entreated them
that they would not have any regard to that, wherein he had transgrest their
Custom, considering rather that if he suffered for the affairs of the
Country: It was for them he had fallen into this transgression. Finally that it
seemed wonderful and strange to him, if any Carthaginian knowing what Council
had been taken against the Romans, as well for the public as private good,
did not adore Fortune: Seeing that now being made subject unto them, they had
purchased such grace and favor: Whereof if any one would have put the Country
in Hope, some days before the Romans had the Victory, he would not have been
able to speak for the greatness and excess of the apparent miseries,

Wherefore he entreated them again, not to do any thing slowly, nor by
Discourse: And that consenting all with one voice to the Articles of the peace,
they should Sacrifice unto the Gods, and pray that the people of Rome might
confirm them. When it seemed that he had given wise advice, and fit for the
time, it was concluded to accept the Accord prescribed, and to pass it with
the Romans. Wherefore they suddenly sent away the same men in Embassy which
had contradicted the Articles.

A Parcel of the Deeds and Posterity of Ptolomy.
FInally who will not wonder, that Ptolomy had not provided to give aid to
these men during his life, seeing there were some which were ready to succor
them? But when Death surpised him, he left a young Infant, to whom by right
of nature, he had indeauoured, as they say, with both hands to preserve him the
Crown: Then encouraging one another, they make have to practice a Villainy, and
to murder this Infant, and to divide his principallity among them. The which
they do not after the manner of Tyrants, who pretend some color for their
infamy: But carry themselves afterward so impudently and brutishly, as that
which they speak of the life of Fishes is due unto them. Of whom they say,
that although they be of one kind, yet the defeat of the smaller feeds and
entertaines the life of the greater. Wherefore who will not think to see a
great execration against the Gods, and a cruelty toward men, and likewise a
great avarice of the said Kings, seeing this paction and agreement as in a
glass? What is he who for these causes having accused Fortune in humane
affairs, does not likewise consider that she has since made them to suffer
worthy punishments, and left to posterity a good example for the amendment of
their course of living, as having propounded unto these Kings such an
ignominious punishment? For when they had transgrest the agreements among
themselves, and divided the Infants Principality, all things did justly prove
hurtful and opposite unto them, which they had wickedly resolved against their
Kinsfolks and Neighbors, by the bringing in of the Romans? for that the one
and the other being suddenly vanquished, they were not only forced to abate
their covetousness of another man's goods: but being made subject to tributes,
they were constrained to obey the Commandments of the Romans. Finally, Fortune
has in a short time disposed of the Reign of Ptolomy, making the Potentates
of the others, and their successors, some of them to be banished and
miserable, involuing some in a manner in the like Disasters.

Of Philip of Macedony.
THe Cianeins fell in these miseries not so much through Fortune, and the
injustice, of their Neighbors, as by their own rashness and the bad
government of their Commonweal, where most commonly the worst were in
esteem, and good men put to death for the spoils of their Wealth, and by this
means they are in a manner willingly fallen into these misfortunes, whereunto
all men incline, I know not how apparently, yet they cannot resolve upon any
advice, nor suddenly distrust: which some brute Beasts do. A good comparison.
For if sometimes they enter into Jealousy of Baits and Nets, if they have
seen any other perish, you shall hardly draw them to do the like, holding the
place for suspect, with a distrust of all things which have any resemblance. In
regard of men, when they hear some speak, and see others perish in like
manner: Yet suddenly when any one using gracious words, has propounding a
mutual hope of correction, they run without any regard into the toiles,
knowing certainly that never any man which had swallowed this kind of bait had
escaped, such policies being an assured defeat to all men.

When as Philip had reduced the City under his obedience, he rejoiced as if he
had brought some brave and honorable action to an end. And when he had
speedily given Succors to his Allies, and had terrified all those which
estranged themselves from him, and had claymed abundance of goods and bodies
under the color of Justice, he never thought of those things that were
contrary, although they were manifest: giving at the first Succors to the
Allie, who had not been wronged, and yet had broken the confederations with
his Neighbors. And as finally he had confirmed the brute of his cruelty
toward his Friends, afflicting the Cities of Greece with great miseries, he
had justly purchased the general esteem of a cruel man withal the Grecians.
Thirdly, he wronged and reviled the Ambassadors of the said Cities,
Ambassadors wronged by Philip.
who were come to free the Cianeins from that eminent danger: And being called
by him, and conferring daily with him, they were present at things which he
desired not.

Moreover, he incensed the Rhodiens against him: so as they could not endure to
hear any mention of him. Finally, Fortune therein favors him openly. His
Ambassador made an Oration upon the Theater against the Rhodiens, commending
the magnificence of Philip, who when he had by some means got possession of
the City, he had done that grace unto the people. This he did to reprehend the
suspicion and detraction of those which resisted him, and to manifest his
resolution to the City. There came also some one from the Port unto the
Magistrate, aduertising him of the ruin of the Cianeins, and of the cruelty
which Philip practiced against them: So as when the Governor entering in the
midst of the Ambassadors Oration, speaking the said things, and declared the
news, the Rhodiens could not believe for the excess of the fact.

Philip having then preuaricated and dissembled, not so much against the
Cianeins as against himself, began to be so transported and to stray from his
duty, as he gloried and bragged in his actions as good, for the which he
should have been ashamed. The Rhodiens declared Enemies to Philip.
The Rhodiens from that day held Philip for an enemy, and prepared to that end.
The Etoliens also conceived a hatred against him for the same fact. When as
lately being reconciled, he had given forces to that Nation, there being then
no cause of hatred nor spleen, (when as a little before the Etoliens, the
Lysimacheins, Calsidoniens, and Cianeins were made Friends) he has in
assailing first the Lysimacheins, distracted their City from the Alliance of
the Etoliens: spoiling those of the Calsidoniens, and thirdly the Cianeins,
whilst that the Chief of the Etoliens was resident in their City, having the
superintendency of the public affairs.

Finally Prucias rejoiced for that which had happened beyond his desires: But he
was discontented that another should reap the reward for the taking of the
City, and that there was fallen unto him a desolate place naked of buildings,
so as he could not effect any thing. After he had assembled the greatest men
of the Macedonians, he came to them with the King and Agathoclia, faining in
the beginning that he was not able to speak for tears: And when he had wiped
them often with his cloak, and caused them to cease, take says he, carrying
an infant, this which the dying Father has delivered into the arms of this
Creature (showing his sister) and has left it unto us upon our faith, do you
understand my masters of the Athenians? The love of this infant is of small
moment to procure his safety, where as now the cause is in you and your hands.
Tlepoleme in truth has for a long time (as it is manifest to those which
consider well of things) had greater desires then were fitting, and has now
resolved on the day and time when he will usurp the Town. For this cause he
entreated that they would not believe him, but those which being present knew
sufficiently the Truth.

This Speech being ended, he brings in Critolaus, who said he had seen the
Altars and Sacrifices, prepared by the multitude, for the usurpation of the
Crown. The which the Macedonians hearing, they were neither moved with
pity, nor had any respect unto that which was spoken. But in mocking and
murmuring they iested among themselves, so as Prusias knew not how he got out
of the Assembly; the which happened in other Assemblies of the people. In the
mean time many of the old Soldiers arrived by Sea, whereof some being kinsmen
and other friends, they entreated them to assist them in this present
business, and that they should have regard to the injuries which had been
done them by dishonest and unworthy men. Most of them were incensed to put the
great men to death: for that they presumed that what should happen would be
unto their prejudice: Seeing that Tlepoleme took all things necessary that
were sent to Alexandria. Finally, it was an advancement to Agathocles to
incense the Choler of many, and of Tlepoleme.

They had put Danae his Mother in Law into custody, being pulled from the
Temple of Ceres, and drawn thorough the City bare-headed, seeking by this
means to show their hatred against Tlepome. Danae a prisoner.
Wherefore the people being incensed spoke no more in secret: For some in the
night wrote their conceived hatred in all places. Others in the open day going
in Troops, delivered the hatred which they bare unto the greatest. They which
were with Agathocles, seeing the affairs, and having little hope in them, they
thought of their retreat. But when as through their indiscretion they were ill
provided, they desisted from their Enterprise, and made a Register of the
Conspirators and of their Adherents in this commotion, to the end they might
suddenly kill some of their Enemies, and seize upon others, and by this means
usurp a Tyrannical power.

And as they practiced these things, they accused Moeragena one of Tlepolemes
guards, for that he aduertized all, and held his party in regard of the
familiarity of Adee, Governor at that time of Bubaste, Agathocles suddenly
gives charge to the Secretary Nicostrates, that he should inform dilligently
of Moeragena, with all manner of torments. Moeragena being suddenly taken by
Nicostrates, and led into a certain secret place of the Hall, he answered at
the first well, concerning the accidents which had happened: But when he
confessed nothing of the things which were spoken, he was stripped. Some prepared
the instruments to Torture him, others holding Whips put off their Cloaks. At
the same instant one comes running to Nicostrates, and after he had whispered
in his ear, he parts in have. Nicostrates follows him suddenly without
speaking word, beating continually upon his thigh. This was an unhoped accident
for Moeragena. For some held the Whips, but they had no Commandment to whip
him, others had the instruments ready to torture his feet.

When as Nicostrates was gone, they were all amazed, and looking one upon
another expected when he would return. Soon after the assistants vanished one
after one, Moeragena saues himself naked.
and in the end Moegarena was abandoned. This done, he passes the Hall
contrary to all Hope, and being naked slipped into a certain Tent of the
Macedonians near unto the Hall. When by good fortune he had found the greatest
there assembled, he acquaints them with his disaster, and how he had escaped,
as it were, by miracle. Some of them did not believe him, others seeing him
naked were forced to give credit. Moeragena intreates them with ^eares, not
only to have a care of his safety, but also of the Kings and their own: And
that their Death was manifest, if they did not make use of the occasion, for
that all the World was inflamed with Hatred, and there was not any man but was
ready to put Agathocles to Death, saying that this Hatred increased Hourly,
and that they must have men to execute this Enterprise.

The Macedonians hearing this Speech were incensed, and in the end obeying to
Moeragena: They suddenly enter into the first Tents of the Macedonians, and
then into those of the other Soldiers. They were joining and near to the side
of the City. When as many of them took upon them the Charge, and that there
was no need of any thing but of some one, to give courage to them that came,
and who should first execute the Enterprise, this attempt kindled like a flame.
There were scarce four hours spent, but that all men as well Soldiers as
Citizens, conspired to assail Agathocles. There was a accident which happened
suddenly, which served well to end this attempt. For when they had brought
Letters to Agathocles, and that the Spies were returned, and the Letters sent
by Tlepoleme, signified unto the Army that he would be soon there, being
likewise assured by the Spies that he was near, he fell into so great a
transport in his judgment, as he neither did nor thought of any remedy
against the eminent dangers, but following his accustomed course, he went to
drink and banquet with others.

And when Oenanthe was sad and sorrowful, Oenanthe sad.
she goes unto Ceres Temple. Where (when it was opened for a certain Annual
Sacrifice) she prays humbly, then she uses Enchauntments toward the
Goddesses, finally she stays at the Altar and rests there. Many Women were
silent and observed her heaviness and affliction. The kinsfolks of
Polycrates, and some other Noble men comforted her, and being ignorant of the
approaching misery. She on the other side crying out with a loud voice, Come
not near me you Beasts: I know well you are ill affected toward us, and that
you require the Gods to send us some ill Fortune: But I hope that with their
good pleasure you shall taste of your own Children. Having ended this Speech,
she commands the Executioner to suppress them, and if they did not obey, to
beat them. Taking this occasion they all depart, and in lifting up their hands
toward the Gods, they prayed that she might make trial of that which she
had wished to the Company.

But when the men had concluded the reuolte, and that in every house the fury
of the Women was added thereunto, their hatred grew double. When as the
darkness of the Night was come, the whole City was filled with Mutiny,
lights, A mutiny of the people.
and running up and down. Some assembled at the Theater with cries, others
encouraged one another, and some ran to hide themselves in houses, and places
that were not suspected. And when the spacious places about the Hall; the place
for running of Horses, and the Court about Dyonisius Theater, were filled with
a multitude of all sorts of men. Agathecles hearing this, rises up being
drunk, after that he had emptied his gorge, and came unto the King after he
had taken all his Kinsmen except Philon.

After he had used some Speech moving to compassion, he takes him by the
hand, and leads him to the Armory of lauelings, seated betwixt the top and the
wrestling place, and which bends by the way of the Theater: And after he had
opened two Doors, he came to the third, accompanied with two or three of the
Guard and his Kinsmen. These Doors were transparent and shut with double
Bars. And when at that time all the Commons of the City were there assembled,
so as not only the places were full of men, but also the passages and tops of
houses, there grew a confused cry and howling of Women and Children, with the
men in this Mutiny, as well of them of Chalcedonia, as of Alexandria mingled
together. A^ Sunrising the cry was confused: yet the chief^ sound was, that
they called for the King.

The Macedonians rising first, seize upon the Ports of the Kings Treasure. But
when they understood in what part of the Palace the King was, turning to the
first Doors of the first Armory, they beat them down. And when they were
come unto the second, they demand the Infant with a great cry. Agathocles
seeing what would befall him, intreates the Guard to intercede for him to the
Macedonians, letting them understand, that he would relinquish the government
of the Infant, with his power and dignity, and moreover all the government:
entreating them to be so favorable unto him, as to save his life, affoording
him necessary Victuals and the like, returning unto his ancient and former
course of life, and that he would not (nay he could not) offer offense or
wrong unto any man whatsoever.

None of the Guards pitying him in his distress, wo^ld obey him, only
Aristomenes undertook the charge, who was afterward Governor of the public
affairs. He was an Acarnanian, and as he was advanced in years, having the
superintendency of the affairs, he was held a good Governor to the King and
royal Palace: And in the mean time he had respect to the prosperity of
Agathocles: for he was the first who calling unto him Agathocles, he alone had
a Crown of Gold by all the assistants: the which they usually do only to
Kings. Finally, he was the first that durst carry a Ring with Agathocles
Image. And when he had a Daughter by his Wife, he called her Agathoclea. But
we have spoken sufficiently of this Subject.

He therefore having taken charge of Agathocles commandment, and going forth
at a Posterne, he came unto the Macedonians. When he had used some little
speech, and declared the Will of Agathocles, the Macedonians sought to kill
him* and when as many put forth their hands to defend him, they enquired the
Opinion of the rest, which being understood, he returned to Agathocles, having
charge to come back with the King, or else to return no more. The Macedonians
having given this Answer, sent back Aristomenes, and assailing the second
Door, they vnhang it. Wherefore they which were with Agathocles, Ag^thoclea
shows her Papps unto the Macedonians.
seeing the violence of the Macedonians, as well by their actions as by their
answer, coming first to the Door, lifting up their suppliant hands:
Agathoclea likewise showed the Papps wherewith she said she had given the
King suck, entreating the Macedonians with a mournful and miserable voice,
only to save her life. And when as by the great lamentations of her Fortune
she had prevailed nothing, in the end they draw forth the Infant with his
Guards.

The Macedonians presently set the King on Horseback, and lead him to the
Theater. As Soon as he was discovered, they stay his Horse with great clamors
and joy, and taking him down they set him in a royal Chair. In the mean
time the Commons partly rejoice, and were partly sad. They rejoiced for the
coming of the Infant: again, they were sad and grieved for that they which
were the Offenders, had not been taken and punished accordingly. Wherefore
crying continually, they required that they might be brought and exemplarily
punished by an Ignominious and reproachful Death, as the Authors of all their
miseries and troubles. But when the Day was far spent, the Mutiny of the
people could not be pacified by any means.

Sosibius the Son of Sosibius, then Captain of the Guard, having the
principal charge of the Kings affairs, seeing that the Mutiny of the people
could not be pacified, and the Infant grew sad through the insolency and
nouelty of the present affairs, and the trouble of the Commons, he demanded
of him if he would not deliver unto the people those which had offended
against him or his Mother. And when he consented, he commanded the Guards to
make the Kings will known: And then they took the Infant in his Chair, and
carried him to his own house.

But when the Kings pleasure was divulged and made known by the Guards, all
the place was full of joy and exclamations. They which were with Agathocles and
Agathoclea, retired presently to their houses. The Guards presently forced some
of them, and others were thrust on by the people, to seek them out and kill
them. Whereof the beginning was by an accident.

One of the Guard, and a follower to Agathocles named Phylon, being yet full
with Drink, came forth into the place. Who when he saw the Mutiny of the
people, he said unto the assistants, that if ever Agathocles came forth again
as he had done, they would repent it. They which heard him, some blamed him,
others thrust him, and when he offered to defend himself, some suddenly tear
his Cloak, others slew him miserably with their Iauelings. Phylon slain.
Whilst they dragged him about the place yet breathing, and that the Commons
had tasted the fury of striking, they expect hourly to have the rest brought.

Soon after Agathocles was the first, being bound and mannacled: who going on
was suddenly thrust thorough by some one, Agathocles slain.
wherein he performed the part of a Friend, and not of an Enemy. For by this
means they prevent his worthy punishment. They brought with him Nicon and
Agathoclea naked with her Sisters, and consequently all their Parentage:
Finally, they draw Oenanthe out of the Temple, Nicon and Agathoclea slain.
and bring her on horseback naked unto the place: When all these were
delivered unto the Commons, some bite them, others prick them, and some pull
out their eyes and dismember them, until they were maimed.

The Egyptians are wonderful cruel in their fury. The Egyptians cruel.
At the same time some Virgins which had been bred up with Arcinoe, hearing
Sirene crying out that Philammon Trite^ had been present at the murder of the
Queen, they fall upon his house, and kill him with Stones and Staves, The
cruelty of Virgins.
smothering his young Son. Finally, they drag his Wife into the place and
kill her. This was the end of Agathocles and Agathoclea with their Kinsfolks.
I am not ignorant what Fables and colors some Historiographers use in these
actions, to amaze the Readers with a copious advancement of words, and
otherwise then the truth contains.

Some refer this accident to Fortune, showing how inconstant and inevitable
she is: seeking to bring Causes and Similitudes of actions. It is true that in
the pursuit of this Work I had resolved to help my self with the said
actions, for that this Agathocies had nothing honorable for his courage and
prowess in the War, neither any happy mannaging of affairs which ought to
be desired; Neither did he understand the cunning and policy of a Courtier,
in the which Sosybi^s and many others being very well instructed, had usurped
Kingdoms: The which notwithstanding happened unto this man. He grew great by
chance, for that Philopater was not able to govern the Realm.

Having therefore gotten this occasion to come unto greatness, when as after
his Death he had a fit opportunity offered to maintain his power, yet he lost
both life and goods faintly and basely, being slain within a short time.
Agathocles and Denis Sicilians.
Wherefore it is not fitting, that in the relation of such things they should
add words: especially when they speak of such as Agathocles and Denis
Sicilians, with some others, which had been famous and renowned for their
actions. One of them in truth came of a base extraction: But as Tymeus cauells,
Agathocles being a Potter, he came in his younger years to Sarragosse. They
were either of them in their times Tyrants of Sarragosse: of that City I say,
which at that time was great in authority, and abounding in riches: And
afterward they were Kings of all Sicily, and enjoyed some parts of Italy.

In regard of Agathocles, he died not in assailing Affricke, but after this
manner with a desire to Reign. The saying of Scipio.
And therefore they say of Publius Scipio, who first forced Carthage, that when
they demanded of him what men he held ablest to undertake an Enterprise, and
of great discretion and courage, he answered Agathocles and Denis.

We must in truth when the proposition is made, hold the Reader in suspense
and doubt, and relate their fortune and humane accidents, in adding words in
manner of Doctrine: In regard of the said things, I am not of Opinion it should
be done. For this cause we reject in this passage the Writers of Agathocles
with their many words, for that those horrible Narrations and fearful events,
which have nothing but a conceit worthy to hold the Reader in suspense.
Finally, it is not only unprofitable to treat of them with a long discourse,
but also their vehemence in the end brings tediousness and trouble. There are
two ends, namely, profit and pleasure: Two ends in Histories.
whereunto they must have regard which will ruminate any thing either of
hearing or sight.

And for that profit belongs chiefly to the narration of an History, it is most
necessary and convenient, that this kind of adding of words unto fearful
accidents, should turn from these two ends. What is he that would willingly
follow unexpected accidents, and without reason? No man rejoices continually,
either for the seeing or hearing of things which are out of Nature and the
common sense of men: But in the beginning we are exceeding joyful and glad to
see some, and to hear others, to the end we may rightly understand and know
after what manner that is done which seems unto every one very strange and
impossible.

When we once begin to know them, no man takes any delight or pleasure to stay
upon things which are strange from the course of Nature, nor will have any
desire to fall often upon the same subject. Wherefore the Narration must draw
a desire of imitation where he may delight. And if they add words to some
miserable accidens besides these ends, they are more fitting for a Tragedy then
a History.

Peradventure you must pardon those which do not consider things which are
common to Nature and the World: But they hold the Fortunes of their Ancestors
great and wonderful, whereon falling by Fortune in Reading or Hearing them
from others, they settle their affections. Wherefore they know not, that they
use more speech of such things then is needful, which are neither new, having
been spoken formerly by others, neither can they profit nor content.

The remainder is wanting.
A PARCEL OF the Sixteenth Book of the History of POLYBIVS.
Of the Battle given at Sea betwixt Philip and King Attalus.
PHilip was much troubled, seeing many things succcede unfortunately in his
siege, and withal that the Enemies were in the Haven with a good number of
covered Vessels, neither could he well resolve what to do. And when as the
present occasions deprived him of all means of choice, in the end he weighed
Anchor, and set Sail contrary unto the Enemies Hope. For Attalus and his
Company expected that he should grow obstinate at the Siege, considering the
preparation which he had of Engines of Battery. Philip made all haste to sail
away, imagining that he might get before them, and make a safe retreat unto
Samos along the shore: Yet he was deceived in his conceit. For when as
Attalus and Theophiliscus saw that he had weighed Anchor, they suddenly
resolved and set Sail, observing no order, Attalus charge Philips Army at
Sea.
for that they conceived that Philip would have perseuered in his Enterprise.
Yet they charge him making great speed with their Oars: So as Attalus fell
upon the right wing which got before, and Theophiliscus upon the left.

Philip seeing himself thus pestred, and suddenly surprised, he gave the
sign of the Battle to them of the right wing, commanding them to turn their
prowes against the Enemies, and to charge them resolutely: Then he retired to
the smaller Islands, which were in the midway with the lighter Vessels, The
number of Philips ships and of his Enemies.
expecting the end of the Battle. The number of Ships of War which Philip
had, were fifty three covered Vessels, with a hundred and fifty Foists and
Galleyes uncovered. In regard of the Vessels remaining at Samos, he could not
arm them. Those of the Enemies were in number threescore Vessels covered, with
those of Constantinople: with the which there were nine Galliots and three
Galleyes.

When as Attalus Ships began the fight, presently they that were near, charge
one another without command. Attalus fell upon a Vessel with eight Oars,
crushing it in such sort as it took water: and when as they which were upon
the hatches, had defended themselves long, in the end he sunk it. On the
other side Philips Galley of ten Oars, which was the Admiral, was by chance
taken by the Enemies: For when as a Galliot sailed against it, it bruised it
much in the midst of the Bulk, joining unto it behind at the poope, to the
which it remained grapled, for that the Pylot could not stay its violence. So
as when this Vessel stuck close unto her, she was much hindered, neither could
they govern nor turn her. In the mean time two Quinqueremes charge her, and
bruising her in two places, sink her with the Soldiers. Among the which was
Democrites, Captain General at Sea for Philip. At the same instant
Dionysodorus and Dynocrates brethren (who were Commanders of the Army under
Attalus) giving a charge, Democrates Captain General to Philip, sunkt.
found themselves in great danger in the fight: So as Dynocrates gave charge to
a Vessel with seven Oars, and Dionisodorus to one of eight. Dynocrates was
broken above water, and that of the Enemy under the water, yet he could not
free himself from them, although he had often attempted it in sawing.

Wherefore when as the Macedonians defended themselves valiantly, he was in
danger to be taken. But for that Attalus came to succor him, charging the
Enemy, and parting the two ships which were grapled, Dynocrates saved himself
by good fortune. In regard of the Enemies, they were all slain fighting
valiantly: so as the Vessel being destitute of Soldiers, was taken by
Attalus. And when as Dionisodorus sailed with great swiftness to fight, he
could not overtake any, and passing through the Enemies he had the Pallisadoe
on the right side disarmed, and the Beams broken which carried the Tower. This
happening he was invested round by the Enemy with great noise and cries. All
the Mariners perished with the Ship, and Dionisodorus swum away with two others
unto a Galliot which came to succor him. In regard of the other Vessels the
danger was equal: For as the number of Philips Foists was greater, so was that
of Attalus in covered Vessels. Finally, the Combat was so carried upon Philips
right Wing, as the Victory inclined to neither. It is true that Attalus was in
better hope for the future.

The Rhodiens in the beginning of the party separated themselves from the
Enemies, who having a great advantage by the lightness of their Vessels,
fought against the Macedonians making the Reare-ward. And when in the beginning
they fell to flight, they carried away all their defenses, charging them
behind and in poope. But when as Philips Vessels began to turn head
altogether, giving aid to those which were in danger, and that the Rear of
the Rhodiens were joined to Theophiliscus: then they charged with great fury,
encouraging one another with great shouts and Trumpets. And if the Macedonians
had not mingled their Foists among their covered Vessels, the Battle had
been soon decided: for they took from the Rhodien ships all commodity in
diverse sorts: For that when as by either side the order was broke, they were
all mingled. Wherefore they could not easily enlarge themselves, nor turn
their Vessels, nor assist themselves with those means whereof they were best
provided, for that the Foists did continually charge them, sometimes falling
upon the P^llisadoe, so as they could make no use of their Rowers, and
sometimes upon the prow and poope, to deprive them of their Pylot and Oars.
And when as they fought in a direct line, they invented a stratagem: for
abating the prowes they made their charge fruitless, breaking the Enemies
Vessels under water: To prevent the which they could find no remedy. It is
true, this happens seldom for that all avoided the encounter, for that the
Macedonians fought valiantly hand to hand, and most commonly in passing they
razed the Pallisadoe, making it unprofitable. Then suddenly casting about,
they assailed those that were in poope: and likewise giving charge to those
which showed themselves upon the flanks, or which turned aside, they brake
some, and took the Equipage from others: so as fighting after this manner,
they had sunk diverse of the Enemies Vessels.

There were three excellent Quinqueremes of the Rhodiens in danger: whereof the
Admiral was one, in the which Theophiliscus commanded: Then that whereof
Philostrates was Captain, and the the third was governed by Antolice: in the
which Nycostrates remained. It happened that she gave a charge to one of the
Enemies Vessels, where she left her spur, so as it sunk with the Soldiers:
And Antolice's Company being invested, for that they took water at the prowe,
defended themselves valiantly: But Antolice being wounded fell into the Sea
with his Arms and died, the rest fighting with great courage. At what time
Theophiliscus coming to succor them with three Quinqueremes, he could not
save the ship being full of water

After that he had broken two of the Enemies Vessels, and cast the Soldiers
into the Sea, he lost the greatest part of his men fighting resolutely, for
that he was suddenly invested by many fregats and couerd Vessels. It was
hardly in his power to save his ship, being wounded in three places: for that
he had adventured himself too boldly: But Philostrates came to succor him,
undertaking the apparent danger with great courage. But when he was joined
unto these Vessels, he rechargeth the Enemy furiously again: where he was
seen weak of body by reason of his wounds, but much more excellent and
constant in courage then before. It happened that there were two Combats at Sea
very far one from another: For Philips right Wing coasting still along the
shore, never abandoned the Coast of Asia, but the left Wing succouring the
Reare-ward, had fought with the Rhodiens, for that they were not far from
Chios. When as Attalus seemed to have gloriously Vanquished Philips right Wing,
and that he approached near unto the Island, where he Anchored, expecting the
end and conclusion of the Battle, he perceived one of his Quinqueremes in
danger to be sunk by a ship of the Enemles, and made have to succor it with
two other of his Quinqueremes. When as the Enemies ships turned away to
recover Land, the more he pressed desiring to take it. The which Philip
perceiving, that Attalus strayed too boldly and aduenturously from his Company,
he made have being accompanied with four Quinqueremes, three Gall^otts, and
the nearest Frigates, hoping he should be able to take it, as it fortunately
happened; forcing him to get unto the nearest shore in great distress. Then
leaving his Vessel there, he fled on foot with the Sea men, to save himself
in Erythee. Erythee a town in Asia.
Wherefore Philip recovered the sh^p and the Kings plate.

They which were with Attalus in this great danger, bethought themselves of a
policy in War, and set the richest of the Kings plate upon the Hatches. The
Policy of Attalus his Soldiers.
Wherefore the first of the Macedonians approaching with their Frigates, and
seeing great store of plate with a purple Robe, and other rich furniture lying
there, they gave over the pursuit, and attended the spoil, so as Attalus
retired unto the Port of Erythree without any disturbance. And although that
Philip were absolutely the weaker in this Battle at Sea, yet he returned very
ambitious and proud through Attalus misfortune, making great haste to come
unto his Company. Where after he had drawn and gathered together all his
Vessels, he persuaded them to be of good Courage and Resolution, seeing he
had won the Battle. And in truth, such was the opinion of men, as if
Attalus had been dead in ^lying, seeing that Philip returned, bringing the
royal Vessel prisoner.

Dyonisodorus considering what was become of the King, gathered the Vessels
together and sounded a re^reate: after which he retired safely to the Porst of
Asia.

At the same time the Macedonians, who fought against the Rhodiens, having
been well beaten, they retired out of danger: For every ship got him away
under color to give succors to those that were in danger and distress. In
regard of the Rhodiens they retired to the Port of Chios, having taken some of
the ships, and broken patt of their spurs. The loss of ships which Philip
made*
There was sunk in this Battle at Sea which Philip had against Attalus, the
Galleys of ten Oars, nine Oars, seven Oars, and six Oars, and moreover
ten Vessels covered, three Galliots, and five and twenty Foists, withal the
Mariners. And in that which was against the Rhodiens, ten covered Vessels,
and forty Foists: and there were two Quadriremes, and seven Foists taken with
the Mariners. In regard of that of Attalus, one Galliot with two Quinqueremes
were sunk, with the royal Skiffe. And of the Rhodiens two Quinqueremes and
Galleyes, but there was nothing taken. As for the loss of men, there died
three score Rhodiens, and about three score and ten of Attalus men, and of the
Macedonians under Philip, to the number of three thousand, and above six
thousand Mariners: and there were taken alive, as well Allies as Macedonians
two thousand, and seven hundred Egyptians. Such was the end of the Battle at
Sea near unto Chios.

Philip attributed the Victory unto himself for two principal causes: The
causes why Philip challenges the Victory to himself.
First for that he had forced Attalus to fly to Land, and had taken the
royal Vessel: the other for that he anchored in the place which they call
Argennon, among the Enemies, wrackes, and that the next Day he carried
himself as a Conqueror, gathering together the Relics of the fight, and
drawing together the Bodies of such as might be known, to the end he might
confirm this Opinion. But the Rhodiens with Dyonisod^rus made him soon after
confess that it was not true, so as he did not hold himself to have had the
Victory: For the next day the King being busied about these things, they set
sail against him, the one being advertised of the other: and when (after they
had put their ships in Front) no man durst present himself, they retired to
Chios.

But Philip who had never before at one time lost so many men, nor such,
carried his misfortune impatiently, and was in a manner desperate, although he
labored by all means to hide his conceit, matters seeming unsupportable: for
besides many other occasions, the misfortunes which happened after the
Battle, had put all those that were present in fear. Believe me, that after
so great a slaughter of men, all the Country where the Combat was fought, was
full of Carkases, blood, Arms, and the wrackes of Ships. And the days
following you might have seen the shore full of all these things ^eaped
together. So as it was not only displeasing unto him, but to all the
Macedonians.

In regard of Theophiliscus, having suruiued a day, and written into the
Country of the success of the Combat at Sea, and had appointed Cleoneus to
command the Army in his place, he dyed of the wounds he had received: The
death of Theophiliscus.
who had showed himself a valiant man in danger, and who by the providence of
his Council, was worthy to have his Name preserved in memory. For if he had
not given advice to follow Philip, all the rest had neglected the opportunity
of the Victory, being amazed at his courage: so as in beginning of the fight
he forced his Citizens to follow the occasions of the time. He likewise
persuaded Attalus not to temporize, nor to waste time in the preparation of
things concerning the War: But contrariwise to fight valiantly, and to
undergo the present danger. Wherefore the Rhodiens have with good reason,
after his death done him such honors, as the living and those that were
present were not only incited to fight valiantly for their Country, but also
the posterity.

What do we then see in this violence? No other thing but Nature. It
oftentimes falls out that many upon a bare show of hope, desire impossible
things, vanquishing every man's hope with their covetousness: and when they
have once begun, they cannot divert their fancies: for that they have their
understanding blinded and deceived with the impossibility of their attempts,
and the discontent of the accidents. When as Philip had in vain given some
assaul^ to a small Town, for that it was well fortified, he retired, after he
had ruined some places with the whole Country.

Being gone from thence, he planted his Camp about Prinasse, Prinasse besieged
by Philip.
and besieged it by myning. Where when he lost his time, for that the place was
stony, he used this invention: he causes a great noise to be made by day in
the Mines, as if he labored to overthrow the Walls, causing in the night great
store of earth to be brought and to be laid at the entry of the Mines, to the
end he might terrify the Inhabitants by a view of so great a digging in the
ground. It is true that at the first the Prinasseins were constant and
courageous: but when as Philip had signified unto them that their Wall was
undermined the length of the third part of a Furlong, and had demanded of them
if they would deliver the City and save their lives, or perish with it, the
foundations being burnt, then giving credit unto his words, they presently
delivered it.

A Parcel of the City of the Iasseens.
THe City of the Iasseens is situated in Asia upon the Gulf joining to
Neptune of Milesia, The Gulf of Neptune.
and called of the Myndiens. According to the advice of many, it takes its name
from the Cities of the Vargylietes, which are built upon the back part. They
say that in the beginning they were peopled by Argines: and that afterward the
Milesiens predecessors being brought in, and the Children of Neleus, they built
the City of Myletum, The City of Miletum built.
after their defeat in the Wars of Carya. This City has ten Furlongs in
circuit. The common brute is, and they believe it among the Vargylietes, The
Image of Diana.
that although the statue of Diana Cindiades be uncovered, yet it endures no
fogs nor rain, like unto that of Vesta among the Iasseens: the which some
Historiographers have auerr'd. For my part, I know not how I contradict and
blame boldly in all this treaty this advice of Historiographers. In truth they
seem to me wholly to favor of their Childishness, who without consideration
comprehend not only idle and sottish things, but those which are impossible.
For if any one should say that some body may be so illuminated and
transparent, as he shall make no shadow, this would show a transported
Judgment, as Theopompus has done, saying that they which enter into the
Temple of Jupiter in Arcadia, make no shadow. Whereunto that is conformable
which is now spoken. Wherefore we must pardon some Historiographers in all
things which preserve the devotion of the people toward the Gods, who relate
monstrous things, but in that which exceeds this course, they are not to be
pardoned. Peradventure in every thing there is a different quality to describe
them, yea, sometimes impossible: wherefore we must pardon if any one through
ignorance does stray a little from the truth: and according to my judgment
reprove all that which exceeds reason.

A Parcel of Publius Scipio.
PVblius Scipio being soon after returned from Affricke^ When as the
expectation of the people was conformable to the greatness of his actions, it
fell out that they conceived a great love and affection toward him: The which
was not without cause. For whereas they feared never to chase Hannibal out of
Italy, nor to free themselves nor their Allies from the eminent danger: they
seemed then certainly not only to be delivered from all fear and misery, but
also to domineere over their Enemies: wherefore they were confounded with joy.
When he triumphed* being moreover by the effects of things which were brought
in, advertised of the precedent dangers, they were touched with an exceeding
love as well to the Gods, as to the Author of so great an alteration.

Syphax King of the Masaisylins was led in triumph through the City with the
other Prisoners, Syphax King of the Masaisylins.
who soon after died in Prison. These things thus perfromed, the Romans made
continual Combats for many Days, and celebrated Feasts in their assemblies,
having wherewithal to satisfy it by the liberality and bounty of Scipio. Many
attempt great Wars bravely, and strive with a certain vehemence to augment a
Commonwealth: But it is a rare thing to bring them to the propounded end, and
to accomplish by reason and industry, if Fortune sometime opposes that which
wants courage and speedy action. Wherefore some may with reason blame the sloth
of Attalus and of the Rhodiens, in commending the royal courage of Philip, and
his constancy in his enterprise: not that his conceit is always worthy of
Commendation but so far as it concerns his present Enterprise and attempt. I
propound this distinction to the end no man should suspect us of contradiction:
for that (as we have heretofore) commended and blamed Philip, so now I do the
contrary. They must understand that in the beginning of this Work I have so
made my distinction, saying that it was necessary sometimes to commend and
blame the same persons, A man may be commended and blamed according to the
diversity of his Actions.
for that moments and events of things do many times change the hearts of men,
when they incline to better or worse. It happens likewise sometimes, that men
by Nature endeavor things which are reasonable, and sometimes the contrary:
whereof in my Opinion the one happened now to Philip. When he was inflamed for
the precedent losses, showing more choler and rage then reason, he
accommodated himself to the present occasions, with a constant and admirable
courage, and has by this course enjoyed those things which followed, in
advancing himself against the Rhodiens and Attalus. I thought good to deliver
this, for that some give over their enterprises in leaving their first heat,
like unto bad and lazy runners: Some likewise vanquish their Enemies in this
only, that they are constant in their enterprises.

Of the Cities of Abydos and Sestes Maritine and opposite.
I Hold it lost time to use any long discourse of the commodities of the Cities
of Abydos and Sestes: for that matters of small moment are known to all, by
reason of the ordinary frequenting of the places: yet I do not think for the
present that a summary aduertisment to the Reader, would be unprofitable in
regard of them. You must understand that the things which are now to be spoken
of the said Cities) are not so much drawn from their situation, as from their
opposition and conference. Whereas the Navigations of the Sea, which some call
by the name of Ocean, others Attlantique, is not passable, but at the streights
which are at the Pillars of Hercules: Neither can they in our Sea, in the
Propontis and Pontus, unless it be made by the straight betwixt Abydos and
Sestes. Of the profit of Abydos and Sestes.
As Fortune has prepared two Gulfes with some reason, it falls out that the
straight of the Pillars of Hercules is broader then that of Hellesponte: For it
is of three score Furlongs, and that of Abydos only of two. The which we may
conjecture has been made for a greater spaciousness of the exterior Sea, A
comparison of the straight of Abydos with that of Gibeltar.
then ours. That of Abydos is more commodious then that of the Pillars of
Hercules. For the first is inhabited on either side, and in manner of a Port,
for the mutual communication of Traffic, and has in some place a Bridge for
those which pass on foot from one firm land to another. They also salie
continually on the other side. In regard of that of the Pillars of Hercules, it
is little frequented, for that the people which inhabit some in Affricke, some
in Europe, have little commerce together: and this exterior Sea is little
frequented and tried. The City of the Abydeins The City of the Abydeins.
is environed on either side with the farthest bounds of Europe: having a Port
from whence Sailors with what wind soever, may be seen. But it is not possible
for any man to come unto the City, being without this ingulfement of the Sea to
the Port, by reason of the swiftness and vehemence of the current.

Another Parcel of Philip of Macedon.
YEt when as Philip had fortified one part with Pallisadoes, The Abydeins
besieged by Phil^p
and cast a Ditch about the other, he besieged the Abydeins by Sea and Land. In
regard of the means of their defense, it was not admirable, neither for the
greatness of the preparation, nor for the diversity of inventions, which are
declared in the same work, by the which the besiegers and besieged do usually
practice and surprise one another by policies: But for the good directions and
valor of the besieged, it is worthy of memory, if ever any were, and which
ought to come unto posterity. In the beginning the Inhabitants of Abydos
relying in themselves, maintained the attempts of Philip valiantly: and as for
his Engines set up at Sea, they brake some with casting of Stones, and they
burnt others: so as the Enemies could hardly save their Vessels from this
danger: In regard of those at Land, for time they made a valiant resistance,
never despairing to obtain the Victory against their Enemies. But when as the
Fort which stood without the Wall had been overthrown by Mines, and that the
Macedonians were afterward come unto the Wall which they had built within, in
the end they sent Iphias and Pantacnote in Embassy, to yield the City unto
Philip, but upon condition that he should suffer the Soldiers of the Rhodiens
and Attalus to depart, and their Bodies free, to save themselves where they
thought good with their Apparel. And when as Philip had given them charge to
submit themselves unto his will, or to fight it our bravely, the Ambassadors
retired. The course which the Abydeins take in despair.
This being heard, the Abydeins assemble the people, and consult in despair of
their necessities. First of all they decree to give liberty to their Slaves, to
the end they might willingly become Companions in the Combat: And consequently
draw all their Wives into Diana's Temple: and the Children with their Nurses
into the Schools, and finally their Gold and Silver into the Market place, and
the richest apparel into the Rhodiens Galley, and that of the Cyziceneins.

When they had decreed these things, and had with one accord executed the
resolution, they make another assembly, choosing fifty of the most ancient, and
men of credit, being strong and able to execute the decree, and make them
swear in the presence of all the Citizens, that if they saw the Wall taken by
the Enemy, they should then kill their Wives and Children, and set fire of the
said Galleyes, casting (according to their Oath) the Gold and Silver into the
Sea. Finally, they call their Prelates, who conjure them all to vanquish their
Enemies, or to dye fighting for their Country. This done, after they had
sacrificed, they force their Prelates, and their Wives to make execrations upon
the Sacrifices of the said things. These things thus confirmed, they did not
countermine aginst the Enemies Mines, resolving that if the Wall sell, they
would stand upon the ruins, fighting to the death. Wherefore some one may with
reason say, that the folly of the Phocenses and the joy of the Acarnanians,
has been vanquished by the courage of the Abydeins. The Phocenses seem to
have decreed the like for their Kinsfolks, although they were not wholly in
despair of the Victory, for they were to fight in field with the Thessalians.

The Acarnanians foreseeing the attempts of the Etoliens, resolved the same in
their eminent danger, whereof we have formerly spoken in particular. The
Abydeins being shut up, and in a manner desperate of their safety, desired
rather by a common consent to try this Fortune with their Wives and Children,
then living to deliver them into their Enemies hands. For which reason we may
blame Fortune for the ruin of the Abydeins: Seeing that having compassion of
the calamities of the former, she has suddenly relieved them* yielding unto
the desperate hope and safety: whereas contrariwise she has been incensed
against the Abydeins. The men were slain and the City taken: their Children
with their Wives fell into their Enemies hands: For after the fall of the Wall,
planting themselves upon the ruins, according to their Oath, they fought with
such great courage, as when as Philip had sent supplies unto the Macedonians at
the assault until Night, he was in the end forced to take breath, and to
despair of his attempt. The Abydeins did not only fight with great
confidence, standing upon the dead bodies in danger, and with resolution with
their Swords and Iauelings: But having no means to use them, they cast
themselves with fury upon the Macedonians, overthrowing some with their arms,
charging others always with the stocks of their broken Iauelings: and
repulsing them, thrusting directly at their Faces and other naked parts. The
prowess of the Abydeins.
Night being come, and the Combat ceasing, Glaucides and Theognite assembling
some few of the ancient, changed (for the hope of their private safeties) that
severe and noble vow of the Citizens, in regard of the great number that had
been slain at the Wall, and for that the rest were weakened with toil and
wounds. Wherefore they resolved to abandon their Wives and Children to
Captivity, and at the break of day to send their Priests and Wives, with their
Diadems and head-bands to Philip, to the end that entreating him upon their
knees, they might deliver him the City.

At the same time King Attalus being advertised of the Siege of the Abydeins,
sails by the Egean Sea to Tenedos. In like manner Marcus Emilius the younger a
Roman, came by Sea to Abydos. For when the Romans had been truly advertised
of the Siege of Abydos, and would expostulate with Philip according to their
charge, and to understand the cause why he assailed the Kings, Marcus Emilius
s^nt to Philip.
they sent this Emilius unto him. Who when he had audience of Philip in Abydos,
he let him understand that the Senate admonished him, not to make War against
any Grecians, nor to meddle with the affairs of Ptolomy: And whereas he had
done outrage to the Rhodiens and Attalus, he should make a promise to give them
satisfaction: in doing which he should remain in peace, but if he would not
obey, he should prepare to have War with the Romans. When as Philip labored
to let him understand that the Rhodiens had been the first Assailants, Marcus
interrupting him said; What have the Athenians? Cianeins, and Abydeins done?
which of them has first assailed you? The King studying what to answer to
these three demands, The brave answer of Philip to Marcus Emilius.
told him that he pardoned his arrogance in words, for that first he was young
and without experience: Secondly, that he was the best man amongst them, as in
truth he was. The Romans (said he) have no reason to break the Accords, nor to
make War against me: but if they did, he would defend his own valiantly and
invoke the Gods for aid. This Speech being ended, they parted one from the
other.

Philip having gotten the City of the Abeydeins, he presently took all the
Goods which had been carried away by them. The cruelty of the Abydeins to
themselves.
When he saw the people and their fury, who slew, burnt, and strangled
themselves, their Wives, and Children, casting them into Wells, and hanging
them in their houses, he was amazed: And being discontented at that which was
done, he let them know that he gave them three days respite that would hang or
kill themselves. But the Abydeins preventing him (according to their first
resolution) could not suffer any one of those to live, which were not yet bound
nor tied to this kind of necessity, holding themselves in not doing it, for
Traitors toward those which had fought, and were dead for their Country. All
the rest without delay dyed according to their Races.

Of Philopomene and the deeds of the Acheins.
ANd when as Philopomene had considered the distances of of all the Cities, and
that they might come to Tegee by one way, he wrote Letters to all the Cities,
and sends them to those which were farthest off, and diuides them in such sort,
as every City had not only those which were directed unto it, The form of
Philopomenes Letters to the Cities.
but also those for other Cities lying upon the same way. He has written to
the Magistrates in these terms: When you shall have received these Letters,
use all diligence, that such as are able to bear Arms, may assemble in the
Market place, every man furnished with five Days victuals, and seventeen
Sous, and sixeteene Deniers in Money. And when they shall be all assembled,
lead them to the next City: where being arrived, deliver the Letters to the
Magistrate, and perform the contents. In the which was contained the charge
which had bin given to the former, only the name was altered, but he place was
not named whither the Voyage was intended.

This course being continued, no man knew to what end nor why this preparation
was made, nor whither they went out of the next City. All being uncertain and
receiving one another they marched on. But for that the Cities which were
beyond, had not an equal distance from Tegee, he did not send Letters to them
all at the same time, but particularly according to their order: so as unknown
to the Inhabitants, and to those which arrived, what should succeed, all the
Acheins entered in Arms by all the Gates. He had without doubt resolved these
things in his judgment, by a Military stratagem, for for the multitude of
Scouts and Spies which the Tyrant had. The which the Tyrant had. The same day
that the multitude of the Acheins should assemble, he sent choice men, who in
the Night should pass the Selasia: and at the break of day run into the
Country of Lacedemon. But if the Mercenaries by encounter did any way trouble
them, he gives them charge to recover Scotite, obeying Didascolonde the Candiot
in all things. For he had given him the charge of all this enterprise. These
men went resolutely to the place appointed. And when as Philopomene had
commanded the Acheins ^o suppe early, he goes with his Army out of Tegee: and
making good use of the Night in his Voyage, he leads his Army to the place
appointed near unto Scotite, the midway betwixt Tegee and Lacedemon. The
Soldiers of Pelene the day following ran speedily as it is their custom, A
sally out of Pelene upon the Acheins.
and assailed the Enemy suddenly, who were advertised of their coming by
their Scouts. And when the Acheins (according to the Commandment they had
received) retired, they pursued them at their backs confidently and with
courage. But suddenly they fell into the Ambush, where some of them were
slain by the Acheins, and others taken.

A PARCEL OF the Seventeenth Book of the History of POLYBIVS:
Where they treat of the Peace betwixt Philip of Macedony and the other
Grecians, by the means of Titus a Roman.
THe time appointed being come, Philips Company.
Philip artiues by Sea from the Demetriade, to the Gulf of Meli^a, accompanied
with five Foists and one Galley, wherein he sailed. He was attended on by
Apolodorus and Demosthenes Macedonians, his Chancellours. There was also
Brachylles of ^eocia, and Chiliades the Achein, a Fugitive out of Morea for the
causes above mentioned. With the which were also King Saminandre and
Dionisodorus sent by Attalus. And as for the Cities and people, Aristenetes and
Xenophon were for the Acheins: and Acesymbrotes and Nauarchus were for the
Rhodiens: and for the Etoliens came Phenee Chief of the Army, with many other
Citizens.

When they were approacht the Sea near unto Nicea, Titus the Chief of the
Romans, stayed at the shore. Philip being almost at Land, stayed in his
Vessel. And when as Titus persuaded him to Land, he said (standing upright in
his ship) that he would not. Being likewise demanded by Titus what he feared,
he answered, No man but the Gods: The wise answer of Philip.
but there were many there whom he did not trust, namely, the Etoliens. And
when the Roman Commander wondered, saying, that the peril was equal unto all,
and that time common. Philip answering said, that he understood it not so: For
an inconvenience happening to Phenee, the Etoliens had Commanders enough for the
War: But if Philip dyed, there was no King of Macedony for the present. In the
beginning of his Speech he seemed importune to them all. But Tytus advised him
to speak of the Affairs for which he was come. Philip answered him, that it
belonged to him and ^ot unto himself: For this cause he required him to let
him know what there was to be done to enjoy a Peace.

The Roman Commander told him that he must use plain and open words, and
advised him to leave all Greece, restoring the Prisoners and Fugitives which
were in his power: To yield likewise unto the Romans the places of Sclauonia,
which he had seized on after the Accord made in Epirus: That he should restore
unto Ptolomy, all the Cities which he had taken since the Death of Ptolomeus
Philopater. When Tytus had spoken this, he held his peace: But turning to the
rest, he willed every man to deliver his charge*

Dionisodorus being sent by Attalus began first, The Articles which
Dionisodorus demanded of Philip.
saying that he should restore the ships taken by him in the Battle at Sea
near unto Chio, and likewise the Prisoners: and re-edifie the Temple of Venus,
and the A^senall of the triumphs of Victories which he had ruined. After whom
Asesymbrotes Chief of the Army at Sea for the Rhodiens, Asesymbrotes demands
for the Rhodiens.
required that Philip should leave Perea, which he had taken from them, and
finally retire the Garrisons which he had at Iasse, in the Vargylies, and in
the City of the Eromeens: And moreover restore the Perinthiens to the
comminalty of the Constantinopolitains, and to abandon Sestes, Abydos, and the
Faiers of Asia. The demands of the Acheins and Etoliens.
After the Rhodiens the Acheins demanded Corinth and the City of the Argiues
whole and safe. After these the Etoliens required first as the Romans had done,
that he should abandon all Greece, and that afterward he should restore the
Cities whole and entire, which formerly had been of the same Burgess with the
Etoliens.

When as Phenee Chief of the Etoliens had spoken thus, Alexander following
after, whom they call Isie, in show a man of judgment to manage affairs, and
of great Eloquence, Alexander against Philip.
said, that Philip did not demand a peace roundly, nor made War valiantly, if
it were to be done at any time: and that in assemblies and treaties he watched
carefully, playing the part of an Enemy: and that in the War he carried
himself wickedly, and not as a good man. For when he should affront the Enemy,
it is manifest that he flies the list, and in the mean time burns and ruins
Cities: and being thus vanquished by his will, he corrupts the rewards of the
Victors: although the ancient Kings of Macedony were never of that mind, but
quite contrary. They have fought often Battles in the open field, and have
seldom ruined any Cities. The which is manifest to all the World, as well by
the Asian War of Alexander against Darius, as by the difference of the
Successors, by the which they have all made War against Antigonus for the
Empire of Asia. And their posterity has been of this humor until the time
of ^yrrhus, to fight valiantly with an Enemy in open Battle: Doing all that
concerned a mutual Combat of men furnished with Arms, yet pardoning the
Cities: for that the Victors of them are vanquished, and blamed by those which
are subdued. It is the part of a mad man to ruin that for which the War is
made, and then to leave it: The which he said Philip did at that time, and that
he had ruined more Cities in Thessaly, being of the same friendship and League
in War; when as he parted speedily from the streights of Epirus, then ever
any of those had done which made War against the Thessaliens.

And when he had used a long Speech, and delivered other things of the same
subject. In the end he demanded of Philip, why Lysimachia being associated to
the Etoliens, and having a Commander of the War from them, he had chased
him away, putting a garrison into the City? Why he had spoiled the Cyaneins,
of the Etolien Burgeoiship, being a friend to the Etoliens? Moreover upon what
color he detained Escheins, Thebes, Phthie, Pharsalia, and Larrisse? Having
spoken this, Alexander held his peace. When as Philip had approached nearer to
Land then before, standing upright in his ship, Philips answer.
said, that Alexanders Speech was Etolique: and that it was notorious to all
the World, that no man ruined those which were his companions in Arms, and yet
a Prince according to the occasion of times, is many times forced to do things
against his will. The King using this Speech: Phenee having a bad sight, looks
oftentimes cross upon Philip, saying that he told Fables: and that he should
either vanquish in fighting, or else subscribe and obey the commandments of
the Victors.

And although that Philip were discontented, yet he omitted not his kind of
speech; but turning to Phenee, a blind man said he, would see it. He was in
truth apt to Choler, and it was it a manner bred in him, to jest at the good
Fortune of other men. Then turning toward Alexander, thou demaundest of me,
said he, for what reason I have taken Lysimachia: To the end that thorough your
negligence and baseness, it might not be ruined by the Thrasiens, as then it
happened, having retired my Soldiers for the present, being there for the
defense thereof, and not as thou say to take it. In regard of the Cyaneins, I
made no Warreagainst them: But when as Prusias assailed them in giving him
succors, I took the City with him, whereof you have been the cause. For
when as the other Cities of Greece and my self had required you often by
Embassies, to abrogate the Law which allows you to take spoil upon spoil:
You answered that we must first take Etolia from Etolia, then the said Law. A
strange Custom of the Etoliens.
And when as Tytus wondered how that could be, the King labored to make him
understand it, saying that the Etoliens had a Custom not only to assail
those and their Country, with whom they had War: But also it is lawful for
them, if their Allies be in Quarrel, to assail both the one and the other
with their Regions, and to hold them, without any common decree. And by this
means the Etoliens have neither Laws of Friendship nor Hatred, being ready to
fall upon those which are in controversy for any Affairs. Whereon then do
these men ground an accusation against me? I was a friend to the Etoliens, so
was I allied to Prusias, and I attempted against the Cy^neins to succor my
Allies.

But behold a case of wonderful discretion, that they which have made
themselves Enemies to the Romans, command the Macedonians to depart out of
Greece. Without doubt it is a very arrogant Speech. If the Romans speak it, it
is tolerable, if the Etoliens, intolerable. But out of what Greece would you
have me depart? How do you limit it? Are there not many Etoliens in Greece? You
shall see that the Agraeins, Apodates, and Amphiloqueins are not of Greece, at
the least you leave them to me. And when as Tytus smiled, this said he, shall
suffice against the Etoliens: And as for that which concerns the Rhodiens and
Attalus, we may with more justice and equity require, that they should rather
restore to us our Prisoners and Vessels, then we to them. We have not assailed
the Rhodiens nor Attalus first, but they us, it is without contradiction. Yet
for thy sake we will restore Perea to the Rhodiens, and to Attalus his ships
and men which are living. In regard of the ruin of the Triumph of Victories,
and of Venus Temple, we cannot repair them: And for that which concerns the
Trees and Gardens, I will send men to dig the ground, and will give order
that the Trees which are cut may grow again. And when as Tytus smiled again
at the scoff of Philip, Philip addressing himself to the Acheins, he put
them in mind at the first of the benefits and favors they had received from
Antigonus and himself. Moreover he laid open the many Honors which the Acheins
had done unto them. Finally, he has read the Resolution of their reuolte in
following the Romans party. Upon which occasion he propounded many things
against the preuarication and ingratitude of the Acheins: Yet promising to
restore them Argos. In regard of Corinthe he would confer with Tytus.

After this Speech held to the rest, he said to Tytus* that he was to speak
to him and to the Romans, whether he were of opinion that he should abandon the
Cities and places which he had Conquered among the Grecians, or else those
which he had received from his Predecessors. And when as Tytus held his peace,
Aristenes was suddenly ready to answer for the Acheins, and Phenee for the
Etoliens. But when the hour was past, the Time had closed up their mouths.
Philip required that he might have men given him to write down all that was
to do for the peace. For when he was alone, he said he had no man with whom
conferring, he might yield a reason of the Actions wherewith they charged him.

And although that Tytus heard Philip willingly in his jest, yet being loath to
be discovered by others, he gave him a touch, saying: It is no wonder if thou
be alone Philip, when thou have slain all those which gave thee Council.
The Macedonian using a Counterfeite smile, held his peace. Then they all gave
in Writing what they had demanded, appointing another assembly for the day
following at Nicea. To which place Titus came with his Company, where all the
rest appeared, but Philip came not. And when as the day was far spent, and
that Titus expected his coming no longer, he armed at Sun setting,
accompanied with the same men, saying that he had spent the whole day in
vexation and discontent, for the difficulty of the things wherewith they
charged him, But according to the opinion of others he did it to frustrate by
the shortness of time, the accusation of the Acheins and Etoliens. He had
seen them the day before at his departure ready for their defense, and to
complain of him.

Wherefore at his ariuall he entreated the Commander of the Romans to treat of
this business with him in private, to the end that in debating it, they might
not fall to any outrageous words, but draw it to some end. When he had often
entreated this, Titus demanded of the Assistants their opinion what he should
do: and when they all yielded unto it, and that he should observe his words,
he took Appius Claudius a Captain of a thousand, and commanding the rest
that retiring a little into the Sea, they should stay there, bidding Philip to
come to Land. The King accompanied with Apolodorus and Demosthenes landed,
Philip lands.
and had a long discourse with Titus. In regard of that which was spoken of
either side, The Articles agreed on by Philip.
it is a difficult thing to judge. Titus then when as Philip was retired,
related unto the rest the things which he had propounded, namely that he would
yield unto the Etoliens, Larissa and Pharsalia, but not Thebes: That to the
Rhodiens he would leave Perea, but not Iasson nor Bargulies to the Acheins
Corinthe, and the City of Argiues: to the Romans that which he held in
Sclauonia with all the prisoners. That he would restore to Attalus the vessels,
and all the prisoners that were living since the nauall fight. But when as the
whole Company disliked of this accord, saying that they must generally decree
that he must depart out of all Greece: Otherwise all these articles would be
vain and frivolous.

Philip seeing this contention, fearing likewise the future accusations, he
entreats Titus to defer this assembly until the next day, for that it is now
late, saying that he would persuade them, or suffer himself to be persuaded.
And when as Titus had granted this, they resolved to assemble again at the
Port of Tyronye, and so they parted. The day following they all met at the
hour appointed. Philip having made a short speech, Another assembly a^ Thronye.
requires them all, especially Titus, that they would not break of the treaty
of peace: for that there were many things which did conduct to the conclusion
of an accord, unless the fault were in them, that the composition was not
made. Otherwise they must send Ambassadors to the Senate to order their
differences, to the which he would obey, and do all they should command him.

These things thus propounded by Philip, the others said that they must do
that which concerned the war, and not trust to his demands: But the Roman
Commander said, that he was not ignorant that Philip would not do any thing
that was propounded unto him: and yet their cause was nothing impaired, in
yielding him this favor which he demanded. For there could nothing be spoken
there that could be confirmed without the Roman Senate: and that moreover the
approaching time would be very commodious to make trial of their advice. For
as the Armies are unprofitable in regard of the Winter, there could be no
inconvenience, if in the mean time they referred themselves unto the Senate,
but a great commodity unto them all.

When they were of this opinion seeing Titus to concur, that the present
differences should be transferrd'd to the Senate, Philips cause sent to Rome.
they resolved to suffer Philip to send an Embassy to Rome, and in like manner
all in particular to make their causes known unto the Senate, and to accuse
Philip. When this resolution of the Assembly had succeeded according to the
humor and advice of Titus conceived in the beginning, he presently pursued
those things which were requisite for the Enterprise, having given order for
his affairs. Finally, he deals no more with Philip, but assigns him two
Months only, in the which he should send an Embassy to Rome, and should
retire his Garrisons for Phocis and Locre. He gives him likewise charge, that
he should not make War against any of the Roman Allies, and should give
order that in the mean time the Macedonians should do them no outrage.

And when he had dealt with Philip upon these Articles by Writing, he brought
the rest of the things propounded to an end of himself. He suddenly sends
Aminandre to Rome, knowing his sufficiency in affairs, and to purchase Friends
easily wheresoever he came: and that he would procure some good conceit and
hope, in regard of the name of Royalty. After whom he sends for Ambassadors,
Quintus Fabius, his Nephew in respect of his Wives Sister, Ambassadors sent to
Rome by Titus, the Etolien^, Acheins, and Athenians
and Quintus Fului^s, and with them Appius Claudius whom they call Nero. The
Etoliens sent Alexander Issien, Democrates a Calydonien, Dicearchus a
Trichonien, Polymarchus an Arsinoen, Lamin an Ambracio^e, and Nicomachus an
Acarnanien: and of those which were Fugitives from Thurion, and dwelt at
Ambracia, Theodotes, Pherea a Fugitive of Thessaly, and then remaining at
Strate.

The Acheins sent Xenophon an Egien: King Attalus, Alexander alone: The people
of Athens Ciphesodorus. All which come to Rome to the Senate, to deliver unto
their judgments the things which they had resolved that Year, before that the
two Consuls (at the request of the others) were sent into Gallacia against
Philip. When as Titus Friends conceived that the two Consuls should remain in
Italy for fear of the Ganles, they enter all into the Senate, and accuse
Philip roughly, delivering the same which they had formerly objected unto the
King: Yet they labored carefully to possess the Senate with an opinion, that
they could not hope for any liberty, if Calchis, Corinthe, and the Demetriades
con^nued in the hand of the Macedonians.

They said, that Philip had used that speech, and had assured that the said
places were the Bonds and shackles of Greece: the which he might well say with
reason and truth. For they could not sail safely from M^rea to Corinthe, there
being a royal Garrison: neither durst the Locrines, Beocians, and Phoco^ses
do it, whilst that Philip holds Calchis and the rest of Negrepont: Neither
likewise the Thessalians and Magnetians could not sail freely, Philip and the
Macedonians holding the Demetriade. Wherefore in that which Philip has said,
that he would leave the other places, it is a fancy and a shift to escape the
present time: and when opportunity should serve, he would easily subdue the
Grecians, so as he held the said places. For this cause they entreated the
Senate, that Philip might leave those places; or else continue in his
Enterprise, and fight valiantly: And that the greatest part of the War was
already decided, the Macedonians having lost two Battles, and the greatest
part of their forces at Land being consumed.

These Speeches ended, they entreated them with all affection not to suffer the
Grecians to be frustrated of the hope of their liberty, nor themselves
deprived of an honorable Title. The Ambassadors of Greece having debated these
things or the like: those of Philip had prepared a Mountain of words, but they
were suddenly rejected. For when as they were demanded if they would leave
Calchis, Philips Ambassadors rejected.
Coriuth, and the Demetriades, they denied that they had any thing in charge.
Wherefore being checked, War declared against Philip.
by this means they ended their Speech. The Senate sends the two Consuls into
Galacia, and declares the War against Philip to be just, giving charge to
Titus to attend the Grecians affairs.

When as the news came into Greece, all things succeeded to Titus according to
his desire. For besides that Fortune favored him, what soever he undertook
he brought to an end by his providence and care. The Commendation of Titus.
He was in truth (if there were any among the Romans) a witty and ingenuous
man. He not only undertook ordinary affairs, but those that were secret,
and with such Dexterity and Courage, as he surpast all others, although he
were yet but young: for he scarce past the Age of Thirty years. He was the
first which past into Greece with an Army.

A certain Parcel.
Mankind which seems to be the most cunning and malicious of all the
Creatures, has greater means to be more vicious. The others serving their
corporal Desires, are only deceived by them. But Mankind sins no less by a
desire of glory through negligence and inconsideration then by Nature.

More of Titus and the Grecians Actions.
ANd when as Titus could not learn where the Enemies Camp was seated, and
being assured that they were come through Thessaly. he commands them all to cut
stakes, and to carry them with them, to the end they may be ready at
necessity. This without doubt seems (according to the custom of the Grecians)
impossible, being easy to the Romans. The Grecians in truth are no good
Commanders of their Bodies in Marching, The Grecians delicate of their Bodies.
and do hardly endure toil. But the Romans having their Targets hanging at
their backs in a Belt of Leather, and carrying their Head-peeces in their
hands, bear the stakes. There was a great difference betwixt them. A
difference betwixt the Romans Stakes and the Grecians.
The Grecians held a stake that had many branches at the foot very commodious.
But the Romans use stakes with two, or three, or four branches at the most, so
as they are easy to carry, for a man carries two or three Faggots together.
There is also this difference: For the Grecians stake planted before the Camp,
may be easily pulled up. When that only which is strong, is fixed in the
ground, and has many and great branches, if two or three of them show
themselves, and draw the stake unto them, it is easily pulled up. And whereas
this happens, there is a breach easily made, by reason of the greatness, and
then the joining of them is undone by the shortness and mutual height of this
kind of Pallisado The Romans do otherwise. They plant themright up, and
interlace them in such sort, as it is not easy for any one to discern or know
from which the of the stakes stuck in the ground, the shootes take their
growth, nor from what stocks the branches come. Finally, it is not possible
for him that seeks to pull them up, to put to his hand, for that they are very
thick and intermixed together: And if they be carefully planted, he that shall
lay hold on them, shall not be able to pull them up easily, for thatall their
joints take their force from the Earth: Secondly, he shall be forced to
transport many shootes together, which shall lay hold of one branch, in regard
of their mutual interla^ing: Neither is it likely that two or three will seize
upon one stake. Yet if it happens that some one pulls up one or two, yet the
space cannot be discovered. Wherefore there is a great difference, for that
this kind of stakes is easy to find, and easy to carry, and the use is more
safe and firm. So as it is apparent, that if the Ramans have not any thing
touching the mannaging of the War which is worthy of imitation, yet this kind
of stakes (at the least in my judgment) deserves it.

When as Titus had prepared all things ready to serve him at need, he marches
a slow pace with his whole Army. Titus plants his Campeneare to Pherees
And when he came within fifty Furlongs of the City of Pherees, he camped
there. The day following at the break of day, he sent forth Spies, to seek
if they could by any means discover where the Enemies were, and what they did.
But when as Philip had received advertisement, that the Romans were at that
time Camped near unto Thebes, raising his Camp from Larissa, he prepares his
way toward Pherees with his whole Army.

When he was within thirty Furlongs, planting his Camp there, he commanded
them to have a care of their Victuals. At the break of Day awaking his Army,
he sent forth those that were appointed for Scouts, giving them charge to
gain the Hills above Pherees: Then at the Sunne-rising he parts with all his
forces. It happened soon after, that the Scouts of both Armies met on the top
of the Mountains. Knowing one another in the Dark, they stayed a little
distance off: and advertised their Commanders of that which had happened. And
when they required Directions what they should do, they were called back.

The day following either of them sent forth Horsemen, and about three hundred
Soldiers to discover: with whom Titus sent two Bands of Etoliens for their
experience of the places: The which assailing one another near unto Pherees
and Larissa, An encounter of the foretunne^s.
they fought valiantly. But when the Etoliens of Epoleme fought with great
courage, being also called the Italiques, it happened that the Macedonians were
pressed. But after they had skirmished some time, they retired to their Camps.
And when as the day following the Plain was displeasing to either of them, for
that it was full of Trees, Hedges, and Gardens, they raise their Camps. Philip
took his way toward Scotusse, making haste, to the end he might draw
Victuals from the City, and lodge his Army with more advantage. Titus
coniecturing what would happen, parts with his Army at the same instant, making
haste to spoil the Scotussiens Corn before the coming of Philip. But for
that in the marching of the two Armies, there was a great interposition of high
Hills and Mountains, the Romans nor the Macedonians could not discover one
another in the direction of their way. Wherefore that days journey being
ended, Titus came unto Eretria, and Philip to the River of Onchiste, and
presently planted their Camps there unknown to one another.

And when as the day following they had marched on, Philip stays at Melambie
of the Seotusseins, and Titus about the Thetidie of Pharsalia: where they were
again unknown one to another. And as there fell a Rain and the yearly
Thunder, it happened that the day following in the Morning there arise a great
fogge, the which falling they could not see what was before their feet. Yet
Philip making haste to dispatch that which was offered, Campt wandering with his
Army: But being hindered by the troublesomenesse and difficulty of the way in
regard of the fogge, he advanced little, and pallisadoed his Camp.

Finally, he sent Phedria, and gives him charge to gain the tops of the Hills
interposed. Titus likewise being Camped about Thetidie, and being doubtful
where the Enemies were, he made choice of ten Bands, and about a thousand of
the most valiant, sending them before to search diligently, and to enter the
Country: who marching to the tops of the Hill, fell by indiscretion into an
Ambush of the Enemies, The Romans charged by the Macedonians.
by reason of the darkness of the day. Either of them at the first were
somewhat troubled, but soon after they charge one another. They likewise send
to inform their Commanders of this accident.

But when as the Romans in this Charge were pressed, and in danger by the Ambush
of the Macedonians, they sent unto their Camp for Succors. Titus commanding
the Etoliens, sends those which were under the charge of Archidamus, and of the
Eupolemus, and two Tribunes with five hundred Horse, and two thousand Foot. At
whose coming they which in the beginning did but skirmish, resuming courage,
presently put on another kind of Combat. The Romans relying upon their
Succors, double their forces for the fight. And although the Macedonians
defended themselves bravely, yet they sent unto the King, being pressed and
annoyed by their Arms, and for their refuge recovered the tops of the
Mountains.

And when as Philip had no hope but that they should be able that day to give
Battle with all their Forces for the fore-sayd Causes, he had sent many of
his men to forage. But when he was advertised of that which happened by those
which he had sent, and that the mist was past, he sent Heraclides the
Gyrtonien, Chief of the Thessalian Horse, and Leon Commander of the Macedonian
Cauallery.

He likewise sent Athenagorus with all the Mercenaries exept the Thracians.
Who being come to the Ambush, and the Macedonians much reinforced, they made
head against the Enemy, and repulsed the Romans from the Hills. The Dexterity
of the Etolien Horse did much hinder the Enemies from turning head. They fought
in truth with great courage and confidence. The Nature of the Etoliens as well
on force as Horseback.
The Etoliens in regard of the Foote-men, are faint both in their Arms and
Ordonance for a Combat in Field: But their Horsemen are excellent above all
the other Grecians in particular and separated Combats. Wherefore it happened,
that for that they had stayed the violence and fury of the Enemy, they could
not so soon recover the Plain, but stayed for a time in Battle.

But when as Titus saw not only the most valiant and his Horsemen retire but
also his whole Troops to be dismayed, Titus puts his Army in Battle.
he draws his whole Army to Field, and puts them in order upon the Hills. At
the same instant they which were in Guard, ran hastily one after another to
Philip, crying out unto him, Sir, the Enemies fly, lose not this occasion: The
Barbarians seek us not: This day is yours, embrace the time, and by this
means they ^n^ire and stir up Philip to Battle, although the situation of
the place did not content and please him. For the said Hills (which they call
Dogs-head) are rough, difficult of all sides, and high. Wherefore when as
Philip had formerly foreseen the vnequalnesse of the places, he had not in
the beginning made any preparation unto Battle: But being then provoked by
the great confidence of the aduertisements, he draws his Army with all speed
out of the Fort.

In regard of Titus, he orders his Troops and Bands for the Battle, and
follows them close which began the Skirmish, making remonstrances unto the
Battalions as he turned. His Speech was short, plain, and intelligible to the
Hearers. Propounding then the cause, he said unto his Soldiers: Are not these
O Companions, the same Macedonians, who formerly holding in Macedony the top of
the Mountains toward Heordia, you have forced with Sulpicius, and chased from
thence with the defeat of the greatest part of them? Are not these the same
Macedonians, who being seized upon the difficult places of Epirus, and leaving
no hope of approach, you have chased by your prowess, and forced to fly into
Macedony, abandoning their Arms? What reason is there then that you should
fear the same men, with whom you are to enter into an equal Combat? To what
end do we propound unto you precedent actions to consider on, but that in
regard of them you should fight more confidently? Wherefore Companions attend
the Battle with resolution, giving courage one to another. I hold for
certain, that with the good pleasure of the Gods, the end of this Battle
will soon be the conclusion of the precedent.

When Titus had used these Speeches, he commands the right Wing of his Army
not to budge, setting the Elephants before them: And assailes the Enemy with
great courage with the left Wing, being accompanied by the most valiant. They
which among the Romans had began the Fight, showing their courage, pressed the
Enemies, having been relieved by some Troops of Footmen. And when as at the
same time Philip saw that the greatest part of his Army was in order of
Battle before the Pallisadoe, A Battle betwixt the Romans and Philip of
Macedony.
he marches, taking the Targetteers and the Battalion of the right Wing, and
ascends the Hills with speed: giving charge to Nicanor (whom he called
Elephant) to command the rest of the Army to follow close. As soon as the
first had recovered the top, he defends the Battalion, setting the Targets
before, and seized upon the higher Country. And when as the Macedonians pressed
the Romans much, upon the two flanks of the Hills, he discovered the tops to
be abandoned. As he fortified the right Wing of his Army, it happened that the
Soldiers were much annoyed by the Enemy.

For when they they which were best armed, were joined unto the most valiant of
the Romans, and succored them in this fight, they pressed the Enemies much and
flew many. As the King was there in the beginning, and saw the Combat of the
valiant men not to be far from the Camp, he rejoiced: again, when he saw
them decline, and to have need of Succors, he was forced to send them, and
at that instant to hazard a Battle, although that many of the Troops of his
Army were yet upon the way, and approached to the Hills. And in taking the
Soldiers he ranks them all, as well on foot as Horseback on the right
Wing, commanding the bears of Burthe^s and the Battalions, to double the Front
of their Ranks, and to stand close upon the right hand.

This being done, when as the Enemies joined with them, he commanded the
Battalion that bending down their Iauelings they should match in order, and
mingle with the strongest. At the same instant, when as Titus had retired those
which had bagunne the Fight, to the spaces which were betwixt the Ensigns, he
charge the Enemy.

The Combat beginning on either side with great fury and clamor, all crying
together, yet those which were without the fight crying unto the rest, the
Battle was made very horrible and cruel, and it showed the force of the
Combat, Philips right Wing carried it self valiantly in this Battle:
charging the Enemy from above, having an advantage in their order: which
finally for the present fight was much more commodions, in regard of the
diversity and several sorts of Arms. In regard of the rest of the Army, some
were joined unto the Enemy fighting a far off, others showed themselves upon
the left hand having gotten the tops of the Hills.

When as Tytus saw and did well perceive that his men could not endure the
force of the Enemies battallion, and those of the right wing to be repulsed,
and some seaine, and others to retire by degrees, and that all his hope of
safety consisted in the right Wing, he goes speedily unto them, and considers
the Enemies order. When he saw some succeed in their places which had fought,
and others to descend from the Hills, and some to stay upon the tops, he
marches against the Enemy with his Ensigns, putting the Elephants before. And
when as the Macedonians had no ^duertisement by Trumpets and Clarons, and that
they could not make it good, nor receive any true order of a battallion, as well
for the difficulty of the place, as for that the Combattants had the form of
goers, and not of an order of Battle, and that there was no further means to
fight single, or hand to hand with the Romans: Being also terrified and much
injured with the Elephants, and likewise separated one from another, they
marched presently away. Wherefore many Romans pursued them continually and slew
them.

One of the Captains Milleneirs being of this Troop, having but twenty
Ensigns, considering at the very instant what was to be done, did great
service for the obtaining of an absolute Victory. For when he saw those that
accompanied Philip, assailed the others often, and grievously to annoy the left
Wing, he turns to them that were in distress, leaving those which vanquished
on the right Wing, and charged the Macedonians in the Rear. When as they of
the Battallion could not make resistance, fighting man to man, this other was
at their backs, killing those they incountred, there being no man that could
succor them, so as in the end they were forced to turn head, and to abandon
their Arms. Although that Philip (as we have said in the beginning) had a
great hope in the Victory, making a conjecture in his own conceit, yet seeing
the Macedonians to abandon and leave their Arms suddenly, and the Enemies to
charge in the Rear, he parts speedily from the Battle with some Horse and
Foot to consider fully of the Combat.

When as he imagined that the Romans by their pursuit would approach to the
right Wing on the tops of the Hills, he seeks to draw together as many
Thaesiens and Mac^donians as possibly he could. When as Tytus pursued the
Chase, and had discovered the left Wing of the Macedonians to ass^ile the
tops of the Hills, The sign which the Macedonians give when they yield.
he stayed: For that the Enemies held their Iauelings right up: The which the
Macedonians are accustomed to do when they yield, or retire from the Enemy.
When he had known the cause of this accident, he restraines his men, being
willing to pardon those that were amazed with fear. But whilst that Tytus
considered of these things, some of the fore most Charge them from above and
kill many: The victory of the Romans.
few escaped abandoning their Arms. This Battle being thus ended of all
sides, and the Romans having the victory, Philip retires toward Tempe, and
coming the first day to the Tower of Alexander, he past the Night there. The
day following passing to Gonnes, he entered Tempe, staying there for those
which should escape in the flight.

When as the Romans had pursued the Chase for a time, some strip the dead,
others draw the Prisoners together, and a great part go to force the Enemies
Camp. There they find the Etoliens, who had forced it before for spoil, and
imagining that they were frustrated of a booty which was due and did belong
unto them, they began to accuse the Etoliens before the General, and to
complain, that he had imposed the danger and the burden of the Battle upon
them, giving the profit and benefit unto others: yet being returned unto their
Camp, they were somewhat pacified. The day following they assemble and gather
together the Prisoners, and the rest of the spoil and booty, and from thence
they took their course toward Larissa.

There dyed in this battle about seven hundred Romans, and neer^ upon eight
thousand Macedonians; Number of the dead on either side.
the Prisoners were not less then five Thousand. Besides many that escaped by
flight. Thus ended this Battle given betwixt Philip and the Romans in
Thessaly at the Dogshead.

Of the difference of the Roman and Macedonian Arms.
I Had promised in the sixth Book, to make a Comparison of the Roman and
Macedonian Arms, and of the ordring of their Battles, and wherein they
differ either worse or better: Now I will endeavor to perform my promise. As
in former times the Macedonian Armies have given good proofs of their Valor,
having Vanquished the Asiatiques and Grecians, and that the Romans have
surmounted the Affricans as much, as all the Western Nations of Europe, and
that in our time the conferrence of these Armies and men is to be made, not for
once but for many times, it will be commodious and profitable to seek out
their difference, and for what reason the Romans vanquish, having always the
upper hand in Martial Combats: To the end that acknowledging it from Fortune,
we should with reason call them happy Victors, as the ignorant usually do: But
knowing the true cause, we should commend and hold these Captains for
miracnlous. In regard of the Battles given betwixt Hannibal and the Romans,
and their loss, it is not needful to use any long Discourse. The Romans
without doubt did not suffer those losses, for want of Arms, and the order of
their Battles, The Romans have bin Vanquished by the policy of Hannibal.
but in regard of the good direction and policy of Hannibal.

We declared this when we related the Battles themselves. The end of the
War confirms our opinion. For when as the Romans had found a Commander like
unto Hannibal, they suddenly were Victors. So does this, that when as
Hannibal had Vanquished the Romans first, he furnished the common Soldiers
better with the Roman Arms, rejecting their own: Having usurped them in the
beginning, he afterward made continual use of them. Pyrrhus in like manner
did not only use the Italians Arms, but also their ordering of Armies, when
as by change he sets in the head of the Romans an Ensign and Band of the
Battallion. Yet he could not overcome nor vanquish by this means, the end of
the Combat being always doubt to the one and the other. It shall be therefore
necessary and convenient to Trea^e thereof first, to the end that nothing may
seem any way contrary unto our opinion: but I will begin our conferrence.

It is an cafie thing to know by many instructions, that if a Battalion
observes its proper order and forces, so nothing can annoy it, nor withstand
it, for as an armed man has three foot in his posture in a close Combat, and
that the length of his Pike from one end to the other is of four and twenty
foot, and at the least of one and twenty: And that for the space of his hands
with the end which remains for to shake it, they abate six foot during the
Combat, it is apparent that a Pike shall have fifteen foot in length,
besides the body of every man that is armed, when with both hands he presents
it and charge the Enemy. Whereby it commonly happens that the other Pikes
pass three foot before the second, third, and fourth rank of the precedent:
The others before the fifth, if the Battallions be fitly joined and close,
according unto the order of those which are in the Rear and upon the Flanckes:
As Homer teaches when he says, the Target assures the Target, the Head-peece
the Head-peece, and the Man the Man: The Head-peeces adorned with Horses hair,
touch one another with their brave Crests: tending, that they should be joined
together and close.

As these things are spoken with good reason and truth, it is apparently
necessary, that the Pikes should be charged, according to those that go before,
passing betwixt them the length of ten foot and a half. By this means they
may visibly know of what force the preparation and order of a Battallion is,
having the length of sixteen Ranckes: Whereof they which exceed the fifth
cannot fight with their P^kes. For this cause they cannot fight hand to hand,
nor man to man: but they support them at their backs until they take breath,
to the end that the first rank may hold a firm order, repulsing all manner of
force with their Pikes, which (passing the first) might charge upon the rear.
For in marching after this ^manner, they press the fore-most with the weight
of their bodies, to make a more violent charge. For it is impossible for the
fore-most to turn back.

This being the order of a Macedonian Battalion, as well in particular as in
general, we must by way of comparison speak of the properties and
differences of the Roman Arms, and of their ordering of a Battle. The Romans
have three foot space with their Arms. The which in fighting they move from
man to man, Order of the Romans Arms.
for that every man couers his body with his Target, the which they also use
when any occasion of Combat is offered. They commonly fight with the Sword by
transport and apart: Wherefore it is manifest that these men have betwixt them,
a Retreat and space of three foot at the least, betwixt him that goes before,
and the other which follows to fight more at ease, whereby it happens that a
Roman standing still, contaynes the space of two Macedonian Soldiers, being
in the first Rank: So as he must offer himself and fight against ten Pikes:
All which one cannot cut if he would, holding them in his hands: Neither can
the following Forces any way assist the first Rank, neither to assail nor to
manage their Arms. So as we may easily conjecture, that it is impossible for
any man living, to sustain and defend the violence of a Macedonian Battallion
in Front, For what cause the Romans Vanquish.
if (as we have formerly said) it retaynes its propriety and force, for what
cause then do the Romans Vanquish?

Whence comes it that Macedonian Battallions, are frustrated of their Hope of
Victory? It is for that the Roman Ordonance, has in Battle infinite places
and times commodious for the Combat, and the Macedonians have only place and
time, when it may be serviceable and commodious. And therefore if upon some
necessity the Adversaries ^all suddenly upon the Macedonian Battallions, when
they are to give Battle, it is likely that they which make use of it, would
be always the Masters. But if they can divert or turn it, (which is an easy
thing) of what amazement and great terror will this Ordonance be?

Moreover it is very plain and manifest that a Macedonian Battallion has
need of Plains and Even ground without any let or incumbance, as Ditches,
Springs, Valleys, Hills, and Watercourse: for all these things may disturb,
break, and make frustrate their desire and intention. It is (as a man may say)
in manner impossible, to find a Country of twenty Furlongs (I speak of no
more) where none of the aforementioned things are found. It is without any
question or doubt a rare thing, and which no reasonable man will deny. Yet I
will allow there are some found. If the Enemies do not direct and guide
themselves thither, but passing on ruin the Towns, Villages, Cities, and
whole Regions of their Friends and Allies, what profit then will grow by this
kind of Ordonance? If it stays in places of advantage, it cannot give
succors to its friends, nor preserve it self. For Victuals, Munition, and
succors, may be very easily intercepted by an Enemy, if without any
opposition he be master of the field. If likewise in leaving places of
advantage, a Macedonian Battalion seeks to execute some enterprise, he is in
danger of the Enemy. For although that some one goes to field, and does not at
one time offer his Army to the fury of the Macedonian Battalion, diuerting
himself for a time during the fight, we may easily conjecture by that which
the Romans do at this day, what will happen. The conjecture of that which we
say, must not be taken from the effect. They do not present their Battalion
in such an indifferent place, as they must suddenly fight with all their forces
in front. One part fights the other stirs not.

Moreover if at any time the Macedonians press their Enemies eagerly, and are
afterward repulsed by them, the proper order of the Battalion is broken. For
they leave the rest of the Army, whether they pursue those that are retired, or
fly from those which charge them. The which being done, they leave unto the
Enemy the place which they had held, not to charge in front, but to serve them
upon the flancke or in the rear, to succor those of the Battalion. Why it is
not probable, that it should be easy for a Roman Battalion, to observe time
and advantage, and not for a Macedonian, seeing the differences are great,
according to the truth of the said things.

Moreover it is necessary for those which make use of the Macedonian Ordonance,
to pass through all sorts of Countries, and to plant their Camp, and finally
to seize upon commodious places and to besieged and endure sieges, and to
present himself against the Enemy. All these things are requirest in war:
Sometimes also the general moments which are great, serve much for the
victory: all which are not easy for a Macedonian Ordonance, yea sometimes they
are unprofitable, for that the soldier can neither serve in rank nor man to
man: Whereas the Roman is fit and profitable for these things. For every Roman
coming to fight with his Arms, is active for all times and places and for all
charges: and has generally one Ordonance, whither he be to fight in Troop
with the whole Army, or particularly Ensign, to Ensign or Man to Man.
Wherefore as the commodity is most excellent, so many times the end and
conclusion of the Battle is more prosperous and successful unto the Romans,
then to others. I have therefore thought it necessary and convenient to use a
long Discourse concerning these things, for that there are many Grecians at
this day which hold it incredible, that the Macedonians should be vanquished
and overcome, being ignorant of the cause and means, whereby a Macedonian
Ordonance is vanquished by the Roman Arms.

When as Philip had used all possible means he could in this Battle, and
yet was prevented of the Victory, Philips retreat into Macedony.
he foorth-with made great have (passing by Tempe) to recover Macedony, being
accompanied with all those which had escaped from the Battle. He presently
sent unto Laressa the second Night after the Battle, one of the Archers of
his Guard, giving him charge to tear and burn the Royal Letters, doing
therein an Act worthy of a King, who in his adverse Fortune had not forgotten
that which was to be done. He knew and did well perceive that if the Romans
were once seized on his Commentaries, there might be many occasions offered
unto his Enemies against him and his Friends. It may be it happened and fell
out to him as to others, who not able to contain their power moderately in
prosperous things, yet have borne and suffered many Crosses and Disasters with
patience: The which happened unto Philip, as will be apparent by the following
Discourse. So as aiming at that which was convenient, we have plainly showed
and declared his Attempts tending to reason, and again his change to worse,
and when, how, and wherefore these things were done, having plainly set forth
and expressed his Actions: We must by the same means declare his Repentance and
diligence, whereby being changed thorough his adverse Fortune, he carried
and behaved himself at that time like a wise and discreet man. Finally, Tytus
having given good order after the Battle, for those things which concerned
the Prisoners and spoil, he went to Larissa.

A Parcel of an imperfect sense.
TO define folly we cannot, for that they are desirous of the same means. This
kind of remissness and dullness, is often (...) in many. Neither is it to be
wondered at, if it has place among others: But among those in whom this Spring
of malice is found, there is another cause, for the which that wise saying of
Epicharmes does not agree: Watch and remember that thou must distrust. This is
the bond of hearts.

Of a certain Accord betwixt Antiochus and the Romans.
AT the same time came from the Vargyles Publius Lentulu^, Antiochus makes an
assembly at Lysmachia.
with ten Legates: and from Thasse Lucius Terentius and Publius Villius. When
their coming was suddenly declared unto the King, they assembled all within
few days at Lysimachia. After whom followed Hegissi^nactes, and Lisias sent at
that time to Titus. Finally, the conference in private betwixt the King and the
Romans was gracious and courteous. But when the assembly met for affairs, they
embraced another disposition. Lucius Cornelius required that Antiochus should
leave all the Cities, the which being subject to Ptolomy, he had taken in
Asia. In regard of those which were subject to Philip, he contested much to
have him leave them. For it was a mockery, that Antiochus coming he should
reap the fruits of the War which the Romans had made against Philip: He
likewise advised him not to meddle with the free Cities. He also said, that it
seemed strange, that without reason he had past into Europe with an Army as
well by Sea as Land: That no man could conceive it to be to any other end, then
to make War against the Romans. These things being propounded by the Romans,
they held their peace. Antiochus answer to the Romans.
The King in answer said, that he wondered for what cause they debated with him
for the Cities of Asia, and that it was more fitting for any other then for the
Romans. Finally, he entreated them not to usurp, nor to deal with the
affairs of Asia: And that for his part he would not meddle with any thing
that was in Italy. In regard of Europe, he had entered with his Armies to
recover the Cities of Cherronese and Thrace: For that the command of all those
places belonged to him: this government in the beginning being due to
Lysimachus: But when as Seleucus made War against him, and had overthrown
him in Battle, all the Kingdom of Lysimachus became subject to Seleucus by
force. After the time of his predecessors, Ptolomy was the first who violently
the said places, usurped them: The like did Philip. And that for his part he
recovered them, accommodating himself to his own times, and not to those of
Philip.

And as for the Lysimachians, ruined without reason by the Thracians he reduced
them to himself, no way wronging the Romans, and restored them to their
Country: The which he did to show this mercy to the affairs of Seleucus, and
not to make War against the Romans. In regard of the Cities of Asia, they
ought not to enjoy liberty by the commandment of the Romans, but of grace. And
for that which concerned Ptolomy, that with all his heart he gave him thanks:
and that he understood that he had not only concluded Friendship with him,
but made a League. When as Lucius was of opinion that the Lampsaceneins, and
Smy^niens, should be called, and audience given them, it was done accordingly.
There Parmenio and ^ythodorus presented themselves for the Lampsaceneins, and
Cerane for the Smyrnien. When as these men debated freely, the King being
incensed to yield an account of their debate before the Romans, interrupting
the Speech of Parme^io, cease says he, to plead so much, I am not well
pleased to dispute with my Enemies before the Romans, but rather before the
Rhodiens, and then by this means they brake off the Assembly without any
mutual affection.

Another Parcel.
MAny men desire actions of courage and prowess, but the experience is rare.
Scope in truth and C^comenes have had great occasions for Combats and hardy
Enterprises. For as Scope was formerly taken, he had resolved in the same hope
with his Servants and Friends, but he could not save himself. Finally, his
just death (having led a wretched life) has given testimony of his great
weakness. And although that Scope was aided and assisted with great Forces,
having the government of the King in his nonage, and was of his Council, yet
he was soon ruined.

For when as Aristomenes knew that he had assembled his Friends in his house,
holding a Council with them, he sent unto him by his Guards to come unto the
assembly. But he was so transported in his judgment, as he did not that
which he ought to have done, neither could he (being called) be obedient unto
the King: which was the greatest folly in the World: until that Aristomenes
knowing his baseness, lodged Soldiers and Elephants near his House, and sent
Ptolomy the Son of Eumenes with the Young men, to bring him with fair words,
if he would come willingly; if not, to use force.

When as Ptolomy was entered into his house, and signifying unto him that the
King demanded Scope, he did not at the first observe his wo^ds: But casting his
looks upon Ptolomy, he was long in that estate, as it were threatening him, and
wondering at his presumption. But when as Ptolomy approacht with assurance, and
laid hold of his Cloak, then he required help of the Assistants. Being in
this estate, and a great company of the young men coming about him, being also
advertised, that his house was environed with Soldiers, he followed him
obeying the times, being accompanied by his Friends. When as he was come to
the Assembly and Council, the King charged him a little: Then Policrates newly
arrived from Cypres: and in the end Aristomenes. The accusation was according
to that which had been spoken: but they added moreover, that he had drawn his
Friends together to consult, and that being called by the King, he would not
obey. For which things all they which were in the Assembly, not only condemned
him, but likewise the foreign Ambassadors there assisting. But when as
Aristomenes came to accuse him, he took many notable persons, not only of
Greece, but also of the Etolien Ambassadors, who were there for the accord:
Among the which was Dorimachus, the Son of Nicostrates.

And when as these men had spoken, Scope labored to allege some excuses: But
when as no man give ear unto him for the foulness of his Crimes, he was
suddenly carried to Prison with his Friends. The Night following, Aristomenes
caused him to dye of poison with all his Friends and Kinsfolks. Scope pu^ to
death by poison.
In regard of Dicearchus, he put him to death, having suffered great Torments:
having endured fit punishments for all the Grecians. This was that Dicearchus
whom Philip (presuming to break the accords with the Islands of Cyclades, and
the Cities of Hellespont, had made him Commander of all his Army at Sea, and
superintendant of the said business. And when he was sent to a manifest
execration, he did not hold it an unreasonable and wicked act, thinking he
should be able to terrify both Men and Gods by his rage. Making haste to
recover the ships, Altars set up by Dicear^hus to cruelty and iniquiry.
he set up two Altars, the one to cruelty, and the other to iniquity: Upon the
which he sacrificed and prayed as unto the Gods. Wherefore it seems he was
punished by a just Death, as well in the presence of Gods as Men. For as he led
a life of a strange Nature, so he ended by a strange Death. Finally, when as
the other Etoliens were desirous to retire home, the King suffered them to go
with all their Goods. Scope in his life time had a wonderful desire of riches.
He exceeded all other in avarice. And after his death his houses were found
abounding with Gold and rich moueables. Whereas he had for assistant the
ingratitude and drunkenness of Charimorthe, he had wholly corrupted the Realm.

When as the Privy Council had taken order for the Etoliens affairs, they all
inclined to give power to the King to command: Not in regard of the maturity of
his age, but for that they thought thereby, that the estate of the Crown would
further the affairs: and that if the King took upon him a free power of the
Realm, it would be a beginning and advancement to the better. Making then a
stately preparation, they put it in execution with royal Magnificence.
Policrates seemed to have assisted them much in this Enterprise. For as this
man was dear unto his Father, being yet young, there was not a better Courtier
in all the whole Court, neither for that which concerned his fidelity, nor the
affairs, nor yet i^ more favor with the King. When as Cypres with the
revenues were delivered unto him upon his faith and trust, in that dangerous
time subject to many hazards, he not only kept this Island for the Infant, but
also gathered together great store of Treasure, the which he then brought unto
the King, delivering the government of Cypres to Ptolomy the Megalopolitaine.
And when upon this occasion, he had purchased a great power for the future, in
time he strayed and fell into a rash and wicked course of life. Ptolomy
Agesandre by the force of his Age fell into the like infamy. Wherefore when
opportunity shall serve, it shall be no great trouble to declare what great
ignominy and reproach followed their governments.

To God only be all Honor and Glory.
The Contents of the chiefest matters contained in this History.
AN alliance made by Hieron with Leptine. fol. 6 Accord betwixt Hieron and the
Romans, and what it contains. 10 Agregas besieged by the Romans. 11 Agregas
spoiled by the Romans. 13 A defeat of Hannibals ships for want of a good wind.
15 An Engine invented by the Romans, called the Raven. ib. A defeat of 4000.
allied to the Romans by Amilcar. 16 Army of 140000. Romans, and more
Carthaginians. 18 A remonstrance made by the Carthaginian Captains, unto the
Soldiers of their Army. 18 Amilcar vanquished. 20 A victory of the Romans
against the Carthaginians. ibid. Aspis taken by the Romans. ibid. Asdrubal,
Bostar, and Amilcar, Commanders of the Carthaginian army. 21 A remonstance of
Polybius: 24 Aspis besieged by the Carthaginians. 25 A great number of the
Roman ships perished by a Tempest. 26 Asdruball sent into Sicily by the
Carthaginians. 27 A new army at Sea, prepared by the Romans. 28 A defeat of
Carthaginians by the Romans. Army at Sea prepared by the Romans. 29 A
conspiracy of mercinary Soldiers serving under the Carthaginians. 30 Alexon.
ibid. A sally of the Carthaginians upon the ^^omans Engines of battery. 34 An
enterprise of the Romans upon Tri^anum. 35 A Combat at Sea betwixt the Romans
and the Carthaginians. 36 Appius Claudius deposed from the Consullship, and
afterward condemned to dye. 37 Amilcar spoils the Coasts of Italy 39 Amilcar.
ibid. A good comparison. 40 Army at Sea prepared by the Carthaginians. 41 A
victory of the Romans, against the Carthaginians. 42 Amilcar Father unto
Hannibal. 43 Amilcar. 50 A mutiny of mercinary and oiher common Soldiers in
Sardinia, and Bostare slain. 52 A great inhumanity and wickedness committed.
54 A cruel resolution. ibid. A defeat of the Carthaginians by Matho. 57
Assignation of a battle. 58 Asdrubal chosen and made General of the army. 60
Agron King of Sclauonia. ibid. A defeat of Etoliens by the Slauonians. 61 A
reprehension of the Epirots. 62 A bold answer of an Ambassador. 64 A Victory of
the Slauonians against the Acheins. 65 Apotonia yielded to the Romans. 65
Accord made with Tuto. 6^ A treaty made betwixt the Romans and the
Carthaginians. 67 A description of Italy. 67 A price had to be credited. 68 A
defeat and ruin of the Senogalloies by the Romans. 71 A defeat of the Gauls
in Delphos. 71 Amazement of the Romans, for the descent of the Gauls. 72 A
descent of the Transalpins into Italy. 72 A victory of the Gauls against the
Romans. 74 A defeat of the Gauls army. 77 A victory of the Romans against the
Millannoys. 79 Acerras besieged. 79 A defeat of Gauls by the Romans. 80
Acerras taken by Cornelius. 80 Asdrubal slain. 81 All Morea reduced into a
League. 82 A League betwixt the Dymonsori^s and them of Patras. 84
Aristomachus, Xenon, Cleomenes^ 86 Antigones Tutor to Philips son. 86
Athenes. 86 A good consideration of rate. 87 A good in^ention of a rate. 87
Acrotorinth yielded to Antigonus. 90 Argos taken by the Acheins. ib.
Acrotorinth taken by Antigonus, ibid. Aristomachus. 94 Aristomachus strangled.
95 Army levied by Cleomenes^ 97 Antigonus blamed. ibid. Antigonus camp seated
upon the banks of Gorgile. 98 Attalus. 103 Agesilaus. 106 A good comparison.
ibid. Antiochus an enemy unto the Romans. 108 Asdrabal son in Law to Hannibal.
109 A good consideration and necessary for all Governors. ibi. Army of a
hundred thousand men. 110 An Embassy from the Romans unto Hannibal. 110 An
other accord made betwixt the Romans and the Carthaginians. 118 An other
accord. ibid. An other accord made with Asdrubal. ib. A division of Provinces
to the Consul. 125 A surprise made by the Bullo^ians upon the Romans. 126 A
defeat of the Numidians, by the Roman Cauallery. 129 Army of Hannibal
decreased. 137 A combat of the horse, betwixt Hannibal and Scipio. 141 A^
Embassy from the Bullonians to Hannibal. 142 A plain is sometimes an occasion
of am ambush. 144 Ambush laid by Hannibal for the Romans. 145 A defeat of the
Roman horsemen. 146 Army levied by the Romans both by Sea and Land. 147 A
defeat of some Romans by Asdrubal. 148 Ambush laid by Hannibal. 151 A defeat
of the Roman horsemen by Maherbal. 153 A Dictator created. ibid. Asdrubals
p^rting from Carthage to go into Spain. 158 Army at Sea prepared suddenly
by the Carthaginians. 159 Acedux or Abilux. ibid. Acedux conspires with the
Romans. 160 A combat betwixt the Romans and the Carthaginians. 163 A legion of
five thousand men, and the manner how the Romans raise an army. 166 A skirmish
betwixt the Carthaginians and Romans. 168 A great amazement at Rome. 170
Asdrubal. 171 Acheus. Antiochus. 175 Ariston. 176 An Embassy sent from Arate
to the Etotoliens. 180 A Fight betwixt the Acheins and the Etoliens. 181 A
defeat of the Acheins. 181 Arate blamed by the Acheins. 182 Advice of the
Acheins touching the war against the Etoliens. 182 Amity amongst the
Lacedaemonians. 187 Ambassadors sent from Lacedemonia to Philip 188 Alexander
the Great. 188 Amphixions restored to their Laws. 189 Answers to Ambassadors.
192 Aristocrates 193 A league made between the Lacedaemonians and Etoliens. 195
An absolute Defeat of the Gauls Empire. 200 Attalus and Acheins. 201 Achate
caused himself to be called King. ibid. Accord betwixt the
Constantinopolitaines and the Rhodiens. 203 Accord made with Prusias. ibid.
Alexander. 205 Assault given by Dorimache to the Fort of Egire. 206 Alexander
slain. 207 Athens taken by Lycurgus. ibid. Ambrachia taken by Philip. 208 An
assembly of the Etoliens to keep the passage of a River. 209 Arate ioynes with
Philip. 212 Appelles Tutour to Philip. 216 Appelles persists in his Enterprise.
219 Accusation of Appelles against Arate and and the Acheins. 221 Answer of
Arate. ibid. Alexander Chamberlain to King Antigonus. ibid. Alexander the
Great. 229 Amycle. 233 A multitude against Philip and his men. 237 Appelles
taken Prisoner. 239 An Army near to Ephesus. 242 Archidamus slain by
Cleomenes 243 Antrochus Son to Seleucus 245 Antiochus marries with Laodicea.
246 Antiochus puts his Army in Battle. 252 Antiochus goes against
Artabazanes. 253 Antiochus has a Son. ibid. Artabazanes makes an accord with
Antiochus. ibid. Apoliphanes advice to Antiochus. 254 Antiochus corrupts the
Captains of Seleucia. 256 An Army rassed by Ptolomy. 258 Answer of Ptolomies
Ambassadors to Antiochus. 259 Advice of Armies by Antiochus and Ptolomy. 260
Antiochus his army divided into three. 261 Army of Ptolo^y. 266 Army of
Antiochus. ibid. Andrew the Kings Physician slain. 267 Antiochus send
Ambassadors unto Ptolomy. 270 Accord made betwixt Ptolomy and Antiochus. ibid.
Arate prepared for the War. 272 Again and Cassander taken by Scardilade. 273
Athenians abandon Ptolomy. 279 Antiochus passes Mount Tourus. ibid. Advice of
Government. 282 A true Monarchy. 283 A true Aristocracy. ibid. A Democracy.
ibid. A Royalty. 284 Aristocratia. 286 Authority of the people. 289 Athenians.
304 All things subject to corruption. 311 Accord made betwixt the
Carthaginians, Macedonians and Grecians. 313 Ache^s taken and brought to
Antiochus. 328 Accord made by the youth of Tarentum with the Carthaginians. 331
Appius besieged by Hannibal. 337 A w^se consideration of Hannibal. 338
Amazement of the Romans. 339 Alexander ruinated Thebes. 348 Antipat^r. ibid.
Antigonus. 349 Alexander the Epirote. 352 Asdrubal abandoned my many Spaniards.
375 Advice of Asdrubal for the War. 376 Andobale speaks to Publius S^ipio.
ibid Attalus against Philip by Sea. 379 Advertisement by fire. ibi. Advice of
E^eas touching signs by fire. 380 An other kind of advertisement by fire,
invented by Cleomenes and Demotrites. 381 Asdrubal brother to Hannibal slain.
386 Accord betwixt the Romans and the Etoliens. 388 Anaxid^mus slain. 393
Asdrubals Camp near to Elinge. 394 Asdrubal charge the Romans. 395 Asdrubal
puts his men in battle. 396 Agathocles cruelty. 407 Achiens free from fraud.
414 Apege the wife of Nabis. 416 Advice of the Romans. 423 Articles
comprehended in the accords past betwixt Scipio and Carthaginians. 430 Articles
of accord propounded by Scipio to the Carthaginians. 435 Agathocles showed her
paps to the Macedonians. 442 Agathocles slain. 443 Attalus charge Philips
army at Sea. 446 A man may be commended and blamed according to the diversity
of his actions. 453 Abideins besieged by Philip. 454 A course which the
Abydeins take in despair. 455 Alexander against Philip. 460 Antiochus answer
to the Romans. 477
B.
Beginning of the History. 5 Blame of Philin and Fabius Historiogra. 9 Battle
at Sea betwixt the Carthaginians and Romans. 16 Battle at Sea betwixt the
Romans and Carthaginians. 19 Battle given by the Romans to the Carthaginians.
24 Battle won by the Carthaginians. 58 Boloniens defeated by the Romans. 71
Battle of the footmen. 76 Boloniens Country spoiled. Boloniens yield unto the
Romans. 78 Beginning of the League. 81 Bostar Chief of the Carthaginians. 160
Bremius chief of the Gauls. 200 Blame of Philip 238 Bold enterprise of
Cleomenes. 244 Bataile betwixt Ptolomy and Antiochus. 268 Beginning of
governments. 284 Blame of Nomarche and Philomale. 351 Beginning of the fight
for Carthage. 362 Battle betwixt Asdrubal and the Romans in Italy. 385
Battle by the Elephants. 432 Brave answer of Philip to Marcus Emilius. 456
C.
Carthaginians loose the Battle. 13 Carthaginians army 350. sail. 17
Complaint of the Soldiers. 45 Courtesy of Romans to the Carthaginis. 56
Causes of Alexanders war in Persia. 106 Cause of the first war betwixt the
Romans and the Carthaginians 108 Countries Conquered by Hannibal. 110 Cruelty
of Hannibal. 153 Carthaginians defeated by the Romans upon a Hill, and then
surprised. 161 Course which Hannibal took in passing the streights kept by the
Romans. 162 Camp of Asdrubal of 30000. foot, and 300. horse. 418 Camp of
Syphax of 10000. horse, and 50000. foot. ibid. Carthaginians Senate hold a
Counsel 421 Conspiracy of the Carthaginians against the Roman Ambassador. 426
Carthaginians press Hannibal. 428 Cruelty of Virgins. 443 Causes why Philip
challenges the Victory to himself. 450 Cruelty of the Abydeins to themselves.
456 Courteous and wise answer of Philip. 459 Custom of the Etoliens very
strange. 461 Commendation of Tytus. 465 Defeat of Hieron by Apius. Defeat of
the Carthaginians by Apius. 8 Dissension betwixt Amilcar and Hanno. 55 Death of
Amilcar. 59 Death of King Ageron. 60 Demetrius father to Philip. 61 Duraza
surprised by the Sclauonians. 64 Diverse victories of the Gauls against the
Romans. ^0 Diligence of the Romans 73 Defeat of the forlorn hope of the
Gauls. and the death of King Aueroeste. 77 Diverse defeates of the Acheins. 89
Duty of a Historiographer. 92 Death of many great Princes. 101 Demetrius lost
his Realm and Life by conspiracy. 105 Demetrius King of Sclauonia. 111
Discretion of the head of an enterprise. 112 Demetrius a man of great courage,
and little judgment. 114 Division of the world in three parts. 124 Delta an
Island in Egypt. 131 Duty of a good Captain. 150 Description of the Country of
Capua, and its situation. 155 Diu^sion of the Roman Army, betwixt the two
Dictators. 163 Discord between the two Consuls. 168 Diversity of swords
betwixt the Gauls and the Spaniards. 170 Defeat of the Roman horsemen by the
Gauls and Spaniards. 171 Difference betwixt a private and public i^iury. 191
Death of Thibete. 203 Dor^mache smothered 207 Defeat of the Etoliens. 212 Duty
of a King. 230 Death of Appelles and his son. 239 Death of Molon. 252
Distribution of Ptolomies Army unto his Captains. 258 Diverse Towns taken by
Antiochus. 261 Defeat of the Elienses. 274 Demetrius his advice to Philip.
ibid. Duty of the Senate. 289 Dooiss^ty of the Romans. 295 Defeat of the Romans
by night. 340 Duty of a Commander. 342 Disposition of Publius Scipio. 357 Duty
of Commanders of an Army 369 Diogenes fights with the Barbarians. 371 Defeat
of Asdrubal. 377 Diverse Nations under the leading of Hannibal. 394 Double
policy of Scipio. 395 Disorder by the Elephants. 397 Defeat of the Spaniards.
402 Defeat of the Celtiberians. 422 Diverse opinions of the Carthaginians
concerning their war. 423 Democrates Captain General unto Philip, sunk.
447 Death of Theophiliscus. 450 Death of Scope by poison. 479
E.
Ambassadors sent by the Carthaginians, to Marcus Attilius. 22 Embassies s^nt
through all Affricke by Matho and Spendiu^. 47 Emilius slain in the battle.
172 Ambassadors sent to Philip from the Messeniens and Acarnanians 226 Etoliens
charge Philips rear ward. 231 Ambassadors from Rhodes to Chios. 237 Elephants
of Lybia fear them of India. 268 Earthquake at Rhodes. 270 Etoliens
circumuented by a stratagem. 274 Ambassadors come to Philip. 276 Etoliens blame
Agelaus for making of the peace 279 Error of Arate. Error of Cleomenes.
Error of Philip. Error of Nicins. 345 Exercises appointed by Scipio for his
Army by Sea and Land. 368 Excellency of Hannibal. 394 Excuse of Alexander upon
Calistines. 411 Enteruiew of Hannibal and Scipio. 4^9 Ambassadors wronged by
Philip. 438 Egyptians cruel. 443 Ambassadors of Philip rejected. 465 Ambassador
sent to Rome by Tytus. 464
F.
Fifty thousand men within Agregas. 12 Fore sight of the Carthaginians. 31
Forty thousand men slain by Amilcar. Fertillity of Italy. 68 Foresight of
Amilcar, father to Hannibal. 108 First Accord betwixt the Romans and
Carthaginians. 116 Fear of the Elephants upon the Rhone. 129 Fabius returns
to the Camp. 163 Fabius speech to Lucius Emilius. 165 Fort of Naples taken by
Hannibal. ibi. Fifteen hundred Etoliens defeated by Philip. 209 Flight of
Euripides. 112 Forces which Philip left at Dyme. 224 Flight of Megalle. 238
Flight of Lycurgus into Etolia. 239 Form of a Buckler. 293 Form of a Target.
293 Flight of Asdrubal. 421
G.
Great resolution of the Rhodiens. 33 Ges^on makes remonstrances to the
Soldiers 46 Ges^on with his Company put to death. 54 Ga^les (...) of living.
69 Gauls ^^turnes from the Romans 70 Gauls were seven months in Rome. 72
Gessates dwell on this side the Rhine 79 Grecians terrified by the Gauls. 81
Great villainy committed by the Mantiniens. 93 Gauls indeauoured to stop
Hannibals passage over the Rhine. 127 Gauls inhabiting along the Rhine, have
often past into Italy. 130 Gauls repulsed. 143 Great Amazement which was at
Rome, for the battle lost. 152 Great reputation of Fabius. 164 Gauls
battallion of foot broken by the Romans, and reunited again. 171 Great
diligence in Philip. 233 Gift of Antiochus to the Rhodiens. 271 Government,
const^ncy, and good Counsel required in a Captain. 295 Geometry necessary for
the War. 346 Great fury of the fight. 433 Gulf of Neptune. 451
H.
Hieron chosen King of the Saragossins. 6 Hieron follows the Carthaginians
part. 7 Hannibal son of Amilcar Captain of fifty ships, with 10000. men. 31
Hannibal a Rhodien. 33 Hanno hanged on a cross. 52 Hannibal crucified. 57
Hannibal his speech to Antiochus 109 Hannibal answers, when he comes to age he
will be an enemy to the Romans ib. Hannibals victory on the Barbarians. 110
Hannibals answer to the Roman Ambassadors. 111 Hannibals Army of 50. thousand
foot, and nine thousand horse. 123 Hannibal raises his Army to pass the
Rhone. 127 Hannibals victory over the Gauls 128 Hannibals speech unto his
soldiers. ibid. Hannibal passes the Alps along the Rhone 130 Hannibal
conducted by Guides at the passage of the Mountains. 131 Hannibal makes a
speech. 134 Hannibal goes on his course. 135 Hannibals speech to his soldiers.
139 Hannibal puts his men into battle. 145 Hannibals speech to the prisoners
that was allied to the Romans. 148 Hannibals policy to keep himself from
killing by Treason. ibi. Hannibal loses an eye 149 Hannibal runs along the
Coast of the Adriatique sea. 153 Hannibal presents battle to Fabius. 154
Hannibals policy against Fabius. 157 Hannibals speech to his soldiers. 169
Hannibal puts his men into battle. ibid. Hannibals Army consists of forty
thousand foot, and ten thousand horse. 170 Hannibals loss. 172 Hannibals
proceeding after the battle of Cannes. 312 Honors done unto Arate after his
death. 323 He turns his discourse to the Carthaginians. 329 Hannibals
remonstrances to the Tarentins. 334 Hannibal within forty furlongs of Rome. 339
Hannibal sent to Tyche^^. 427 Hannibals speech to Scipio. 429 Hannibal flies to
Adrume^um. 434 Hannibal forces a Citizen. 435
I.
Intelligence of the soldiers within Carthage. 44 I^^irians and Sclauonians.
63 Iseas King. 84 I conceive that this Promontory is that which they call the
Promontory of Mercure in Affricke, where as now the City Cle^ea stands. 116
Idleness of the Etoliens. 183 Ithoria very strong. 210 Image of Minerua. 217
Indiscretion of Commanders blamed. 275 Inconstancy of the people. 400 Island of
^yrnon not well known by Tymens. 404 Image of Diana. 451
K.
King Etas and Gallus slain. 71 King Andubal taken 148 King Darius 199
Knowledge of the diversity of days necessary for Captains. 343
L.
Letters from Tunes to the Mutines Camp. 53 Lucius Emillius and Caius
Tarentius, chosen Consuls. 164 Lucius Posthumus Praetor. 165 Lucius Emillius.
171 Lucius Posthumus defeated in Gaul. 173 Lycurgus chosen King. 1^5 Lyciens
Town raized and burnt 20^ Lacedemonian Magistr^tes slain by C^^lon. ^^9
Lacedaemonians unfortunate after they (...) the Laws of Lycurg^s. ibid. Leonce
a Tra^tor to Philip. 226 Laws of War. 230 Lycurgus takes the Town of El^*
^33 Leonce and his Faction return^d unto Apelles. 237 Leuy of Armies by
Antigonus and Ptolomy. 360 Logbasse sent Ambassador by the S^lgenses. 263
Logbasse and his children slain. 265 Lycurgus called home. 272 Lyce defeated
Eurip^des 273 Lacedemon^ans Commonweal. 305 Lisse taken by Philip. 3^4
Laodicea the w^fe of Acheus. 327 Lacedemon taken by Epaminu^das. 340 Lelius
assailes Syfax his Camp by fire. 420 Lucius S^ruivus Lucius Citinus and Lucius
Fabius sent Ambassadors unto Carthage* 425 Loss of ships which Philip made.
449
M.
Marcus Valerius, and Octatillius chosen Consuls. 10 Marcelle taken by assault.
16 Marcus Attillius taken, with 500. Romans. 24 Many Towers ruined by their
Engines. Mount Erix. ^8 Mount Aetna. ibid. Mutany of the common Soldiers. 45
Matho punished. 58 Megalopoly raized. 91 Mount Taurus 103 Modena besieged by a
great number of the Gauls. 125 Misery very common among Soldiers. 137
Magobrother to Hannibal. 144 Marcus Manuttus Constable. 154 Many Countries
ruined by Hannibal. ibid. Manuttus his Speech. 164 Messenians seek the
Alliance of the Acheins. 179 Music profitable to all the World. 186
Messenians always friends to the Arcadians, and enemies unto the
Lacedaemonians. 192 Machate sent Ambassador from the Etoliens to the
Lacedaemonians. 149 Macha^e preuailes in his Enterprise. 195 Metropolis taken
and burnt. 209 Mountain of Appiare. 212 Malicious policy of Appelles. 216
Money and Corn delivered to Philip by the Acheins. 224 Methap taken by Philip.
228 Methape Razed by Philip. 231 Magalee and Leonce do outrage to Arate. 232
Magalee and Crinon condemned by the King in 12000. Crowns. ibid. Mutiny
against Philip and his men. 237 M^sery of Courtiers. 238 Magalee kills himself.
239 Molen goes to fie^d with an Army. 246 Muti^y in Antiochus his Camp. 250
Molen Crucified. 253 Mine of Whea^ about two of our Bushels, waighing an
hundred and ten pounds. 263 Mutiny among the Megalopolitains. 273 Mon^r^hall
^ouernment of one alone by fear. 283 Mutual knitting together of three
Commonweals. 290 Manner of Tribunes in the Choice of Legions. 293 Manner of
the Romans Camping. 297 Manner how they punish such as fail in the Watch. 300
Manner of recompensing the Soldiers valor. 301 Mago deliu^rs the Fort. 364
Many rivers comes out of Tauris 370 Machenides sla^ne. 393 Manner of Libias
living. 404 Manner of breeding Swine in Italy. 405 Maegarena saues himself
naked. 440 Mutiny of the people. 441
N
Nara^e. 51 Note the Injustice of the Romans. 58 Nicophanes Cercid^s. 87 Never
Commander did any thing worthy which was not pleasing unto his Soldiers. 109
Nature of Philip. 216 Nature of the Macedonians. 224 Nicagores accuses
Cle^menes. 243 Number of Scipio's Army at Land^ 361 Number of Ships that were
taken. 366 Number of the Dead. 387 Nabir Tyrant of the Lacedaemonians. 415 Ni^on
and Agathocl^^ slain. 443 Number of Philips Ships and of his Enemy. 447
O
Order of the Battle of Zantippus. 23 One hundred and fourteen Vessels of
the Carthaginians taken by the Romans. 26 One hundred and fifty of the Romans
Vessels lost. 28 Occasion ^o renew the War between the Romans and the Gauls.
72 Order of the Gauls Battle. 76 Orcomene taken with other Towns. 91 Order
of Antigonus Battle. 98 Other Articles past betwixt the Romans and
Carthaginians. 107 Opinion of Polybius in the delight of an History. 120 Order
which Hannibal gave for the defense of Spain. 121 Oration which Hannibal made
to his Soldiers. 122 Order which Hannibal held to put his men into Battle.
170 Occasion of the Ruins of Cynethenses^ 186 Ocanthy. 205 Order that Philip
held to take to pass the Streights of Therme. 228 Old Arate made Chief of the
Acheins. 240 Order required in all things. ibid. Order of Molens Battle. 252
Order of Ptolomies Army in Battle. 267 Order of Antiochus his Battle. ibid.
Ochtocracia is a government of the Mutiny of the people. 283 Olygarch^^. 286
Office of the Co^suls. 288 Order of the Watches. 299 Order of two Camp in
Marching. 302 Order for the Engines of battery. 320 Order of the Romans in the
Division of the spoil of a Town. 365 Order of Philopom^ns Battle. 390 Order
of Machanides Army. ibid. Order of Scipio's Battle. 401 Of the voyage of
Alexander against D^rius Calisthenes. 408 Order of Battle of the Romans Army.
422 Order which Syphax and Asdrubal held. ibid. Order of Scipio's Battle. 431
Order of ^annibal his Battle. ibid. O^nanthe sad. 440
P
^unishment of Traitors. 5 Policy of Hieron. 6 Philin. 9 Palermo besieged by
the Romans, and taken by assault. 27 Policy of Cecilius to defeat the
Elephants. 28 Port of Trepanum taken by Luctati^^ commander of the Roman Army.
41 Policy of Amilcar. 51 Prudence of Hieron. 55 Phenice taken by the
Sclanonians. 61 Parthenia yielded to the Romans. 65 Pillage made by the Gauls
upon the Romans. 70 Policy of the Gauls. 74 Pursuit of Emilius. 75
Pythagorians burnt in Italy. 82 Port of Corinthe taken. 85 Pillage of Mantinnia
came to nine score 1000. Crowns. 96 Polybius has been present at a great
part of the things which he has written. 105 Philip. 106 Philiuus a
Historiographer. 118 Polybius has made forty Books. 120 Parting of the Roman
Armies. 126 Polybius his Remonstrance against Historiographers. 130 Polybius
visited the Alps. 131 Polybius his excuse. 135 Polybius has visited Affricke,
Spain, and the Gauls. 137 Policy of Hannibal for an example to his Soldiers.
138 Paulus Emilius spe^ch to the Soldiers. 167 Policy of Hannibal. 169
Polybius writes nothing but what he has seen or received from those which
had seen them. 175 Philip. ibid. Ptolomy Philopater. ibid. Polymarches. 184
Philip comes to Corinthe 187 Philips wise Answer. 188 Phebidins. 190 Philips
Army. 196 Pr^sias. 201 Pl^tor Chief of the Sclauonians. 205 Philips Army. 208
Poetia taken by Composition. 299 Peania taken by assault. 210 Philip fortifies
the Fort of the Eniades. ibid. Psophis taken by assault. 213 Philip gives
forces to the Aeheins. 214 Philip assaults Alphira. 217 Phialenses yield to
Philip. 218 Prudence of Antigonus toward the Lacedaemonians. 229 Practice of a
Tyrant. 230 Paphia burnt 231 Philip comes to Corinth. 233 Philip sails to
Corinth. 239 Ptolomy King of Egypt. 241 Ptolomy slain by Cle^m^nes. 244
Practice of Molen against Epige^^. 250 Ptolomy the Benefactor. 255 Policy of
Agathocles and Sosibius. 257 Pednelissenses besieged. 262 Peace concluded
betwixt Acheus and the Selgenses. 265 P^olomyes Victory against Antiochus. 269
Presents made to the Rhodiens by many Cities. 270 Ptolomy his Present to the
Rhodiens. 271 Peace betwixt Philip and the Etoliens. 277 Philips Enterprise
against Sclanonia 280 Philip leaves his Enterprise for fear. ibid. Prusias
defeates the G^ules. 281 Principality or Monarchy. 284 Pay and entertainment of
Foot and Horse. 302 Platoes Commonweal is to be^ rejected. 306 ^ompe of the
Romans to an honorable person. 309 Philip causes Arate to be poisoned. 323
Philomene appointed for Hunting. 329 Philip subdued by the Thessalonians. 348
Publius Scipi^ and his Brother Created Ediles. 358 Publius Answer to Andobale.
376 Philops men ^akes War against Machanides Tyrant of Lacedemon. 389 Publius
Scipi^ draws his Army together. 394 Publius Scipio assembles his Army. 398
Punishment of the Mutiniers. 400 Partell corrupted. 407 Pedisca the W^fe of
Syphax. 417 Pursuit of the Romans after Syphax. 423 Phylon slain. 453 Policy
of Attalus his Eouldiers. 449 Prinassa besieged by Philip. 45^ Queen ^uca. 61
Quintus Fabius chosen Dictator. 153
R.
Rhegium besieged by the Romans. 5 River of Ciamosure. 6 Romans resolve to
succor the Mamertins. 7 Retreat of Hannibal from Agregas. 13 Romans invention
to inure their men to the Oar. 14 Romans Army by Sea. 17 Rhodien taken with
his ship. 34 Romans surprised by Arthal^. 37 Romans Fleet broken at Sea. 38
River of Mechera. 50 Reconciliation of Amilcar and Hann^. 58 Rome taken by the
Gauls. 70 Retreat of the Ga^les. 75 Reuolte of Aripote of Argos. 90 Reuolte
of the Mantiniens. 93 Ri^er of Tagus. 110 Roman Ambassadors sent to Carthage.
115 Remonstrances of the Gaulish Kings unto the Carthaginian Camp. 128 Roman
Ambassadors signify War unto the Carthaginians. 121 Reuolte of the
Bolonians. 125 Romans advertised by Hannibal. 138 Retreat of Scipi^. ibid.
River of Trebia. 142 Romans fear for the loss of the Battle. 147 Romans
defeated and surprised. 151 River of Vantoure. 156 Romans Army at Sea. 158
Romans Victory at Sea. ibid. Romans great Army at Sea. 159 River of Fenne. 168
Romans Army of four score thousand Foot, and 6000 Horse. 170 Romans lose the
Battle. 172 Rhodie^s succor the Synopenses. 205 Retreat of the Dardariens
without doing anything. 211 Retreat of Euripides from Stymphalia. 212 River of
Eremanthea. 213 Reuolte of the Leapreates against the Etoliens. 218 River of
Acheloe. 227 River of Erota. 235 Retreat of Molon. 248 Reasons of the war
propounded by Antiochus. 259 Rabatamassana yielded to Antiochus. 262 Romans.
288 Roman Cauallery armed after the Greek manner. 295 Romans manner in giving
the word. 299 Roman Commonweal more excellent then the Lacedemonian. 308
River of Lisson. 313 Race of Acheus. 328 Ri^er of Erota. 334 Romans in Field.
339 Remonstrance of Publius Scipio unto his Army. 359 Royal City of the
Persians 369 Remonstrance of Edecon to Publius. 374 Reprehension of Calistenes.
408 Remonstrance of the Roman Ambassadors to the Carthaginians. 425 Rhodiens
declar^d Enemies to Philip. 438
S.
Succors required from the Romans by the Mamertins. 6 Supplies which the
Carthaginians put into Agragas. 11 Scuerity of the Romans toward their
Soldiers. 11 Sixscore Vessels made ready for the Sea by the Romans. 14
Spendius. 46 Surprise of the Carthaginians Camp. 49 Sephira. 50 Supplies of
Numidians come to Spendius. 51 Succors from Sclauonia to the Midionians. 60
Scerd^lade. 62 Some Gauies banished their Country for their disloyalty 63
Sparia or Lacedemon. 101 Sardinia abandoned by the Carthaginians. 108 Sagont
forced by Hannibal. 112 Scipio his speech to his men. 141 Sempronius puts his
men into Battle. 146 Scipio arriues at Empories, and conquers unto Ebro. 147
Six thousand Romans taken in a Burrowe by composition. 162 Supplies sent from
Rome into Spain. 159 Scerdilade and Demetrius. 183 Scope chosen Head of the
Etoliens 190 Situation of Constantinople. 196 Shelfes in the sea. 198
Situation of Synop. 205 Situation of Egire. 206 Situation of Ambrachia. 208
Scope makes an incursion into Macedony. 208 Situation of Sophia. 212 Sally of
the Elienses upon the Macedonians. 213 Succors sent to the Elienses by
Dorimache. 216 Situation of Triphalia and its Towns. 216 Situation of
Alphira. 217 Slander of Appelles. 220 Situation of Sephasenia. 225 Situation
of Amycle. 234 Speech of Hermes against Epigene. 245 Situation of Media. 247
Situation of Silucin. 255 Selutia assaulted. 256 Seleucus his present. 271
Situation of Thebes. 275 Speech of Agelaus. 277 Succors sent by the Romans to
Scerdilade. 281 Six kinds of gouernments^ 283 Spanish sword. 294 Septier is two
Mines, and a Mine is two London Bushels. 302 Sign of the Sardens negligence.
315 Sally made by them of Lisse. 324 Strong Fort yielded unto Antiochus. 328
Skirmish betwixt the Romans and Carthage. 334 Superstition of the Roman Dames.
339 Situation of Carthage. 361 Second assault given to Carthage by the Romans.
363 Scipio ass ailes the Fort. 364 Soldiers Oaths touching the Pillage. 365
Scipio's providence concerning the Pris^ers. 3^6 Syringe besieged by Antiochus.
372 Syringe taken by Antiochus. ibid Spaniards join with the Romans 376 Scipio
saluted King of the Spaniards. 377 Skirmish of the Bactreans with Antiochus.
3^4 Safety of Monarchies. 391 Sudden Charge of the Romans against the
Carthagin^ans. 395 Scipio p^^s his men in Battle. ibid. Scipio's speech to
his Army. 400 Scipio lays a bait for the Enemy. 401 Spania^ds put themselves
in Battle. ibid. Scip^e draws to the Enemies Camp. 419 Scipio sets
Asdruba^^ Camp on fire. 420 Scipio ^t^ends the siege of Bysarthe. 421 Scipio
draws toward the Enemy. 422 Syphax returns in safty. 423 Sc^pio's Answer to
Hannibal. 429 Scipio's speech to his Army. 431 Strength of a Battle. 432
Saying of Scipio. 444 Syphax King of the Masaisylins. 452
T.
The Persians. 2 The Lacedaemonians. ibid. The Maccdonians. ibid. The Romans.
ibid. Timer us an Historiographer. 4 Taking of Messina by some Campanois. 5
Taking of Rhegium by the Romans. ibid. The punishment of Traitors. ibid. The
Campanois holding Messina, are called Mamertins. ibid. The Mamertins deliver
their Town and Fort to the Carthaginians. 6 The M^mertins recover the Fort
from the Captain of the Carthaginians. 7 The order of the Roman Armies and the
number of men in a Legion. 10 Tunes taken by the Romans by an assault. 2^ The
Numidians great Robbers. ibid. The leading of the Carthaginians Army given to
Xantippus. 23 The policy of Cecilius to defeat the Elephants. 28 Tree
principal Promontories in Sicily. 30 To^ne of Erix taken from the Romans by
Amilcar. 40 The Canspiracy of the Women of Affricke. 48 The Victory of Amilcar.
51 The Victory of the Carthaginians against Spendius. 52 Towns of Hippona and
Bysarthe reuolte from the Carthaginians. 55 The extreme necessity that pressed
the strangers Camp. 56 The Victory of the Sclauonians against the Epirotes. 62
The Romans Embassy to Teuca Queen of Sclauonia. 63 The Turinois and Agoniens.
68 The Genouois. 68 The Poe. 68 The Venetians come from Paphlagonia. 69 The
number of the Gauls Army. 73 The preparations which the Romans made for War.
ibid. The number of Soldiers that was raised in Italy. 73 Tuscany ruiued by
the Gauls. 74 The advice of Anero^ste. 75 The Arms which the Gauls did use.
77 Taking of King Congolli^ane. ibid. The Army of Millanois. 78 The vneasinesse
of the Gauls Swords. 79 The Pythagorians burnt in Italy. 82 The Lacedaemonians
and Thebanes. 83 The alliance of twelve Cities. 84 The envy of the Etoliens
against the Acheins. 86 The Nature of Kings^ 87 Tages yielded unto Antigonus.
91 The great Villainy committed by the Mantiniens: 93 The Mantiniens sold. 94
The cruelty of Aristomachus. ibid. The great fidelity of the Megalopolitains.
95 Third part of the Booty is due to the General. 96 The Number of the Nations
that were in Antigon^^ Army. 97 The Wars which Antiochus and Philip made. 103
Tostnes of Sclauonia reduced to the Roman obedience. 113 The war like policy of
Emilius. 113 The Victory of the Romans upon the Sclauenians. 114 The number of
Hannibals Army in a table of Copper, seen by Polybius. 122 The number of horse
and foot which were in Hannibals Army at his parting from Spa^ne. 123 The
parting of the Roman Armies. 126 The means to pass the Elephants. 129 The
Sauoyards hinder Hannibal and his Army. 132 They of the Mountains charge the
Carthaginians. ibid. Treason of the Barbarians against Hannibal. 133 The number
of men which Hannibal had, after he had past over the Alps. 135 The policy of
Hannibal for an example to his Soldiers. 138 The retreat of Scipi^ 141
Treason of the Gauls against the Romans. 142 The manner of the Numidians
fighting. 146 The difference betwixt a Dictator and a Consul. 153 The means
which Fabius made to stop Hannibals passage 156 Two Dictators at Rome at one
instant. 162 The River of Fante. 168 The Romans in old time very sermonious.
170 Ten thousand Romans taken alive. 172 Three score and ten thousand slain in
the battle. ibid. Tarent, Capua, and Naples reduced under the obedience of
Hannibal. 173 Time of the death of Antigonus, Seleucus, and Ptolomy. 175 The
causes of the war betwixt the Achei^s and Philip against the Etoliens and
Lacedaemonians. ibid. Taurion taken by assault. 177 The nature of the These
alonians. ibi. The murder of the Governors of the Lacedaemonians 188 The blame
of the Epirots. 192 The murder of the Lacedemon Governors by the young men.
195 The power of clemency in Princes. ibid. Towns taken in Argos by Lycurgus.
195 Two causes why the Black Sea and the Pontique run contin^ally. 197 The
refuge of Europe. 199 Thracians vanquished by the Gauls. 200 Tole imposed upon
those that sailed into the Black Sea by Constantinople 201 Town of Thalam^.
215 Thalame yields. ibid. Typaneates yields unto Philip. 217 Towns which yield
to Philip. 218 Taurion dispossessed of the government of Morea. 221 Therme
spoiled by the Macedonians. 228 Temple of Apollo. 234 Taking of Leonce. 238
The^dote. 245 Town of Broches 247 Town of Broches besieged. 257 Taking of
Ptolomy. ibid. Tr^ce made with the Selgenses. 264 Thebes besieged by Philip.
275 Thebes yielded to Philip 276 Timoxenes Chief of the Acheins. 299 Tyranny.
285 Towns for retreat for those that are voluntarily Banished 290 Thebains.
304 Two principle of every Commonweal. 306 Treason practiced against Acheus
by Cambila and Bolis 325 Tarentum betrayed unto Hannibal by treachery. 329
Tarentum taken by Hannibal. 332 Tegea taken 393 Three causes of the peoples
mutiny against Princes. 309 Two kinds of untruths. 406 Tymerus reprehensible.
407 Tymerus speaks by hear say and imagination. 412 Tunis taken by Scipio.
423 Two ends in Histories. 444 The situation of Phigalea. 175 The Etoliens
spoil and iniure the Messeniens. 176
V.
Varro off^rs battle, and the order which he held. 170 Varro flies with
threescore and ten Horse. 172 Vanquish an enemy by mildness. 230 Victory of
Garsyere against the Selgenses. 263 Understanding more commendable then fortune
357 Voyage of Alexander against Darius Calistines. 408 Vices of Heraclides 415
V^^ca besieged by Scipio 417 Victory of the Romans against the Carthaginians
434
W
What is required in a Tragedy 92 What the Carthaginians held in Afric. 124
War attempted by the Etoliens against Morea. 177 War concluded against the
Etoliens. 189 Whom the survey of the watch belongs. 300 What a Ladder for the
War ought to be. 346 Wife of Mandonin. 366 Wisdom of Scipio. 397 Witty answer
of a young man 408 War like to a disease. 411
X
Xantippus a Lacedemonian 22 Xantippus returns into his Country. 25 Xenoete
his Army defeated and spoiled. 249
Z
Zalucus the Lawgiver. 407 Zachantia spoiled and ruined by the Carthaginians.
435
FINIS.
The Plot of the Romans CAMP.
Every side of the Camp has 2100 foot in the Ditch.
The Ditch and Pallisadoe.
Every side of the situation of the Tents 17000 feet. 200 100 Footmen strangers
and newly come. Footmen of the Allies extraordinary 840. Footmen of the Allies
extraordinary 840. Footmen strangers and newly come. The Length. 100 Horsemen
strangers and newly come. Horsemen of the Allies extraordinary 300. Horsemen of
the Allies extraordinary 200. Horsemen strangers and newly come. 100 100 Choice
footmen and voluntaries. Choice horsemen and voluntaries. The Market place. The
pretorium. The Questory or Treasury. Choice footmen and voluntaries. Choice
horsemen and voluntaries. 100 The Tribunes. 50 ^ ^ 100 100 Footmen Allies 326.
Horsemen Allies 40. Forked Iauelins 120. Principal^ 120. Triarij Roman horse
30 Roman horse 30 Triarij 60 Principals 120 Forked Iauelins 120 Horsemen
Allies 40 Footmen Allies 326 100 Footmen Allies 326. Horsemen Allies 40. Forked
Iauelins 120. Principals 120. Triarij 60 Roman horse 30 Roman horse 30
Triarij 60 Principals 120 Forked Iauelins 120 Horsemen Allies 40 Footmen Allies
326 100 Footmen Allies 326. Horsemen Allies 40. Forked Iauelins 120. Principals
120. Triarij 60 Roman horse 30 Roman horse ^0 Triarij 60 Principals 120
Forked Iauelins 120 Horsemen Allies 40 Footmen Allies 326 100 Footmen Allies
326. Horsemen Allies 40. Forked Iauelins 120. Principals 120. Triarij 60 Roman
horse 30 Roman horse 30 Triarij 60 Principals 120 Forked Iauelins 120 Horsemen
Allies 40 Footmen Allies 326 100 Footmen Allies 326. Horsemen Allies 40. Forked
Iauelins 120. Principals 120. Triarij 60 Roman horse 30 Roman horse 30
Triarij 60 Principals 120 Forked Iauelins 120 Horsemen Allies 40 Footmen Allies
326 50 A cross street 100 Footmen Allies 326. Horsemen Allies 40. Forked
Iauelins 120. Principals 120 Triarij 60 Roman horse 30 Roman horse 30 Triarij
60 Principals 120 Forked Iauelins 120 Horsemen Allies 40 Footmen Allies 326 100
Footmen Allies 326. Horsemen Allies 40. Forked Iauelins 120. Principals 120
Triarij 60 Roman horse 30 Roman horse 30 Triarij 60 Principals 120 Forked
Iauelins 120 Horsemen Allies 40 Footmen Allies 326 100 Footmen Allies 326.
Horsemen Allies 40. Forked Iauelins 120. Principals 120 Triarij 60 Roman horse
30 Roman horse 30 Triarij 60 Principals 120 Forked Iauelins 120 Horsemen
Allies 40 Footmen Allies 326 100 Footmen Allies 327. Horsemen Allies 40. Forked
Iauelins 120. Principals 120 Triarij 60 Roman horse 30 Roman horse 30 Triarij
60 Principals 120 Forked Iauelins 120 Horsemen Allies 40 Footmen Allies 326 200
foot 100 Footmen Allies 326. Horsemen Allies 40. Forked Iauelins 120.
Principals 120 Triarij 60 Roman horse 30 Roman horse 30 Triarij 60 Principals
120 Forked Iauelins ^0 Horsemen Allies 40 Footmen Allies 326 200 foot. 175
foot. 150 foot. 50 100 100 50 50 100 50 100 50 50 100 100 50 150 175 Footmen
Allies 1260 Horsemen Allies 400 F. Iauelins 1200 Princip. 1200 Tria R. 600
Horse 300 R. horse 300 Tria 600^ Prin^ p. 1200 F. Iauelins 1200 Horsemen Allies
400 Footmen ^60

The Romans Camp contains in its square, equal of all sides, 91. Acres and
about 12. Rod: after 22. foot to the Rod, and 100 Rod to the Acre.

In regard of the Gates of the Camp, I have purposely omitted them, for that
Polybius makes no mention: Although the manner of the Romans was to have four
according to the four Corners of the world: And it is placed in the midst of
every side of the Ditch.

As for the light Iauelins or Darts, they are divided among other Bands: And as
for the streets I have not set them down, for that they may be easily imagined.


