SUNDAY NO SABBATH. A SERMON Preached before the Lord Bishop of Lincoln, at
his Lordships visitation at Ampthill in the County of Bedford, Aug. 17. 1635.

BY JOHN POCKLINGTON Doctor of Divinity, late fellow and President both of
Pembroke Hall and Sidney College in Cambridge, and Chaplain to the Right
Reverend Father in God the Lord Bishop of LINCOLN.

1 TIMOTHY 6.20. O Timothee, depositum custodi, devitans profanas vocum novitates,
and oppositiones falsi nominis scientiae, quam quidam promittentes circa fidem
exciderunt.

LONDON, Printed by ROBERT YOUNG. 1636.

SUNDAY NO SABBATH.
ACTS 20.7, 8. 7 And upon the first day of the week, when the Disciples came
together to break bread, Paul preached unto them, ready to depart on the
morrow, and continued his speech until midnight.

8. And there were many lights in the upper chamber where they were gathered
together.


THis Text, I conceive, is not unfit for this time. In the text is synaxis, a
meeting; and at this time there is synodus, a meeting.

In the text is a meeting of Disciples; and such is the meeting at this time.
He that called the Disciples together, and sat President in that meeting, was
the Apostle Paul; and he that called us hither, and sits President in this
meeting, is our Diocesan; who can derive himself the successor of an Apostle:
otherwise we should have taken his call for the voice of a stranger, and not
have here appeared. It is Saint Austines resolution, S. Aug. cont. M^nich. ep.
c. 4. ^om. 6.
Successio Episcoporum ab ipsa sede Petri, is that which, amongst other things
by him named, keeps us in gremio Ecclesiae, and subjects us to our Bishops
jurisdiction. The meeting in the text is intended for two Actions, Breaking of
bread, and Preaching. And the especial intent of this meeting is, to receive
our Bishops directions for the administration of the Sacraments and Preaching,
as his Articles inform us. Hitherto, if I can but hold me by my text, I hope
not to fall into impertinencies. But in the next place the day of meeting in
the text jumpeth not with the day of meeting for this our Synod. For that is
the first day of the week: yet this comes as near it as may be, for with
Jacob it holds his brother by the heel; this is the second. And had it been
appointed on a Sunday, the authority of the Council of Constantinople,
Ephesus, and Chalcedon, would have justified it against all Sabbatarians. For
by the Emperors edict they were precisely commanded to meet, and did meet, and
sat, and gave suffrages, and dispatched letters on a Sunday.

But in the other circumstances the text and the time are nothing at all
allied. The place of meeting then was an upper chamber, ours a Church dedicated
and consecrated for those holy duties in the text, and used also for Synods.
That meeting was in the night, ours in the day. They had the benefit of many
lights, we of one great light that rules the day. In the text the Sermon
continued till midnight; but herein if I leave not my text, you will leave me.
And if none of us all follow St. Paul in preaching in an upper chamber, in the
night, and till midnight, neither he, nor his successors will tax us. For
Saint Luke is feign to make an Apology for him in these respects, He was to
depart the next morrow. So that necessity put him upon that time and place;
and the importunity of his Disciples would not be satisfied with a shorter
discourse. For fons abiturus, (says Saint Austine) they knew they should never
see his face any more, S. Aug. ep. 86.
nor refresh their thirsty souls with those waters of life that issued from
the fountain of his blessed lips; that he which could shake the Viper from his
hand, could not find in his heart to cast these Babes from his breasts.
Therefore, contrary to his own rules given to the Corinthians, he did
administer the Sacrament and preach, where men did both eat and drink, and
continued the same (out of order) till midnight. And so without any curious
division, I come, after my plain manner, to handle the words in the text: and
for your better memory take them up as they lie in order, and begin with the
time of this meeting.

Upon the first day of the week.] Herein I conceive four things considerable.
1. what is meant by the first day of the week. 2. and 3. next, when and by
whom was that day appointed for holy assemblies to meet on. 4. when does the
holy observation of that day begin.

For the first. S Basil H^xam. ^om. 2. and a^ S^. S^^ct. 27.
The words in the Original are one day of the Sabbaths, one being put for
first (says S. Basil) as the evening and the morning were one day, i.e. the
first. So una Sabbathi is that quam primam dicimus, (says St. Ambrose) as we
find it written, S. Amb. ps. 47.
Mat. 28.1. Vesperi Sabbathi quae lucescit in primam Sabbathi, In the end of
the Sabbath when the first day of the week began to dawne. S. Aug. ep. 86.
For that day (says Saint Augustine) which three of the Evangelists call unam
Sabbathi, one Sabbath, prima Sabbathi a Matthaeo dicitur, Saint Matthew
expounds them, and calls the first day of the week. And it is manifest (says
the same Father) that this first day of the week is that day, qui postea dies
Dominicus appellatus est, which afterward was called the Lords day. S. Cyril.
in Johan. l. 8. c. 58.
Saint Cyril affirms the very same; Christ appeared to his Disciples una
Sabbathi, on one Sabbath, or on the first day of the week, i.e. die Dominico,
on the Lords day. It is manifest then, that by one day of the Sabbaths is meant
the first day of the week; and the first day of the week is the Lords day. So
we see what is meant by the first day of the week, it is the Lords day.

The next points are, when and by whom was the observation of the Lords day
appointed. The Church (says St. Ignatius) has set apart one day, S Ignat. ep.
ad Magnes.
and called it the Lords day, in confutation of those sons of perdition that
deny the Lords work performed on that day, that is, his resurrection. So have
you the time when, and the authority that did appoint the observation of the
Lords day, delivered by Ignatius scholar to Saint John, Niceph. l. 2. c. 35
that first so called it; and, as it is recorded, one of those babes whom our
Savior took up into his arms, as his master was received in his bosom. The
time was the time the Apostles lived in. The authority was the Church.

What mean you by the Church? Take that cleared out of St. Augustine, S. Aug.
ep. 119.
Apostoli and Apostolici viri sanxerunt, the Apostles and Apostolic men have
ordained, that the first day of the week should be set apart for the religious
and solemn service of God, because our Redeemer arose on that day; and
therefore it is called ever since dies Dominicus, the Lords day, and ex illo
caepit habere festivitatem, and from the very Apostles time and from their
constitution, it began to be kept as a festival day.

A festival day! what mean you by that? Why a sanctis patribus constitutum
and mandatum (says the same Father) it is a constitution and command received
from our holy Fathers, S. Aug* sermon. 251. de temp.
that men should leave all worldly business on Saints daves, and maxim diebus
Dominicis, and especially on the Lords day, that they may betake themselves
wholly to the Lords service. The first day of the week then is the Lords day,
appointed to be kept as a holy feast for the Lords service, by the Apostles
themselves in their own time. And this day which the Apostles call the Lords
day, S. Justin. ora^ ad Anton*
St. Justine Martyr an Apostolic man calls Sunday. Solis autem die communiter
omnes conventum agimus ad preces and supplicationes, on Sunday we all meet
together to prayers and supplications, because that is primus dies, the first
day on which our Savior arose. For he was crucified pridie Saturni diei, the
day before Saturday, and the next day after Saturday, qui sc. Solis est dies,
which is Sunday, Apostolis and Discipulis suis apparuit, he appeared to his
Apostles and Disciples. And hereupon his Apostles and Disciples thought fit to
appoint and command this day to be kept holy. The Lords day then is by the
Apostles so called, and by this Apostolic man named Sunday; and may fitly so
be called, because (says Saint Ambrose) in eo ortus Sol justitiae illuminat,
S. Amb ser. 61.
the Sun of righteousness then arose, that enlightneth every one of us. The
first day of the week then is the Lords day, and Sunday. And the Lords day was
by the Apostles themselves in their own time appointed for holy assemblies to
meet on, as on a feast day dedicated to the Lords service. And so has that day
been called, and used ever since in the true Catholic Church of God for 1554.
years together without interruption, both in the Greek and Latin Church.

What shall we think then of Knox and Whittingham, Troubles at (...). page 30.
and their fellows, that in their letter to Calvin depart from the
constitution, ordinance, and practice of the Apostles and Apostolic men, and
call not this day the Lords day, or Sunday, but with the piety of Jeroboam
make such a day of it, as they have devised in their own hearts, to serve
their own turn, and anabaptizing of it after the mind of some Jew hired to be
the godfather thereof, call it the Sabbath, and so disguised with that name
become both the first that so called it, and the Testators that have so
bequeathed it to their Disciples and Proselites to be observed accordingly?

It was full thirty years before their children could turn their tongues
from Sunday to hit on Sabbath: and if the Gileadites that met with the
Ephraimites before they could frame to pronounce Shibboleth, had snapt these
too, before they had got their Sabbath by the end, their counsel had brought
much peace to the Church. For this name Sabbath is not a bare name, like a spot
in their foreheads to know Labans sheep from Jacobs; but indeed it is a
mystery of iniquity, intended against the Church. For allow them but their
Sabbath, and you must allow them the service that belongs to their Sabbath.
Then must you have no Letanie, for that is no service for their Sabbath,
(containing suffrages devised by Pope Gregory) but for Sundays; nay, Troubles
at Frankf. page 30.
for Wednesdayes and Fridayes, which must not so be used, for six days thou
must labor: nay, you must have no part of the Service in the Communion book
used, for that is Service also for holy days, Welph. detemp^ l. 2. c. 4.
which are abominated as idolatricall, being dedicated to Saints. Well then,
the Sabbath must be yielded them, otherwise there will be no day left for God
to be served on.

What Service then must you allow them for their Sabbath? Why nothing but
preaching. How shall that be known? Why out of their own mouths. Thus soon
after the Conventicle in London in 84. about the 31th. year of the Sabbaths
nativitie, writes one of them in his letter to some Superintendent amongst
them, to whom he gives an account of his Sabbaths exercise: Ego singulis
Sabbath is, si non alius adveniens locum suppleat, (cum praescripta Leiturgeias
formula nihil habens commercit) in caetu concionem habeo, idque reverendorum
fratrum consilio; I preach every Sabbath in the congregation, (having nothing
at all to do with the order prescribed in the book of Common Prayer;) and
this he does, not of his own head, but by the counsel of the reverend
brethren, delivered doubtless in that late Synod.

Now you see the Common Prayer book, which the Kings Majesty's authority in
causes Ecclesiastical, with the Convocation house, have appointed, and the
Parliament the reunto assented, is clean cast out of their Sabbath, and no
service allowed or used but preaching. Marvel not then at the casting out of
lawful sports; their zeal could and did dispense with them well enough for a
long time together, as they of Genevah and the Low Countries (even sitting the
Synod of Dort) did, and still do. But the plot with us will not bear them,
for they must gain elbow room for their Sabbaths exercise, or preaching,
falsely so called, being for the most part (as their hearers will justify) but
violent discourses, and personal invectives against the present State, and
settled laws of the Land, with the Governors, thereby to get themselves
magnified for the great power of God with Simon, that having cried down all
Laws, Ecclesiastical and Temporal too in time that suit not with their
Sabbath doctrine, they may be able (making their reliance on their inveigled
thousands whereof they brag) to put their hands to their mouths, Mar. ju.
epiles.
and to say with him in the story, Petition to his Majesty in 1603. Richard.
2^.
Behold the fountain from whence all laws for government of Church and
Common wealth must shortly spring.

You see then what the plot was that bred, and still keeps the name of Sabbath
on foot; that if St. John or the Apostles that first called and appointed the
Lords day, should come amongst them, and happen to call it the Lords day, they
would quickly find him to be none of their Tribe, nor for their turn, being
(...), without his watch word of the Sabbath. But if Justin that blessed Martyr
should be so profane as to call it Sunday, he would be in danger under their
discipline to be martyred the second time for not adoring their idol Sabbath,
as he was under Antonius for not worshipping Jupiter.

Ob. Secondly, if the Lords day was appointed and kept by the Apostles, what
shall we say to those turbulent spirits (as master Calvin calls them) qui
tumultuantur ob diem Dominicum, Calv. i^s^^. ^ c. 8 S. 33. (...) 3^
that are all up in a hurly-burly for being abridged of their Christian
liberty, and made to observe days and Feasts, and particularly the Lords day?
Whereupon it was sadly demurred upon, even in Genevah, Barcl^i^ paroen. l. 1 c.
13.
to have that day altered to Thursday; and himself holds it alterable. What
shall we think also of the Centurists, Cent. 1. l. 2. c. 6. de fe^ ^^.
that not only say there is no place of Scripture to command the observation
of the Lords day; Cent. 2. c. 6. page 11 ^.
but that the contentions raised by Anicetus and Victor, Popes of Rome,
touching the observation of Easter on the Lords day, do sufficiently declare,
that for two hundred years after Christ some kept the Sabbath holy, some the
Lords day; and that they were false Apostles that attempted at first to bind
the Church to the observation of Feasts, as of the Lords day: and for this
cause they stick the mystery of iniquity on the foreheads of those two
blessed Martyrs.

Sol. To that part of the objection which is framed out of the Centurists, some
perhaps would answer, that the guise of the Centurists is to use the Catholic
Fathers and holy Martyrs as Balaam used his Ass. For if they will not go that
way that they would have them, though Gods Angel suffer them not so to do, but
the Spirit of truth lead them quite otherwise, they fall upon them, and use
them as rudely as he did the Ass. A wrong which cannot but be highly
displeasing to that good God, who was so moved upon the sight of the injury
done the poor beast, that he was upon the point to have taken a sharp
revenge upon the false hypocrite, in habit of a Prophet, for the same.

But with cruel Balaam I will not compare them, because he wished for a sword
to be avenged of the poor Ass; whereas these, like diligent Schoolemasters,
examine the exercises of the ancient Fathers, show them their errors, tell
them of the many spots and blots they find in them, and let them see how they
are put to the trouble to correct them at every turn; whereupon their patience
is so moved, that they rebuke them sometime with very sharp language: and when
all is done, they are so ashamed of diverse things they hear from them, that
they set them to school again to learn their lessons backward.

This their diligence and pains in correcting and wiping the Fathers, as one
wipes a dish that turns it upside down, is not well accepted on all hands:
for some passionate men think they whip the Fathers without cause, and for not
running the way of their errors, which these Auditors account to be so many,
and so costly too, that the Merchant pays more for them than for all the
truths, (...).
moral, natural, supernatural, that are in Aristotle, Plato, or the blessed
Bible, though you give the Apocrypha leave to be bound up with it. I would be
loath to say as Saint Paul does of the testimony of Epimenides, This witness
is true. But be it truth, or some counterfeit, like Jeroboams wife, their
credit is eclipsed, and their testimony abated by their doings. So I leave
them till anon.

Secondly, I answer, true it is, that Saint Paul and other Apostles preached to
the Jews in the Synagogue on the Sabbath day, because they would meet upon no
other: but it is untrue, that they set that day apart to preach unto the
Gentiles, or the Jews either. They were false Apostles that labored to lay
that yoke on the Disciples necks, whom Saint Paul opposed with all his might,
Col. 2.16. Gal. 4.10. and did utterly reject their Sabbath, and appointed no
day of public meetings but the first day of the week, when their collections
were ever made, 1 Cor. 16.1. and so continued to be made on that day, and on no
day else, in all succeeding ages. And because Saint Paul did keep the first
day of the week, and opposed the observation of the Jewish Sabbath, therefore
the Ebionites (say St. Irenaeus and Epiphanius) rejected his writings,
Apostatam legis dicentes, S. Irer. l. 1. c. 26. S. Ep^ph^h^e. 31.
rating him for an Apostata.

So likewise the blessed Martyrs in the Primitive Church, Eusebius. l. 3. c. 24.
S. Ignatap. 3. ad M^g.
by the doctrine and example of Saint Paul and the Apostles, so unfeignedly
abhorred the observation of the Jewish Sabbath, that they esteemed the
observers thereof, and the contemners of the Lords day, the very sons of
perdition, enemies of our Savior, and sellers of Christ: and, as Saint Justin
Martyrtells Trypho, S. Just. (...). Triph. Tom. 2.
they gladly endured the most horrible torments that men and devils could
devise to inflict upon them, rather than yield Sabbatha vestra and solennes
dies observare, to keep your Sabbaths and days of solemn assemblies; which
(says he) could not hurt us, were they not forbidden us by the doctrine and
practice of the Apostles, and Christ himself. S. Just. ad Anton.
But the observation of Sunday was so generally and religiously observed of all
Christians, that then was the common meeting of all, qui vel in oppidis vel
rure degunt, both Citizens and Country men. All sorts of Christians met on
Sundays, and none on the Sabbath day but Jews only.

With what face then dare the Centurists vent such untruths, that the keeping
of the Lords day was a thing indifferent for two hundred years? And with what
conscience dare they forge those to be false Apostles, that were the bringers
in of the observation of Feasts, and particularly of the Lords day? Or with
what conscience dare they use the Martyrs of God, members of Christ's body, so
unworthily, as to make the blessed Saints in heaven, fellow heirs with Christ
Jesus, meet vessels for the mystery of iniquity to begin to work in, who did
no more than either was appointed by the Apostles and Apostolic men before
themselves, or was afterward confirmed by the Council of Nice, the Edicts of
Constantine and his successors, the Decrees of the Council of Constantinople,
and other Synods, as well in the Greek as Latin Church, in all succeeding
ages?

Ob. But they say there is no place of Scripture to command the observation of
the Lords day, but only the Tradition from the Apostles; therefore the day may
be altered.

Sol. Be it so: yet (as Chemnitius excellently says) though we be not bound by
any necessity of law in Novo Testamento, C^em. Exam. de ^est. 4. pars.
in the New Testament to observe the Lords day for solemn assemblies,
barbarica tamen petulantia, yet were it barbarous sauciness to refuse to
observe the custom of the Apostles and Primitive Church. For (as Saint
Augustine says) wherein the Scripture has determined nothing, mos populi Dei,
S. Aug. ep. Cas. 86.
and instituta majorum pro lege tenenda sunt, the custom of Gods people, and
the ordinance of our Elders, are to be observed as laws. And in this case for
any man to doubt whether he should relinquish and abandon his own new devices,
and ita faciendum, and that it becomes him to do as he sees the whole Church
of God to do, insolentissimae insaniae est, is an insolency with madness to
boot (says Saint Augustine. S. Aug aep. 119. Ja.
) And to talk with such, interminata orietur luctatio, were to uphold
wrangling world without end.

3 If the first day of the week be the Lords day, we must look to do the
Lords work on it, and not trench upon him by doing our own work thereon. For
no excuse of business ought to keep us from the service of God on that day.
No necessity is a greater tyrant than poverty, yet is that no good excuse for
thy absence from Church (says Saint Chrysostom) to say thou art poor, and
must follow thy business. S. Chrysoft. hom. 24. de bap. Christi.
For God has not taken to himself the greatest part of the days of the
week, but has given thee six, unam vero sibi reliquit, and left himself but
one; yet will thou find out the thief poverty to steal that away from him
too, as sacrilegious persons do consecrate things. But what do I speak de
integro die, of a whole day? Do but that in keeping the Lords day which the
widow did in her alms, that gave two mites, sic tu duas horas, so give the
Lord two hours. This if you do not, beware you lose not integrorum annorum
labores, the labors of many whole years.

Qu. May then no work of our own be done on the Lords day, not so much as out
of the times of the Lords service?

Resp. Out of doubt there may; yea, though we should suppose that Christians
are bound to keep the Lords day as strictly as our Savior kept the Sabbath.
For our Savior (says Epiphanius) non artem fabrilem, lignariam, S. Epip^^^ 2.
(...) 2. ber. 66. p. 229.
aut ferrariam, did not follow the trade of a Carpenter or Smith on the Sabbath
day, though he was so poor that he used Joseph's trade, and made both Carts and
Ploughs, yet conversatione and doctrina, by his doctrine and course of life he
showed that some works of our own might be done on the Sabbath out of the
times of divine service; for himself made clay, est autem opu^ lutum subigere,
and to make clay is a kind of work: a work neither of necessity nor charity;
for had it so pleased him, the work of charity had taken place before the clay
could have been tempered. He commanded also the Cripple, grabbatum tollere, to
carry away his bed, which then needed not, for the arrantest Pharisee thief in
Jerusalem would not have meddled with it on that day. The Disciples also by his
doctrine and example (says the same Father) spicas vellunt, torrent, and
edunt, do pluck and parch their corn on the Sabbath day. And there was no law
(says Saint Irenaeus) that forbade them so to do: (...)
metere autem and colligere in horreum lex vetabat, but the law forbade reaping
and carrying into the barn on the Sabbath day. His reason is this, continere
enim se jubeb at lex ab omni opere servili, (i.e.) ab omni avaritia quae per
negotiationem and reliquo terreno actu ^gitatur, The law forbids all servile
works, wherein covetousness sticks as a nail between two stones. Some
small chares then of our own may be done on the Lords day, out of the times of
the Lords service.

Secondly, meat may be dressed, and Feasts may be kept on the Lords day by
Christ's example, S. Luc. 14.13.
who was at a feast on the Sabbath day; and none ought to blame us for doing
the like. For recte Ecclesiae festa colunt, S. Aug. de temp. ser. 253. and 255.
qui Ecclesiae filios se esse recognoscunt, they do well to keep the Feasts
of the Church, that remember themselves to be the sons of the Church. This
doctrine Saint Augustine taught his people, Novit sanctitas vestra fraires, my
brethren, your holiness knows very well that to day consecrationem altaris
celebramus, we celebrate the Feast for the consecration of the Altar, in quo
unctus vel benedictus est lapis, in quo divina sacrificia consecrantur, ac
merito gaudentes celebramus; and we do well to keep this feast with joy, not
with wanton, lewd, or unchaste joy. (Saint Austine is no Proctor to plead for
Baal, nor any that follow him.) For, nescio qua front (says he) I cannot tell
with what conscience he can show a cheerful countenance in altaris
consecratione, that is not precise in cordis sui altari munditiam custodire, to
preserve purity in the altar of his heart.

The Lords day then is and ought to be kept as a Feast, as the Sabbath was.
Judith. 10.2.
For magnum scandalum (says Saint Augustine) nay magnum nefas (says
Tertullian) it is a great scandal, S. Aug. ep. 86. Tert. de Coro. Mil.
and a foul sin to fast on the Lords day. Therefore we condemn the
Manichees (says Saint Ambrose) that fast on Sundays. S. Amb. ep. 33. l. 10.
We are bound to fast on Fridayes, and of feast on Sundays; so have we a day
and amaritudinis and laetitiae; in illo jejunemus, illo reficiamur; to fast on
the one, to feast on the other. The Jews themselves (says Tertullian) kept
not their Sabbath with fasting: for pridiana paratura, by their provision of
two Omers for a man, it plainly appears that they made as large a meal on
the Sabbath as on any day else.

Ob. But they were commanded to dress their Sabbath dinner the day before, and
the Commandment says, On it thou shall do no manner of work.

Sol. Not to dispute it further, S. Aug. ep. 119. c. 12.
how, or to what the Jews were bound upon their Sabbath, however, this nothing
concerns us Christians, if we understand the Commandment aright: for though
all the nine Commandments sic observantur ut sonant, are to be kept according
to the letter; observare tamen diem Sabbathi, non ad literam jubemur secundum
etium ab opere corporali, sicut observant Judaei, yet we Christians are not
commanded to observe the Sabbath after the letter by a strict rest, as did the
Jews; nor the Lords day after the manner of the Jewish Sabbath: for of all the
ten Commandments, the third, which concerns the Sabbath, figurative
intelligendum est, is to be understood figuratively. For this Commandment was
given for no other end but only for a sign (says Saint Irenaeus) out of the
Prophet Ezechiel, ^. Iren. l. ^. c. 30.
cap. 20. and out of the Law of Moses, Exodus 31. and then shows whereof it was
a sign. Sabbath a perseverantiam totius diei erga Deum deservitionis
edocebant, their Sabbath taught our continual service of God; Orig. ho^. 2^.
in (...). 28.
which Origin calls Sabbathum Christianum, a Christian Sabbath. And because no
man is justified either by the Sabbath or Circumcision, therefore in signo data
sunt populo, they were given the people for a sign. This Theodoret largely
shows out of the plain words of the Prophet Ezechiel, cap. 20. ver. 11. S.
Theod. in Ezech.
The Sabbath was none of those Commandments that could give life to the
observers, but was given them only to be a sign, in signum temporis illius,
Tert. de pr^^^ lib. c. 4.
(as Tertullian speaks) and not in sallutis praerogativam, not to bring them
salvation, but to make them known from other Nations. Other Nations that
descended of Abraham used circumcision as well as the Jews, but no Nation kept
the Sabbath but Jews only. Therefore 1541. years they were known by that
sign to be Gods people: but the keeping of the Sabbath made neither them nor
the Pharisees to be Gods people. This is evident. For Abraham (says Saint
Irenaeus) was justified and called the friend of God, S. Iren. l. 4. c. 30.
sine observatione Sabbathorum, without keeping any Sabbaths.

Nay, there was not any of the Patriarchs (says Tertullian) that kept the
Sabbath, neither Adam, Tert. adv. ^udaeos de praeser^ c. 2.4.
Enoch, Noah, Abraham, nor Melchizedek, for 2455. years, yet were they just
men, and obtained salvation. This is so clear a truth, that the Jews could
not deny it: and Trypho does confess it, being pressed thereunto by Saint
Justin. And for this 1635. S. Just. i^. Tryph. Tom. 2.
years it has not been kept in the Christian world. Manifestum est igitur
(says Tertullian) it is manifest therefore, that that cannot be moral, nor
perpetual, that began but with Moses, S. Tusti^. (...) verit. l. 2. in Tryph
(as Saint Justin Martyr says) and ended with Christ, when he nailed all the
ceremonial law to his Cross, with those words, Consummatum est, it is
finished. Therefore the third Commandment, (as Saint Austine) or the fourth
(as Josephus and other Fathers call it) touching the Sabbath, must be
understood only figuratively, and not after the letter, as the other nine
commandments are. This is the doctrine of antiquity, which has gotten a
placet from Gomarus, Goma. invest. sab. c. 3.
whose followers may perhaps embrace the same.

Ob. Dicunt autem Judaei, quod primordio, etc. Tertul. de praescrip. c. 2. and
4.
But a Jew will object and say (says Tertullian) that God from the beginning
did sanctify the Sabbath, and therefore the Sabbath ought to be kept holy, and
no manner of work must be done thereon.

Sol. This is the very argument which Marcion learned of the Pharisees, John.
9.16.
and blasphemously uses to prove Christ not to the Son of God, because he
carried himself so cross to his Fathers actions and Laws. For the Sabbath
which his Father sanctified and rested on, operatione destruxit, Tert. in Mar.
l. 4.
he profaned and overthrew by working on it: so did his Disciples, for cibum
operati (mark how pure this blasphemous Heretic was) they dress their meat
on the Sabbath. My answer therefore is this, that the Lawgiver best knew how
to observe his own laws; and if his Fathers rest did not bind him from doing
some work, no more does it us. Besides, we see the Patriaches, even
Melchizedek himself, a Priest of the most high God, did not take themselves
bound to rest on the Sabbath at all. For though they saw Gods example, yet they
heard no commandment to enjoyne them to rest on that day as he did; therefore
they never observed the Sabbath.

Thirdly, though a Jew will little regard what the Patriarchs did, or what all
good Christians resolve and practice, but will force the Lawgiver to keep his
own law, not after his own meaning but after theirs, as the Pharisees did our
Savior, saying, This man is not of God, because he keeps not the Sabbath
day, viz. as they construed and expounded the Commandment for the observation
thereof: yet that nothing concerns us that keep the Lords day by virtue of
Apostolical constitution and tradition of holy Church, and not the Sabbath by
force of the fourth Commandment, which the Apostles by Christ's doctrine and
example understood solutum, to be dissolved. And, cujus vis soluta nec nomen
haerebat, S. Amb^th Lu. 6. l. 5.
(says Saint Ambrose) when the Sabbath lost his force it forfeited the name;
therefore ought not so to be called: and so having lost both force and name, is
become nothing at all but a mere Idol. An Idol has the shape of something,
but because it has eyes and sees not, etc. it is nothing in the world. So
though their Sabbath has the name of one of the Jews holy days, yet keeps
it not neither the day they kept, nor the service belonging to it, and so is
become nothing in the world.

True it is, that some that with great zeal and little judgment exclaim
against recreations, and dressing of meat, and the like, on Sundays, must make
a Sabbath of Sunday, and keep up that name, otherwise their many citations of
Scripture, mentioning only the Sabbath of being applied to Sunday, will
appear so ridiculously distorted and wry-neckt, that they will be a scorn and
derision to the simplest of their now deluded Auditors, who are abused with the
name of a Christian Sabbath out of Origin, which is not kept on Sunday only,
(...)
but every day. Christ is our Christian Sabbath (says Origin) and he that
lives in Christ, semper in Sabbatho vivit, requiescendo ab operibus malis,
operatur autem opera justitiae incessanter.

Others also for the plot-sake must uphold the name of Sabbath, that stalking
behind it they may shoot against the Service appointed for the Lords day. Hence
it is that some for want of wit, some for too much, adore the Sabbath as an
Image dropped down from Jupiter, and cry before it, as they did before the
golden Calfe, This is an holy day unto the Lord; whereas indeed it is the great
Diana of the Ephesians as they use it, whereby the minds of their Proselytes
are so perplexed and bewitched, that they cannot resolve whether the sin be
greater to bowl, shoot, or dance on their Sabbath, than to commit murder, or
the father to cut the throat of his own child. All which doubts would soon
be resolved by plucking the vizzard of the Sabbath from the face of the Lords
day, which does as well and truly become it as the Crown of thorns did the
Lord himself. This was platted to expose him to damnable derision, and that
was plotted to impose on it detestable superstition.

Yet to die for it they will call it a Sabbath, presuming in their zealous
ignorance or guilefull zeal, to be thought to speak the Scripture phrase,
when indeed the dregs of Ashdod flow from their mouths. For that day which
they nickname the Sabbath, is either no day at all, or not the day that they
mean. It were well therefore that they would forbear to speak strange
languages in the Church for Saint Paul's sake, and use them then when they all
meet together in new England amongst them that understand the language; for
with us the Sabbath is Saturday, and no day else. No ancient Father, Father!
Nay, no learned man, Heathen or Christian, took it otherwise from the
beginning of the world till the beginning of their schism in 1554. And if we
find the word otherwise used in some writings that of late come unto our
hands, blame not the Clerks, good men, for it, nor entitle the misprision any
higher, or otherwise than to these pretenders to piety, who for their own
ends have for a long time deceived the world with their zealous and most
ignorant or cunning clamours, and rung the name of Sabbath so commonly into all
men's ears, that not Clerks only, but men of judgment, learning and virtue,
not heeding peradventure so much as is requisite, what crafty and wicked device
may be menaged under the veil of a fair word used in Gods law, do likewise
suffer the same often to escape the door of their lips, that detest the drift
of the devisers in the closet of their hearts.

I will now shut up this point in Saint Hilaries words. S. Hilar. l. 6.
Non sum nescius difficillimo me asperrimoque tempore haec disserere, multis
jam per omnes ferme Romani Imperii provincias Ecclesiis morbo pestiferae hujus
praedicationis infectis, and velut ad piae fidei hujus mala usurpatam
persuasionem, longo doctrinae usu, and ementito nomine verae religionis
imbutis, non ignorans difficilem esse ad emendationis profectum, voluntatem:
quam in erroris sui studio per plurimorum assensum authoritas publicae
sententiae contineret. Gravis enim est, and periculosus error inplurimis, and
multorum lapsus, etiamsi se intellig at, tamen exurgendi pudore authoritatem
sibi praesumit, ex numero habens hoc impudentiae, ut quod errat, intelligentiam
esse veritatis asserat, dum minus erroris esse existimatur in multis.

There are so many that see so little benefit will be sucked out of the
constitutions of the Apostles, practice and tradition of holy Church, doctrine
of godly and learned Fathers, that they have got themselves heaps of teachers,
that to serve their own turns will call and keep the Lords day as a Sabbath,
and so proclaim it with such loud outcries, that the voice of truth will
become silence, and her self made error, and so made to believe of her self,
or to forgo her own modesty, and to believe none but her self.

But with Moses, liberavi animam meam, being called hither very unwillingly, I
have set before you good and evil, light and darkness, life and death, the
doctrine and practice of the Church of God, and the leaven of Pharisees, and
fashion of Schismatickes and Novellists; choose which you will, and the Lord be
your guide. Only of this be you well assured, that if you will have Manna
rained down unto you, you must forgo your Sabbath, and stick only to the
Lords day: for in nostra Dominica die semper Dominus pluit Manna, Orig. super
15. Exodus hom. 7.
and in Sabbatho non pluit.

The last point touching the day of meeting is, When does the Lords day begin?

Resp. I answer, S. Ambra. in Ps. ^7.
out of Saint Ambrose, The first day of the week began when the Sabbath ended.
The Sabbath ended when Christ arose. Christ the true light arose with the light
and spring of the morning; for vesperi Sabbathi quae lucescit in primam
Sabbathi, are Saint Matthews words. Nihil pulchrius, nihil expressius (says
he) this place is as fit and pat for our purpose as may be. The Sabbaths
evening is in the light of the first day of the week.

So Saint Leo resolves Dioscorus Patriarch of Alexandria, vespera Sabbathi
initium diei Dominici, S. Leo epist. ^d Diosc.
the beginning of the Lords day is in the end of the Sabbath. The end of the
Sabbath is in the light of the first day of the week. Look then for Jacobs
hand on Esau's heel, or the beginning of the Lords day in the end of the
Sabbath. But Saint Nyssen is more punctual and clear: S. Nyssen. deresur.
orat. 2.
the Lords day (says he) begins at Cock-crowing, atque in hoc ipso articulo
temporis, and at that very knot and joint of time: For then end we our
Sabbaths, or Saturdaies fast, and then begin we nos oblectare and laetari, to
keep our Sundays feast, and that by an ancient custom, which all are bound
to observe. For (...) (says he) does not signify the evening, or that part of
the night which is post occasum Solis, after Sun set; but the rise of the
morning, with which the Sabbath ended.

Yet for all this the Church by way of preparation for the better
sanctification of the Lords day, has prudently and piously appointed holy
offices to be used on the Eve before. And in obedience to this positive
constitution of holy Church Saint Augustine would have his hearers to observe
the Lords day, S. Aug. ser. de tem. 25.
a vespera ad vesperam, from Even to Even, sicut antiquis praeceptum est de
Sabbatho, as it was also commanded the Jews concerning the Sabbath. And
therefore (says he) look that from Saturday at Even, us que ad vesperam diei
Dominici, till the Lords day at even, we set aside all rural and worldly
business, ut solo divino culiui vacemus, that we may attend only on the Lords
service, and begin to repair to the Church to evening prayer on Saturday
nights; and he that cannot so do, let him be sure to pray at home.

Remember then that you which will needs have the Lords day a Sabbath, do set
aside all business, and flock to the Church to say or hear Service on
Saturday Evens; which hitherto you have not done, notwithstanding the order of
the Church, which prescribes that part of that day to prepare us for the more
devout observation of the Lords day. Thus much of the day of meeting, The first
day of the week.

2 In the next place, we have in the next words to consider of the persons that
then met. These were not Jews, for then the Sabbath had been the day of their
meeting; but Gentiles, Asians, Macedonians, Thessalonians, Paul, with his
companions and Disciples. Now Paul had ordered before this time in Galatia, and
in Corinth, that his Disciples were to have their meetings on the first day of
the week, whereunto they submitted themselves. For on the first day of the
week they now met, and so did the whole Church of God by their example for ever
after. Wherefore their obedience and humility would better beseem us, than the
pride and opposition of Diotrephes against St. John, and St Paul, and the whole
Church of God, about the day of meeting, or the Service thereon used, only for
pre-eminence sake.

3 Now I come in the next place to the holy duties wherein the Apostle and his
Disciples spent the Lords day. The first of these is breaking of bread. How is
that done? St. Augustine tells us, sicut frangitur in Sacramento corporis
Christi, S. Aug. ep. 86.
not as bread is broken in a Tavern, but as it is broken in the Sacrament of
the Lords body. Therefore the Syriac plainly calls this breaking of bread,
receiving the Eucharist. So does Justin Martyr. And none is so fit as he to
expound St. Austins sicut, to tell us how bread was broken in the holy
Eucharist in those primitive times. This he does in his information given
thereof unto Antoninus plus.

Sunday (says he) is the day of our meeting, S. Justin. orat, ad Anton.
for taking that nourishment which with us is called the Eucharist. Then the
brethren come together ad communes preces and supplicationes, to common prayers
and supplications: then are read the writings of the Prophets and Apostles:
deinde Lectore quiescente, when the Reader has finished all divine Service,
Praesidens orationem habet, he that has the chief place makes an Oration or
Sermon, and instructs the people, and exhorts them to imitate those excellent
things which they have heard read.

Here is reading of prayers and lessons, both out of the Old and New Testament,
and after them a Sermon; and the Sermon does not justle out any part of divine
Service, though the President or Bishop himself made it. Thus the first
Service ends with a Sermon.

And now begins the second Service. Sub haec consurgimus omnes, etc. prayers
being finished, and the Sermon done, we all stand up at once and pour out our
prayers. Stand up and pray! Marvel not at this. For in the Primitive Church
prayers on the Lords day were performed standing, in memory of Christ's
resurrection. And it was not lawful de geniculis adorare, to pray kneeling, as
appears out of Tertullian, Tertul. de Coron. mil. Council. Nic. Can. 30. S.
Bafil. de Sp. Sancto. c. 27. S. Aug. ep. 119. S. Epiph. l. 3. To. 2.
and the Nicene Council, and the Fathers that succeeded.

Then precibus finitis, prayers being ended, ei qui fratribus praeest, offertur
panis, etc. Bread, wine, and water are offered to the Priest, who takes the
same, and with all his might courageously preces and gratiarum actiones
profundit, poures out prayers and benedictions over them: and then all the
people give a cheerful acclamation, and cry Amen. Then is distribution made
cuique praesenti, to every one present; doubtless to lay men as well as to
Priests and Deacons. Then also the richer sort contribute what they think fit,
which is laid up for the use of the poor.

Here are reading of prayers and lessons, expounding of Scripture,
supplications, benedictions, oblations to the Priest, collections for the
poor, distribution of the Sacrament, all required to breaking of bread, ficut
frangitur in Sacramento corporis Christi, as it is broken in the Eucharist. And
so we see how the use of our first and second Service is founded on, and
agrees with the practice of the Primitive Church, by the testimony of this
holy Martyr. Yet this may more clearly be delineated out of the Fathers that
succeeded him. Christian Churches in the Primitive times had these distinct
places in them: there was Sacrarium, Presbyterium, and Auditorium: the
Sacrarium or holy place, was distinguished from the Presbytery by certain
lists and railes: the Presbytery also was divided from the Auditorie, Nave,
and body of the Church per cancellos, by a certain partition that gave it the
name of a Chauncell. In the holy place stood the Altar, or Lords board, and not
in the body of the Church. In the Presbytery was placed Cathedra Episcopi, and
exedrae Presbyterorum, the Bishops Chair or Throne, and stalls for Priests.
For anciently none else, not so much as Deacons, were permitted to sit in the
Church. In the Auditorie stood the Pulpit, or Readers Tribunal (as Saint
Cyprian calls it.) Now the Service that was performed in Sacrario, was much
different from that which was done in Auditorio. None were allowed to come and
stand within the lists of the holy place, where the Altar was fixed, but the
Priests, Council. Arel. Can. 15. S. Cyp. l. 1. ep. 9.
whose office it was, non nisi altari deservire, to stand and serve at the
altar, and none but they. Council. Constantinop. 6. Can. 69.
And the Canon in the sixth general Council excludes all lay men from
thence, unless it were to come in to offer. And the passages in Theodoret
between S. Ambrose and Theodosius make it manifest: S. Theod. l. 5. c. 18.
and they are much mistaken that produce the Council of Constantinople, to
prove that communion Tables stood in the midst of the Church.

But the Service in the Auditory might, and was much of it performed by such as
had only a toleration to read from the Bishop, without imposition of hands by
the Presbytery as Celerinus had from Saint Cyprian. S. Cypri. 2. ep. 7.
And such had authority to go into the Pulpit, and read the Service appointed:
and when the Reader had finished the Ecclesiastical office, then the Expounder
or Preacher went up into the Pulpit, and did expound some place of Scripture
formerly read. Tert. depraeser. c. 16. Eusch. l. 6. c. 34. S. Cypr. l. 4. ep.
2. and. l. 2. ep. 1. and l. 1. ep. 7. and 4.
At this Service were present Catechumeni, Competentes, Neophyti, and all sorts
of Auditors, believers or unbeleevers. But at the second Service (which began
in Sacrario, when this first Service ending with a Sermon was done in
Auditorio) none were admitted to be present but only the faithful. And these
kneeled behind the Deacons in the midst of the Presbytery, or Chauncell, and
with them such Priests as after penance done ad limina Ecclesiae, were admitted
only in communionem laicorum. For Penitents were permitted to kneel together
with the faithful, but that was post exomologesin, as Tertullian thinks fit
to call it, after confession and penance; which was so district and severe in
those primitive times performed in sackcloth and ashes, and the Penitents
casting themselves down at the thresholds of the Church doors, and after
admission into the Church, with much ado granted, then casting themselves
down upon their knees before the Altar, or Lords board, to receive the Priests
absolution, that our silken ears will be in danger to be galled with the
hearing of so rough a discipline. Yet all of us confess in the Commination,
That in the Primitive Church there was such a godly discipline, whereby
notorious sinners were put to open penance; and that it is a thing much to be
wished for, that such discipline were restored again. Bishop Latimer soon
missed it, or some such thing, and complains of the want thereof; therefore
he, with the other godly Bishops of his time, send their wishes after it to
fetch it again, till God be pleased to provide means powerful for the
restoring thereof.

Tertullian taxes the Heretics of his time for neglect of this decent and
godly discipline. Tertul. de praeser. c. 16.
They kept no distinction of places, nor of Service in their Conventicles. Quis
catechumenus, quis fidelis incertum est; pariter adeunt, pariter audiunt,
pariter orant. The whole heard of them ran in a rout together, both to
Prayers, Sermon, and Sacrament, that you could not know one from another.
Eusebius. l. 5. c. 28 and l. 6. c. 34.
It was quite otherwise in the holy Catholic Church. That which Zepherinus
required of Natalius, Fabianus of Philip, and Saint Cyprian of the Penitents of
his time, S. Cyp. l. 2. ep. 7
make it manifest, that there were distinction of places in the Church to rank
all sorts of Christians in. And Saint Ambrose his practice shows a
distinction of Service. The Catechumeni being dismissed, missam facere caepi;
S. Amb. ep. 33.
Saint Ambrose began not the second Service, as our Church calls it, at the
Altar, Book of Fast 1. D^m. R^gi^
before the first Service in the body of the Church was finished, and the
Catechumeni sent out: which still is the custom in our Church, and none will
ever go about to put that sweet harmony which we keep with the Primitive
Church out of tune, but such as Tertullian complains of, Schismatickes and
Sectaries. And so we see that all those holy actions which are distinctly
performed both in the first and second service, are all included in this action
of breaking of bread, sicut frangitur in Sacramento corporis Christi. And so I
come to the second holy action.

2. This is Preaching. The Preacher is Saint Paul. What kind of Sermon then
did Saint Paul make? for fit it is that his action be our direction.

Saint Paul's preaching is of three kinds: 1. (...), he reasoned with them, or
taught them by way of dialogue. 2 (...), he continued his speech. 3 (...), ver.
11. he used a long homily, which held from midnight till morning.

For the first: Saint Paul's preaching did not stand only in making a long
discourse, which some, pitifully perishing in a dearth of matter, and in an
inundation of light and froathie words, trumpet up for the only preaching: But
he gave others leave to speak as well as himself; for that must needs be to
hold up the dialogue in the text, yet he preached for all that. Wherefore if
the Curate catechize in the afternoon, as he is commanded, by question and
answer, which makes the dialogue in the text, this man preaches. There is
therefore no cause at all why some should take the matter so grievously, that
charge should be given by the King (whom they never mean to obey therein) that
afternoon Sermons should be turned into catechizing, that is, that one kind
of preaching should be exchanged for another, the less profitable for the more
useful. Certain also it is, that whether they travel all the Scriptures
over, and then pass on to the ancient Fathers, they shall find no ground at
all for the fruitless and disobedient exercise of their afternoon talent,
till they come home to their own wilful selfe-conceitednesse. Our Savior
came not to break the law, but to fulfill it, who being at Capernaum on a
Sabbath day preached but once. For statim e Synagoga from the Synagogue he went
immediately to Simons house to dinner, where Simons wives mother ministered unto
them, Mar. 1.31. and there stayed healing diseases till sun set, and went no
more to the Synagogue to preach in the afternoon. The law that enjoined
afternoon Sermons for keeping their Sabbath, was not then known to the
Pharisees themselves, who else were apt enough to have laid it in his dish at
supper; Troubles at Franckford, page 194.
no nor to these men's progenitors for 1565. years after, as by their own
confession may appear.

True it is Saint Peter preached once at the ninth hour, or at three a clock
in the afternoon, Act. 3.1. but the occasion, place, and other circumstances
being so extraordinary, his example binds us no more to do the like, than
Saint Paul's here does to preach in an upper chamber all night long.

The holy Fathers also in the best times had their Sermons in the forenoons,
and it will be hard for the best or stubbornest of them all to show a Sermon
preached by any of the Fathers in the afternoon, Saint Basil only excepted,
who had his second and ninth homily in the afternoon; Socrat l. 5. c. 21.
Niceph. l. 12. c. 34.
because as Socrates and Nicephorus affirm, the custom in Caesare a was not
to preach in the forenoone, but Episcopi and Sacerdotes post lucernarum
accensiones sacras Scripturae populo exponunt, the people have the Scripture,
expounded to them in the afternoon. Their preaching was but expounding (as
they call it) and that but once neither. Why then should they not yield to
change their afternoon discoursing into preaching by way of dialogue, as St.
Paul here did?

Secondly, St. Paul preached (...), all the while he was in his Homily. What
his Homily was, it is hard for me to say; whether it was one that himself
made, and did not read; or one that he read, and another made. An Homily I am
sure it was, and it may be made by all the Apostles, or the chief of the
Apostles, as (Bucer says) our Homilies were penned by some eminent Preachers.

I pray you tell me, (when Saint Paul went through diverse Churches, as now he
did, to establish them in the faith, and to that end took with him dogmata, the
decrees made by the Apostles and Elders that were at Jerusalem, Act, 16.4.
and delivered them to the Churches to be kept) whether he did read them or
no, or delivered them as a Roll sealed up? If he read them, there is his
homily. And most certain it is he read them, even by his own rule. For if he
caused Epistles from some one man to be read in the Church by him that brought
them, it is more than evident that himself bringing the Decrees of the
Apostles and Elders, he would not in any sort transgress his own rule, but
do the decrees, himself and the Church that right as to read them, that the
Churches might see what it was that he delivered them to keep, and be fully
assured that himself walked in the self same steps with the rest of the
Apostles, and so be enabled to stop the mouths of all false Apostles, who
objected that against him, and thereby be fully established in the faith, which
was the only end of his coming; which could not have been wrought nor
obtained, if these Decrees had not been read at all, or read by any other.
Wherefore I take it for a clear truth, that St. Paul read the Decrees, and
sure I am by the word used in the text, that when he read them and did no more
but read them, without adding or diminishing, that he preached by way of
Homily: (...)

Reading of Homilies then is preaching, Council. Rhem. Can. 15.
and so adjudged by the learned Bishops in the Council of Rhemes. The Canon
concerns Bishops themselves, Ut Episcopi Sermones and Homilias sanctorum
Patrum, prout omnes intelligant, secundum proprietatem linguae praedicare
studeant. The Canon says not praedicari studeant, but praedicare; themselves
must give good example, not only in preaching Sermons of their own making, as
it is appointed, Can. 14. (which some cry up for the only preaching) but also
read and interpret the Homilies of holy Fathers themselves, which is also here
called preaching.

So likewise when the Diptychs, containing the Decrees of the four first
general Councels, Constantinop. 5. Act. 10.
and of Saint Leo were read, pro utilitate and pace Ecclesiae praedicantur,
they are said to be preached for the profit and peace of the Church. This
reading of Decrees is called preaching in the Council of Constantinople.

If then reading of decrees of the Apostles, and by that president reading of
Diptychs and Homilies be preaching, and used for the profit and peace of the
Church, and for the establishing of them in the faith, then surely is reading
of lessons, Epistle and Gospel, much more preaching, and the Reader is a
Preacher.

The Council of Aquisgrane lays down the office of a Reader, Council. Aq. c.
3.
and to prevent all exceptions ex canonica authoritate, and says thus,
Lectores sunt qui verbum Dei praedicant, Readers are Preachers. This they might
learn of Saint Ambrose, S. Ambr. in ephesians. c. 4. v. 11. S. Cypr. ep. 4. l. 4.
and ep. 5. l. 2.
and he of Saint Cyprian. Saint Cyprian gives only a toleration to read unto
Celerinus nobly descended, yet says it will make more for his honor in
coelesti praedicatione fieri generosum, to be made a Gentleman for his heavenly
preaching; yet this preaching was but reading. And further says, that there is
nothing wherein a Confessor magis prosit, can more profit his brethren, than
by reading the Gospel, unde Martyrs fiunt, whereby Confessors are made
Martyrs. This was the doctrine of Origin before him. Orig. hom. 10. in Genesis
Reading then is preaching, nay heavenly preaching; and there is nothing more
profitable for the Church, nor more powerful to make the most perfect men of
God of all other, even to make Martyrs.

What shall we think then of T. C. and such as he has seduced, that traduce
Readers for dumb dogs, blind guides, empty feeders, and say that reading is so
far from making the man of God perfect, that rather the quite contrary may be
confirmed? Whether do you not think that this blessed Archbishop and Martyr,
and these holy and learned Bishops would not sharply have censured the
broachers of such doctrine within their Diocesses? or will you condemn them,
their doctrine and Canons, to deifie T.C.?

For my part, qui Bavium non odit, amet tua Carmina Maevi, he that detesteth
not the Father of such Schismatickes, with their Brood, I wish him no worse but
that he may fall so far in love with the pure zeal of those wandering
Danites, their refined brethren led by such guides, that they may believe their
spies, and follow them per mare, per terras, into new Laish, to dwell in a Land
of their own, Cottons Sermon.
and to go no more out, but make themselves happy without corrivalls, under an
Ephod and Priest of Micha's own making. And surely if they did believe their
own doctrines, and would be honest and true to their own positions, I cannot
see how they should stay here longer than for a good wind. The government of
our Church (they say) is Babylonish: while they stay here they are in the midst
of Babylon, therefore the rites of Babylon they will not use; and there is no
reason that they should. Why then does not that loud cry awaken their
consciences that calls them out hence, Come out of her my people, that you be
not partaker in her plagues? How do they think that any man should trust
them, that are so false to their own friends, their own followers, their own
faith and doctrine, and will forsake them all, and with Demas embrace this
present world in the midst of Babylon, with so great hazard of the plagues of
Babylon?

Doubtless these Church Schismatickes are the most gross, nay the most
transparent Hypocrites, and most void of conscience of all others. They will
take the benefit of the Church, but abjure the doctrine and discipline of the
Church. These are whorish and Babylonish: But tithe milk is not whorish, if it
be not mingled with water; nor a tithe sheafe Babylonish, till it be as big as
great Babylon it self. Is not this ridiculous hypocrisy? If their stomachs
be so queazie to rise against these things, because their pure nostrill
resenteth the dip of the Popes foot in them, let them begin to abandon the Pope
in that which he has by Canons and Bulls allowed, viz. in tiths and offerings;
and not in that which he never allowed, in our Book of Common Prayer, wherein
is set down the only direction we have for keeping the Lords day in such
godly duties as the text specifieth. If their condemnation or want of the Popes
confirmation of that holy book, were of power to hang a millstone about it,
and to cast it into the bottom of the sea of their abominations, we might lie
down in sorrow, and cry our last Ichabod, the glory is departed from Israel:
And they might with the voice of melody sing and say, With great wrestlings
have I wrestled with my sister, and have prevailed to make her a very Babylon,
and to cause her to sit in the dust, and never to rise any more. But praised be
the Lord, whose day we will ever keep, and not their Sabbath, that has
delivered us as a prey out of their teeth.

I will now conclude this point. We see that breaking of bread, and preaching
in such sort as has been explained, are the holy exercises used by St. Paul
and his Disciples, and by the holy Martyrs and godly Fathers in the Primitive
Church for the observation of the Lords day.

From hence then we may conclude who are profaners of that most holy day; not
those that use harmless recreations, or do some small useful chare, or
perhaps take a nap on the Lords day: But those that do these with Eutichus when
Paul is preaching, or (as St. Austine says) caeteris ad Ecclesiam pergentibus,
S Aug. Ser. de tem. 251.
when others go to Church, or in such sort that publicum impediunt ministerium
(as Chemnitius speaks) they hinder them from the public service of God.
Chem. de Fest. p. 4.
Those also are profaners of the Lords day, (as Origin says) qui sacris
lectionibus terga vertunt, Orig. hom. 11. in Jer.
that make base account of Scripture read; and such (as Saint Cyrill says)
that will not Ecclesiastico officio interesse, S. Cyril. in Je, l. 8. c. 5.
come to Church till Service be ended, and the Sermon to begin: and such (as
St. Austine says) that cogunt Sacerdotem ut abbreviet missam, make the Priest
to curtaile divine Service, S. Aug. Ser. de tem. 251.
aut ut ad eorum libitum cantet, or sing or say it after their fancy, not
antiphonatim, the Priest one verse and the people another; which factious
disposition St. Basil reproves in some Clergy men of Neocaesarea, S. Basil.
ep. 45^
that being against the practice of the universal Church continued from
Ignatius, who was directed thereunto by an Angel, as Socrates affirms. Those
yet are worse profaners of the Lords day, Socrat. l. 6. c. 8.
that will not read the Letanie on it, for excitavit Diabolus (says St.
Chrysostom in plain terms) the Devil himself, and no body else, S. Chrysostom.
Ser. antequam iret in exil. Bed. his. l. 1. c. 25.
has stirred up those that make brabbles (...), about the Letanie to bring it
into contempt, which was the means of the first conversion of our English
Nation.

Trypho the Jew alleges Isa. 58.13. to prove Justin Martyr a breaker of the
Sabbath, who tells him that the Prophet I say requires no more than was before
commanded by Moses in the law, S. Just. in Tryph. Tom. 2.
whereunto he had given his answer.

This very place of Scripture our zealous Sabbatarians his issue, borrow of
that Jew, and use as a sword to cut off all sports and recreations on their
Sabbath, with all other actions of our own, because we are forbidden to do
our own will, or to speak our own words, or vain words on the Sabbath. But
let them beware that with Saul they fall not upon their own sword. For I pray
you deal clearly, and say, whether those that will neither preach, pray,
catechize, administer the Sacraments, nor perform any part of divine Service,
as Gods Magistrate appoints, do not their own wills? His I am sure they do
not. And when they make new glosses and expositions of Scripture, never
received in the Church of God, nor delivered by any ancient Father, whom by
Canon they are bound to follow, and call the Lords day a Sabbath, Lib. Can. An.
1571. Can. 19.
whether they do not speak their own words?

And when they use vain repetitions, and babbling in their prayers and
preaching, saying, Lord, Lord, oftener in one prayer, than there are words in
all the Lords prayer, do not use vain words, and take the Lords name in
vain; and be not punctually those whom our Savior reproves by Saint Mark,
cap. 7. ver. 7. In vanum me colunt, they honor me with vain words, vain
glosses and expositions, vain babbling and repetitions, crying, Lord, Lord, and
all in vain, for they do not the thing that I say. For I say, when you pray
say Our Father, etc. and thus you will not do, but will pray an hour together
before a Sermon: yet though Christ and his Church command them to say it, they
will not do it.

He that can say Corban, and cry up the Sabbath, the Sabbath, it is a
sufficient Supersedeas, it is duty and piety enough, though he neither honor
Father nor Mother, Christ, nor the King his Vicegerent, nor the Church his
Spouse. Let those then that are so violent against such as recreate themselves
civilly and modestly, in such wise as Gods Magistrate does allow, to prove them
Sabbath breakers, which is no sin at all, look they be not found such as with
an high hand and stiff neck profane the Lords day in despite of Authority, and
so add drunkenness to thirst, namely, to their open profanation, rebellion or
disobedience, which is as the sin of witchcraft. From which leprosy washing
seven times in Jordan will not cleanse them, unless they can prove Gods
Magistrate Nebuchodonosor, and themselves the three children.

Sure I am their disobedient and scornful contempt of our Church Liturgy is
to many godly and learned men, far their Superiors in these respects, very
scandalous; and may drive many that reverence antiquity with us, and for that
cause stand well affected to our Church, to withdraw themselves from us. That
it is not to be wondered at if Recusants should increase, but rather it is a
wonder that there are no more. For how can any man of judgment and discretion
like that Liturgy and form of divine Service, which our selves (they say)
contemn, scorn, mangle, and misuse as we list, and some reject utterly as
unlawful and Antichristian? Do we tell them it is poison, and do they see us
cast it out of our hands, and do we wonder that they will not run and take it
up and eat it, or that they refuse the use of it, as we do, or rather forbear
the Church till it be used?

They will use no Cross forsooth, nor Surplice, meet no coarse at the Church
gate, Church no women, read no Service on Wednesdayes, Fridayes, Saturdayes,
Holy days, nor on their Eeves, will not stand at the Creed, nor Gospel, kneel
at the Communion, nor bow the knee at the blessed name of the Lord JESUS, nor
go in procession, or keep their perambulations, nor do any thing at all as
the Church appoints; yet the worst is, they would be esteemed members, nay
pillars of the Church: whereas indeed they are neither the one nor the other,
but a disease, a fretting canker, a dangerous faction in the Church. They are
wandering stars, and disasterous planets, who have and do blast the most
flourishing and glorious Church under the cope of Heaven, were it not that
these withered branches do appear her only spots of disgrace. And because
they are such, hence it is that the Church for her own safety is feign to
renounce all defense of them and their doctrines against the Romanists.
Therefore she ought not in right to be upbraided or deserted for any thing they
say or do.

The Church knows, and every member thereof of sees, that this generation
had eaten out her bowels long since, like Vipers, and become her destruction,
but that by Gods providence they have as sufficiently discovered their
malicious projects to be bent alike for the casting down of Crowns and
Scepters, and laws of the Land, and the Professors thereof, as for the
trampling under their feet of Miters and cornered Caps, Bishops and such as
exercise jurisdiction under them, together with our Book of Common Prayer, and
Canons Ecclesiastical. Therefore the Church has little cause to honor them
as her children, with her defense, before they will be brought to honor her
and her orders, nay to honor the Lord and his day, in breaking of bread, and
preaching in such sort as she has learned of St. Paul, and delivered in the
Book of Common Prayer. And now I have done with them.

The last point, with which I will conclude, is the place where Saint Paul
preached: In an upper chamber.

Let no man think from hence, that he has got a warrant to do so in these
days. This is the third time Paul came to Troas. At the first time, being 41.
years of age (as some account) he was called away by a vision into Macedonia,
and made no stay at all. Acts 16.
About three years after he came thither again to look for Titus, 2 Cor. (...)
but not finding him, he only faluted the brethren, and went away in great
heaviness. Now in the 47th. year of his age he comes hither again, and
stays but seven days; so that he had no time to take order for building of a
Church to preach, and to celebrate the Euchrist in. Follow him therefore to
Corinth, where he stayed a year and six months, where we shall not take him
preaching in an upper chamber. Acts 18.11.
For so soon as the Jews had driven him out of the Synagogue, and beaten
Sosthenes the Ruler of the Synagogue for suffering him to preach on the Sabbath
day, and also blasphemed his doctrine in all probability touching the
observation of the Lords day, saying, as it was maliciously reported amongst
the Jews, that the Lord was not risen, but that his Disciples stole him away,
therefore the day of his resurrection ought not to be kept, nor preached on
their Sabbath, tending so much to the overthrow thereof. Upon this or the like
blasphemy St. Paul took just occasion to renounce them and their Synagogue,
saying, From henceforth I go unto the Gentiles. And so immediately he took
order for a public place to meet in, so large, that men and women, learned and
unlearned, believers and unbeleevers might all meet together. And this place
was a CHURCH.

If the whole Church be come together into one Place, they may speak
languages, provided that they do interpret, 1 Cor. 14.33. Yea, but how does it
appear that this one place is a Church? Why because himself calls it so,
saying, In the church I had rather speak five words, etc. ver. 19. So their
coming together to eat the Lords body was into one place, 1 Cor. 11.20. and
this one place was a Church, ver. 18. When ye come together in the Church, I
hear, etc. this is not to eat the Lords body.

This Church, or public place of meeting is many ways distinguished from
private houses. The Church was free for all to come into, Jews or Gentiles,
believers or unbeleevers, 1 Cor. 14.24. so were not private houses. In private
houses women might speak: not so in the Church. In private houses men might be
covered, and women uncovered: S. Chrysostom. in Act. ho. 21. and de Sacer dot. l. 6.
and hom. de eucha, in encaeniis.
not so in the Church. In the Church reverence was to be given to the Angels
which attend the Lord our Savior at his table in tremendis mysteriis (as St.
Chrysostom speaks) where he is truly and really present: not so in private
houses. In private houses they might eat and drink: not so in the Church.
These Churches had Bishops set over them, which had power of excommunication,
penance, and absolution; which was not used in private houses, but only in the
Church, 1 Cor. 5.5. 2 Cor. 2.7. To these Churches belonged stocks of money,
whereby Widows and others were maintained at the discretion of the Bishop, 1 Timothy 4.9. which authority they had not in private houses: but were at the
courtesy of the owners to be received or not. Mat. 10.10.
In these Churches stood the Lords board, which was not placed in any private
house, 1 Cor. 10.21. This table of the Lord is called also an Altar, 1 Cor.
8.13. They that wait of the Altar are partakers of the Altar; which is not to
be understood of Israel after the flesh. For habemus Altar, we under the
Gospel have an Altar, Heb. 15.10. And so is the word Altar, and Lords table
indifferently and alike anciently used in the writings of the Fathers, who best
knew how to expound Scripture. These were some Tables or Altars of stone, quia
Christus est lapis angularis: some were of wood, the better to express his
death on the tree, S. Just. in Tryph. Tom. 2. Tert. l. 4. adv. Marcion.
posuerunt lignum in panem ejus, Jer. 11. These wooden Altars or Tables the
furious Circumcellions brake down in St. Augustines time.

So that from the 47th. year of Saint Paul's age, which was the 57th. of our
Savior, we may count out of Scripture, that the devotion of Gods people began
in building of Churches for breaking of bread and preaching, and with them
began the solemn exercise of the jurisdiction of Bishops in excommunication,
penance, confession, and absolution, which without Churches could not well be
exercised. But in Ecclesiastical writers we find the beginning more early, and
so the use continued without interruption in the midst of all their
persecutions for 287. years together, until Dioclesians time.

I might be infinite in this kind, but I will give you but a touch thereof.
Eusebius. l. 5. c. 17.
The Apostles and disciples staid in Jerusalem after Christ's resurrection
twelve years together, and preached to the Jews in their Synagogues: but
because they kept the Sabbath no better than their Lord did, but began to keep
the Lords day, which the Jews detested, and to neglect the Sabbath, S. Justin.
de verit. l. 2. in Try.
which they only doted on as necessary to salvation, they are driven out of
Jerusalem, and dispersed into sundry Nations. And in the first year of their
dispersion, which was about the 47th. of our Savior, they began to build
Churches to preach and administer the Sacraments in on the Lords day.

About this time or before a goodly room in Theophilus his house in Antioch, An
Christi 38. Hieron. in ep. 2. ad Gal. and Eusebius. in Chr. S. Clemen. recogd. l.
10.
where ten thousand met at one time, was consecrated for a Church by St. Peter,
and there was placed St. Peter's chair, which for a long time after there
continued.

S. Mark also about the same time caused diverse Churches to be built about
Alexandria, Eusebius. l. 2. c. 16.
wherein it was unlawful to eat and drink; but they were used only for
reading, preaching, and meditating on Gods word, praying, singing of Psalms,
and the like. In the year 57. S. Paul caused a Church to be built in Corinth,
and in diverse other places. Anno 63. Joseph of Arimathea caused a Church to be
built in Glastonbury. Hist. Eccles. Angl.
Erat haec Ecclesia ab ipsis Apostolis Domini aedificata, witnesses Henry the
second in his Letters Patents: For being burnt in his time, he takes a Princely
care for the building of it again, as the Kings Majesty now does for the
repairing of that goodly edifice of S. Paul's Church, now fallen to decay. Anno
71. Crescens sent into Galatia by St. Paul, Eusebius. l. 3. c. 4 Ado.
would not content himself to preach in private houses, but by S. Paul's
example caused a Church to be built at Vienna. Anno 79. St. Eusebius. l. 3. c. 20.
John caused a goodly Church to be built about Ephesus, where himself, with an
Archbishop and diverse Bishops of several Churches in Asia, met at a Synod.
This Church stood over against the hill where he robbed whom S. John converted.
Eusebius. l. 2. c. 25
Gaius Bishop of Rome affirms, that til his time for 220. years together
Churches had continued near unto the Vaticane, built by the Apostles, which
had Churchyards belonging to them, and where were to be seen the Tombs and
Monuments of the Apostles. Anno 110. Ignatius reproved Trajan in a Church. Anno
117. Niceph. l. 3. c. 19 Dion. in Adrian.
Adrian caused Churches to be built for Christians, wherein he forbade any of
the Roman gods to be placed. Anno 160. Eusebius. l. 5. c. 25.
Polycarpus received the Sacrament publicly in the Church of Rome. Anno 197.
Bed. l. 1. c. 4.
Lucius King of Great Britain desired of Eleutherius, ut per ejus mandatum
fieret Christianus, which being granted, ^lores hist.
he dedicated the Temples of the Heathen gods to the worship of the true God,
and made Churches of them, and placed in them 28. Bishops, and three
Archbishops Seas. Tertul. adv. Va^en. and in Apolog.
Anno 203. Tertullian makes mention of these Churches built before his time,
and says that commonly they were built upon an hill, (as Isaac was offered and
Christ crucified on an hill) and looked toward the East, Nostrae columbae
Domus in editis and apertis, and Orientem amat. Hence it is (says he) that the
Heathen traduce us for worshipping the Sun, quod innotuerit nos ad Orientis
regionem praecari, because it is openly known that all we Christians pray unto
God in our Churches with our faces to the East: and if they stand not so, they
are not like Christian Churches, nor judged to be consecrated by Christian
Bishops. S. Ire^. l. 3. c. 3.
Anno 180. Irenaeus saw Poly carpus sit in his Bishops chair in Smyrna. S.
James his chair stood in the Church of Jerusalem for 326. years together,
says Eusebius, and was there to be seen in St. Austins time, Eusebius. l. 5. c.
20. and l 7. c. 19.
notwithstanding Dioclesians Decree. Anno 239. S. Aug. l 2. Con. lit. P^ttl. c.
51. Cus^b. l. 6. (...) 34.
Fabianus suffered not Philip the first Christian Emperor to join with the
faithful in the Church, before he had stood in loco poenitentium. And so you
see the zeal of Christians in building of Churches began in the Apostles
times, and continued for 280. years together at least.

And how necessary it was for the Apostles and their successors, planters of
the Gospel, to build Churches, and not to pray, preach, administer the
Sacraments, or exercise Ecclesiastical discipline of excommunication and
absolution in private houses, S. Aug contr. M^n^^. epis. (...). 4 ^^m. 6.
Irenaeus, Tertullian, St. Augustine, and diverse godly Fathers tell us. For
hereby Catholics and good Christians were known from Heretics. For nullus
Haereticorum basilicam suam audet ostendere, Heretics had no Churches to
show, nor chair wherein they succeeded the Apostles.

Thus Irenaeus confounds Valentinus, S. Iren. l. 3. c. 3.4.5.
Cerdon, and Marcion; they could not show how they succeeded the Apostles: but
he could prove his own succession, and reckon up all those that succeeded the
Apostles in their several Churches; and so shows who succeeded Peter and
Paul in the Church of Rome. Whereby their vanity may in part appear, that
against all Antiquity, upon idle ghesses, make fools believe that St. Peter
was never at Rome, making the succession of Bishops and truth of the Latin
Churches as questionable as the Centurists orders.

Thus Tertullian puts Valentinus and Apelles to it to show their descent.
Tertul. de pra^^. ser. c. 11.
If they will not be accounted Heretics, aedant origines Ecclesiarum suarum,
evolvant ordinem Sacerdotum, etc. it a ut primus sit aliquis ex Apostolis, let
them show when their Church began, so that the first founder be an Apostle: as
Polycarpus was placed by St. John in Smyrna, and Clemens by St. Peter in the
Church of Rome. Confingant tale quid and Haeretici, let Heretics lay their
heads together, Tert. de prae^ ser c. 17.
and produce such a pedigree of their faith. Which he was sure they could not
do: for sine matre, sine sede extorres vagantur, and Ecclesias non habent.
They were not Christians that had no Churches for 200. years after Christ: but
it plainly appears by St. Irenaeus and Tertullian, that they were Heretics
that were so long without Churches. These had no Church for their Mother, no
Sea for their Bishops, nor succession of them from the Apostles, but were mere
stragglers. And for this cause (says St. Cyprian) Haereticus sanctificare non
potest, S. Cyp. l. 1. ep. 12.
quia nec Ecclesiam nec Altarehabet; an Heretic cannot consecrate the
Sacrament, because he has neither Church nor Altar; for Eucharistia in Altari
sanctificatur. Without Churches no Sacrament could be consecrated, nor received.

In this sort St. Augustine confounds the Donatists and Sectaries of his
time; S. Aug l. 2. cont. Petil. c. 51.
Numerate Sacerdotes, vel ab ipsa sede Petri, and in illo ordine, quis cui
successit videte; Reckon up your Priests, who succeeded one another after St.
Peter in his chair, if you will be esteemed members of the Church. Hereby we
may by Gods mercy make good the truth of our Church. For we are able lineally
to set down the succession of our Bishops from St. Peter to S. Gregory, and
from him to our first Archbishop St. Austin, our English Apostle as Bishop
Godwin calls him, downward to his Grace that now sits in his chair, Primate
of all England, and Metropolitan.

This succession of Bishops to the Apostles, and exercise of Ecclesiastical
discipline, preaching of the word of God, and consecrating of the Eucharist on
the Lords Board, or holy Altar, was judged a thing so necessary by the Apostles
and their successors, Eus^^. l. 8. c. 1.
that (as Eusebius reports) Christians never ceased building, repairing, and
enlarging of Churches, even in the hottest times of persecution. And though the
Pastors were many times driven out of them, and wandered up and down in
Mountains, and Dens, and Caves of the earth, yet they found such favor with
the Emperors, that the Churches still continued. And their chaires were never
empty, nor the succession of their Bishops interrupted, no not in Dioclesians
time, when so many Churches were demolished.

True it is Cecilius in Minutius Foelix, and Celsus in Origin, and other
Gentiles reviled Christians, and called them Atheists, quia nec templa nec deos
haberent, because they had neither temples nor Gods. And indeed they had no
such temples, nor worshipped such gods as they did. Yet Christians were never
without Churches to serve the true God in. Howbeit, they were not called
Temples, or Basilicae, before the Emperor Constantines time, who built them in
that stately and magnificent manner, that they might equalize or surmount the
sumptuous Temples erected by the Heathen to Diana, Venus, Jupiter, or other
heathen gods.

Thus necessity of Gods service, and exercise of Ecclesiastical discipline,
caused and continued the use of Churches from time to time, and their zeal
inflamed them to beautify and adorn them in the most sumptuous manner that
might be, that with David and Solomon they might show (so far as their
poverty would suffer them) in such glorious and magnificent buildings, and by
the sumptuous costlinesse bestowed in adorning of them with gold, silver, and
precious stones, the incomparable glory, and infinite greatness of the
Majesty of their God, to whom that poor house was dedicated, and before whom
they presented themselves to perform such service as himself and his
Vicegerents have appointed: which doubtless (as by the practice of S. Paul and
the Apostles, and the best Saints of God, may appear) is much more acceptable
unto him, being performed in an house of his own, than if it had been continued
in one of ours, in some upper chamber, as now upon necessity it was.

Wherefore since by Gods mercy we do in part enjoy the piety and bounty of our
Predecessors, and have the houses of God left us to serve God in; let us
abandon the irregular fashion of straggling Schismatickes, in making
Conventicles, praying, preaching, and breaking bread in corners, private
houses, and dining rooms. And on the other side, let us conform our selves in
frequenting the Lords house, to the practice of the Lords Church, especially on
the Lords day, and say with David, O come let us go into the house of the
Lord, and fall flat on our faces before his footstool.

And if we do not only bend or bow our body to his blessed Board, or holy
Altar, but fall flat on our faces before his footstool so soon as ever we
approach in sight thereof, what Patriarch, Apostle, blessed Martyr, holy or
learned Father, would condemn us for it? or rather would not be delighted to
see their Lord so honored, and their devotion so reverently imitated, and so
good hope given to have it in such sort continued in the Lords house, on the
Lords day, by the Lords servants, unto the Lords coming again, who doubtless
will then ratify what he has already pronounced, Blessed are those servants
whom the Lord when he comes shall find so doing? Amen.

FINIS.
PErlegi hanc concionem habitam in visitatione Trionnali Reverendi in Christo
Patris Episcopi Lincolniensis, in qua nihil reperio sanae doctrinae aut bonis
moribus contrarium, quominus cum utilitate pablica imprimatur; it a tamen ut si
non intra tres menses proxime sequentes typis mandetur, haec licentia sit
omnino irrita.

Ex Aedibus Lambethanis II. Calend. Martii, 1635. GUIL. BRAY Rmo. Patri D.
Arch. Cant. Sacellanus domesticus.


