The Hystories of the most famous and worthy Cronographer Polybius: Discoursing
of the wars betwixt the Romans and Carthaginenses, a rich and goodly Work,
containing wholesome counsels and wonderful devises against the incombrances of
fickle Fortune.

Englished by C. W.

Whereunto is annexed an Abstract, compendiously coarcted out of the life and
worthy acts, perpetrate by our puissaunt Prince king Henry the fifth.

Imprinted at London by Henry Bynneman for Thomas Hacket.

And are to be sold at his shop in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Key.

The Phisnomie of Polybius.
bust of Polybius

Whom Nature, Birth, and Science lore,
have made the child of fame:
This portrature (through Grauers Art)
does show to thee, the same.
A Greek by birth, of noble blood,
Polybius eke he hight.
His works deserve immortal praise,
and fame vpholdes his right.
Read with advise, do judge with skill,
and troth will cause thee than
To say as thou of right may say,
he was a worthy man.
Whom though the Fates with cruel hand
have cut from mortal breath,
Yet we enjoy (through worthy Fame)
his deeds, in spite of Death.
B. G.

The life of Polybius collected out of his History.
THe famous, and worthy Grecian Polybius, was borne in the City of
Megalopolis, in Arcadie, (which is a province of Achaia, situate in the midste
of the plentiful Peloponesus, or Moria) which took the domination of Arcas,
son to lupiter He was a noble man, and of high parentage, as it may be
gathered by diverse tokens. He surmounted all ye me^ of his age, in four
points, as this his work manifestly witnesses: in Eloquence, Geographie,
writing of Histories, and in martial prowess, bysides diverse other rare
qualities, for which his singular gifts, he was made tutor of P. Cor. Scipio,
which after was named Scipio Africanus Mayor. He pende the Roman Histories more
credibly than any other. In so much that Titus Liuius peragon of all the Latin
Chronographers followed him through all his works, as one which for favor or
dread, had never corrupt the sincerity of the History. But of the forty
books, in which he wrote them, tearing time and blind ignorance, capital foes
to virtue and good literature, have devoured them all, in the odious pit of
cankred oblivion, except five books, which remain vnpoluted, with certain
suppliments and imperfect patches, to the great obliteration of such famous
facts, as were perpetrate in that time.

Phocylides.

I Lapso read manum miserum seruato virumque.
To the right worshipful Thomas Gaudy Esquier, Christopher Watson wysheth
Argantos age, Policrates prosperity, Augustus amity, and after the
consummation of this terrestrial Tragedy, a seat amongst the celestial
Hierarchy, etc.
IT was the common guise in ancient time, and generally is embraced at this
instant (right worshipful) that such as did or do yield the fruits of their
study to be patronized under the rampires of any noble Philomos, or Mecoenas,
as they used and use (though vsurpedly to term them) never stinted to travail
with tooth and nail to hunt for hauty stately and current terms, wherewith
they flourished forth such virtues as their patrons practiced, so that usually,
for hope either of gain or favor, a thousand times more laud tha^ they
deserved, was attributed unto the^, whose tristing vain and Gnatonicall humor,
I heartily abhor, in so much yt (least I might incur the suspicion of
certain in that Getical kind of gabbing) I will speak no word in your laud,
and that not unadvisedly: for weying the insufficiency of my wit in
performance but of the naked truth (if I should attempt to pen your panigrick)
eke dreading least it should be object to me, which was to a certain writer
(not vnse^blable to my self in this matter) purposing to pen the praises of
Hercules to desist from such a folly, whereby rather dishonor tha^ fame might be
purchased to him, considering that there is no such simple sot which already
reputeth him not inthronised amongst ye heroical estates. Waying the case then
as it stands, I count it a mere mockery here, as the fashion was and is, to
tell you of your rare and virtuous qualities, of which your very ennimies, if
you (as I doubt) have any, can say nothing but good. Thus then, al vain words
set apart, I desire your worship benignely to accept this as a token of the
intier affection I bear toward you, which taken as I mean it, shall deserve to
furnishe some void corner in the lowest part of your Library.

From my chamber in your house at Gaudy Hall.
To the Reader.
WEre it as perilous to deal Cards at play.
As it is quarellous to deal Books this day
One and forty men amongst one and fifty
Would flee one and thirty to flee one unthrifty:
And yet Cards so dealt should have in revealing,
Foredeale of Books in this hard time of dealing.
Cards be tooted on but on the one side,
Books on both sides, in all places porde and pride,
Not to content, but to contend upon spiall,
Of least tittle that can come in trial.
Waying these things (gentle Reader) I may be thought to have attempted a bold
enterprise to take upon me (being yet in my nonage) such a work as few or none
have done at like years, also knowing the danger thereof, which is the
hasardyng of my good name: yet considering the causes that moved me to it, I
trust there is none which will not bear with me.

The principal and chief cause was, an Oration spoken extemporally by a noble
and worthy peer of this realm before our victorious governor Henry the fifth,
as more at large appears in the Epistle to the Questioners. The second was a
fervent zeal which I bear toward my native country, and sundry
exhortations written by grave and great learned clearkes, willing us to employ
our whole labor and study, that we ouerslip not our life like savage and
brute breasts, whom Nature has formed prone and subject to the filthy lusts
of the belly. The third and last was, that they of riper years and exacter
knowledge should be pricked (as it were with a spur) by this my doing, to the
attemptyng of some work to remain for an attestation that they lived not
brutishely, but as men regarding their vocation. I confess this my Translation
to be unpolished, not exquisitely framed, or in a curious style: for as our
English Epigramme says, The plain fashion is best, that's truly expressed, or,
the plain fashion is best, that's plain without plaites. which epigra^me
persuadeth me not to crepe into your favor with any tedious ambage or painted
prea^ble, seeing the matter is of importance enough to alliciate al men to the
reading hereof.

Thus I put forth this my freshma^ly enterprise (yet not without reason) for
Time is tickle,
Chance is fickle,
Man is brickle,
to your grateful accepting, co^cluding thus.

This work standing clear from all intent of ill
In place or lack of good wit, accept good will:
For if you carpe this, I tell you my mind plain,
Bold blind bayard shall not lead me thus again.
Fare you well. From Gaudy Hall in Norfolk.
Franciscus Asulanus Lectori salutem.
EA semper humani generis est infelicitas id infortunium, ea calamitas, vtsi
quid grato deorum munere mortalibus nobis datum sit, eo nequaqua^ diutius frui
possimus: Sed simulac illius iucunditate oblectari coepimus, id extemplo
euanescat, ac ueluti rapaci quodam inuidentis fortunae liuore nobis incautis
auferatur. Quo fit, vt quo quid vel dignius vel charius habemus, hoc citius eo
priuemur miseri. Hoc vero ipsum rebus in omnibus clara videmus luce: nam quid
in humanis adeo firmum est, in quo spem certam ponere possumus? quid adeo
stabile, in quo placido securi otio quiescamus? Dij boni, and ipsamet tam
dubia, tam fallax est vita, vt nemini ne horulam quidem viuere certo sit
exploratu^. Sed ne pluribus ego exemplis rem manifestam prosequar, hoc vel in
hisce Polybij libris, quorum causa haec scribimus, facile cognosci potest. Hij
profecto vt optimi erant, ita breuissimo, iniqua hac sort, inter mortales
tempore viguerunt: and vix a priscis suae tempestatis hominibus semel aut
iteru^ fuerunt lecti. Adeo nobis infestam tulit fortuna legem, vt optima
quaeque tam raptim e nostris effugiu^t oculis. Id vnum autem dira hac in
pernicie nos potest solari, quod and si maxima huiusce operis pars deperdita
sit (erant enim quadraginta historiarum libri) quinque tamen adhuc nobis
supersunt concinno scripti stilo: qui caeleberrimu^ Polybij nomen vulgatis
passim testantur laudibus. His hercule facile videmus praeclarum hunc
scriptorem long omnes alios ta^ immensa voluminum magnitudine quam optimo
dicendi genere excelluisse. Hic profecto ille est quem optimum scribendis in
historijs ducem Grauissimus inter Romanos Titus Liuius vbique fere imitari
voluit.

Accipe igitur Polybium nunc Britannia loquentem lingua. Quem propediem patrio
ipsius sermon historias enarrantem (fata adsint) audiueris.

Sis fortunatus.
R. W. in laudem Histor. Polybij, Anglico Lectori.
IF famous factes,
or worthy acts,
Rejoice thy daunted mind:
Polybius reed,
Where as in deed
Good Physike shall thou find.
For there is pende,
which to the end
Of mortal men shall last:
By chieftains hands
Done in strange lands,
In alder time now past.
Of Captains stout,
which fought it out,
Their country to defend.
whose good name shall
at no time fall,
Unto the worlds end.
Of Consuls strong
Here all along,
The doughtie deeds are set:
Which by no craft
shall be out raft,
Their honor for to let.
Then Virtue learn,
That thou may earne
Such glory for to have,
As Momus sect
Can not reject,
When thou art closde in grave.
Thales Milesi. Gloriam sectato.
The Histories of the worthy Chronographer Polybius.
IF it had chanced that those Historiographers, which have written before me,
had pretermitted the commendation of Histories, it might be thought, that I of
necessity and constraint in the beginning of this my work, should have
erhorted every man to the reading of them: especially because there is no more
plain or ready way to the right instruction of life, than facts done in
former passed years: but because that not only part but all in general, not by
a few means and reasons have practiced it both in their begynnings and
endings, declaring that the knowledge of them is the best guide and
scholemaster to civility, and that they only are the cause why men with
equal and indifferent minds suffer the variety and change of Fortune, taking
example at other men's damage: waying these things I thought none would judge it
necessary to recite them again, which have been inculcate of so many,
studiously affecting this kind of learning, especially not of me, because the
novelty and strangeness of the matter which I determine and deliberate to
entreat upon, is of efficacy and force enough to draw the minds both of
young and old, to the reading and diligent digesting of this my work. For what
man is there so dispising knowledge, or any so idle and slothful to be found,
which will eschew or avoid by what policies, or by what kind of government
the most part of nations in the universal world were vanquished, subdued, and
in space of three and fifty years made subject and obedient to the Romans,
which before that time was never seen or heard? For who is there so studiously
bent, either that has such an ernest affection or zeal to other discipline or
study, that he supposes any kind of knowledge to be of more value, either
worthy to be esteemed or preferred before this? But the antiquity and
worthiness of this my work, shall be more manifest, if the sovereignty and
seignorie of those men that flourished in so great glory and dignity, of the
which the Historiographers have written at large, should be compared to the
excellency of the Roman Empire: and above other these are most worthy, for
that comparison. The Persians, in ancient time were of great power and
authority, of marvelous might and riches notwithstanding as often as they
passed the bounds and lymits of Asia, they not only douted ye perdition of
their principality, but also ye loss of their own lives. The Lacedaemonians
after they had made many conflicts and bickrings, for the Regiment of the
Grecian Empire: And at the last having obtained their hearts desire, they
could scantly keep it twelve years in tranquillity and quietness without
great grief, trouble and vexations. The Macedonians had the soueraignetie over
certain parts of Europa, from Adria, to the great river Isther, which is but
a small portion of that region: but afterward having vanquished and suppressed
the Persians, they enjoyed the principality of al Asia. These also though they
ruled over sundry nations and diverse places, yet they left a great part of the
world unconquered: for they never endeavored them selves to subdue Sicilia,
Sardinia, or Africa, and scantly ever heard they tell of ye other fierce and
intractable Nations which inhabit toward the Ponent, or west parts. But the
Romans not only conquered a few parts, but subdued and brought the most part
of the world in subjection. As concerning the times, this my history shall
begin at the hundredth and forty Olympiade. Concerning the wars at the
conflicte of the confederates and allies, called amongste the Grecians, the
sociall war which Philip son of Demetrius, and father to Persius, first
made against the Achaians, and Aetolians. Of the factes perpetrate by the
Asians, at the battle of Syria, which Antiochus, and Ptolomeus Philopater,
made the one against the other. Concerning the facts of the Italians and
Affricans, at the wars betwixt the Romans and the Carthaginenses, commonly
called the battle of Hanniball, for these consequently do depend of those
which are last written by Sicionius. Before this time there were many batailes
fought in sundry places: but afterward it chanced that the history increased
and augmented so, that it came (as it were) into one body: for the state and
condition of the Italians, was mixte and intermingled with the Libians,
Grecians, and Asians, so that they all tend and belong to one matter and end,
for the which cause and have made and taken the beginning of my work from this
time. For when the Romans in that battle had overcome and vanquished the
Carthagmenses, they supposed the chief and worst part to be passed, and
therefore thought they might better venture to atchieue the whole: even at that
present they were imboldened to take in hand the conquest of the rest,
attempting to sail with their whole strength and power into Grecia and Asia.
But if we once perfectly understood yt customs, ordinances and fashions of
them which labored and trauayled for atchieuing the rule and dominion of the
world, peradventure it should not be requisite any preciselyer to repete by
what power or puissance, either by what enforcement they were animated to
attempt such an enterprise. But considering that the old manners, ordinances
and fashions, either of the Romans, or the Carthaginenses, were known to the
most part of the Grecians, I supposed it requisite to prescribe in this
book, and in the next, to disclose their power and abylitie, with the famous
acts done by them, before I enter into the History, least by chance some man
preparing and indeuoring him self to the reading of this work, might be in
doubt by what counsel or power, either by what great hope the Romans were
persuaded to the Conqueste of the whole World, and domination of our Seas
since, in this my beginning and preparation, all men may clearly perceive and
understand, that the Romans had store and plenty enough of all necessaryes,
to the mayntenaunce of such a conquest, and accomplishing of their pretensed
purpose. This also is the chief and principal beautifying of any work with
the famous and worthy acts perpetrate in this time, that as Fortune has
caused all things done through the most part of the world to tend and belong
to one end and scope, so that likewise in one History or Chronicle, they may
well be written and comprised. Which thing chiefly incoraged me to take this
History in hand, and so much the rather because no man before this my time
has attempted to commit to remembrance yt factes perpetrate in the universal
and whole world, for then would not I have attempted this enterprise. But
every one particularly has mentioned and penned certain particular wars,
with the facts done in them: but of a coniunct commemoration of things done
universally, either of their beginnings, or for what cause they began, or what
end they had, there is none as far as I can understand that has written to
these days. I thought it expedient and necessary, considering that this my
work should come abroad into the hands of my countrymen, being politic and
eloquente fellows to entreat of the most famous renomed and profitable facts
of Fortune, which although she has wroughte many wonderful, preclare and
notable acts in the days of diverse men, worthy of admiration, yet has she
wrought nothing which exuperateth, yea or that are to be compared with these in
our days: Which worthy acts can not be understand, by reuoluing the writers
of private Histories, unless there chance to be some such man, which passing
by a gorgious and bravely builded city, or beholding the parts thereof drawn
forth, incontinently supposes that he has a perfect knowledge of the
situation, sigure, and course of the universal world, which is incongruent
and impossible. And verily as I judge, they no less err and dissent from the
truth, which think by readyng a particular or private history to obtain the
exact knowledge of the universal, tha^ those which beholding the parts of a
lively and beautiful body disperpled and separate into sundry members, and
think them selves perfectly to know the good shape and feture of the same
joined together. But if a man would take and unite the distinct separate and
severed parts, setting them according to their due disposition, conjunction
and perfectness, then afterward show it them again, undoubtedly they would
confess to have erred and gone astray like to one in a dream, for it is
possible that seeing the separate parts, they might conceive a certain
imagination, but to obtain a sure knowledge, it is impossible. Wherefore we
may well gather, that a particular History is nothing to be compared with the
knowledge of the universal, in the reuoluing of which, it is impossible that a
man shall not take both sweet profit and wonderful pleasure, by reason of the
variety and worthiness of matter contained therein.

This book shall begin at the navigations of the Romans out of Italye, which
consequently follows those things that were last written by Timeus, and was
the hundredth twenty and nynth Olimpiad. But now it is expedient that I disclose
how and at what time the Italyans prepared and made them selves ready to take
ship into Scicilia, also with what strength and puissance they attempted that
voyage which was the first land that they entered without Italye, after they
had appeased the civil discord, domestical dissension, and bloody wars
in their own country. Also the original of this profection, must be explaned
without obscurity or dissimulation, least in fetching ye cause too far, the
entrance and beginning be made ambiguous or doutful. Also there must be such a
beginning, as is agreeable with the times and facts, so yt one part may declare
and expound an other, although in the repeating of these things, it were,
expedient that the acts done in them should be briefly discoursed. For the
beginning being unknown and dark, it is very hard to make the consequent to
be credited: but if the principle or entrance be true, the auditors will have a
firmer opinion of the rest. It was the nintenth year after that war, in
which Simon the Athenian subdued Xerxes, the sixtenth year before the
battle fought against the Leu^trans, in which the Lacedaemonians, made a
treaty concerning peace with the king of the Persians.

About what time Dionisius the elder having vanquished and suppressed the
Grecians, inhabiting the coasts of Italy, which bordered upon Ellepora,
beseiged Regia, a city of Callabria, at which instante the French men
possessed all Rome, saving the Capitole, at which time the Romans taking truce
with them, recovered their ancient liberty and freedom of their country,
and began to war against their neighbors bordering and marching to their
region, and having overcome and put in subjection all the Latins, they warred
on the Tuscanes, then with the Frenchmen, and immediately after with the
Samuits. Not long after that, the Tarentines supposing them selves to be in
danger for certain offenses which they had committed against the Roman
Legates, received home king Pyrrhus, a year before the Frenchmen entered
Italye, with them that were at Delphos, before being vanquished and fled into
Asia.

Now the Romans having tamed the Tuscanes, subdued the Samuits, and driven the
Frenchmen to flight in sundry skermishes, began to envy the other parts of
Italye, not thinking that they travailed to subdue any foraine nation, but that
which of right was their inheritance, patrimony and nutritive soil. Now the
Romans having obtained a perfect habit in the wars through daily experience
used in their exploits and conquests upon the Samnits and Frenchmen, for which
causes they earnestely continued in this broyle, to such time as they had
expelled Pirrhus, with his co^federats and garrisons out of Italy, then they
pursued and turned their whole strength against these which had condiscended to
him. Now even at an unawares, suddenly and unhoped for, they were become lords and
regentes over all the inhabitants of Italye, except the French men. After this
they began to besiege ye Romans which kept Rhegia. A like chance happened at
that same instaunte to two cities situate in the straightes of that Sea, Rhegia
and Messana. For the Campanes, warring under Agathocles in Scicilia, wondering
at the excellency and worthiness, also at the riches and ple^tifulnesse of
Messana, espying opportunity to accomplish their prete^sed purpose, being once
received within the walls under the cloak of friendship, violated the covenant
of truce, inuading the City, thrusting out the Citizens and inhabitants,
cruelly murdering them, seasing their wives and children, every man as he
chanced, in the conflict and tumult, then they rysled and divided the riches
and treasures, with the pleasant pastures and fertile soil amongst them. Thus
they obtained a most excellent, rich and worthy City, impleate with
inestimable treasure, abounding in plenteousnesse and store of all things, also
within a small tracte of time, and imitatours of this their perverse
enterprise. For at that time when Pirrhus, King of Epirotes sailed with his
army into Italy, the inhabitants of Rhegia, being dismaide and set in a
perplexity with his sudden arryuall, required aid and assistaunce of the
Romans (because the Carthaginenses, their enemies ruled the seas) which sent
them succoure that defended their City for a certain time.

They were in number four thousand men over whom Decius and Campanus were
Prefects and rulers. But in continuance being moved and incitate by the example
of the Mamertines or Samuites having them also confederates of their facinorous
and wicked conspiracy, vyolated and falsefied their oath made to the Cytizens
of Rhegia, being provoked and allured, partly with the opportunity of time,
partly with the great riches, substance and abundance of the inhabitans, they
detruded and expulsed the Citizens, afflicting and tormenting diverse of them,
and according as the Mamertines had done before, semblably did they now
deteining and inhabiting the City. The Romans although they were sore grieved
and inwardly vexed with the calamyties chanced to the Rhegians, yet they could
not aid or help them presently, being troubled with other wars, the which
being finished they went and besieged ye city of Rhegia, which in continuance
of time was expugnate and won by force. The defendants had so hautely
withstoode the assault that the most part were slain, for they perfectly
understood, if they either yielded or were taken by force, that they should not
avoid cruel Tortors, so that only thirty were taken alive, which
incontinently were conveyed to Rome, where as the Consuls were led into the
market place, there tormented with rods, and then according to the order of the
country, were cut shorter by the length of their heads, both that they might
be punished for committing such a heinous offense and for renewing of their
amity with the Rhegians, restoring unto the^ their city, pastures, and other
things that were left. The Mamertines for so the Campanes called the^ selves,
when they had taken Messana, during the time yt the Roman Legion detained
Rhegia, being maintained with their aid not only defended and kept safe their
own bounds and precinctes, but also displeasured and put in ieopardy diverse of
the Cities adjacent, as well of the Carthagine^ses as of the Siracusans. They
had also made tributary unto them sundry cities of Scicilie. But now the
Rhegians having their city restored, and they being destitute of the Roman
Legions help, were environed and besieged of the Siracusans for certain causes
which afterward shall be declared. Not long before that time there was a
sedition sprung up between the Scicilian soldiers, and the governors of the
Weal public, in so much that they constituted captains over them of the
Artemidans (and him which afterward was their king (one named Hyeron, a very
young man, being but a stripling and of young years, but so furnished and endued
with all the gifts of nature, as knowledge, virtue, and wisdom, that he
wanted nothing appertayning or necessary to a king, except only a kingdom.
When he had obtained the authority and regiment of the Soldiers, at the
length being environed with a great troop and company of his friends, he
entered the city and took diverse of the Citizens which were confederats of the
rebellion, the which victory he used so moderately and mercifully, that all the
Siracusans with one voice and consent (which was a rare thing almost never
seen before that time) proclaimed him the second time governor and ruler
over them. Then Hyeron as he showed by manifest arguments, deliberated and
determined to be of greater and higher estimation than a Captain. But first of
all he weyed and considered with him self how the Siracusans were eftsoon
accustomed immediately after the departure of the Captain and the army from
the City, to kindle vprores and seditions, therefore perceiving the honesty
and fidelity of Leptinus, also of what authority, credence, and estimation
he was of amongst the Syracusans, and of how much reputacion and power
amongst the inferior sort, he thought it not incongruent to join himself unto
him by affinity, that he might have on to live in the city, when he with his
army should be occupied in other affairs. Thus having married the daughter
of Leptimus, and knit friendshyp with Hyminian knots, perceiving how the old
Syracusan seruiters, which were hirelings and conduct soldiers, were very
unstable fickle and full of mutabilitie, commonly desirous of new things and
changes, he prepared an army against the Barbarians, which kept Messana,
pitching his tents and pauilions, placing the front of his battle along the
river of the Ciamossians. Then he took both the horsemen and footmen of the
Syracusans, as though he would assault his enemies at some other place,
retiring an other way with all his power, conducting them safe and without
damage into the City, suffering the rascal and hired soldiers to be
enuironned and enclosed with their enemies, so that they were brought to ruin
and utter confusion. When he had by this means dispatched the old seruiters
out of the City, he prepared and waged soldiers of more credence and
stabilitie. Thus having set all things in a good and reasonable estate, and
perceiving the Barbarians to advance and boast them selves, also to be proud
and arrogant of the former victory, so that they did al things unadvisedly,
foolishly, and without regard, like indiscreet and harebraine fools, he with
his soldiers and a company of exercised and trained Citizens, departed from
the City, coming to the field Nileum, with a quick and swift progression,
where he fought a terrible fight along the banks of the river Longanus, with
the Campanes, in which he vanquished them, and took their captain. Now
perceiving the foolish hardiness and braynsicke boldness of the Barbarians to
be repressed in this victory, he returned with the Syracusans, where with one
voice and common consent of the people, he was proclaimed King. The Mamertines
first of all as I said before, being destitute of the Roman Legions help,
then grievously afflicted and troubled with this overthrow, were almost utterly
discoraged, the most part fled to the Carthaginenses, yelding themselves and
their fortresses into their hands. An other company sent Legates to the
Romans, notifying them that they would yield their fortress with all the
munitio^s belonging, into their hands, requiring them to assist them as their
own countrymen. The Romans a great tracte of time, determined with
themselves what was best to be done, for they judged it very absurd, foolish,
and contrary to reason, that they which a little before had so cruelly
tormented their own citizens for betraying Rhegia, and falsifying their
truth, now to aid, succoure, or help the Mamertines which were culpable of
the like offense. But when they considered that the Carthaginenses had not
only suppressed with violence and force Africa, but also the most part of
Spain, with all the Islands of Sardinia and the Sea Tirrhenum, they suspected
their neighborhode, which thing would sone be brought to pass, unless they
sent succoure and help to the Mamertines. Messana being once taken, which by
diverse was offered them as I declared before, there was no danger in
recovering the rest of the Siracusans, especially because all other parts of
Scicily were under their governance and power. When the Romans had thoroughly
pondered these things, they supposed that of necessity and constraint they
were compelled and enforced to aid, relieve and defend Messana, not
permitting in any case that the Carthaginenses should edify themselves as it
were a bridge, by the which they might have free passage to enter Italy at
their pleasure. Yet this matter was long in determining, and in conclusion
perceiving it more dishonest than commodious, the Senators proroged and
dismissed it without any resolute determination. The people of Rome, being
defatigate and wearied with long war, now were in rest and quietness, so
that for lack of their accustomed wages they were sore impouerished, so that
they showing to their captains, the profit which should ensue by aiding them
incontinently it was concluded to join with the Mamertines, which decree was
corroborate by the assente of the comminaltie, so that Appius Claudius, one of
the Consuls, was elected to con duct an army into Scicilie in their defense.
The Campanes being certified of their coming, partly with terror and
threatenings, partly with subtle sleightes and deceiptes, ertruded the
Carthaginian captain out of the city, which before they had received,
calling Appius Claudius unto them yeldyng the City into his tuition. The
Carthaginenses tormented the Prefect of the munition, hanging him upon a gibet,
because thorough his dastardly cowardlynesse they had lost the City, and
incontinentely with all celeritie they levied an army, rygging their navy
along Pelorus, pytchyng their tents about Messana, circumspectly besieging
the City Hieron, supposing at this instant a most fit occasion to be offered
for banishyng the Barbarians out of Scicilie, which kept Messana, took truce
with the Carthaginenses, and then with the Syracusans pitched his tents by the
mount Galchidicum, berieuing the Mamertines of that issue. Now the Consul
which with great trouble and perilous dangers had passed the sea by night,
was arrived at Messana, where seeing the enemies with great strength inuading the
city both by water and land very sharply and vehemently, supposing it to be
very dangerous and nothing honorable, dismissed certain Ambassadors to
either of his enemies camps, assaying to deliver the Mamertines with
quietness, all war and strife appeased. But perceiving that neither of the
adversaries would give ear to the words of the embassage, and in the end being
forced to danger himself, he determined first to encounter and contend with the
Siracusans. Then he began to order his Soldiers, imbattayling and placing his
forefronts against Hyeron, giving unto them diverse exhortacions, during which
time the Siracusan Captain made no less preparaunce. This conflicte continued
a long time very sharp and terrible, but in continuance the Romans had the
victory, where having slain many of their ennimies, boldly pursued the king
into his pauilion, then the Consul having spoiled and rifled the dead bodies,
entered the City with his host. Now Hyeron mistrusting all things, in the
night following departed with the residue of the Scicilian army. Appius in the
next morning perceiving their departure intended to pursue them, and
musteringe his Soldiers commanded that they should look to their wounds,
and provide for the pursuit of their enemies against the next morning: so in
the dawning of the day he set forward, and coaping with his enemies, devoured
part with the sword, causing the rest to bestow themselves in villages
adjacent. Thus having raised the siege without interruption, he made diverse
incursions, inuading the grounds of the Siracusans and others bordering nigh,
foraging and ransacking and depopulating their goods, and in the end besieging
them. This was the first profection yt the Romans made out of Italy for the
causes preceding, at the which chiefly I took my beginning because I thought it
a most apt and perfect beginning of this my work, repea those things somewhat
exactlier which were thought necessary, lest I should pretermitte any doubts,
in explicatyng the causes. For I supposed it necessary to be reveled how the
Romans stood in great danger and distress, even in ieopardie of losing their
own city. Also after what manner having recovered Italy again, they attempted
to subdue foraine nations. Also I adjudged it very necessary to declare the
excellency and magnificencie of their Empire, yt the flourishing estate which
it came to afterward, might be yt better credited, by the true knowledge of
their original. Wherefore if it chance the sequel of this my work, when I
come to speak of famous Cities, that I digress in showing any thing exactlier
than the matter is thought to require, let no man wonder at it, seeing I do it
to that end and purpose, that my narration may be such, whereby we may
precisely know and perfectly understand how and by what means every one
came to that state in which they are at this present, according as I have done
of the Romans. But now the time requires to pretermit these things, and that
I should return to my incepted purpose, and that which I intended in the
beginning, first compendiously showing those things which were done before the
times that I intend to mention of. Of which the battle fought in Scicilia
betwixt the Romans and the Carthaginenses is the first. Then the Punike or
civil war in the which is contained the facts of Amilcar and Asdruball, with
the other things perpetrate by the Carthaginenses, descending to those times
in which the Romans made their first exploit into Illiria and the other parts
of Europa. Furthermore I must entreat of the conflictes and contentions
betwixt the Romans and the Frenchmen, which were in Italy at that time. Also of
the war called Cleomonicum which was at that present amongst the Grecians, to
the which all these my circumstaunces belong. For it is not necessary for me
to speak of every particular thing, neither should it be profitable to the
Readers, or delectable to the hearers hereof. Also I purposed not to write any
history of them, but summarily to touch those things which are necessary to
the knowledge of these I have in hand. Wherefore I will ouerrun them as
briefly as is possible, endeavoring my self to conioyne the end of the^ with
the beginning of this work, for by the continuation and hanging together of
them and my narration, I suppose most sincerely to touch these things, which
other writers have written, and also to prepare a very facile and ready way to
the true knowledge of this history. But before we make any further progression,
it is my pleasure and fantasy, more advisedly, and in an ampler sort to
entreat of the wars made by the Romans against the Carthaginenses for the
domination of Scicily, because there has no battle ben seen of more
continuance, that had more preparance made for it, either that contained more
famous and noble acts, either so terrible conflictes, or more variety and
change of chances. At that time both the countries were like in strength and
puissance, of a reasonable ability. Wherefore if any consider the strength and
power of both the cities and Empires, he shall understand that in no other wars
or time after that they might be so well resembled. This also specially
persuaded, enforced and pricked me forward to write of this war, because
those which are thought to have pende it most faithfully, as Philinus and
Fabius, far dissente and disagree from the truth. But though I dare not say
they erred willingly and of a set purpose, yet I think they were deceived (as
affectoures are accustomed) by too much favoring of their councountrey men.
For Philinus writes by affection and a natural motion, that the Carthaginenses
did all things like strong, valiant, and courageous Captains. Then Fabius is in
yt Diameter quite dissenting. But I think there is none which reprehendeth the
rest of their lives for this, considering that it is a good and honest man's
duty rather to favor his friends and nutritive soil, than foreign nations.
But it is his duty which takes in hand the writing of a history, to
moderate him self and abstain from all parcialitie, yea often times to extol
and praise his utter enemies when by their deserts they deserve to be well
spoken of Other times to reprehend their countreyme^ and friends when their
facts are found worthy of reprehension. For as a beast having his eyes
scratched out, the rest of his body is fit for no use or profit, semblably the
use of a history being falsified, it is altogether unprofitable. Wherefore we
must neither abstain from reprehe^ding our friends, ne yet from commending our
enemies, when they merit it, neither is it to be thought foolish to praise
those at sundry times, considering that these of whom to speak presently, could
neither continually conquer victoriously, neither is it like that they always
took the foil. And that these things are true which I have spoken, it may be
gathered by those things which Philinus has written. These are his words in
the beginning of his second book. The Carthaginenses, and the Siracusans,
besieged Messana, where the Roman soldiers arriving, incontinently encountered
with the Siracusans, of whom they being overcome, and almost put to utter
confusion, reentred the city, and atte^pting an other insult with ye
Carthaginenses, were not only spoiled and put to flight, but also ye most part
taken. Immediately after these, he shows how Hieron was so affrighted after ye
combat, that he not only fyering his tents and pauilions fled away by night,
but also forsook and left all the strongest fortified and well fenced castles,
situate betwixt Messana and Scicilye. He reports also how the Carthaginenses
in that conflict were so daunted, yt they for sooke their tents, dispersing
them selves in the Scicilian villages, not being hardy after that day to
attempt any thing with their army. Also how the Prefects perceiving the minds
of the people to be so discouraged, cou^sailed them no more after yt day to
commit them selves to the mutabilitie of Fortune in battle. He shows also
how the Romans pursuing the Carthaginenses, not only wasted, spoiled and
foraged their province and the Syracusans, but also to have besieged the
Scicilians, the which things are so absurd, foolish and incongruent, that it
were vain and mere folly to persist in their consultation. For those which a
little before besieged Messana, and as he said, were conquerers in ye battle
immediately and without intermission, he declares how having their hearts
surprised with great fear, they fled away, lurking in the cotages and houses
of the City, until they were besieged. And those which hardly before were
kept in their city by the Carthaginenses and foiled in fight, straight way he
makes conquerours, spoiling the territoryes of their enemies, with diverse
incursions, and finally inuading their city. But these by no reason can agree.
Wherefore of necessity either that which he puts first, or the which he
places last, must be false and of no effect. But this is manifestly known to
all men, that the Carthaginenses and Syracusans, after they had fled from
their tents, conveyed them selves immediately to the City, where without
intermission, the Romans besieged the Scicilians, which proves and
corroborateth his last position, so that of necessity his first assertion must
needs be false, untrue, and of no value. For the Romans obtained victory in
the battle fought by Messana. Yet he foolishly fained the^ to have been
vanquished of the Carthaginenses. Oftentimes of this fashion erreth Philinus
incongruentely, and without reason: and Fabius accordingly as I shall show in
their places.

But now to return to my purpose from the which I have somewhat digressed by
showing these things, that thereby the studious affecters of this work might
better perceive the conueyaunce of the history. When the fame was divulgate
and brought from Scicilie to Rome, of the prosperous and fortunate success
chanced to Appius and the rest of the Roman soldiers, Marcus Valerius and
Caius Octacilius being create Consulls, were both sent into Scicilie with the
Roman army, in the which host were four legions, all Romans, by the aides
which was sent them yearly by their allies, every legion conteinyng four
thousand foot men and three hundredth horsemen. At the arrival of the Consulls
many Cities both of the Carthaginenses, and the Syracusanes revolted unto
them. Hieron perceiving the Scicilians to be discouraged, also the number and
power of the Romans to be augmented, supposed that their amity should be
more commodious to him than the friendship of the Carthaginenses: wherefore he
dismissed certain ambassadors to the consuls to entreat for peace, the Romans
perceiving the Carthaginenses kept the seas in every corner, and being afraid
least at any time they should be destitute of victuals, they supposed ye the
friendship of Hieron, should be very commodious to them for the preventing
of such casualties, so that they concluded peace with the Siracusans on these
conditions: That the King should restore the captives which he had in prison to
the Romans without ransom. Moreover, that they should pay an hundredth
talentes of money, and then to be received and admitted as friends to the
Romans. King Hyeron having gotten him self thus under the protection of the
Romans, aided and supported them with victuals and other necessaries, as often as
necessity required, passing the rest of his life in more happy and fortunate
estate than any other of ye Grecians, so that in mine opinion his life was more
honorable and renowned than any of the residue, continuing in like estate and
happy success a great tracte of time both in public and private affairs.
As soon as these news were published at Rome they condescended to them, liking
very well the conditions and peace concluded with Hieron: after that day they
thought it not necessary to send their whole strength and power without Italy,
supposing two legions to be sufficient, because they thought the war not so
perilous the king being associate unto the^, also for that of him they should
have plenty of such things as were necessary to the Army. The Carthaginenses,
perceiving Hieron to be revolted and become their enemy, and the Romans to
have the greater part of Italye in possession, supposed that they neded greater
puissance to withstand their force, so yt they wrote to ye Ligurian Captains
and prefectes of the Gallician army, also to the Spanish soldiers for aid.
Which being arrived in Scicilie, and perceiving the city of Agrigentine to be
a place very fyt for their purpose and strong munition against their enemies,
bordering against them, stored it with great plenty of victuals, and used it as
a warlike munition against the Romans. The Consuls having concluded peace with
Hieron, voyded out of the Province. After their departure, Lucius Posthumous
and Quintus Aemilius being elected in their places, came into Italye, with the
army, which having diligently considered the preparation of the Carthaginenses,
made about the City of ye Agrigentines, being of more audacitie than their
predecessors, thought it necessary earnestly to apply their matters in
Scicilie. Wherefore they mustred all their soldiers together and invaded the
City, incamping them selves within eight furlongs of the munition, keeping
their enemies within the City. Now it was Autumn, and every man supposed that
the siege would continue very long, for which cause the soldiers left their
Camps boldly, laboring sorer than need required to get in their harvest. The
Carthaginenses seeing their enemies rouing and wandering abroad here and there
in the province adue^turously and without circumspection, had a good hope
that the Roman Legions that day might be vanquished, and easily oppressed, so
that they rushed out with great violence, part into the tents and camp, and
part amongst the reapers and laborers. But the diversity of manners and orders,
as they have often times preserved many, so the Romans this day especially by
them were exempt from dangers: for there is a law amongst them, that whosoever
in the time of war abse^teth him self out of his appointed station, or
wandereth out of the Camp, for so doing he must receive Martial law. By the
which good order, it fortuned that the Carthaginenses, being a greater
multitude and number of men, yet by the noble and valiant resistance of the
Romans, and with the loss of many soldiers, the Africans had the greater
foil, and in the end were driven from the Camp and fled away, many of them
being spoiled in the pursuit, and the rest with great joy of their enemies
driven within the walls. Such fear reigned in both armies by the danger of
this day, that afterward the Carthaginenses were not bold so rashely and
without regard to enter the camp of their enemies, neither permitted the
Romans their soldiers so unadvisedly to run on haruesting. Now when the
Carthaginenses desisted any more to urge their enemies with extern skirmishes,
fighting only far off with shaftes and darts, the Consuls divided their
army into two parts, laying ye one company at the temple of Aesculapius, and
incamping yt other on that side which lies toward Heraclea, being the just
midst betwixt the two Armies, they encompassed with a double ditch either side
of the City, making one betwixt them and the walls of the hold, to defend
them from sudden invasions, there was also a another diche cast on ye outside,
least the fortress should be succored as it often times chances to cities
besieged. They fortified ye places betwixt the ditches and the host, with
diverse garrisons of men: victuals and other necessaries for the Camp, were
brought by the Siracusans into Erbesum from whence the Romans carried them into
their tents, for ye town was not far distante from them.

The two Armies lay thus five months, in the which time nothing was done of
either part worthy of remembrance. But in continuance of time when hunger and
famine began to pinch and nip the Carthaginenses by reason of ye great multitude
enclosed in the city, (for they amou^ted to above fifty thousand men) then
Annibal which was ruler of the City, altogether mistrusting of his matters
sent word to Carthage to certify them, not only how the City was besieged,
but also to require them of aid and succor, with which news the
Carthaginenses being moved, they prepared an Army, and collected a great number
of Elepha^ts and ships which they sent to Hanno, their other captain in
Scicilia, who having gathered his men together, went to Heraclea, where he
pondering all things advisedly, took the Town of Erbesum by treason, with all
the victuals and necessaries belonging to the hoaste which unto that day had been the greatest storer, and chief supporter of the Romans, by which loss it
came to pass that the Consuls were as fiercely assalted as they did defend,
and were often brought to that stay through penury and want of other
necessaries, that sundry times they deliberated of dissoluing their camp, which
undoubtedly had chanced in continuance, if that Hyeron King of the
Syracusans, had not with great diligence provided and ministered necessary
things to the host. After this Hanno perceiving the Romans to be infected with
sickness and penury, (for there was a great plague in the camp,) and seeing his
soldiers very apt and ready for the battle, gathered together above fifty
Elephants, making all things in a redynesse and bringing his power out of
Heraclea, commanding the Numidian horsemen to march before, and joining with
their enemies to provoke their horsemen as much as they could to enter the
battle, then they to take their slight without staying, unto such time as
they came unto him. The Numidians obeyed the commandment of their General,
for at the first they so provoked their enemies, yt incontinently the Roman
horsemen rushed upon them very rashly, the Libians according to ye precept of
their Captain, without resistance fled until they came to him, at which sight
the Romans turned their backs, but Hanno with his company handled the^ hotly,
killing many and pursuing the rest into their Camp. This broyle being thus
finished, the Carthaginenses departed with their army and encamped on a hill
called Torus, but. x. furlongs dista^t from the army of their enemies, where
they lingered two months without any enterprise, saving with shooting of
arrows and casting of darts. In ye mean time Annibal made many signs and
tokens both by messe^gers and beacons in ye night to Hanno, yt ye soldiers
were not able to susteins the famine any longer, and how many of his retinue
were revolted to ye Romans for want of sustenance. Hanno being moved with these
news, imbattailed his men and set all things in order. The Consuls likewise,
with no less diligence prepared them to ye conflict, being moved with the
dangers before declared. Both ye armies were co^ducted into an equal place,
where they coped together with eager and sharp onsets. This conflict continued
long very terrible and dispitefull, at ye length the Romans caused the first
battle of the Carthaginenses to recoyle and give back, who rashly and
without regard, brast in among the Elephants, with which the beasts being
afraid, disquieted and troubled the whole army, in which broyle yt Romans
charged them earnestly, compelling the Carthaginenses quite to forsake the
field. The Africans being proflygate, and in this manner almost brought to utter
confusion, part pauned their lives for standing by it, the remenant fled to
Heraclea. The Romans having gathered the pray of Elephants and other booties
gained of the Carthaginenses, returned with their retinue into their camps.
That night the guard of the Roman hosts watch was neglige^tly kept, what for
the inspeakable joy of their prosperous success (as is often times seen in such
braueries) and for the great travail taken in the conflict. Annibal desolate
and aba^doned of all help, and having no hope of aid, esteming yt to be a most
couenient time for him and his soldiers to escape forth, for the causes before
remembered, issued out with his army which lay in Agrigentine, at midnight,
thorough the camp of ye Romans, without danger or interruption, strawing the
ways with chafe. The Romans in the dawning of the next morning perceiving
their enemies to be fled, began a pursuit, but incontine^tly returned to ye
City where their army without interruption or resistance assailyng the gates,
entered within the walls, spoiling and raunsacking all things within famous
town, seasing and taking great pray of goods and servants, with other
inestimable booties, When word was come to Rome, how the Carthaginenses were
discomforted, and Agrigentine taken, they began to wax insolent and angry and
assaying greater things, not being content with those things which they
ente^ded in the beginning, to aid the Mamertines, and defend Messana, for to
resist the power of the Carthaginenses in Scicilie. But now hoping after
greater principalities, they purposed to expel them quite out of the province,
supposing by that means of their doings should have more prosperous success.
Through these cogitations, they were moved and determinately bent concerning
their exploits in Scicilye, knowing that their foot men were of more prowess
and worthiness than their enemies. After the expugnation of Agrigentine,
Lucius Valerius and Titus Octacilius elected Consuls, and having a great army
levied, were sent into Scicilye, so that now their strength was equal: for ye
Carthagineses had domination over the seas, ruling every angle at liberty
without interruption, which is an evident argument, that after the suppression
of Agrigentine, many of the Mediterrane towns in Scicilie revolted to the
Romans for dred of their great puissance of footmen. But after that the
fleet was abroad, it is to be thought that many more situate by the sea
coasts, yielded themselves for fear to the Carthaginenses. Thus Fortune
favored either part equally, but Italy was often times sore molested with the
incursions of the Libian Navy. But Africa was nothing troubled with any army
or host of their enemies: which thing being diligently po^dered, the Romans
determined to coape with the^ by sea. Which thing especially solicitated and
provoked me to speak of this war at large, least any should be ignorant of
this principle, how and at what time, and for what causes the Romans were
enforced to prepare a Navy to encounter with their adversaries. When the
Romans perceived that the war could not otherwise be finished, they prepared a
Navy of an hundredth and twenty ships, of the which a hundredth were
Quinqueremes, and the residue Triremes. In the preparance of this navy the
Quinqueremes were very comberous and hard to be built, because no such Barks
were used in Italy before that time, for which cause the excellency and
magnanimity of the Romans is to be marvelled at, being men altogether
ignorant of the seas, which before that time had never regarded the knowledge
thereof, now so courageously to venture upon them, as though they had already
vanquished their enemies, with whom they never tried that kind of combat. Also
considering how at that present the Africans by the judgment of all men, were
most expert and active upon the waters, as a thing left unto the^ by their
forefathers for an inheritance, which is both a singular testimo ny and a good
argument of the worthiness of ye acts which I intend to treat of, and the
hautinesse of the Romans. For at their first sailing to Messana, they had not
only no ships of war, but sca^tany little Bark or vessel, but borowing ships
of the Tarentines, Locrines, and Neapolitans, for the safety of their army.
There rode at that present many of the Carthagine^ses ships about the coasts
of Scicily, from whence one of the quinqueremes houering aloof from the rest
of ye fleet, being wracked, by chance came to ye hands of ye Romans, at which
they took example to make theirs: whilst ye navy was in furnishing, ye army was
trained in learning to row after this manner. There were seats made orderly in the
sand, in which the Romans sat, and were warned by the voice of a general
which stood in the midst of them, to stretch forth their arms altogether, and
likewise to draw them in by the sand, so that at a certain sign, they all
began and left of together. According to this rate they learned to row, then
the ships being finished, they entered the sea, and within a few days after
made a true trial in the waters. Gaius Cornelius the Consul, which not long
before was made general of the Navy, having brought all the ships into the
deep, passed the seas to Messana with seuentene sail, leaving the residue
about the coasts of Italy. When he had prepared all things necessary to his
Fleet at Messana, spying a convenient time, he passed with the same ships to
the Islands Hyparides. About that time Hanniball the Carthaginean captain was
arrived at Pauormus. He hearing tell of the Consuls arrival, sent one Boodius a
Senator of Carthage thither with twenty ships, which coming upon them
suddenly in the night, finding the Romans ships in the Haven, environed them.
The Consul thus being prevented at unawares, wist not what way was the best to
take, but in the end yielded himself as overcome to his enemies, which
incontinently conveyed him and the prises to Hannibal. Within a few days after
this overthrow of Cornelius, Hannibal upon whom fortune as yet through her
benignity had smiled, not oppressing him with any sinister chance, hearing
tell that the Roman Navy rode in the coasts of Italy, not far distant from
Scicily, earnestly desired to behold the multitude, order, and buylding of his
ennimies Navy: for the which purpose he elected fifty ships, and passed
into Italy, but instead of the Italian coasts (Fortune now turning her
tippet) he was driven amongst the fleet of his enemies, which being well
prepared and ready at all points, assailed him immediately, so that loosing the
most part of his ships, he escaped away very hardly, yet better than he did
hope for. After this the Romans setting toward Scicilie, were advertised by
the captives, of the misfortune chanced to the Consul, wherefore they sent a
post to Caius Duellius his companion and captain of the footmen. But whilst
they houered for him, word came that the power of their enemies was at hand,
therefore they dressed themselves toward the naual conflict. But considering
how their ships were very slow and nothing apt to celeritie, they invented
certain munitions and defenses for every one of them, afterward called Crows.
The munition was found in this sort. There was a pillar of wood erected in
the stern of the ship, four else in length and three hands in breadth, having
in the top a pulley with stayres made of planckes adjoining to it, which were
four foot in breadth and six else in length, the stayres were made hollow,
having munitions in fashion of battlements up to the top of the cannes and
knee plates, in the end of the pillar was a sharp instrument of iron tied to
the stayres with a rope in a ryng, and it was in fashion much like to a mattock
so that this engine resembled much those with the which corn is hoysted out of
ships, with the which invention as soon as they joined with their enemies,
slacking the rope and letting it down, it fastened insolubly in their aduer
aries Bark by the heaviness of the weight, so that if the forepartes met, two
men descended together by the stairs, the two formoste always bearing targets,
with which they defended the rest. If they met crosspath or ouerthwartes, they
easily skipped out at all parts. After this preparance to the Nauall war,
Caius Duellius having knowledge of the unfortunate chance, happened to his
companion captain of the navy, left his host with the Tribunes, hasting him
self toward the fleet: and hearing say, that the Carthaginenses were not
very far from Mylis, with great speed made thither with his whole power.
The Africanes as soon as they heard tell of their enemies coming, were in
hope to have good success (supposing the Romans to be unskillful in governing
a Navy) wherefore they prepared thirty ships, putting them forth to maete
their enemies without al fear, as though they had gone forth to fetch home
some won booty: their captain was Hanniball, which (as I have showed a little
before) conducted his army out of Agrigentine in the night time through his
enemies camp. He had a Septireme, which in time past belonged to Pirrhus king
of Epirotes. Now when the Nauies were within prospect one of the other, and
that the engines were espied in every ship stern, the Carthaginenses were sore
discouraged at the aspect of such a rare sight, but at the length rejecting all
fearful and dastardly cowardnesse, little esteeming the new invented engines,
set upon their enemies with a bold courage. The ships being grapled
together, the Romans assailed their enimyes, descending out of their own
ships into theirs, by their new invented engines. Many of the Carthaginenses
were slain, the rest amazed at the policy of their adversaries, yielded to
them. This conflict resembled much the conflicts and skirmishes made on the
land and not much unlike in danger. Thus were the thirty ships taken which
assailed the Romans with the Pretors, which as I showed before be^longed to
king Pirrhus. Hannibal seeing all things chance contrary to his expectation,
with hard shift in this troublesome tumult, slipping into a skiffe or ship
bote, fled away. The residue of the Carthagenean Nauye entered accordingly upon
their enemies, but perceiving how the former company were entrapped with their
enemies engines, began to practice their fraudulent fetches and deceitful wiles,
not entering according to the accustomed guyse, but ouerthwartly using ye
celerity of their ships, supposing thereby to escape the danger. But the
inventions were so aptly disposed and placed, that they easily clasped them
which way so ever they entered, with which strange sight the Carthaginenses
being amazed, took their flight, having lost fifty ships in that conflict. The
Romans having thus obtained the domination of the seas, persisted in their
wars, and earnestlier employed their business, sailing into the coasts of
Segestana, delivering the town there from besieging, then setting from them,
they won the city Macella. After these wars on the sea, Amilcar captain
over the Carthaginean army, which then lay in Scicilie, hearing tell how there
was a contention sprung betwixt the Roman soldiers, and the aids (sent from
their confederates) contending of their prowess and worthy acts, insomuch
that the forainers their adiutours, being vanquished, were encamped by them
selves. Wherefore Hanno with all diligence hasted toward them, so that suddenly
ere they were aware, he destroyed about four thousand.

After these factes thus finished, Annibal with the remnant which were escaped
from the conflict, came to Carthage, from whence soon after accompanied with
certain noble captains and a navy of triremes, he was sent in to Sardinia,
where within a few days after, being enclosed in a certain porterangle, by
the Romans lost the most part of his ships, him self escapyng the hands of
his enemies: but shortly after being taken of the Carthaginenses he was hanged
for his evil doings on the gallows. The Romans as soon as they had obtained
the soueraintie and rule of the seas, with all diligence employed them selves
for to invade Sardinia.

The next year following, there was no valiant acts done by the Roman army
in Scicilie, worthy of remembrance. Caius Sulpitius and Aulus Rutelius,
afterward created Consules, were sent to Pauorinus, because at that present,
the power of the Carthaginenses lay there. At their arriual immediately they
embatailed their men before the city, but the Carthaginenses being within the
walls offered not once to come forth, which thing the Romans perceiving,
departed from thence to Hippana, which they immediately took. They likewise took
Missistratus, which by reason of impregnablenesse had resisted a certain time.
The^ they brought their army against the Camerenenses, which a little before
had rebelled against them, which with terrible continuance, warlike weapons,
and tearing torments they vanquished. Atna and diverse other towns were taken
by them. Also Lippara was besieged by them. About this time Aulus Tutelius the
Consul and captain of the Navy lay in the coasts of the Tinderitans, where
he espied the Carthaginean Navy sailing by the coaste, wherefore he commanded
his men incontinently to make them ready in all have, and follow him. Then he
accompanied with ten ships, marched forward before the rest. The
Carthaginenses espying this trick, how part of their enemies were but entering
into their ships, another sort launching into the deep, and the first
company far distant from all the rest, they returned suddenly with an
incredible celeritie drowning many of the Romans ships, and the Pretors
ship with those that were in her, scantly escaped with great rowing and much
labor. Whilst this broyle was in hand ye rest of the Roman navy marching
forward met with their enemies, took ten fraughted prises, sinking eight,
ye rest fleeing away retired to Lippara. Both the captains departed from this
conflict, either of them attributing the victory to himself, for which cause
they more ardently prepared for the Naual war, during which time nothing was
done amongst the footmen worthy of noting, but troubled themselus with
trifles. In the beginning of the next summer having furnished them selves of
all necessaries, they repaired to the war again. The Romans met together at
Messana, with three hundredth and thirty quinqueremes, from whence they sailed
by the south side of Scicilie, having overcome the country of Pachinus, to
E^nomon, where the footmen abode for them. The Carthaginenses passed the sea
with three hundredth and fifty ships, remaining at Lilybeum. The Romans
consulted concerning a voyage into Africa, judging it requisite to sail
thither with their whole puissance, to the end that the Carthaginenses should
not only be disquieted in Scicily, but also molested at home in their native
countreye. On the other part the Carthaginenses perceuing how easy a thing it
was to descend into Lybia, also how faynte hearted the people were, the
ennimie being once entered into the Province, therefore they intended
incontinentely to encounter with the Romans, hopyng by that means to stop
their exploite into Africa. In this manner the one part preparing to invade,
and the other to resist, foreshewed the great wars to ensue. The Romans
having prepared all things necessary to their Navy, elected out of their
number of footmen, such as were of most hautie and valyant courage, imbarkyng
them then they made a quadripartite division of their Navy, gyuyng to every
part a double name, saving to the last, which still retained the name of the
rearewarde, as is accustomed in other battles. There was above a hundredth and
forty thousand men in the Roman navy, every ship had three hundredth rowers,
and six score fightyng men.

The Carthaginenses having prepared their Navy of ships, being fraughted
only with men, amounted at the least to the number of a hundredth and fifty
thousand: so that not only the beholders, but also they which heard tell of
the huge number, great ability, and worthy acts of these two armies, may
wonder. The Romans perceiving that this their nauigatio^ of necessity must be
ouertwhart and crooked, also calling to mind the expertnes of their enemies in
rowing, purposed to make their course invincible, placing the two Sepremes in
which Marcus Attilius and Lucius Manlius were in ye forefront with an equal
distance, after these the first and second ward followed, keeping like
compass which betwixt every two was enlarged with their stemmes sticking
outward. The Navy being protract on a length, fronting on the former ships,
had a triangle on each side, unto the which was joined the third Navy, in the
manner of a proppe or pillar, so that the three frontes being disposed thus,
they resembled a perfect triangle. After the third Navy came the carts and
foists, in which their horses were tra^sported, and there was cords which
reached out of them into the third navy: after these came ye reareward in
their order, which were disposed that they surmounted and exceded the wing of
them which marched before. The Roman fleet being set in order after this
manner, the first parts which were the two triangles of the sides, were void in
the midst, the other that followed, yt is to say, they which came after the
pillar or strength, were more solid, so that the whole navy was sure and
indissoluble. By this time the Carthaginean Captains had gathered their
strength and exhorted their soldiers that they should be of bold and stout
courage, informing them if they conquered the Romans in this combat, afterward
they should fight for the regiment and sovereignty of Scicilye: but if the
Romans should suppress them they should not war for Scicilie, but for their
country, for their freedom and for their children. Having thus incensed their
soldiers, they commanded them to go a boorde. They incontinently obeyed the
commandment of their general, showing them selves very forward, perceiving
the eminent danger. Now when the governors of the Carthaginean army had
perceived the order of the Roman fleet, they likewise divided their Army into
four parts, of the which three be launched into the deep, and lay with their
right wing extended out in length with the four parts of their ships bent
toward their enemies, as though they would have environed them. The fourth
part which was the left wing, remained as under a munition by the shore. Hanno
and Amilcar were generals of the Carthaginean navy. Hanno ruled over the
right wing, having with him the swifter ships, and Amilcar the left, with the
slugs. This was he which (as is before declared) escaped so hardly at
Tindarides. Now Amilcar used this policy. The Consuls at their first
meeting, espying the forefront of the Africans to be very thin, brust in
through the midst of them with great violence, which according as Amilcar had
commanded, fained a recoyle, to the end that they might sever and disioyne
the Roman navy, which pursued them now earnestle, so that the first and
second ward marching after their enemies, and the third and fourth coming
slowly after, caused that the two first wards were separated from the last.
Which separation being perceived of the Carthaginenses, there was a sign made
out of Amilcars ship, as they were agreed before, at which sight with a
sudden inuersion they returned, inuading the Romans which pursued them. The
battle was very terrible and cruel. The Carthaginenses far exceded the
Romans, in subtle fleights and swift rowing: but after that it came to
handblowes, and the ships were grapled, the Romans passed in strength and
worthiness. According as I have declared, was the beginning of the nauall
wars. Hanno which (as I declared before) was captain of the right wing,
espying the battle to be begone with the forewarde of the Romans, set
forward to invade the rearewarde, where was a terrible and perilous conflict,
during long and very douteful. Then the fourth ward of ye Carthaginenses set
toward their enemies and incountred with that fleet which had the ferry
botes, who letting the ropes slip, assailed them very fiercely. Thus was the
battle divided into three parts, and there was three nauall conflictes at
one time, every one far separate from another. In the which the fightes were
alike, because of their equality, each part encountered other courageously,
all things went alyke on both sides. Then in continuance, Amilcar with his
company were put to flight, Lucius Manlius persisted in pursuing his enemies,
but Marcus Attilius espying the conflictes in the rearewarde, and amongst yt
Hulkes, hasted him to aid them with the second ward: the rearewarde which had been in great peril and danger, and almost suppressed by Hanno, were so
incoraged and animated by the Consuls coming, that they fought courageously.
The Carthaginenses being thus suddenly intrapte with their enemies on every
side, trusting to the celeritie and swiftness of their ships, thrust into
the deep and fled away. During this time the third navy of the Romans which
lay by the shore, was sore assauted and grievously oppressed by the
Carthaginenses, but Lucius Manlius and Marcus Attilius having set the reareward
and the other in safety, took their course a contrary way to aid them being
in distress which lay as though they had been besieged and almost overcome,
which had cha^ced in deed, but yt the Carthaginenses being afraid of their
crows, durst not graple with the^, so that they only studied to drive them to
the shore. But the Roman Consuls having at unawares encompassed them, took
fifty of their fraughted pryses, the residue being driven to the shore, fled
away. Thus these three battayles were fought severally betwixt the Romans and
the Carthaginenses, on one day, according to this prescript order, in which the
Romans were conquerours, of whose Navy there was four and twenty Ships
wracked, of the Carthaginenses above thyrtie. The Romans had no fraughted
ships taken, but they took to the number of three score and more. After this
combat having repaired their taken ships, and joined them to their army,
having victualles and other necessaries collected, departed toward Libia.
There is a place in Africa called the Promentary of Mercury, reaching into ye
sea toward Scicilye, there the Romans arrived first, from whence having
repaired their ships, they sailed to Clypia, and there not far from the
City having disbarqued the soldiers, begone to enuironne the Town with
dytches and trenches. They had prepared all things ready to besiege the Town,
but the defendants yielded them selves willingly to them. Now the Carthaginenses
which had before fled from the nauall conflict, were arrived at Carthage,
supposing the Roman army after their prosperous success, to have gone
immediately thither, for which suspection, they levied a great number of
horsemen, footmen, and ships to defend the necessary places of the City.
After all this preparaunce being finished, it is to understood how the
Consuls had besieged the City of Clipia, rejecting all domestical fear, they
prepared men ready to their war both by water and land, pretermitting nothing
belonging to the safety of the province or city. In the mean time the
Consuls having overcome the City of Clipie, and put soldiers into it, they
sent legates to Rome, which should certify the Senate of their affairs, and
bring them word what they should then take in hand. Finally they brought their
whole army to the Frontiers of Carthage, inuading the province without
interruption, pilling, forraging, and wasting the region before them, burning
and destroying the sumptuous buildings, seasing all kind of prays and booties
bringing above twenty thousand laborers to their ships. In the mean time
the legates sent to Rome were returned, making relation how the senate willed
one of the Consuls to remain in Africa, with the host, and the other to
repair to Rome with the navy.

The Consuls perceiving the minds of the Senate, agreed that Marcus Attilius
Regulus should remain in Africa, with forty ships, fiftene thousand
footmen and five hundredth horsemen, and that Manlius with the residue of the
navy and host, with all the multitude of captives should return to Rome. The
Carthaginenses perceiving by the great preparation of the Romans, that this
war should be of long continuance, appointed Asdruball the son of Hanno and
Bostarus, captains of their host. Then they sent to Amilcar to Heraclea, which
immediately came to Carthage, with five thousand footmen and five hundredth
horsemen, and was associate the third captain to them. The three generals
began to consulte amongst them selves concerning the administration of the
wars, in which co^sultation they determined to aid the province, and not to
suffer such havoc and waste to be made of the Region. Then Marcus Attilius
within a few days after, went to the City Adis, indeuoring him self to
besiege and conquer it, of which the Carthaginenses having knowledge, employed
their whole diligence to receive and deliver it from the siege, marching
forward with their whole Army toward the Romans, to such time as they came
to a hill, standing on the right wing of their enimyes, on the which for
certain considerations they pighte their pauilions, supposing it to be a
place most expedient and apt for their purpose. All their trust and
confidence of victory, were in their Horsemen and Elephantes. Thus forsaking
the playnes and valeys, they ascended with their Army into a high, huge and
steep platte, even as it were teaching their enemies what they should do, as
without doubt it chanced after: for the Romans perceiving how the Elepha^ts
(in the which their enemies put their chief confidence) were altogether
unprofitable for battle, and of no force in the mountains, supposed it to be
best, not to defer or prolong the time any longer, either to permit them to
descend into the plains, but incontinently pretermitting no opportunity,
encompassed the hill on either side, by which devise it came to pass that the
power of the Elephantes and Horsemen, were of no force and to no purpose, so
that only the mercynarie soldiers fought out of the higher places,
constrayning the Roman soldiers a little to retire, but the other part of the
hill was suddenly vanquished, and the Romans ascended.

The Carthaginenses perceiving them selves to be environed on every side with
their enemies, immediately they fled and left their tents standing, flying
down by the shoot bank. The Romans a certain space pursued the footmen,
then having spoiled ye tents and making diverse recourses through the whole
province, spoiled the fields and rifled the Towns. Shortly after they invaded
and took Tunis, perceiving that it was a very fit place for the wars, lying
against Carthage and the province encamped there. The Carthaginenses being a
little before overcome by sea, were now likewise suppressed by land of the
Romans in diverse battles, not for lack of men or strength, but of policy
and expert captains. Thus they were disquieted with diverse afflictions, and
in desperation of their health. After this combat wherein they were so
dispersed and foiled, there arose a great route of the Numidians against them,
hoping to get some gains, of whom they had almost as much hurt as of the
Romans, for they being a gredy covetous pilling snatching and ravenous nation,
depopulated and wasted all things before them. The Carthaginenses quaking for
fear of the Numidians, fled out of the province into the city, where as
they were greatly discoraged, prognosticating the furyous famine like to ensue,
as well for the multitude of people enclosed within the City, as for fear of
the long siege. Now Marcus Attilius perfectely understanding the great danger
that the Carthaginenses were in both by sea and by land, so that the city
within a small tracte of time, would reuolte and yield unto him, yet fearing
least the new Consul then ready to come into Africa, should ascribe the
facinorous and worthy acts done by him, to his own glory and praise, thought
it best to conclude peace with the Carthaginenses, which gratefully and with
joyful minds accepted it, dismissing the chief men of their city to entreat
with the Consul concerning the conclusion of the league. This matter being thus
brought to pass, yet were the demaundes so unreasonable, that they refused to
take truce with them, yea they were so far out of measure, that they could
not suffer the Consul to speak to them, for Marcus Attilius having the victory
and dominion over all things, thought whatsoever he offered to the
Carthaginenses, that they should accept it as a gift or reward: but they on
the contrary part, thought there could be nothing more rigorous, sharp,
cruel, or biting, than the words of the Consul were unto them, being driven
to the last pinch. Wherefore they departed, not only enemies and peace
vnconcluded, but also abhorring and detesting the answer of Attilius, as too
grievous, displeasant, paynefull, and hard also, as to magnificke, stately, and
arrogante.

When they had showed these things in the senate house at Carthage, though
long before they were in despair, and had no hope of prosperous success,
nevertheless, yet hearing the unreasonable requests of the Consul, with a
great disdain they did animate them selves, reviving their pristinate corages,
determining rather to abide extreme danger and calamities, yea and death it
self, than to suffer any reproach, infamy, or disworshippe, either of their
good name, or of the worthy and famous acts done and achieved by them. At
that same present a certain Carthaginean, (by chance) which was sent into
Grecia at the beginning to hyer soldiers, returned home with a great troop
and multitude of men, amongst whom there was one Zantippus, a Lacedemonian,
who was a passing expert and cunning Soldier, and had been much exercised and
trained in the wars, which hearing tell of the conflict and overthrow of the
Carthaginenses: also perceiving how it was fought and being informed of the
time and place where, further considering their preparance with horse and
Elephants, turned him to his companions, and said: The Carthaginenses took not
this overthrow of the Romans, but through their evil guiding and ignorance of
their inexpert captains. These words of Zantippus immediately were bruted
thorough the whole city, and came to the ears of the rulers, which made him
to be called before them, minding to try his counsel. Now when Zantippus was
come to them, and had showed the reason of his words and the causes why the
Romans made such havoc of their men, he promised if they would be counseled
by him (afterward leaving the hills and high places keeping the plains) that
he would instruct them how to save them selves, and a ready way to overcome
their enemies. The Carthaginean Captains being moved with these words of
Zantippus incontinently auctorized him general over the whole army: and there
was a great rumor noised abroad through the whole host, of Zantippus words,
so that there was nothing but pleasant noise and merye talk thorough the whole
army. When he had brought the soldiers out of the city, and imbattailed
them, there appeared such manifest difference betwixt them, and the other
vntrayned Captains, that all the people cried out with a clamorous shout,
they desired nothing so much as war, they had such a good hope Zantippus
being their guider.

These things being thus brought to pass, the Carthaginean Captains
perceiving the ardent zeal and fervent desire of the soldiers, exhorted them
as the time permitted: then within a few days after, brought them forth
against their enemies. There was in the Carthaginean army above twelve
thousand footmen, four thousand horsemen, and nygh a hundredth Elephants.
Marcus Attllius having knowledge of his enemies, though he were somewhat
astonnyed to see them (contrary to their accustomed rate) keep in the plains,
and place their tents in them, yet being very desirous of battle, he marched
forward to meet them, placing his tents within two hundredth paces of his
ennimies. The next day following the African Capitains took counsel amongst
themselves what was best to be done. The whole multitude turned to Zantippus,
calling him by name, and said that they were ready, and prepared to venture
them selves what danger soever there were, desiring him to make forward to the
battle. The Carthaginean captains perceyuyng the valiant courage of their
soldiers and the desire they had to encou^tre with their enemies, considering
also the presence of Zantippus, thought yt this was a most convenient time to
set upon their enemies, wherefore commanding the soldiers to prepare them
selves, they granted Zantippus ye regiment of the army to rule at his pleasure.
He having received of the captains, authority over the host, set toward his
adversaries, and in araying his army, placed the elephants every one in his
order, before the forefront of ye battle: a little space after the^ he placed
a legio^ of ye Carthaginenses, appointing ye stipendarie soldiers to keep the
right and left corner then he appointed them of most agilitie to fight
betwixt the two wings of the horssmen. The Romans perceiuyng their ennimies
in a readynesse, prepared and made ready their army, setting the most
valiant and active Soldiers that could be pycked out of the whole
company, against the Elephantes. After them, they fortified their forefront
with diverse and sundry munitions, pointing their horsemen in either wing,
placing their standerds not in the beginning, but in the strength of the
battle their order was very slender in the breast, and strengthened with many
aids in the back to withstand the force of the elephants. But as it was well
provided of the Romans to keep back the beasts, so it was very dangerous
for being ingired, for the Carthaginenses having the greater troop of horses,
might easilier enuiron the^ disposed so straightly. Now both the companions
being pressed to join battle, either of them looked to be assailed of other.
As soon as Zantippus had commanded the elephantes to be put toward the
enemies, the horsemen of both wings braste in egerly. The Romans according to
the custom of their country, sounding their trumpets, commanded their
soldiers to girde valiantly into the thickest of the army. The syghte was
very sharp and terrible amongst them: but the Roman soldiers dreading the
multitude of the Carthaginenses, fled incontine^tly from both wings, the
footmen of the left wing having inclined the force of the elephantes, esteemed
nothing the multitude of the hired soldiers, but rushed in valiantly on the
right wing of the Carthaginenses, putting them to flight, and pursuyng them
sharply to their tents: but those which were placed next to the Elephants were
hurled down and overthrown on heaps by the filthy beasts. The fortune of
victory depended doubtful, the resistants defended them selves so worthily:
but after the rerewarde of the Romans was compassed in with the Carthaginean
horsemen, and were compelled to encounter with them, and those, which (as I
showed) were placed in the midst to resist the elepha^ts, driven on the
strongest company of their ennimies, by whom they were suppressed and quite
overthrown, the Romans began to languishe and faint on every part, some being
trode^ down with the multitude of yt cruel and fierce beasts, other slain by
the horssemen in the same place where they stood in the beginning, so that a
small handful remained to the latter end, which perceiving there was no hope of
recovery, fled away to save them selves, but they also the place being very
plain, were ouerrunne with horsemen and elephants, other five hundredth flying
away with Marcus Attilius, were intrapped and taken by their enemies.

In the Carthaginean army were slain eight hundredth hired soldiers, which
fought in the left wing against the Romans. Of the other part escaped only
two thousand with their ensigns and standerdes, which (as you heard a little
before) chased the Carthaginenses to their tents, all the rest saving Marcus
Attilius, and a few which were taken with him, were slain. The Carthaginenses
having made spoil of the bodies of their ennimies, returned into the City
with great joy and gladness, leadyng with them the Consul, and the rest of
their Captives.

If there be any man that pondreth and wayeth this according to verity, he
shall find diverse things included herein very necessary, and passing
profitable to the amendment and right government of our lives. First, if he
reuolue and intentiuely consider in his mind how frivolous, un constant and
vain a thing it is to put any hope or trust in Fortune, because of prosperity
or other famous facts done according to our minds. Marcus Attilius may be a
singular example to every one, which of late flouryshyng with so many famous
triumphs, and adorned with so many glorious victories, and in his chief pomp
and glory, would by no means possible, nor by any intercessions, be
merciful or favorable to the Carthaginenses, being at the last cast, and in
extreme danger, now himself was forced humblye to request mercy and peace at
their hands, which with tedious exorations and low obeisance had required it of
him not long before, so that the worthy saying of Euripides was at this time
verified, that the counsel of one wise man counteruaileth the strength of many
soldiers: for one man by his politic prudence, overcame and utterly destroyed
a multitude before invincible, restoring the city (grievously afflicted and
oppressed) to the pristinat state, relieuing the Citizens minds, which were in
utter despair. I have voluntarily remembered these things, knowing the fruit
contained in them to belong much to the correction and amendment of men's
lives. For there are two ways laid before men, by example of which, they may be
reformed to a better trade of life, the one is by his own calamities, the
other by example of other men's harms, of which the former without doubt is
of more efficacy, but it cha^ceth not without ye great detrime^t of him, which
suffers it: ye second though it be not so efficacious, yet it is good, because
it is expert and void of all danger or damage. Wherefore very few choose the
first willingly, by reason of his collaterals, which are affliction,
oppression, and trouble, but the other is well accepted of all men, because it
is exempte from all detriment, grief and vexation: so that a man of
understanding may well perceive, experience to be the best guide and conducter
to the right institution and amendment of life, which chiefly consists in
the commemoration of other men's facts, for they with out trouble, hurt or
damage, give best instructions to wise men: but for this matter let these
suffice. The Carthaginenses having all things chanced prosperously and
according to their desire, pretermitted no kind of braueries, pomp and
gladness, whether it were in praising their Gods, or in offering sacrifice to
them, and other rights, neither in making and setting forth of plays, ne yet
in giving and receuing gifts, according to the custom of the country.
Zantippus having restored the Carthaginenses to their pristinate estate, soon
after returned to his own country, having vigilantly foreseens all dangers.
For it often times chances, that he which does worthily, is mortally hated and
envied therefore, but being defended with his Citizens allies and friends, he
may easily flee and eschew the same, where strangers and forayners are quickly
dispatched. There is also an other cause alleged for his departure, as I shall
show more at large in his place. When relation was made at Rome, of the
overthrow of their host, and the Consuls taking, also how the rest of their
army were besieged in Clipia, they prepared to aid them, leuying a populous
army which they sent into Africa. In this mean time, the Carthaginenses
besieged Clipia, labouryng earnestly to over com it, hoping to take those which
escaped the battle. But the Roman soldiers defended them selves so
courageously, that the Carthaginenses labored in vain, who perceiving their
travail to be of none effect, raised their camp. Now they heard word how
the Romans had prepared a navy, which should come into Africa, with which
rumors, the Carthaginenses being moved, began to repair their old Navy,
also to prepare a new, so that having two hundredth well appointed ships,
they determined to stay their passage into Africa. The Romans having also
furnyshed three hundredth and fifty sail, sent Marcus Aemilius, and Seruilius
Fuluius Consules, with an army into Africa, the which did determine their
journey first into the country of Scicilie, and from thence unto Carthage, but
suddenly not looked for, by the promontorie of Mercury, they did meet with
the Lybian Navy, which (as I have showed before) was set there to stop
their voyage, and violently rushed upon them, immediately seasing a hundredth and
fourtene fraughted prises, thence saylyng to Clipea, they received the Roman
Soldiers, and remained a while in Africa, and then returned to Scicilie. When
they had prosperously passed over the sea, betwixt Africa, and Scicilie, and
were not far distant from the city Camerina, there chanced such a great
calamity and shypwracke to them, as can not be well expressed: for of six
hundredth forty and four ships, scante four score were saved, all the rest
being either drenched or rent with rocks, goared up the shore with carkases
and other trafike. There was never greater spoil at one time before these our
days, yet chanced it not so much by fortune, as thorough the foolyshe
boldness of the Consuls, for mariners and lodes me^ warned them often to eschew
from the out costs of Scicilie, being without ports, and very dangerous,
especially at that time of the year betwixt Orion, and the can icular signs,
but they rejected and did set light the Counsel of the Maryners, and puffed
up in pride with their former victories, also being desirous of a few holds
of little value, belonging to their enemies, so that their glorious and
triumphant victory, which they had obtained before, was blemyshed with this
miserable calamity, suffering severe punishment for their unbridled
boldness, and as they are in deed valiant, so they suppose that al such
exploites as they purpose to take in hand, must of necessity be finished,
judging nothing impossible for them: and as diverse times in this their
unadvised rashenesse they had fortunate success, so many times they err and
slide into great and manifest dangers, and especially in combats on the sea,
for though in conflictes on the land, matching only with men, they often
times have the preemine^ce, but not always, yet on the seas, they so
harebrainely hasard them selves, that often times they are pestred with great
perilles as they are at this present, and sundry other times, and shall be
hereafter, except they repress and bridle their untamed rashenesse. When the
Carthaginenses had knowledge of this unlucky chance happened to the Romans,
they earnestly employed their whole diligence to the Nauall war on the sea,
supposyng them selves nothing inferior to the Romans by water, for this their
unfortunate chance, and equal with them by land, because they had overcome the
host of Marcus Attilius. Wherefore immediately they sent Asdrubal with all their
old soldiers, with a Navy of two hundredth ships, part new made, part
having their stemmes and tackeling refreshed: also a hundredth and forty
Elephantes, with a supplement of new Soldiers into Scicilie, which having his
army safely conducted to Lilybeum daily exercised his Soldiers and
Elephantes, continually molesting the friends of the Romans thoroughout all
Scicilie. Although the calamity of the great shipwreck had discouraged and
appalled the hearts of the Romans, yet they disdained to give place to the
Carthaginenses. Wherefore they prepared a new navy of two hu^ndreth and
twenty ships, which was finished with such celeritie, that within three
months they were vndockte, and set on the water, which may be thought a
thing almost incredible. Aulus Aquilius and Caius Cornelius being Consuls,
were appointed to sail into Scicilie with that Navy, and to make war with
the Carthaginenses, which incontinentely taking their journey, came to
Messana, where as they did receive the remnaunt of the Shippewracke; which
made in the whole, a navy of three hundredth sail. From thence they did pass
onwarde to Panormus, the chief City of the Carthaginenses, assailyng it with
great power and violence, and besieged it on both sides, so ye within few days
with their torments, brakes and slings, they battered down the Toure, entryng
in with great violence, and won the base town called Neapolis, which being
once taken, the Citizens sore discouraged, yielded the other parts, commonly
called the old town. When Panormus was taken, the Consuls left certain
soldiers there, and returned to Rome. The next Caius Seruilius, and Cneius
Sempronius, being chosen in their places, took the navy, and passed the seas
into Scicilie, from thence into Africa, where ariuing in the province, they set
their army on land in diverse places, making great havoc every where, yet
they did nothing worthy writing: At length they arrived in the Isle of the
Lotophagians, called Mirmix not far distant from the little Syrtes or
quickesandes, where not knowing the places through which they should sail,
chanced in a straighte angle, where their ships were grounded by the ebbing
of the sea, during which time they stood in a marvelous perplexity and
almost drownde in despair, until the water by flowing, set them on foot
again, yet could their not escape scotfree, but of constraint were compelled to
empty their ships, and cast their ballesse over board. After that day the
Romans being pinched with so many perils, made their voyages by sea, as though
the enemies had been in their tails. After this they returning into Scicilye,
vanquished Lilybium, and remained at Panormus, front whence as they passed
toward Italye, there arose such a sodayn tempest that above a hundredth and
fifty ships of their navy were dispersed by the rage of the Seas, which
after long tossing from post to pillar, were wracked and lost. The Romans being
daunted with these hurtes and calamities, though they esteemed the majesty and
honor of their Empire above all other things, yet being oppressed with these
miseryes, determined utterly to forsake the seas. Then they only prepared an
Army on the land, which were sent into Scicilye, under the tuition of Lucius
Cacilius and Caius Curious being Consuls, to whom they delivered only three
score ships, for the transporting of their corn and victuals, by which it
came to pass, that the Carthaginenses had the superiority again, for the
Roman navy taken away, they only ruled over the waters having also great
confidence in their army and Elephantes on the land. The Romans, being
advertised of the battle fought in Africa, and the driving back of their
army only thorough the multitude and strength of the Elephants which brake
their battle and disturbed their orders, making great confusion in the host,
after that time they were so pauled with ye fear of the beasts, that for the
space of two years next ensuing, when they should have coped with their
enemies, either in Africa or in other places, they never durst encounter with
them, or pitche their Tents in the valeyes, but continually kept in the hills
and high places, for no other cause but only to shield them selves from the
Elephantes. The Romans perceiving their host to be thus discoraged, without
lingering prepared a new Navy, and having an election of officers, Caius
Attilius and Lucius Manlius were appointed Consuls. Thus furnishing fifty new
ships, and repayring the old Navy, they levied a fresh Army.

Asdruball Captain of the Carthaginenses, perceiving the fearfulness of the
Romans, also having knowledge by the fugitives of the Romans preparation, and
also hearing how one of the Consuls was determined to repair into Italye, with
part of the Army, and that only Metellus with scant half of ye army should
remain at Panormus, now Autumn drawing nigh, he removed from Lilybeum, and
brought his army to yt territories of Panormus. Metellus perceiving his
enemies to be at hand, and seeing Asdrubal desirous of battle, restrained his
men within the walls, which thing much more incensed the Carthaginean
captain, in so much, that having spoiled and burned the fields on every side,
he marched toward Panormus. The Consul kept his men so long within, that he
ministered the enemies occasion to pass the river which fronted on the walls.
The Consul perceiving the Elephants and main army to approach, he sent out his
most active soldiers to solicitate and provoke his adversaries that they might
come to the hands of the rest, and perceiving that all things chanced according
to his mind, he appointed such as were of most agilitie to stand as it were a
rampire above a ditch, from whence they should fight with their enemies a far
of with their darts, and other rouing weapons, commanding them that if at any
time the beasts began to rage, they should skip into the ditches, and from
thence hurl at them again: he made a great company of darts or pykes to be
conveyed out of the City, which he placed in the pits. Then he with all yt
standarts stood at a another contrary angle of the City butting on the left
wing of his enemies. As soon as the battle was begone, the master of the
Elephants being very desirous of honor and the name of a conqueror, nothing
esteming Asdrubals commandment, sturred up the beasts against the light
soldiers, which according to yt Consuls commandment gave back, and seeing the
beasts pursue them very hastily, skipped into the ditches. Now when the
Elepha^ts were come to the pit side, they were so galled, what with shaftes
shot out of the Town, and the soldiers pikes in the trenches, that they could
pass no further, but were compelled to recoyle and burst in among their own
Army, perturbing their order, and making great slaughter amongst them. While
this broyle was in hand, in came Metellus with his crew from an other part of
the City, and girded in amongst his enemies so hautely, that being troubled
with the Elephantes before, and now so sharply assailed by the Consul, they
were easily suppressed, part being slain, the rest saving them selves by
taking them to their heels. There were ten Elephantes taken, with ten Indians,
the rest which had cast down their riders after the conflict were taken by the
Consuls. After this prosperous triumph no small praise was attribute to
Metellus, the which by the confession of every man was the only cause that the
Roman soldiers peaked not in mountains and hills, but durst in any plain
place skirmish with the Carthaginenses. When the rumor of this victory was
noysed at Rome, the whole City was impleate with inexplicable gladness, not
only because the Elephantes being taken, the enemies were much their
inferiors, but because their soldiers were animated and imboldened. Therefore
as they had decreed in the beinning, they prepared an other navy, and sent it
into Scicilye, being very desirous to finish the wars.

Thus having prepared viands and other necessaries, they passed the seas into
Scicilye, with two hundredth ships. This was the fourtenth year of this war.

After their arrival in the wished Port, the Consuls took such footmen as
were in the province, and went to besiege Lilybeum, for that City being
subverted, they hoped soon after to pass into Africae.

But the Carthaginenses being moved also with the same reasons, did purpose in
any case to preserve and keep their munition from taking, knowledging them
selves to have no title to any thing in Scicilie, that being lost, for all the
residue of the province, saving Drapanum was in subjection to the Romans. But
least those things which I determine to entreat of in Scicilye, should seem
difficult or obscure to any unacquainted with the places, I purpose briefly and
in few words to declare the situation of the Island.

Scicylie bordereth for the most part upon Italye, and the frontiers thereof,
as Peloponesus does upon Grecia, and this is the chief difference betwixt
them: Scicilye is separate from Italye by an arm or creek of the Sea,
Peloponesus from Grecia by a dry march or plot of ground, so that one may pass
on foot from it into Grecia, but not from Scicilye into Italye, except they
pass by water: in form it resembles a triangle having at every corner a
promentary, of the which that bordering toward the southern clyme, ioineth to
the sea of Scicilye, and is called Pachinus: that which exte^deth toward the
North is likewise an end or corner of the sea, and is distant from Italye but
a mile and and a half, and is called Pelorus: the third which declyneth
toward Africa and Carthage is but a mile, half a shoot, seven and twenty
pases distaunte from the coasts of Africa, and the inhabitants call it
Lilybeum, it seperateth the Sardinian and Scicilyan sea. In this prome^tarie
there is a hill of the same name (at that instante besieged of the Romans,)
fortifted with strong walls, deep ditches, perilous puddels, and many
standing waters, by which the port is made very dangerous and perilous to be
entered, except the Pilottes be very cunning and expert. The Romans besieging
this City, environed it on either side with two camps, making many ditches,
rampers, erecting sundry munitions, placing their engines, pretermitting nothing
thought requisite to the expugnation of a hold: first they assaulted a town
which stood in the hill side, bending toward the African Sea, by all means
that could be invented, daily inuenting new torments, continually setting
them in places most convenient.

In continuance they overthrew six Towns standing nygh to yt, as with their
whole power they were assayling the walls.

This siege was very sharp and mortal, the Citizens were sore discoraged and
oppressed with great fear and dread, for many of their towers and bulwarckes
were very ruinous, being sore rent and torn, and diverse turned over, and cast
to the ground by their Enemies: and the Engines damaged them daily more and
more.

The number besieged, amounted to above ten thousand, beside the great
multitude of inhabitants. In this their grievous distress, Imilcon ruler of
the City valyantly defended them from their enemies, continually reedifying
and making up new walls within the City, where the Romans brake them with
rams and brakes, circumspectly watching where his enemies made trenches, and
by making other disapointed them of their purpose, so that the subtle and slye
slyghts of his adversaries were frustrate and of no effect: oftentimes he
issued out setting on them both by night and day, so that greater slaughter
was made in those byckerings, than in plain combat. At that time certain of
the conducted Soldiers being lieutenaunts and sergeants over the Carthaginean
host, made a conspiracy, intending to batray the City to the Romans, and
being aided with the consent of their coparteners, skipped over the walls in
the night, and came into the Romans Camp, and declared their whole intent to
the Consul.

There was at that time there present an Achaean, named Alexon, which before
had saved the City of Agrigentine from betraying when ye Siracusans kept it.
This Alexon having knowledge of the conspyracie, immediately bewrayed their
counsel to Imilcon, which without lingering congregated all the Captains and
officers of the army, except those yt fled out by night to the Romans,
revealing unto them all that he knew of the treason, earnestly requesting and
beseching them that they would persist steadfast and stable, and not with
infamy and obloquie yield them selves and the City into the hands of their
enemies, promising unto them large rewards, if they would keep their faith and
promise. Unto whom they all answered that there was nothing which they more
esteemed than their truth and promise. Then he sent with the^ to pacify the
Gallicean army, Annibal (his son whom the Carthaginenses strangled in
Sardinia, after he had lost the navy, as I showed before) supposing that he
would be most acceptable to them, because he had warred under his Father in
their company. He appointed Alexon to go to the other hired soldiers, because
they had great affiance in him. Immediately after he called the whole multitude
before him, giving part of them fair and friendly words, promising to other
ample and large rewards, by which means he brought to pass that they
promised to be stable and faithful toward the Carthaginenses. So that they
which wrought the treason, returning and desiring them to give ear till they
had showed such things as they had talked with the Romans, were not only
divided of their speech, but driven from the walls with darts and stones. Thus
were the Carthaginenses brought by treason into extreme danger, and almost
into the hands of their enemies, but Alexon which before by his truth and
steadfastness to the Agrigentines, had not only delivered the City, but the
whole province with their laws and liberties, now also saved ye Carthaginenses
from utter destruction. The Citizens of Carthage, though they could not hear
tell how all things fared at Lilybeum, yet suspecting them to be in distress,
because of the long siege, prepared fifty ships fraighted with ten thousand
men, over which Navy they constituted Annibal son of Amilcar Captain,
giving him certain exhortations as the time permitted, commanding that in any
case with all celeritie he should sail to Lilybeum, and aid his country men.

Annibal with his Soldiers landed first at Egusa, situate in the midst
betwixt Carthage and Lilybeum, from thence with a prosperous gaile, he entered
the port of the besieged City with hoysted sails, having all his men in a
readiness and prepared on the deck. The Consuls being somewhat abashed with
their sudden arryuall, and partly afraid to encounter with them, least he
should be driven into the Haven with the boisterous and windy blastes then
raging, determined not to stop their entrance, but only to ascend the shore
in their Armor, and look if by that means they could fear them.

The multitude which were on the walls, perceiving the presence of their
countrymen, trembled and quaked for very joy, exhorting them with plausible
words and clamorous noyses to enter in boldly.

Annibal being of an incredyble audacitie and hautie courage, pushed into the
port valyantly, and without danger or peril landed his men. Now when they
were within the Town, there was marvelous tryumphing, not so much for the
arryuall of the fresh Soldiers, as because the Romans durst not try to
stop their passage. Imilcon perceiving all the army desirous of battle, the
old soldiers being incoraged by the arrival of the new suppliment, and the
new soldiers, because the thorns as yet had never pricked them, supposing it
best not to pretermit that opportunity, endeavored him self by all means
possible to get the engines of his enemies destroyed. Then he gathered all the
army together, and exhorted them with a long oration, imboldning their corages,
promising great gifts to every one that behaved him self valyantly, showing
the Carthaginenses that they should not be unrewarded. The Soldiers were
maruellously moved with his fair and pleasant words, promising him that they
would be ready to their power, earnestly desiring him to linger no longer, but
even at that instante to issue out against his enemies. The Captain thancking
them for their good wylles, immediately dismissed them, commanding that they
should go and prepare them selves, and incontinently to return and give
attendaunce on their Captains to do such things as should be appointed them.
After that he called together the generals, showed them his purpose,
distributyng the army amongst them, appoynting every one his place, and
commanded that they before all other in the first watch, should be ready in
their statio^s, which without grudging obeyed the commandment of their graund
captain. Imilcon having brought forth his power in the dawning, set upon the
ordinance of his enemies in diverse places. The Romans co^iecturing their
intent, were nothing slothful, but armed them selves, and set all things in a
readiness, and issued upon the Africans newly come out of the city: the tumult
was very great about the walls. The Carthaginenses were about twenty
thousand men, and the Romans mo, which caused them rudelier and without order
to enter upon them, by which their foolishness they were in more danger: for
amongst a great company of soldiers one man fought against an other, as
though it had been in a particular combat. But the fiercest and cruellest fight
was about the ordinance: for they of both parts which were appointed to that
ward, endeavored themselves myghtily, the one part to overthrow, the other to
defend, until such time that the bata^le was so fierce and mortal, that with
valiant and hautie courage, they died without giuyng one foot from their
appointed places. The Carthaginenses that day behaved them selves so valiantly,
fieryng their engines, shiuering them with their swords and other weapons, that
the Romans were not able to resist, seeing almost their ending day. After long
contention, Imilcon perceiving the great and despiteous slaughter, with the
effusio^ of blood that was made, and his purpose never nigher an end,
commanded a retreat to be blown. The Romans though that days they were in
great danger of losing their ordinance, yet they resisted their enemies with
such incredible courage, that they preserved them and al other things in
safety. After this Anniball departed with his puissance from Lilybeum, about
the dead of the night, his enemies not knowing, and passed to Adherball, the
other Carthaginean captain, which lay at Drepanum, for which City they took
special care, to keep it from the enemies, as well for the goodlinesse of the
town, as for the commodiousnesse of the port: and it is distant from Lilybeum,
but fiftene miles. Now the captains were wonderful desirous to know how all
things fared with their companions, but the entrance was so narrowly watched
since Annibals departure, that it was impossible for any man either to enter in
or issue out of ye city. At that time there was a certain Rhodian named
Annibal, a man surely very famous, which perceyuyng the minds of ye
Carthaginenses promised to take upon him in spite of all the Romans to enter
in to Lilybeum, where having viewed all things, and knowing their state, he
would return and certify them. The Carthaginenses though they were iocunde to
hear him talk of this enterprise, yet they thought it impossible, because
the Romans compassed the entrance of the port. But the Rhodian without fear
went aboorde, and set forward, arriving in the next I Will over against Lilybeum,
from whence the day following he sailed toward the City in the sight of all
his ennimies, which employed their whole diligence to let his entrance, but
he obtained the haven, fulfillyng his former promise. The other Consul
wondering greatly at his bold enterprise, prepared ten of the swiftest ships
to watch in the haven all night, in the which he him self remained for his
departure, commaundyng all the rest of the Navy to do accordingly. Then all the
ships that were in the entrance along both the sides, lay with rowers stretched
out, looking for his forth coming, supposing verily that he should not escape
them. But the Rhodian picked not out by night, neither at a corner, but at
middaye, and through the thick of his enemies, so well prepared, escaping
without all danger by his boldness and the swiftness of his Bark, and
having passed them a little, he was not content to escape free, but turned his
stem, and began to brag neither durst any of the company ve^ter upon him,
his Galey was so wonderful swift. The Rhodian as it were triu^phing over his
enemies, with one poor boat came to Carthage, declaring in the Senate al
things that he had either heard or seen: after that, many being encouraged
through his example took the same enterprise in hand, so that nothing was done
at Lilybeum, but incontinently it was known at Carthage. The Romans
maruellously grieved yt they should stiil be thus deluded with their enemies,
assayed to stoy up the entrance of the port, first casting in many of their
hulkes and carts fraught with sand into the mouth of the same, with infinite
other matters, but al was in vain, for the profou^d deepenesse thereof glutted
up, and the bubblyng of the water dispersed it into sundry places: yet in
continuance with great labor, there stood a great piece of their munition,
upon which one of the swiftest ships belonging to the Carthaginenses, light
with a great violence, and being taken by the Romans, and made ready at all
points, was retained in the port, watchyng for the coming of the rest, but
specially of the Rhodian, which by chance came thither by night, and entered
the haven with accustomed celeritie, but when he purposed to depart, the taken
ship pursued him so sharply, that he was almost taken first, he marvelled at
his swiftenesse: but viewyng her well, and perceiuyng that she was one of the
Carthaginean Quadriremes taken by the Romans, he trusted no more to the
swiftness of his ship, but began to encounter with his enemies: after that
it came to handstrokes, the Romans being both more in number and valianter
men, prised her without labor, and took the Rhodian. The Romans having gained
this prise, and joined her to the Quadrireme both well furnished of all
necessaries, kept them continnally in the entrance, prohibiting without any
difficulty the easy entrance of their enemies into Lilybeum. During this time
they besieged the town very sharply, overthrowing the walls of their
ordinance, so that Imilcon had no more hope to reedifie them, or to bar
the engines of his enemies. After these things had continued in this estate a
good while, there arose suddenly such a te^pestuous wind, yt all the ordinance
and other things were beaten and dashed together with the violence thereof, and
one of the high bourded toures blown over. A certain Grecian, a soldier of
those which were in the City, supposing this a time most expedient to destroy
the instruments of their adversaries, went and declared his devise to the
Captain, who allowing it very well, immediately having all things prepared,
issued out of the City, commanding them to fire their enemies ordinance in
three sundry places. The Soundiours having wrought their feate, immediately
the fire caught such hold with the violence of the winds (for the engines were
very drte, and had stood long against the Sun) yt they were soon consumed,
for as long as the wind blew, it was impossible that any man should rescue
them. The Romans were wonderfully aghast with this sudden chance, and wist not
what to do, being desolate and abandoned of al good fortune, many of them were
driven to the ground with gobbets and trunchions of timber that fell down,
many were blinded and almost smothered with the smoke, when they preased to
rescue the ordinance. The harder that the Romans were bestead with their
myschaunces, the more commodious was it for the Carthaginenses purpose: for
they not only beheld their enemies, and the ordinance flaming aloft, but
what soever they hurled at them, the wind carried it with maine violence to
their great damage and hurt. At the length the fire waxed so outrageous, that
the pillars and foundations of the Toures were set on fire, and the heads of
the rams were melted.

After this, the Consuls never intended to reedifie their engines, but environed
the town with ditches and hills, purposing to take their enemies, with a
slow siege, and not to remove their tents before they had overcome the hold.
The inhabitants having repaired their walls, shifted well with this their
lingering off.

When relation was made at Rome, of these things there was a Senate summoued, in
which they decreed to send a supplement of ten thousand men, because many were
destroyed at ye siege, and the navy almost desolate. This crew arrived first at
Messana, and from thence went by land to the camp at Lilybeu^. Now was Appius
Claudius entered into the Consulship, and the other returned to Rome, so that he
ruled the host at Lilybeum, and perceiving the vacant places to be supplied,
called the Captains together, and showing the^ that be thought that a very
expedient time to sail to Drepanum, and at an unawares to set upon Adherball,
suspecting no such thing: for not knowing of the new supplement arrived in
Scicilie, he supposed that the Romans were not able to conduct their fleet for
lack of men. After that the Consul had disclosed his mind, they allowed it
very well, and picked out the most actius Soldiers that were in the whole
army, and put them in the swiftest ship. The Soldiers were very iocund and
glad of this journey, not only because it was nyghe hand, but also for the
great booties which they hoped for.

Thus all things being prepared, they disankred, and sailed toward Drepanum,
about midnight unware to their enemies, so that in the dawning they drew nigh
the City. Adherball though at their first apperance he was somewhat daunted
with sudden fear, yet being recovered, and receiuyng by^ pristinate
boldness, he purposed to try the brittle destiny and fickle state of
Fortune, by gyuyng them battle rather than to be enclosed in an Angle, and
shamefully besieged of his ennimies. And therefore immediately he gathered
together a great company of rowers, called the mercinarie or hired Soldiers
out of the City, and gave unto them diverse admonitions, showing them also
that if* they did fight couragiousely, they should be sure of victory, but
if they fled like dastardly cowardes, and would not venture them selves, he
unbuckled to them the budget of mischeues that they should suffer being
besieged. After he had ended his oration, they all promised to show their
valiantness, exhorting him with a clamorous noise to defer the time no
longer, but immediately to set toward his ennimies. Adherball praising the
valiant courage of his soldiers, warned them to imbarke incontinentely,
commanding them diligentely, and with vigilant eyes to mark his ship, and
follow him merrily, then without lingering he marched forward, leading the ring
him self, according as he promised to encountre with the Romans. The Consul
espying his enemies (not according as he hoped, ready to run away, and save
them selves, but rather ardently desiring battle) commanded all his fleet to
retire, for part were entered, diverse even in the entrance, and many coming far
behind: when the foremost endeavored the^ selves at the commandment of the
general to return, there was such a hurly burly with beating and dashing
betwixt them that came back, and the other that were entering, that the whole
navy was in great peril, and many of them sore forfrushed. At the last being
brought in order with great pain and travail, the generals set them in array
along the bank with their stemmes toward the enemies. Then the Consul which
followed in the rearewarde, launching into the deep, kept the left wyng.
Whilst the Romans were in this trouble, Adherball with other five ships,
encompassed above their left wyng, turning the stemmes of his ships toward
them, keepyng him self at large on the sea, making signs that the other four
ships, which followed him, should do likewise, so they having prepared them
selves, hoysed up their streamers, and rushed in among ye Romans, which kept a
long the bank side for to suppress the Carthaginenses, as they should have
issued: but afterward it was a great hinderance and let to them selves, for
certain causes which I shall show. As soon as the two Nauies were met, the
Praetor making signs out of his ship to the other, the Romans were impaled
on either side, the skirmishe continued long and terrible without any
inequality, for there were the worthiest soldiers of both ye armies, yet the
Carthaginenses prevailed, not only because their ships were swifter and
their rowers more skillful, but by keepyng at large on the seas, where they
might scour abroad at their pleasure: or if it chanced any of them to be
intrapped with their ennimies, immediately launching into the deep, they were
at liberty, where if the Romans did pursue them, incontinentely they were
again coaped with an other company, to their great dangers, and often times the
losing of their ships. If any of their fellows were in danger, they easily
rescued them, ploddyng with their pumpes forward. Now the bank was a
marvelous hinderaunce to the Romans, being caught up in such a straicte
corner, that they could neither retire, when need did require, nor yet aid
those which were in danger, which are chief impediments in a conflict on the
sea. For it was impossible, that they should pass thorough the chief troop
of their ennimies, and resist their force, their ships being such slugges,
and their rowers so vnexperte. The Consul perceyuyng that he was like to take
the foil, and also seeing part of his ships sore beaten by the shore, and
diverse drowned, brought to utter despair, fled away before all the rest,
and other thirty ships, the which stood next unto him followed after. All
the rest of the number of four score and thirtene were taken by the
Carthaginenses, saving those which were perished. Adherbal was greatly praised
of the Carthaginenses, for this noble and worthy act, which through his hautie
courage and singular wisdom, had overthrown his enemies. But Appius Claudius
was greatly dispraised with many opprobrious words, for behauyng him self so
imprudently, and bringing the Romans in such danger. Finally, being rejected
from his Consulship was with great ignominy, reproach and dishonor judged to
death. The Romans although they acknowledged this their simple cut and sore
repulse, yet nothing obliuious of their pristinate valiantness, incontinently
prepared a new navy and fresh soldiers, sending them into Scicilie^ under
the governance of Lucius Iun^us, then Consul, commaundyng him to supporte
those, which besieged Lilybeum, with victuals and other necessaries. Iunius the
new Consul departed to Messana. with the three score beackte ships, where he
gathered all the Galleys which were in Scicilye, (saving those that lay at
Lilybeum,) which made a Navy of an hundredth and twenty sail, beside the
hulkes and carts prepared for carriage, amounting nighe to four score, of
which he delivered almost half, with certain other beakt vessels to the
Questor, commanding him to convey ye victuals to the camp, remaining still
him self to receive the others, which were coming from Messana, and the
grain out of the Country. About this time Adherbal sent the Roman captives
and the prises which he had taken, to Carthage, and appointed Carthalon ruler
over thirty sail, making him set toward his enemies, and warning his to
take all such ships as he could take, whole and unbroken, and to burn the
remnant. He him self followed after with three score ships. Carthalon
departing at night, very spedely and suddenly entered on the Roman navy, which
lay in yt haven of Lilybeum, and put them to their pinch, for the watch making
a sudden out cry and great uproar, Imilcon perceived the noise, and in the
dawning espying them present, called all his soldiers out of the city, and
invaded his enemies. The Romans being thus circumuented on every side, were in
great peril, but yt Carthagmean captain taking part of their ships, and
setting the rest on fire, departed from thence and sailed toward Heraclia, to
stop the viands which were coming that way to the Camp. As he was in this
exployte, his scoutes made relation to him, that there was great store of
ships at hand. He hearing these news made no delays, but set forward to
meet them, contemning the Romans for the great overthrow which he had lately
given them. The Romans also having knowledge of the Carthagienses by their
explorators, and perceiving the^ selves much their inferiors in naual co^bats,
drew to ye next bank, in which there was a hollow bending place by ye
ouershoting of the rocks, upon which the Romans stood, beating their Enemies
back with stones and slings. The Carthagmenses determined to keep the^ there,
whilst they revolted, but perceiving the nature of the place, and how the
Romans resisted them sharplyer than they looked for, taking certain of their
dromundaries, costed into a creek adjoining, where they determined to stop
their passage. While these things were in hand, yt Co^sul having dispatched his
business which he tarried for among ye Siracusans, and taken ye Promontarie of
Pachinus. passed toward Lilibeum, ignorant of the misfortune chanced to his
companio^s. But Carthalon having knowledge of his coming by his espials,
hasted toward him, very desirous to encounter with them far from ye other
company. But Lucius Iunius per ceiuing yt he was at hand, determined not to
encounter with him, being afraid of the great multitude, and he was so nigh,
that they could not fly back, wherefore he thruste into very dangerous
places, and retired to the next harbor, decreeing rather to suffer extreme
peril, than to permit the Roman Navy, to fall into their Enemies hands. The
Carthaginean Captain perceiving his fetch, desisted to pursue them, and kept
in a port just betwixt the Roman Nauies, supposing by that means to poulder
their passages. Within a few days after there began a wonderful tempest to
arise, which the Carthaginean Maryners espying (for they had great knowledge on
the seas, and were very expert in those places,) counsayled Carthalon to
expugnate the promo^tarie Pachinus, and then to eschew the immynent peril. He
following their counsel, escaped scotfree, and without danger, but the Roman
Navy being sore turmoyled with the violence of the tempest, by reason of their
vile harbors, was all torn and rent in pieces, of which great wrack nothing
was saved that ever profited after. The Romans being molested with these
miserable calamities, were now again inferior to the Carthaginenses, for being
plaged and dispitefully handled not long before at Drepanum, and now having
lost their whole navy, were glad to forsake the Sea, and hope for victory
only by land: of the contrary part, the Carthaginenses ruled on the seas
vnco^trolled, and hoped well to have a saying by ye land. Wherefore both the
Romans which were at Rome, and those at Lilybeum, though they were disturbed
with these contrary chances, yet intended to persist in the siege, wherefore
they sent from Rome such things as were necessaire, and the soldiers according
to their power, continued the camp. Lucius Iunius after he had lost the navy
by sinistre fortune, came to Lilybeum very heavy and careful, addicting him
self wholly to excogitate and imagine some strange invention with which he might
adnihilate or diminish the ignominy and slander wherewith his worship was
shadowed.

Wherefore not long after, by a slender occasion that was offered, he conquered
yt mount Erix by a policy. This Erix is a mount within Scicilie, depending
over the sea on that part which looks toward Italy, it stands betwixt
Drepanum and Panormus, but nygher to Panormus, it excedeth all the mountains
in Scicilie, saving Aetna, in largeness and breadth: in the top it has a
plain, in which stands the temple of Venus more magnificke, gorgious and
beautiful, than any other building in Scicilie. A little below the top, there
is a City of the same name, having marvelous difficult and scarce penetrable
passages. The Consul laid one Army in ye top, and another at the foot of this
mountain, in ye passage to Drepanum, hoping by that mean to keep both ye hill
and the City. Erix taken, ye Carthaginenses appointed Amilcar surnamed Barcas,
general over their navy, which with his whole power passed into Italy, where
he proyed and sacked the sea coasts. This was the eightenth year of this
war. Then having destroyed ye territories of the Locrines and Brutians, he
returned with his whole puissance into the frontiers of Panormus, where he took
a plot correspondent to the wars situate betwixt it and Rhegia, joining to the
Sea, and strongly defenced of nature, and passing fit for the defense of an
army. This hill is straightly encompassed with stepe rocks, having a plain on ye
very tippe, twelve miles in compass, very notable and a fertile soil, the air
is very pleasant and no noisome or venomous beasts able to abide in it,
certain great and huge rocks stand betwixt it and the land, in ye midst
there is a ground wart, which serves for ye watch toure, ye port is very
commodious for those which pass from Drepanum or Lilibeum, to Italy. There be
but only. 3. passages, which are very difficill to this place, two from the
land, and one from yt Sea. Amilcar pitched his tents there, as a man desperate
and of no hope, in the midst of his enemies, yet he permitted not his
adversaries to be in quiet, but often times went by Sea, and wasted the coasts
of Italye, to Cumara, and in the end brought his Army by land, where he
encamped before Panormus, but eight hundredth pases distante from the Romans,
remaining there three years, during which time he did many notable acts, to
tedious to rehearse particularly. The Romans as is showed before, lying in two
parts, one company at the top, another at the foot of Erix, Adherbal by
pollycie won the Town which stood on the hill side, betwixt the Roman
Armies, by which chance the Romans which lay on the top, were besieged and
sore molested with the Carthaginenses, and they them selves likewise keeping the
Town, were as sore beset with the two Armies, having but one entrance, and
that very strait for the conueyance of victuals into the Town. Thus both the
parts persisting in their obstinacy and stubbernesse, suffered diverse
punishments, grievous tortours, and extreme calamyties. When the war in this
manner had been long protracte, during which time Amilcar plaged the Italyans,
often times by water, for they almost for the space of fiftene years, had
abstained from the Naual war, but now perceiving that the war could not
otherwise be ended, they were moved to prepare a new navy. And because their
treasury was sore impouerished, the private Citizens according to their
ability, disbursed the money, diverse of them making one Quinquereme amongst
them. Thus were the people of Rome affected to further their wars, and
mayntaine the Glory of their Empire, building two hundredth ships, like to the
Rhodians, which as I showed before, was taken at Lilibeum. Lucius Lutacius was
appointed ruler over this army, and sent against the Carthaginenses, in the
next spring, which suddenly entering Scicilie with his fleet, at the first
arrival obtained the port of Drepanum, and the other about Lilibeum. The
Carthaginean ships quaking for fear, flocked about their Captain, but
Lutacius preparing engines, ordinance, and instruments, endeavored him self to
expugnate the City: And perceiving how the Carthagmean Navy was at hand, he
remembered their old overthrows, and considering with him self of what
effect and force it was, to be expert on the water, with the great emolumente
thereof, he spente not the time slouthfully, neither in luskish loytering, but
continually exercised his rowers and Mariners, suffering none to lie idle: by
which their diligence it came to pass, that within small tract of time, they
were very expert and apt for the naual war. The Carthaginenses having
knowledge of their presence, made ready their fleet, fraighting it with corn
and other necessaries, to the sustentation of them which besieged Erix. Hanno
was appointed Captain of these ships, and departed immediately to
Hi^ron^sum, from thence to the tents of Amilcar, vndiscryed of his enemies,
preparing there to disloade and deliver the victuals. Lutacius having
knowledge of their coming, misdeeming their counsel (for it was not hard to
conjecture) picked out ye most hardy fellows of the whole Army, and went to
Egusa, being not far distaunt from Lilybeum, where he exhorted and incoraged
his Soldiers as the time permitted, commanding them to make ready against
the next morning, to give battle to the Enymies. The next day in the
morning, Lutacius very well perceiving how the wind served his Enemies at
will, and was contrary to him, also seeing the Sea stormy and boisterous, douted
what was best to do. Yet afterward considering if he coped with them whilst
the storm endured, that he should only match with Hanno and the ships
pestered with traficke, but if he prolonged and tarried until the sea were
calm and the ships discharged, that he should not only have to do with a
company of quick and light soldiers, chosen out of the whole army, but also
with Amilcar, who was greatly feared at that present: considering these things,
though the waters were both boisterous and against him, he determined to
encounter with his Enemies, coming with full sails against the
Carthaginenses, ready to assail them. They perceiving their entrance to be
stopped by the Romans, having likewise their fleet ready for battle, let
down their sails, and set toward their Enemies, encountering either other
with valiant courages: but as this conflict differed in all points from that at
Drepanum, so likewise, there chanced a contrary end. The Roman fleet was
passing swift, they had vnloded all things, saving necessaries for the wars
their rowers had been long exercised, which made them plyant and agreeable to
battle, they had also the chosen and best Soldiers of their whole army. But
the Carthaginenses were troubled otherwise, their ships were fraighted, which
made them unfit for the battle, their rowers were vnpicked fellows,
altogether rude and without knowledge in the wars, their soldiers were new
and not acquainted with dangers, for they had not regard to the waters, so
much as they were accustomed, supposing the Romans would never have meddled
with the Seas, through which their sluggishnesse and secure living, as soon as
they encountered, they had the foil, fifty of their ships were frushed and
souncke, seventy taken full fraughted, the rest by a sudden change of wind,
laued them selves by flying to Hieronesum. After this battle the Consul with
all his Navy returned to Lilibeum, where he divided the spoil and captives,
amongst his soldiers. There were taken above ten thousand Carthaginenses,
beside those which perished in the conflicte. The Africans though they were
very prompt, and given to the wars, yet after this terrible overthrow, they
were utterly discoraged for diverse causes, for they were not able toayde those
in Scicilie with necessaries, their navy being lost, and the Romans ruling
every corner of the seas, yet they took it for a heinous offense, to forsake
their worthy Soldiers: they had no worthy Captains to send against their
Enemies. Waying these things, they dispatched an ambassador, with all convenient
speed to Amilcar, auctorysing him to do what he thought best, for the
preservation of their country. Amilcar performed the office of a politic and
worthy captain, for as long as there was any hope of recovering their honor,
he never eschewed any travail or danger, but with great industry and labor
sought it forth: he never ceased more than his adversaries to restore their
worship, and when he perceived there was no more hope of recovering ye same,
like a moderate and wise man he gave place for ye time, sending ambassadors to
the Consul to entreat for peace. And verily it is no less the toke^ of a good
and expert general, as well to mark ye time in which he must forbear his
Enemies, as to know what time is expedient to assail them. Neither did
Lutacius the Consul contemn or reject their request, acknowledging yt trouble,
peril, and danger yt the Romans were vexed with all, by reason of the
continual wars. So at the length peace was taken upon these conditions.
First if it pleased ye Senate and people of Rome. Secondaryly that the
Carthaginenses should depart quite out of Scicilye, and never after that to war
against Hyeron, neither to molest the Syracusans, or any of their friends.
Thirdly that they should dismiss and send home all the captives without
ransom. Fourthly, that they should pay within twenty years space to the
Romans, two thousand and two hundredth talentes of tried and pure money.

When these conditions and agreements were sent to Rome, they would not ratify
them, but sent ten Commissioners with the common consent, which coming into
Scicilie, changed the former pactions in manner nothing at all, but taking
shorter days for paying of the money, adding thereunto a thousand talents.
Also that they should not only depart quite out of Scicilye, but out of all the
Islands betwixt it, and Italye. According to this prescript order was the
first war finished, that the Romans had with the Carthaginenses for the
principality of Scicilie. It endured four and twenty year without
intermissio^ or peace. It was the lo^gest war and greatest that ever I heard
of, in which they fought at one meeting with the number of five hundredth
Quinqueremes, and above, of either side. Another time with few baiting of seven
hundredth by diverse other noble conflicts worthy to be written of, which I
pass by and leave untouched. The Romans lost in that war seven hundredth
Quinqueremes biside those which were drowned and broken: the Carthaginenses
about five hundredth. So that they which before wondered at the armies, fleetes,
and naual wars of Antigonus, and Ptolomeus, after this betwixt the Romans and
the Carthaginenses counted them as trifles and nothing. For if any consisider
ye great difference betwixt Quinqueremes, and those Trieremes which the Persians
used against the Grecians, and the Lacedemoni^ns against the Atheninans, verily
he shall well understand that there was never sorer conflictes, nor greater
armies on the seas, which is a manifest probation of those things that I spoke
of in the beginning, that the Romans, neither by fortune nor chance as the
Grecians suppose, obtained such honor and ample dominions, that in continuance
they enjoyed the most part of the world, but by their propre virtue,
prowess and hautie courages: yet peradventure there are some which doubt what
the cause is, seeing the Romans now excel both by land and water more than they
did at that time (having also dominion over the most part of the world) are
not able to build so many shyps, or make such a Navy at one time. But this
thing shall be plainly declared when I come to entreat of the state, manners and
fashions of their common wealth. But to speak of them now should neither be
profitable or commodious to the readers of this my history, for the things
being large, would require a long digression. And (yet unto this day that I
may speak as I think) they are drowned in the gulf of oblivion thorough their
default which wrote ye histories. For part wist not what things they should
write, other though they knew what to write, yet they were obscure, in penning
them so intricately, yt their works were unprofitable, and for no use. Verily if
there be any which atte^tiuely note this war, he shall perceive that these.
ij. worthy cities were equiuale^t at ye beginning in all points, they both burned
with one fire, both were desirous of renoume, both were of like hautie corages.
The Roman soldiers were more excellent and active fellows. But Amilcar
surnamed Barcas, the Carthaginea^ captain and father of Annibal, which after
fought against ye Romans, was in ferior to no man in valiantness and wisdom.
After they had taken truce, they had either like fortune: for the Romans began
to war against the Faliscians, but within a short time having subdued their
City, the wars brake up, and they lived in peace.

Thus ends the wars betwixt the Romans and the Carthaginenses, for the
principality of Scicilie and the Samnites.

The second part of Polybius his first Book, intreatyng of the wars betwixt
the Carthaginenses and their hired Soldiers.
AFter that peace was concluded with the Romans, the Car thaginenses were sore
oppressed with intestine hostility, moved by sundry of the Africanes their
Countrymen, they were also sore molested by the Numidians, and other
neighbors adjacent, which almost vanquished them, so that they were constrained
to fight, not only for them selves, for their province, for their native soil
and laws, but for their liberty, and the safegarde of their children. Which
bataile because it is worthy of remembrance, I shall show it compendiously as
I purposed in the beginning: for how cruel, despitefull and deadly a war it
was, which every man calls bloody and detestable, any man may gather by the
facts done in his time. Here shall plainly be showed how vigilant and circum
spect captains ought to be, how they ought to provide for afterclappes, also
what difference it is to make war with rude and barbarous nations ignorant in
the law of arms, and those which be civil and know good manners. Finally by
showing this battle, the fountain and original cause shall be apparaunt why
Anniball made war with the Romans, which because it was not only obscure to
such as have written histories of it, but also unto them which were there
present (for in battle there falls many secret chau^ces) I thought it
needful to show the verity to the studious readers of this my work. Amilcar
having concluded peace with the Romans, disancored and sailed from Erix to
Lilybeum, where he gave up his rule, and delivered the army to Gesto, which
was captain there, to tra^sport them into Africa, which fearing some evil to
chance amongst such a multitude as they were, especially being behind with
their wages, which the treasure house was not able to discharge, it was so sore
impouerished, he politikely provided that they should not al go together, but in
diverse companies, to the end that they might be the better dispatched,
suffering one company to depart home before he dismissed an other. But the
Carthaginenses partly through negligence, partly through poverty, did not
only not dispatch them, but commanded them to remain in ye city, until their
fellows came, that they might al receue their wages together, during which time
ye soldiers did very much hurt in the city both by day and night, and the
multitude augmented so fast, that their factes were intolerable. Then the
citizens sent for their Captains, desiring them to conueye the Soldiers to
Sicca, and to remain there until the rest of the army were come into Africa,
commau^ding certain money to be distributed particularly amongst them, that
they might suffer more patiently the protracting of the time. The generals
obeyed their commandment, incontinently beginning to lead forth the
Soldiers. They according as they had done before, would have left their
carriage and other impediments in the City, thynkyng to return for their
wages. But the Carthaginenses being afraid, that if they should grant them
that liberty, part would tarry with their wives, other for love of their
children, would either not depart, or return incontinently, and so they to
remain in as evil a case. Wherefore they drove them out by violence, with all
their baggage. When the Soldiers were in Sicca, they lived lice^ciously, and in
drousy idleness (which are most pernicious in an host, and springs of
rebellion) many of the^ asking their wages with proud boasts, and much more
they did before, being mindful of the great gifts promised by their captains
when they exhorted them to battle, so that now they looked for ample
rewards beside their stipends: but their opinion was frustrate, for as soon
as all the company were congregated in Sicca, Hanno the Carthaginean Praetor
was sent unto them, not only without the gifts which they looked, for but also
talked very much of the scarcity in the treasure house, requiring them to
remit part of their wages. The multitude moved with these words began a great
uproar and a clamorous noise. There was a great contention and debate (and no
wonder, considering the company and their diverse languages) for the
Carthaginenses had gathered an army of sundry foraine nations, and partly not
without a cause, for the army could not conspire any thing amongst them
selves for the variety of their speeches, and were more obedient at the
commandment of the general. But if there chanced at any time either
sedition or insurrection in the army, no one man could quench it, for the
barbarous clounes would not be qualified, and being once angered, the brainsick
fools waxed intractable continually outragyng like brutishe beasts without
all measure, as they did at that present: there was in the army Spaniards,
Frenchmen, Ligurians, Baliarians, and a great troop of Grecians, diverse
vagabondes of Africa, with innumerable roges, and fugitives: for which cause it
was impossible that one man should rule them all. The Praetor understood not al
their la^guages, and to have many speakers unto them, it was counted mere
fooilshnesse: wherefore only their captains must needs do it, so that Hanno
labored in vain: for some of them understood not the commandment of their
general: an other company bruted it clean contrariwise, some through
ignorance, other of a set purpose and malice, so that nothing was in the host
but wrath, anger and ruffling up and down with many mischeuous and wicked
factes. Amongst other things they murmured and complained, because none of
the Captains under whom they had warred in Scicilie, which promised them the
great rewards, were sent to them, and at the length in great rage and anger
they fell to their weapons, nothing regarding Hanno, or the other captains: and
setting toward Carthage, they encamped at Tunes, five miles distaunt from the
City. They were in number above twenty thousand. Then the Carthaginenses
began to have respect to the^ selves. Then they began to confess their
folishnesse when there was no way to escape ye immine^t danger: for they were far
ouersene to retain such a number of hired soldiers in one place, their wars
finished: and they played no less the idiots, when they detained not their
wives and children, with the other traficke in the City to serve for hostages,
if need required. But now being afraid of the great multitude, they
pretermitted nothing which they thought of effect to mitigate their fury,
sending corn and other victuals into their tents to take at their own price:
and diverse ambassadors were sent unto them out of the Senate house. But the
vagabonds daily waxed crouser, perceyuyng the Carthaginenses fearful, also
considering how they had been exercised in the Scicilian wars, and the force of
the citizens to be very small, where before they required but their wages, now
they craved recompense, for their horses were slain in the wars, and being
not satisfied with these requests, they challenged the grain of many years
ensuing to be due unto them, and such a price as never was heard of before that
day, immediately to be paid for it, daily excogitating new devises, to excitate
the Citizens to battle.

The most rascal and seditious knaves were of greatest authority in ye army.
The Carthaginenses condescending to their dema^ds, appointed that al things in
controversy betwixt them, should be decreed by the arbitrament of some one
that had been their captain in Scicilie. They favored not Amilcar Barcas,
because he came not forth to them in this troublesome time, and had given over
before willingly the captainshyp, but the whole company trusted much in
Gesto, because he was their captain in Scicilie, and had been very courteous
toward them, but especially in their transportation to Africa, so they decreed
to put all things to his dermination. Gesto incontinently disancoring, with
certain money, as soon as he arrived at Tunes, called the Prefects together,
commanding every nation to be separate and gathered together. Then he began to
blame them for their misdemeanoure, gyuing certain exhortatio^s for the time
present, wishyng them after that (with a long oration) to worship, love, favor
and have the Carthaginenses in estimation, in whose service they had been so
long time, persuading and exhorting them to be content with their wages,
determyning to distribute it by nations.

There was in the host a certain Campane, which being a servant, fled out of
Scicilie from the Romans to the Carthaginenses, a man of great strength and
courage in battle, named Spendius: This fellow was afraid, if peace should be
concluded with the Carthaginenses, that his master would catch him, and handle
him according to the Roman laws, wherefore he labored with tooth and nail to
kindle dissension, wishing rather sedition than quietness, war than peace.
There was also an African named Matho, which was a freeman, and had been in
the Scicilian wars for the Carthaginenses, yet he feared punishment,
because he was chief of the sedition. This Companion calling the Africanes
together, counseled them to be ware, for without doubt when the other
soldiers had received their wages, and were gone, he said that the
Carthaginenses would wreake them selves of the Libians, being informed that
they were chief mouers of rebellion: And for this cause he wished them to take
heed of them selves. The multitude being moved with these words, and because
Gesto made only mention of their wages, speaking nothing of recompense for
their horses, neither of the required grain, they gathered into one place to
determine of the matter. Spendius and Matho inueyed sore against Gesto, and ye
other Carthagine^ses, and the co^panysone agreed to their wicked purpose, so yt
if any counseled them otherwise, they never regarded whether it tended to the
same end or no, but immediately stoned him to death. After this manner there were
many not only captains, but also private me^ which lost their lives, and
nothing was heard in this tumulte thoroughe the whole host, but cast cast:
and the vagabunds raged a great deal more, being new risen from supper well
tippled, so that if this word Cast, chanced once to be pronounced, the stones
were so ratled in every corner, that there was no place to escape by.

Thus when no man durst resist their devise, Spendius and Matho were
incontinently with the whole consent elect capitains. Gesto although he
perceived their unbridled boldness and treason, yet he endeavored himself
continually to prefer the profit of his country before all other things,
and seeing their wild wilfulness daily to increase, and the danger like to
ensue to the Carthaginenses, and the peril that he himself was in, determined
to try all ways, one while calling the chief of the conspiration, another
time the bands particularly, endeavoring himself to qualify them by pleasant
words and fair promises, but they being frustrate of the corn, persisted in
requiring it, as done unto them.

Gesto granted that it should be delivered them willingly, if they would yield
Matho unto him, at which words they fell into such a frenzy, that incontine^tly
they spoiled him of all ye money brought to pay them, taking him and the other
Carthaginenses there present. Matho and Spendius, rulers of these rascals,
intended to commit some heinous offense, by which they might move the Citizens
sooner to battle, wherefore they highly extolled the insolency of the
soldiers, taking not only the money, but the males and ferdels, with the
other cariages from the Carthaginenses: and after they had blustered out many
opprobrious taunts and contumelious words against Gesto and his companions,
commanding them to be cast in bonds, they began to rage and wax cruel, (so
that such rebellion was never heard of before) proclayming open war against
the Carthaginenses. For these causes and according to this order, began that
war which is called the African battle. Matho and Spendius, having committed
these factes before mentioned, sent pursiuants through out Africa, inuiting
them to licentious liberty, and to aid them against the outrageous tiranie
of the Carthaginenses. The Libians condiscending to this their cruel
conspiracy, and supporting them with victuals and other necessaries
abundantly, the Captains divided the Army betwixt them, marching with the one
part to the siege Vtica, and with the other to expugnat Hippona, because these
two Cities would not agree to yt treason. The Carthaginenses which before time
were sustained by husba^drie and accustomed to stuff their treasury with the
tributs gathered in Africa, also to defend them selves with hiered Soldiers,
now were not only destytute of these patrons, but greatly infested with them,
so that being suppressed with so many sundry calamities at one time, they were
in dout which way to turn the^, and they were so much the greuouser, chauncing
at unawares: for after they had been vexed with long wars in Scicilie, and
concluded a league with the Romans, they hoped to soommer and keep holydaie,
thinking them selves mortized in a firm rock, but it chanced clean
contrary, for there pushed out an other plague more cruel and mortal than the
other. They fought with the Romans for the domination of Scicilie, but now they
were compelled to plye the box for their own safegarde, their children,
country, and native soil, to which they neither had armor, weapons, navy, or
other preparance, they were brought to such an ebb by the Romans. Now they
looked for no trybute, neither hoped for any aid or succor from their
friends, fautors, or allies. Then they perceived what difference there was
betwixt extreme hostility and intestine dissension, of which domestical
discord, they them selves were the source and spring, for in ye former war,
supposing the^ to have just causes, they were too proud and insolent,
exacting much of the Africans, bereuing them of half their corn, and doubling
their tributes, neither would they redress any of these faults which they
committed through ignorance, bragging them selves of their mastershippes, not
because they had behaved them selves honestly, and dealt mercifully in their
offices, but for exaggerating and heaping up great mowes of money in the
treasure, house for which they had sore pilled the co^minaltie, imitating Hanno
which I spoke of before, which were causes that the people of Africa, not only
with small entreating, but at a beck agreed to the rebellion, for the women
which before time had seen their husbands and children kept in seruitute and
bondage, because the tributes were unpaid, gathered together in every city,
concealing nothing of the goods which was left them, and willingly brought
their attire and other ornaments (a thing which might be thought incredible) to
pay the Soldiers, by which means Matho and Spendius had such foison and
plenty, that not only they discharged all such things as they promised in the
beginning of the conspiracy, but also reserved plenty for afterclaps: by
which we may learn to provide, not only for time present, but also for the
time to come. The Carthaginenses though they were hemmed in on every side with
these great calamyties, yet were they not altogether drowned in despair, but
as the time permitted, hiered new soldiers, and made Hanno Captain over them.
Then the youth of the City began to arm them selves, and exercise riding, the
Citizens began to reedifie and botch up their old barks. In the mean time
Matho and Spendius with three score and ten thousand armed men, which were
come to them out of Africa, having the Army divided (as I showed before)
besieged Hippona: Yet they had not brought all their Army from the tents at
Tunes, for which cause the Carthaginenses were clean excluded out of Africa.
Carthage is situate on a promontarie stretching toward the sea, and resembles
an Island, saving that it joins to Africa: by land on the one side the City
it self is environed partly with the sea, and partly with motes: the piece of
ground that joins it to Africa is three miles in breadth. Vtica is not far
distant from that angle which vergeth into ye sea: on the other part beyond
the ditches stands Tunes, so that the soldiers having one part of their
army there, and an other at Vtica, excluded the Carthaginenses out of Africa,
and issued often times both by night and day, setting the City in great danger.

While they were in doing these things, Hanno prepared diligently al things
appertaining to the war (for he was a very witty man and full of policies in
such devises) sone after he set toward his Enemies, where by the evil
descerning of time he showed a point of an inexpert Captain.

After his coming to Vtica, at the first onset he put his enemies to flight,
being afraid of the Elephantes, but shortly after he brought them which he
came to aid, into greater danger than ever they were tofore, for when he
had placed his ordinance and other engines belonging to war, as darts,
quarelcasters, brakes, in his tents before Vtica, he encountered with his
Enemies, which being unable to resist the Elephantes, after great slaughter
fled into a hill adjacent, which was full of Trees and other bwilde. Then
Hanno which had been only accustomed before yt time to war against ye
Numidians, who once beginning to fly, never stay or look back for the space
of three days, left to pursue his Enemies, as though he had won ye field,
where he regarding nothing, lived riottously. But his adversaries trained up
under Amilcar in Scicilie, where they often times had both fled and pursued
their enemies, in one day perceiving him to be entered into the City and lie
there uncircumspectly, as though he had conquered them, invaded his tents,
where they killed many of his Soldiers, chasing the rest with great ignominy
and slander into the town, carrying away his engines and munitions without
co^tradiction. But the incircumspectnesse of Hanno hindered not the
Carthaginenses only at this time, but also within a few days after, when his
enemies pitched their Tents at Sorza, where having good opportunity and sit
time in which he might have vanquished them, (for twice after they were
imbattayled, they fell at contention amongst them selves,) yet he through his
sluggish idleness pretermitted both those occasions. The Carthaginenses
perceiving the imprudencie of Hanno about such affairs, chose Amilcar Captain
of their army again, delivering unto him three score and ten Elephantes, with
the hired soldiers and vagabonds, also the horsemen and footmen of the City,
so that ye whole number amounted to ten thousand men. Amilcar incontinently
setting forewarde, with his worthy prowess, at one time both discoraged his
enemies, and delivered Vtica, showing him self worthy of the praises given to
him for his former acts, and acquiting him self very well of the expection
which the people conceived of him. His worthiness and policy was known first
in this manner. The Promontarie in which Carthage is situate, joins to ye
rest of Africa, with a very sharp ridge, full of holes and bushes, so that the
passage is very difficill and made with handy labor. Matho kept all the hills
above the passage, very circumspectly, and the river Machera being of profounde
vastness and swifte course runs by it, and can not be passed, but over one
bridge, on which bridge there stands a town called Sephira likewise under
the regiment of Matho, so that the passage into Africa was not only stopped to
the Carthaginean Army, but to every private man. Amilcar pondering these things
circumspectly, endeavored him self by all means to inuente some way by the
which he might pass into Africa with his army, and at the length used this
policy, understanding how the heads of this for named river, were so stopte
with certain winds, that the vaste profoundnesse thereof, was turned to
shalow, at which time, he supposed best to conueie his army. Making no man
privy to this his devise, he houered to epsy opportunity, which once offered,
he set forward in ye night time with his soldiers vndescried, and conveyed
them over yt river. In the morning not only his enemies, but the Citizens were
astonyed at his wonderful passage. Then he marched foreward to them which kept
Sephira. But Spendius perceiving that he had conveyed over his Army with all
his retinue, immediately set forward to aid his companions. There were at
Sephira. x. thousand men, and at Vtica, about xv. thousand, so they supposed
that they might at pleasure impale the Carthaginenses if they both marched
forward at one time, and incountered with them ye one company before and the
other behind, wherefore encouraging their company they set forward toward
Amilcar, which failed not of his journey, placing his Elephants in the first
front, then his horsemen and lightest footmen, setting ye legion soldiers in
ye rearewarde, and perceiving his enemies to be very earnest, commanded yt
inco^tine^tly the whole order of ye battle should be changed, so they which
stood in ye fore ward should return as though they would flee, and come into
the hinmost part, likewise they which were in the rearewarde traversing about,
should enter into ye for most rampire, at which sight the Libeans being ready to
invade them on both parts, supposing them to be afraid and ready to run
away, incontinently brake their order, and came hurling upon them, and to handy
strokes, but perceiving the horsemen ready to resist, and the residue of the
army to assail them in warlike order, they were so astonyed with the
rareness thereof, that scattering them selves abroad, they were compelled to
flee, many were slain of the legion soldiers, while they invaded the sides of
the battle, and diverse were ouerrunne by the Elephantes and horsemen, so that
there was six thousand Libians slain, and two thousand taken in this
combat, the rest fled, some to Sephira, and many to the Camp by V^^ca.
Amilcar after this triumph, pursued those which escaped into Sephira, winning
ye Town at the first assalte: all the Soldiers fled to Tunes, from thence he
passed through the province, receiving many of the towns which revolted
favorably, and expugnate many by force of arms, which caused the
Carthaginenses, which of late had no hope of good fortune or liberty, to
receive their pristinate courage and boldness. Matho in this time besieged
Hippona, persuading Spendius and Autoricus, Captains of the Frenchmen, to
pursue their Enemies, counselling them to eschew ye plains for fear of the
Elephantes, and keep them selves continually in the sides of the mountains and
in addible ways, and never to keep far distant from him, for many
inconveniences that might ensue: he also solicitated the Numidians and Libians
to rebellion, intising the^ with many sugared words to assist him, and not to
pertermit such an opportunity, in which they might dyliuer Africa from bondage
and servitude. Then Spendius with. vj. thousand old seruitours picked from
amongst the whole host at Tunes encamped by ye hill sides, not far distant
from his enemies: he had also under his conduct, two thousand Frenchmen
belonging to Antoricus, for the rest were revolted to the Romans at ye siege
of Erix in Scicilie. At this present Amilcar with his Army remained in a
plain, environed with mountains on every side, and there repaired to Spendius
great crewes of the Numidians, and troops of the Africans, so that ye
Carthaginenses were hemmed in with three great hosts of their enemies, on ye
fore side with ye Africans, in ye diametre with the Numidians, on ye other side
wc Spendius, which brought Amilcar into a great perplexity, as one desolute
and aba^doned of al liberty. There was at that present amongst the Numidians,
one Nerua, a man disce^ded of a honorable and noble progeny, both worthy and
valiant in battle, which had always intierly affected ye Carthaginenses, and
then especially rapte with the nobleness of Amilcar, which supposing that a
time most expedient to obtain his favor, approached to his tents, having in
his company about a hundredth Numidians, and being approached nighe his
pauilion, stayed boldly beckning with his hand, and signifying yt he would
speak with him. Amilcar wondering at his audacitie, sent one forth unto him,
whom Nerua advertised that he would commen with his captain. Amilcar yet in
dout and not rashely crediting his words, stood still, but Nerua incontinently
delivering his horse and spear to a Numidian that stood by, approached to
Amilcar. The whole army wondered to see such boldness in one man, and
beginning to disclose his mind, showed how earnestly he had been always
affected toward ye Carthaginenses, and that above all things he required ye
amity of Amilcar, for which causes he came at that present to submit him
self, promising that he would be pressed and ready to aid him without all
deceipte or guile, to ye uttermost of his power. Amilcar perceiving his entier
affection toward him, reioised wonderfully, as well for the hautie courage
that he saw in the young man, by coming to him so stoutly, as for the
simplicity and plainness of his words, not mixte with fraud or guile, not
only admitting him to his frendeship, but affirming if he would persist
faithful and true toward the Carthaginenses, that he should have his Daughter
in marriage. After their communication was finished, Nerua returned to his
soldiers, and in the next morning came to Amilcar, with two thousand
Numidians, which were under his retinue, so that this crew of men being
revolted to the Carthaginenses, Amilcar thought him self able to match with
his enemies. Spendius likewise having his army stre^gthned by the coming of
the Numidians, and Africanes, conducted them into a plain place, and
immediately encountered his ennimies, where was a terrible and cruel fight: but
after long contention, by the multitude of their elephants and the prowess of
Nerua, the Carthaginenses obtained the victory. Then Antoricus and Spendius
being desolate and abandoned of all comfort, fled away. There were slain in
that combat about ten thousand men, and four thousand taken.

After this victory Amilcar granted pardon and freedom to all those which
would remain and be his soldiers, delivering them the armor of those, which
were slain, the rest he called unto him, persuading them neither to rebel or
move war against the Carthaginenses, remitting al such offenses as they had
committed until that time, without punishment, licencing them that would to
return to their countries. About this time the hired soldiers that kept
Sardinia, imitating Matho and Spendius, invaded all the Carthaginenses
inhabiting the I Will, and soon after leading Bostarus and the other into a hold,
beheaded them. Then was Hanno sent to be a captain there with a fresh band of
men, which immediately after conspired against him with the old soldiers, and
made him commense in a Tyburne tippet.

After that, fearyng to suffer condign punishment for their facinorous facts,
murdered all the Carthaginenses, within the I Will, taking the towns and cities
into their own hands, inhabityng them until such time as there arose a
contention betwixt the Sardinians and them, at which time they were expelled
and fled into Italy. After this manner was Sardinia alienate from the
Carthaginenses, well replenished with men, abounding in foison and plenty of
grain, of the which because many have written before me, I supposed it not
necessary to renouate them, being known to all men. Matho and Spendius with
Antoricus, captain of the Frenchemen, fearing least the clemency of
Amilcar, in dismissing the captives, should prevail and entice the Libians,
with the other hired soldiers from them, endeavored them selves to invent some
facinorous and detestable act, by which they might alienate and withdraw the
minds of the multitude from the Carthaginenses, commaundyng a common convent
and general meetyng to be proclaimed. As soon as the multitude was gathered
together, they called a pursiuant with letters, as though he had been presently
sent out of Sardinia to them The tenure of the letters was, that Gesto, and
the other Captives should be kept circumspectely, because there were diverse in
the host, which for to obtain the Carthaginenses favor intended to deliver
them.

Spendius having feigned this occasion, did exhort the Souldioures not to
have much confidence in the feigned elemencie of Amilcar, for dismissyng the
captives without punishment, saying he set them not at liberty to save them,
but by that policy to obtein the residue, and revenge him on the whole
multitude: he also exhorted them that they should give vigila^t watch to keep
Gesto, and ye other captives, for if they once escaped, he declared how the
enemies would have them in derision and contempt, with many other
inconveniences that would ensue, saying they might be well assured, if that
such an excellent and worthy captain, being so expert in the wars, should
escape from them thorough their negligence and misdemeanor, that he would be
their mortal enemy. As he was yet speaking these words, there came an other
poast from Tunes, with letters, conteinyng semblable matter, which being red in
the multitude, Antoricus captain of the Frenchemen arose up, declaring how he
had invented a policy by which they should be sure from their enemies, and it
was that all the confidence they had in the Carthaginenses, should be utterly
extinguished, ratifying that so long as they trusted to their gentleness and
mercy, there could be no trusty soldiers in the army, for which cause he
thought it most expedient that they should be best credited and only heard
which invented most cruel torments, against the Carthaginenses, and who
soever persuaded them otherwise, he thought to be judged enemies and traitors.
When he had spoken these words, he exhorted and persuaded that Gesto and the
other captives with all the rest of the Carthaginenses which should be taken
after that day, might be put to most villainous and cruel death. This his
oration was of great effect amongst the multitude, because the most part
understood him: for he was of such continuance in the wars, that he spoke the
Africanes language, in which most part had knowledge by continuance of this
war, so that the Soldiers commended his doing maruellously. Then flocked out
many plumpes of every Nation, and consulting amongst themselves, thought it
best that these cruel punishementes should be put in practice, especially upon
Gesto, which had been very beneficial to them before that time. There was such
a cacklyng amongst them, blabberyng in strange language, that none understood
it, but being bruted once in the host, how they intended to canuaise ye
Carthaginenses so cruelly, a certain sedi tious person called Geta, being there
present, cried out alowde (Cast.) At which word the whole army made ye stones
to rattle about them, and drew out their own country men, kinsfolks and
neighbors all to scorched, as though they had been torn with wild beasts.
Thus they brought forth Gesto, with the other Captives, to the number of seven
hundredth, beginning with him, which a little before they chose to be their
arbiter, as one, to whom they were most bound, cutting of their hands,
tearyng their members, and in the end their thighs being all forfrushed, cast
them into a bushie plot, not altogether dead. The Carthaginenses having
knowledge of the cruelty showed to their Citizens, wist not what they should
do, but with great grief and pensiveness, bewailed the despituous death and
cruel torments they sustained. Then they sent ambassadors to Amilcar and Hanno,
desiring them not to suffer the cruelty showed then to their Citizens to be
unrevenged, willing them to send a Harolde to their malicious enemies for to
obtain their bodies to be enterred: but their carcases were not only denied,
but also warnyng given to send no more Haroldes, for if they did, they
should also drink of the same whippe, saying, they had decreed by the common
consent, and also would ratifye it, that as many of the Carthaginenses as
they could catch, should be cruelly put to death, and that of their
confederates and mates they would cut of, and keep the hands, for good
abearaunce, and so dismiss them to Carthage, which order they observed
diligently afterward, so that if any consider these things attentively, he may
boldly affirm, that not only in the bodies of men are certain maladies
incurable, but also in their minds. For as a botche if you lay any healyng
medicine to cure it, when it begins to feel the operation and virtue of the
medicine, increases, likewise if you neglect and take no regard of it, it
augmenteth much more of the propre nature, neither desisteth it til such time
as the whole body be corrupt: semblable restoration and corruptions chance to
the mind: so that no other brute beast is made more cruel, fierce or
outrageous, neither more wild or bestial than a man if you grant him liberty
and freedom: if you handle him beningly or gently he thinks you go about to
deceive him, so that you are worse trusted for your benefit bestowed:
contrariwise if you take against him, there is nothing so hurtful or noisome,
which he will not assay, supposyng it to turn to his great praise, while he
slides into such brutishenesse, that he clean forsakes the Nature of a man,
which has the beginning of corrupt manners and sinistre education in the
nonage. To this also there chances many augmentations afterward, but the
especial captains are covetousness and cruelty, which vices flourished
plentifully at that present, both in the multitude and generals.

While this brewing was yet in tapping, Amilcar sent for Hanno, the other
Carthaginean captain, supposing yt armies being knit together to end the war
sooner, and all the prisoners which he had either there, or caughte
afterward, he cast to be devoured of the Elephantes, perceiuyng the rebellion
should only be extinguished by utter subversion of his enemies. Now the
Carthaginenses were in good hope, and feared not the wars, but fortune altered
suddenly, and turned their matters quite contrary: for as soon as the two
capitaines were associate, there engendered such a rancor and debate betwixt
them, that they not only omitted to invade their ennimies, but offered
occasions that their adversaries might assail them. The Carthaginenses being
moved with this dissension, commanded that one of them should return into the
City, and the other which the Soldiers would, to remain with the host. To
amplify this mischief the most part of their hulkes which conveyed victuals
and other necessaries into the ca^pe were lost in a sudden tempest: also
Sardinia (as I said before) was revolted from them, whence they were accustomed
to have much aid and succor in their wars: and lest they should lack misery,
Hippona and Vtica, which only amongst al ye cities in Africa, not only in that
troublesome time, but in their wars against Agathocles, and the Romans had
remained their especial and faithful friends, were now become their enemies,
and all the Carthaginenses with their captains to aid them, were cruelly
murdered, neither could they obtain their bodies of the cruel Creons. Matho
and Spendius being very proud and lofty for these occasions, marched forward
to besiege Carthage. Then was Annibal associate to Amilcar, for after that
Hanno was forsaken of the soldiers by the election in the uproar, they sent
him forth. Then Amilcar with Annibal and Nerua, scoured through the province,
preventing and stoppyng the victuals of their enemies, continually endeavoring
him self to those things yt were most necessary, but being environed and
compassed on every part with his ennimies, he was glad to retire to the
Cities adjoining of their friends and aides. Hieron, King of Scicilie supported
the Carthaginenses very plentifully with all necessaries, considering that
their prosperity should be very commodious to him, both for the defense of
Scicilie, and observing his amity with the Romans, least the Carthaginenses,
being clean vanquished and suppressed, the Italians might at their pleasure,
and without contradiction do what pleased them, which surely was a politic
and subtle invention: for it is good to take heed and suffer no prince to come
to such estate, that in manifest wro^gs he must be winked at. The Romans also
being in league with the Carthaginenses at that time, forlet him not to aid
them. But there was a breach betwixt them for this cause. The Carthaginenses
when their City was first besieged, taking five hundredth Romans which coming
from Italy, supported the vagabo^ds with victuals, cast them in prison, which
the Romans took grievously, and as an outrage to them. Wherefore shortly after
they sent ambassadors to the Carthaginenses for the same matter, to whom they
gently dismissed those which were in bonds, which doing was so acceptable and
grateful to the Romans, that incontinently they sent home without raunsom all the Carthaginean soldiers that they took in Scicilie, continually after that
day aydynge the Carthaginenses with such things as were requisite, permitting
their merchant men to transport corn to Carthage, straitely commanding that
none should aid their enemies, neither would they accept the legates of the
old soldiers inhabiting Sardinia, offering to yield the I Will unto them.
Incontinently after the citizens of Vtica, which had rebelled against the
Carthaginenses, gave up both them selves and their City, into the Romans
hands, whom they likewise forsook, intendyng by no means to falsify their
promise. The Carthaginenses being thus relieved with succor of their friends,
suffered the siege pacientely, so that Matho and Spendius were as sore besieged
as they did besiege: for Amilcar kept al victuals and other necessaries so
straightly from the^, that they were glad to dissolve their camp. Within few
days after, they chose out the valiauntest soldiers of their whole army, so
that with fifty thousand men they incontine^tly marched toward Amilcar,
eschuing ye plains for fear of the Elephants and horsemen of Nerua, keeping in
the hills and byways scant passable, at which time though they were nothing
inferior to their enemies in boldness, yet for lack of knowledge, they were
overcome by the Carthaginenses. There a man might have well discerned the
difference betwixt a cunning and expert captain, and the rude multitude: for as
they fought daily, Amilcar did nothing uncircumspectly or foolish hardily,
which soon dau^ted the courage of Spendius, but continually finding ways to
entrap his ennimies, and other times bringyng them in danger with sudden
invasions, casting all those which he caught on live to be devoured of the
elepha^ts, and at the last closed them in a perilous place, very fit for
his purpose, where he set them in such a perplexity, that they durst not
fight for fear of the Elephants and horsemen, neither could they escape by
runnyng away, they were so encompassed with ditches, where they were so
languished with penury and want of food, that one was constrained to eat an
other, suffering just vengeance for the cruelty they used to their friends and
country men. Thus they remained, not daring encountre with their enemies,
perceiving them to have obtained victory alredie, and presently beholding yt
terrible tortours provided for them. They thought it vain to ask peace,
perceiuyng no hope of mercy to remain, considering the great cruelty which
they had used before, but remained in myserie, contynually loking for aid from
Tunes. After they had devoured the bodies of their captives and servants (for
of long time they had none other repaste, they remained with great grief of
hunger and fear of punishment, at the last decreing to speak with the
Carthaginenses to entreat for peace, they sent a purs^uant to desire yt their
Legates might talk with Amilcar. When they had obtained this request, the
ambassadors were sent, with whom Amilcar made this paction, that he would
choose freely ten of his ennimies, which he pleased, and let all the rest
depart with bag and baggage, without damage or hurt. When these couenantes
were established, Amilcar went to receive those, for whom he had concluded
peace, so that Spendius, Antoricus and diverse other chief doers in the host,
and beginners of the uproar were delivered him. The Lybians perceiving the
deliverance of their captains, and being ignoraunte of the pactions that were
determined, supposed the Carthaginenses to have betrayed them, wherefore
incontinently they armed them, thinking to defend them selves in an angle of
their tents, but Amilcar marching against them with his Elephants and other
of his host, quickly dispatched and killed them, every one being in number
above forty thousand, nigh to a place called Serra, taking the denomination of
the Carpenters instrument, called a Saw. Thus the Carthaginenses which a little
before were in despair of their safeguard and health, began to receive a good
courage, hoping to be reduced to their pristinat estate. Amilcar with Nerua and
Annibal, ceased not to wander and forage abroad in the country, so that many
of ye Africans revolted to the^, and diverse Cities yielded willingly. Then they
brought their host to Tunes, inte^ding to besiege Matho and his accomplices.
Annibal pitched his tents on yt side of the town which is toward Carthage and
Amilcar on the opposite. They brought with them Spendius and the other which
they had taken, and hanged them all in the sight of their enemies. When Amilcar
was departed to his station, Matho perceiving Annibal to come into his tents
with his soldiers very rashly, thought it not best to pretermit such an
opportunity, but issued out against the Carthaginenses, and took many of them,
compelling the rest to return, sacking their tents, and carrying away their
stuff. In this co^bate Annibal the Carthaginean captain was taken alive, and
inco^tinently led to the gallows of Spendius, where they took and hanged up
Annibal, and murdered thirty noble men of Carthage, about the dead corpse of
Spendius, so that fortune declined equally to both parts, giving them time to
be revenged of their enemies. Amilcar being warned to late of this unhappy
chance, could not help them, the plot was so impassible, wherefore he removed
from Tunes, and brought his army to the river Machera, where he encamped along
ye bank. The Carthaginenses hearing tell of the wretched chance happened to
their men, begone to despair, but incontinently recovering their spirits, they
studied diligently to preserve the state of their City. Then they sent their
Senators legates to Amilcar which led with them Hanno, and a new crew of men,
commanding that in any case they should take up the old rancor and debate
that was betwixt him and Amilcar, which being united together, should with one
mind endeavor them selves to conquer their ennimies, willing them to way the
cruelty of that time, with the necessity and apparaunt danger the City was
in.

The Senators called the captains together, then after many and sundry
exhortatio^s smothered and repressed the cankered sedition, reconcyling and
making the^ obedient to ye Carthaginenses. Then afterward all things were
ruled by ye two captains, so that warring against Matho, after many chances
both at Leptis and other places, they appointed to pitch a field and fight it
out with their enemies, to which both parts came coragiously, gathering the
friends and allies out of every corner, sending for them which were appointed
to defend the cities, knowing that in this battle one part should win the
spurs. After that both armies had prepared all things belonging to the
battle, and were ready, they orderly invaded on the other: ye battle was
marvelous cruel, rigorous and mortal, but the Carthaginenses in the end
obtained the victory. The most part of their Enemies were slain in fight,
the rest fled to a little City adjacent, which yielded immediately. So that
only Vtica and Hippona, perseuered in their obstinacy, acknowledging their
wickedness, hoping of no mercy for their facinorous crime, by which we may
learn a modest mean to be of much efficacy, and that it is better to pill
straws, than to work such curious gear and crafty conueyaunces, that in the
end the same is intolerable. But at the last, Amilcar and Hanno incamping
about them, they were forced to yield, and agree to all such things as pleased
the Carthaginenses. According to this manner was the African war ended, in
which ye Carthaginenses had such prosperous success, that they not only
obtained all Africa, but also executed condign punishment upon the rebels.
Matho and his copes mates were led about the town with the youth of the City
for a triumph, and then put to pains worthy of their wickedness. This war
endured three years and four months, far exceeding all other in cruelty and
wickedness, that ever I heard of. About that time the Romans were allured by
the persuasions of the soldiers that fled out of Sardinia, to transfrete into
the Island, which thing the Carthaginenses somewhat stomaked because the Ila^d
belonged rather unto them, and therefore prepared an army to send into it. The
Romans having gotten that occasion, commanded them to desist from their
purpose, affirming their preparaunce not to be so much against the Sardinians,
as against them. The Carthaginenses perceiving how they were not able at that
present to match with the Romans, louted for the time, and eschuing al
occasions of battle, did not only grant them the Island, but also sent them
a thousand and two hundredth talents, least they should assail them at that
present. Thus orderly according to this prescripte manner were these things done.

Nihil est dulcius been impensi temporis Memoria. Contra vero his molestius
nihill.

Thus ends the first book of histories written by the most famous and worthy
Grecian Chronographer, Polybius, entreating in the first part of the wars
betwixt the Romans and the Carthaginenses, for the domination of Scicilie, in
the second part of yt wars betwixt the Carthaginenses and their mercinarie
soldiers, a rich and worthy work containing wholesome counsels and wonderful
devises against the incombraunce of fickle fortune, and comfortable
consolations for them that are depressed by her, a work much profitable to all
the Reders thereof but especially to the diligent digesters of the same.

To the Questioners. Those which are desirous to know the causes why I joined
this abridgement of King Henry the fifth his life, to this foraine History, let
them read the Epistle following.
IF any covet to know why I took in hand to renouate the triumphante reign
and victorious acts of this Arabical Phoenix and famous conqueror, either how
I was bold to coarct them so compendiously, whereby his martial prowes may be
thought to be appalled or diminished, to the reasonable request, and trusting
to their humanity, thus I answer them, employing my diligence and study in
the obscure works and intricate engines of the famous Aristotle, prince of
Philosophers, to attain some knowledge continued in that sage Sophye, my
wits were so cloyed, yea almost dased, that of necessity and constrainte, I
was forced to seek some recreation. Then incontinently came to my memory, a
sentence of the divine and golden Plato, containing these words. When thou
art fatigate with study, recreate and repose thy self with reuoluing
worthy Histories. Then I began to excogitate what Histories of al other were
most famous and Peragons in the comparison of the rest, being desirous to
practice some present remedy. But then tumbled an other thought in my brain,
which persuaded me to think, if the variety of study revived and set on edge
an obtuse or blunt wit, that the alteration of the language should be of some
effycacie and force. So I raught to our English Chronacles compiled by Edward
Hall, which by fortune (beheld the fountain and effycient of my translation,
and all the rest) lay open at that present in the life of King Henry the fifth,
where was noted in the margent, the Oration of Henry Chickley Archbishop of
Canterbury, which Oration I red over, and at the end a replye to the same,
made by the right honorable Lord Rafe, earl of Westmerlande, a man of no
less gravity than experience, which was garnished with such flowers of
Rethoricke, and matter of importance, that if it had been in Greek and Latin,
it had been nothing inferior, but equivalent with the Orations of Demosthenes
or Tully. When I had taken a superficial sight of it, I was rapte in mind more
profoundly to digest his stately style knit together as the Ambre, and
arguments indissoluble as the Adamant. After that I had circumspectly pondered
and wayed it with deliberation, I wondered not a little to see such eloquence
and pithie sentences proceed out from such a potentate as scant in these our
days demane from grave and great learned Doctors. There lacked no copy of
examples, as of ye Persians, the Africans, the Greeks and especially of the
Romans, by diverse other nations, yea of England and Scotland. When I had
perused the mellifluous Oration of this worthy Orator and mighty magistrate,
I determined with my self to read some of the famous Histories, out of which
he had picked such pleasant pearls, and especially before the rest that
History entreating of the wars made by the Romans for Scicilie, and the
City of the Samnites, out of the which he had collected the most firm and
infringible arguments of his Oration. With the perusing of the which History,
I was so rapt and pleasured, that my appalled senses were quickened, and my dull
wit sharpened and revived. For ye which causes I vowed to apply my vacant
hours in reducing it to our maternal and vulgar tongue, under the protection and
gouerna^ce of ye most worthy sequel and hautie successors of ye incomparable
Earl, trusting so much to their bou^tiful beneuole^ce and accustomed
ge^tlenes, which naturally is planted in yt stock, so that they would
gratefully accept my good will toward them. When ye matter was come to this
point, I thought that of necessity I must needs pen the oration which was the
original cause of this my translation, that thereby I might satisfy them
which were desirous to know for what cause I took this work in hand, which
could not be done without declaring of the bishops which was the cause of the
earls. So then I was persuaded, that every man would be desirous to know for
what cause the bishop made his, which could not be showed without entering into
the life of King Henry, the which percell of his life would have caused him to
have been judged of some malign and cursed persons, a wicked prince. But for
their confounding which would go about to take such a cause where none is
offered, I judged it as a thing necessary, at the least compendiously to show
this abstract, of the life of our worthy and renoumed prince and governor, not
neding any argelier to explicate and set forth his works, both because I
should sooner empty the Occeans, and fill the vorages of Scilla and Caribdis,
than show his merited praises which are done already, as worthily as may be by
any man, (in the union of the two illustre and noble families of Lancaster and
York, compiled by the forenamed Hal) but yet not accordingly as they ought to
have been, or as he deserved, and also because this may sufficiently serve for
the understanding of that which I intended. Thus fare you well: from my study
in saint John's College at Cambridge.

Yours Christopher Watson.

The victorious acts of king Henry the fifth.
THe mighty and puissa^t prince Henry, son and heir to king Henry the
fourth, took upon him the high power and regiment of this Realm of England,
the twenty day of March, in the year after that Christ our savior had entered
into ye immaculate womb of ye holy Virgin his natural Mother, a thousand four
hundredth and eight, and was crowned King, the ninth day of April next ensuing,
and proclaimed King, by the name of King Henry the fifth. This King was the man
which (according to the ancient proverb) declared and showed, that honor
ought to change manners: for incontinently after that he was inthronised in the
siege royal, and had received the diaadem and scepter of this famous and
fortunate region, he determined with him self to put on the shape of a new
man, and to use an other sort of living, turning insolency and wildenesse, into
gravity and soberness, and wavering vice into constant virtue: and to the
intent that he would so persiste without reflection, either least he should be
allured by the sinister persuasions of his familyer companions, with whom he
had passed his adolescencie in wanton pastimes and ryotous rufflings, he
banyshed and separated from him, all his old flatterers, and light bold
brainesicke playfeeres, but not unrewarded, inhibiting them from thence forth
on a great pain, not once to approach either to his speech, or presence, nor
yet to lodge or soiourne within ten miles of his high Court, or royal
mansion, and in their places elected and chose men of gravity and great wit,
with such as were practiced in policy and martial prowes, by whose skilful
wisdom, curious counsel, prudent policies, and ingenious instructions, he
might at all times rule regally, to his high honor, and guide his gouerna^ce
princelike to his profit. This peerlesse prince was righteously reported to be
ye rare Arabical Phoenix, and the very Peragone of his predecessors.

This haughty Henry was a King, whose life was exempt from al faults, and his
living unspotted with obloquie, this curtuous king was a princely potentate,
whom all men leally loved and none disdained or dread: this prewe Prince was
a coragious Captain, against whom fickle Fortune never fraudulently frowned,
nor irous mischaunce once spitefully spurned: this warlike Captain was a
sincere shepherd, whom his fawning flock faithfully favored, and obediently
obeyed, and with continual acclamations, reknowledged their loving lord. This
our pastor was such a just iusticiarie, yt no facinorous fact was pretermitted
unpunished, or faithful frendshyp destitute of due desert. This gentle
Iusticiarie was so unfeignedly feared, that all rage and rebellion were quite
banished, and all sedition suppressed. His fervent virtues were no more notable
than his fine qualities were worthy of praise, for the which few or none were
to him comparable. No man could be found more temperate in eating and drinking
than he was, he fained no frugalitie, his diet was not delicate dainties, but
rather rural and gross, more to be desired of the wearied warrier than to be
offered to amorous ladies. His indomable courage was so constant, and his heart
was so immutable, that he rejected al fear and dastardly dread from him was
utterly banished. He had such profound knowledge in conducting and ordring an
army, and such a rare grace in the incoraging of his soldiers, that french
men publicly pronounced him to be invincible and impossible to be vanquished.
He was endued with such pregnant wit, such perfect prudence and admirable
policy, that he never enterprised any thing before he had diligently debated
it, and circumspectly foresene all such mean chances as might happen. And when
the end was concluded, with all celeritie and courage, he furthered his pretense
and purpose.

Wonder it is to hear, how he being a potentate of honor, a prince of youth, a
King of riches, and extract of so hautie a family, did continually abstain
from lascivious living and blind avarice, yea in the time of sinister chances,
he was no more dolent than in the time of victory, the which constancy few
men have or can use. Such a stable stomach had he, and such a gravity was
engraven in the bottom of his heart. What politic practices and diverse
devises, he ingeniously inverted and used, in findyng sudden and resolute
remedies for present mischiefs, and what captainlike conueyances he
frequented, in the exempting him self and his people in imminent distresses,
except he had showed them in the courageous conflict and bold battle fiercely
fought at Egencourt, and in diverse other places to the great confusion of the
French nation, they might have been thought incredible. In the which bold
battle he victoriously vanquished, with a small power of our English
soldiers insuperable, the flowers of France, fast buckled with boisterous
ba^ds on their barbed horses, holding sharp spears and funeral weapons in
their vnhautie hands: also the bold Britains with fiery handgunnes, and
slashing swords, with the practiced Pickards, which carried strong and weighty
Crosbowes, beside the fierce brainsick Brabanders, and strong Almayns, with
their long pushing pykes, by his prudent policies, he suddenly subverted all
these, in the which combat, the sword devoured above ten thousand persons,
whereof were princes and nobles bearing banners a hundredth six and twenty, all
the remnant sixtene hundredth except, were Knights, Esquiers, and Gentlemen,
so that of noble men and high blood were slain eight thousand and four
hundredth of the Gallician army. And in this furious battle only five or
six hundredth of our English army, with two or three of the nobility were
exempt from the fruition (with eternal glory) of this incomparable terrene
triumph. This conflict may be a notorious mirroure and gasing glass to all
christen Princes to behold and follow, and also a reasonable testimony and
attestation of the worthy acts perpetrate by our famous King Henry, the
english Hector, which was the blasing comete and glistering lantern of his
days. He was the mirror of Christendom, and the glory of his countreye. He
was the flower of kings passed, and a seeing glass to such as should succeed.
No emperor surmounted him in magnanimity, no potentate was more piteous or
lord more bounteous, no King had less of his subjects, and never King
conquered amplier dominions, whose fame by his death as lively flourishes, as
his acts in this life were seen and remembered, he was the scourge of the
Frenchmen, and continually abated and appalled their courages: yet he never
put confidence in his own strength, neither in the puissaunce of his people,
nor in the fortitude of his champions, neither yet in the strength of his
barbed horses, or any whitte in his own policy. But he acknowledged God to be
the only cause and gatherer of these his heap of renoumes and victorious
conquests, in whom he put his whole confidence hope and trust, upon whom he
steadfastly ancored and firmly cleaued unto in all his dangers, as to an
immouable rock or steadfast corner stone. And he which never leaves them
destitute that put their trust in him, remunerated his firm faith, with many
glorious and triumphaunt victories, of the which some might almost be thought
incredible, if we had not red in the book of Kings, that God likewise had
defended them that put their affiance in him, and committed them selves wholly
to his governance. This worthy Peragon, amongst all governors, remembered
that a King ought to rule with wit, gravity, circumspection, diligence and
constancy: and for that cause to have a rule committed, not as an honor, but
for an onerarious charge and quotidian carfulness, not to look so much on
other men's living, as seriously to consider and intentiuely reuolue his own
propre acts and doings, for which cause he not so much trusting to the
readiness of his own capacity, nor to the judgment of his own wavering
will, called to his Counsel such prudent and politic personages as should not
only help to illeuate and sustein his charge, in supportyng the burdeyn of
his realm and empire, but also incense and instruct him with such good
reasons and fruitful persuasions, that he might show him self a singular
mirror ano manifest example of Moral virtues and good qualities, unto his
common people, and loving subjects.

After that he had laid this prudente and politic foundation, he intended in
his mind to do many noble and notable acts, and remembryng that all goodness
comes of God, and that all worldly things and human acts be more weaker
and poorer than the celestial powers and heavenly rewards, determined to
begin with some thing which should be pleasant and acceptable unto God. So that
after he had establyshed all things, being in controversies and variaunce
within these his peculiar realms, countries, territories and confines to the
same, nothing forgetting, nor no one thing more desiring than the extermination
and ceassing of the long scisme and division sprung and continued in the
catholic church of christian religion, by the most wicked desire of a
Sathanicall swarm of wicked worldlings, as contemptuous Cardinals,
bloudthirstie Bishops, pelting Priours, ambiti^us Abbots, mischeuous Monks,
filthy Frierlike furies, and a company of cakling Canons, with a pestiferous
plumpe of popish Proctors, and a troop of trouncing Tyrants, with other mo
monstrous monastical mirroures of mischief, disordred orders of the
insatiable Romish sea, which nominated them selves spiritual Chyrurgians, but
in deed they were carnal, covetous and greedy deuouryng gluttons, aspiring for
high honor and not for virtue to the licencious and proud rent rock of Rome,
where was and is frequented daily wanton, luxurious, superfluous and indecent
pompes, with dissolute manners, neither are they taken for enormities (being
permitted by their diabolical dimigod) with these perverse fugitives, being
alienated and revolted from Gods truth, and arrived in the pensive haven of
inexplicable wickedness, for which their diuelishe digression, they shall be
afflicted with condign punishment and terrible tortours, unless they speedily
retire and endeavor to reduce them selves, from the barbarous insolency, in
the which they have long loitered, as the acclamations and earnest exhortations
of the sincere Euangelisters, desistyng any longer to protract the time to
persevere and participate with those raging Romists, which desire more to pill
than to profit Christ's flock and christian religion by sellyng of their
polling pardons, which they make serve in place of passportes for those which
intend to peregrinate through purgatory, and ungracious indulgences. For these
causes the Kings royal majesty most graciously granted and establyshed a
parliament in the second year of his famous reign, to his high honor, and to
the inestimable advancement of pure religion, calling his high court the last
day of April in the town of Leicester. In the which parliament many
commodious laws were concluded, and diverse petitions moved were for that time
deferred, amongst which requests one was, that a complaynte exhibited in the
parliament holden at Westminster in the eleventh year of King Henry the fourth,
which by reason that the King was at that instant vexed with civil division,
intestine discord, domestical discention, and the prorogation of the
parliament came to no effect, might now be well studied, pondred and resolutely
concluded. The effect of which supplication was, that all the temporal lands
which in ancient times had been devoutly given, and now disordinately spent by
the rude religious rablement and other spiritual spitesoules, which apishly
usurped the names of spiritual pastors, might well suffice to maintein to the
honor of the Prince and defense of the realm, fiftene honorable Earls, fiften
hundredth worshipful Knights, six thousand and two hundredth gentle Esquiers, and
a hundredth alms houses, for relief only of the poor, needy and impotent
persons, and the King to have clearly to his private commodity and amplifiyng
of his tresury twenty thousand pou^ds with many other ample provisions and
large values of the rakehellish, otherwise called religious houses, which I
pretermit that was riotously spent by the panchplying porkheads. This before
remembered supplication was attentively noted and much feared, amongst ye cursed
company of drousie dreaming Dromos, I mean Baals Baldons yt mungrel Massalians
and cruel churchrobbers whom it touched most in effect, in so much that the
gross Gospeller, Ethnike Epicures, beastly bellygods, wic ked worldlyngs and
spiritual shauelyngs, were fallen in a pelting chafe, the bloody Bishops
broyled, the cullionly Cardinals coured, the proud Priours frouned, the fat
Abbots swet, the pore Friars cursed, the white Chanons chafed, the poor Nuns
puled like Puttockes, in conclusion, all the sectarie Sathanists were sore
displeased. Now to find a present preservative for a mischeuous chance, and a
sanatiue tent for a deep wound, Caiphas clergy clustred, mynding rather to
play with the pliant reed, tha^ stubburnely to stand with the stiff Oak,
purposed rather to bow than break, so that they agreed to offer unto the King
a mighty mass of money to stay the new moved demand. The cause of this offer
seemed to some of the crafty cullions and perjured pilates, neither decent nor
convenient, for the pattern lay so plain before their eyes, that they well
foresawe and perfectly knew that if the commons once perceived their
legierdemaine, and that by rewards and offer of money they endeavored them
selves to resist their request and petition, that then they being stirred and
kindled with fury would not only asprely rail, but also worthily contemn
them as privy corrupters of Princes, and ennimies to the public utility, and
importunatly call upon the Kings Majesty and his honorable Lords temporal,
that they were like to bestow both labor, charges, and living. Wherefore
they determined vigilantly to forecast all chances that might prevail, or
further their pretensed purpose, and like an ungracious guard, and as auctors
and procurers of all mischieues and facinorous factes, they intended to
exterminate this the commons request out of the Kings mind, and to obnebulate
his senses with some glistering veil, or to replenish his brain with some
new toy, lest he should fantasy or regard their importunate petition. The
performance of which tended so much to Gods glory and the advancement of true
religion and virtue. Wherefore upon a day when the Kings Majesty was set the
parliament house upon his imperial throne, Henry Chickley Archbishop of
Canterbury, thereto newly preferred, which had been a Monk of the cankred
Carthusians sect, a man which had professed wilful poverty in religion, but
to speak congruely in ye relegation of religion, yet hopping abroad, waxed as
lusty as a March hare, or rather mad (as we may term it) his mind was
incensed with the furious flames of lordelyke honor: Also this perverse
Paul, being a very Saul, according to the rule of blessed Becket, was so
zealous in Gods religion, that he regarded ten times more his own private
commodity than the sincere evangelical doctrine, as all the train of the
dimigod his filthy fraternity did, always concealyng double faces under their
hoodes and counterfeacte coules, but truelyer termed calves cases, after low
obeysaunce and double duckyng made to the Kings honor, spoke after this manner
in effect.

When I consider our most intierly beloved and less dread sovereign lord
and natural Prince, the loving kindness, the daily labor and continual
study, which you incessantlye implore, both for the aduauncemente of the
honor of your Realm, and also profit of your people, I can not or ought
not, except I would be noted not only ungrateful to your royal person,
being my patron and preferrer, but also a neglecter of my duty, a secret
mummer of such things, which do touch your inheritance, hold my peace
or keep silence. For all Authors do agree, that the glory of Kings
consysteth not only in high blood and hautie progeny, not in abundance of
riches and superfluous substance, nor in pleasant pastime, nor in joyous
solace: but the very type of the magnificencie in a prince rests in populous
rich regions, subjects, beautiful cities and towns, of the which thanked be
God, although you be conveniently furnished both within your realms of
England and Irelande, and the principality of Wales, yet by lineall descent by
progeny of blood, and by very inheritance, not only the Duchy of Normandy,
and Aquitane, with the Counties of Aniow, and Main, and the country of
Gascoyne, is to you as true and indubitate heir of the same, laufully
deuoluted and lineally descended from the high and most noble prince of famous
memory King Edward the third, your great grandfather, but also the whole
realm of France, with all the prerogatives and preheminences to you as heir
to your great grand father is of right belonging, and appertaining. In which
Realm to rehearse what noble persons, what beautiful Cities, what fertile
Regions, what substanciall merchants, and what plentiful Rivers are
contained, I assure you, that time should rather fail, than matter wax scant.
The fraudulent Frenchmen to defraude, and take away your right and title to the
Realms of France, in the time of your noble progenitour, King Edward the
third, alleged a law, untruly feigned, falsely glosed and sophistically
expounded, whereof the very words are these. In terram Salicam mulieres ne
succedant. Which is to say, let not women succeed in the land Salique. This
land Salique the deceitful glosers fained to be the Realm of France. This
law the logical interpreters assign to derect the Crown and Regalitie of
the same Region, as who would say, that to that prehemine^ce, no woman were
able to aspire, nor no heir female is able to inherit. The French writers do
affirm that Pharamonde king of the French Gaulles, first instituted this law,
which never was, should or might be broken. See now how an evil gloss
confounds the text, and a parcial interpretour marreth the sentence, for
first it is apparently known and by a hundredth writers confirmed, that
Pharamond, whom they allege to be aucthor of this law, was Duke of Franconia
in Germany, and elected to be king of the Sycambres, which calling them selves
French men, had gotten a part of the Gaul Seltique, betwixt the rivers of
Marne and Seyne. This Pharamonde, deceased in the year of our Lord, four
hundredth twenty and six, long after whose death, Charles the great being
Emperor, and many years making war on the Saxons, did in bloody battle,
disperse and confound the whole puissance of that nation, in the year of our
Lord, eight hundredth and five, bringing them to the Catholic faith, and
Christian co^formitie, after which victory, certain Soldiers as the French
Cronographers affirm, passed over the water of Sala, and inhabited betwixt it
and the River Elne, and were commonly called Saly, Frenchemen, or Saligalls,
which country now is the land of Misinie.

This people had such an indignation at the brutish and dishonest fashions of
the German women, that they constitute a law which disabled the femals for
succeding any inheritance in that land. Now if ye intentiuely and with
indifferent ears precisely note these two points, you shall easily (all
mystie mantles laid aparte) perceive that the law Salique was only feigned and
invented to defraud your noble progenitors and you from your proper
patrimony, and right enheritaunce, for they say that Pharamonde constitute the
law, for the land Salique which the hodipekes gloss calls France. Then I
demand of master gloser, or rather of the true sense a disposer, or of master
Doctor Commenter, if ever the deviser, as by chance he might, took the degrees
of a dotarde, if I may call an open liar a Commenter, whether Pharamonde which
dyed four hundredth twenty and one years, before the Frenchmen possessed the
Gaul Salique, and never did see or know it, enacted a law of that thing which
at that instante was not his or inhabited of his people. Furthermore, this the
Realm of France which is your patrimony, consists of three, Gaul Belgique,
Seltique with Aquitane Salique. Then may the turndish gentle master Gloser,
expound like peruersely, that Gaul Belgique is the country of Britain, as
Geta, like to gloss (but the ignorant ingaram, did it through ignorance, so
that his bold blindness must be borne with, but not suffered) that the land
Salique is the whole Realm and dominion belonging to the Crown of France.
Wonder it is to see ye leude Leagerdemaine, and childish conueiaunce of the
folish Frenchmen, which ieopard to iuggle so openly with this fantastical
law, a simple slight God wotteth and easily perceived without peeping through
a wimble bored hole, imitating ye crafty hazerders, which cosinlike use to
play at see thou me, or see me not. For when King Pipen which was Duke of
Brabante, by his mother Begga and master of the palace of France, coueted the
Crown and Scepter of the Realm, the fickle French nation not remembering this
infringeable law, as they termed it, deposed Childricke the third being very
heir male, and undoubtedly descended from the line of Pharamonde and Cloves,
King of France, by the counsel of Zachary then Bishop of the rouing roges
and massing Cayphernites, and inthronised this Pepin, as next heir general,
descended of lady Blichilde, daughter of King Clothaier the first. Hugh Capet
also usurped the Crown without right or reason, of Charles Duke of Loraine,
the sole heir male of the line and stock of Charles the great, after that he
had shamefully murdered in pitiful prison, by the perverse procurement of ye
bloudthristie bishop of Orleans, and deuillishly destroyed the said Charles, to
make his traitorous title seem true, and appear good, where in deed it was
both evil and untrue, to blind the opinions of the rural route and common
people: thus setting a glass before their eyes, he craftily conveyed him self
as heir to the lady Lingard, daughter to King Charlamaine, son to Jews the
Emperor, which was son to Charles the great, King of France. King Jews
also the ninthe, (whom the Frenchmen called Saint Jews) being very heir to
the said usurper Hughe Capet, could never be satisfied in his conscience, how
he might justly keep and possess the Regalitie of the Realm of France, till
he was persuaded, and fully instructed, that Queen Isabel his grande Mother
was lineally descended of lady Armengard, daughter and heir to the above named
Charles Duke of Loraine, by the foresaid Hugh Capet of life and Realm
wrongfully deprived: by the which marriage the blood and line of King Charles
the great, was again united and restored to the Croune and Septer of France,
so that it more clearer than the sun openly appears, the title of King
Pipen, the clame of Hugh Capet, ye possession of king Jews, yea and of all ye
French Kings to this day, are derived, claimed and conveyed from the heir
female: and yet they would bar you, as though your great grande mother had been
no woman nor heir female, but a painted image or fained shadow. If so many
examples, if such copy of preside^ts collected out of your own histories and
gathered out of our writers, suffice not to confound your simple Salique,
invented by false fablers and crafty imaginers of you fabling frenchmen, then
hear what God says in the book of Numeri, when a man dies without a son,
let the inheritance descend to the daughter, if your princes call them selves
most Christian Kings, let them follow the law of God before the law of the
Panime Pharamond. Are not al laws discrepa^t from gods laws evil, and to all
Christian ears odious and noisome are? French women descended of the blood
royal, no Christians and not worthy to enherite the Realm of France? is the
Realm of France more noble than the kingdom of Judah, of whom Christ
descended by a woman, when God said to Abraham, that in one of his seed all
nations should be blessed? how came Christ of ye seed of Abraham, but only by
that immaculate Virgin his glorious Mother? likewise when the Prophet Michee
said, thou Tribe of Judah, art not least of estimation amongst the princes of
Judah, for out of thee shall come a Captain which shall rule and direct my
people of Israel. How descended Christ from the root of Iesse, and how was
the Duke and captain of the Israelites, and how descended he of the line of
David, but only by his mother, a pure virgin and a married wife. Behold by gods
law women shall enherite: behold in France, Frenchmen have enherited by yt
only line of the woman, and yet Englishmen be prohibited to claim by the
heir female, contrary to the law of God and man, wherefore regard well my
sovereign, your just and true title to the Realm of France, by gods law and
man's law lawfully to you deuoluted, as very heir to Queen Isabel, your great
grand mother, daughter to King Phillip the fair, and sister and heir to three
Kings, deceasing without any issue, which enheritaunce of the woman, is
declared to be just by the Mosaicall law and used and approved by ye Gallicean
desce^t, as I have before declared. Therefore for gods sake, leese not your
patrimony, disherite not your heirs, dishonor not your self, diminish not
your title which your noble progenitors so highly have esteemed. Wherefore with
courage advance forth your victorious banour, fight for your right, conquer
your inheritance, spare not sword, blood, nor fire, your war is just, your
cause is good, and your claim true. Therefore courageously and speedely set
forward your war against your capital enemies, for maintenance of the
which, we your loving Chaplains, and obedient subjects of the Spirituality,
to show our selves willing and desirous to minister aid and succor to you,
for ye recovery of your ancient right and true title, to the Crown of
France, we have in our Spiritual Convocation, granted to your highness, such
an infinite tresure and su^me of money, as never by yt Spirituality was granted
to any prince before your days, to serve for an assurance, caution, pawn,
gage, and pledge, also for a witness, attestatio^, and approbation of ye
unfeigned favor which we your true Chaplains bear toward you, beside our
songs, himnes, odes, cantels, and collects, with diverse other daily prayers,
and continual precations dedicate, consecrate and attribute to god and his
Saints, yt prosperous success may ensue your martial exployte, and royal
passage. When ye Archbishop had finished this his oration, which rightly may
incense the hearts of all true English men and make them to be ready at ye
princes pleasure, not only to endeavor the^ selves to restore ye which of right
belongs to ye crown of England, but also to enlarge ye bonds of their
natural country like faithful hearted Philines nevertheless he used it
wickedly, as a vele of his wicked purpose. The honorable lord Rafe, earl of
westmerla^d, a noble of no less gravity tha^ experience a champion of no less
experience than stomach, which was at that instante worthy high warden of the
Marches toward Scotland, and therefore considering if that the King with his
whole power and chiualry of the Realm should pass over into France, (as
Chickley had craftily conveyed ye matter) that the remnante should be to weak
to withstand the strength and power of Scotland, if during the kings absence
they should invade yt Realm. Wherefore as a true Curtius toward his country,
he arose up and after making of due obeisaunce to the Kings highness, he spoke
this vnpremeditat Oration (not without the great solace of all the Convocation
house) as here follows. Surely sir, as my lord of Canterbury has clarkely
and curiously declared, the conquest of France is very honorable, and when it
is gotten and obtained very profitable and pleasant. But saving your graces
reformation, I say and affirm, that to conquer Scotland, is more necessary,
more apparent, easy, and more profitable to this Realm, than should be the
flourishing gain obtained by the conquest of France. For although I am not so
well learned as my lord Archbishop is, and have not ben Laureate in the
University, neither proceeded to basest degree in schools, yet have I eftsoon
read and hard the opinions of famous and great clerks, in the which they
douted not to affirm, that strength knit and combined together, is of more
efficacy and force, than being severed and dispersed. As for an example,
sprinkle a vessel of water and it moysteth not, but cast it out wholly
together, it not only washes, but also nourishes. This notable example and
saying before this time has encouraged kings, animated Emperors, inflamed
princes, and allured courageous Captains, to conquer Realms to them
adjoining, to vanquish nations adjacent to their dominions, to subdue people,
either necessary to their purpose, or being to them daily enemies, either
continual adversaries, for attestation whereof, behold what was the chief
cause and occasion why rulers and governors so sore labored, thirsted and
coueted to bring all regions to them adjoining into on rule or Monarchy, was
it not done to this intent that the conquerours might have only power and
entier gubernation of all the lands and people within their clymate, and
govern them in time of peace, also their aid in ye time of war, which
monarchy was of that majesty and estimation in the world, that no other
foreine prince either exterior pote^tate, either had audacitie or yet was able
to attempt any thing within the territory or region of the Monarchiall prince
and adorned King? Let the Kingdom of the Assirians be your example, and if
that suffice not, then look upon ye Persians, after upon the Greeks, and
lastly view the Romans, which ever desired and coueted more to obtain the
little isle of Scicilie, the territory of the Numidians, and the mean City of
the Samnites, lying under their, wings rather than to obtain populous Gaull,
ple^tuous Pannouie, or manly Macedonie, far distant from their sight and out
of their circle or compass. This desire seems to rise of a great, prudent
and vigilant pollycie, for as a prince is of more puissance when his countries
join, so is he of more strength when his power is at hand. And as men
destitute of comfort be more relieved by friends which are present, than by
kinsfolks dwelling far distant and in forayne regions, so Princes have
commonly coueted and ever desired to have their dominions lying about them,
and at hand, rather than to hear by report from them being far distante. If
this has been the pollycie of conquerers, the appetite of purchasers, and the
study of governors, why does your most noble grace desire France before
Scotland, or covet a country far distant from your sight, before a Realm
lying within your leap: remember you not how the I Will of Britain was an entire
monarchy, in the time of your noble auncetour King Brute the first royal ruler
of this your famous Empire, and glorious region? which dividing his realm to
his three sons, endued Lothron ye eldest, with this part of Britain, which
your honorable highness now enjoys, and gave to Albanacte his second son,
the country of Albanie, now nominated Scotland, and to Camber the youngest, he
appointed the country of Cambria, now called Wales, reserving always to him
and his heirs, homage, liege, and fealty loyal, for these same countries and
dominions. By this division the glory of the Monarchy of Britain was obscured
and clearly defaced by this separation, the strength of the British kings were
sore diminished and weakened, by this dispersion intestine more war began and
civil rebellion budded first with bloody shoures within this region. For
during the time that it was wholly under one, no forain nation durst once either
invade or attempt war against ye Britains, but the region being discided,
and the monarchiall estate once severed, outward enimitie and externe
hostility no whit so much infested, grieved or troubled our valiant and bold
Britains as their own neighbors, extracte of one propre parente and descended
of one progeny. For the auaricious Albanacts, otherwise called the false
fraudulent snatching Scotts, and the careless Cambers, otherwise denominate
unstable and wavering Welshmen, falsified their faith, not only by withdrawing
their fealty, denying their homage, and refusing their allegiance due to their
sovereigns, the Kings of this realm, but also made continual war and
destroyed their towns, and slew the friends of their neighbors, the
Britains. For which cause diverse of your hautie progenitors, have not only
made war and subdued the faythlesse Scots, for denying of their homage and
reaping of rebellion, but also have deposed their Kings and Princes,
inthronising and setting up other in their estates and dignities. Was not
Scater their king slain and extincted for his rebellion by your noble
predecessor Dunwallo Moluncius. Arthur also the glory of the Britains,
directed Angosile to the scepter of Scotland, and received of him homage and
fealty. If I should reckon how many of their kings have done homage to your
ancient predecessors, or rehearse what number of Scottish Kings, they have
corrected and punished for disobedience, and denying their duties, or if I
should declare what Kings they as superioure lords and high Emperors over the
under kings of Scotland, have elected and made rulers, to the intent that all
people might manifestely perceive, that it was more glorious, more honorable
and more famous, a King to make a King, than to be a King by natural descent,
I assure you, that your ears would be more weary of hearing, than my tongue
fatigate with telling the truth. Your noble progenitour King Edward the first,
coveting to be superior, to surmount in honor, or at the least to be
equiuale^t in fame with his noble ancesters and famous progenitors, studied
daily, and hourly compassed how to associate together, and turn the whole
I Will of Britain, which was divided by Brute into three several parts, to the
pristinate Monarchial state and one dominion.

After long study and great consultation, he victoriously subdued Wales,
tamed their wildenesse, and bridlyng them with sharp bittes, turned them to
their old home and aunciente degree: which thing done, he semblably invaded
Scotland, and conquered the country to the town of Pearche, (...) uent with
the serpentine policy, to avoid and eschew al things, which might either be
impedimentes to their progression and setting forward or occasions of their
return and loss of their enterprise, least they leaving behind them, a
noysom neighbor, a continual adversary, and a secret ennimie, may as soon
come to leese their own patrimony, as conquer or gain the dominions of
other. Wherefore the trite and common adage says: Better one bird in hand
than ten in the woodde. Leave not the certain for the uncertain: for which
consideration it is expedient and nedeful, that I enu^ciate or declare unto you
certain articles contained in the ancient league and amity continued betwixt
the realms of France and Scotland, whereof the words be these. The wars and
injuries moved or done by the English nation to either of the said countries
to be as common wrong to both. If the English me^ make war on the french
nation, then the Scotts at the costs and charges of the French king, shall
minister to them succoures. Semblably if the Scotts be molested by the English
wars, the Frenchmen having their costs allowed, shall be to them as aiders
and assisters. And that none of both nations shall either contract or make
peace with the Realm of England without consent or agreemente of the other.
And to the intent that this league and amity should be kept inviolate, Robert
le Bruise the usurper of Scotland, willed by his testament two things
especially to be observed, the one, never to break the treaty concluded with
France, the other never to keep peace or paction made with Englishemen longer
than the observing thereof were to them commodious or profitable. Yet Mare and
other Scottish writers color this cause, saying that he would have no treaty
or peace concluded with England, above three years. But what so ever writers
write, or talkers tell, they be to him most faithful executers, and have never
yet falsified or broken his testament, but continually performed his
commandment. Yea for the verificatio^ of Bruses brutish bidding, and for the
performaunce of this his wicked will, and to keep and preserve this league
inviolate, none of your auncesters ever invaded France, but incontinently the
Scots troubled and vexed England, none of your progenitors ever passed the
seas in a just quarrel against the French nation, but yt Scots in their absence,
entered your realm, spoiled your towns, burned and destroyed your villages,
sacked your houses, pilled and forraged your country, afflicted your
subjects, slew your people, taking and distributing booties innumerable: and
thus continually abandoning your country, the caitifes are and have been
accustomed covertly to keep themselves in wooddes and secret places, that they
might there fight and with sudden assaults, and at unawares, invade the
defe^ders of your frontiers: and all these deceipts were and are practiced to
provoke then your auncesters and now you to desist and return from the
inuading of France. If I should unbuckle to you their com mon breakyng of
leagues, if I should vncaste their crafty and subtle dissimulation, if I
should draw the veil of their falsified fair promises, often sworn, and
never kept: if I should vnsheath all their shameful shifts, if I should show
open the pestiferous pack of their peevishness, I doubt not but you would ten
times more abhor to hear of their detestable dealing than I should be
ashamed of the truth telling. Therefore I will not only persist in aduouching
my assertion, but also affirm and prove, that of necessity and constrainte,
to sweep all corners of private enemies shall be needful, suffering no
lurking moates behind your back, which may prove mischenous lettes when you
go to conquer adversaries before your face. Moreover, beside all these, if you
consider the quotidian charges, the inconstant cha^ces which may happen, I
think, yea and little doubt but Scotland shall be tamed before your journey
can be framed to France, for if you intend to invade it, account what number
of ships must be prepared to the transportation of your army, reco^pt what a
charge of ankers, forcast what a com panie of cables, and what other
innumerable necessaries appertain to a navy. After your navigations and safe
arrival (as I trust God will prosper your journey) if your men chance to
decay by sickness, or to be extincte by sword, if victuals fail, if money
wax scant, if the winds turn contrary, or hoistyng tempests make the sea to
outrage with belchyng dashes, when these necessaries should be transuehate to
your army, then shall you be destitute of aid, provision, and treasure, which
in a foraine region are the confusion and defacing of an army. On the contrary
part, if you invade Scotland, your men be hard at hand, your victuals are
nere, your aid is even at your back, so that in that voyage and exploite you
shall have abundance and plenty of all things, neither shall any necessaries to
that conquest be wanting. See what an occasion favorable fortune has friendly
offered unto you: is not their king your captive and prisoner? is not the
realm in great division and at intestine discord? for the Duke of Albanie
now presentely wishes rather to have a strange governor than a natural
tyrant. Wherefore as I began, so do I persist, that it is necessary before your
profection to France, to invade Scotland, and by Gods grace to conquer and
join that regio^ to your empire, and to restore the estate and old preeminence
to the renoumed monarchy of Britain, and so being beautified with realms, and
furnished wc people, you may with more ease enter France, for the recoueryng
of your righteous title and true inheritance, in obseruyng the old ancient
proverb, which says:

He which intends France to win, With Scotland let him first begin.

After this Oration of the worthy Earl, the Duke of Excester rose up and
spoke an other, in the which he per suaded the Kings Majesty to take in hand
the conquest of France, but not without attributing great laud and praise to
the Oration of the Earl, but especially he commended the entrance of his
confirmation, in the which he had alleged how the Romans more desired such
as were under the flight of their own Egle, or whose possessions were a moate
to their eyes, as the I Will of Scicilie, and the City of the Samnites, and
other, which he clearkly declared, than other regions far distant, and not
object to their horizon. But by them he nothing prevailed for ye King so much
regarded the sayings of his uncle, that incontinently he sent him and others
ambassadors to the French King. And shortly after having furnished his navy
with all things fit for such a royal voyage, yet being mindful of the
words which his true and loyal peer, the Earl of Westmerla^d a faithful
Codrus toward his country had spoken, he appointed him as a most worthy
champion, and one in whom he had fixed great hope and confidence, with the
Lord Scrope and other diverse hardy personages, valiant captains and worthy
warriers to defend the marches and frontiers adjoining to Scotland, in ye which
they did many hauty and valiant enterprises. When the King had thus ordered and
disposed all things for the tuition and safeguard of his realm, perceiving that
ye wind was prosperous and pleasant for the navy to set forward, they weyed
up their ankers, hoysed up their sails, and took sea with a hundredth and
forty ships, and on the vigile of the Assump tion of our Lady, with all his
fleet lan ded at Kidcauxe in Normandy, without resistance or bloudshedding,
and shortly after won the town of Harflew, conquered the battle of
Aegincourte, subdued Caen with the Castle, obtained Roan, wanne Ponthoys, and
then concluded peace, having married Lady Catherine the French kings daughter,
and being proclaimed heir and rege^t of France, keeping such a noble house in
Roan, that all men resorted to his court, and few or none to the French kings:
after Christmasse he ordained his brother duke of Clarence his lieutenant
general, both of France and Normandy, and on the morrow after Ca^dlemasse
day took shippyng at Caleys, and landed at Dover. And thus was the supplication
put up for dissoluyng of the devils stews, falsely named religious houses,
clearly forgotten and buried, according to the minds of the sinful
Sathanistes and hooded hipocrites. After this the King made an other voyage
into France for certain wrongs offered unto him, and pursued the Dolphin, in
such wise, that he could scant find Hiempsalles hole to hyde him self in. Thus
after many victorious co^ quests upon yt Frenchmen, this flower of chiualry
passing to aid them of Cosney which were besieged by the Dolphins adherents,
came to Corbell, and so to Senlesse, where whether it were through the heat of
the air, or daily labor, being sore feebled and weakened, he began to wax
sick, yea and so sick that he was constrained to desist from his pretensed
purpose, and send the duke of Bedford his brother to perform his journey and
enterprise. Then he began to wax sicker and sicker, and was conveyed in a
horselitter to Bloys, where perceiving himself to draw toward his end and that
death the stealing thief which goth about to subvert, and in a moment of an
hour clearly to suppeditate al prin ces inte^tio^s, came running upon him wc
his piercing darte, he rendered to God most hearty thanks, chiefly for that he
would call him out of this miserable life, at such a time when as he was of
most perfect remembrance both toward God and the world, and also in the time
of his flourishing conquest, in which he had never received misfortune, evil
chance or spot of dishonor, affirming that he was both glad, and inwardly
rejoiced, because the short time and small tracte of his mortal life should
be a testimony of his strength, a declaration of his Justice, and a setting
forth of his acts and procedings, also that by his death he should obtain fame,
glory and renoume, escapyng the reprehension of cowardnesse, the moate of all
infamy, which by chance he might have gotten, if nature had prolonged his
life. Saying as eternity is the triumpher of time, so he trusted after this
fragile and caduce life, to obtain eternal being: and after this miserable
pilgremage, to enjoy the celestial kingdom, and to come to the place of rest
and quietness. Thus committing his soul to God, his young son prince Henry
to his nobles, his love to his friends, and his body to the earth, he said
certain godly psalms, and received the blessed communion, afterward reciting
the Psalm of the Passion, he completed and expyred his fatal breath, the last
day of August, in ye year of our Lord, a thousand four hundredth twenty and
two, in the ninth year, the fifth month, and twenty and fourth day of his
reign, the eight and thirty year of his age. When ye death of this Doctor in
Martial affairs, and of all cheualry, the very peragon, was published among
the common people, incontinently their hearts were appalled, their courages
abated, and their dolor much increased, yea their wits were so troubled, that
like mad men they tare their hair, accusing and blaming Fortune, which had
bereft them of so rare a jewel, for robbing them of so noble an ornament, and
defacing them of so sure a defense, and for euerting of their strong bulwark.
Thus this worthy King dyed of a pleurisey, which at yt time was a rare
sickness, and strange disease: for the name was to the most part of men
unknown, and Phisicio^s were little acquainted with any remedy for ye same:
his body was imbaumed, closed in lead, and laid in a royal Chariot,
sumptuously adourned with cloth of gold. Upon the corpse was laid a lively
represe^tation of his proper person, beset with robes, diadem and scepter,
with ball, and other abilime^ts apperteining to a King, the which chariot was
drawn with brave Coursers, gorgiously trapped in several arms, accompanied
with diverse dolent mourners. Thus with great funeral pomp, his body was
conveyed from Boys de Vincence to Paris, and so to Roan, from thence to
Abinell, after that to Caleis, then to Dover, and so through the city of
London to Westminster, where he was enterred with such solemn ceremonies, such
mourning of Lords, such prayers of prelates, and such lamenting of commons, as
never before that day was seen in England. Thus ended this noble and puissant
prince (an Ulysses in worldly policy, a very Nestor in prudent wisdom, an
other Hector for manhod, and victorious acts, an other Tully not only in
eloquence, but also in defending his people and him self from private and
cursed conspiracies, as he showed at his departure from Southampto^ into
France, his most worthy and fortunate reign over this our Realm of England.
Whose life although cruel Atropos before his time abbreuiated, yet neither
fire, rust, or furious fretting time shall amongst our English nation either
appal his honor, or obliterate his glory, which in so few years and brief
days, at chiued so high and glorious adventures, and made so many great and
famous conquestes, to the preserving of his name in perpetual memory, and the
glory of us English men in omnen perennitatem.

Thus ends the recapitulation of the life and victorious acts, perpetrate by
our puissaunt Prince of famous memory, King Henry the fifth of that name.
FINIS.
Imprinted at London in Knightrider street, by Henry Bynneman, for Thomas
Hacket, and are to be sold in Paul's churchyard at the sign of the Key.

Anno. 1568.

