THE FLOWERS OF THE LIVES OF OUR ENGLISH SAINTS
depiction of Mary, enthroned Queen of heaven surrounded by saints

Lady of Paradise, I bring these flowers
Plucked from this little Paradise of ours
Thy prayers and thy blessi^ng made them grow
To thee then next to God, we do them owe.
THE FLOWERS OF THE LIVES OF THE MOST RENOWNED SAINTS OF THE THREE KINGDOMS
ENGLAND SCOTLAND, AND IRELAND

Written and collected out of the best authors and manuscripts of our nation,
and distributed according to their feasts in the Calendar.

BY THE R. FATHER, HIEROME PORTER Priest and monk of the holy order of Saint
Benedict, of the Congregation of England.

THE FIRST TOME.

Printed at DOWAY with license, and approbation of the Ordinary. M. DC. XXXII.

TO THE READER.
IT may pleasethee, good reader, before thou take in hand to peruse this
book, to look over the contents of the Preface, both for thy own
satisfaction and mine. Farewell.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THOMAS LORD VVINDESOR.
RIGHT NOBLE AND RIGHT VIRTUOUS,
FOR these two titles due unto your HONOR (one from your Ancestors, the other
from your own worth and endeauours blessed by grace from heaven) these
glorious Saints of our nation do willingly present their lives unto your eyes
to survey them, and their prayers for your soul to profitt by them. The poor
Historian, who making the first trial of his pen, has out of diverse
ancient monuments gathered their faithful Legends, with as great diligence
and true simplicity as he could, persuaded himself, that, then your HONOR no
man could challenge more right in the dedication of these first fruits of his
labors, and that the Saints them selves would have no other Patron of their
holy stories then You, who love to read them, to serve them, to imitate them:
And he him self, and all of his coat and family acknowledging You their noble
favorer, judged it a plain obligation to protest by this public profession,
the high eslceme they have of your honorable love unto them, and the loyal
endeauours they will all ways employ, to pray for your HONOVR'S eternal
happiness, and daily increase in prosperity, and heavenly blessings. It may
please your HONOR to pardon this bouldnes, and esteem of them, as yours
truly devoted, and of me the unworthiest amongst them, as o^e who thinks it
the greatest honor to be thought,

Your HONORS Poor servant and Beads man Br. HIEROME PORTER.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
OF all the instructions and disciplines which are found to be profitable for
man's use, History, by the judgment of prudent men, is judged not to be the
last, or lest. Tullie the Prince of the Roman Eloquence calls it: The witness of
the times, the Light of truth, the Life of memory, the Mistress of life, the
Reporter of antiquity. Which being generally spoken as it does agree also
with Histories Profane, so by far greater reason it may be applied to the
Ecclesiastical, which by so much more exceeds in worth the other, as things
divine do excel the human. But no part of Ecclesiastical History is more
profitable to faithful Christians, or more healthful for their souls, then
that which treates of the holy lives and virtuous actions of the SAINTS, and
proposes them as paternes of perfection to be imitated in Gods Church. Whence
it is, that both in the old and new Testament, are mentioned the examples of
holy men, that well and truly served and pleased God in this lise. What else
does Jesus the son of Syrach in his book entitled Ecclesiasticus, from the
fortith chapter to the one and fiftith; but rehearse the praises of his worthy
fore fathers, and propose their deeds to be imitated by posterity? Does not
the Doctor of the Gentiles S. PAVL by a long rehearsal ^^eb. (...).
of a list of Patriarchs, Prophets, and Fathers, exhort the Hebrews to
believe in CHRIST?

Also in the beginning of the primitive Church, Pope Clement the first divided
the seven regions or First writ^^ (...) saints lives
parts of the city, to seven Notaries, that each of them in his precinct,
might write the passions and famous deeds of the Martirs, to be reserved for
the knowledge of posterity: and unto these Pope Fabian added seven Deacons
and as many Subdeacons, that the acts of the SAINTS might be searched into
and described with greater faith and diligence. These, many holy Doctors,
and learned writers followed, as S. HIEROME, who with wonderful great care and
eloquence, set forth the lives of the ancient Hermites, and Fathers of Egypt:
and that Organ of the holy Ghost our saint GREGORY the Great, who in the
four books of his dialogues comprehends the lives of many holy men of
Italy, and amongst the rest? fills one whole book with a large history of
our holy Father S. BENEDICT. The good (...) the st(...)es of Lords do (...).
For, these and many other holy Doctors, Authors of SAINTS Lives,
understood well that this manner of writing was both profitable to all good
Christians, and the whole Church of God.

But one and not the lest of the causes which should move us to write and read
the Lives of SAINTS, is, the increase of His honor and glory, that made them
SAINTS, by adorning and enriching them with singular gifts and graces. For it
is a thing most reasonable that we honor and serve them, who knew so well how
to honor and serve our Lord, and that we endeavor to augment their
accidental glory (for the essential we cannot) who aspired to nothing more
then to amplify and dilate the glory of God. And since that Io. 12.
God him self (as our Savior says) honors those that honor him, by good
reason men ought to honor them that God honors. The royal Prophett David
considering the lawfulnes of this debt, exhorts us, to praise God in his
Saints. Also it is a thing just Psalm. 15^.
and profitable to implore the favor and aid of our brethren who are
allreadie in possession of an assured victory, to the end that by their
prayers and intercessio^s we may arrive at the quiet haven where they have
landed, and be made partakers of their heavenly crowns and triumphs.
Moreover, it is a great glory for our Mother the Catholic Church, to know
the brave deeds of the illustrious children which she has begotten. It is
also a strong bucklar and bullwarke against Saints lives a buck lar against
Heretics
the infidels that impugn Her, and a scourge to the heretics, fallen from
her, whose erroneous follies can not be better convinced, then by the pious
examples of the SAINTS; for it is a far more excellent way to teach by
works then by words, and all the works of the SAINTS are holy, and all in
all contrary to the fantastical imagination of Heretics. For what can more
confound their Faith, which alone they would haut sufficient for, salvation,
then the good works of the SAINTS, their peanance, their fasting, their
abstinence, their pilgrimages, their rigid and severe mortifications of their
bodies to bring them subject to the mind, all which the blasphemous mouths of
Heretics do reject as vain, superstitious, and impious actions? But far
otherwise did CHRIST, his Apostles, and SAINTS teach, both by words and deeds.
And what they thought and did, can by noe other means be mamanifested, but by
the hystories of their lives. So that both to convince Heretics, and
interpret the doubtful Saints lives the interpretation of Scripture.
and hard passages of holy scripture, the Lives and examples of the SAINTS do
greatly help. Which made S. HIEROME call, the Lives of SAINTS, the
interpretation of holy scripture; and S. AUGUSTINE say, that the holy scripture
treats not only of the commandments of God, but also of the lives and
manners of the SAINTS, to the end that if we chance at any time to doubt of
the true sense and understanding thereof, we way receive light and instruction
from that which they have done. For composing our lives and manners according
to the imitation of the SAINTS, we need not fear falling into error: when we
see how the supreme governor of all has adorned them with manifest miracles,
and with evident signs declared that their Lives were grateful unto him.

Their lives therefore must allwaies serve us as a mirror besore our eyes
therein to behold our own vices Saints lives a pattern for our act^^s.
to learn to correct them, and to look upon their heroical virtues to
endeavor to imitate them. There the proud shall find how to become humble, the
hardhearted how they may be mollified, the cold how they may be warmed, the
tepid how they may be heated, the pious and fervent of spirit how they may be
more and more inflamed with the love of heaven: and in a word, all of
whatsoever age, sex, condition, profession or calling, may thence reap sweet
flowers of all kind of virtues, documents of wholesome peanance, and lively
examples of true piety, far more efficacious to move their minds to the
practice of goodness then the force of weak words only. This S. AUSTEN
affirms of him self. This in times past many noble Lords and Matrones of
Rome did testify, who being all either staggering in their faith, or growing
cold in charity, by only Hier. ad Marcell.
hearing of the most holy life of great S. ANTHONY the Hermit, were enflamed
with so great fervor of spirit, and fire of devotion, that abhorring their
former life,, and desiring ever after to sly all sin and occa: sions of
sin, they bad adieu to the vain world, and the pompes and pleasures thereof,
separated them selves from the conversation and company of men, and applying
their minds wholly to the divine service, followed the banner of CHRIST and his
SAINTS, and crucified their own bodies together with all the vices and
co^cupiscences thereof. But not to these only, but to many others allsoe, the
same is read to have happened in the like case.

Considering therefore and pondering oftentimes these things with my self, I
was much grieved, that in Causes moving the: Author to write these lines.
these lamentable times (wherein our miserable country is afflicted, spoiled,
and oppressed by heresy) the Catholics amidst these tribulations were
deprived of the great profitt and consolation which they might receive by the
reading of the Lives of their SAINTS; because that either their works were
not written, or if they were written, it was in such Authors that now are
scarce to be found, and that in Latin, which is not for the capacity of the
unlearned. I was noe less grieved also that the SAINTS them selves, that
heretofore were the ornaments and Lights of our country, were now being
unknown, deprived of their part of that due honor, which otherwise should
have been done unto them, being made known. For these reasons then, and
partly for mine own private exercise, but principally (gentle Reader) for thy
consolation, I have here adventured (seeing noe better writer would take so
worthy a work in hand) to try my pen in behalf of our glorious SAINTS, and
to set forth, though not as worthily as I should, yet as truly and sincerely
as I could, the Lives of all the most renowned. SAINTS of our ^land of great
Britain, and of the Isles thereunto belonging^ and thereby I have restored
again to all good Catholics my Countrymen, that, which the cruel injury of
the times had violently robbed them off, and sought to have buried in the
darkness of perpetual oblivion.

But because all works that are exposed to the public view of the world, are
exposed also to the censure of diverse sorts of poeple diversely affected, I
thought convenient to set down here some few aduertiseme^ts, as well to prevent
all occasions of misconstructions or cauills, that might be taken in the
reading of this treatise, as also to inform the well-inclined Reader, against
some doubts or difficulties, that may occur in the perusing of the same.

First then, because the most illustrious Cardinal Baronius (a man that has
otherwise well deserved of the Baronius his mystake
Church of God for his Ecclesiastical history) does, contrary to the
ancient and common opinion of the world, rob the Benedictine order of one of
its greatest ornaments S. GREGORY the great, and deny that ever he lived a
Monk under the holy RVLE of the Great Patriarch of Monks saint BENEDICT, and
consequently affirms that saint AUGUSTINE and his fellow-Monkes whom he sent
to convert our country (who were professed of the same Monastery in Rome
under saint GREGORY) were not of the same Order; lest my Reader should chance
to stumble upon this new opinion, which since has been by many famous and
learned writers hissed out of the school of true History, I will here for his
better instruction briefly set down some few authorities of many auncienter
and later Authors then Baronius, who do all constantly asseuer the contrary;
that is, that both S. GREGORY him self, and the Monks he sent, and made
Apostles of England were indeed of the holy Order of saint BENEDICT, and not
of I know not what Equitiam family, as Baronius pretends. And omitting here to
draw arguments from the ancient charters and writings granted to Monasteries,
even in the time of saint AUGUSTINE him self, which all evidently convince the
same for a truth (as of some you may read in his life May the 26.) I will
first draw into the lists of this Combat, that ornament of our Country, saint
ALDELME Bishop of Sherburne, who died above nine S. Aldelme against Baronius.
hundred years before Baronius was borne. In his work then which he writ in
verse of the praise of Virgins and Virginity, having spoken much in
commendation of out holy Father saint BENEDICT, whom he affirms to have been
the first that ordered the exercises of Monasteries and a monastical life, he
makes this epilogue to the paragraphe of saint BENEDICTS praises. Benedicti*
Huius alumnorum numero glomerantur ouantes
Quos tenet in gremio facunda Britannia ciues:
A Benedicto.
quo iam nobis Baptismi gratia fluxit,
Atque Magistrorum veneranda caterua cucurrit.
In number of HIS children gladly stand
All that have place in fruitful Britains land.
From HIM to us baptismall grace did flow,
To HIM our troops of Teachers we do owe.


Whereby he evidently concludes that not only the Apostles them selves, who
brought the Grace of Baptism into our country, were children of saint BEEN
DICT, but even that all the faithful people of great Britain were
Foster-children unto the same saint BENEDICT whose disciples had nourished and
fed the infancy of their faith with the milk of CHRIST'S holy Gospel, and
first brought them into the bosom of his true Church. And this same passage of
saint ALDELME was quoted seven hundred years ago by Amoinus a monk of the
samous Benedictine Abbey of Amoinus.
Fleury in France, in a sermon of the praises of saint BENEDICT, which has
bin lately set forth by Ioannes a Bosco in his work entitled, The Library of
Fleury. This Amoinus, who is a very grave and ancient author, following the
aforesaid truth embraced by our saint ALDELNE, bouldly and without any
difficulty affirms saint GREGORY the great to be a child of saint
BENEDICTS, in the prologue of his second book which treats of the Miracles
of our holy Father. Nether is he content to say it only as the opinion of his
own head, but constantly asseuers it a thing received by the whole English
nation. For thus he speaks in the life of saint ABBO (extant in the Library
of Fleury, chapter the 4.) In the mean time came an embassage from the English
nation to Fleury, desiring to have the help of some prudent and wise men.
Because this nation came to the love of our holy Father S. BENEDICT, and of
that See the life o^ (...) Oswald. Feb. 28.
foresaid place, for two causes. One was, because Blessed Pope GREGORY having
sent thither preachers of Christ's faith, more peculiarly beat into their
memories the observance of the Rule of the same beloved servant of our Lord
BENEDICT. And the other, because one called OSWALD, a man of great authority
amongst them, having despised the world, embraced the service of Christ^ in the
about named Monastery of ^leury. Therefore by the authority of this grave
Author a witness of so great antiquity, it plainly appears, that saint
GREGORY professed the holy Rule of S. BENEDICT, and that the Preachers he sent
into England did the like.

But lest some impertinent cauiller (for such an one he must needs be that
calls in question the authority of our Aldelme whom the Church approves for a
Saint) should say that these and such like writers professing the Benedictine
Order them selves, are parties in the controversy, and that consequently their
authority cannot decide this question; I will here briefly bring Authors of
almost all other Orders and Professions who do expressly avouch that saint
GREGORY and his disciples our Apostles were Benedictines. And because Baronius,
the Father of the contrary opinion, Thomas Bozius.
which we impugn, was a Priest of the Oratorian Congregation, let the
Venerable Father Thomas Bozius Priest of the same Oratorie proceed first
against him. This Bozius, who was a learned, grave, and prudent writer, seems
of set purpose to condemn the judgment of his fellow-Priest in this point,
so plainly he speaks for us in many places: especially in his fifth book of
his excellent work entitled, Of the signs of the Church, chap. 3. GREGORY
the great (says he) borne of a most noble race, and having througly performed
his office in the chiefest honors of Rome, at length despising all things, and
bequeathing him self to the Order of saint BENEDICT, he made profession of a
monk, and (besides others founded in other places) he built a Monastery at
Rome on the side of the hill Scaurus: in that place very many did learn both
solid p^etie, and heavenly learning, and addicted themselves to the Order of
saint BENEDICT. Hence GREGORY drew out Augustine, Mellitus, Iustus, Paulinus,
Laurence, and John, and other Monks, whom BID and others do mention: and by
whom the service of Christ was dispersed and confirmed amongst the English, and
mani^ monasteries of the same Order builded.

And in his third book of the state of Italy chap. 5. which book he writ
after this controversy was set a broach by Baronius: that he might show him
self, notwithstanding the arguments of Baronius, to be constant in the verity
of his former opinion, he says thus: We have showed at large in the fourth
book of the Signs of the Church, sign the 6. that, by noe other endeavor
then that of the Roman Bishops the Christian religion wa^ planted in England,
Scotland, and all places seated beyond the rivers Danubius and Rhene. And in
the fifth book, sign 12. we have made it evident, that almost all those that
employed their labors in this matter, were Monks of the Order and institute
of saint BENEDICT the Italian. Also in his sixth book of the same work chap.
6. he says of our holy father saint BENEDICT, that, He drew so many
followers after him, that the number of them cannot be mustered. Out of his
family issued forth so many and so great men flourishing in all kind of
praises and virtues, that which way soever thou turn thy self, thou may
stand fixed in admiration. For how many Martyr^ I pray you came out of his
Order? How many men most holy in sainctitie and miracles? How mani^ great and
admirable Popes? Let us produce one, able to be compared with them all, GREGORY
the first, to whom the Englishmen are indebted whatsoever, goodness is amongst
them. Thus we see how learnedly, solidly and constantly this Venerable man
asseuereth the truth, and our intent, against Baronius, who was his
fellow-Priest, and the ornament and flower of the Oratorian Congregation. No
man I am sure can except against his authority, who doubtless, If there had
been any probability in the contrary assertion, would have been most willing
to have subscribed to the opinion of so great a man as Baronius, being of his
own coat and profession.

To Bozius, let Onuphrius Panuinus an Augustine Friar and a most diligent
searcher of the Roman antiquities Onuphrius Panuimus.
succeed; who in his Epitome of the Roman Bishops gives this most clear
testimony for our purpose: GREGORY by nation a Roman borne of the most
ancient and noble family of the Anicij, forsaking all the Pompes of the
world, entered into a Monastery of Monks under the Rule of the holy Father
BENEDICT, and gave all his goods, lands houses, tenements, vineyards etc. to
the Monasteries of monks, and at length built a Monastery of Monks in Rome,
etc. This testimony of Onuphrius is of great authority, for living in the
city of Rome, he gave him self wholly to search into Ecclesiastical
antiquities, whereof he has published many famous and profitable monuments to
the world,

Next to him let us hear ANTONIUS Bishop of Florence, whom the Church
honors for a learned Antonine Bishop of Florence
man and a Saint. He not only calls our holy Father Saint BENEDICT, by a
general name, Patriarch of all the Monks of the west, but peculiarly terms
him the Spiritual Father of S. GREGORY, and consequently of His disciples, and
our Apostles, tit. 15 cap. 12. His life replenished with virtues (says he
speaking of S. BENEDICT) is written by GREGORY in the second of his dialogues
throughout the whole book: the sweetness whereof He himself allsoe sucked and
lived a Monk, and an Abbot under the same RVLE, before he was made Pope. thus
S. ANTONINE who was a Dominican Friar. But S. THOMAS of Aquin, not only the
ornament of the Dominicans, S. Thomas of Aquine.
but the very height and Zenith of the Deuines, (who had received the first
rudime^ts of his infancy in the Monastery of Cassine, and is said to have
breathed his last gasp in an other Benedictin Abbey called, Fossa noua) being
a most exquisite weigher of those things which he meant to affirm; in that
goulden work which he writ against the impugners of Religions, and religious
men, speaks these words for our purpose The same consideration (says he) is
to be had of blessed GREGORY, who built Monasteries according to the Rule
commenced by S. BENEDICT.

And Joannes de Turrecremata a Cardinal, and an other fair light of the
Dominican Order, writing upon Joannes de Turrecremata.
S. BENEDICTS Rule, affirms the same in these words: Saint GREGORY confirmed
the Rule of the Blessed Father BENEDICT: under which also he lived, and was a
most worthy Monk, and Abbot. Thus he. And Wernerus Rolwinck in his history
confirms it: GREGORY (says he) noble by birth, nobler in virtue but Wernerus
Rolwinck.
most noble in sainctitie, was a most worthy Monk of the Order of the most
holy Father S. BENEDICT etc.

But it would be to long for us in this short discourse to set down at length
the words of all the grave Authors that strengthen this verity, it shall
sufice to rehearse A list of Authour^ against Baronius.
the names only of some of the chiefest writers them selves, and refer the
reader to their own writings. The same therefore is avouched by IOANNES
MARIANVS rerum Hispaniarum lib. 5. cap. 12. lib. 6. cap. 22. HIERONIMVS PLATVS
in his second book of a Religious state, cap. 28. and 32. PETER RIBADENEIRA of
the society of JESUS in his History of the lives of Saints which he writ in
Spanish, in the life of S. BENEDICT. FRANCIS SVARER of the same society in his
last tome or treatise of Religion, 2. book chapt. 17. FRANCIS RIBFRA in his
prologue to S. Teresias life. IOANNES AZORIVS in the first part of his moral
institutions 12. book chap. 22. GREGORY LOPEZ of Madera Doctor of both
laws. Counselor and Judge Palatine to Phillip the third, King of Spain, who
in a treatise of the verity of the relics which were miraculously found in
the holy mont of Granado, has a very learned and solid discourse against
Baronius in our behalf; And lastly (to omit thousand others of all orders,
conditions, and professions) IOANNES DIACONVS in the history of S. GREGORY'S
life, does constanly asseuer the same truth, to wit, that both S. GREGORY and
the Monks he sent to preach in England were professors of the holy Order of S.
BENEDICT.

Let us bring in the last place some witnesses of our own nation, not all that
have written of this matter, for they would require a whole volume, but some
whose authority is beyond all exception. How great a man in all manner of
learning, and chiefly in the Ecclesiastical history as well of the universal
Church, as of our English nation was Doctor Nicholas Sanders, it is well
enough known to the world. He in the beginning Nicholas Sanders.
of his history entitled, Of the English Schism, has these words? Gregory
the great sent Augustine, Mellitus, and other Monks of S. BENEDICT, to the
English Saxons, who brought that nation from Idolatry to Christianity, and
endued Ethelbert King of Kent with the baptism of Christ. And NICHOLAS
Harpsfield* a man no less skillfull in the antiquities of England then
SANDERS, in his Dialogue written against the Magdeburgenses, and in other
places of his works confirms the same verity. But let the most illustrious
Cardinal WILLIAM ALLEN conclude this Controversy, who in an Epistle to
Athanasius an English Monk of Cassine in Italy, writes these words: I could
rehearse unto thy piety (says he speaking of the Benedictine Order) many
things out of the histories of our nation of the great reuowne and Sanctity of
this Order, for both Saint AUGUSTINE him self, and the other disciples of
Saint GREGORY, that conucrted the country to the Faith, were all of this
Order: and all the Monasteries first instituted (which Venerable BEDE
mentions) and BID him self, were of the same institution; and all the
Cathedral Chapters, which in after times came to be of Secular Canons, were
from their beginning of the Order of S. BENEDICT.

Truly the authority of these three men, who in these later times were three
fair lights of our Country, and second to none in the knowledge of the
Ecclesiastical history, as their works now extant do declare, who had
searched into all the anncient monuments and charters of England, deserves so
much creditt, that in respect of them, the opinion of any other man
whatsoever, may be neglected and contemned in this point. It remaynes therefore
confirmed by the authority of all the forenamed Authors that both S. GREGORY
the great, and the Monks he sent to preach the faith of Christ in England,
were all of the holy Order and institution of Saint BENEDICT. For no man I
think can be so perverse (unless he be a professed enemy to the Benedictine
Order) as to forsake the assertion of so many, Holy, learned, grave, wise,
and prudent Writers both* ancient and modern, and follow the innovation and
novelty of one Baronius, whose arguments against us are so weak and whose
conjectures so unlikely, that the whole stream of his opinion seems rather
to proceed from some other spring, then from the mind and learning of so great
a man. It would be too long to recite them here. It shall suffice that over and
above the foresaid Authors and thousands more, we have the ancient and common
tradition of the whole world against Him. It is a sufficient, and more then a
sufficient answer for him, that our assertion has been allwaies received in
the Church for a truth even since the time of saint GREGORY him self, yea and
that all the whole stream of antiquity does convince him of innovation in
this point. Of which his mistake I could easily pardon him, for allthough by
seeking to rob the Benedictine family of saint GREGORY, he thought to have
done a disparagement to the whole order, yet it fell out far otherwise; for
his denial of a thing that had been always before embraced for a truth in
ancient times, moved many learned men that zealed the Truth and good of the
Benedictine Order, to make a most exquisite and strict search into the
monuments and bowels of antiquity, and finding that the opinion of Baronius
was but a child that could by no means pretend any title or right of descent
from Authors of former ages, they so learnedly, solidly, and manifestly made
the contrary assertion appear to the world (to wit that saint GREGORY was
indeed a monk of saint BENEDICT) that that which before lay, as it were,
buried in antiquity and not thought on received for a truth, but not talked
on, known of all, but commended but off a few, became more conspicuous to the
world, more glorious to the Benedictine Order, and more famously treated off
throughout the whole Church: so that the new opinion of Baronius served but as
a foil more clearly to set forth the verity of saint GREGORY'S being a
Benedictine Monk, and to make the world take better and more particular
notice, that so great an Ornament of the universal Church had been brought up
in the school of saint BENEDICT.

But that we may take away all further difficulty in this matter, let great
saint GREGORY him self tell us what Order he professed, for surely no man can
say but he is a judge without exception, and one whose authority is able to
weigh down more then I will name of such as write against us. In his
commentary on the bocke of Kings, writing to his Monks and Nouices, he uses
in many places the express words of saint BENEDICTS Rule and applies them to
expound the holy text, or rather makes use of the text it self to confirm the
precepts of the Benedictine Rule: and there, in citing the words of the same
Rule, he styles our holy Father L^b. 4. comm. in 1. P^g. c. 4
saint BENEDICT with the title of, Arctissimae vitae Magister optimus, summae
veritatis discipulus eruditus, The best Master of the most strict life, and a
learned Disciple of the highest verity. Whereby it is manifest that saint
GREGORY in proposing here the Rule and masthership of saint BENEDICT unto his
Monks, for a pattern of their life and government, does acknowledge him self
and them to be children of the same saint BENEDICT, whom he calls his and
their Best Master of strict regular life. For if he and his monks were
Basilians, or Equitians or of any other Order, why does he not rather propose
unto them their Rules, and call S. BASIL and Equitius their Best Master? Were
it not a thing strainge and against all rule for a Superior of Franciscans or
Dominicans to propose in a speech to his subjects the observance of the Rule of
saint IGNATIUS, and call him the Best Master of their Religion and profession,
omitting to make any mention of his own Patrones saint FRANCIS or saint
DOMINICK? Surely if saint GREGORY had been a disciple unto Equitius (as
Baronius faynes) he could not have been so unmindful of the Father of his
monastical religion as to prefer saint BENEDICT before him, with the title
of, the Best Master of regular discipline; and to propose his Rule to be
observed by his Monks, and not once in all his works to make the lest mention
of the Rule of saint Equitius. But how could he, when never any such rule
has ever yet appeared unto the world? But of his Best Master saint BENEDICT,
he makes such honorable and large mention, that having dispatched the life of
saint Equitius in one short chapter of his Dialogues, he fills a whole book
with the life virtues and miracles of our glorious Father saint BENEDICT,
whose Rule he confirmed and preferred before all others, to show the abundance
of love which he bore unto him, whom he styles the Best Master of his
monastical life. It would be too long to set down here all the places of our
holy Father's saint BENEDICTS Rule, which this great Doctor of the Church S.
GREGORY expounds to his Monks in the above cited Co^mentarie on the book
of Kings, It suffices for our purpose that he acknowledges S. BENEDICT for
his Best Master, and proposes his Rule to be observed by the Monks of his
Monastery, For what more manifest proof can there be to show that both he and
the Monks his subjects were all children of the Benedictine Order, and that
saint AVGVTINE our Apostle and his fellow-monkes and preachers were
professou^s of the same Rule, and Religion.

Thus much (good Reader) I have thought good to insorme thee in this point, not
because the truth of the cause I defend did want any such proofs, but because
there are some so wilfully blind in the opinion of Baronius, that they do
yet strive against the whole stream of antiquity and ancient Authors, and
seek to maintain his novelty. Against whom (If thou chance to encounter any
such) thou art here sufficiently instructed to be able to speak some thing for
the truth in this matter. And do not think that in disputing this point
against a man so worthyly deserving of the Church as the most illustrious
Cardinal Baronius, we do it with intent to lay an aspersion of disgrace on
his glory, God forbid; for the defense of the truth can disgrace noe man; and
especially him, who in sailing through so huge an Ocean as his Annalls are,
could not chose but err in some things, lest the world should have taken him
for some thing above the common sort of mortal men. To conclude, we see that
the greatest part of our English SAINTS are known allsoe to have been of the
holy Order of S. BENEDICT, as it appears in the ensuing treatise of their
lives. For the Catholic religion being first planted in England by the labors
of S. AUGUSTINE and his fellow-Monkes, who were all Benedictines, that holy
Order was allsoe so happyly rooted in the whole country, and so many
learned and holy men were bred and brought up in the same, that the whole
English Church was governed by the Professors thereof, and replenished with
great store of SAINTS of both sexes of the Benedictine family, there being
noe other Rule of regular life but S. BENEDICTS on foot in England for the
space of above seven hundred years after the conversion of it to the
Christian faith. Noe wonder then that the Benedictine Religion in England was
the mother of so many and so great SAINTS. Their lives and of all others I
have endeavored to set forth briefly with as great care as I could, desiring
thee for whose comfort I have taken this pains, to weigh the faults (if any
thou chance to find) in the balance of good will, and so thou shall not only
encourage me to go forward in this, and a greater work then this, but allsoe
oblige me to remain thy friend, desiring no other reward for my labors but
thy prayers unto these glorious SAINTS, that I may in the end be made
participant of their heavenly company. In the mean time wishing thee the like
happiness, I rest

Thy friend and Wellwiller, P. H. P.

APPROBATIO.
Nos (...) Frater Sigebertus Bagshaw Congregationis Anglicanae Ordinis sancti
Benedicti Praeses Generalis, facultatem concedimus, vt liber de vitis sanctorum
Angliae, Scotiae, and Hiberniae, in duos Tomos distributus, and a Reuerendo
Patre Hieronymo Portero Congregationis nostrae Monacho and Presbytero collectus
and conscriptus, quem etiam ab aliquibus Paribus nostris Theologis, in quibus
merito confidimus perlectum, and approbatum nouimus prelo committatur; modo
licentia etiam Ordinarij accedat.

Datum in Collegio nostro sancti Gregorij Duaci, die 18. Maij anno Domini 1632.
Fr. Sigebertus Bagshaw Praeses qui supra.

APPROBATIO.
OPUS hoc de vitis Sanctorum Angliae, Scotiae, and Hiberniae, ex authenticis
little historijs collectum, duobus tomis distinctum, and Anglice conscriptum a
R. P. Hieronymo Portero ordinis nigrorum monachorum S. Patris Benedicti
Congregationis Angliae: sieut ab ipsius collectoris superioribus, viris mihi
familiariter notis and fide dignis, qui ipsum totum diligenter recensuerunt,
accept, nihil continet a fide aut bonis moribus dissentaneum, nec quidquam quod
vllum possit offendere, sed potius totum est ad deuotionem and pictatem in
lectoribus catholicis excitandam idoneum, ideoque praelo vtiliter dari posse
censui.

Duaci 19. Maij 1632. Mathias Naueus S. Theol. Doctor and lib. censor
Episcopalis.

A summarie of the kings Privileges
PHILIPPI IV. Hispaniarum and Indiarum Regis Catholiei authoritate, concessum
est Reuerendo in Christo Patri Leandro de sancto Martino Priori Benedictinorum
Conuentus S. GREGORII Duaci, and assignatis suis, per quemcunque typographum
iuratum, tipis mandare librum, cui titulus est; The lives of the most renowned
Saints of England, Scotland, and Ireland, collectore R. Patre Hieronymo Porter
Congregationis Angliae Benedictino etc. Aliisque cuiuscunque conditionis
interdictum est intra decennium, praedictum librum imprimere, imprimiue facere,
aut vendere, sub poenis originali diplomate contra delinquentes expressis.

Datum Bruxellis 25. Iunij M. DC. XXXII. De mandato Regis Ely Ottignies.

PRimum hunc tomum vitarum Sanctorum Anglie, a R. patre Hieronymo Portero
Conuentus nostri Sancti Gregorij monacho and presbytero, ex authenticis
historijs concinnatum, totum accurate perlegi: nihilque in eo esse testor, quod
meo iudicio non sit verae fidei, bonisque moribus consentaneum, and Lectorum
piae deuotioni valde accommodatum. In fingulis enim historiis Sanctorum operam
dedit, vt and veritas gestorum prudenti examine libraretur; and non tam
miracula (quibus seruorum suorum sanctitatem Deus abunde testatus est) quam
virtutes and gesta deuotionis plena, stylo claro, facili, and inaffectato
exprimeret; magisque Lectoris voluntatem ad imitationem, quam intellectus in
admirationem pertrahent. Ita sub maiorum and melius sapientium iudicio censui
24. Iulij. 1632.

Fr. Leander de S. Martino Sacrae Theol. Doctor, Prior conuentus
Benedictionorum S. Gregorij Congregationis Angliae, and linguae sanctaein
Academia Duacena Regius professor.

In laudem Authoris and Operis.
EPIGRAMMA.
PRodijt ingenij tandem faetura beati,
Et gestit solemn nata videre nouum.
Non haec maiorem licet exoptare: minorem
Quaerere, vix magnum non scelus esse potest.
Fallimur: exciderat, quod te, Portere, parente
Haec proles primum coepit inire diem.
Ergo maiorem licet expectare: minorem
Quaerere, vix magnum non scelus esse potest.
Fr. Leander de sancto Ioanne, M. B.

A TABLE OF THE LIVES OF SAINTS CONTAINED IN THIS FIRST TOME, According to the
Order of the Months, and days of their feasts.
IANVARY.
5. THE life of S. Edward King, and Confessor. 1. 7. The life S. Cedde Bishop
and Confessor. 35. 8. The life of S. Wulsine Bishop and Confessor. 39. 9. The
life of S. Adrian Abbott. 42. The life of S. Brithwold Bishop and Confessor,
45. 12. The life of S. Bennet Biscop Abbott and Confess. 46. The life of S.
Alured Abbot and Confessor. 56. 13. The life of S. Ke^tigerne Bishop and
Confess. 61. The life of S. Peter Abbot. 69. 15. The life of S. Ceolulphe King
and Monks. 70. 16 The life of S. Furseus Abbot and Confess. 72. 16. The life of
S. Henry Hermitt. 78. 18. The life of S. Deicola Abbot and Confess. 82. 19. The
life of S. Walstan Bishop of Worcester. 84. 21. The life of S. Ermenburg Queen
and Abbess. 100. 22. The life of S. Theorithgid Virgin. 101. 24. The life of
S. Cadock Bishop and Martyr. 102. 26. The life of S. Balthild Queen and Nun.
104. 28. S. Sexulphe Bishop, and Confess. 111. 29. The life of S. Gyldas Abbot
and Confess. 112. 30. The life of S. Birstan Bishop and Confessor; 114. 31.
The life of S. Wilgis Monk and Confess. 116.
FEBRVARY.
1. THE life of S. Brigitt Virgin of Kyldard. 118. 2. The life of S. Laurence
Archbishop of Canturbury. 126. 3. The life of S. Wereburg Virgin and Abbess.
131. 4. The life of S. Gilbert of Sempringham Confess. 135. 6. The life of S.
Jnas King and Confessor. 142. 8. The life of S. Elfled Virgin and Abbess.
147. 9. The life of S. Thelian Bishop and Confessor. 149. 10. The life of S.
Trumwine Bishop and Confess. 152. 11. The life of S. Cedmon Monk and
Confessor. 153. 13. The life of S. Ermenild Queen and Abbess. 157. 18. The
Translation of S. Edward King and Martyr. 159. 20. The life of S. Vlrick
Confessor and Hermit. 162. 23. The life of S. Milburg Virgin and Abbess.
173. 24. The life of S. Ethelbert King and Confessor. 179. 25. The life of S.
Walburg Virgin and Abbess. 183. 26. The life of S Milgith Virgin and Nun.
187. 28. The life of S. Oswald Bishop and Confessor. 188. 28. The life of S.
Aydo Abbot and Confessor. 200.
MARCH.
1. THE life of S. Swibert Bishop and Con^essour. 202. 1. The life of S. David
Bishop and Con^ess. 218. 2. The life of S. Chad Bishop and Confessor. 224. The
life of S. Will^ick Priest and Confess. 129. 3. The life of S. Winwaloke Abbott
and Confess. 231. 4. The life of S. Owen Confessor and Monk. 2^5. 5 The life
of S. Pyran Bishop and Con. 236. 6. The life of S. Kyneburg Queen and Abbess,
and of saint Kineswide, and Tibbe Virgins. 23 7 The life of S. Esterwine Abbot
and Con. 241 8. The life of S. Felix bishop and Con. 244 11. The life of S.
Bosa bishop and Con. 245 12 The life of S. Gregory the great, Pope and
Confessor. 24 71. The life of S. Patrick Bishop Apostle of Ireland. 270 18.
The life of S. Edward King and Martyr. 292 20 The life of S. Cuthbert Bishop
and Confessor. 229 20 The life of S. Herebert Priest and Hermit. 322 23. The
life of S. Edilwald Priest and Anachorite. 324 25. The life of S. Alfwold
Bishop and Confessor. 325
APRIL.
3. THe life of S. Richard Bishop of Chicester, 327 6. The life of S. Elstan
Bishop of Wilton. 340 9. The life of S. Gisla and Rictrude Virgins. 341 11. The
life of Guthlake Monk and Confessor. 343 15. The life of S. Paternus Bishop
and Con. 356 17 The life of S. Stephen Abbot and Con. 357 19. The life of S.
Elphegus Martyr Archbishop of Canturbury. 361 21. The life of S. Anselme
Archbishop of Canturbury. 380 24. The life of S. Mellitus Bishop and Con. 399
24. The life of S. Egbert Priest and Monk. 402 30. The life of S. Erkenwald
Confessor Bishop of London. 407
MAY.
1. THe life of S. Asaph Bishop and Confessor. 412 6. The life of S. Eadbert
Bishop and Confessor. 413. 7. The life of S. John of Beuerley Bishop and
Confess. 415. 8. The life of S. Wyre Bishop and Conf. 421. 11. The life of S.
Fremund King and Martyr. 424. 15. The life of S Dimpna Virgin and Martyr. 426.
15. The life of S. Brithwine Abbott and Conf. 432. 19. The life of S. Dunstan
Archbishop of Canturbury. 434 20. The life of S. Ethelbert king and Martyr 456
21. The life of S. Godrick Hermit and Conf. 4^2 25 The life of S Aldelme
bishop of Sherbune. 487 26. The life of S. Augustine Apostle of England, first
Archbishop of Canturbury. 496 27. The life of S. Bid Priest and Monk. 523
JUNE.
5. THE life of S. Coniface Apostle of Germany, bishop and Conf. 535 6. The
life of S. Gudwall bishop. and Conf. 550 7. The life of S. Robert Abbot and
Conf. 554 8. The life of S. William Archbishop of York. 559 9. The life of S.
Columba Abbot and Con. 56^ 10 The life of S. Margaret Queen of Scotland. 564
15 The life of S. Eaaburg Virgin. 569 17 The life of S. Botulph Abbot and Conf.
571 22 The life of S. Aiban first Martyr of great Briiaine. 574 22. The Passion
of S. Amphibalus Priest and Martyr. 587 23 The life of S. Etheldred, or Audry
queen and Abbess, 593 24 The life of S. Bartholomew Priest and Monk. 610 25
The life of S. Adelbert Deacon and Confessor. 612
A Preparatorie prayer before you read the life of Saints.
MOST dear Savior of our souls, who have endowed thy Saints with so many
and so great gr^^es and virtues, to serve us sinners for a light and guide
amidst the darkness of this false world, grant us grace that this holy reading
of their lives may so inflame our h^^^ts, that we may follow and imitate the
traces of their gl^^^ous examples, that after this mortal life, we may be ^^^e
worthy to enjoy their most desired company in hea^^^ there together with
them to praise and glorify thee ^^^uer.

Amen.
An other Prayer after the same reading.
O LORD who being thy self the true Light o^ the world, and only Way to heaven,
have neue^thelesse out of thy superabundant goodness, o^dayned the Saints as
so many heavenly torches, t^ conduct us happily through the night of this
dangero^^ life, to the port of Salvation; Voutchsafe out of t^^ same goodness,
to imprint an ardent desire in our hear^^ by this sacred reading, faithfully to
imitate thy Sainc^^ and follow the path of virtues which they have taug^^ us.
And thou o glorious saint N. Name the saint, whose life you have read.
obtain us the grace by thy holy prayers and meritts, that we may o^^ day be
made partakers of thy eternal glory in heaven

Amen.
THE LIFE OF THE GLORIOUS KING S. EDWARD COMMONLY CALLED THE CONFESSOR.
IAN. 5. Written by Alured Abbot of Rhieuall 1164.
THE AUTHORS PREFACE.
BEING to write the lise of the glorious King, and most beloved servant of the
king of kings S. EDWARD, we will take our beginning out of the words of S.
PETER Prince of the Apostles, who admiring the wonderful vocation of the
Heathen Centurion to the Christian faith, cries out: Jn very deed I perceive
that God is not an accepter of persons; but in every nation he that seareth
Act. 10. v. 34.
him, and works justice is acceptable unto him. For in every people, order,
degree, and dignity our Lord knows who are his servants, and according to
his divine will he takes pity on whom he thinks good, Romans 9.
and shows mercy to whom he pleases Neither can it be said, that poverty
of its own nature does give holiness of life, nor that riches do take it way:
obscurity, and lownes of state makes not a man perfect, nor nobility of
co^ditio^ a reprobate; neither does liberty shutt up, nor servitude lay open
the gates of Paradise unto us. Our first Patriark Abraham whose wonderful
faith, and vnparalel'd obedience shined in the abundant poslession of wordly
means, is highly commended Abraham rich and virtuous. loseph most chaste
for a man excelling both in perfection of life, and abounding in great store
of wealth and riches. Joseph being by King Pharao ordained lord and master of
all Egypt, showed a perfect example of chastetie to the whole world. What
manner of man holy Job was in the Job a mirror of patience.
prosperity of his wealth, the loss of it gives sufficient testimony, whom
the teadious infirmity of his body, the wicked temptation of his wife, and
the shameful reproaches of his own friends endured with an unmatchable
patience have rendered far more excellent. No man was richer then king David,
and noe man more Sainctly, noe man more exalted to the height of dignities, and
noe man more depressed An union of royal ^^e and saintetie.
to the rules of humility: he was buried in the midst of infinite treasure,
and yet amongst the friends, and favorites of all mighty God he was preferred
before many others, and held to be a man according to Gods own heart. Let noe
man therefore wonder if we g^ue unto our glorious Edward the titles both of
KING, and SAINT; who is known to have bin rich in poverty, and poor in
riches, sober in his delights, and delighting in sobriety, making his purple
robes the badge, of humility, and under the glory of his royal crown giving
a true example of the contempt of the world, as will plainly appear by the
history of his life, which follows.

I. WHEN KING ETHELRED by the Earl Thoretts daughter had King Ethelred his
Father
received his son Edmond surnamed Jron-side, and Alfred by queen Ensnie his
second wife, EDWARD yet enclosed in his mothers womb was preferred before them
both by the disposition of him that works all things according to the
counsel of his divine will, and by the prerogative of his supreme power
governs the kingdoms of men disposing them to whom he pleases. For a
Council of the Lords spiritual and temporal being assembled before the King
to treat of the state of the Realm (which by horrible fore-warning signs was
thr^atned with future destruction) some were of opinion that for the better
establishing thereof, Edmond should be declared h^^re to the crown, because of
his invincible valor, and strength of body: others judged it a safer way to
prefer ALFRED, thereby to gain the power of the Normans, in that Richard
then Duke of Normandy was h^ uncle But the high and mighty ruler of all
things p(...)t and f^ture, foreseeing the short life of the one, and the
immature death of the other, turned all their voices and consents to the
ch^ld^nborne; and moved them to elect for their king an insant ^^^vard (...)
as yet ^on^ay^e^ in the weak cloisters of his mothers womb: s^e that the
whom the land did not yet enjoy was ordained Lord and Gorernor of the land; and
the nobles, and Peers with great joy did swear allegiance unto him of whose
birth they were ignorant and uncertain. But this uncertainty was shortly
after taken away by the happy and wished birth of king EDWARD, soon after
which the fu^^rie of the Danes cruelly invaded the realm of England, spoiling
and destroying a great part thereof with fire, and sword, which moved king
Ethelred to send the queen with her children into Normandy out of the reach
of the Danish cruelty, where our princely EDWARD S. Edward his virtues being a
boy.
lived in his uncles house a child among others his equals, but allwaies free
from such vices as that age is wont to be inclined unto. He was chaste of
body, sparing of his speech, plain in his actions, and pure in his
affections. He took great delight often to frequent Churches, more often to be
busied in his prayers, to be present at the holy sacrifice of Mass, to visit
Monasteries, and religious houses, and to enter into a strict league of
friendship particularly with such monks whom true virtue, and Religion made
worthy to be loved above others.

II. IN THE mean time the enemies sword committed such outrage The Barbarians
waste England.
within the realm of England, that all places were filled with slaughter, and
destruction, nothing appeared that was not masked with the grimme vizard of
sorrow, lamentations, clamours, and desolation. Churches were burnt,
Monasteries pulled down, and Priests chased out of their seats, compelled to
lie in secret, and desert places to bewail the common miseries of their
country. When among others the venerable man BRITHWOLD Bishop of Winchester as
full of agony as pity, grief, and sorrow could make a pious heart, retired
to the Monastery of Glassenburie putting his whole confidence in prayers and
psalms to almighty God. Where as in great abundance he powered out his
devotions washed in tears for the delivery of the kingdom and people out of
these calamities, at length he burst out into such like words saying: And thou,
(...) Lord, how long? ^s. 12. 43. 87. (...). 3.
how long do thou turn away thy face? do thou forgett our miseries and
afflictions? They have slain thy Saints, destroyed thy a^ltars, and there is
none that can redeem us, nor bring health unto us. I know, o Lord, I know that
whatsoever thou have done unto us, is by thy just judgment done. But what!
will thou for ever cast us off? and will thou not begin to be Psalm. 76.
more pacified as yet? When when (o my Lord God) shall there be an end of these
calamities? Or will the sword of thy wrath for ever exercise his cruelty, and
make a general slaughter among us? A vision showed to Bish. Brith would.
At length amidst these prayers, and tears a sweet slumber seized on his
sorrowful sen^es, wherein, as it were, in a dream he beheld the B. Apostle S.
PETER seated in an eminent place, and king Edward clad in Royal ornaments
standing before him, with an amiable countenance in most comely and decent
manner, unto whom the holy Apostle (having first with his own hands
consecrated, and anneiled him King) piously imparted some admonitions and
precepts tending to the health and salvation of his soul, and above all things
recommending unto him a single life, he revealed how many years he should
reign and govern the Kingdom. The Bishop much amazed at this strange vision,
humbly craved of the Apostle to make known the mystery thereof unto him;
desiring withal to understand of the present state of the realm, and to know
his sentence touching the end of their instant miseries. To who^ the Apostle
with a pleasing countenance: This kingdom (said he) is our lords who will
reign over the sons of men: he it is that transferreth Dan. 2.
kingdoms and chaingeth Empires, and to punish the sins of the people gives
the government to an hipocrite. By sin the people have offended our Lord,
who has delivered them captive into the hands of the Gentiles; and their
hateful enemies, and strangers have obtained soueraign^ie over them. But God
will not forgett to be merciful, neither in his ire will he contain his
mercy from you. And it shall Psalm. 76.
come to pass after thy death, that our Lord will visitt his people, and and
work their redemption. For he has selected a man according to his own heart,
who in all points shall fulfill his will, and pleasure, and who having by my
assistance obtained the kingdom of England shall set a periode to the Danish
fury. He will be acceptable unto God, grateful to men, dreadful to his
enemies, loving to his country, profitable to the whole Church, and at length
shall conclude his worthy life with a most blessed and happy end. But as the
Bishop A Worthy commendation of king Edw.
enquired further of Saint EDWARDS posterity: The kingdom of England
(answered the holy Apostle) belongs unto God himself, who after this will
provide a king according to the divine ordinance of his own will and pleasure.

III. BUT as yet the fury of this Danish tempest continued, and the waves
thereof were exalted to the height of an insulting and imperious pride, in so
much that the common miseries of the land were much increased by a civil
discord, and inward iarring of men's minds amongst them selves, noe man knowing
whom to trust with the secrets of his heart. The whole Island was full of
traitors, noe true faith to be found, noe friendship but was scarred with
suspicion, no common conference but was cloaked with deceitful dissimulation.
Till at Canutus king of the Danes a Christian of great piety chosen king of
England ann 1016. the lawful heirs being rejected for the unjust murder of S.
Edw. the martyr, halfbrother to Ethelred.
length the treason of the country and the craft of the enemy preuay^^ed so
far, that king Ethelred being dead, most part of the realm ^or saking the
lawful heirs of their late king, gave up obedience unto Canutus that
wrongfully had invaded, and cruelly spoiled the kingdom: and the mighty Edmond
Jronside, when he had valiantly overthrown the Danes in three several
battles, being at length by the treachery of Eadrick Duke of the Mercians
cruelly murdered, his little children were taken out of their cradles and
delivered to the pitiless fury of the Barbarians to be slain. And ALFRED S.
EDWARDS elder brother ^^omeing into England with a navy of twenty five ships,
hopeing ^o bring some relief unto these broils, and calamities, was slain ^y
the strainge and wicked treachery of GODWIN Earl of Kent, and ^ll his army
murdered in most cruel manner, by the command of the said Godwin, and by the
blouddie hands of his faythlesse friends, and countrymen. After whose death S.
EDWARD wholly destitute of all huma^ assistance lived as a man miserably
banished from his country, kingdom, and royalty: he much feared to fall into
the snares of wickedness, and doubted lest he should either be falsely betrayed
by his own servants, or purchased for the butcherie by his enemies. Therefore
putting his chiefest confidence in the almighty he humbly prostrated himself
before the court of heaven, and powered out his devout prayers, and lamentations
after this manner: Behold (o my Lord God) how in myself I am destitute of all
help, and comfort, my nearest friends and kindred have forsaken me, my very
neighbors, and confederats are ready to stand against me, and now that my
Father has finished his manifold labors with death, the cruelty of my
enemies, and traitorous subjects has devoured my brethren, and deprived me of
their company, my nephews are cast into banishment, Can^tus had married his
mother.
and my own mother careless of my safety, is given in marriage to the only
enuier and destroyer of my glory. And thus desolate and lest alone without
comfort they are not yet satisfied, but thirst also for my blood. But left to
thee (o Lord) poor, and miserable I trust thou will be an aid and succor to
thy poor orphan. In times past thou did wonderfully preserve King Edwin
delivering him out of the jaws of death, and establishing him in his kingdom.
Thou did restore that bright ornament of England S. OSWALD from a miserable
banishment to the royalty of his crown, and give him conquest over all his
enemies by the virtue of the holy Cross. If now in like manner thou will
voutchafe to be my helper, and keeper and settle me in my Fathers kingdom, I
vow ever to acknowledge thee for my God, and thy B. Apostle S. PETER for my
Patron, whose most sacred Relic; at Rome I promise to visitt under thy good
leave, protection S. Edward voweth a pilgrimage to Rome.
and government. From this time ever after being made stronger in faith, and
liuelier in hope, confidently expecting he expected the will of our Lord,
referring himself wholly into the hands of his sacred providence and
disposition.

IIII. TILL AT length when death had robbed Canutus of thevse of the world, and
cut of his sons before they were ripe, the English freed thereby from the
hard yoke of the Danes elected EDWARD for their king, and caused him to be
consecrated and anointed in He is crowned in the year 1043 by means of Count
Godwin, as says Baronius.
honorable manner at Winchester by the hands of Eadis^^^ Archbishop of
Canturbury. Then the Clergy began again to flourish, and shine with wisdom
and sainctetie, Abbeies, and Monasteries excelled with all kind of religious
discipline, Churchmen performed their offices in peace, and the communaltie
their duties in order. The very earth it self seemed to rejoice hereat, and
send forth fruit in more abundance, the air became more healthful, and even
the waves of the sea more patient and temperate. And foreign kings and
Princes stricken with admiration at so sudden a chainge were glad with this
so great a king to enter into a firm league of peace and frienship, only
Denmark desiring revenge, and breathing The royal virtues of S. Edward
nothing but slaughter still threatened the utter ruin and destruction of the
English nation. But amidst all these joys the blessed king was nothing puffed up
with pride of humane glory at his prosperity, nor terrified with his
threatened ruin, but always measuring his greatness by his goodness, he proposed
unto him self a devout manner of life, appearing equal to his domestics,
humble to Religious men and Priests, grateful to his people, compassionate to
the distressed, and bountiful to the poor. He used noe exception of persons,
for ^he poorest and humblest man's cause as well as the richest he ever ^eighed
in the balance of true justice, and pleaded for them both ^ith equity,
always showing him self a pitiful father unto poor ^rphans, and a righteous
judge unto widows. He granted what^oeuer was asked him, and what was given
he received with silence. Noe man ever beheld him either puffed up with pride, or
grown ^^erce with anger, or blemished with gluttony. It is unspeakable ^ow
great a despiser he was of money, for he ueuer was found to be ^yther sadder in
the loss, or merrier in the possession thereof. He was of a comely and mean
stature of body, nether very gross, nor ^ery slender, of a fair sanguine
complexion, his beard and hair ^rowne.

^. AS ONCE he took his rest in bed the chamberlain came in, See the
wonderful contempt of money, and the rare clemency of so great a king.
^^d opening the chest where the Kings treasure lay, putt therein such ^oneies
as he had brought, and departed forgetting to shutt it ^gaine. Which one of the
grooms espieing came to the box, and ^auing taken out as much money as he
thought good, went away ^ith it, not knowing or suspecting the King to be so
near; and presently (having belike disburdened him self of that prey) ^e
returned, and acted the like offense again, having still the King him self for
his spectatour. Which as the third time he attem^ted, the King (foreseeing by
the spirit of prophecy that the Trea^urer was at hand) believe me, good
fellow (said he) thou art too ^mportune, and unreasonable, take what thou have
gotten and be ^one, for if Hugoline (that was the Chamberlaines name) come and
^^ke thee, he will not leave thee one penny of thy gettings. The ^ellow
suddenly fled, and was scarce out of the doors when the Chamberlain came in,
who finding some store of money taken ^way, was much afflicted, and trembled
with very fear; his loud ^ries and sighs bewrayeing the anguish, and fury of
his mind: whereat the king rose up, and seeming ignorant of what had happened
demanded the cause of his great disquiet, which being decla^ed, he said: Hold
thy peace, and rest content, for it may be he that took it has more need of
it then we, let him, (on Gods ^ame) enjoy it, that which remains is
sufficient for us.

VI. THE NOBLES and Peers of the Realm fearing so worthy a stock should
perish without fruit, were sollicitous to have a His care to ^^ser^e c^^a^tetie.
successor from this holy King, and to that end they very earnestly dealt
with him to persuade marriage. Whereto the King much amazed was very loath to
consent, fearing lest the beloved treasure of his chastetie conserved but in
the weakness of a fray e^vessell might easily he dissolved with such a heat.
But what should he do? it he did obstinate y resist their desires, he feared
to discover, and betray the sweet secret of his holy purpose: on the other
side, by consenting to their petitions he mistrusted the utter ruin of h^s
vowed chastetie. At length judging it the safer way to yield to their earnest
importunities, he recommended his chastetie unto God his only hope and refuge
in distress, saying; O good Lord, thy mercy h^eretofore preserved the three
children from harm in the midst of the Chaldeans fiery furnace. By thee holy
Joseph leaving his cloak in the hands of the adultrous woman, escaped with the
just Dan. 3. Genesis 39. Dan. 13. Iu^ith. 12
title of chastetie. By thy virtue the incomparable constance of Susanna
triumphed over the wicked allurements of the dishonest Elders; and holy Judiths
virginity under the wings of thy safeguard could receive neither taint, nor
blemish from the wicked minded Holos^rnes. Behold (o Lord) how I thy poor
servant, and the son of thy handmayd, and after a fashion an honorer, and
lover of thee, and thy Virgin Mother do humbly beseech thy aid and assistance
that so I may receive this Sacrament of marriage, that I may not incur^e the
hazard of my vowed chastetie. Therefore forcing himself Ma^^ieth against ^is
will.
unwillingly to consent to his nobility, he took to wife Edith the daughter
of Count Godwin This Godwin was a man of great wealth, but of a notable
subtletie, a traitor both to the King and country, who trained up in the
school of deceit, was accustomed so craftily to dissemble in all things,
that he could win the peoples consent to any manner of seditious faction at
his pleasure. And therefore Edith his wife a vertuou^ brache of a wicked s^ocke.
to his daughter was applied this verse as a proverb: Sicut spina rosam genuit
Godwinus Editham: which may be thus englished: From rugged thorn as springs
the sweetest rose,
So EDITH fair from wicked GODWINgrowes


For she was a holy Virgin whom (it seems) Christ our Savior had prepared for
his beloved EDWARD, infusing into her, from the very cradle, the love of
chastetie, hate of all vices, and a singular affection to virtue. By continual
reading and labor of her hands she ^uoyded idleness, and secured her self from
the stains of lascivious thoughts, and the danger of youthful conferences
provoking there^nto. Therefore this godly couple being met together agreed
both ^n one holy purpose vowing always to spend their lives in chaste^ie,
^udging it expedient to admit noe other witness of this faithful promise, He
co^enanteth with his wife to live cast.
then God him self. So that she became a wife in mind but not in body, he a
husband in outward consent but not in act. A matrimonial love remained
between them without the act of matrimony, and an union of two chaste
affections without any prejudice to virginity. He was loved but not
corruptedly, she affected but left un touched: and like unto an other Abisag
she warmed the king with love, but did not provoke him to lust; delighted him
with obedience 3. Reg. 1.
but did not make him effeminate with unchaste desires.

VII. BUT THE good name, and fame of queen Emme his mother Thomas Rudburn.
mon. winton. in chron. Queen Emme his mother wrongfully accused of
incontinencie.
was branded with many false reports by the instigation of Robert A chbishop
of Canturbury and Godwin Earl of Kent who jointly accused her before the king
of diverse crimes and especially that, under color of private devotions, she
used the company of Alwin Bishop of Winchester with more then honest
familiarity, to her own great dishonor, and the kings disgrace. And they
aggrauated the matter with many vehement exclamations that such offenses so
scandalous, ought not to be left unpunished, for that it would be an insta^ce
for others to committ the like. With these, and such like speeches the good
king (whose pious simplicity was not acquainted with the subtleties of their
falsehood) was persuaded to give up the whole examination of the matter to
Robert the Archbishop, who presently caused a Council of other Bishops to be
assembled at Winchester, and imprisoned Queen Emme in the Monastery of
Werwell, and Alwine at Winchester. In the mean time the miserable Queen (more
greiued at the infamy raised against Alwine then at her She complains to the
council of Bishops.
own) made her complaint before the Bishops that she was grievously oppressed,
and wronged by the malicious detractions of her adversaries, earnestly craue^ng
some help and redress from them; and withal showing a great readiness on her
part, to make known her innocence by any reasonable means and conditions as
should be thought convenient; when the Bishops with the king had easily
composed all these troubles, if Robert of Canturbury had not so vehemently
withstood their good endeauours by aggravating his malice against her, and
heaping together many fal^e crimes to her infamy, in so much that she was
content for the satisfaction of the world, and clearing the imputation of her
innocence to purge her self with as sharp a trial, as any that is recorded;
by vndergoeing the over hard law of Ordalium, which is to pass over hott
burning irons barefooted; and for this end the king drawn thereunto by their
importunity, assigned her a day to be tried at Winchester in S. SWITHVNES
Church, whither she came the night before, and employing She cleer^th her self
miraculously
all that time in prayer at his tomb, she devoutly recommended her self and
her cause unto God, and his B. Saint: And on the morrow in presence of the
king her son, many of his Nobles, and Peers, and an infinite number of
people of all sorts and sexes, being led between two Bishops, clad in a mean
and simple garment, her eyes and hands lifted up toward heaven, she passed
over nine glowing red hott shares barefooted, without any feeling of hurt,
vseing this speech to her leaders, as not knowing she was past the danger: O
Lord when shall J come to the place of my purgation? But understanding she had
already walked upon, and over those fiery instruments, she presently looked
back, and then first beheld the burning shares, when straight falling upon her
knees with tears she gave thanks to her deliverer: whereby she recovered both
the love and her ancient estate of the king, who now seeing the manifest
proofs of her integrity, cast him self down at his mothers feet humbly
desiring pardon for his oue^ much facility in permitting her spotless
innocence to be so hardly tried, and exposed to the peril of such an
infamy: and the better to expiate this unadvised fault* of his, he willingly
submitted him self to receive some few blows with a rodd on the bare back
given by the hands of the Bishops, and his weeping mother. But the nine
plough-shares were A rare example of hu^^l^tie in S. Edw.
in memory hereof reserved in the Bene^ic^ine Monastery of Winchester, and
for the better recording of the same, the king gave three mannours, the Queen
nine (according to the number of shares) and Bishop ALWINE nine others to the
said minster for ever, and enriched the same with many fair ornaments.

VIII. AS ONCE on the feast of Pentecost the King was present at the divine
mysteries of Mass, in time of the elevation of the sacred body of Christ, he
began on a sudden (allwaies observing his princely gravity) to show some
more then usual alacrity and mirth in his looks, and countenance, which he
expressed with a grave, and moderate smiling to him self: whereat all that were
present began to admire, and not without cause, knowing that to have befallen
him contrary to custom. And therefore Mass being ended some of his most
familiar friends earnestly entreated him to declare the reason. He ever endowed
with a sincere simplicity, plainly confessed the truth, saying: The His visiot
of the Danish kings destruction
Danes met and agreed together with their King to enter again into the
course of their ancient f^rie and malice, to disturb, and overthrow that
peace which the merciful goodness of God both bestowed upon us; and being
ignorant of his divine justice that has scourged and chasticed our offenses,
they attribute it to them selves, extolling their own strength, and saying:
Our hands are mighty, and not our Lord has wrought all Deuteronomy. 32.
these things. And because the Almighty being angry with our forefathers did
deliver us to the merciless power of these Danes, they referring this to the
virtue of their own forces, judge it an easy matter to bring us to the like
miseries again, not understanding that the same God that gives the wound,
gives allsoe a salve to heal it, and the same that mortifieth, reuiueth,
Ibidem.
sends to hell, and reduces from holl again. For this very* day, the King
of Denmark having gathered a huge army together, finding the winds to blow
with his desires, commanded a navy to be prepared. And now the ships were
ready to be committed to the sails, and the sails to the winds, when the
wicked king whose hasty ambition not able to be contained within him self, as
out of a little boat he entered into his ship, his feet slipped out, and he
between both fell hedlong into the sea, in whose merciless depth, and
swelling waves he was instantly deuowred and swallowed up. And thus by his
sudaine death, the Danes and English were both set free from sin, and
danger. And I hope in our Lord God, and his most sweet mother, that during my
time their blouddie endeauours against us shall never take effect. This it is
which by the revelation of CHRIST I did both see, and know, and at which I
seemed to rejoice and smile. Our Lord made me rejoice, and whosoever hears
this may rejoice The truth of his vision proved.
with me. The time and hour being recorded, spies were sent into Denmark who
found all to be most true, and to have happened at the same instant, as it was
revealed unto this B. King.

IX. THESE things thus prosperously succeeding, the king not unmindful of his
vow of pilgrimage, and calling to mind the great benefits he had received at
the hands of all mighty God, who His care to perform his vow.
had enriched his poverty, exalted his humility, and ennobied his low estate
with glory, made diligent preparation for the performance of his promise, with
money to desray the charge o^ his ^ourney, and rich gui^ts to bestow at Rome.
And therefore having assembled the Noble^ and Peers of the Realm, he made a
speech before them of the state of his kingdom, and of his pilgrimage to the
sacred shrines of the Apostles, in this manner. You cannot have forgotten His
speech to his nobles.
how by the cruel invasion of barbarous people into our inheritance, we have
bin made a scorn to our neighbors, and a scoffing mockery to those that are
round about us. For some being slain, others oppressed with the hard yoke of
an ignominious slavery, they left neither honor nor glory to our nation. At
length my father being dead, my brethren murdered, my nephews cast into
banishement, fortune so highly favored our enemies in all things, that
indeed it seemed to me that there was noe remnant of any hope left, that
promised any redress of our miseries. When contrary to all expectation
yielding my self up to the mercy of Almighty God, and putting my whole
confidence in him alone, I vowed my pilgrimage to the sacred tombs of the
Apostles in Rome, and committed my self from thence forth to his divine
protection, and disposing. And he like a pitiful Father gave such ear unto
my supplication, and was so far from disdayning my prayers, that he freed me
from all blemish of scorn, and restored me from an exiled life to the quiet
possession of my fathers kingdom. Moreover to the increase of my glory he
added heaps of worldly riches, and ennobled all the rest with many spiritual
gifts, and graces from heaven. He it was, that without any bloodshed brought
our rebels under subjection, made us triumph over our enemies, and composed
all our disioynted affairs, and inward broiles with a most amiable and desired
peace. Now (God forbid) that we should prove ungrateful for such, so many,
and so great benifits; but rather being delivered out of the hands of our
enemies, let us endeavor to obey and serve him in all truth and justice,
following the Royal Prophets counsel, that says: Make vows, and render them
unto your Lord God. Therefore it behoo^es you together with Psalm.
me to determine, and ordain after what manner this realm may be governed
dureing the time of my pilgrimage: by what law, what peace, what justice, and
what judge things may be ordered, and by whose courage and prudence our
castles, towns, cities, ports, and all our public and private affairs
shall be ruled, My first hope is, that God him self will be the chief and
supreme governor of all in general and he alone will be LORD-PROTECTOVR of the
sweet peace he has bestowed upon us, and he, I hope, will always be with me,
and guide me in my journey; unto whose sacred protection I committ you all,
humbly beseeching his heavenly majesty to preserve, and keep you, and so to
dispose of me, that once again I may see you. Then all the whole company with
one voice cried mainly out unto the King* alleadgeing many reasons, and
arguments, that they ought not so to be forsaken and exposed to the swords of
their enemies, that the country was not to be left so naked, and open to
foreign treacheries; nether was it fit they should run the hazard of so
many dangers for one, and that but a seeming good deed. Whereat the King
finding him self to be not a little urged, and moved with their woeful cries,
lamentations and prayers, was very wavering, and doubtful in mind, not
knowing for a long time what course to take: For on the one side, to omit the
performing of his vow he judged most dangerous, and on the other, not to yield
and give way to the prayers, and tears of such and so many great Lords, he
esteemed most discourteous and inhumane. At length he resolved to defer his
pilgrimage until he had consulted the Pope him self therewith, meaning to
follow his He c(...)teth Pope(...)
advise and counsel; and to know, whether in this case his vow were to be
fullfilled, or otherwise to be satisfied and redeemed.

X. THE POPE having seriously considered and diligently discussed Pope his(...)
to S.
the matter, wrote his answer to the King in this manner. LEO Bishop servant
of the servants of God to his beloved son EDWARD King of England sends
health and Apostolical benediction. Because we have understood of thy desire
both laudable, and grateful to God, we give thanks to him by whom Kings do
reign, and Princes decree justice. But in every place our Lord is near unto
Dispe^seth with his vow of pilgrimage.
them that truly call upon him, and the holy Apostles united with their head
are one spirit, and equally give ear to devout prayers: and because it is
manifest that the English nation will be indomaged by thy absence, who with the
raynes of justice do restrain the seditious insurrections thereof, by the
authority of God, and the holy Apostles we do absolve thee from the bond of
that vow, for which thou fear to offend God, and from all thy sins, and
offenses by virtue of that power which our Lord in B. PETER granted unto us
saying: Whatsoever thou shall loose on earth, shall be Mat. 16.
loosed also in heaven. Furthermore, we command thee under title of holy
obedience, and peanance to distribute the expenses prepared for thy journey, to
the poor: and that either thou build a new one, or repair an old Monastery
of Monks to the honor of S. PETER Prince of the Apostles, and provide the
brethren therein sufficient maintenance out of thy own revenues; that their
continual prayers sung there to almighty God, may add an increase of glory
to his Saints, and purchase more abundant pardon unto thee. And whatsoever
thou shall give or is allreadie given, or shall hereafter be given to that
place, we command that it be ratified by Apostolical authority, and that for
ever there be an habitation for Monks, subject to noe other lay person but the
King himself: and we grant and confirm by most strong authority whatsoever
privileges thou shall there ordain to the honor of God; and lastly, we
pronounce the heavy sentence of eternal damnation against all that shall
presume to infringe, or violate the same.

XI. BUT FOR the greater confirmation of the Popes letters The vision of a holy
man.
and answer to the King, an oracle was sent from heaven, and revealed to a
holy man then living in England shutt up in a hollow cave under ground, who now
being well struck in years both of age, and sainctetie, daily expected a
release to the desired reward of his meritorious labors. To him the blessed
Apostle S. PETER appeared one night in a vision with these words: King EDWARD
sollicitous for the vow wherewith he obliged him self being in banishment, and
careful for the peace of his Realm, and the necessities and prayers of the
poor, has consulted the Pope, to be advised of all things by the authority
of the Roman Church. Therefore let him know that by my authority he is
absolved from this obligation, and that he has received a command from the
Pope, to erect a Monastery in honor of my name. Let him then without delay
give creditt to the Apostolical letters, be sure he obey the Popes precepts,
and yield unto his counsels, for whatsoever they contain comes from me, whom
in times past he chose to be his special Patron, the companion of his
journey, and his obtainer of grace. But there is a place on the west side of
the city of London, which long since I have both chosen and loved, S. Peter's
love to Westminster Abbey and the Monks thereof.
and which heretofore I consecrated with mine own hands, ennobled with my
presence, and honored with many miracles. The name of the place is Thorney,
which heretofore for the sins of the people was given up to the enraged
power of the Barbarians, and by them brought down from wealth to poverty,
from majesty to deiection, and from a place of respect and honor to an estate
vile, and contemptible. By my command the King must undertake worthily to
repair, and reedifie this Monastery, and to amplify, and enrich it with
large possessions. There shall be nothing but the house of God, and the gate of
heaven. There a ladder shall be erected by which the Angels ascending and
descending shall present the prayers and petitions of men before almighty
God, and obtain grace unto them. I will lay open the gates of heaven to those
that ascend from thence, and by virtue of the office which my Lord and Savior
has given me, I will absolve those that are tied in the bands of sin, and
receive them, being absolved, and justified, in at the gates of the heavenly
court, which sin had barred up against them. But do thou write unto the
King whatsoever thou have heard and s^ene, that by a redoubled benefitt of God,
he may be securer of his absolution, deuouter in the execution of his precept,
and become more fervently possessed with love and duty toward me. With these
words he vanished in the glorious light that guarded him: and the old man
according to his command related what he had heard by letters directed to the
King, which at the very instant that the Popes answer was opened, were also
received, and read. Whereat the good King, taking great consolation, with King
Edw. obeys the Pope
a joyful cheerfullnes, and a cheerful joy bestowed the money prepared for
his journey amongst the poor, and reedified the Monastery.

XII. WHEN Ethelred king of Kent by the preaching of S. AVGVSTIN the Benedictin
monk had received the Christian faith, Sebert his nephew then king of the
East Angles by the same holymans endeavor was purged from Paganism in the
sacred font of Baptism. This Sebert erected a famous Church in honor of S.
PAVL within the walls of London (which was esteemed the chief head of his
kingdom) and placed Mellitus the Monk therein, honoring him with Episcopal S.
Mellitus made Bishop of London.
dignity. But without the walls in the West part of the city he founded a
goodly Monastery for Monks of S. BENEDICTS order, in honor of S. PETER the
Apostle, enriching it with very large reuenews. When the night before the
Dedication of the Church, s. PETER him self in an unknown habitt appeared to a
fisherman on the other side of the river Thames running by the said Abbey,
desiring him to pass him over, and he would reward his pains; which was
performed: when goeing out of the boat in sight of the fisherman he entered the
new-built Church, where suddenly was seen a strainge light from heaven, that
gave such a wonderful luster to all therein, as if it would have prevented the
suns comeing by turning night into day. There was present with the Apostle in
the Church a multitude of heavenly burgesses filling it with melodious music,
and most fragrant odours. Having finished all the solemnities and ceremonies
due unto the dedication of a Church, he whom our Lord made a famous FISHER of
men, returned to the Fisher of fishes, whom he found wonderfully amazed, and
carried almost beyond him self with the flashes of the divine splendor, and
therefore S. Peter consecrateth the Church of westminster.
with a courteous consolation the Apostle restored him to him self again,
reduceing his distracted thoughts to the rules of reason; and the two fishers
entering into the boat together. S. PETER demanded whether he had taken any
fish or not? Being suddenly stricken (replied he) with the sight of that
unusual brightness, and detained with expectation of thy return, I endeavored
not to fish, but securely a tended my promised reward from thee, whereunto the
Apostle answered; cast forth thy netts, and try. He obeyed his command, and
presently found his nett laden with store of fish, all of one kind excepting
one fish of a mighty greatness without comparison. Having drawn them on shore
the Apostle bad him present that great one to Bishop MELLITVS in his name, and
the rest (said he) take for thy reward. An abundance of this kind thou shall
enjoy all thy life time, and thy posterity a long time Fishing on Sundaies
forbidden.
after thee; only hereafter dare not to fish on the Sundaies. I am the Apostle
PETER who with my heavenly fellow-citizens have allreadie consecrated the
Church built in my name, and by the authority of my own dedication, I have
prevented the Bishops benediction. Tell him therefore what thou have seen, and
heard, and the marks imprinted in the walls shall give sufficient testimony
to strengthen the truth of thy relation. Let him therefore forbear from any
further dedication, and supply only what we omitted, that is, to celebrate the
most sacred mysteries of our Lords body, and blood, and with a sermon to
instruct the people, giving them to understand that I will oftentimes visitt
this place, and be present at the prayers and petitions of the faithful,
promising to lay open the gates of heaven to all those that spend their days
soberly, justly, and piously in this world. The next morning the fisher with
his great fish meets the Bishop MELLITVS as he was goeing to dedicate the
Church, and makes knownes unto him whatsoever was given him in charge by the
Apostle. Whereat the Bishop much astonished entered into the Church, and finds
the pauement signed with the inscription of the Greek and Hebrew alphabet, the
walls anointed with holy oil in twelve several places, and the remnants of
as many wax ca^dles fastened to twelve crosses, all things being yet moist,
with the late springling of holy oil, and water. Whereupon together with the
people he gave praise, and thanks to almighty God, for that great
remonstrance of his goodness unto them. The whole posterity of the fisherman
confirmed the truth of this miracle, for as they received by tradition from
their father they offered the tenth of all the commodity gotten afterward by
that art to S. PETER, and his servants in that place. Till among the The
fishers deceit punished.
rest there was one that attempted to beguile them of that duty, but he
received his punishment, for so long he was deprived of the benefitt of his
art, until having confessed his fault he had made condign restitution of the
wrong with, a faithful promise of amendment.

XIII. WHEN S. EDWARD had understood all these things out of the relation and
records of antiquity, he was enflamed with an extreme desire to reedifie that
Monastery, and to restore it out of the ruins of deiection, and poverty to
the height of wealth, and dignity: and to that end he dispatched messengers to
Rome, as well to obtain privileges for that place, as allsoe to treat some
other affairs, with letters to the Pope, to this effect. TO NICOLAS S. Edwards
Epistle to Pope Nicolas 2.
the chief father of the universal Church, EDWARD by the grace of God king of
England sends due subjection and obedience. We glorify our Lord for the care
he has of his elect Church, in ordayning thee an excellent successor in the
place, and seat of thy good predecessor. Wherefore we think it fit to lean
unto thee as unto a firm rock, to sharpen and approve all our good actions,
and allwaies to admit of thy knowledge, and fellowship in doing good,
especially desiring thou would renew, and increase all those donations and
privileges which we obtained from thy predecessor; to wit, that thou ratify,
and confirm the Monastery of Monks, which I have built in honor of the B.
Apostle S. PETER, according as it was enjoined me by thy predecessor, under
title of obedience, and penance, for the dispensation of a vow I made to go to
Rome, and the remission of all my sins; as allsoe that thou reestablish,
determine, and secure all the privileges belonging to the He willingly pays
duties to Rome.
possessions, peace, and dignity of that place for ever. And I, for as much as
lies in me, do increase, and confirm the donations and customs of the
moneies which S. PETER holds, and chalengeth in England: and now I send them
accompanied with other free gifts from my self, humbly entreating thee to
offer prayers and sacrifices to almighty God for me, and the peace of my
kingdom, and that thou institute and ordain a continual, and solemn memory
of all England in general, before the sacred bodies of the Apostles.

XIV. THE POPE answered him in this manner. NICOLAS The Popes answer to the
king.
Bishop servant of the servants of God, to the most glorious, most pious, and
most worthy of all honor our specially beloved EDWARD King of England,
sends all manner of salutation, most sweet health, and Apostolical
benediction. We give thanks unto almighty God who has adorned, and honored
thy most prudent excellence in all respects to conserve devotion toward the
blessed Apostle S. PETER, and all love toward us his unworthy successor, in
giving obedience, and consent unto Apostolicque counsels, and censures. We
therefore send our letters to thy Royal nobility whereby we grant unto thee
the holy Apostles society, and ours, beseeching his mercy who is truly Lord
of all, and only sovereign above all, to make thee par taker of all our good
works, if any we have in the sight of God, and at all times to make us more
fervent brethren and fellows in his love, wishing him to grant noe less part
or reward of our duty and obedience in his heavenly kingdom unto thee, then we
desire to fall unto our selves. Allsoe we will not cease hereafter unfeignedly
to power out our daily prayers for thee, that God himself would bring thy foes
and enemies which attempt to rebel against thee, into subjection, and confirm
in thee the inheritance of thy fathers throne; beseeching the blessed Apostle
S. PETER to be thy guardian and aid in all tribulation, or adversity that may
befall thee. We therefore do restablish, confirm, and increase all
privileges given in thy behalf, to wit, that thou be clearly absolved from
the vow which thou did seem to fear, and from all other thy sins, and
iniquities by the authority of him, that has ordained my unworthiness chief
pastor of his Church. Furthermore because it is credibly reported, that that
place which under title of holy penance thou have undertaken to build, and
repair, has long since bin consecrated by the hands of S. PETER him self
(whose unworthy Vicar we are) as allsoe because it is, and has been the
ancient seat of Kings, we by the authority of God, and of the holy Apostles,
and by the power of this Poman Sea, and ours, do grant, permit, and most
strongly confirm, that henceforth for ever it be the place of the Kings
Coronation, and the storehouse of his Royal enseignes, and a perpetual
habitation for Monks independent of any other person, but only the king him
self, and that they enjoy absolute power to elect fit, and worthy Abbots out
of their own body to succeed in the government, according to the rule of S.
BENEDICT, Westminster privileges confirmed to the Benedictine Monks, and
exempted from Bishops.
and that noe sorreigne or strainge person be brought in by violence but such
as the convent shall freely consent to elect. We do also exempt, absolve, and
free that place from all Episcopal subjection and jurisdiction, that noe
Bishop enter there either to order, or command any thing, unless it be done
by the desire and consent of the Abbot and his Monks. And that the same place
enjoy a free precinct, that is a circuit, and Churchyard about it to bury the
dead, without any respect or exaction of the Bishop, or any other person: and
with a most ready and willing mind we give, and grant to that place all
privileges whatsoever by our authority may be granted, which belong any way
to the honor of God, and to increase the dignity of the place. We do
likewise by the authority of God, and ours, ratify, confirm, and establish
all the possessions, and hereditaments which ancient Kings, or any other
person, or thou thy self, or any of thy Lords have granted unto the same
place: and all the charters, and writings made of the same donations we decree
to be and remain still in force, and all such persons as shall attempt to
infringe, invade, diminish, disperse, or make sale of the same, we condemn and
declare them to be guilty of eternal malediction with the ^raitour Judas, and
that they be not partakers of the blessed resurrection, but that they know them
selves to be adjudged by S. PETER the Apostle when with his fellow-Apostles he
shall sit in judgment over the twelve tribes of Jsrael. But unto thee and thy
successour-kings we committ to be the aduocats and defenders of the same place,
and of all the Churches of England in our place and steed, that with the
Council of thy Bishops and Abbots thou constitute, and ordain all things in
all places according to justice; and know that for such good doing thou shall
receive a worthy reward from him, whose kingdom and empire shall never cease,
nor be diminished. This was the Popes answer. Now lets return to S. EDWARD.

XV. GOEING once with the Queen, and Earl Harold to see a P^^. (...)
great sum of money, which without his knowledge they had collected
throughout the realm to supply his wants, and especially to cloathe his
soldiers, and servants with new liueries against the feast of Christmas,
entering with them into the Exchecquer he espied the devil sitting, and
sporting him self upon that heap of money; of whom the King having demanded
what business he had there? I keep my money (replied he) unjustly gotten out of
the goods of the poor. Whereupon the standers by were much amazed, hearing
their speeches but seeing nothing But the holy king, S. Edwards contempt of
money.
that contemned all temporal riches for love of the eternal, commanded all
that money to be presently restored from whence it came, giving herein a
perfect example to all Princes and Rulers in the world, not to maintain the
glory of their braueries with money wrongfully raised, and forced out of the
means of their poor subjects the communaltie. The like clemency moved him
out of his Royal bounty, to remitt and freely release his subjects He
remitteth Dane-gilt.
of that most grievous tribute called Dane-gilt, which in his fathers time was
paid to the Danish navy, and afterward brought into the kings Exchecquer.
But he commanding it should be noe more exacted, freed thereby the Realm of
England for ever of that unsupportable burden.

XVI. BEING on a time in his palace near to S. PETER'S Church, there came an
Irishman noe less straing then miserable, lame of both his legs; for the
sinews of his hammes being shortened, His name was Giles Michel.
and contracted had forced, and drawn his legs backward to the hinder parts
of his body, not directly but sideward, so that his ankles grew fast to his
buttocks, and his toes being sunk into his haunches were grown over with
flesh, that from the setting on of the chine-bone downwards, his body was
quite out of order. He crept upon his hands, and knees by the help of two
little hand-stooles, and being most painful and greiuous to him self, he
haled, and drew him self, after him self. This wretched man seeing the kings
Chamberlain, cried unto him: O Hugoline (said he) will thou not look upon me?
nor take pity on me? nor will not this my misery and calamity move thee to
comfort my distress? What (said he) will thou have me do? Six times (replied
the poor criple) creeping in this woeful manner as thou ^eest, I have visited
the Churches of the Apostles, and have not yet obtained the recovery of my
limbs. Notwitstanding the Prince of the Apostles has not quite denied my
petition, but has deferred it only, desiring to have king EDWARD his
fellow-partner in this cure, whom he knows to be most devout toward him in
all things. For he himself has commanded me to go to the king, and that on
his sacred back he carry my lame body to the Church adjoining to his palace,
and by that means I am promised to receive the perfect use of my limbs. This
being declared to the king, he gave thanks unto almighty God, and causing the
criple presently to S. Edwards incomparable humility.
be brought before him, like unto that strong spiritual ass (Genesis 49.)
bowing to his fortune, and chardge, laid down h^s Royal shoulders to be the
supporters of that miserable burden of calamity. O most strainge miracle of
humility! The poor wretch full of rusull, and nastie sores hangs on the back
of this Royal Prince, clipping, and embracing his kingly neck with hands, and
arms so full of filth, and scabbs, that the very sight bred a general
loathing in the beholders, and some it moved to laughter, as it were, in
scorn of his so base, and sluttish humility: others jesting and scoffing as
it, cried out that the beggar had deluded the king: others again rashly judged
his plain simplicity to be mere folly. But when this Royal Porter had
marched some part of his way with this beggarly burden, the sinews of the
criple began to grow longer, his bones to be strenghthened, the dead flesh to
receive the two companions of life, warmth, and feeling; his toes, before sunk
into the flesh, issued out, and his feet loosed from his haunches were restored
to their natural function. When to No^e a strainge miracle.
the great admiration of all, with the stretching forth of his thighs and
legs, by the pliant, and flexible ^ag litie of his hammes, there gushed out
great store of filthy blood, and corruption, which falling on the kings
garments, served for an ornament, rather then any dishonor. Whereupon the
criple received the perfect use of all the limbs of his body, whose one half
hitherunto was rather a painful burden, and grievous trouble unto him, then
any ease or commodity. Which noe sooner was perceived by the attendants, but
they all cried out to the King to cast him down now since he was healed, and
free him self from the running ulcers of his loathsome burden. But he, mindful
of the chardge he had undertaken, held on his pious journey, not listening to
their bewitching speeches, but entering into the Church, having resigned and
offered up the sacrifice he had brought to almighty God, and the Prince of
the Apostles S. PETER, he dismissed him safe, and sound to walk forth him self
by the help of his own legs, which never before had done him the like
service. Therefore now having them by special miracle restored, to the end to
employ the first fruicts of their labors in the honor of the supreme author,
and worker of miracles, he received a sufficient viaticum of the King, and
took his journey toward Rome, there to give thanks to almighty God, and S.
PETER for this so great a benefitt.

XVII. AS THIS B. King was once in S. PETER'S Church present at the divine
sacrifice of Mass before the altar of the B. TRINITY, together with Count
Leofricke; he, that in beauty This Leofrick is much commended for holy life,
and founding Monasteries, and namely that of Couentrie where he ^as buried.
far excels the sons of men CHRIST JESUS, appeared visibly on the altar
to them both, in the true form and figure of his heavenly body, and
stretching forth his sacred right hand gave S. EDWARD his benediction, by
making the sign of the Cross in the air: at which the King humbly bowing
down his head, devoutly adored the presence of the divine Majesty: But the
Earl ignorant of the Kings thoughts, and desiring to have him partaker of so
great a vision, began to make toward him, when the king understanding his
meaning, willed him to be still, and keep his place, assuring him that he saw
that sacred vision as well as he. And Mass being ended, the king spoke to the
Earl in this manner: By his Majesty, and love whom we have seen (o my
Leofrick) I do conjure thee, that this vision be not published in our life
time, left for the favor of the world-, we should be puffed up with pride to our
own ruin, or lest the envy of the incredulous should endeavor to disable
the truth of what we say.

XVIII. A WOEMAN under whose jaws grew certain kernels, which defiling her
face with a deformed, and ugly swelling, blown up with corrupted humors, had
chai^ged the blood into filthy matter, wherein were bred worms which breathed
out a most horrid, and loathsome smell; and long she had suffered the grief of
this infirmity, till at length being admonished in her sleep, she repaired to
the Court to hope for a remedy from the Kings own S. Edw. cures the disease
now called the Kings evil.
hands, by his either washing, touching, or blessing of the diseased place. And
being come before the King, and having declared her case unto him, he neither
regarded the filth of the sore, nor conceived any horror at the stench that
came from it, but handling, and washing the swelled places with his Royal
hands, blessed them with the sign or the Cross, whereat the skinge suddenly
breaking open, the worms together with the corruption gushed out, the
swelling was assuaged, and all sense of pain ceasing, gave place to a perfect
recovery of health.

This wonderful grace of cureing this disease called in latin struma, now the
KINGS EVIL, (for noe other reason but because it has bin usually healed by
Kings) was first derived from S. EDWARD to all the Kings of England, After him
our English kings do the like.
and remaynes as a holy inheritance unto them to this day, and has been, and
is daily practiced, and to good effect practiced by our modern Kings, allbeit
professing a religion quite contrary to that of S. EDWARD, yet by his meritts
(as it may be piously thought) they work this wonderful cure. Yea Queen
Elizabeth but a woeman had the like power, and cured many thereby as it is
well known by men of creditt yet living. Therefore the Frenchmen are all
deceived, not against their wills, and particularly the French author of the
English history, ANDREW LE CHESNE did not speak heartily, and as he thought
when he denies that the Kings of England ever enjoyed this virtue, affirming it
to be a grace peculiar to them of France derived from S. LEWIS, but ^ur EDWARD
flourished above one hundred and forty ^eares before Lewis, and therefore it is
likely that if any such thing be among them, they must rather have received it
from our Kings, then that theirs have it absolutely, and particularly to them
selves. Furthermore William of Malmesbury (a Lib. 2. de Reg. Ang.
man far better conversant in our English histories, then any Frenchman
could be) having related the foresaid miracle, affirmed it to be the constant
report of such as well knew the life of S. EDWARD, that he had cured many of
this same disease whilst he lived in Normandy. But let us go on. A blind man
cured with the w^ter in w^^^^ the kin^ (...) w^^hed.


XIX. A BLIND man understood by revelation that he should recover his lost
sight by the meritts of S. EDWARD, washing his face with the water wherein the
King had washed his hands. The king understanding this from his Chamberlain,
was much amazed, and made show of some displeasure, and discontent, alleging
that the poor man was deluded with vain imaginations, that noe such matter
could be expected from the hands of a sinner as he was, but it belonged to the
power, and virtue of the Apostles to work such wonders, and for this cause he
ought not to creditt those dreams. Notwithstanding he washed his hands, and
went away into the Church, as not desiring to be present at the miracle,
thereby to avoid the occasion of being tempted with vain glory. But the
Chamberlain having reserved the water, brought it to the blind man, wherewith
he had noe sooner washed his eyes, and face but presently to the great wonder
of all, he recovered his sight, and with joy beheld the light again, whose
loss he had long bewailed. The like favor was showed to a citizen of
Lincoln, who An other cured in like manner.
having lost his sight came to the kings palace; and obtained of this water,
applied it to his unprofitable eyes, and was immediately cured, and his
perpetual night chainged to a most welcome, and long desired daylight. An
other blind man being admonished to go to the king to have his sight restored,
desired the Chamberlain, to make known his case unto him; which done; Let him
come (answered the holy king) for why should I be greiued but rather rejoice
if the divine goodness be so pleased, as by my unworthy hands, to bestow this
promised benefitt upon him. The man was brought in, and by the only touching,
and blessing Many blind cured.
of the king, between his royal hands a filthy blood ran abundantly from
his eyes, whereby they were cleared, and all the swelling of his eyelidds
assuaged. Then he that before could not see, cried out; I see thee (my
souueraigne Lord and King) and thy face shines like unto the face of an angel
standing before me. Allsoe at an other time two blind, and one having but one
eye, being sprinkled with the water in which the holy man had washed, were all
three restored to perfect sight.

XX. AS HE some time sat at table with Earl Godwin, Harold, and Tostins the
Earls two sons as yet but children, according to what the fight of Godwins
children did portend.
their age and condition played in the hall before them; but as one of them
handled his brother more rudely then the sweetness of their game required, their
jest was turned into earnest, and their sport to a plain fight. For Harold
somewhat abler in strength of body, violently setting upon his brother,
fastened both his hands in his hair, and having laid him along on the ground,
had gone near to thrattle him if by the standers by he had not bin prevented.
The king behoulding this skirmish, turned to Earl Godwine, and said: Do
thou consider nothing in this contention of thy children but a childish sport
or battle? Nothing else, my liege (replied he.) But by this boyish conflict the
blessed king understood by revelation what would afterward befall to the
children. For (said he) noe sooner shall they be out of their childhood in man's
estate, but an inward malice toward one and other, will mutually possess
them: and at first (as it were in jest) they will seem to go about to ruin
each other by private deceits, till at length the stronger having got the
upper hand, will banish the weaker, and overthrow him, giving him death for his
rebellion. But his death will in a short time be recompensed with the ensueing
calamity of the author. And all this fell out as England it self may be the
Their contention and ruin.
bleeding witness of her own miseries. For Tostius being by Harold put to
flight, and he a while after had succeeded King Edward in the kingdom, Tostius
together with the King of Norway (that came to his aid) was utterly
overthrown, and slain and almost all his army destroyed. The same year
William Duke of Normandy comeing into England to claim his right to the
crown in one blouddie battle vanquished Harold, who at once was deprived both
of life, and kingdom: or (as some think) reserved in misery to do peanance
for his former wickedness.

XXI. AT AN other time Godwine sitting by the King at table, one of the
seruingmen comeing toward them chanced to stumble so much with on of his
feet, that he had caught a fall, had he not recovered him self again by the
nimble bringing on of his other foot, by help whereof he was set up right
again. The beholders talking diversely (as the manner is) of this accident, and
reioyceing to see how opportunely one foot relieved the other, Earl Godwin,
as it were in jest, put in these words. So a brother helps his brother, and
both relieve each other in necessity. The King (calling to mind the death of
his brother Alfred) In like manner (replied he) might mine have bine a comfort
unto me, had Godwin permitted it. Hereat Godwin trembling, and making feigned
signs of sorrow in his countenance: I know (my Liege) I know (said he) that
your mind does yet accuse me as accessarie to your brothers death, and that
you judge them to be believed that wrongfully give me the title of traitor
both to him, and you. But let God the great eyewitnes of all secrets be judge
between us, and let him not permit this morsel which I hold in my hand to
pass down my throat without causing my death, if I be either traitor to
you, or guilty of your brother's death. And the King making the sign of the
Cross upon the morsel, the wretched Earl putt is into his mouth, Gods
punishmeut against the traitor Godwin.
which being chewed, went into the midst of his throat, where it stuck so
fast, that, notwitstanding all his labor, and pains, he could get it neither
up, nor down: But rather the more he striued, the more it seemed to fasten,
so that in a short time the sluses of his wind were stopped up, his eyes
turned round in his head, and without speaking one other word he vomitted out
his traitorous soul to receive her judgment in the next world. The king that
saw him make this lamentable end, perceiving God's just punishment to have
befallen him; spoke aloud to the standers by: Cast out this dog, and bury him
in the high way; which was presently performed. This Godwin abusing the king's
pious simplicity wrought many villainies in the kingdom against both God and
justice. By his wily fleights, and crafty dealing he had chased out of the
Realm almost all the kings kindred, and friends, which he had brought with him
out of Normandy, imagening to have all things go according to his own
desires, when the king being deprived of his friends should only make use of
his counsel, and follow his dictamen in all things. But the blessed man never
took notice of his bad doeings, allwaies performing his own duty toward
God, foretelling to many that in the end almighty God would punish his
wickedness; yea and some times he stuck not to say as much to Godwine him self.

XXII. THIS HOLY king next after the Prince of the Apostles, S. Edwards love to
S. John Evangelist.
bore a singular affection and devotion to S. JOHN Evangelist, in so much that
he would never deny any thing demanded in his name. For proof whereof it
happened that a certain poor pilgrim (his Chamberlain being absent)
importunately asked him an alms in the name of God, and S. JOHN: He having
nothing else in a readiness, gave him a ring of great value of his finger. Not
long after two Englishmen going in pilgrimage to visitt the holy sepulcher at
Jerusalem lost their way, and wandered a long time throught strainge, and
uncouth places, till the sun goeing to set, the darksom night approached,
and increased their ignorance, so that not knowing what to do, nor which way
to turn, there appeared a venerable grave old man that, brought them to a
town hard by, where they were received kindly, and entertained very
sufficiently with diet, and lodging. The next morning as they were departing,
the same old man putt them in their right way, and in taking leave of them,
Brethren (said he) be of good cheer, and doubt not but you shall return to
your country in safety; for almighty God will make your journey prosperous,
and I my self for your good kings sake will have care to direct you in all your
ways. For I am JOHN the Apostle who affect your King with all love, for his
pure virtue of chastetie S. John loves him for his chastetie. j
which highly deserves it. Take therefore this ring which he gave me for an
alms, appearing in the habit of a pilgrim, and deliver it unto him again,
telling him withal that the time of his death draws near, for six months
hence I will visitt him, and bring him where together with me he shall follow
the lamb which way soever he goes. At these words he vanished away, and Apoc.
14. v. 4.
they having visitted the holy land returned safely into their country, and
related orderly to the King what they had seen, and heard. And in testimony
of all gave him the ring, which was afterward kept with great reverence as a
holy relic in the great Church of Westminster: and by virtue of it, many
were cured of the falling sickness, and of the contractions of their limbs.

XXIII. NOT LONG after the blessed man fell into a grievous sickness, during
which he was in such an ecstasy, that for the S. Edw. in an ecstasy
space of almost two days he lay without any sign of life. At length
waking, as it were out of a deep sleep he opened his eyes and sitting up in
his bed spoke to the attendants in this manner. When in my youth I lived a
banished man in Normandy I ever held the friendship and company of good and
virtuous persons, as most dear and grateful unto me, and chiefly those Monks,
and Religious men that excelled others in virtue and religion I observed, and
with them I conuersed most familiarly; among whom two Monks Benedictines had
obliged me in the bands of charity verle particularly unto them, by their
honest His love to Benedictine Monks.
conversation, their holy life, their sweet behavior, and their affable and
courteous discourse. These I more frequently visitted, their discourses being
to my soul, as sweet meats to my palate. And these (being some years since
translated out of this world to the joys of heaven) I beheld in this my sleep
standing before my face, rehearsing (according to the will of God) what shall
befall this country after my decease. They say that the wickedness of the
English nation is grown so full, and to such a height, that it provoke Gods
wrath, and hasteneth his His prophecy of England.
revenge. The Priests have broken their. covenant with God, they handle the
sacred mysteries with polluted souls, and defiled hands. They are not true
pastors but mercenaties, that do noe protect their flock, but expose it to
the devouring jaws of wolves, seeking only their own private commodity of
the milk, and the wool neglecting the good of their sheep, that at last
eternal death may justly devour and swallow both sheep, and sheapheard in
the bottomless pit of hell. The Princes allsoe and governors of the land are
unfaithful, companions of thieves, and wasters of the country, they neither
sear God, nor honor the laws, men to whom truth is grievous, and burdensome,
righteousness contemptible, and cruelty delightful: so that neither the
Prelates hear any respect to justice, nor the subjects have any regard of
good order and discipline. And therefore our Lord And the comeing in of the
Normans.
has drawn his dreadful sword, he has bent and prepared his bow to
shoote-forth the arrow of his just wrath, and revenge against this nation; into
which he will send a mission of wicked spiritts, to whose power they shall be
delivered in one year and one day, to be punished with fire and sword. With
that, sighing and grieuing at the news of this calamity threatened against my
wretched country, (o ye witnesses of the heavenly secrets) said I, what if
this people beiog converted from their wickedenes shall do worthy works of
penance, will not God grant the^ pardon, and leave his blessing among them?
Penance is of such force that it suspended the dreadful sentence of death
pronounced by Gods own mouth against the Ninevites, and also differed Joan.
2. 3. Reg. 21.
the imminent revenge due to wicked Achab. Therefore I will persuade my people
to do penance for their offenses past, and carefully beware those to come, and
perhaps our Lord will be merciful, and not power out these great calamities
upon them; but with his wonted piety will receive them then returned unto his
service, whom perverted from him by their wicked life, he was prepared to
punish and destroy with this heavy judgment. No no (replied they) it will not
fall out so happily; for the hearts of this miserable people are so hardened,
their eyes so blinded, and their ears so fast dammed up against all goodness,
that they will neither hearken to any correction, nor understand any good
counsel; they are neither with threats terrified from evil, nor with benefits
provoked unto good. At these their words my grief, and care increasing, What
(said I) will our Lord show his anger for ever? will he not at last begin to
be more pacified? When then shall joys succeed these so many miseries, what
comfort, or consolation shall moderate Psalm. 76.
these great adversities? What remedy is to be expected in these An obscure
promise of Gods mercy toward England.
evils, that as on the one side we are terrified, and contristated at our
future rebukes, so we may be a little comforted with the promise of the divine
mercy that follows them? Hereunto the Saints proposed unto me this Parable.
When a green tree cut down from the stock, and removed three furlongs
distant from his own root, shall without the help of any ma^s hand, or by
any external aid, return again to his own root, and placing it self
thereon, shall resume juice again to flourish, and bring forth fruit, then and
not before some comfort may be hoped for, in this tribulation, and a remedy
against the foretold adversity may be expected. Having said thus, they
returned to heaven, and I to you, and my self again.

XXIV. WHILE the king related this vision, there were present the Queen,
Robert keeper of the sacred palace, Duke Harold, and wicked Stigand, who
mounting on his fathers bed had defiled it, impiously inuading the
Archiepiscopall Sea of Canturbury during the life time of Robert true
Archkishop thereof: for which offense he was afterward suspended by Pope
Alexander the second, and in a Council held at Winchester by the same Popes
Legates, and other Bishops, and Abbots of England, he was both deposed from all
Episcopal dignity, and cast into prison by the command of William Conqueror
where he ended his wicked life with a most miserable, and well deserved death.
This Stigand being there present at the kings narration, had all the powers of
his soul so barred up against Stigand a Clergieman punished for inuading a
Sea belonging to the Benedictine Monks.
all goodness, that he waxed more obdurate, at the dreadful story, neither was
he terrified with the threatening oracle, nor gave any creditt to the pious
relatour: but murmuring within him self, that the king began to dote in his old
age, he laughed where he had more cause to weep. But the rest, whose minds
were more virtuously given, lamented and wept abundantly, knowing very well
that the Prelates and Princes led their lives according as the blessed king had
declared.

XXV. SOME are of opinion, that the foresaid similitude is grounded upon an
impossibility; and these were chiefly such as bewailed that the whole
Nobility of the land was come to so low anebbe, and so far spent, that
there was neither king, nor Bishop, nor Abbot, nor Prince of the same nation
scarce to be seen An interpretation of the Kings vision.
in England. But quite of an other opinion am I (says Alured) especially that
S. DVNSTAN did both foretell that this calamity should befall us, and yet
afterward promised a comfortable redress. Thus then it may be expounded: This
tree signified the kingdom of England in glory beautiful, in delights and
riches plentiful, and in the excellency of the Royal dignity most eminent.
The root from whence all this honor proceeded, was the Royal stem, or race
which from Alfred, (who was the first of the English Kings anointed, and
consecrated by the Pope) descended by a direct line of succession to S. EDWARD.
The tree was cut off from the stock, when the kingdom being divided from this
royal issue, was translated to an other lineage: the distance of three furlongs
shows that during the reign of three Kings there should be noe mutual
participation betwixt the new and the ancient race of Kings: for Harold
succeeded King EDWARD, next to him came in William Conqueror, and after him
his son William Rufus. But this Royal tree took root again, when Henry
the first unto whom all Regal dignity was transported, neither by force
compelled, nor urged with hope of gain, but merely taken with an affection of
love, took to wife Mawde daughter to S. EDWARDS niece, joining and uniting
together by this marriage the blood royal of the Normans, and the English both
in one. Then this tree did truly flourish, when of this united royalty, Mawde
the Empress was begotten: and then it brought forth fruit, when by her we had
Henry the second who like unto a corner stone united both nations together.
And therefore by this we now see, that England has an English King, as allsoe
Bishops, Abbots, Princes, and knights of the same ancient race, derived from
this union of both nations. But if any man be displeased with this exposition,
let him either expound it better, or expect an other time until he find these
particularities fullfilled.

XXVI. BUT LET us return to our B. King, whose sickness still increasing made
him evidently feel and understand by the secret S. Edwards death.
Ambassadors of near approaching death, that his hour was come to pass out
of this world; and therefore caused his death to be p^blished abroad before
hand, lest the knowledge thereof being delayed, he should want the comfort of
the prayers and sacrifices of his Clergy, and people, which he earnestly
desired. This done, the holy man laden with many days of old age, and as
many good works as hours in each day, he yielded up his pure soul into the
most pure hands of his Redeemer. By whose death England's whole felicity,
liberty, and strength was utterly lost, b^oken, and overthrown. Noe sooner
was the breath gone out of his holy body, but his face casting forth beams of
wonderful brightness made death in him seem beautiful, and lovely to the
behoulders. This glorious King, and worthy benefactour of S. BENEDICT's order
died the fifth of January, one thousand sixty six, The beauty of his dead
body.
when he had reigned twenty three years six months and twenty seven da^es.
He was honorably buried in S. PETER'S Church which him self had built for the
Benedictine Monks, and had now bin newly consecrated during the time of his
last sickness, on S. Innocents day before.

XXVII. MANY miracles by the merits of this B. Saint were A lame man cured at
his tomb.
wrought afterward at his sepulcher: among which, one Raphe a Norman, who for
the space of many years had bin by the contraction of his sinews so lame of
his legs, that he could but creep, (and that with great difficulty) on his
hands, and hinder parts, came the eight day after S. EDWARDS burial, to his
tomb, and making his prayers to almighty God, and this glorious Saint, he
was perfectly cured and healed of all his infirmities.

XXVIII. ALLSOE about twenty days after his burial six blind men came
following a man with one eye, hanging one to an other, Six blind man restored
to sight.
so that one only eye leading the way, directed seven persons to the B.
Saints sepulcher, where sorrowfully declaring their misery unto him, they
humbly beseeched his assistance against the woeful teadiousnes of their
perpetual darkness; and immediately by the merits of the holy King they had all
their sights restored, and so perfectly restored unto them, that they were
able to return each one guiding his own footsteps. Allsoe the bell ringer of
Westminster Church being blind used to pray daily at S. EDWARDS tomb, till one
night he heard a voice that calling him by his name, bad him rise, and go to
the Church, but as he went, he seemed to behold King EDWARD in great glory
goeing before him; and from that Three cured of quartan agues.
time he had the perfect use of his sight ever after. Allsoe a Monk of
Westminster a very learned man, one Sir Guerin a knight, and an other man of
Barking, were all three cured of quartan agues, as they prayed at his holy
tomb.

XXIX. SIX AND thirty years after the death of this glorious King, his
sepulcher being opened, at the earnest request and suit of His body found
uncorrupted
the people, his holy body was found most entier without any the lest sign
of corruption, as clear, and white as the cristall, as if it had all ready
putt on the divine robes of glory; casting forth of the tomb an exceeding
sweet, and odoriferous savor to the wonderful joy and comfort of all that
were present. The linen wherein he wrapped was as fresh, and pure, as when
first it was employed to that holy use. Which moved Gundulph Bishop of
Rochester to attempt to pluck a hair of the Saints head to reserve to him
self for his devotion. But his pious desire was frustrated, for the hair stuck
on so fast that it could not be pulled off without breaking.

XXX. A WOEMAN that conte^ptibly presumed to work upon S. EDWARDS A miracle
day was grievously punished with a sudden palsy, till being brought to the
B. Saints sepulcher, and with tears demanding pardon for her fault, she was
restored to her health again. Many other miracles have bin done by the
meritts of this glorious Saint, all which moved Pope Alexander the third, at
the instant desire of King Henry the second, and the Clergy of England to putt
him into the number of canonized Saints, and to cause his feast to be
celebrated throughout the kingdom of England. But of this we will speak more
at large on the feast of his translation the thirteenth day of October. This
feast of his deposition has bin allwaies very magnificently, and religiously
celebrated by his successour-kings on this day, as plainly appears in the
histories of England, and is particularly proved out of that which Matthew
Westminster rehearses of king Henry the thirds devotion toward S. EDWARD. In
the year of grace 1249, (says he) which was the thirtith year of our
sovereign king Henry the third, the King being then at London on the feast of
the Nativity of our Lord, and having spent the Christmas holidaies in
sumptuous feasts and banqueting, as the custom is, together with a great
multitude of his nobility, he assembled many more Nobles and Peers of the
Realm to be present, and Henry the thirds devotion to S. Edwar.
rejoice with him at the feast of S. EDWARD, whom more cordially he loved, and
honored, then others of the Saints. And on the eve of that B. Kings
deposition, our sovereign Lord the King according to his pious custom fasted
with bread, and water, spending the whole day in continual watching, and
praying, and giving of alms. But on the feast itself he caused Mass with
great magnificence and solemnity to be celebrated in the Church of
Westminster, in vestments all of silk of an inestimable value, and adorned
with a great multitude of wax tapers, and the resounding notes of the A
consideration on his virtues.
Conuentuall and Monastical quier, Ought not we likewise to follow this
virtuous example, and give praise unto almighty God for the excellent gifts
wherewith he honored this B. King, in choosing, and calling him to so great
glory even before he was borne? And for that he revealed unto him the great
favors promised to the kingdom of England for his sake, long before they
happened? Who will not admire, and endeavor to imitate the sacred virtue of
chastetie, which so great a King entirely conserved so many years, with his
Queen in holy marriage? Who will not embrace his most profound humility, and
contempt of the world, and him self, when he carried that wretched cripple on
his royal shoulders to obtain his health? Who will not strive to serve
almighty God with affection, seeing how highly he exalts, and honors his
Saints? How he exalts them with miracles, and so gloriously recompenseth
their service, giving peace, health, and prosperity to kingdoms by their
intercession, and in the end making them immortal kings, and everlasting
courtiers of the kingdom of heaven.

This life is taken chiefly, and almost wholly o^t of that which B. ALVRED
Abbot of Rhieuall has written. John Capgraue has the very same; William
Malmesburie, Roger Houedon, Matthew Westminster, Nicholas Harpsfield, and
almost all writers of Saints lines make very honorable and worthy mention
of him. And the Roman Martirologe on this day.

The life of S. CEDDE Bishop and Confessor of the holy order of S. BENEDICT.
IAN. 7. Out of Venerable Bede hist. Eccl. lib. 3. and 4
SAINT CEDDE was borne in London, and having gone so far out of his youth,
that he was able to make choice of a manner of life, he putt on a monastical
habit, among the ancient Monks in the Monastery of Lindisfarne. In which
school of piety he profitted so well in a short time, that he was thought
worthy to be sent as an Apostolical man with other devout Priests to preach
the Gospel to the Mercians, or inhabitants of Middle-England, where by his
pious labors S. Cedde conuerteth the East Angles.
and exemplar life, he greatly promoted the Catholic cause. But Sigbert then
king of the East Saxons being at that time by the means of Oswin king of
Northumberland, from a Heathen converted to the Christian faith, and baptized
by Finanus Bishop of York, B. CEDDE at the earnest entreatie of Sigbert was
called back by Finanus, and sent with king Sigbert to convert his country to
the faith: whose labor there took so good effect, that in a short time he
brought most part of that Province from Paganism (into which since their
conversion by S. MELLITVS the Benedictine Monk, they had fallen) to the true
knowledge and subjection of Christ's Church; and he him self (who by Gods grace
was now made their second Apostle) returning into Northumberland the messenger
of his own good success, was by the hands of Finanus, in presence of two
other Bishops, ordained allsoe the second Bishop of London, the chief city of
the East Saxons, succeeding S. MELLITVS both in the Apostleship and Bishopric
He is made Bishop of London.
of that Province. And now he began with a more free authority to bring to
perfection the work so happily begun, by erecting of Churches in diverse
places, making Priests and Deacons to aid him in baptising, and preaching the
holy word of God, instructing the new-christened, to observe as far forth as
they were able, the stricter rules of a religious life. Great was the joy and
comfort which the new converted King Sigbert and his poeple received to see the
happy success of his endeauours. He was to good men meek and courteous, to
the bad somewhat more stern, and severe in punishing their vices, as appears
by the ensuing accident.

II. THERE was in the kings court a noble man that lived in the bands of
unlawful wedlock, against whom the holy bishop after many pious admonions
given to noe effect, denounced the sentence of excommunication, strictly
forbidding the King, and all other persons to forbear his company, and not to
eat nor drink with him. But the King being invited by the same Nobleman to a
Excommucation.
banquet, made light of the bishops precepts, and went to him. And in his
return chauncing to meet the holy man, he was much afrighted, and leaping of
his horse fell prostrate at the Bishops feet (now likewise alighted from horse
back) humbly craving pardon of his fault. The holy man touching him as he lay
along with his rodd, So S. P^ter prono ^^eed death to Ananias. Act. 5.
with an Episcopal authority used these words. I tell thee (said he) that
because thou had refused to refrain from the house of that wicked and damnable
person, in that very house thou shall breath thy last. All which came
afterward to pass as holy CEDDE had foretold. For within a short time by the
hands of the same Earl, and his brother, the king was most cruelly murdered
in that house: his butchers alleging noe other cause moving them thereunto,
but his overmuch clemency and mercy in romitting offenses committed against
him: so that it is credibly thought that this untimely death of so good and
virtuous a Prince, did not only wash away his fault, but increase his meritt.

III. THIS blessed Bishop was wont sometimes to visitt his country in
Northumberland, and to comfort his countrymen there with his divine
preachings, and godly exhortations, whereby he got so much favor with king
Edilwald son to king Oswald (that reigned over the people of that country
called Deiri) that moved thereunto both by the sainctitie and wisdom of this
virtuous Bishop, and allsoe by the means of his good brother Celin chaplain
to the king and court, he gave to S. CEDDE a piece of land for the building of
a Monastery, whither he and his people might resort to serve God, and receive
the Sacraments. The holy Bishop made choice of a place for this purpose in the
desert mountains, which before that time was rather a covert for thieves, and
wild beasts, then a fit habitation for Christians. But he would not permit
the foundation to be laid, before he had purged and consecrated the place with
fasting and prayer: both which he performed every day until the evening, and
then he contented him self with one and that a small meal, consisting of a
little bread, one egg, and a little milk mingled with water. Thus he passed
all the lent (excepting sundaies) until Fasting in Lent until evening.
he was called away from this holy exercise upon some special business of the
king, by which he was forced to intermitt his pious de seigne, when there
remained only ten days of the forty to come. But because he would not let
his holy task be there broken off, he entreated Cimbell avertuous Priest and
his natural brother, to finish the godly work he had begun, according to
the fore-shewed example. Which being by Cimbell gladly undertaken, and as
piously He builde^h a monastery.
performed, soon after Bishop CEDDE erected the Monastery now called Lesting,
ordering it according to the same laws, and discipline of religion, as that of
Lindisfurne or Holy Island, where he had learned his first lesson, and rudiments
of virtue.

IV. BUT IN that great controversy which arose afterward between the old
Scottish or Irish Monks, and the Monks of S BENEDICTS order the Apostles of
England, touching the celebration of Easter, in which it was sharply disputed
an each side, especially between S. WILFRID the Benedictine Monk and Bishop
Colman a Scott, holy CEDDE being a diligent interpreter for both parts was so
convinced by the divine arguments of S. WILFRID, that he quite gave over to
follow the footsteps of the Scotts, and came to the knowledge of the true and
Catholic manner of observing the feast of Easter; and allsoe to wear a round
shaven crown after the Monastical fashion of Benedictines brought first into
England by S. AVGVSTIN our Apostle and his fellows that were all Benedictine
Monks. And afterward by the persuasion of WILFRID (Colman and his adherents
being fled into Scotland) S. CEDDE him self received the rule of our most holy
father S. BENEDICT, and induced all the Monks, of his new Monastery of
Lesting (of which he was head) to do the like, and under the same holy rule he
governed them in all manner of virtues until his death. Thus after some years
well spent both in government of his Bishopric, and this Monastery: at the
length as he visitted the same in time of plague, he fell into a sickness, which
set free his soul from the teadiousnes of this worldly life, to taste the
desired joys prepared for the reward of his merits and good works in heaven.
He was first buried abroad, but afterward a Church of stone being built there
in honor of S. Cedde dies.
our blessed Lady, he was taken up and laid at the right side of the altar.
At his departure he resigned the government of the Monastery to his brother S.
CHAD, whose life you may read the second of March.

V. WHEN the Monks of the Monastery he had erected amongst the East Saxons
understood of his death, thirty of them went into Northumberland, desiring
either to live by the body of their holy father, or (if God so pleased) to
die, and be buried there: Such was the great love they bore unto this blessed
Saiuct. But in that time of mortality they all walked the paths of death,
excepting one little boy, who (as it was piously thought) was preserved from
death by the special prayers and intercessions of this holy Bishop. For living
many years after, and studying holy scriptures, he came at length to
knowledge that he had never received the Sacrament See the peculiar providence
of almighty God.
of Baptism: whereupon he was forthwith christened, and afterward being
promoted to priesthood, he became a very profitable member of Gods Church,
having been by the prayers and merits of S. CEDDE miraculously preserved from
the danger of a temporal, and eternal death S. CEDDE died about the year of
our Lord 664.

Of him do make mention S. BID whom we have followed, JOHN CAPGRAVE, WILLIAM
MELMESBVRY de Pontific. Land. NICHOLAS HARPSFIELD saec. 7. cap. 13. TRITHEMIVS
of the famous men of S. Benedicts order lib. 4. cap. 66. and many others.

The life of S. WVLSINE Bishop and Confessor of the holy order of S. BENEDICT.
IAN. 8.
SAINT WVLSINE borne in London of worthy parents, was carefully brought up in
the service and fear of God, until he was grown out of his childhood, and
then they offered him unto God and S. BENEDICT in the Monastery of the
Benedictine Monks at The virtue of his youth.
Westminster, to be trained up in that divine school of virtue; wherein he
became so good a proficient, that in a short time his grave carriage, and
religious behavior gave a great testimony ^f future sainctetie. By watching,
fasting, and prayer he overcame the two sworn enemies of goodness, the flesh,
and the Devil. So highly he contemned the pleasures and vanities of the
world, that nothing seemed to him more irksome, and teadious, then the very
thought thereof, in respect of the great comfort he received out of the divine
contemplation of heaven, and heavenly things; whereunto he addicted all the
powers both of his body and soul. In humility he was most lowly, in
obedience most ready, and full of charitable affection toward all men. Having
passed over his youth in the continual exercise of these, and other
Monastical virtues, he received the dignity of Priesthood, and then he did
not only shine unto his He is made Priest.
brethren, and draw them to virtue by his good example; but allsoe by reading
and expounding the holy scriptures by pious exhortations and preachings, he
would win them to the love of true religion and devotion. At length by the
means of that great pillar of the Benedictine family S. DVNSTAN, he was
chosen Abbot of the same Monastery; in the performance of which holy charge,
it is beyond the force of weak words to express, how much he labored And
Abbot of westminster.
for the salvation of fowls, and what excellent examples of virtue and godly
life he showed unto his brethren. But such were his rare virtues, that long
they could not be contained within the bounds of a weak Cloister. For king
Ethelred called him thence, as it were from under the obscure bushel of his
Monastery, to be placed in the view and admiration of the world, in the
Bishopric of Sherburne, and by the free election of the Clergy, and great
applause of the poeple, he was exalted to the government of that Sea. Then it
was rare to behold how worthily he began to rule his people, thundering at
first a dutiful respect into their The true virtues of a good Bishop.
hearts, he afterward shined all love among them: his first and principal
care being, to appear unto his subjectss such as he would have them be, and to
be such as he appeared, making his godly life, the example of his own
doctrine, and his doctrine to arise, as it were, out of his deeds. So that in
a small time he wanne singular love in his people, and engraffed singular
confidence. His daily exercise was to exhort his subjects, to comfort the
afflicted, to feed the hungry, to cloth the naked, to redeem captives, to
entertain poor pilgrims, to teach the ignorant, to withould the desperate
from the shipwreck of their souls, to inflame the tepid, and animate the
seruent, to provide carefully for those under his charge, and punctually to
perform the duty of his profession and calling. He was wont to spend the time
of Lent within the Monks cloister were freed from the tumultuous affairs of
the world he led a rigid monastical life, exercising him self in fasting and
prayer, and heavenly contemplation. On maundie thursday he came abroad, and
having consecrated holy Chrisme according to the custom of Consecration of
Chrisme.
the Catholic Church, he would preach unto the people, and give them his
benediction. After the celebration of the feast of Easter he was wont to visitt
his whole diocese, as well to teach, instruct, and direct his vnder-pastours
and clergiemen worthily to perform their duties, as allsoe to amend, correct,
and punish whatsoever was done amiss, contrary to the rules of good order,
discipline, and justice.

II. HE WAS wonderful careful both to augment, and exalt that ancient sea of
Sherburne, and to establish it in a continual peace, in good order and
discipline, and to that end he cast out from thence Nichol. Harp. saec. 10. c.
9. and William Malm. Monks ought nor to be subject to Bishops.
the secular clergimen for their bad life, and in their steed brought in the
Benedictine Monks, over whom he would have placed an Abbot, but they desired
rather to live under his government, whereunto (though unwilling) he consented:
foretelling them that it would be a beginning of great calamities unto their
successors to be subject to the Bishops. But in all that he did for the Monks
he never detracted any part of the means belonging to the Bishopric, to set
them up withal, but provided elsewhere sufficient reuenews for them, allwaies
preserving the Episcopal Sea in her own ancient and splendor in all things.

III. THVS having for the space of five years worthily governed his flock, and
done the office of a good pastor, he fell into a vehement sickness, together
with a virtuous knight, and his dear S. Wulsine falls sick.
friend named Egeline, who hearing of his lords infirmity, seemed to suffer
more therein, then in his own, and therefore (not able to go him self) he
sent to know in what danger he was. The languishing holy man, by the messenger,
willed his si^kly friend suddenly to dispose of him self and his estate, and to
prepare for his last journey; for to morrow next (said he) we shall go both
together to the court of our eternal King, where he shall receive the reward
of his faithful service. The messenger being departed, he used these words to
his Monks: By the filial love you have ever showed unto me, I do conjure you
(my dear children) that before you committ my bones to the earth, you cause
the body of this our faithful friend to be brought hither, and to be buried
with me in this Church of Sherburne, that in death our bodies be not separated,
whose souls during life were tied faithfully together in the bands of true
love and friendship. To these words the Monks that were present, could give noe
other answer but tears, the woeful witnesses of the sorrow they conceived to
depart from so dear a father. But he exhorted them all to be rather joyful
then grieved at his near approaching happiness, and always to live in the fear
and love of God, till he felt the pangs of death begin to cut of his
discourse; when lifting up his hands and eyes toward heaven, he cried out with
the first martyr S. STEPHEN: Behold I see the heavens opened and Jesus
standing on the right hand of God: and with the breath of these words he
breathed forth his pure soul to receive her reward in the purest He dies
place; the eight day of January, about the year of our Lord 985. Of this B.
Saint do make mention ARNOLD WION in the appendix of his martirologe, WILLIAM
MALMESBVRY, JOHN CAPGRAVE, NICHOLAS HARPSFIELD, and others, whom we have
followed.

The life of S. ADRIAN Confessor and Abbot of the holy order of S. BENEDICT.
IAN. 9.
SAINT ADRIAN borne in Africa, for his great virtue Out of venerable Bede.
and learning was chosen Abbot of the Benedictin Monastery of Niridan in
Campania not far from Naples. He was a great divine, and very skillfull both
in the Greek and Latin tongue: and to these sciences was added as an ornament
of all, a true zeal of the service of almighty God, and monastical
discipline, with a perfect knowledge of Ecclesiastical government. All which
shined so clearly in him, as they gave sufficient testimony with how sincere
a desire of virtue he had first forsaken the world, and putt on the habitt of
religion.

II. IT happened during the time of this holy Abbot that the Metropolitan Sea
of Canturbury, by the death of Deus-dedit, or Gods-guist sixth Bishop thereof,
was vacant and destitute of a Pilote: when the people and Clergy of Benedictin
Monks moved Egbert then King of Kent, and Oswin king of the Northumbers to
send one Wighart a^vertuous and holy Priest to Rome, to be consecrated Kings of
Engl. sent to Rome for an Archbishop of Canturb.
Bishop of Canturbury. But Wighart coming to Rome in the hott time of plague,
died before he had received his intended dignity. Whereupon Vitalianus, then
Pope sent for S. ADRIAN out of his Monastery of Niridan, and desired him to
accept the charge and dignity of the Archiepiscopall Sea of Canturbury. But he
refused this offer, humbly answearing that unworthy hy was to undertake, and
more unable to perform any such weighty office in Gods Church. And therefore
desired some days of deliberation to search S. Adrian refuses the
Archbishoprik
out an other, whose worth did more worthily correspond with so hight a
degree and calling. In this while he found out a holy Benedictin Monk of his
acquaintance called Theodore, that lived in Rome, and him he presented unto the
Pope as one fit for that dignity, he being a man excellent in the two
chiefest ornaments of the mind, learning, and virtue. This man the Pope
accepted and consecrated Archbishop of Canturbury; on condition that ADRIAN,
who had refused the chief dignity, should at lest accompany him into England
as his coadiutour in that Apostolical mission. Hereunto the blessed Saint
willingly consented, and undertook the voyage, making him self a subject,
where he might have been a commander, His great humility.
and choosing rather to profitt the nation with his preaching and learning,
then govern it by an Episcopal authoritle: such was his wonderful humility,
and burning zeal to gain souls to God.

III NOW therefore this holy couple took their journey toward England, and
coming into France, S. ADRIAN (who was famous in that country, for having been
sent on diverse embassages between Christian Princes) was (for his greater
meritt) suspected to go to the Kings of England on some business of estare from
the Emperor plotted against the French, and therefore was stayed by the King
of the Gauls, until he had cleared him self of that suspicion. Which done, he
went after Theodore into England, where within a year or two he was by the
same Theodore made Abbot of the Benedictin Monks in the monastery of S. PETER
in Canturbury, now called S. Austins, from the Benedictin Monk S. AUSTIN our
Apostle, He is made Abbot of S. Peter's in Canturb.
who lies buried there. In this place S. ADRIAN gathered together a great
number of disciples whom he taught and instructed out of the holy scriptures,
to find the ready way to everlasting life; and besides this, he taught them
Music, Astronomy, and Arithmetic, as allsoe the Greek and Latin tongue:
which his pious labors took so good effect, that many of his scholars
spoke Greek and Latin as perfectly as their own mother tongue: and especially
two, far exceeded their other fellows in all manner of learning, one was
called Albin, who succeeded S. ADRIAN in the regencie of the Abbey, and the
other Tobias, who was afterward Bishop of Rochester

IV. Moreover this blessed Saint was of so great meritt, and so highly
esteemed before almighty God, that he is reported to have bin the worker of
many miracles, and that by his intercession a de^d man was raised to life. At
length having labored in the vineyard of our Lord a long time both in Jtalie
and England, leaving His death
behind him many learned disciples the fruits of his labors, the thirty
ninth year after he came to Canturbury, he left this world to receive his
reward in heaven the ninth day of January, the year of our Lord 708. He was
buried in the Church or chapel of the B. Virgin MARIE, which King Edbald had
built in the foresaid Monastery of S. AVGVSTIN. And this Church happening
afterward to be burnt, S. ADRIAN appeared to one of the Monks, and commanded
He appears in glory.
him to go to S. DVNSTAN (who then was Archbishop of Canturbury) with these
words, in his name: Thou live in houses well covered and fenced against the
weather but the Church of the Mother of God, wherein I, and other domestics of
heaven do inhabit lies open, exposed to the injurious storms of the wind.
Whereupon S. DVNSTAN carefully caused that Church to be repaired, which him
self afterward frequented every night, such divine sweetness he received by
his prayers offered to God in that place. But one night entering into it he
beheld S. ADRIAN seated amongst a glorious quier of Angels and Saints praising
and glorifieing almighty God. His body was allwaies held in great veneration
but especially from hence forth: and many miracles are reported by the author
of his life, to have been wrought at his tomb, which for breuities sake we
omit, desiring of almighty God grace rather to imitatehis virtues, then to
admire his wonders. Of S ADRIAN makes mention S. BID as before, BARONIVS tom.
8. ann. 668. TRITHEMIVS in his 3. book of the famous men of S. BENEDICTS
order, HARPSFIELD saec. 7. cap. 8. and. 9. MOLANVS, JOHN CAPGRAVE, and others.

The life of S, BRITHWALD Bishop and Confessor of the holy order of S. BENEDICT.
IAN. 9. Out of venerable Bede hist. de gest.
SAINT BRITHWALD a Monk of S. BENEDICTS order in the famous Abbey of
Glassenbury, was made Abbot of the monastery called Reaculer in Kent, where at
that time the Kings of Kent sometimes kept their Court, allbeit now (says
Camden) it be but a poor village not far distant from Tanet. Being a man of
very great learning and knowledge in divine scriptures, and wonderful well
practiced in Ecclesiastical and Monastical discipline, he was chosen by the
Benedictins of Canturbury to succeed S. THEODORE in that sea (which had bin
vaca^t the space of two years) in the year 692, and consecrated Archbishop
thereof the year following. He was the eight Archbishop of Canturbury, and
governed his Chutch with all true virtues belonging to a good Bishop the space
of thirty seven years, six months and fourteen days. In his time a
Council was held at London, wherein the point of worshipping holy Images was
handled and confirmed. At length this holy man laden with many years of
venerable old age, and full of virtues and holiness, yielded up his blessed
soul to the beginning of that life which never ends; the ninth day of January
in the year 731. William Malmesbury a very grave author affirms, out of
Goscelinus who writes the acts of the first nine Archbishops of Canturbury,
that S. BRITHWALD was famous for working of many miracles. And he is reported
to have written the history of the b^ginning of the Benedictin monastery of
Euesham, with the life of S EGVINE Bishop of Worcester. Thus much out of
venerable BEDE, NICHOLAS HARPSFIELD, and others. TRITHEMINS in his work of the
famous men of S. BENEDICTS order; WION, MOLANVS, and GALESINVS in their
Martyrologes make worthy mention of S. BRITHWALD.

depiction of Benedict Biscop S. BENEDICTVS BISCOP ABBAS PATRONVS
Congregationis ^enedictinorum Angliae. Jan. 12o

The life of S. BENNET surnamed Biscop, Abbot and Confessor of the holy order
of S. BENEDICT.
IAN. 12. Written by venerable Bede his disciple.
THE GLORIOUS servant of God S. BENNET by birth descended from the ancient
race of the nobility of England, but the nobility of his mind was such, as
far more deserved the fellowship and company of the noblest, and worthiest
sort of the English nation. He was borne in Yorkshire, and in his youth
followed the discipline of war, in the Royal service of Oswy king of the
Northumbers, from whose princely liberality he received, as the reward of his
faithful service, no small possession of lands and His life during his youth.
means suitable to his degree and calling. These for a time he enjoyed, till
he attained to the flourishing age of twenty five years, and then (a divine
inspiration moving him thereunto) he forsook and left the world and fading
worldly goods for love of the eternal, he despised the war fare of these
lower regions and the vain rewards thereof, that serving under the enseigne of
our true King CHRIST JESUS he might receive an everlasting kingdom above; He
left his country, house, and kindred for the love of CHRIST and his Gospel,
that he might gain the hundredfould reward he promises, and possess life
everlasting: he refused to enter into worldly marriage that in the court of
heaven he might be worthy to follow the holy lamb so candid with the glory
of virginity; he loathed to be a carnal father of children, being ordained by
CHRIST to His first journey to Rome.
train up his children in the spiritual doctrine of heaven. Having left
therefore his country (because the Christian faith, and Ecclesiastical
discipline was yet but rawly established in England) he went to Rome, there, as
in the source and fountain of all true religion, to learn a perfect form
oflife, where CHRIST'S chief Apostles had planted the first and principal
foundation and head of the whole Catholic Church. He visitted the sacred
tombs of the Apostles with great devotion, unto whom his love was allwaies
such, as the tears now shed over their shrines, were sufficient witnesses to
prove it excellent. But he made no long stay at Rome, but returned back into
England, where he was very diligent and careful to honor, and as far as he
was able to practice him self, and teach others those rules of Ecclesiastical
discipline at home, which he had learnt, and seen abroad.

II. ABOUT that time Alchifridus son to Oswy having a great His second
journey to Rome.
desire to go to Rome, to visitt the holy shrines of the Apostles, would
needs take that journey with S. BENNET, notwithstanding the earnest
persuasions and entreaties of his father to stay at home. Their journey
succeeded well, and shortly after they returned in safety again, during the
time of Pope Vitalian. When S. BENNET came not empty, but laden with the
sweetness of good and wholesome doctrine as before; which the better to digest,
after some He takes the habitt of S. Benedict.
months he departed out of England, and went to the Benedictin monastery of
Lirin in France, where he took leave of the world and putt on the monastical
habitt of the great Patriark of Monks S. BENEDICT, and received the
Ecclesiastical tonsure. In this pious school of regular discipline he lived
for the space of two years, very carefully learning, and observing the rules
of a true monastical and religious life. But noe sooner was he a little
hardened in the surnace of religion, and made perfectly strong and able to
resist the temptations and adversities of the world, but his love to the Prince
of the Apostles (which it seems lay buried at Rome) served as a loadstone to
draw him thither again. And finding a fit opportunity of shipping he
committed him self to that much desired journey, which most prosperously he
performed. It was at the time when Egbert King of Kent (as we have said in the
life of S. ADRIAN) had sent Wighart to Rome, to be consecrated Archbishop of
Canturbury. But Wighart dieing, and Theodore being made Archbishop in his
steed, S. BENNET, found to be a man very wise, religious, and industrious
(allthough at that time otherwise determined) was by command of the Pope
compelled to cease from the devotion of his pilgrimage to attend unto
employments of a higher calling; which was to return into England with
Theodore now Elect of Canturbury, and S. ADRIAN Abbot, to serve them both for a
guide and an interpreter by the way, and in England. BENNET, whose chiefest
lesson was obedience, most willingly yielded to the Popes desire, and brought
the Archbishop into Kent, where they were both gratefully welcome. Theodore a
scended the seat of the Archbishopric, and S. BENNET undertook the
government of the monastery of S. PETER and PAVL in Canturbury, of which
afterward S. ADRIAN was made Abbot. For S. BENNET having ruled there two His
third journey to Rome.
years entered into his third journey toward Rome, which he performed with his
wonted prosperity. And at his return he brought with him not a few books
fraught with divine learning, all which he had either bought at an easy rate,
or received gratis from his friends. Coming thus laden into England, he
betook him self to have some conference with the King of the West Saxons
called Kenewalk, whose courteous friendship he had made use of before, and bin
much assisted by his benefitts to him-wards. But this good King being about the
same time taken away by an immature death, the holy man was frustrated of his
desire; and therefore he turned his journey directly into his own country,
where he was borne, and went to Egfrid then King of the Northumbers. To whom he
made relation of all whatsoever he had done since he departed a young man out
of his country: neither did he keep secret from him how he was enflamed with
a fervent desire of religion: then he told him whatsoever he had learned both
in Rome, and other places touching Ecclesiastical and monastical order and
discipline: and what store of divine books he had purchased, and with what
great relics of the Apostles, and Martyrs, he had enriched his country. At
length the King liked him so well, and prevailed so far with him, and got
so great love, and familiarity, that he gave him out of his reuenews the
lands of three score and ten families, to build a monastery in honor of the
Prince of the Apostles S. PETER, which S. BENNET with great joy and speed
performed, in the year of our Lord 674. the fourth year of King Egfrid.

III. IN THE mean time before the foundation of the Church was laid S. BENNET
went over into France, and brought thence masons, and other skillfull workmen
to build it of stone, according to the Roman fashion, which he ever loved. And
the great love he The first use of glasing in England.
bore to the Apostle S. PETER, in whose honor he labored, made him use such
diligence, that within the compass of a year after the foundation was laid,
the solemnities of Mass were honorably celebrated therein. But when the work
drew near unto perfection, he likewise sent messengers into France, to fetch
over glasiers, to adorn the windows with glass; a work never before used in
England. They came, and did not only perfect this work, but allsoe taught
their trade unto many of our Englishmen. Allsoe such sacred vessels,
vestments, and other necessaries for the service of Church and Altar as could
not be found in England, like a religious merchant, he provided and bought from
beyond the seas. But finding the poverty and want of France not to be able to
furnish him with such ornaments as he desired, and especially to obtain from
the Pope new privileges for his new-built monastery, he made a fourth journey
to Rome; and this as soon as he had assembled a Convent of Monks into it, and
His fourth journey to Rome.
ordered them according to the rule and institution of great S. BENEDICT.
Shortly after he returned, making a more happy return of spiritual Gods then
ever he had done before. For besides almost an innumerable multitude of
books, and great store of relics of the Apostles, and Martirs of CHRIST'S
Church, he had obtained of Pope Agatho to have John chief Cantor of S. PETER'S,
and Abbot of S. MARTINS in Rome along with him into England, to instruct and
teach as well his monastery, as other Churches allsoe in the form and manner
of singing, and doing all other Ecclesiastical rites, and ceremonies,
according to the institution of the Roman Church. All which John at his coming
he performed, not only by word of mouth, but allsoe by publishing many rules,
and precepts to that purpose in writing, which for memory sake were afterward
carefully laid up and reserved in the library of the said monastery. Allsoe
by the license of King Egfrid, and at his earnest entreatie, he obtained of the
same Pope letters of privileges granted unto the said monastery, to warrant,
defend, and free it from all externe jurisdiction, or forcible invasions for
ever. Likewise he brought from Rome many pictures of holy images, to beautify,
and adorn his Church, and namely a picture of the B. VIRGIN MARIE, and the
Pictures used in Catholic Churches
twelve Apostles, which he placed in the middle arche or vault of the Church
from wall, to wall, and with pictures containing all the Evangelical history,
he adorned the north side; and with others of the visions of the Apocalypse, he
made the south part correspondent unto it: To the end that all that came into
the Church, even the unlearned, which way soever they cast their eyes, might
behold and contemplate (though in an image) either the loving countenance of
CHRIST, or his Saints; or with a more watchful mind consider the wonderful
grace of his incarnation; or having before their eyes the danger of the last
rigid examine, they might remember more districtly to examine the guilt of their
own conscience.

IV. NOW when King Egfrid saw with what great virtue, industry, See the
devotion of this good king
and religion this venerable man did do the part of a wise, and holy steward
in all these proceedings, he was wonderful much delighted thereat, and because
he perceived the land he had given him, to have bin well and fruictfully given,
he increased his former gift, with the donation of forty families more. On
which land by counsel, and persuasion of the King, the holy man built an He
builds an other monastery to S. Paul.
other monastery on the other side of the river, dedicated to the honor of S.
PAVL, not far from the former: and thither he sent Ceolfrid to be Abbot with
seauenteen other Benedictine Monks, strictly chardging, and commanding them,
that one and the self same peace, familiarity, and concord should be conserved
in both places. And as the body cannot live without the head by which it
breathes, nor the head without the body by which it lives: So let noe man
any way attempt to disturb or disquiet these two monasteries of the chief
Apostles, that together are knitt in a fraternall society, of peace. Whence
it comes, that afterward both these monasteries were commonly called by one
name, Weremouth Abbey.

V. ABOUT this time, the blessed Saint having much increased the number of
Monks in both these places, and ordered them according to the rule of his great
Master S. BENEDICT, he made one Eosterwin a Priest and Monk, Abbot of the
monastery of S PETER, to Eosterwin Abbot.
the end that by the sociable assistance of so virtuous a Colleague, he might
with more ease undergo the labor of government, which he was scarce able to
perform alone, by reason of his much traveling up and down for the good of
his monastery, and his frequent iourneys beyond seas, uncertain when to
return. Eosterwin therefore undertook the care of the monastery the ninth
year after the foundation; and remained in the same while he lived, and he
lived but four years after. He was a man by birth noble, but he did not make
use of the worth of his nobility (as many do) to breed matter of outward
glory, and contempt of others, but made it the first stepp to ennoble, and
enrich his mind with virtue. For being cozen german unto S. BENNET, they were
both so truly allied in a virtuous nobility os minds, both alike such
sincere contemners of all worldly respects and honors, that neither the one
coming into the monastery did expect to be preferred either by reason of his
honorable nobility, or kindred, or the other judge it a thing fit to be
offered him upon those respects: But being a manfull of good and holy
intentions, only rejoiced that he did observe regular discipline in all things,
in an equal measure with the rest of his brethren. But S. BENNET, soon after
he had ordained Eosterwin Abbot of S. PETER'S, and Ceolfrid of S. PAVLS, made
his fifth journey out of England to Rome, and happily returned home, enriched as
before, with very memorable gifts of ecclesiastical wealth, His fifth journey
to Ro^me.
as books, relics of Saints, and pictures, containing the histories of the
old, and new testament compared together, and such like. And amongst other
things, he brought two cloakes all of silk, of an incomparable work; for which
he purchased of King Aldfrid, and his Council (for Egfrid was slain in his
absence) the land of three families, on the south side of the river Were. But
the joys he brought from abroad, where mingled with sadness at home; for he
found Eosterwin, whom at his departure he had left Abbot of S. PETER'S
Monastery, and not a few of his monastical flock, to have changed this world
for a better, being taken away by the pestilent fury of a sickness, which raged
all over the country. Yet to this there was comfort at hand, that by the
election of the brethren, and his fellow-Abbot Ceolfrid, he found one Sigfrid a
deacon of the same monastery, a very reverend, and meek man, substituted in
Eosterwins place. This Sigfrid was a man very sufficiently instructed in the
knowledge of holy scriptures, adorned with most godly manners, endowed with a
wonderful virtue of abstinence, and for the better conseruing of the virtues
of his mind, he was kept under with noe small infirmity of body; and to
maintain the innocence of his heart, he allwaies labored with a hurtfulland
irremediable disease of the lungs.

VI. AND not long after S. BENNET allsoe began to be wearied S. Bennet falls
sick.
with a sickness comeing forcibly upon him. For the divine goodness, (that the
virtue of patience might allsoe give testimony of the great sincerity of
these holy Abbots in religion) laid them both prostrate for a time on the hard
bed of a temporal sickness, that having triumphed over the same by death, he
might afterward refresh them with the perpetual rest of a gladsom peace, and
euer-during life. For Sigfrid (as we have said) having bin long tormented with
the teadious grief of the inwards parts of his body, evidently perceived, that
now he was come to his last: and S. BENNET whose disease still increased by
degrees for the space of three years, was now weakened with such an extreme
palsy, that death seazing on the lower parts of his body, took from thence
all sense of feeling, so that life withdrew it self only into the higher
lodgings of that weak building, remaining there, only the better to exercise
the office of a religious and virtuous patience. His whole study, during the
time of his sickness, was allwaies to spend the little allowance of breath he
enjoyed in rendering hearty thanks and praises unto the author of all goodness
for his benefitts, and to exhort his brethren with the fraternall words of
piety, to remain constant in the service of God, and in the observance of the
rules, and institutions which he had planted among them.

VII. FOR you ought not to imagine (said he) that the laws His speech to his
brethren on his death bed.
and constitutions which I have given you, have proceeded out of my
owneignorant, and unlearned understanding; for out of seuenteen diverse
monasteries, which among all the wearisom labors of my often trauells, I found
to be best, have I learnt, and gathered. all these precepts, delivered them to
your piety to be observed. But chiefly this precept he did often times
reiterate unto them, that in the election of their Abbot they should have noe
regard to the nobility of birth, without the worthiness of virtue; nor respect
the greatness of dignity in the world, but the abundance of charity, and
humility in religion: For in very deed I tell you (said he) that in comparison
of two evils, I had rather see the place in which with so great labors I
have built this monastery, reduced into a perpetual desert, (if so it please
God) then that my own brother, who is known not to follow the stepps of
virtue, should succeed me in title of Abbot, to rule, and govern the same.
Therefore (dear Brethren) be allwaies very careful never to choose your Abbot
An Abbot to be chosen not for nobility, but virtue.
according to birth, nor out of any other Body, then your own, but following
that which our great Abbot S. BENEDICT has prescribed in his rule, and the
decrees contained in our privileges, you ought in the convent of your
Congregation with common counsel of the brethren, to search out one, who
according to the deserts of life, and doctrine of wisdom, shall be found, and
approved to be most worthy, and fit to perform so great an office: and such
an one being found, you shall present him to the Bishop, who with his wonted
benediction ought to confirm him in the Abbatiall dignity. In these and such
like speeches did he spend a great part of his weak sickly days; whilst to
mitigate the wearisom teadiousnes of the long night, which the heavy burden of
his disease did render restless from sleep, he would some times call one of
his brethren to read unto him either the example of holy Jobs vnmatcheable
patience, or some other part of the scripture, whereby he might receive some
comfort in his grief, and be able more lively to lift up him self from the
lowest degree of worldly torment, to the confideration of the highest reward of
his suffering. And because he could not by any means rise to pray, nor easily
make use either of tongue, or voice, to recite his accustomed task of psalms,
he learnt by his own prudence, and the His truly religious spirit.
dictamen of a true religious spirit and affection, to call certain of the
brethren unto him at all the hours either of day, or night office, with whom,
being divided into two quiers he would sing, and say as well as he was able,
all the accustomed psalms of the office, and what his weakness would not let
him perform, was by their assistance supplied.

VIII. BUT when this worthy pair of Abbots, BENNET and Sigfrid having bin long
wearied with these teadious infirmities, did both plainly perceive that they
drew near the entrance of the dreadful gates of death, and saw them selves to
be both unfit for See a true pattern of affection
the government of the monastery; for so far their infirmities had wrought
in them the perfection of the virtue of CHRIST; that when as upon a day both
piously desiring to see, and salute one and other before they departed out of
the world, Sigfrid was carried upon a beer (like a true picture of death) to
the chamber where S. BENNET lay upon his poor couch, and being both by the
serving hands of their doleful brethren in such sort composed together upon
the same pallett, and their heads upon the same bolster (behold a lamentable
sight!) they were not masters of so much strength, as to join their holy
lips together to give a kiss to their last farewell, but were feign having
made show of their desire herein, to finish it by the assistance of fraternall
hands.

IX. THEN S. BENNET entering into consultation with Sigfrid^ and the rest of her
brethren, sent for Ceolfrid that was Abbot of S. PAVLES monastery, a man not
only near unto him in the bands of kindred, but allsoe (which is the chiefell)
in the sweet society of virtues, and him by the common consent, and favor of
all, he placed at the helm to be the only pilot, and governor of both his
monasteries; judging it the only best course, the better to conserve the peace,
unity, and concord of both places, to beepe them perpetually under the
regiment of one only superior. And for this purpose he wished them to call to
mind that Evangelical sentence: Every kingdom divided within it self, shall
become desolate. But two months after this, the venerable, and beloved man of
God Sigfrid Luc. 11. v. 17.
having passed through the fire and water of temporal tribulation, was by a
welcome death brought into the sweet refreshing of an everlasting rest: And at
length after four months more, the excellent worker of virtues, and great
conqueror of vices S. BENNET, conquered with the weakness of his earthly body,
came to his last: It was when the frozen night came on with his winter blasts,
to begett a sacred day of eternal, and clear light of felicity. His
watchful brethren met together in the Church, with prayers, and psalms to
drive away nights horrid shadows, and to comfort the grief of their dear
fathers departure, with the continual singing of the divine praises. Some
would not bouge out of the chamber, and from the beds side in which the strong
sickman lay; expecting by the passage of death, to take the sweet entrance of
life. With desire they expected that as his example, taught them how to live
well, by the same they might likewise learn how to die. For the further
mitigating of his grief, the Gospel was read all night (as it was wont) by a
Priest that attended on him. The hour of his departure drawing near the
Sacrament of CHRIST'S facaed body was given him for his viaticum; and so that
blessed soul, having bin a long time parched, and examined in the flames of an
happy tribulation, forsakes the earthly furnace of the flesh, and being at
liberty, took a long desired flight to the neuer-dieing glory of His death.
celestial happiness. This glorious Confessor died in the year of our Lord
690. the twelfth day of January, when he had governed his monastery sixteen
years, eight by him self, and other eight with the assistance of his holy
Colleagues Eosterwin, Sigfrid, and Colfrid. He was buried in the Church of S.
PETER, which he built, that so he might not be separated from him in death,
whom he ever loved in his life: and by whose aid the gates of heaven were
opened unto him. His life is written by S. BID, whom we have followed. VSVARD,
MALMESBVRY, WIGORNIENSIS, JOHN CAPGRAVE, BARONIVS, and other grave Authors
make honorable mention of his virtues.

This Saint BENNET was the first that reduced the BENEDICTIN order in S.
Bennet Batrone of the modern Congregation of England.
England into the form, and government of a Congregation; that is, when many
monasteries are under own head, or superior, who during his time (whether it
be perpetual or determined upon years) is supreme monarke, as it were, of
them all. And for this cause the English Congregation of Benedictin Monks now
extant, and derived immediately from the ancient Congregation of England, both
by succession, and Apostolical privilege, honors this glorious Saint as
their chief Patron, next after the universal Patriarch of the whole order
great S. BENEDICT him self, and Saint AVGVSTIN our first Apostle. For allbeit
in the beginning the Congregation which he erected, consisted only of two
monasteries (as may be seen in his life) yet afterward the whole number of
the Black Benedictin Monks in England was ranged into one Congregation; as
appears by the bulle of Pope Innocentius the third granted unto them. And in
like manner as the Congregation of Clunie, and others began srom a small
number, to grow to such greatness, so likewise did that of England, from the
uniting of the said two monasteries by S. BENNET BISCOP, increase to a general
union of all the Benedictin Monks throughout the whole Jland.

The life of S. ALVRED Abbot and Confessor of the holy order of S. BENEDICT.
IAN. 12. Written by John Capgraue
ALVRED borne in England of nobles parents, was brought up from his tender age
in the fear of God, and good learning; he learnt, even in his youth, to
vndegoe the sweet yoke of our Lord, remaining allwaies in the innocence of
his life pure from all spott of sin. His piety and learning increasing daily
with his age, he gained so great favor and love with David King of the Scots,
that he esteemed him before most of his court, and had exalted him to a
Bishopric, had not his entrance into a He refuses a Bishoprik.
religious order hindered it. In all occasions this holy youth carried him self
with so great piety, and meeknes, as noe injury could move him to anger; noe
opprobrious speeches could provoke him to revenge: he allwaies endeavored to
repay hatred with love, to render good for evil, and to ou^rcome envy with
duty and service. A certain knight perceauing him to be beloved, and honored
of the King more then any other, raised a hateful and malignant persecution
against him, and grew so fierce in his malice, that he was not afray sometimes
openly to vomitt part of his venom against him with injurious words before the
King him self. To whom the holy man with a mild and unmoved countenance: You
speak very well (said he) and honestly, I know your tongue was never
acquainted with untruths; and therefore I take you to be His rare humility and
patience.
my very good friend. The knight finding him to be a firm rock, whom all the
outrageous storms of his malice and hatred could not move, nor stir from the
ground of virtue, suffered a willing overthrow in his wicked endeauours, and
showing the effects of a repentant mind, demanded pardon for his great
temeritie, promising from thence forth ever to oblige himself unto him in an
vnsayned league of friendship. To whom ALVRED: I confess (said he) I rejoice
heartily at thy repentance, and therefore I shall love thee better far then
ever; for thy hatred to me has increased my A good lesson.
love to my dear Redeemer: and my patience being exercised, and tried hereby,
has perhapps bina means to make me profitt a little in my duty to almighty
God. Thus this B. man from the briers of other men's malice reaped the
sweetroses of virtues unto him self.

II. AFTER this, meaning to bidd adieu to the world, and all He takes the
habitt of a monk
the vanities thereof, he went unto the Abbey of Rhieuall or Ridall in
Yorkshire, and putt on the habitt of a Bernardin Monk under the holy rule of S.
BENEDICT. In which solitary kind of life, giving him self wholly to
contemplation of heavenly things, and the continual exercise of true
religious, and monastical virtues, he attained to such perfection, that like
the moon amongst the lesser stars, he shined amongst the rest of his
brethren in all manner of virtuous life and behavior. And shortly aster he was
so He is made Master of the nouices.
good a proficient him selt, that he wa^s thought able to read a lesson of
virtue unto others, and therefore the education of the nouices, or
probationers, was committed to this chardge. But whilst he executed that
office, there was an unconstant Clerk that entered into the order, whose
vocation after a small trial began to waver, like a reed in the wind. His
unsteadfast mind being perceived, his good Master earnestly requested allmighty
God to give him the grace of perseverance. Soon after the same Brother
desiring to return into the world, opened the thoughts of his heart unto his
Master, saying that his weakness was not able to endure the hardness of the
order, that all things therein were contrary to his nature, that he could not
vndegoe their daily pains and exercises, that he was grievously vexed, and
tortured with their long watching, that he often fainted under his manual and
daily labors: that the roughnes, and rudnes of his clothes did pierce his
tender skin, and that indeed his will was rather inclined to follow secular
delights, and worldly lusts, and pleasures then to break his back with such
austeritie. And I (replied his Master) will prepare thee daintier meats, and
gentler clothing, and in all things else belonging to thy profession I will be
more indulgent unto thee. I will not stay (said he) allthough it were to be
master of all the wealth in the house. Neither will I taste any food (replied
ALVRED) until God all mighty bring thee back again, either willing, or
nilling. The one runs to the gate to be gone; the other enters into his
chamber to pray that he should not go. The holy man laments the loss of his
son, and with the deep sighs of a sorrowful heart bewayling his great
temeritie, refuses to receive any consolation. The fugitive coming to the
gate, which to his sight A notable miracle.
was wide open, found it either not to be so indeed, or else some thing else
stronger then a gate to be shutt against him; for having often times striuen
with all his force to go ^orth, he failed of his purpose, and was not able to
pass over that place, where the gate was wont to stand being shutt. Being
stricken with admiration hereat, he returned to his master, before whom with
great signs of repentance, he humbly demanded pardon of his folly, promising
to remain constant, and steadfast in his vocation ever after: His Master with
tears of joy entertained him, giving humble thanks to almighty God for his
goodness.

III. S. ALYRED was second to none in those days in all manner of learning
both divine and humane, and his knowledge being ennobled with the rich
ornaments of virtue, and religion, moved his brethren by common consent to
elect him for their Abbot of Rhieuall: In which dignity, as if all his former
life had bin but a He is chosen Abbot of Rhieuall.
shadow, or figure of true religion, he began as it were to reform and wind
him self up into a far higher degree of austeritie, and devotion: and when as
now he might assume more liberty, he contrary to custom did quite abridge him
self of all such things as might give his body content: in his diet so
sparing, that his extreme abstinence made him seem to bear the shape rather
of a spirit, then of a man. He increased the number of his Monks to one
hundred and fifty, and five hundred brethren. For the space of ten years
before his death, being cruelly vexed with the stonecollick, and the gowt, he
made use thereof for the better trial of his humility, and patience, in which
virtues he was excellent; not ceasing nevertheless to write spiritual books,
and homelies upon the Gospel, to preach often unto his brethren, allwaies
conforming his own life to whatsoever proceeded either from his pen, or
tongue. In his writings, sayings, doeings, and all his manner of life he was a
most diligent imitatour of the great father of his Order S. BERNARD. Allwaies
meek, humble, patient, and one that both in him self, and with others, and
amongst all men was so peaceable that it far exceeds the force of this pen
to express, or any heart to think, how entierely and sincerely, he did
embrace, purchase, and nourish true peace, and concord.

IV. AS ONCE he sat before the fire being so cruelly tormented with the
colic, that through the sharp conuulsions of his grief he was forced to sit
double with his head bent down between his knees, there comes into the room
one of the brethren that long before hated him for his goodness, and now spieing
this opportunity to be aduantageous for his revenge, stole behind him sitting
in that manner, and with all his force thrust him violently into the fire;
crieing out aloud: Now thou art justly punished'for thy hypocrisy, and
falsehood: Herevppon some of the Monks coming to the noise, got up the holy
Abbot out of the fire, and out of a zealous anger began to lay violent hands
upon the author of this mischief. But the blessed Saint forgetting his
infirmity, His wonderful patience.
and still mindful of charity, strictly forbadd them from that enterprise:
Cease, cease (said he) my dear children, and do not robb your wretched father
of his garment of patience. Alas I am not angry, I am not hurt, I am not
troubled at this; my child it was that cast me into the fire, and hereby he
has not urged me my death, but purged my imperfections. He is my child allbeit
weak and imperfect: And indeed I am not sound in body my self, but his
weakness has cured the imperfection of my soul. And here withal embracing
him about the neck, he gave him the loving salutatio^ of peace, and as though
he had endured no wrong at all, he studied with all gentleness to mitigate the
fury of his heart, which without cause was enraged against him.

V. FOUR years before his death, he had his body perfectly exempted and
dischardged from all pleasure of enjoying this life, for he brought it so
lean, and bare with continual fasting, watching, sickness, and other
voluntary austerities, that nothing but the skin was left to cover the naked
bone. And in all his infirmities he would not hear of a physician, but
contemning for the love of God all remedies of the body, he only busied him
self about that one thing which is necessary, to provide for the health of his
soul. He read such books as would move his heart to melt into tears of
sorrow and compunction, and instruct him in the way of good life and manners;
and amongst many others he used very much to read S. AVGVSTINS confessions.
He was often wont to sit in a hollow place made in the floor of his Oratorie,
piously ruminating with him self that from earth he came, and into earth she
should return. In a word, living on earth, his conuer sation was in heaven,
for often times he enjoyed the vi^ion of the blessed Angels, with whom he
conuersed as familiarly, as with his own brethren. Many other miracles are
reported to have bin wrought by this holy Saint, which we omit.

VI. A YEAR before his death, unto his other infirmities was added the
cruelty of a dry cough, which finding a body allreadie weakened, brought him
to such extremity, that often times having said Mass, he was compelled to lie
down on his bed for the space of an hour, being neither able to move, nor
speak a word. He foretold unto one of his brethren the hour of his death two
days before; which being at hand he caused them all to come together, and
exhorting them to the love of patience, humility, and other virtues, full of
good works and meritts, he yielded up his blessed soul, to receive a crown
of justice, at the hands of the just judge, the twelfth day of January, in the
year of our redemption 1166. during the reign of Henry the second. And in
success of time he was registered into the number of canonized Saints. This
life is gathered chiefly out of JOHN CAPGRAVE, or IOANNES ANGLICVS, most of our
English Historiographers do largely speak his praises.

The life of S. KENTIGERNE Bishop and Confessor.
IAN. 13. Written by Joscelinus.
LOTHVS the Heathen King of the Picts had a fair daughter called Thamet, who
by the often hearing and attending to the preachings of Gods servants, the
power of the divine grace concurring thereunto, was converted to the Christian
faith. This Thamet having been ravished by the lascivious violence of a noble
man of the court, was in punishment of that faultlesse fault, by His parents.
the laws of the country, and her own fathers decree, adjudged to be cast
down headlong from the top of a steep hill so to perish. In the execution
of which cruelty, recommending her self to almighty God, and lifting up her
hands and eyes toward heaven for aid, she was thrown down backwards, but by
the hand of him that saves those who truly call upon him, she was delivered
from receiving any hurt at all. Which miracle her Pagan father ascribing to
the power of art magic, caused her presently to be putt into a leather boat,
and without either sail, or oar, to be committed to the uncertain conduct of
the winds and waves. But the almighty protector and ruler of the s^as,
brought her safe to an other port, where she went on land, and came at length
to the town of El^e or Assaph in Flintshire, His birth
and there she was delivered of a boy who being baptized by Seruanus a holy man
of that country, was named KENTIGERNE. Such was the birth and parentage of
this Saint, who allthough he may seem to have contracted some stayne of
honor therein, yet his worthy manner of life so clearly washed away all spott
of any such imputation, that for true virtue, life, and learning he became an
example to be set in balance with any holy man of those times. His youth was
first trained up in the virtuous school of Seruanus, under whom he profitted
in a short time beyond all his other school fellows both in learning and
virtue; purchasing by his own towardnes, such a singular love with his good
master, that he was wont to call him Munghu, that is, most dear friend, and by
that name he was ever after honored and called upon by the people of that
country, in their devotions unto him. But the malice of envious persons (who
because they could not attain, began to hate so great goodness) foreing him to
depart from his master Sernanus, he went into Scotland to a place called
Glasghu, where he led a His anstere life, and penance.
very austere and holy life. In his poor clothing and diet, he bore the true
pattern of an other JOHN BAPTISTE. His clothes were made of goate-skinnes; he
would fast often times without tasting any meat the space of three days;
neither would he then seek after dainties, but was content to eat such things
as first came to hand. He abstained from flesh and wine perpetually. His sleep
was very little, which when nature compelled him unto he took lieing along in
a hollow stone with a great stone under his head, in steed of a pillow. To this
austerie, he added the rudenes of a shirt of hayrecloathe, which he allwaies
wore next his skin. And in this poverty did he travel over that country,
preaching, teaching, and converting great multitudes of people of the faith,
till at length by He is made Bishop.
the common consent of the King and Clergy, but much against his own will, he
was exalted to the sacred dignity of Bishop in the sea of Glasghu Which honor
nothing altered him in his rigid and strict kind of life, but rather served as
a spur to increase his wonted austeritie.

II. HE WOULD walk abroad allwaies in his albe, and stole, with his
crosier-staffe in his hand, which allthough it were but of plain wood, yet he
was (if I may so call him) a golden Bishop, shining His manner of prayer and
mortification.
to the world with great examples of charity, and good works. Every night,
after a short refreshing of sleep, he would go naked into the cold water and
in that manner recite over the whole Psalter; and this custom he allwaies
observed in despite of winters frost and snow, unless his sickness, or some
other necessary journey did hinder him: and then he would make amends with
some other spiritual exercise. So entierly had he mortified, and deadened in
him self all the lafciuious instigations, and motions of the flesh, that, as he
would often tell his disciples, he was noe more provoked to lust at the sight,
or touching of the fairest woeman in the world, then in the cold embracing of a
hard stone. Often times whilst he preached, there appeared a white dove over
his head, with a beak, as it were, of gould. Every lent he would segregate
His observance of Lent.
him self from all company, and live in some desert place, eating noe other
food but herbs and roots. On Maundie thursday he was wont for the exercise of
his humility, having gathered a company of poor people, and leapers
together, to wash their feet with water, his own tears in the mean time
concurring thereunto: and having wiped and dried them first with a towell, and
then with his own kisses, he would attend on them at table with all submission
and diligence. On good Friday, in memory of our Lords Passion, he spent
almost the whole day, and some part of the night in scou^ging and chastising
his body with sharp whipps and stripes, until his own nakedness did blush at
this his piously cruel piety. On holy Saturday, or Easter Eve, excepting the
time of the divine office, he allwaies lay hid in a certain grave or sepulcher
within the ground, in contemplation of our Lords passion, and punishing him
self with stripes, till the hour of our Saviors resurrection the next
morning. By his preaching he reduced the infidels o^ his diocese unto the
Catholic faith, and with the force of his sacred doctrine, he reduced all
Apostates, and heretics to the safe bosom of our holy mother the Church: he
demolished all diabolical Idols; built some Churches, allotted certain
limitts and bounds unto Parishes; and where soever he traveled in this
spiritual trafick to gain souls, he would not make his iourneies on horse
back, but allwaies on foot, as did the Apostles. And lest he might seem to
eat his bread in Idleness, he labored many times with his own hands in the
tillage of his land.

III. AFTER the death of King Morken, during whose reign he was made Bishop,
the kinsmen of the same King, like the sons of Beliall, plotted, and
conspired his death; whereof the holy man being admonished by revelation from
God, he took his journey into Southwalls, which country was at that time
richly beautified with the flourishing virtues of S. DAVID, with whom having
spent some time, he received of the King of that country called Cathwalla, a
piece of land to build a monastery. And having erected a He builds a
monastery.
monastery at Elue in Flintshire, he there constituted his Episcopal sea. He
gathered together in that monastery the number of nine hundred threescore and
odd Monks, which all served God under regular discipline in a very strict and
rigid manner of life: Three hundred of the most unlearned of them, were deputed
to the labor of husbandry to toil and ^ill the fields, and keep sheep, and
other cattle: other three hundred were employed in works within the The manner
of life of the ancient mo^ks.
monastery, to provide victuals, and other necessaries: and the rest, which
were sufficiently learned, were allotted to the quier, night and day, to
celebrate the divine office: and none of these were easily permitted to wander
abroad, but were bound to the limitts of their monastery, as to the
Sanctuary of our Lord. The holy Bishop divided them into diverse companies or
conuents; and as one company ended the divine office in the Church, an other
presently entered to begin the same again, and that having done, comes a
third company in like manner; so that by the continual succession of the
diverse companies, the divine service was maintained in that Church night and
day without any intermission. Amongst these Monks there was one called Asaph a
man of very great virtue, and a worker of many miracles, him S. KENTIGERNE
loved above all the rest, and for his virtuous life he delivered unto his hands
the care of the monastery, and appointed him for his successor in the
Bishopric.

IV. THE HOLY man remaining on a time longer at his devotions then his
ordinary custom was, his face appeared fiery and glistening, to the great
admiration of the beholders: and after his prayers were ended, he fell into
most grievous lamentations, which He has a revelation of S. David's death
moved some of his disciples humbly to request him to declare the cause of his
so great sadness. To whom after a silent pawse: You must know (said he) my
dear children, that the crown, and glory of Britanie, and worthy father of
his country S. DAVID, is now departed out of the prison of his body, to
receive his rewards in heaven. Believe me, I beheld not only a great multitude
of Angels, but the Lord of Angels CHRIST JESUS him self, come to meet him, and
lead him into the glory of his heavenly paradise. Know likewise that our
Britanie being deprived of this her great light will groan for the loss of
so great a Patron, who Praise of S. David.
whilst he lived, was the only buckler of our defense against the reuengefull
sword of Gods just anger, half drawn out to punish the malice of our
Country; and long since, had not his virtue withheld it, had made a general
slaughter amongst us. Now therefore our Lord will deliver this country into
the hands of strange nations, which neither acknowledge him for God, nor his
religion for the truth. And this our wretched I Will shall be inhabited He
prophesies the misery of Brinie.
by Pagans, and all Christian religion therein shall for a time be utterly
destroyed, but afterward by the wonderful mercy of almighty God, all shall
be repaired again, and the country reduced notonely into her ancient, but
into a far better and more flourishing state of religion.

V. THIS Blessed Saint had been seven times at Rome, where unto S. GREGORY
the great, afterward Apostle of the English, Bishops confirmed by the Pope.
he related the whole course of his life, the manner of his election, and
consecration, and all other chances which had befalne him. The holy Pope
understanding him to be a man of God, and full of the grace of the holy Ghost,
confirmed his consecration, which he knew to have proceeded from God, and
supplieing, according to his earnest desire, such ceremonies as had bin omitted
therein, he dismissed him unto his pious chardge by the holy Ghost enjoined.

VI. IN THE mean time death having exercised his revenge on all the holy man's
enemies in Albanie, or Scotland, the inhabitants thereof forsaking the way of
truth, and returning like dogs to feed upon their own vomitt, fell again
into the rite^ of flatt Idolatry. And therewithal the heavens and elements
with drawing their usual influences caused a general famine, and dearth in
their country. Till at length almighty God raised a King named Redereth, who
having bin baptized in Ireland by the disciples of S. PATRICK, with all his
heart honored almighty God, and studied by all means to restore his kingdom
to the true faith of CHRIST. He sent therefore messengers with letters directed
unto S. KENTIGERNE, earnestly desiring him by the name, and love of our Lord,
to return to his desolate flock, that was left destitute of all care and cure;
affirming it to be a thing unworthy for a pastor to forsake his sheep, and a
Bishop his Church, for whose love he ought to lay his soul at stake, unless
he would turn a mercenarie, who flies for fear of persecution. Likewise he
assured him that his enemies which sought his life, had allreadie in seeking it
lost their own. Therefore the holy man ordayning S. ASAP^ his successor with
six hundred and threescore of his Monks, took his S. Kentigerne returned into
Scotl.
journey toward Glasghn. The king giving thanks to almighty God with a
great multitude of people, went to give him the meeting, and to receive him
with honor due unto so great a Saint. He having first given his benediction
to the whole company, said: All those whosoever envy the salvation of men,
and are adversaries unto the word of God, I command them by the virtue and
power of our Lord JESUS CHRIST suddenly to depart hence, lest they be an
hinderance unto those who will receive the truth. At Note a strainge miracle,
and virtue of his words.
these words, agreat multitude of most horrible, and ugly spiritts was scene
to fly out of that company with wonderful swiftnes; at which sight they all
trembled with the very apprehension and fear. But the Saint exhorting them
to take courage, and comfort, gave them to understand what goblins they did
believe in, and therevppon incited them to give creditt unto the true faith of
JESUS CHRIST: when in a short time by his continual preaching and miracles, he
recovered all the inhabitants of that country out of the The fruits of his
prechings.
black night of Idolatry, to see the clear day of Christ's Gospel. And
presently the heavens gave them rain, and the earth, which before was barren,
brought forth fruit in due season. Also he purged the country of the Picts
now called Galloway, from the blindness of idolatry, and heresy: he converted
Albanie, and founded there many Churches, and monasteries. He sent some of his
disciples to the Scottish Isles called Orkney, to Norway, and Island, to His
many miracles.
bring unto those nations the joyful tidings of CHRIST'S Gospel. Wheresoever
he him self either traveled, or preached, he gave sight to the blind, hearing
to the deaf, speech to the dumb, cured the lame, cast out devils from
possessed persons, restored madmen to their senses, healed leprosies, palsies,
and all other diseases. Some times by the only touching of his garments, or
taking some little particles of his meat, or drink, many sick persons
recovered their desired health. The Queen that had bin a long time sterile,
through his prayers obtained a son of almighty God, who afterward
succeeding his father in the kingdom, excelled all his predecessors in wealth
and piety.

VII. S. COLVMB hearing the fame of S. KENTIGERNE, came from his monastery in
the Island Hij with a great company of his monks He makes great league with
S. Columb.
to visitt him, and enter into a league of frienship and familiarity with him.
And coming near unto the place where the holy Bishop was, he divided his whole
company into three troops. The Bishop likewise that came to meet him, did in
the same manner divide his followers into three squadrons, in the first he
placed the iuniors or younger sort, in the second those of a middle age, and in
the third old aged men, venerable in their gray hayres. And as these two sacred
armies of JESUS CHRIST marched toward each other, they song spiritual hymns
and canticles on both sides: and S. COLVMB to his followers; I see (said he)
over the third quier a fiery light in manner of a golden crown, to descend
from heaven upon the Bishops head. But the two holy leaders of these troops
coming near together, saluted each other with mutual embracings, and holy
kisses of love, and friendship; in testimony thereof they chainged their
pastoral staves, and the staff which S. COLVMB gave the Bishop, was kept
afterward with great reverence in S. WVLFERS Church at Rippon.

VIII. A MIGHTY great stone cross being made, for the Churchyard of Glasghn
which could not be erected by men's strength, was at A cross set up
miraculously.
the prayer of the holy man set up in the night by an Angel. And in that
place afterward the divine goodness granted perfect health unto many diseased
persons that craved it, by the meritts of S. KENTIGERNE. He built a mill upon
the river Gladus, that would never grind any stolen corn, neither could the
stones, or wheels thereof by any force be turned about from Saturday noone,
till monday morning.

IX. AT LENGTH the holy man being so far spent with ouldage, as his withered
sinews did scarce hang his joints together, and His last exhorta tion to his
disciples.
perceauing that the hour of his death was at hand, he called his disciples
about him, and exhorting them with a dieing voice to the conseruance of true
religion, mutual charity, peace, and hospitality, he gave them an express,
and strict command firmly to observe the decrees of the ancient holy
fathers, and ever to follow the institutions of the Catholic Roman Church.
When many of his disciples, who most dearly loved him, falling prostrate
before him cried out with weeping words: We know, dear father, that thou
do desire to be dissolved from thy aged body, to reign with CHRIST: but we
humbly beseech thee to take pity on us, whom thou have gained to the service
of CHRIST. Confession of sinne^.
In whatsoever our humane frailty has offended, we have allwaies confessed
unto thee, desiring to be corrected by the arbitrament of thy discretion.
Obtain therefore of almighty God that together with thee we may depart out
of this vale of tears and miseries, to the everlasting joys of our dear
Lord: for unto us it seems a thing unfitting, that either a Bishop without
his Clergy, a sheapheard without his flock, or a father without his children
should enter into the joys of his Lord. The holy man being moved with pity,
fetching his breath as well as he was able: The sacred will of God (said he) be
fullfilled in us all, and according as he knows best, and as he pleases, let
his divine providence dispose of us all. Herevppon being admonished by an
Angel, that his prayer was heard, he was likewise willed to enter into a warm
bath, in which lifting up his hands and eyes toward heaven, he resolved as it
were into a sweet sleep, and yielded up The manner of his death.
his blessed soul into the hands of his Redeemer. It pleased the heavenly
wisdom to give his servant this pleasant kind of death, whose life was a
continual martyrdom. His disciples having taken his body out of the bath,
many of them entering therein, had the favor to follow their holy leader into
the heavenly dwellings. He died the thirteenth day of January, about the year
of our Lord 596. and in the hundred eighty fifth year of his age, when he had
bin Bishop an hundred and threescore years, famous for sainctetie and
miracles. He was buried in the Church of Glasghu, at whose tomb all manner of
diseases were miraculously cured. His life was written by IOSGELINVS an
ancient author, IOANNES ANGLICVS, and JOHN CAPGRAVE, whom we have followed. Of
him make mention NICHOLAS HARPSFIELD histor. Ecclesiast. sex primis saec. cap.
28. ARNOLD WION, and others.

The life of S. PETER Abbot of the holy order of Saint BENEDICT.
IAN. 13. Out of venerable Bede.
PETER was a Roman Monk of S. BENEDICTS order, and one of those which were sent
by S. GREGORY the great with our first Apostle S. AVGVSTIN to preach the
Gospel of CHRIST unto the English nation. S. AVGVSTIN being consecrated
Archbishop of Canturbury, sent back Laurence, and Peter his fellows, to bring
news unto the holy Pope of their good success in the conversion of England,
and allsoe by his prudence and counsel to be resolved of some difficulties,
which arose in the planting of Catholic religion in that new Church. This S.
PETER at his return into England was by the same S. AVGVSTIN ordained the
first Abbot of the Benedictin monastery of Canturburie, erected by King
Ethelbert, in honor of the Apostles S. PETER, and S. PAVL. Of the time, and
manner of his government in this office we have nothing certain; but that he
led a very virtuous and holy life, it is manisest, by that which S. BID
writes of him: At length (says he) being sent Ambassador into France, he
chanced to be drowned in a gulf of the sea between two c^pes, at a place
called Ampleat; and being by the inhabitants committed to an ignoble burial,
it pleased almighty God to make known, of how great meritt the holy man was,
by an heavenly light which appeared every night over his grave, until the
neighbors understood thereby, that certainly it was a holy man that lay buried
there; and being better informed who it was, and whence he came, they took
away his body, and carried it to the city of Bullein, where it was buried in
a Church, after such reverend, and honorable manner as became so worthy a
holy man. He died about the year of Christ 607. Of him do make mention beside
S BID, TRITHEMIVS in his work of the famous men of S. BENEDICTS order,
MOLANVS in his Catalogue of the Saints of Belgia; and others, whom we have
followed.

The life of S, CEOLVLPHE King and Confessor, Monk of the holy order of S.
BENEDICT.
IAN. 15. Out of venerable Bede de gest. Angl.
CEOLVLPH, after the death of King Osrick, was made King of the Northumbers:
but the beginning, and progress of his government was encumbred with so
many difficulties, and adversities, that after some years trial thereof,
entering into a serious consideration with him self of the miserable
uncertainty, and uncertain misery of man's life; and perceauing how dangerous
were the tumults, and precipices of this world, and that the greatest and most
prosperous fortunes of Princes, were most of all subject to decline, and
chainge even in a moment: and calling to mind the strict and rigid account that
we must render of all our thoughts and actions at the day of judgment before
the dreadful tribunal of the all seeing Judge; he began so far to loathe
the care of worldly things, and so to despise those vain honors, He
resolves to be a Benedictin monk
that forsaking the Royal estate, and robes of Majesty, he put on the poor
weeds of a monastical humility, in the Benedictin monastery of Lindissarne,
or Holy-Iland; piously following herein the footsteps of six others his
predecessors, English Kings. Now instead of his crown of gold, the token of
sovereignty, he wore his hair shaven with a crown made of the same, as the
badge of a punishing humility: his royal scepter by virtue whereof he bore
sway, and authority in the world, was now turned to a breuiarie, whereunto he
was wedded, and he that before ruled a kingdom, was now under the check and
command of a poor monk his superior: for his chains of gould, which were
the ornament of his princely body, he is now content to use a poor pair of
beads, and thereon daily to reckon the number of his almost numberless
devotions. He was a man in whom a great knowledge of things divine and humane
was joined with an excellent piety and singular devotion: so absolutely
learned, that venerable BEDE the greatest scholar His learning and piety.
and writer of our nation, dedicated his history of England unto him with the
title of, MOST GLORIOUS KING, to be by his wisdom not only reuiewed, and read,
but also approved and if need were, corrected. The often reading of these
books (he being of him self much addicted unto the knowledge of antiquities,
and especially of England) was a spur unto him allreadie inclined thereunto,
to undertake this monastical life: In which when he had lived the space of all
most twenty years, in the continual exercise of piety and devotion, he gave
up his holy soul, to receive for a temporal kingdom an eternal, amongst
other blessed Kings, whom the same pious considerations had caused to leave
their scepters and purples, to be ranged under the humble enseigne of S.
BENEDICT. The day of his death is unknown, but how full of merits and good
works he died, his burial which was near unto His death
the great Benedictin monk S. CVTHBERT, and the many miracles which it pleased
God to show at his tomb, do give sufficient testimony. Afterward his body
together with S. CVTHBERTS was taken up and placed in a rich shrine in a more
eminent place. Thus much of him we have gathered out of venerable BEDE, WILLIAM
MALMESBVRY de gest. Reg. Angl. lib. 1. cap. 3. BARONIVS tom. 9. ann. 737.
NICOLAS HARPSFIELD saec. 8. cap. 21. ARNOLD WION lib. 4. ligni vitae cap. 6. de
Regibus and regnis Benedictini ordinis, and other grave Authors.

The life of S. FVRSEVS Abbot and Confessor of the holy order of S. BENEDICT.
IAN. 16. Out of venerable Bede.
FVRSEVS borne in Ireland of Royal parents, but more ennobled by his virtues
then his birth, was famous for dignity amongst his friends, but excelling over
the world in the special gift of divine grace. He was of a beautiful form,
chaste of body, devout in mind, affable in discourse, of an amiable aspect, and
replenished with grace, and good works: brought up from his very infancy in
the continual study of holy scripture, and monastical His youth and learning.
discipline. And as he grew in years, so grew he allsoe in the daily increase
of virtue, and pious desires. For the better accomplishment whereof, he
forsaked his parents, friends, and native soil, and betook him self for the
space of some years to the study of holy scriptures; in which in short time
he became sufficiently well instructed. But that the world might know that he
did not only labor for him self, but for all those that sought the truth, he
built a monastery, which served as a free-schoole of virtue, wherein he taught
all that came unto him the true way of salvation. Great was the number of
people that flocked together unto this holy teacher of virtue, by whose godly
preaching, and devout exhortations, many were not only retired from their bad
manner of life, and brought into the right way of salvation; but allsoe were
subjected unto the regular observance of a monastical order. Amongst these, he
was desirous to have the company of some of his own kinsinen, and for that
end, he made a journey unto his native country: but in the way he happened to
fall sick, and in this sickness his soul, being as it were separated from her
earthly lodging, enjoyed a most delightful vision of Angels, that seemed to
lift him up toward heaven, were he beheld an infinite company of heavenly
citizens, who with their sweet melody filled his ravished understanding with
inestimable joy and comfort. The dittie of their A vision.
song was that versicle of the Psalm. Ibu^t Sancti de virtute in virtutem:
vi^ebitur Deus Deorum in Sion. Holy men will proceed from virtue to virtue: the
God of Gods shall be seen in Sion. This song they repeated oftentimes with
such rauishing tunes, as it is far beyond the force of weak words to
express. But being restored to his body, and him self again, about the time
that the cock gives warning of the days approach, he heard, in steed of the
melodious harmony of the Angels, the woeful lamentations, and cries of his
friends and kinsfollies, who all this time had watched at his body, which they
supposed to be dead. But now perceauing him again to come to himself, their
lamentation was changed into a fearful admiration, and their admiration bred
joy to see him alive. Then the holy man looking about him, and finding noe man,
unto whose wisdom he could committ the knowledge of the vision he had seen,
was very sorrowful; choosing for that time, rather to bury it within the
secret of his own heart, then reveal it unto such as knew not how to
understand it.

II. BUT the third day afterward being again taken with the like rauishment,
he beheld nor only greater joys of the blessed company An other vision most
strange.
of heaven, but allsoe the wonderful wars, which the wicked spirits raised
against him, striving to hinder his journey toward heaven: allbeit the
protection of the Angels frustrated their malicious endeauours. Many false
accusations they brought against him, and laid diverse crimes to his chardge, of
all which by his guides the Angels, he was freely disengaged. And as he was
lifted up by these blessed spirits toward heaven, they commanded him to look
down into the world. Which done, he saw like a dark and indeous The 4. fires
of vice that burn the world.
valley underneath him. And in the air he beheld four fires not far distant
one from the other: which they told him were the fires that should burn and
consume the world. The first they said was the fire of Liars: which those fall
into, that neglect to fulfill their promise made in Baptism, in renouncing
the devil, and all his works. The second was the fire of Covetousness,
appointed for such as prefer the riches of the world before the love of
heaven, and heavenly things. The third was the fire of Discord, provided for
those that stick not to offend their neighbors, even in trifling and
superfluous matters. The fourth was the fire of Jmpietie, allotted for such as
care not how they spoil, and oppres;se the inferior, and weaker sort of
people. He beheld these fires to increase so by little, and little till at
length by spreading they came together and made one mighty huge and dreadful
flame, which seemed to approach near unto him. Whereat he cried out to his
guide the Angel: O Lord, behold it comes upon me. Fear not (replied he) that
which thou have not kindled shall not burn thee. For allthough this seem to
be a mighty great and terrible fire, yet it only tries, and examines men
according as their works have deserved: the worldly desires of men shall burn
in these flames. For even as one is enflamed in body by unlawful lust, and
pleasure, so released from his body he shall suffer his deserved torments in
fire. Then he beheld one of the three Angels his guides, to walk before, and
divide the flames, and the other two conducting him on each side through the
fire, defended him from the danger thereof. He saw likewise the devils flieing
through the flames, making fiery wars against the just: then followed their
many accusations against him, and the Angels defense in his behalf, with a
vision of a greater company of heavenly spirits; as allsoe of many men of his
country and acquaintance, that he had known not unworthily to have behaved
them selves in the sacred function of Priesthood, of whom he learnt many
things very profitable, as well for him self, as for all such as would hear
them. When these had ended their discourse, and returned unto heaven with the
troops of Angels, there only remained with B. FVRSEVS the three Angels his
guides; with whom returned again toward the foresaid fire, the Angel divided
the flame as before, but as the holy man entered into the way laid open for him,
the wicked spirits caught up one of those wretched souls which they broyled in
those flames, and threw it at him; at the very touch whereof, he found his
shoulder and cheek to be scorched, and burnt. The holy man well kne^w the
person, and remembered that at his death he had given him a garment which he
received. But the holy Angel taking the tormented soul cast him again into
the fire: whereat the wicked spirit cried out: Why do you cast him of now,
whom you received before. For as you took the goods of that sinner, so ought
you to partake of his torments. Not out of covetousness (replied the Angel) but
to save his soul did he receive it: and therewith the fire ceased. And the
Angel turning unto the holy man, said: that which thou did kindle, now has
burnt thee: for hadest not thou taken the goods of this man dieing in sin,
the torment of his fire had not touched thee. And speaking further, he taught
him what was to be done for the salvation of those that did repent.

III. BEING restored to him self again, he bore all his life time after a
visible sign of the burning which he had endured in his soul, upon his
shoulders, and cheek, the Flesh evidently showing to the wonder of all
beholders, what the soul had inwardly, and hiddenly suffered. But he retained
allwaies his wonted care, and diligence of following virtuous and pious
courses, by word, work, and example to teach, and preach the way of truth, and
justice unto the world. Yet he would never manifest the order and manner of his
visions but unto such only, as out of a desire of repentance, or compunction of
hearth desired to know them. There lives yet (says Proof of the foresaid
vision.
venerable BEDE) an ancient Monk of our monastery, who is wont to relate,
that a certain religious and trusty man* told him that he had both seen S.
FVRSEVS in the province of the East Angles, and heard the manner of these
visions out of his own mouth. Adding moreover, that in the midst of winter,
when the frost was most sharp, and cold, that sitting in a light and single
garment recounting these visions, either out of the greatness of the fear he
conceived, or of the sweetness he received by the remembrance of them, he would
sweat as much as if it had bin the hottest day of summer.

IV. HAVING therefore a long time preached the word of God in Jreland his own
country, being not able any longer easily to endure the great multitude of
people that flocked unto him, he forsook all that he seemed to enjoy, and
goeing out of his native country, with some few of his brethren in his
company, he passed the seas, and came through Wales into the province of the
English, where he was honorably received, and worthily entertained by Sigebert
then King of the East Angles. But he, that desired wheresoever he went allwaies
to promote the service of almighty God, began presently to putt in practice
his accustomed trade of preadhing, laboring by the example of his virtues, or
the inciting forces of his speeches, either to convert the incredulous to the
truth, or to strengthn, and confirm the faithful more and more in the truth,
and love of JESUS CHRIST. Such were his daily labors, such were the pious
employments in which he continually busied all the powers of his soul, and
forces of his body.

V. BUT while these things are thus doing he fell again into an other
sickness, during which he enjoyed the delightful vision of An other vision.
Angels, that admonished him to proceed with courage, and diligence in the
happily begun work of preaching, as also with an invincible patience, to
hold on his accustomed exercise of watching, fasting, and prayer: because that
his death was certain, but the hour of his death most uncertain. With this
vision being much confirmed in his pious courses, he hastened to build a
monastery on the land which King Sigebert had given him for that purpose:
which done he instituted it with the regular discipline of a monastical life
under the holy rule of of S. BENEDICT. The situation of this monastery by
reason of the neerenes of the sea, and words was very pleasant: it being built
in a certain old castle called Cnobbersburg, that is the town of of Cnobber:
it was afterward by Anna King of that province, and many other noblemen,
very richly adorned with more stately edifices, and enriched with diverse
gifts of great worth.

VI. And in this very monastery King Sigebert him self, being weary Harp.
saec. 7. cap. 15. King Sigebert becomes a Benedictin monk
of the world and worldly cares, and desiring to give his mind only unto God,
put of his princely robes, and leaving the government of his King do unto his
cozen Edrick, betook him self to live under the humble weeds of a Benedictin
Monk; judging it more honorable in a cloister to conquer him self by obeying,
then in the world to bear sway over others by commanding. But long he had not
enjoyed this quiet life, when wicked Penda King of the Mercians making war
against his forsaken Kingdom, he was by force taken out of the monastery by
his own friends, and made General of their army, which they presupposed
would be much hartened and encouraged with his presence: Who to show that his
profession was dearer to him then his life, put on no other armor then a good
conscience, nor taking other weapon then a little rodd in The canfidence of a
secure conscience.
his hand, went securely, though unwillingly, against the bloudthirsting armies
of his and CHRIST'S enemies, where both he himself, and King Egrick, unto whom
he had left the kingdom, happily lost this life to win a better.

VII. BUT lets us return unto S. FVRSEVS who now having, as we have said,
built a monastery, and established it with the rule and disciple of a
monastical order, being desirous to free him self not only from all worldly
cares, but allsoe from the government of his monastery, gave up the whole care
thereof unto his brother Fullanus; and being at liberty, he so disposed of
him self as meaning to spend and end the remainder of his life in an
Anachoreticall or Eremiticall life. He had an other brother called Vltanus, who
out of the continual probation of the monastical, and claustrall manner of
living had betaken him self to the solitarines of the desert. Unto him FVRSEVS
went alone, and together with him, he lived by the labor of his hands for the
space of a whole year in continual fasting and prayer, and doing of
penance. But perceauing the country to be much disquieted by the frequent
incursions of Pagans, and foreseeing the eminent danger of the monasteries,
leaving all things in good order he sailed into France, where being honorably
entertained by the French King Clouis the second, and Erconwald then Provost of
Peronne; he built a monastery in a place called Latiniacum, into which were
introduced the monks of S. BENEDICTS order, for as yet and many years after
there was noe other rule on foot but his, in all the Occidentall Church. And
not long after S. FVRSEVS falling sick, he quickly felt the vehemency of his
disease to grow so strongly upon him as he plainly perceived his time to draw
near: therefore recommending him self unto God, and lifting up his eyes
toward heaven, he yielded up his pure soul into the hands of his Redeemer,
the sixteenth day of January. Erconwald caused his body to be referued in the
Church Porch of Peronne, where it remained for the space of twenty fix days
till the consecration of the new-built Church in the same town was finished:
at what time being taken up it was found with no more sign of corruption then
if he had died but that very hour.

VIII.FOUR years after a little chapel being erected on the East side of
the high altar, and dedicated to S. FVRSEVS, his body was taken, up again by
the worthy Bishops Eligius and Ausbertus, and found to be uncorrupted as
before; it was translated thither in most honorable manner: where it has most
manifestly appeared unto the world that through his merits diverse miracles have
been wrought by the almighty worker of miracles who is wonderful in his
Saints for ever. He flourished about the year 636. or as others say, 650.
VSVARD, TRITHEMIVS, MOLANVS, BARONIVS, RABANVS MAVRVS, and many others do
make mention of S. FVRSEVS. But this life we have taken principally out of
venerable BEDES history of England.

The life of S. HENRY Hermit Confessor.
IAN. 16.
HENRY was borne of the nobler sort of Danes, and being come to such age as his
face betrayed his sex, his parents earnestly solicited him to marry;
whereunto in the beginning he seemed not unwilling: but the appointed day of
his marriage drawing nigh, it was revealed unto him in a vision that he ought
to abstain from all carnal copulation, and to keep him self chaste and pure
from this world, by studieing rather how to please God, then a wife. Whereupon
suddenly leaving all his friends, and freeing He refuses to marry.
him self of the possession of those goods he enjoyed, he took shipping at
Tinemouth, and sailed about twenty miles into the sea to an Island on the East
side of Northumberland named Cocket from the river Cocket running there by:
this Island was in ancient times very famous for a holy Convent of Monks that
lived there. S. HENRY being thither arrived, with leave of the Prior he entered
the Island, and having built him self a little lodge scarce of force to beat of
the injury of the weather, he began to serve God in great rigor and austerity
of life. For the space of some years he fasted continually His rigorous
fasting.
only with bread and water; afterward he eat but thrice a week and three
days in the week kept silence. In four years before he died he satisfied
his hunger only with little cakes dried in the sun, made of barley meal mixed
with pure water.

II. GOEING upon a time in pilgrimage to Durham, he came to the banks of the
river Wyre, and not finding a boat ready to carry him over, he made his
prayer to almighty God, and presently without the help of man, a boat
loosed of its own accord from the other A strainge miracle.
side of the river, and came over to the bank where he sat; into which he
entered with his companion, and without any sail or oar, they were both
wafted over in a moment. Having performed this pilgrimage, he returned to the
place of his beloved solitude, where by the instigation of the devil, the
fierbrand of all mischief, he endured most vehement tentations of the flesh,
that grew so strongly upon him, as often times he wished rather to suffer
death it self, then so painfully to struggle and fight against those importune
allurements. To increase these vexations the Monk that was guardian or ouerseer
of the Island, did often treat him with very sharp language, casting to his
teeth many contumelious, and disdainful speeches, till at length admiring the
wonderful humility, joined to the continual piety and devotion of the man,
he threw him self prostrate at his feet, and with weeping entreaties humbly
craved pardon for his temeritie. The holy man with great joy taking him from
the ground quickly pardoned whatsoever he had committed against him: and from
thence forth their minds were ever after united in the band of true love and
charity.

III. IN THE mean time messengers are sent from his parents, His friends
endeavor to recall him, but in vain.
who earnestly desire him to voutchafe to come over, and visitt his native
country, friends, and kinsfolks; which he utterly refused to do, stoutly
affirming that for the love of CHRIST, and hope of eternal life he had quite
forsaken his country, and whatsoever else was dear unto him therein, and
therefore to return to it again, were to incur that hard censure of CHRIST.
Whoesoeuer lays his hand to the plough, and looks back, is not worthy of
the Kingdom of heaven. They replied that Luc. 9. v. 62.
in his own country there were many desert, and solitary places much fitter
for his purpose then this, which did expect him, and should be at his free
disposition. Hereat being moved with a natural love to his own country, he
gave some ear to their peaswasions, but differred to give them his absolute
resolution till the next morrow, promising in the mean time to do whatsoever
should be pleasing and acceptable unto God. The night following musing and
pondering many things in his mind, and being wholely ignorant and uncertain
what course to take, he had recourse unto almighty God, beseeching him with
prayers washed i^ the streams of his own tears, to inspire what would be most
acceptable unto his divine goodness for him to do. When as he prayed, he heard
a voice (seeming to come from the Crucifix before him) that forbad him to
depart from this solitude, but courageously to hold on in the course he had
begun, promising a crown of glory for the reward of his labors, and
perseverance. Then falling prostrate See the force of his pious resolution.
on the ground, giving thanks unto almighty God, he desired that he would
give him such an impediment, as should hinder and retain him there, allthough
he were desirous and willing to depart. He had his desire, for as he gave him
self to sleep being wearied with the instancie of his watching, and prayer, he
was suddenly stricken, as it were with a sword, that made him break of his
sleep scarce well begun; and putting down his hand he felt him s^l^ wounded
with a most grievous pain on his knee, which growing daily worse and worse,
grew at length to a mighty ulcer, out of which every day ran great store of
corrupted matter, with such a stench, as it was insufferable to those that came
near him: insoemuch that the messengers, that came to fetch him thence,
returned well enough satisfied, supposing that his friends (allbeit he were
willing) would not desire the company of a creature so loathsome as now he
was.

IV. NOTWITHSTANDING all this, the holy man lived by the labor of his own
hands, and continued his daily work in tilling his little piece of ground,
which as he dug, he was glad to sustain his own unableness by the help of a
staff. When he waxed weary of working, he wouldsitt him down on a stone to
rest, and expose his A strainge example.
sore to the face of the sun, with the heat whereof, the corrupted breed of
the hidden filth therein, which was great store of creeping worms, would
sallie or issue forth; but (see the wonderful patience o^ this holy man) as
they sell to the earth he would gather them up again and restore them to
their former possession, saying; Return, return, and consume the impure
origin of your own nature, whose inheritance you are. Almighty God granted
to his tilling of a barren piece of ground, an incredible increase of fruict
from the little earth he had, and an increase of patience unto him self: for by
how much the more sharply, and miserably the force of his grief did pearce into
the strength of his body; with so much the more alacrity of heart, in the
anguish of his tribulation, did he allwaies give thanks unto his Maker, and
refer him self to the disposition of his divine will, and providence.

V.THIS Blessed Hermit was so illuminated by God, that he was wont to see and
foretell not only things present, and at hand, His gift of farresoeing and
foreseeing.
but also such as passed a far off, and were but in future. For as once the
Monk Guardian of the Island came into his oratorie, he found him prostrate
before the altar powering out a flood of bitter tears, which seemed to betray
some great anguish of mind; of whom the Monk demanded the cause of his
sorrow: he looking upon him with a blubberd face, made this answer: My own
brother (said he) by the cruelty of malignant people is murdered within my
Fathers own land: and our Lord has privileged and licenced Prayers and
penance for the dead.
me to do worthy penance for his soul. Therefore (my beloved master) be you a
publisher of this my woe, unto the Religious and others of your knowledge, that
by the help of your prayers, suffrages, and almsdeeds he may be found worthy
to receive absolution from the pains, that his sins deserve.

VI.ONE THAT some days before had bestowed a towell upon him, came again to
visitt him; to whom the Saint: Have thou as yet (said he) pacified the wrath
of thy angry wife, whose discontent was so violent against thee for the small
gift bestowed upon me? Here take it again, and give it her if that will make
her patient with thee hereafter. Thus would he object, and reveal unto many
that came unto him, those things which they thought to be most hidden, and
secret, as directly as if he had seen all with his corporal eyes: and of
their secret faults he would sharply reprehend them, to the great wonder and
admiration of the doers.

VII.AT LENGTH when like an other Job, in the continual suffering of his
loathsome grief, being alone in his poor cottage without the assistance of any
man, he had passed over some years, ouercoming many a teadious day, and
irksome night with wonderful patience, the hour of his death drawing near,
wherein he should receive Heavenly music at his death.
the everlasting rewards of his labors, there was heard in the air over his
cell most melodious tunes of heavenly voices, that enterchaingeably sung the
hymn TE DEVM LAVDAMVS, to the end. In the mean time, a Monk that heard the
sound of his little bell, ran thither, and found him sitting on a stone with
the bell-rope in one hand, and a candle burning in the other: And perceauing
him to be dead, he put of his garment, and his hayre-cloath-shirt, and having
washed his body with water, it became suddenly as white, and clear as snow,
neither did there remain on his skin any sign or scarre of his former
grief to be perceived. His face seemed so beautiful and resplendent, as he
could hardly be known for the man he had bin; and he appeared as though not
death, but a sweet sleep had seized on his body.

VIII. THE Benedictine Monks of Tinemouth hearing of his departure, met
together to carry away the body, and bury it in their Church, but the
people of the next Parish, fearing much to be robbed of so great a treasure,
according to their foretake^ counsel gathered a multitude of men together and
endeavored to prevent the Monks by taking away the body by force to bury it
in their own church. But they were no sooner at sea, but there arose a thick
mist, which painted the face of heaven with such an hidcous and dark picture
of night, that those rauishers wandered out of their way they knew not whither,
loosing both them selves, and the prey they sought for. The Monks safely
arriving at Tinemouth with their holy lading, buried it very honorably near
unto the body of S. OSWIN King and Martyr, in an arch of the wall on the south
side of the Church: where many miracles were wrought afterward by the
intercession of this glorious Saint. He died in the year of our Lord 1120.
the sixteenth day of January. His life is extant at Antwe^rp in an ancient
manuscript, out of which, IOANNES ANGLICVS, and JOHN CAPGRAVE we have gathered
the foresaid history.

The life of S. DEICOLA Abbot and Confessor of the holy order of S. BENEDICT.
IAN. 18. Written by Peter de Natalibus in catal. SS.
DEICOLA borne in Jreland, when he came to such age that he was able to make
use of his time, went into France, where he lived under the worthy Benedictine
Abbot S. COLVMBAN in the monastery of (...). But when S. COLVMBAN was by King
Theodorick banished out of France (a place not worthy to contain his virtues)
he took with him into Italy S. DEICOLA, there (being able to carry his old
age noe further with S. COLVMBAN) he retired himself into a monastery of
Benedictin Monks called L^tra in Burgundy, where his holy conversation, and
virtuous life was so He is made Abbot of Lutra.
excellent, and pleasing to all, and he won so great confidence, that he was
made Abbot of the same place, by the free election of the Monks; amongst whom
he was admired for his great virtue and miracles. At length overcome with old
age, he ga^e up the government of the monastery to a virtuous disciple of h^^
^^med Columbine, and retired him self to a secret place, where he spent the
small remnant of his life in continual prayer and contemplation of Luc. 10. v.
42.
that one thing which is only necessary for the salvation of so^les. Till
feeling the happy minute of his departure to draw nigh, he called his brethren
about him, and recommending unto them the observance of true love, and
monastical discipline, he denoutly received the last Sacraments, and made a
happy chainge of this teadious His death
world for the sweet enjoying of immortal happiness, the eighteenth day of
January. His body was buried in the same monastery, where on this day of his
deposition, his memory was yearly celebrated. His life we have gathered out of
PETER DE NATALIBVS in his Catalogue of Saints, TRITHEMIVS in his history of
the famous men of S. BENEDICTS order, VSVARD, and others ^^ke worthy ^^ntion
of S. DEICOLA; and the (...) Martirologe this day.

depiction of St. Wolstan S. WOLSTANVS EPISCOPVS WIGORNIENSIS in Anglia
Monachus Benedictinus. Jan. 19.

The life of S. WOLSTAN Bishop of Worcester, a Monk of the holy order of S,
BENEDICT.
IAN. 19. Written by Senatus Brauon. a Monk of Worcester
THE beloved servant of God S. WOLSTAN was borne in Warwickshire, of worthy and
religious parents, who offered him to S. BENEDICT in the monastery of
Peterborough, where his youth was piously trained up, and instructed both in
secular learning, and Ecclesiastical discipline, till he grew of years and
sufficiency that he was made Priest: In which sacred function he so worthily
behaved him self, that his godly manner of life was always His manner of life
being a Priest in the world
correspondent unto the height of his dignity. He ever celebrated his Mass
with wonderful great gravity, and reverence, adding both before, and after
that dreadful sacrifice, daily preparations and prayers, in which for the most
part he spent the whole day; being contented for his poor maintenance, only
with the voluntary offerings of devout people. The flower of his chastetie, as
a rich treasure, he kept undefiled all his life time. In a word, he led so
virtuous a life, that living in the world, he might be compared with the best,
and preferred before many Monks in the Cloister. So continent in his diet,
that he was never known to drink one draught without necessity; and
allthough for a time he did eat flesh, yet he left that custom too, upon this
occasion. Being one day to go forth upon a special, and an inexcusable
necessity, lest he should depart without his dinner, his servants had set a
goose to the fire to be roasted against the end of Mass. In the mean time A
strainge motive to for^ake eating flesh.
the holy man goes to the altar, and being in the midst of the sacrifice
(because the Church was near adjoining unto his house) the strong savor of
the roast-meate struck into his nose, and caused a sudden distraction in his
mind, in so much that at first he seemed to have bin overtaken with a little
glimpse of pleasure therewith. But recollecting him self, with an
acknowledgment of his fault, he vehemently endeavored (but in vain) to
repel that cogitation. Whereat being stricken with the zeal of an holy anger
against him self, he made a vow before the holy Sacrament, which he held in his
hands, never to taste any meat of that kind any more. Mass being ended, he
departed about the affairs he had in chardge, without taking one bitt of
meat, alleging that the vrgencie of his journey could suffer noe longer
delay. And herevppon he abstained ever after from all manner of fleshie and
unctuous meats whatsoever. Yet was he not so rigid as to condemn, or frown
on such as did eat flesh, but willingly permitted them, affirming merrily,
that as for his own part, he had noe desire to that kind of meat, and if any
flesh were pleasant to the taste, his opinion was, that larkes were most
pleasing and dainty in the eating.

II. THE holy man's father whose name was Estan, and his mother Wlsgeue long
before they died, agreed both to profess perpetual chastetie, His parents
profess religion.
and to live separated under the holy habitt of religion, which they as
faithfully performed, as they died happily: whose pious example (lest the
fruict should degenerate from the tree) WOLSTAN resolved to follow, being of
him self much inclined that way, and much more incited thereunto by the good
persuasions of his mother. He takes the habit of S. Benedict.
Therefore putting on a constant resolution, he forsook the world, and in the
monastery of Worcester (where his father had lived before) he received the
habitt of S. BENEDICTS order by the hands of Brichthege then Bishop of the same
place. It was rare to behold how in his very entrance into the cloister, he
began likewise to enter into a strict and religious course of life, exercising
him self so bravely in watching, fasting, prayer, and all other virtues, that
he suddenly appeared as a wonder amongst the rest of his brethren. Herevpppon
the good rule, and government of his own life, caused him to be chosen for
Master and Guardian of the younger Monks or nouices; and afterward by reason
of his skill in singing, and knowledge of the Ecclesiastical office, he was
made Cantour, and Treasurer of the Church riches; by which office having gotten
occasion more freely to serve God, he gave him self totally to a contemplative
life; remaining night and day in the Church, either at his prayers, or reading
spiritual books; continually punishing his body with a fast of two or three
days together; so given to holy watchings that not only a day and a night,
but sometimes, (which (says Roger Houedon a grave Author) we could scarce
beleene, had His won derfull watching
we not heard it related by tradition from his own mouth) he spent four
nights and four days without taking any sleep, in so much that the drienes
of his brain had like to putt him in danger of life, had he not speedily
satisfied nature with some desired rest. And when weak nature forced him
thereunto, he would not foster his wearied bones in a soft bed, but was wont to
take a little sleep lieing on a bench in the Church with his prayer-booke
under his head in steed of a pillow.

III. BUT after some time Agelwin the Prior of the Monastery bing dead, WOLSTAN
(by the election of the Monks, and the authority He is chosen Prior.
of Alred the Bishop) was constituted, and ordained Priour in his place: which
office most worthily he performed, not forgetting allwaies to keep in practice
the austerity of his former conversation; yea to give the greater example of
life unto others, he increased it more and more. Three days in the week he
abstained from tasting any meat at all, observing continual silence; the
other three days his diet was roots, or herbs boiled, and barley bread.
Whilst he shines in this high degree of virtue and piety, the devil envying
so great goodness assaulted him with a most horrible temptation. For praying
one night in the Church before the high altar, that wicked enemy of mankind
appearing in the form of a feruant at Court, with cruel importunity
challenged him to wrestle, the holy man though already tired with patience, yet
in his own defense he grappled with him, and that so stoutly, as three
several times he laid him along to receive a rude salutation on the pauement:
He wrestleth with the devil.
yet in the last encounter he was so breathless with the extremity of
labor, that panting and gasping for wind, he had almost fallen into a sound.
But the divine clemency was present to his aid, and drove away that hellish
monster to his place appointed; and WOLSTAN perceauing him so suddenly
vanished, then first understood that it was the devil, whom before he took
for a seruingman; at whose only sight ever after he would wax pale, and
tremble and quake all his body over, with the very fear, and thought of what
had past in this encounter. Which in him was much to be admired, who otherwise
was a man of a mighty courrage, so far His great courage.
void of any fear, as he was wont to say, he knew not what it meant. For he
would ride over bridges that were broken, and dangerous, never allighting from
his horse, and securely walk along the narrow ridges of high buildings without
any fear: that we may worthily say of him; Justus vt Leo confidens: A just
man is confident Prou. 28. v. 1.
as a Lion.

IV. A LADY very rich, and beautiful was so far besotted with a frantic,
and unlawful love to the holy man, and so cruelly He is tempted by a
lascivious woeman.
vexed therewith, as her impure desire forced her beyond the limitts of shame,
and brought her to such a degree of impudency, that she tore the veil of
modesty and laid open her filthy desire unto him: praying and entreating him
with sighs; and tears of sond love, to remitt a while his wonted rigor, and
voutchafe to take a taste of the delight of her bedchamber: More she would have
said, but the holy man (who thought she had already said to much) rose up in a
zealous anger, and quickly cut off the thread of her unchaste discourse, He
rejected her.
and arming his forehead with the sign of the cross; Pack hence (said he)
thou wicked firebrand of lust, daughter of death, and vessel of Satan; and
thereat, with all his force he gave her such a smart blow on the face, (which
though it heated her cheek yet it cooled her foul desires) that the sound
thereof was heard all over the house. And by this means like an other
undefiled Joseph, refusing to consent to her vile and wanton allurements, he
bridled the unchaste desires of her heart, with the smart of an outward
punishment.

V. HE WAS wont every Sunday with great care and devotion He preaches every
Sunday.
publicly to preach the word of God unto the people, at which one of the monks
being without just cause disconteted, reproved him, saying, that it was the
office of the Bishop only to preach, and teach, and that it better became a
Monk as he, was to keep silence within his cloister, and not to gadde abroad,
and putt his sicle into other men's harvest. The holy man answered: The word of
God is not bound, 2. Tim. 2.
and nothing is more grateful then to preach CHRIST'S Gospel, and reduce his
people out of error into the true way: therefore he would not desist from so
good a work. But the night following that Monk received the just punishment
of his boldness being in a vision called to account before the dreadful
tribunal of On^ punished by God for hindering Wolstans preaching
an unknown judge, who sharply rebuked him for his temeritie in checking his
beloved servant, and commanded him to be laid along out he ground, where he
was so scourged with sharp whipps, as the tears which trickled down his
cheeks, and the black and blew marks of the stripes, which appeared on his
shoulders when he awaked, were evident and feeling witnesses of what had past.
When this was made known unto holy WOLSTAN, pitying his calamity, he
pardoned him the offense, and with his benediction, likewise gave him so
perfect a cure of his grief, that there remained noe sign thereof to be seen.

VI. S. WOLSTAN standing aloose off, happened once to see one fall hedlong from
the top of the steeple; at which woeful sight being suddenly stricken with
grief, he made the sign of the cross toward him as he fell, who coming to
the ground armed with that si^^^ of life, was nothing at all bruised or hurt
with the marks of death: The wonderful virtue of the sign of the cross.
but getting up safe without any help, he imputed the cause of his fall to
his own temeritie, and the miraculous preservation of his life to S. WOLSTANS
sainctetie.

VII. AFTER some years Alred of Worcester being chosen Archbishop of York,
the general consent both of the Monks, and common He is chosen Bish.
people inclined totally to the election of WOLSTAN; holy King EDWARD allowing
them to choose a Bishop, whom they pleased: Their election was confirmed by the
Popes Legates who then lived at Worcester, expecting a dispatch of some affairs
from the Kings Court. But WOLSTAN as obstinately resisted these honors, as He
refuses to accept it.
many now a days do ambitiously labor to get them; prochiming him self
most unworthy, and protesting by oathe that he would rather lay down his neck
to be divided by the sharp edge of the sword, then undertake the burden of so
high a dignity. Being often times persuaded hereunto by many virtuous and
religious men, he would never consent, till at length well checked and sharply
rebuked for his obstinacy, and disobedience by the holy man of God Vlsius, (an
Anachorite who had then lived a solitary life above forty years,) and
terrified with a heavenly oracle, his constancy was broken, and he to his
great grief compelled to yield and consent to their desires. Therefore on the
feast of our B. Ladies Nativity, by the hands of Alr^d Archbishop of York,
(Stig and the usurper of Cauturbury then being suspended from his function,) he
was ordained, Overcome with persvvasion he is ordained bishop. Joan. 1. v. 47.
and consecrated Bishop of Worcester, in presence of holy King EDWARD the
Confessor, in the twentieth year of his reign, In this consecration S. WOLSTAN
opening the Bible (as the manner was) happened on this sentence worthily
deuining of him, Behold a true Jsraelite in whom there is no^ deceit. For he
was an open plain man, void of all quain^ devices of dissimulation. Yet was
he not so merely simple, as easily to suffer him self to be cosened, by the
greatest and wisest masters of deceit: the almighty wisdom many times
giving evident restimonie, approving the virtuous innocence of his
simplicity. For when Thomas Archbishop of York would have reduced the Sea of
Worcester under his jurisdiction, and did wrongfully alienate and detain some
of the lands, and means the (...) belonging, a very sharp controversy was
had there upon in presence of the King, the Bishops, and other Peers of the
Realm, to decide this case, whereon depended a great part of the Bishop of
Worcesters estate. In the mean time S. WOLSTAN goeing out o^ the Council,
maturely to deliberate with his Monks concerning this weigh^ie matter, that ^oe
nearly touched their freehould; when all their minds were most eagerly
attentive to the diligent examination See his wonderful contempt of the world
in respect of the divine service.
of their cause. Believe my Brethren (said WOLSTAN) we have not yet song None;
therefore let us go ^ing it. The Monk^ offended herewith: First (replied they)
let us dispatch the business we came for, and study our answer to the
Council, we shall have time enough to ^ing afterward: Believe me (answered
he) we will first do our duties to God, and then debate the contentious
reasons of those humane affairs. Therefore having without any delay
dispatched the ninth hour, he commanded his Monks, that were very sollicitous
of the event of their cause, to depose all care, constantly affirming that he
saw the ^B. Bishops and Saints, DVNSTAN, and OSWALD, who would defend both
them, and their cause against all their adversaries. Neither was he any thing
deceived for entering into the Council with great alacrity, and boldness, he
got the sentence of them all in his own behalf, against Thomas Archbishop of
York, who then willingly yielded, and very earnestly desired WOLSTAN to make a
visitt in his diocese, and instruct the people with the piety of his sermons:
Which allthough they did not ^low from him with that abundance of humane
science, and flanting eloquence The virtue of his preaching
as other men made show off, yet his speeches took such deep root and
impression in the breasts of his audience, and touched them so to the quick,
that he would move to repentance and amendment of life more then any others
Preachers that were. For his singular innocence of life, joined to the many
miracles which it pleased God through his merits to show unto the world, did
pearce, and sting the hardest hearts, and draw even his adversaries (though
unwilling) to love, and honor him. But among all his miracles this ensuing is
worthy eternally to be recorded in the Church of God.

VIII. IN A Council held at Westminster, were besides the King with the
Bishops, and Peers of England, were present a Bishop and two Cardinals the
Popes Lega^s from Rome, after they had deposed. Stigand a secular Priest out of
the sea of C(...) which by i(...)sion he had usurped; the King William
Conqueror pretending insufficiency The counsel dispute of his depositio^.
of learning, and want of the French tongue in S. WOLSTAN by all means
endeavored to deprive him of his office and dignity, (meaning belike to putt
some Norman in his place) and L^^fr^^ck Archbishop of C(...) unadvisedly
following the Kings opinion, commanded the holy man without further delay to
resign up his staff, and ^i^g the chief arms and ^^signes of his Episcopal
dignity. WOLSTAN without any show of alteration either in mind, o^ in
countenan^e, stood up, and houlding his c^o(...) staff in his hand: In very
d^ed, my Lord Archbishop (said he) I know, that I am ^^yther worthy of this
honor, nor fi^t for s^e great a His speech to the council.
burden, nor able rightly to undergo the labor, this I know, and this did I
know before, when the Monks elected (...), when the Bishops compelled me, and
when holy King EDWARD my s(...) (...)ed me to this (...). He, by the au(...) of
the Sea Apostolic laid this burden on my (...)ke shoulders, and by this
staff commanded me to be (...)sted with Episcop^ll dignity: now you exact me
to give up the p^st^r all (...), which you bestowed (...) you take away the
office which you (...) me(...). And (...)ly, I am so far from being ignorant
of mi(...) w^^ insufficiency, that submitting my self to the sentence of this
holy con(...)rye, I will indeed resign up my staff of offices but to whom? to
you? ^^e, but rather to him, by whose authority (...) first received it.
Having said these words, he went directly to S. EDWARDS s^rine, and there
speaking to the holy Saint: Thou know often, my (...)aigne Lord (said he) His
speech before S. Edwards shrine.
how unwillingly I vnder^ook^ this char^ge, how of^e^ I auoiyded i^, how often
I hidd, and absented my self, when I was sought for, to (...) it. I confess I
played not the part of a wise man, in taking it; but thou di(...) force me to
it. For all^hough (...)-neither the election of my brethren, ^on the desire of
the people, the consent of the Bishop^, no^ the fauo^^ of the Nobles; yet t^y
sole authority over me, weighed down all these, thy will urged me more then
all the rest. But now, new Lord, new laws, our new Archbishop and our new
King make new (...)rees, and promulgate new op(...). They seem to condemn
thee of error, who di^^^^ co(...)d, and me of presumption, who consented. And
then (...) as a mortal man thou might well be deceived, but can thou now
being united by the living God? Therefore I will not resign to them, that
exact what they gave not; who as being humane creatures may deceive, and be
d(...)ed, but to thee who did first give it, and who now translated into the
very truth it self, have escaped the dark night of error, and ignorance, to
thee, I say, I willingly resign my staff of office, to thy cure I committ the
chardge of those thou have commended unto me; and to thee I may securely leave
them, thy meritts being so well known unto me.

IX. HAVING spoken these words, a little lifting up his hand full of a
confidence more then humane, he struck his crosier staff into the stone which
covered the holy Kings body, saying: Take He yields up his office.
it, my sovereign Lord, and give it to whom thee pleases. And putting of his
Epis^^pall robes, returned again to his cowl^^^d hood, and became a simple
Monk among the Monks. All men wondered to see the staff so steadfastly fastened
in the stone, as if there it had taken root. But when some, attempting to take
it away, had failed of their intent, the matter was related to the Council,
whence (...)frank A notable miracle.
presently sent Gundulf Bishop of Rochester to the tomb to fetch it* who was
not able to stir (...) with all his force; Lanfrank astonished with the
strangenes of the miracle, hastened to the tomb him self, together with the
King, and the other Bishops, and having first made his prayer to almighty
God, he tried with all the force he had to take away the staff, but in vain.
Hereat the King being stricke^ with admiration, cried out that this was all the
handie work of God him self: The Archbishop in like manner now dissoluing into
tear^^, ingenuously confessed his error unto the holy man, saying: Verily our
Lord is just, and he walks with the simple, and his communication is with
those that are humble. Dear brother, ^e ha^^ derided thy holy simplicity: but
God has brought forth thy justice as the day light. Our rash judgment has
erred against thee, and has made known to the world thy simplicity so
grateful unto God. By the authority therefore of the office we exercise, or
rather by the judgment of God himself, which has convinced He is rest o red to
his bishopric.
us, we again restore thee to the dignity, and impose the chardge upon thee,
which unadvisedly we endeavored to take away. But WOLSTAN alleging his own
vnabl(...), and pretending the burden to be beyond his forces, did contend,
that in so sacred a place ought to be placed a holy prelate. Notwithstanding
overcome with their instant entreaties, in sight of them all he came unto the
sep^lc^^r, and taking the crosier staff in his ^and, drew it forth with as
great facility, as if it had stuck but in (...) piece of soft clay or (...).
Then the King and L^^frank both fell pnostrate at his feet, desiring pardon of
their error, and ear(...)tly recommending them selves to his holy prayers,
finding hereby to be most true, that God has made foolish the wisdom of this
world; and the foolish things thereof he has chosen, that he may (...) the
wife. The holyman that would 1. Cor. 1.
not be behind them in (...)litie, and courtesy; seeing them prostrate before
him, with all submission of mind prostrated likewise at their feet whence he
would not rise without the Archbishops benediction; which done, he returned to
his chardge.

X. A WOEMAN possessed with a wild devil, that caused her ^auingly to wander
up and down the fields, and desert, war by the He cures possessed persons.
benediction of S. WOLSTAN restored to her self again, and delivered from the
power of that wicked spirit: the Saint commanding her to give praise and
thanks unto almighty God, and not to WOLSTAN: to love virtue, and live
chastely, left some worse mischief should befall unto her. She following his
holy admonitions, entered into a Nunnerie, and led a life therein both
grateful, and acceptable unto almighty God. ^n other possessed person that
was bound to a post with iron chains, speaking and roaring out a confusion of
so mavoyces, that those that heard thought he had had an army of men in his
belly, which spoke through his mouth. The holy Bishop coming toward him, he
began to tremble and quake in all the parts of his body, to gnash and grind
his teeth, to fo^me at the mouth, and horridly to bellow out against him; The
Bishop much pitying his woeful case, lifted up his hands to heaven, and
devoutly made his prayers unto almighty God for his delivery: and the end of
his prayer brought a beginning of perfect health and liberty to the tormented
person.

XI. A LEAPER ugly, and horrid to behold, spotted all over his He heals a
leaper.
body with the unseemly marks of his disease, washed him self in a bath
wherein was putt the water that had washed S. WOLSTANS hands, and presently the
swelling of his blister^ (...) ^^asswaged, the contagious matter ran out, and
all his body became as pure and clear as a young child's. (...) a nun,
daughter to King Harold, was troubled with such a dangerous swelling in her
eyes, that her ^ylidds being grown to thick lumpes of flesh, had quite covered
her sight, and ^illed the pitts of her eyes with a mass of superfluous
substance. But having received S. Wol^tan benediction, she opened her ^ylidds
again, and obtained her desired ^ight.

XII. One Elsine, that sometimes had bin a servant unto holy King Enwa^d,
entreated the good Bishop to con^ecrate a new Church. In the Churchyard grew a
great (...) tree, which spreading The virtue of S. wolstans malediction.
her branches to (...) extra^^ dina^^^ breadth, cast a very large, and
pleasant shadow on the ground; but withal much darkened the Church windows.
Under this tree El^^^ was wont to play at d^ee, and banquet with his friends,
and therefore would by noe means (according to the Bishops (...) ^^d perm^t it
to be cu^t down, but said; that he had rather the Church should remain
unconsecrated, then no give way v^^^ such (as he thought) a pitiful act.
Therefore holy Wolstan c^^^ the (...) of his ^alediction against that tree,
which as i^ were, wounded therewith, waxed barren by little, and little, and in
a short time, ^ithered and dried up to the very (...): Whereat the Owner i^ a
rage, commanded it to be cut dow^e protesting that nothing was more ^itter
then Worstans malediction, and nothing more sweet then his blessing.

XIII. A (...)s ^able was (...) observed a con^^nuall lecture of such Reading
at his table.
books, as might edify the heare^s, during which cu^rie man kept great
silence. And after meat, that he might impart spiritual food unto their
souls, whose bodies he had ^edd with nourish met, he would expound the lesson
that had bin read, in his mother tongue. But after dinner, when according to
the custom they brought wine to the table, he would only take pure water, none
knowing there of but his servant. In his younger years he drank pure water
only, in his old age he began to mingle it with a (...)e wine, or beer. He
severely observed order and discipline in his house, as well with his secular
as Ecclehasticall persons; his law was that all The discipline of his house.
should be present both at Mass and all other hours of the office. He
appointed guardians of purpose, to watch that noe man should laugh unpunished:
otherwise he either wanted his drink that day or received a sharp blow on the
hand with a pa^^mer, or ferula. Whenever on business he sent any of his
servants abroad, he strictly enjoined them to say their prayers seven times a
day; affirming that as the Monks their seven flowers, so the lay men ought to
offer seven prayers a day unto God. Whosoever swore an oath in his presence,
straight without any intermission felt the revenge of the pa^^mer. He would be
much moved if any man before him did back bite, and detract other men's lives,
or carpe at their manners; for this he judged to be a part of extreme malice.

XIV. He was wont every night after a short sleep, to rise out of his bed,
and recite his psalter, sometimes alone, fearing to hinder His nightly prayers
others rest; sometimes with one of his Monks, whom he perceived to be more
vigilant then the rest. One night he sharply rebuked the drowsines of the
brother that recited with him, who nevertheless did not seek to drive away
his heaviness, but sat gaping, and yawning at his prayers, with the sign of an
unwilling mind: Afterward when that Monk betook him self to his rest in bed,
he was in a vision shaken out of his sleep, and being well lasht with stripes
by an unknown hand, he was justly punished for his lazines: till in the end he
faithfully promised never more to hinder the holy man in his pious devotions.
The holy Bishop was wont to hear at least two Masses euerle day, and to sing
the third him self. Being to take His daily exercise of devotion.
any journey, he was noe sooner on horseback, but he began to say his psalter,
and never paused till he came to the end. His Chamberlain had store of alms
always in a readiness, whereof he was never to deny the needy that asked it.
Wheresoever he lay, stood, or walked, some devout psalm or himne was allwaies
in his mouth, and the figure of CHRIST in his heart. In every one of his
villages he had a little closett, where he kept close allwaies after Mass,
till his Cleark called him either to dinner, or hours. When he remained at
home in Worcester, he would allwaies sing high Mass in his week, and many
other times he would supply the place of the Hebdomadarie, or weekly Priest
therein; which office he said, that he more esteemed He would sing mass in his
turn.
then his Bishopric, and he would chose rather to be deprived of this, then
exempted from the other. He was allwaies present at the Monks collation,
whence he would go with them to the Church; and the benediction at the end of
Compline (as the manner is) being given, he retires himself to his lodging.

XV. WHEN his Monks removed to a larger and fayrer Church which he him self
had erected, looking on the destruction of the old one built by S. OSWALD, he
could not contain him self from w^^ping: whereupon being modestly reproved,
that he ought rather to rejoice, since in his time so great an honor, and
increase happened to his Church, and that by the abundant number of Monks, the
buildings were likewise enlarged: I consider it far otherwise His wonderful
humility.
(said he) to wirt, that we wretched sinners do destroy the works of our
holy predecessors, thereby to purchase all the praise, and glory unto our
selves. That innocent age was not acquainted with glorious and stately
edifices, but in those days men were contented to sacrifice them selves* unto
almighty God, and by their example draw their subjects to the like, under the
defense of any poor homely roof: When we, neglecting the care of men's
souls, do strive only to eternise our names in raising up high towers, and
stable buildings to heaven. Thus out of the glory of his own ^^roiq^e deeds,
would he gather the rich baseness of humility.

XVI. HE HAD an admirable grace in composing of discord, (...) bringing
dissentious people within the laws of love, and friendship: to which purpose
making* sermon on a time, he touched many so to the quick, that they, who
were bitter enemies before, returned to a mutual league of friendship. But
amongst the rest there was one who feared not to brag openly, that he would
never depose the enmity, and hatred he had conceived against his enemy: to
whom the Bishop (failing by any persuasions, or fair means to bring him to
an atonement) said: Blessed (says CHRIST) are the peacemakers, for they
shall be called the children of God. Is it not manifest Matt. 5.
then, that all peace-breakers, and such as by noe reason will be reduced to
make peace, may be called, yea and are the sons of the de^^ill? To him
therefore whose son thou art, for thy contumacic, 1. Cor. 5.
I committ thee, and deliver thy body to Satan, that thy soul may be A
terrible. punishment of one that would not forgive his enemies.
saved in the day of judgment. He had scarce ended these words, when the
miserable wretch by the g^ashing, and grinding of his teeth, the ghastly staring
of his eyes, his foaming at the mouth, and antic turning, and rouling of his
body into strange postures, gave evident restimonie by what diabolical
spirit he was governed. At length being freed again by S. WOLSTAN: he was the
second, and third time possessed in like manner, until from the bottom of his
heart; he promised to forgive his enemies.

XVII. THE virtuous life of this holy man was ennobled with many other
miracles, and wanted not the gift of prophecy. By S. Wolstan^ gift of
prophecy.
which he dissuaded one Ailwine, (who a long time had lived a solitary life at
Mal^erne hills) from his desire of goeing to Jerusalem, foretelling him, that
God almighty would work wonderful things by his means. Ailwine yielding
unto his perswasio^s, founded afterward a famous monastery of S. BENEDICTS
order at Mal^erne, where he gathered together the number of three hundred
Benedictine Monks.

XVIII. ONE Sewulf, (whom he had often exhorted to embrace a monastical life,
to do worthy penance for his sins,) excusing him self, and alleging that
the rigor of it did exceed his weakness of body: the Bishop said; Well, go
this way, thou shall be a Monk whether thou will, or not. At length waxing
old, he took the habitt of S. Benedicts order at Malmesburie, where the very
remembrance of S. Wolstans words, ever after thundered a milder, and humbler
behavior into him.

XIX. As on a time he stroaked the head of a little boy called Nicholas, whom
he brought up from a child, and now even in his A Wonder
youth, began to loose his hair; I think my son (said he) thou will
shortly be bald: and why Father (replied the boy) do not you keep my hair on
my head? Believe me son (answered the holy Bishop) as long as I live, so
much as remaynes, shall not fall away: And so it came to pass. But within the
very week that the holy man died, all that young man's hair went so clean
away, that there remained nothing but the bare scull.

XX. News being brought him that his sister was dead; Now then (answered he)
the plough is come into my land; and very He foreseeth his own death.
shortly the brother will follow his sister. Neither was he a false Prophet,
for within a short time after, being taken with an extreme seauer, his old age
soon perceived, that death was at hand. Then nothing was to be seen among his
monks, and other friend^ about him, but tears, sighs, and lamentations,
woefully bewailing the loss of so pious a Father. When he on the other side
with a devout exhortation proceeding from a joyful countenance strove to
appease their griefs, saying, that his death would be noe loss of life, but a
change for a better; promising not so to forsake them, but that with his
prayers to almighty God, he would for ever assist them: His great confidence
in almighty God.
and that being free out of his prison of clay, by how much nearer he was
joined unto God, by so much readier he would be to comfort, and defend them.
Thrice happy tongue, that out of the storehouse of a secure conscience, durst
power out words of so great confidence. Some with sighs, and sobbs desire to
have him prayed for, and he largely promises to pray for them all. O strange
wonder! See how his holy simplicity was ignorant of having any diffidence in
the mercy of almighty God. Therefore in the year of our Lord 1095. this
glorious confessor of CHRIST, this bright star of the Benedictine order in
England, having with a wonderful rare example of holy life, gouuerned the Sea
of Worcester, the space of thirty four years, delivered up his virtuous
soul into the hands His death
of his creator, to receive the rewards of his worthy labors, the ninteenth
day of January, in the eighty seventh year of his age. His body was brought
into the Church, and detained there three days unburied. The very form and
complexion thereof, seeming rather to set forth the graceful beauty of a
living Bishop, then the horror of a dead corpse. The Episcopal ring, which he
had received at his consecration, many years before his death would not hang
on his finger: for his flesh was so consumed by his extreme penance and
austerity of life, that his body was nothing but skin, and bone. But
although his ring often times fell from his finger thus A notable miracle.
consumed, yet was it never lost: and he did often say, that he would carry
with him to his grave that ring, which without ambition he had received. Being
dead, diverse essayed to take off his ring, but in vain, for that which before
fell off many times of it self, by noe violent means could now be drawn off.
The fourth day he was buried with great reverence, by Robert Bishop of
Hereford, who long before had entered into a strict and holy league of
friendship together with S. WOLSTAN.

XXI. SOME years after his death, a merciless fire taking hold of the topp
of the Church, burnt, and consumed it in miserable sort, An other as strange.
the lead came pouring down, like rain, the great beams, their supporters
being consumed, as whole trees tumbled to the ground; so that in such a
confused wrack of ruin, it seemed nothing that was within the compass of the
Church could escape the rage of the fire. Yet the sepulcher of the blessed
Saint remained free from these outrageous flames, and was not as much as
touched, or smutched with any of the coals, ashes, or any thing else that
fell from above. And to give greater evidence to the miracle, the very
strawmatte on which those did kneel, that prayed before his tomb, was found
whole and untouched.

XXII ABOUT a hundred years after his death, his holy body was taken up, and
enclosed in a very precious shrine, being found in all His body uncorrupted
after an hundred years.
his Pontifical robes, as entier and uncorrupted as when he was laid in the
ground. The feast of his translation is celebrated the seventh of June. Many
other miracles were wrought by the supreme worker of miracles, through the
intercession and meritts of this blessed Saint, which I willingly omit; my
purpose being not to write Saints lives, that the world may only wonder at
their miraculous deeds, but chiefly to draw men to imitate their virtuous
lives: Yet in this history we have had great store both of virtues and
miracles. God of his infinite goodness, give us grace to admire, and praise his
divine power in the one, and to follow the virtuous examples of his blessed
Saint in the other. Amen.

His life we have taken chiefly out of the author of it SENATVS BRAVON. a Monk
of Worcester. Besides whom, WILLIAM MALMESBVRY de Pontif. Ang. lib. 4. and de
gest. Reg. Ang. lib. 3. ROGER HOVEDON part. 1. Anal. an. 1062. and 1095.
BARONIVS tom. 11. an. 1062. 1070. 1072. 1074. MATTHEW WESTMINSTER anne 1074.
NICHOLAS HARPSFIELD saec. 11. cap. 24. and many others do largely speak his
virtues and praises. Jn the SARVM breuiary he has an office of nine lessons;
and in an anncient manuseript Breuiary of S. BENEDICTS order, which belonged to
the monastery of Burton upon Trent he has an office of three lessons on this
day.

The life of S. ERMENBVRG Queen and Abbess of S. BENEDICTS order.
IAN. 21. Out of Matthew Westmin. and others
SAINT ERMENBVRG daughter to Ermenred, brother of Ercombert King of Kent, was
married unto Merwald King of the Mercians, with whom she had the hapines to be
the mother of the three holy Virgins, Milburg, Mildred, and Mildgith, whom she
brought up so piously, as afterward they all embraced a monastical life, and
became Nuns, and Saints of S. BENEDICTS order: their mother also Queen
Ermonburg, allthough her husband was yet living, yet she was so taken with the
desire of a solitary and monastical life, that she never rested until she
had obtained the consent of her husband to the furtherance of her virtuous
desire. Which being gotten, she went into Kent, to her cozen Egbert, that
raygned there, and made him acquainted with her holy purpose, earnestly
entreating him to putt his helping hand to the perfourmance of her good
intentions. Egbert being much moved at so great devotion, gave her a piece of
land at the town of Estrey in Kent, according to her own election, and built
her a monastery upon it dedicated to the two holy Martyrs Ethelbert, and
Ethelred her brothers: Where S. Of Ethelbert and Ethelred see the seventeenth
of October.
ERMENBVRG, having gathered together the number of seauentie other Nuns
under the holy order of S. BENEDICT, spent the remnant of her life in the
continual exercise of religion, and virtue, governing the monastery as
Abbess with all true observance of regular discipline, until by almighty
God she was called out of this world, to receive the everlasting reward of her
meritts in a better. What day she died it is uncertain, but this one and
twentieth of January is made a commemoration of her. Of this blessed Saint do
make mention MATTHEW WESTMINSTER ann. 654. and 676. WILLIAM MALMESBVRY de gest.
Reg. Angl. lib. 1. c. 1. and de gest. Pontif. Ang. l. 4. and NICHOLAS
HARPSFIELD hist Eccl. saec. 7. cap. 10. whom we have followed.

The life of S. THEORITHGID virgin andnunne of S. Benedicts order.
IAN. 22. Out of venerable Bede. hist. de gest. Ang. lib. 4. c. 9.
THEORITHGID was scholar unto the holy Abbess S. EDILBVRG, 1. Cor. 12.
in the Benedictine monastery of Berking in Essex; where she lived for many
years ever exercised in the diligent service of almighth tie god, with all
humility, and sincerity, and helping S. EDILBVRG the Abbess to keep the
true observance of regular discipline, she was the mistress to correct and
instruct the younger sort or nouices. But, that her virtue, might (as the
Apostle says) be made perfect in infirmity, she was suddenly taken with a
most greiuous sickness, and through the merciful providence of our redeemer, she
was afflicted there with for the space of nine years, that whatsoever spott of
filthy sin, by ignorance, or negligence had crept in and got place amongst
her other virtues might be quite par^ched, and burnt up in the painful
furnace of a long tribulation.

II. THIS HOLY virgin goeing out of her bed one night, toward the She enjoys
a strange vision.
dawning of the day, saw manifestly as it were the body of one brighter then
the sun it self, carried up on high in a white sheet from wards the dorter
where the sisters took they rest, till at length it was drawn out of her
sight into the open heavens; by this vision she supposed to be signified, that
some one of her sisters was shortly to be called out of the world: as indeed it
fell out, for within a few days S. EDILBVRG the Abbess chainged this life for
a better.

III Now when THEORITHGID the blessed handmayd of CHRIST had lived three years
more after the death of the Abbess, she was so far spent with the forenamed
sickness, that her skin, and bones did scarce hang together; and at the last
the time of her departure drawing near, she lost not only the use of all her
other limbs but was not able to move (that member which is most voluble) her
tongue. In which case having endured wonderful pains for the space of three
days, and three nights, being then recreated with a celestial vision, she
opened her eyes, and cherefully looking toward heaven, began to speak in this
manner unto the vision she beheld: Thy coming is very grateful unto me, and
thou art hartyly S. Edilburg appears unto her and reucaleth the hour of her
death.
welcome. This said, she was silent as it were expecting the answer of the
party she spoke unto. And again as she were a little moved; I cannot (said
she) gladly endure this. Presently after a short silence, she spoke the third
time; If it cannot be to day I beseech thee that it be not long delayed. Then
being silent a while she concluded thus: If it be fully so ordained, and that
this sentence cannot be changed, I beseech thee that there be this only night
between. Being demanded with whom she held this discourse: She answered,
with my most dear mother EDILBVRG. Whereby they understood that her coming was
to bring news that the time of THEORITHGIDS departure was at hand. For
according to her desire after that day and the nex night, being delivered out
of the prison / of her weak body, she took her flight to the celestial
paradise to receive the eternal reward of her sufferings. She died about the
year of our Lord six hundred seauentie eight. Thus much we have taken out of
VENERABLE BEDE de gest. lib. 4. cap. 9. and NICOLAS HARPSFIELD. saec. 7. cap.
14. Of her do make mention MOLANVS in append. ad VSVARDVM and ARNOLD WION in
append ad suum Martirolog.

The life of S. Cadox, Bishop, and Martyr.
IAN. 25. Out of Ioannes Anglicus.
S. CADOCK was bone in Wales os noble parents, his father was called Gundley,
his mother Gladusa; being baptized by an Anachorite of that country, under the
same man's care he was brought up and instructed in the rudiments of Christian
religion: in which he profitted wonderfully. Being yet but a youth, he bore the
mind of an aged man, refusing to follow such youthful sport, as his equals
invited him unto, truly considering that in the later day laughter shall be
chainged into weeping, and weeping into joy. At length departing from his
master, and his native soil, he built a monastery He builds a monastery.
in Glamorganshire about three miles distant from Cowbridge, into which having
gathered a good number of monks, he instituted them in the rules of a
monastical life. The monastery was called Llancarnanan, that is, the service
of Hearts, because it is reported that in that work he had wild Hearts familiar
and obedient unto him: There in very great abstinence, he led a solitary life,
night and day applying him self unto the contemplation of heaven, and heavenly
things. But the same of his learning, and sainctitie, was a cause that many
famous men flocked unto him, and putt themselves into the rank of his
scholars, and by the instructions of so good, a master, made a wonderful
progress both in learning, and virtue. Amongst these was Gildas surnamed the
Wise, and Ellenius, that afterward succeeded him in the government of the
monastery; and many others.

II IN HIS time a certain Captain or Duke of the Brita^s having slain A Duke
flies to him for Succor.
three of noble king Arthurs soldiers, was compelled, being cruelly persecuted
by the king, to fly, for refuge to S. CADOCK, who comiserating his case, very
courteously entertained him, till (the king being somewhat pacified at the holy
man's entreaties) it was determined by the judges of the Country that to
redeem the men slain, he should give for each one, three of his best kine,
according to the ancient law of the Britains. But King Arthur refusing to
take such kine a were of one color, with much wrangling demanded such as had
their fore parts red, and hinder parts diversely spotted with white and black:
wherevppo the nine beasts were by the paayers of S. CADOCK chainged into the
forenamed colors; and presently again in the kings own sight turned into so
many bu^dells or faggotts of fearne Whereat much astonished he humbly
demanded pardon for his unjust demand. Many other wonderful miracles are
reported to have been done by the prayers of this holy man, which because they
seem to be not very authentically reported are wittingly ommitted. Only this
we have that being afterward made Bishop, he desired of almighty God to
pass out of this life throngh martirdo^, which was granted him. For as he
celebrated the mystery of the dreadful sacrifice of He is martired. daying
ma^le at the Altar.
the mass, a tirannous ring leader of an army of other wicked spirits
wasting, and spoiling the town were he lived, a knight of this blouddie
compaine ruled by a madding fury ran into the Church and with his lanuce
pierced the fides of the holy man at the aultars who with his hands lifted up
to heaven recommended his soul unto almighty God, and earnestly craving
pardon for his murderers, departed out of this world to receive a place amongst
the holy Martirs in heaven, the twenty fourth day of January, about the year
of our Lord five hundred seauentie; In the reign of Malgocune over the
tottering state of Britanie. The memory of this saint is conserved to these
our days in many Churches in Wales; and one in Gloucestershire, dedicated to
his name, and honor. By an other name he it was called Sophias, which gave
occasion of error to the Author of he English Martirologe, when he makes
Cadock and Sophias to be diverse Saints. His life we have gathered out of
IOANNES ANGLICVS recited by JOHN CAPGRAVE, Nicolas Harpsfield, saec. 6. cap.
27. and others

The life of S. BATHILDE Queen and Nun of the holy order of S. BENEDICT.
IAN. 26. Written by an author of the same time
The Authors Prologue.
BY how much the virtuous life of widddowes is more famous in meritts, by so
much it is worthier of praise in the mouth of the world: for they noe sooner
show an example of pious conversation unto others, but they stir up the
tongues of all to celebrate their praises. Calling therefore to mind the
excellent virtues, and meritts of the glorious, and religious widow, and
worthiest Queen S. BATHILDE, once wife to the famous king of France Clodouens,
let us give praise, and glory unto JESUS CHRIST our Redeemer, who is allwaies
known to be wonderful in his saints: and to lay open the way of justice unto
us, not only by men; but by the frailty of women allsoe he shows both to
us, and to all those that love him, rare examples of religion, and virtue. For
indeed our God has a special care of all, and will have none of those to
perish that he has redeemed by the shedding of his own precious blood. Holy
men he exhorts to remain in their Sainctitie, and admonishes sinners to
forsake their sins, and follow good works, that they may walk the high way
to heaven. Which being understood, and well understood by this venerable Lady,
she studied with great care to fulfill it: for she was both religious, and
very devout toward God, and taking upon her the care of the Churches, and
the poor, with a wonderful courage of mind she stoutly governed the Palace,
and uncontrolled, she ruled the Kingdom of France; in so much that her own
deserts exacting it, she was reverenced of all the Bishops, Peers, and People
through out her Kingdom, with more then ordinary love and affection. The
renown of whose life because she was borne in England, I have here set forth
amongst our English Saints.

I. S. BATHILDE descended by birth from the noble blood of the Saxons in
England, but being taken away in her youth (not without the particular
providence of almighty God) and as a prey, carried into France, she was sold
at a rate far to base for so incomparable a parcel of merchandise. There
this precious and admirable jewel of God was first entertained by a famous
Prince of the French by name Erchinoaldus, then chief ruler of the Kings
Palace: in whose service, being but young, she behaved her self so decently,
that her She serves the Prince Erchinoald.
virtuous conversation, and admirable condition, was very pleasing both to the
Prince, and all his family. For she was of a generous mind, most chaste in her
behavior, sober, prudent, and friendly, plotting harm to none. In her speech
neither light, nor presumptuous, but guiding all her actions with the
sincerity of a noble wit. The form of her body was correspondent to the
nobility of her birth, verle grateful, and beautiful to all beholders; of a
countenance merry, and constant, and in her gate grave. In a word, she behaved
her self in all things so well becoming her self, that she pleased the Prince
Erchinoald infinitely, and got great favor in his sight; in so much that he
appointed her to wait at his elbow, where often times she played the part of an
honest cuppbearer, carefully filling wine unto him. She grew not proud with
this favor, but rather being well grounded in humility, became more obedient,
and loving to all her companions; serving her elders with such reverence, as
she disdained not with her own hands to untie and pull of their shoes at
night, and make them clean, to provide them water to wash, and the like; all
which works of humility she did exercise with a prompt and willing mind. By
this her behavior so humbly noble, and nobly humble amongst her fellows, she
got a wonderful praise, and love of all, and her good fame deserved so
happily that Erchinoald the Prince desired she should succeed in place of his
bedfellow; who was dead, and become his second wife, which this holy maid
understanding (inspired by Gods grace) with great care, and secrecy she
withdrew her self from his sight. And being called to She flies the marriage of
Erchinoald.
the Princes chamber, she hid her self in a corner of the house under some
ragged clothes so subtly, that noe man suspected her being in that room:
and then like a wise, and crafty maid, flying all vain honors, and humbly
embracing an humble chasterie, she endeavored to her power, to avoid the
company of a man, that she might deserve to enjoy the society of her
spiritual, and heavenly spouse. But having escaped the Princes embracements,
and he in the mean time being married unto an other, by the disposition of She
marieth the king Clodoueus.
the almighty providence it came to pass, that she who had avoided the
marriage of this Prince, should afterward be joined in wedlock unto the great
Monarke of France, Clodoneus, and be raised by the deserts of her humility to
a higher degree of dignity; by refusing the Kings servant, she was married unto
the King himself, and became the mother of the royal progeny: which without
all doubt was thus brought to pass, that she, who descended from the race of
Kings, should, by marying a King, bring forth an issue of Kings. But in all
these honors ever ruling her self by the raines of wisdom, Her wonderful
works of mercy.
with a watchful care she obeyed the King as her Lord, carrying her self to the
Princes as a mother, to Priests as a daughter, and to yonglings as a pious
nurse: she was loving unto all, honoring Priests as her fathers, favoring
Monks as her brethren, cherishing the poor as her domestics, and (remembering
her own estate of pilgrimage) she entertained pilgrims as her own children.
She was a perpetual refuge unto widows, orphans, and fatherless children,
and gave succor unto all that were weak, and in want. She would always
exhort young men to piety, and religion; and often put the King in mind to have
a care of the Churches, and poor. Also being desirous in this her secular
habit to serve under the banner of CHRIST JESUS, she often frequented her
prayers, daily recommending her self with tears of devotion unto her heavenly
King. Of whom her earthly King Clodoneus being likewise very careful, that
she might the better bring to pass what she had in mind conceived, according
to her own faith, and devotion; counseled her to have some conference Her
charity to religious houses.
with the venerable Abbot Genesius to aid and assist her in her pious
intentions. Through whose hands she exercised her piety to Priests, gave
maintenance to the poor, clothed the naked, and carefully buried the dead. By
him she sent noe small store of gould, silver, and other rich gifts unto the
monasteries both of men, and women. All which was by this pious servant of God
with great care performed.

II. IN THE mean time King Clodonens died, and left the care of his children
to their mother, by whose means, and the authority of the Peers of the
Realm, Lotharins the eldest son was settled in the government of the Kingdom
of France. Also through the labors of this blessed Queen her son
Childerick was made King of A^strasia, and the Burgundians entered into a league
with the French. She builds the monastery of Chelles


III. HAVING thus ordered the public affairs of the Kingdom, it is
incredible what great commodities, and gifts she largely bestowed on religious
howses, in lands, woods, and other hereditaments, either to build their
monasteries on, or to maintain those that were built with sufficiency. Yet
this her great liberality did not seem to satisfy the piety of her desire,
unless at her own only chardge she did build a monastery, which And richely
endoweth the same.
amongst the other particular houses of God, should look toward heaven.
Wherefore now as it were spurning the sea of the world, she erected a
Monastery for Nuns of S. BENEDICTS Order at a place near unto Paris
commonly called Chelles, on the banckes of the river Marne. This Abbey she
enriched with wonderful great revenues of whole villages, and Lordships, all
which she delivered into the possession of the Nuns living there, strictly
and severely obliging the rules thereof, in a precept sealed with her own
hands, and the Kings seal, that none hereafter should ever presume to
alienate, or diminish any of the goods, or lands thereunto belonging, under
pain of incurring damnation with the traitor Judas. And this writing she
caused to be safely referued in the treasury of the monastery: Where to this
very day there lives a very religious Convent of a boue threescore Nuns of
S. BENEDICTS order in a very strict observance of regular discipline. She is
fou^dresse of the Abbey of Corbey.


IV. THIS glorious Queen built an other monastery in the suburds of Amiens,
called Corbey Abbey, and placed therein a devout flock of Monks likewise of S.
Benedicts order, over whom Theodofred was ordained Abbot. And to this place
allsoe she gave great reuenews of lands, and rents sufficient for the
maintenance of a great Convent. It is almost incredible, unto how many other
monasteries and Abbeies of men, and women, and unto how many Churches else
this devout Queen made donations of spacious lands, great goods, rich gifts
and incomparable ornaments, never ceasing from doing such pious offices for
the pure and sincere love of God, whose honor and glory in all her actions
she chiefly endeavored to increase.

V. HER piety and virtue increased daily, and now she was in very great care
to undertake a monastical life in the monastery of She is taken with a desire
of areligious life.
Chelles, which she had erected, and to dwell there in body, as she did in
mind. But the Peers and Nobles of the Realm withstood her devout intentions,
chiefly because by her wisdom the Palace was governed, and for that her
pious conversation had gained the love of all; so that they had not permitted
her to have her defire herein, had not a certain co^motion happened about the
miserable Bishop Sigebrand, whose pride amongst the French hastened his own
death, and ruin. Hence therefore a contention arising amongst them, and having
putt the Bishop to death against the course of law, without examining his
cause, fearing the blessed Queens severe punishment An example of the divine
providence
and revenge of so great and wicked an offense, they persuaded her to embrace
her pious intended course, which before out of a temporal respect they would
not permit her to do. But allthough the Princes did this rather out of
policy then any love of goodness, yet the holy woeman lightened by Gods grace,
considered that this came not to pass so much by their counsels as by the
secret providence of the divine wisdom, to the end her intended devotion
might by some occasion be fullfilled according to her desire. Being therefore
conveyed by some of the most ancient Princes of France unto the long desired
monastery of Chelles, and there by the Nuns honorably received into their
company, she gave hearty She becomes a Nun.
thanks unto almighty God, who hithereunto had preserved her under the
shadow of his holy protection, and now had brought her unto the sweet haven of
her desires. Now she that before swayed the Her obedience.
scepter of France, submitted her self to the obedience of a poor Abbess as
her mother, appearing to the rest of her sisters, not as a mistress, but as a
discret servant in all things, pioufly bearing a serviceable duty unto them.
And with such courage of mind she showed Her humility.
unto all an example of sincere humility, that in her turn, she would serve
her sisters (according to S. BENEDICTS rule) in the office of the kitchen,
washing, and clensing all implements thereunto be longing, and performing all
other base offices of the house. And these acts of humility she did with a
merry and willing mind, for the pure love of him that says in the Gospel; J
came not to be served, but to serve. For what heart could ever think that the
height of so Mat. 20. v. 28.
great power should become a feruant in things so base, and abject, unless
the mighty love of CHRIST had granted this special grace unto her? With
tears she daily insisted at her devotions, and prayers: and often times
frequented her spiritual lecture; and in her visitations of the sick, which
were very frequent, her custom was to impart some pious consolation, and godly
exhortation unto them. Her charity.
She was so well practified in the study of charity, as she sorrowed with
the sorrowful, rejoiced with the joyful; and for the weak, and sickly, she
would often with humility putt the Abbess in mind Romans 12.
to get them provided with necessary helps both for body, and soul: whose
pious desire she like a good mother did very carefully see performed, for
indeed, according to the rule of the Apostles, Act. 4.
they had but one heart, and one soul; so dearly and tenderly they loved
each other in the true love of JESUS CHRIST.

VI. IN THE mean time this blessed woeman began to be afflicted She falls
sick.
with a sickness of body, and to labor grievously with a certain griping in
the gutts, which had brought her near her end, had not the grief bin something
assuaged by the power of physic. But allthough the force of her pain did
cruelly torment her tender body, yet she ceased not out of the purity of a
holy conscience, to give thanks unto the heavenly physician, who succoureth
those that labor in tribulation, and from whom she confidently expected to
receive the everlasting rewards of her suffering. And showing her self a great
example of virtue unto others, she studied to give her sisters a pattern of
true piety, obedience, and humility: often admonishing the Abbess to be
likewise mindful of her duty toward the King, and Queen, and other Nobles
their friends, that the house of God might not loose the good name, and fame it
had gotten, but rather encease it more and more in the true affection of
charity toward their friends, and chiefly to get strength, and constancy in
the sacred love of God and their neighbors: for according to S. PAVL: We ought
also to have the good testimony of those which are 1. Tim. 3.
without. But above all by the mercy and love of JESUS CHRIST she recommended
unto her to have a very special care of the poor, and of strangers.

VII. THEREFORE the death of this holy Saint being at hand, there appeared a
famous vision unto her, in which she beheld a ladder standing up right before
the altar of the B. Virgin Marie, the Her vision before she died.
topp whereof seemed to reach unto the heavens, and many Angels ascended
thereon, which seemed to accompany, and lead her herself to the never dieing
joys of Paradise. O truly happy, who in her journey had Angels her
companions! This is the ladder, which she erected to heaven in her life time:
These are her fellow Angels, whom by her exercise of good works, she made her
friends: The degrees of this ladder are the twelve degrees of humility
contained in the holy rule of S. BENEDICT, which she professed, by the
continual exercise whereof she deserved to be exalted to the clear vision of
of CHRIST JESUS the master of all humility. By this vision the holy woeman
plainly understood, that shortly she was to leave this world, and take her
journey thither, where long since she had hidden her greatest, and chiefest
treasure: commanding those that had been eye witnesses of the vision to
conceal it from the rest of her sisters, that they might not be contristated,
until it pleased almighty God to call her unto him. In midst of these joys
she began more and more, with piety and alacrity of mind, to insist at her
prayers, never ceasing with humility, and compunction of heart to recommend
her self unto her heavenly King CHRIST JESUS: and hiding, as much as she was
able, the vehemence of her grief, she consorted the Abbess Bertilia and the
rest of her sisters with some hope of her recovery, easing them hereby of a
present sorrow, which afterward took them before they expected it.

VIII. BUT perceauing, within a short time after, that now she She yields up
her soul.
was to pay nature her due, and feeling the violence of her pain to be ready
to cut asunder the union of her soul, and body, confidently arming her self
with the sign of our redemption, and lifting up her hands and eyes toward
heaven, she yielded up her blessed soul out of the teadious fetters of the
body, to be crowned with the diadem of eternal glory. For at the same
instant, a divine splendor She is carried into heaven by Angels.
shined over all the chamber, and with that very light, there appeared to the
standers by, a troop of Angels, with whom came her faithful friend Genesins
the Bishop to meet her, and by this heavenly troop her blessed soul, long
tried in the furnace of affliction, was carried up out of their sight to
receive the rewards of her holy meritts, amongst the Angels, and Saints in
heaven. She was buried in the little Church which she had built in honor of
the holy Cross. But afterward the many miracles wrought at her tomb, were
cause that her body was taken up, and translated into the great Church of our
Lady, which was not finished in her life time, where it is kept with great
reverence, in a rich shrine over the high altar, and many times I my self
have seen it solemnly carried in procession. This holy Nun, and great
benefactour of S. BENEDICTS order, died the thirtith day of January; but her
feast is celebrated this day. She flourished about the year of our Lord 669.
Besides the author of her life extant in the first tome of LAVRENCE SVRIVS,
whom we have followed, the Roman Martirologe, VSVARD, BARONIVS tom. (...) ann.
665. TRITHEMIVS of the famous men of S. Benedicts order lib. 3. c. 112. and
many others do largely celebrate her praises.

The life of S. SEXVLPH Bishop and Confessor of S. BENEDICTS order.
IAN. 28.
THIS holy man was the first Abbot and in some kind, founder of the Benedictine
Abbey of Medishamsted, dedieated to S. PETER, which afterward by reason of the
greatness, was called Peterborough. In which office having for some years
dischardged the By his per swasion king wulfere built this Abbey.
part of a good and religious Prelat, by the authority of Theodore Archbishop
of Canturbury, he was consecrated Bishop of Lichfield, in place of Winfrid
deposed from that Sea for his disobedience. He governed his people with very
great sainctetie of life, and examples of good works for the space of three
years, when being laden with virtuous deeds he left this world, to take his
place among his fellow Benedictin Monks in heaven about the year of our Lord
700. MATTHEW WESTMINSTER ann. 614. HARPSFIELD saec. 7. c. 23. ARNOLD WION lib.
2. c. 46. TRITHEMIVS in his work of the famous men of S. BENEDICTS order lib.
4. cap. 158. CAMDEN in desoritt. com. Northampt. and others make worthy
mention of S. SEXVLPH.

The life of S. GYLDAS Abbot and Confessor.
IAN. 29. Out of an anncient author recited by John Capgraue.
GYLDAS borne in that part of Brittanie now called Scotland, and one of the
twenty four sons which a King of that country had by one wife, was from
his youth of a very virtuous disposition, and much inclined to the knowledge
of all manner of learning: for the better obtaining of his desire therein, he
passed over into France, where he employed seven years in the continual
study of all goods sciences; and returned into Britanie laden with great
store of books and learning. But to the end he might with more freedom attend
unto the contemplation of heavenly He goes into Frace to study.
things, he with drew him self from the tumults of the world, into a solitary
place of aboade, where he led the life of an hermit, continually chastising
his body with fasting, prayer, watchings, and hayre-cloath. Yet his virtue
could not lie so hidd, but that many were drawn to him with the noise of his
great fame, to be instructed both in religion, and learning; and at their
departure they served as trumpetts to inuit others unto him, such great
content they received in his virtuous life, and rare learning. Whatsoever
gifts he received from the charity of the richer sort, he allwaies
distributed unto the poor, contenting him self with the riches of his His
great austerity of life.
own poverty. He never tasted any flesh, his ordinary food was herbs, and
barley bread mingled with ashes, in steed of spice, his drink pure water out
of the fountain. His continual abstinence had brought his face to such
leannes, that he all ways appeared like a man that had a fever. At midnight
his custom was to enter into the river up to the neck, and in that sort he
powered out his prayers to almighty God, while his tears strove with the
streams which should run fastest; afterward he repaired to his oratorie,
and spent the rest of the night in prayer. His clothing was one single
garment, in which only he took his rest, lieing upon the down of a hard
rock. Having taught many both in word and deed to follow the rules of good
life, he departed into Jreland, where he converted a great multitude of that
rude people to the faith of CHRIST. Shortly after returning into Britanie, he
found his brother Howell slain by King Arthur, who humbly craving pardon of
his fault, received from the Saint a salutation of peace, friendship, and
forgiveness. He was a perpetual enemy unto the Pelagian Heretics, and to be
the better informed against them, and their doctrine, he made a journey Against
heresies he consulteth the Roman Church.
to the fountain of true religion, Rome, and returned not only better
instructed against them him self, but able to fortify, and strengthen others
with such sound principles of Catholic religion, that they might easily
defend their cause against all the vain batteries and proud bull warks of
heresy.

II. AT LENGTH he built a little Church upon a rock in an Island near unto the
river Seauerne, where spending his time night He builds an ermitage.
and day in continual prayer, he kept his mind wholly vacant and free from the
world, and worldly creatures, seriously attending the contemplation of the
divine goodness of his Creator. But being in such want of fresh water, that he
had noe other store but what was retained after a shower in little holes of the
rock, he made his prayer to almighty God, who sent him a clear spring of
water g^shing out of the same place. But by the frequent injuries and
incursions He departs to Glasten. bury.
of Pirates, he was compelled to depart from hence to Glastenbury, and being
honorably received of the Abbott, he instructed the Monks, and people
thereabouts in the science both of humane and divine things, and building a
little Church not far from thence, he led there an eremiticall life, in great
austeritie and penance. Unto whom, as unto an oracle, many came from all parts
of Britanie, to partake of his wisdom, and learning. He, whose holy desires
tended only toward heaven, striued with all the force of eloquence he could,
to divert their minds from the transitory things of this world, and settle
them on the only consideration of heaven. Having in this manner spent some
years in this habitation, the holy man fell into a grievous sickness, which
made him quickly understand that the hour of his death was nigh; therefore
earnestly desiring of the Abbot to have his body buried at Glastenbury, and
recommending his soul unto the hands of almighty God, he left this miserable
world, to receive his reward in a better, the twenty ninth day of January, in
the year of our Lord 512. His body, according to his desire, was buried at
Glastenbury in the midst of the old Church. Of this holy Saint make mention
MATTHEW WESTMINST. N. HARPSFIELD saec. 6. cap. 23. JOHN CAPGRAVE, and others,
whom we have followed.

The life of S. BIRSTAN Bishop and Confessor.
IAN. 30. Out of William Malmesbury, and Westminster.
SAINT BIRSTAN being a man of most pure and sincere life was chosen Bishop of
Winchester, where he ruled the space of four years. He was wont every day to
sing or say Mass for the souls departed, and by night, without any fear he
would walk about the Churchyard reciting psalms, and other prayers to the
same end. And as once in his wonted devotions he went this round, Mass and
prayers for the dead.
and added to the end of his prayers, Requiescant in pace: he heard from the
ground the voices, as it were, of an infinite army that answered, Amen.
Whereby he found his labors and prayers to be very grateful and profitable
unto the souls departed. The same holy man being an ardent follower of our
Lords example, would every day without any spectatours execute acts of
profound humility, in washing with his own hands the feet of diverse poor
people, covering them a table, giving them sufficiency of meat, and at
length, His works of humility.
as their devout servant, taking away what was left. This service being
finished, and his poor guests dismissed, he would remain in the same room
the space of two or three hours at his prayers. Until once entering according
to custom to exercise these pions offices, not having been before troubled with
sign of any sickness, suddenly unknown to all, his soul departed out of his
mortal lodging, The manner of his death.
leaving it void of all vital spirit. His family, and servants that had long
been acquainted with his customs, thinking that then he was also busied at his
prayers, let him lie there a whole day. And the next morning breaking into his
chamber, they found a dead body stark and stiff, without any sign of life.
Therefore with great cries, and lamentations they buried him in the Church of
Winchester. But the Citizens of the town, because they saw him intercepted by
a kind of sudden death, buried the worthy memory of the holy man in the
deep caves of silence: being ignorant that it is written; The man that lives
well, cannot die ill. And by what Sap. 4.
death soever the just man shall be prevented, and overtaken, he shall be in a
place of refreshing, and comfort. But a long time after this their rashness was
corrected by the almighty power of him that cannot err, for to Ethelwold
Bishop of the same place, (as one night he watched, and He appears to S.
Ethelwold.
prayed, according to his custom, before the relics of the Saints in the
Church of Winchester) there appeared three persons, which stood by him, not in
an ecstasy, but fully awake. The midst of the three spoke these words: I am
BIRSTAN in times past Bishop of this city: This on my right hand is BIRINE
the first preacher, and that on my left is SWITHINE the special Patron of this
Church, and City. And thou must know, that as thou see me here present with
them, so do I enjoy the same glory with them in heaven. Why therefore am I
deprived of the honor and reverence of mortal men, who am highly exalted in
the company of heavenly spirits? Saints are to honored.
At these words they vanished, and ever after by the commandment of S.
ETHELWOLD his memory was celebrated with great veneration. By this we may
learn that holy men (the providence of heaven so disposing) may sometimes be
taken away by sudden death, and not without a special favor, in getting by
a minute of pain, that which others cannot obtain but by many years
torments of sickness. This holy man was consecrated B. an. 932. and died in the
year of our Lord 934. Thus much of him we have gathered out of WILLIAM
MALMESBVRY lib. 2. de Pontific. Angl. and MATTHEW WESTMINSTER ann. 932. NICHOLAS
HARPSFIELD saec. 10. cap. 8. POLIDORE VIRGILL lib. 6. ARNOLD WION lib. 2. lig.
vitae, and others mak^ worthy mention of him.

The life of S. WILGIS Confessor and Monk of the holy order of S. BENEDICT.
IAN. 31. Out of S. Alcuinus in the life of S. willibrord
THERE was in that part of the Brittsh Island called Northumberland a
househoulder named Wilgis, by birth a Saxon or Englishman, who having been
natural father unto WILLIBRORD afterward a Saint, and Archbishop of
Vtreight, as if he had performed the whole duty of his marriage, resolved both
he and his wife to leave the world, and undertake a religious course of life;
which holy purpose how virtuously he accomplished, was by miracles afterward
sufficiently testified, and made known to the world. For having left his
secular garments, he putt on the black monastical habitt of the holy order of
S. BENEDICT, and made profession of a Monk not He takes the habit of S.
Benedict.
upon a forced service, but out of a true will and desire to religion. And
because in leaving his house, and temporal goods, and enrouling him self into
a spiritual warrefare in the camp of JESUS CHRIST, he had undertaken a
perfect life, he would not therefore be backward in what he professed, but in
all things showed him self to be a most perfect servant unto the dear master
he served. But when he had for a while given a pattern of his virtuous life in
the school of the monastery, he became so brave a soldier, that the rudnes
of the fearful desert could not afright him, for shutting up him self within
the limitts of a straight, and narrow cottage, that stood between He leads
an eremiticall life.
the Ocean, and the river Humber, dedicated to S. ANDREW the Apostle, he
labored in the exercise of a solitary conversation and imitating his grand
master S. BENEDICT, he led a heavenly and angelical life on earth, in pureness
exceeding the ruddie blush of the rose, or the whitenes of the fair lilly;
but delightfully shining with a more sweet variety of virtues, then does a
dove in the beams of the sun with diversity of colors. Within a short
space his desire to lie hid, was betrayed by the wonder of his frequent
miracles, and his name was blown so far abroad with the trumpet IAN. 31.
of fame, till it arrived at the Kings Court, and sounded such an alarm all
over the country of Scotland, that great store of people flocked unto him,
whom he never sent away empty, but allwaies laden with the sweet instructions
and admonitions of his heavenly learning, The fame of his virtue draws many
scholars.
being compelled herevppon to labor sometimes in a contemplative, and other
times in a practical manner of life. He became at last of so great esteem,
and honor with the King and Nobles of the Realm, that they gave him the
possession of some lands near adioining, and bestowed many other rich gifts
upon him, by help whereof he built an honorable Church on the Sea side in
honor of the B. Virgin MARIE, and gathered together a Convent of Beuedictine
Monks, small in number, but great in the exercise of true virtue and religion.
These he governed as Abbott with all sainctitie of He builds a monastery.
life and doctrine, until the divine clemency willing to set a period to the
conflicts of his holy labors, absolved this his worthy champion from the most
painful warrefare of this present life, to reign in his heavenly Court, which
so long he had thirsted for, and desired. He was very honorably buried in the
same Church which he had built, and at his tomb have been wrought many, and
wonderful miracles, which give evident testimony of how great price, and
dignity his most blessed soul is held to be in the sight of almighty God.
He died the 29. of January, but his feast is celebrated on this day in the
Benedictin Abbey of S. WILLIBRORD in Germany, where (says S. Wine wonderfully
increased by his meritts.
ALCVINE) on the annual feast of S. WILGIS, there being but one flagon of wine
in the house, it was by the meritts of this B. Saint so miraculously
increased, that the whole Convent of Monks, which were a great number, having
every one drunk two cupps thereof, it was nothing at all diminished;
whereupon the Abbott and Monks giving thanks unto almighty God, with
joyful sobriety, and sober iollitie every man drank as much he desired.
Thus much out of S. ALCVINE in the life of S. WILLIBRORD, MOLANVS, JOHN
CAPGRAVE, THEOFRID Abbot of S. Willibrords Monastery in Germany make worthy
mention of him.

The life of S. BRIGITT Virgin of Kildare in Ireland.
FEB. 1. Written by Cogitosus an Author of the same time
GOD is wonderful in his works, and his power is infinite, in that he draws
good out of our naughtines, and condemns not the souls of the children, for
the sins of their parents, but contrary wise he gathers roses oftentimes out
of the midst of thorns, and produces a clear day out of the darkness of an
ugly night. We have a peculiar experience here of in the life of this holy
virgin S. BRIGITT; which follows.

II. THERE was in Ireland a man called Duptac, who having purchased as a slave
a young and not vnhandsom woeman named Brocca, became so amorous, and fond of
her, that at length her Her parents and birth.
great belly witnessed their more then honest familiarity together. His own
wife perceauing this naughty husbandry, was highly enraged against her
husband, forcing him by all means to make a resale of this slave; and refusing
to be persuaded to pity either by earnest prayers, remonstrances, or indeed
by the holy revelations which two good Bishops had of the treasure which the
slave carried in her womb. In a word, the good wi^e could take noe rest nor
repose until she saw her husbands minion (as she termed her) out of her house;
the poor slave at her time was delivered of a daughter, which was called
BRIGITT, whom as soon as she had over grown the use of her nurse, her father
took home again into his own house, where being very carefully brought up,
she allwaies carried her self honest, The virtues of her youth
humble, peaceable, obedient, and above all so charitable, that vnintreated
she took upon her the office of Almner in her fathers house, giving away to
the poor whatsoever she could lay hold on: and among other things she had
given away her fathers sword. For this cause meaning to ridd her away, he went
to the King, and offered him a bargain of her, at an easy rate. The King
having asked her, why she gave her fathers sword to the poor; I gave it
(replied she) to CHRIST him self; and truly if God would demand it, and that
I were able, I would freely give my souueraigne lord the King, and my father
him self, with both your goods and possessions, unto his divine goodness, Hereat
the king amazed said: Thy daughter is of too much worth either for thee to sell,
or for me to buy; and giving her a sword to make restitution unto her father,
he sent her away.

III. These virtues of her soul were accompanied with an exceeding Her beauty
of Body.
fair beauty of body, and especially her face and eyes were so excellent in
that gift, that they ravished the hearts of all those that beheld her; and
made many desire and seek her in marriage. Her father being much sued unto on
all sides, and not knowing how to ridd him self of those impatient wooers, nor
answer their importunity, motioned the matter to his daughter, giving her
free leave to make choice of a husband according to her own liking, amongst
that ba^d of suitors. But BRIGITT, who desired JESUS CHRIST for her only dear
spouse, and to consecrate her virginity unto him, She obtained the loss of an
eye to avoid suitors.
was quite of an other intention, and knowing that the beauty of her face was
the chief cause of these rude assaults, she prayed heartely unto her sacred
spouse, to give such a deformity unto it, as might hereafter breed rather a
detestation of all the the^ love of any toward her. Our Lord heard her
prayer, and granted her request, by the loss of one of her fair eyes, which
burst and dropped out of her head like a dissolved pearl: and by this means she
became so defformed, that noe man sought after her any more; when she got
her fathers consent to hasten her entrance into a monastery of religious
women, which was the only height and aim of her defires. At the time she
received the holy vayse of chastity from the hands of Machil Bishop and
disciple unto S. PATRICK, he beheld She enters into religion, and is restored
to her former beauty.
a pillar of fire hang over her head, and as she inclined her body and laid
her hand on the foot-step of the altar, which albeit it was of dry seasoned
wood, yet at her touch, and in testimony of her chastity, it waxed green, and
flourished afresh; and at the very same instant her eye was restored again,
and her face became more beautiful then ever. For it seemed her dear spouse
would not endure, that she who had desired to loose her beauty to preserve her
virginity, should remain in such deformity.

IV. WE should never come to an end, if we went about to set down in this
paper, all the rare and excellent virtues of this blessed virgin, with this
wonderful great miracles, which our Savior wrought at her intercession: It
shall suffice to rehearse some only. She freeth a young maid from the company
of the devil.
Being by a young maid invited to dinner, she saw the devil sitting by her
side that had invited her, and having asked him what he did there, and why he
came thither: He answered, that the weakness, and idleness of that maid, invited
him to stay with her, with whom he found him self very welcome. The maid
having heard these words, spoken with a long and intelligible voice, and seeing
not the author, was much amazed, until (being willed by S. BRIGITT) she made
the sign of the cross on her eyes, and then she saw that dreadful ugly
beast, belching flames of fire out of his horrid throat: which sight,
together with the persuasion of the Saint, made her to acknowledge her fault,
and amend her life, being freed ever after of the company of that infernal
monster.

V. A WOEMAN bringing unto this holy virgin a basket of aples A woeman
punished for disobeyng her.
for a present, found at the self same time some poor leapers at the door
expecting an alms. The Saint bad her give those apples unto the wretches at
the door: but the woeman (whether of niggardlines, or out of some horror she
conceived) refused so (as she thought) basely to bestow them, saying that she
brought them for her, and her religious sisters, and not for such loathsome
creatures. This answer much displeased the holy virgin, who sharply
reprehending her for hindering a work of charity, with a prophetic spirit
told her, that in punishment of this offense all the trees in her orchard
should wither away, and never bear fruict again: the woeman departed, and
being come home found her trees, which she had left well stored with aples, to
have store of nothing but want; and from that time they remained dry, barren,
and fruitless ever after.

VI. A NAVGHTIE woeman, being delivered of a son unlawfully begotten, the
better to hide her offense, laid it to the chardge of the holy Bishop Broon
disciple to S. PATRICK. But when he auowed the contrary, that he was most free
from any such wicked act, S. BRIGITT sent for the woeman, and asked her who
was the father of Puni^^me^t of (...).
her child, she answered very impudently, that noe man but the Bishop had to
do with it. Whereupon the Saint making the sign of the Cross upon the
mouth of that vile woeman, presently her shameless tongue swelled in her head,
that she could not speak. She also made the same sign of life on the tongue
of the little infant, A newborn child speaks.
and demanded of him who was his father? A strainge miracle! he that never
spoke word before, answered very distinctly, that it was not the Bishop, but a
deformed, and vile fellow the basest amongst all the common people; and thus by
the discovery of the truth, the holy Bishops reputation remained untouched,
that miserable woeman did penance for her slander, and the people gave thanks
unto the almighty searcher of our hearts, and secrets.

VII. THE daughter of a great Prince having vowed perpetual chastity, and
chosen JESUS CHRIST for her only spouse, was nevertheless forcibly solicited
by her father to marry. On the day appointed The virtue of the sign of the
Cross.
for her marriage, when the banquet, and all other rich preparations were in a
readiness, she stole away secretly from her fathers house, and fled for refuge
into S. BRIGITTS monastery. Her father accompanied with many horsemen,
pursued her, meaning to take her out by force: the Saint seeing them come,
made the sign of the Cross on the ground, and at the very instant the men,
horses, and all stood flock still, like so many statues. Then the Prince
acknowledging the strength of the mighty hand of God to hold him, did penance
for his rashness, and at the prayer of the Saint both he and and his followers
were set at liberty, and his daughter perseuered in the perfourmance of her
sacred vow.

VIII. THIS blessed Saint having cured many diseases, the fame of her
sainctitie was blown over the country, which made two leapers come unto her,
with tears entreating to receive their S. Brigitt cures leapers.
health, for whom, having made her prayer unto almighty God, she blessed a
little water, and bad them wash one and other therewith; one of them being
cured, she commanded him to wash his companion; but he was so ravished with
joy to see him self recovered, and so fearful to loose his health again,
that he had not the courage either to wash, or touch his fellow, fearing
thereby to repurchase his disease; but he felt the punishment of God, being
suddenly covered all his body: over with the same leaprosie, when he saw his
companion perfectly healed by the prayers of the holy Virgin.

IX. IN THE monastery of S. BRIGITT, among her other Nun^^^ there was one
beautiful young dame, grievously haunted with A N^nne grievously troubled with
lascivious thoughts.
lascivious thoughts which had entered into her heart at the gates of her eyes,
by impurely gazing on a dishonest person, unto whom she had promised a meeting
at time convenient. The flame of her filthy affections increased daily, and
the devil (according to his custom) forgott not to blow those impure coals,
never suffering the poor soul to take any rest (so necessary a thing it is
to keep a close guard over the gates of our senses, for fear we give death an
entrance into our soul) so that being near unto the utter ruin, and
shipwreck of her chastity, whilst S. BRIGIT (unto who^ our Savior had
revealed all that passed) made her prayer for her, she was inspired by Is cured
by the prayers of S. Brigitt.
almighty God, to go barefoot upon hott burning coals; which she
performed, and by the heat of one ^ier, she quenched the flames of the other;
and by the sensual pain of her body, overcame the eternal heat which did
torment her soul. On the morrow S. BRIGITT spoke these confortable words unto
her: Because (said she) thou have fought courageously this night, and
extinguished the flames of wantonness which made war against thee, hereafter
thou shall be exempted both from them, and the fire of hell: then making her
prayers unto almighty God for her, she was cured of the burning of her feet,
and quite freed from the wonted temptations, which did molest her.

X. A MAID named Daria which was blind, entreated S. BRIGIT to make the sign
of the cross on her eyes, by means thereof she She gives sight to a blind
maid
not only recovered her sight, but allsoe by an inward light in the soul she
understood, that all whatsoever she could see in this world was subject to
corruption, and vanity, and that that which we see oftentimes with our
corporal eyes is but a bar, and hindrance to the soul; therefore she
returned unto S. BRIGITT, and desired to be restored again to her former
blindness. The Saint by her prayers shutt up the windows of her eyes in
darkness, which before she had opened to behold the light. A Lady of that
country who had a daughter that was dumb from her very birth, brought her at
the age of twelve years unto S. BRIGITT, who taking the gyrle by the hand,
said: Will thou for the love of JESUS CHRIST keep perpetual chastity? Her
mother answered, that her daughter forsooth, She ^ureth a dumb gytle.
was dumb, and could not speak. Nevertheless (replied S. BRIGITT) I will not
let her go, till she answer me. Then the gyrle spoke, and said, she would
obey her commands in all things: In performance whereof she remained a virgin
ever after, and spoke as well, and as distinctly as ani^ of her sex.

XI. NINE men conspired amongst them selves the death of one man, whom they
were agreed to kill at a set day: S. BRIGITT being She delivers a man from
being slain by his enemi^^.
advertised hereof, labored as much as was possible by prayers and entreaties
to auert them from this wickedness, but finding their cruel minds to be so
obstinately bent to that blouddie purpose, as they grew rather worse by
entreaties, she had recourse unto almighty God her only refuge in distress,
humbly desiring him to hinder the execution of their malicious intent. On the
day appointed when they went about to act this blouddie scene, they saw the
very for me and figure of the man they meant to murder, and taking a figure
for the true body (as our Protestants do) they ran after with great fury to
kill one who was dead allreadie, and having given him as many mortal wounds,
as were sufficient to have murdered the strongest living man, they returned
victorious to bring news of their triumph unto S. BRIGITT: who smiling at
their mistake, told them the man they thought they had slain, was yet alive,
and that their courage had exercised his cruelty only upon the imaginary
figure of their enemy, and noe man. Herevppon being much astonished, they
acknowledged their fault, and repenting them of their wicked purposes,
corrected their lives ever after.

XII. OUR Lord wrought diverse other miracles by the holy meritts Many miracles
done by S. Brigitt.
of this blessed virgin; the blind their sight, the dumb their speech,
leapers, and other diseased persons recovered their health. By her prayers she
turned water into beer; and stones into salt; she chainged the course of a
great river, and which is more, by her good persuasions, many desperate wicked
fellows withdrew them selves out of the gulphes of their vicious manner of
life, and entered into the sure port of religion, where they finished their
days in the service of JESUS CHRIST. When this blessed virgin ^ad happily
ended the course of her life, and endured mani^e great labors for the love of
JESUS CHCIST her dear spouse, (being advertised of her death, and having made
it known unto one of her sisters, specifiing Her death.
the day and hour thereof) she gave up her pure soul into the hands of her
dear Redeemer, the first day of February in the year of our Lord according to
Sigebert 518. but Marianus Scotus says 521. in the reign of the Emperor
Justin the elder. Her life was written by an a^thour of her time named
COGITOSVS, and by IOANNES ANGLICVS, JOHN CAPGRAVE whom we have followed. The
Roman Martirologe makes mention of S. BRIGITT, as allsoe that of S. BID,
VSVARD, and ADON: and BARONIVS in his seventh tome of Annalls. But GYRALDVS
CAMBRENSIS a very grave author in his Topographie of Ireland, amongst many
other miracles of this Blessed saint, makes mention of S. BRIGITTS fire
Miracle* of S. Brigitts. fi^r.
which is reported to be vnextinguished, not that it cannot be extinguished,
but because the Nuns did so carefully, and continually nourish and feed it
which new matter: that from her time for many hundred years after, it
neuerwent out, and in the consuming of so much wood, which had bin burnt
there, in all this time, the ashes never increased. This fire was compassed
about with a little hedge of twigges, within which noe man dared to enter; and
if at any time some did presume so to do, their presumption was punished by
a revenge from heaven. Women only did blow it, and that, not with their
mouths but either with bellows, or a fan. An Archer that rashly attempted
to leap over the headge and blow S. BRIGITTS fire with his mouth, suddenly
lost his wits and fell into madness, and running up and down the town, putt
his breath in the faces of all he met, saying: do thou see? thus I blew
BRIGITS fire: and wheresoever he found any fire, he would blow it, still
repeating the same words: till at length being taken by his companions, and
bound hand and foot, he desired to be brought to the next water, where he
drank so much to quench his extreme drought, that he burst his belly, and
died. Many others (says GIRALDVS) were punished for the like attempt.

XIV. But who does not behold and admire, in the life of this glorious A
breef consideration of her vettues, and miracles.
Saint, the wonderful greatness of the goodness of almighty God, who out of
the sin of her Parents, drew so precious a jewel, as S. BRIGITT, making a
poor slave to be the mother unto her, that deliuer^^ so many captive souls
out of the servitude, and slavery of sin? How could the frail vessel of a
poor bondslaue gyrlo, be capable of the noble condition of so great love unto
virtue, and of such a boiling desire of pure Virginity, that for the
preserving thereof she chose rather to loose the tendrest part of her body,
her eyes, and to deface her beantie, the very Idol of women, then to consent
unto a lawful marriage? How manifestly it appreares hereby, that our B. Savior
is sweet, and gracious to his true servants, in restoring unto BRIGITT her
beauty of which at her own request, and for her greater good, he had before
deprived her? So that it is noe wonder, if she that knew so well how to keep
her own virginity untouched, and sacrifice it unto her dear lord, was allsoe
of power by her prayers to obtain the like favor for other young women, and
deliver the innocence of the good Bishop from the calumny which that wicked
woeman laid upon him; and that God has wrought by this blessed virgin the
miracles before rehearsed. Let him be ever Praised, and glorified as well for
that which he is in him self, as allsoe for what he works by his saints,

Amen.
decorative device
depiction of St. Lawrence, Archbishop of Canterbury S. LAVRENTIVS
ARCHIEPISCOPVS CANTVARIEN* Monachus Benedictinus. Feb. 2.

The life of S. LAVRENCE Archbishop of Canturbury, of the holy order of S.
BENEDICT.
FEB. 2. Out of Bid de gest. Ang.
SAINT LAVRENCE was one of those Benedictin Monks whom Pope GREGORY the great
sent with S. AVGVSTIN to preach the Gospel of JESUS CHRIST to our English
nation, in which pious work he labored wonderfully to gain souls out of the
blindness of Idolatry to the light of the true Catholic faith. He was a man
of excellent learning, and virtuous life: And when Ethelbert King of Kent, and
most part of his kingdom were baptized; S. AVGVSTIN sent the holy monks
LAVRENCE and PETER to Rome to bring unto the holy Pope the joyful tidings of
their happy success. S. Austin chooses Laurence for his successou^ in
Canturbury.
After his return into England, when S. AVGVSTIN Archbishop of Canturburic
perceived the time of his death to draw near, lest that Church as yet but raw,
and rude in religion, being one hour destitute of a pastor should begin to
waver, he ordained Laurence for his successor; plainly following herein the
example of the first Pastor of the universal Church the Prince of the
Apostles Saint PETER, who in like manner instituted Clement to succeed him in
the primacie of the sea of Rome. S. LAVRENCE being installed in the dignity of
the Archbishopric, began with great courage, and industry to augment and
promote the foundations of Christian religion so nobly laid, and by his
frequent preaching, exhortations, and continual examples of pious works he
endeavored to advance them to due height of perfection. Neither did he only
His care of all the Churches.
take the chardge and care of the new Church of the English, but was allsoe
very sollicitous, and careful of the ancient inhabitants of Britain, not
forgetting allsoe to be a pastoral guardian of the Scotts, and Irish. For
understanding the manner of life and profession of faith of the Britans and
Scotts to be in many things scarce Ecclesiastical, and chiefly that they did
not celebrate their Easter in due time, but judged it to be observed between
the fourteenth of the Moon and the twentieth, he, together with his
fellow-Bishops writ unto them an epistle of exhortation, desiring, and
coniuring them to keep the same unity of peace, and Catholic observance,
which was observed in the Church of CHRIST over all the world. Of which his
Epistle this was the beginning: His Epistle to the Scottish or Irish Bishops.
LAVRENCE, MELLITVS, and IVSTVS servants of the sernants of God, unto our most
dear brothren the Bishops, and Abbotts throughout all Scotland. When the Sea
Apostolic (according to the accustomed manner thereof, which is to send to
all parts of the world) directed us into these Western quarters to preach the
word of God unto Pagans, and heathens, and we happened to enter this Island
called Britain, indging (before we knew) that all who were Christians, walked
according to the custom of the vntuersall Church, we honored with great
reverence of sainctitie, as well the Britans, as the Scotts. But now having had
some knowledge of the Britans errors, we judged better of the Scotts. Till we
understood by Dagamus Bishop that came into this foresaid Island, and by
Columban Abbot in France, that the Scotts in their conversation do nothing
differ from the Brittans. For Dagamus Bishop being here, refused not only to
eat with us, but would not taste any meat under the same Roof with us etc.
In like manner S. LAVRENCE together with his other fellow-Bishops sent letters
worthy his calling, unto the Priests of the Britans whereby he endeavored to
reduce them to the unity of the Catholic Church. But all his labor profitted
little, so obstinate and perverse they were in their fore-taken opinions.

II. IN the mean time a most grievous tempest, and perturbation arose in the
Church. For B. Ethelbert King of Kent being dead, Eabald his successor utterly
destroying his Fathers holy institutions of A perturba^^on in the English Chur.
Christianity, ran hedlong into all manner of vice and wickedness, and
marrying his stepmother, he lived in that foul fornication, which the Apostle
so highly detested in the Corinthian. Together with him the Noblemen, and
many of the people (choosing rather to offend God, then not to follow the
Kings fashion) fell (as the manner is) from their Catholic institution, into
all manner of loosenes and lewdnes of life, and religion. To augment these
miseries, about the same time Sigebert King of the East Angles being dead, his
sons fell from the Catholic religion (which in their Fathers time they
seemed to approve) into the flatt profession of their ancient Idolatry.
Therefore in the midst of these so great difficulties, the holy Monks and
Bishops Mellitus of London, and Justus of Rochester met at Canturbury, to
deliberate with S. LAVRENCE what was best to be done. At length they were
brought to such straights, that they determined rather to return into their
own country, there to serve God in peace and quietness, then to loose their
labors among these barbarous people so rebellious to the faith of CHRIST.
Mellitus, and Justus departed into France, there to expect what would be the
event of these mi The Bishops fly into Frace.
series, whom S. LAVRENCE promised shortly to follow, unless the wickedness of
the time did change. In the mean space he ceased not to admonish and persuade
the King and people with all the force of arguments he could invent, that they
ought not so silthyly to forsake such excellent precepts of religion, and
soevnaduisedly fall from the great happiness allreadie obtained. But the king
finding the holy Bishop to withstand him, and his desires, began daily to have
a greater auersion from him, and grew at length to be so maliciously bent
against him, that LAVRENCE inteded wise to go after his Brother-Bishops into
France.

III. THE night before he mea^t to depart, he commanded his bed to be prepared
in the very Church of S. PETER and PAVL; where, having Laurence meaning to
fly is scourgedby S. PETER
powered out his hearty prayers, bathed in tears, for the present miserable
state of the Church, he betook him self to his rest, and fell asleep; During
which the Prince of the Apostles S. PETER appeared unto him, and having
severely scourged his nacked back and shoulders with sharp stripes a good
space of the night, he asked him by a strict apostolical authority; wherefore
he would forsake the flock which he had committed to his chardge? and to what
other pastor he would dismiss the sheep of CHRIST, from which he intended to
fly, and leave them in the midst of wolves? Have thou forgott mine example
(said he) who for the little ones of JESUS CHRIST, which in testimony of his
love he reco^me^ded unto me, have suffered chains, stripes imprisonments, and
afflictions, and at last death it self upon a cross? S. LAVRENCE with these
stripes of the Apostle, allthough wounded in body yet much encouraged in mind,
went the next morning to the king, and discovering his back, showed him how
cruelly he was scourged and tome. The king much amazed hereat, demanded who
durst be so bold, as to exercise such cruelty on so great and worthy King.
Edbald renounceth Idolatry.
a man, and understanding that the holy Bishop had endured those cruel blows
from the Apostle S. PETER, and all for his healths sake, he was exceedingly
affrighted, and therevppon abandonning all Idolatry, and rejecting his
unlawful marriage, he embraced the faith of CHRIST and was baptized by S.
LAVRENCE: which done, he called Melli^us, and Iustus out of France, remaining
ever after constant in the Catholicque faith. BUT S. LAVRENCE having again
settled his bishopric in good order, and reduced the people of the country to
the fould of CHRIST, being desirous allsoe (as we S. Laurence Preaches in
Scotland
have said) to bring the Scots and Brittans to the unity of Gods Church, went
into Scotland. In which journey he is reported to have walked (like an other S.
PETER) over an arm of the sea on foot, when the mariner that refused to
carry him ou^r, was in his sight punished with fire from heaven, and swallowed
up together with his boat in the merciless gulphes of the Sea. Preaching in
a certain village, and finding noe man that would receive either him or his
doctrine, but rashly expelled him from amongst them, he was forced that night
to take a hard lodging under a hedge, being exposed to the injury of the wind
and weather; But almighty god, who never forsakes his servants, sent forth a
bright shining light, which encompassed the holy man with such splendor, that
the next approaching morning might well blush at the luster of his brightsom
night. And the same almighty power shot a dreadful thunderbolt into that
village which had refused to harbor his messenger, whereby it was fiered,
destroyed, and buried for ever in its own ruins. Afterward, Tonanus a Bishop
of Jreland understanding of the fame of S. LAVRENCE and of his preaching, came
to see him, and having heard him dispute of the Apostolic institutions of the
Catholic Church, and of the true observance of Easter, he embraced the truth,
and earnestly endeavored to reduce his own country unto the same.

V. LAVRENCE returning again into Kent, happened by the way to lodge in a
house, where his Hosts son was newly dead, and He rayseth a dead boy to life.
the father and mother wonderfully lamenting their loss, desired him if he
would have them believe in the faith of him he preached, to restore their son
to life again. The Holy Bishop having made his prayer unto almighty God,
full of faith and confidence in him (that promised, whatsoever you shall ask
in my name shall be granted unto you) commanded the boy to rise; and he arose
forth with, and related how when S. LAVRENCE prayed for him, he was by the hand
of bright-shining Angels taken out of the ugly claws of the black horrid
spirits, and restored to his body again. Moved with this miracle the father,
and mother of the boy, together with all their whole household, and Kindred,
received the faith of CHRIST, and were at the same time washed in the sacred
font of Baptism. At length this holy Prelat, having for the space almost of
eleven years governed the Sea of Canturburie, continually laboring in His
happy death.
the promotion of gods cause, left this world to receive the everlasting
rewards of his labors in a better; the second day of February in the year of
our Lord 619. He was buried near unto S. AVGVSTIN his predecessor in the
Benedictin Abbey of Canturbury dedicated unto S. PETER and S. PAVL, which had
bin founded in S. AVGVSTINS time, but was perfected, and consecrated by S.
LAVRENCE. And in the Epitaph over his tomb mention is made of his scourging,
in this verse. Pro populo Christi Scapulas dorsumque dedisti.


A long time after his death together with his fellow-Bishops and Saints,
AUGUSTINE and MELLITVS, he appeared in glory to a lame cripple, whose legs,
by the contraction of the sinews, grew fast to his haunches, but as he prayed
for help in the same Church the Blessed Saint with his own hands seemed to
dissolve his joints, and sinews, so that he suddenly found him self to be
perfectly cured. This life me have gathered chiefly out of VENERABLE BEDE de
geft. Ang. lib. 2. and IOANNES ANGLICVS recited by JOHN CAPGRAVE. Mention is
made of him in the Roman Martirologe this day. TRITHEMIVS of the famous men of
S. BENEDICTS order lib. 3. cap. 59. Harpsfield s^c. 7. cap. 7. MALMESBVRY de
gest. reg. Angl. lib. 1. cap. 1. and de gest. P^ntif. Angl. lib. 1. and all our
English historiographers do whorthyly speaks his praises.

The life of S. WEREBVRG Virgin and Abbess of the Holy order of S. BENEDICT.
FEB. 3. Out of diverse grave onthors.
AS a precious diamond, when it is artificially, and well set in a gould ring,
gives a double luster, and grace unto the eye, so the virtues of the mind
which are engraffed in the nobility of birth, and beauty, of body, do shine
with a far greater glory, and dazzle the beholders with more admiration. A
strong proof hereof we have in the life of the glorious virgin S. WEREBVRG,
who by the Sainctitie, and virtues of her good life, ennobled the resplendent
royalty and no blencs of her birth. She was daughter unto Wulfere Her royal
parentage.
King of the Mercians and S. ERMENILD his Queen. Being therefore borne of a
noble and holy race, and in beauty excelling many other of her equals, she
judged it a thing very unseemly to degenerate from the virtue and glory of
her Ancestors, or that the vilences of a corrupted soul should blemish and
deforme the bea^teous grace of so fair a body. And because she had her
beginning from noble progenitors, she abhorred the terrene desires of the
lovers of this world, to unite her self to the most worthy spouse of all chaste
souls CHRIST JESUS, unto whom she betrothed the pure and holy soul of her
unstained body. Gould, gemmes, costly apparel, and whatsoever else the
gorgeous pomp of this world does brag of, seemed unto her rather odious then
glorious.

II. AT LENGTH, the time being come when she was resolved to celebrate her
spiritual spousage, she went to the monastery of Benedictin She takes the
habitt of S. Benedict.
Nuns at Ely, where CHRIST and his angels being witnesses, she received the
sacred veil of virginity, and ranged her self into the company of those
holy virgins under the rule of S. BENEDICT, and the government of Etheldred
her aunt, the^ abbess of the same place. From which time, treading under foot
the vain pride of the world she ever showed her self an humble handmayd of
CHRIST, and by submitting her self to all her other sisters, she overcame them
all in the virtue of true humility, allwaies serving their necessity with the
pious works of a boiling charity: not forgetting likewise to keep a special
guard over her own actions, lest she should committ any small oversight,
which might be displeasing unto her heavenly spouse, for whose love she had
forsaken the pomp of the world, which mortals so much admire. The whole
forces and powers of her soul were bent only to endeavor which way she might
become excellent in silence, abstinence, watchings, pious reading, and holy
Her pious. exercises.
meditations. That in a short time, she went as far beyond her other
companions in these and all other virtues, as she excelled the in the nobility
of blood: yet allwaies thinking so humbly of her self that she was ever most
ready to obey them all, and to undergo the basest offices of the house. In a
word, all her life was such, that allthough as others do, she carried her
body upon earth, yet she always had her mind fixed in heaven, and heavenly
things.

III. AFTER she had a long time given such a pattern of virtue and religion in
the monastery of Ely, king Wulfere her father being She is made Abbess of
three Nunneries.
dead; Etheldred her uncle then reigning over the kingdom of Mercia, sent for
her home into her own country and gave her the government of three
monasteries of Benedictine Nuns (to wit Trentam and Hindbury in
Staffordsshire, and Wedune in Northamptonshire) that with her good and pious
example she might there promote the observance of heavenly, and immortal life,
where she had first received her mortal breath. In this authority, she carried
her self with so great sainctitie, and prudence, that she worthily obtained a
wonderful praise and name in the world, of piety, wisdom, and discretion.
For in such wise she exercised the authority of a mistress, that she seemed
allsoe to bear the condition of a servant, instructing her subjects in the way
of virtue, more by her own example, then by imperious commanding.

IV. AS ON a time she made some stay at her monastery of Wedune near
Southampton, news was brought that an infinite company of wild-geese yearly
accustomed to make a very great spoil in the corn, and other pastures
belonging to the monastery. Whereupon she commanded the messenger to return,
and bring them all before him into the pound. He, allthough he imagined the
holy Note a wonderful miracle.
virgin flowted him, went into the fields, and seeking to drive those wild
fowls off the corn, he found that not one of that almost infinite multitude
once offered to lift up his wings to fly away; therefore perceauing now a
possibility in what he judged before impossible, he began to drive them
forward, when they went before him, (like so many sheep) on a foot pace,
hanging down their heads as it were, out of the confusion of their own
guiltines, till he had them in the place appointed, where he shutt them up as
close prisoners all that night. Never were so many wild The Wild foul
obeys her command.
creatures at once, under lock and key before. The next morning betimes, with
their cackling notes they began to cry out, like poor prisoners for pardon
for their offense, or at lest for sustenance to maintain nature alive. The
holy virgin, who was ever of a mild disposition toward all creatures;
commanded them to be set at liberty, with a straight charge threatened
against them never to return again into those parts. She had noe sooner
spoke, then obedience followed, for the whole troop of those geese fled away
so far that never after any of the same kind once appeared, within the
confines of that monastery.

V. A HEARDSMAN belonging unto her monastery called Al^thus, a man of very
good life, was oftentimes much injured, and at length, in presence of the holy
Virgin, sorely beaten, and wounded by the Baylyf of the same place, all which
the good man quietly bore of with the buckler of patience; whilst S. WERBVRG on
her knees with prayers mingled with threatenings, cried out on him to spare the
One straingely punished for notobeying S. Werburg
poor innocent: but his fury and pride swelling in her humility, disdayned
to liste^ to her pious entreaties but pursued his rude cruelty; when by the
just judgment of god he received his punishment: for presently his stubborn
eneck, and frowning visage was after a horrid manner, writhen and turned
backwards to look behind him, since he refused a good look to the servant of
god which kneeled for pity before him. This made his stout heart to relent,
and throwing him self prostrate at her feet, with repentant tears he
demanded pardon of his offense, so that she from a defendant became a judge,
by whose holy mediation and suffrage unto the eternal judge, he had his face
restored unto the ancient seat again. And the same Heardsman Alnothus led a
solitary and anachoreticall life in a wood near adjoining, until he was
martyred by the thieves that haunted the same.

VI. AT LENGTH the B. Virgin WEREBVRG having for manies years prudently done
the office of a loving mother over her three monasteries, foreseeing the time
of her death to be at hand, she commanded her Nuns, that wheresoever she
died, they should bury her body at the monastery of Handbury: And within a
short Her happy death.
time after (being then at Trentham) she went out of this world, to go to the
heauently union, and marriage of her dear, and long desired spouse in Paradise.
She died the third day of February about the year of our Lord 676. and her
body was honorably buried at Her body found uncorrupted.
the monastery of Handbury, where her tomb was famous for many miracles. Nine
years after, her body being taken up, it was found uncorrupted, with her
clothes on, her face lilly white, only her cheeks a little sprinkled with
red; all in the same manner, as when she was alive: and thus she remained
without corruption until by the just judgment of god, the sins of our
wretched country were punished by the Danish sword: when, left so pure a
relic should be profaned by the hands of those Barbarous and incredulous
people, her body resolved into dust, and her bones were removed to Westchester,
into the Benedictin monastery; where afterward a goodly Church was built, by
Hugh Earl of Chester, and dedicated to her name, which to this day is called
S. WEREBVRGS Church, and is the Cathedral of that city. Many miracles were
wrought in those days at her holy relics, and the like without question
would allsoe be done in these our times, were not the present faith of our
country such, and so great, as it is noe faith at all. Her life we have
gathered chiefly out of IOANNES ANGLICIVS, or JOHN CAPGRAVE, NICHOLAS
HARPSFIELD hist. Eccle. saee. 7. cap. 23. and WILLIAM MALMESBVRY de gest. reg.
Ang. lib. 2. cap. 13. and de gest. Pontif. lib. 4. FLORBNTIVS WIGO^NIENSIS an.
676. POLIDORE VIRGILL lib. 4. de regno Merciorum. CONTINVATOR B^DAE lib. 2.
cap. 33. JOHN SPEED in his history of England, and others do make honorable
mention of her

The life of S. GILBERT of Sempringham Confessor, Author of the Gilbertin monks.
FEB 4. Out of Nicholas Harpsfield and others
SAINT GILBIRT was son to Ioceline a worthy Norman Soldier, his mother was
an English woeman, who before his birth had a famous vision foreshewing his
greatness, when in her sleep the moon seemed to fall into her lap. He was
borne at Sempringham in Lincolnshire. In his fathers house he was of so poor
esteem, that the very servants would scarce daigne to eat their meat with
him. For in feature of body he was something rude and vnhandsom. Being set to
school, and profitting but poorly, he went into France, where by his good
endeauours, he attained unto the degree of master in the liberal sciences.
Afterward returning into England His care in bringing up young children.
he bent his whole labors, piously, and freely to bring up children of both
sexes, whom he not only instructed in the rudiments of learning, but allsoe
gave them exact, and as it were, monastical rules of good manners prescribing
unto them certain times, and places, when to read their lessons, when to
talk, and when to be silent; allwaies endeavoring from his very youth to
win souls unto CHRIST, and to profitt whomsoever he could, by word, work,
and good example. In the mean time, his father, who was Lord of the two
Churches Sempringham, and Tyrington, being much delighted with the virtuous
life of his son, bestowed both those benefices upon him. Which charge he
performed with so great care and diligence, that by his often preaching, and
worthy example of virtues, he did greatly incite his Parishoners to follow the
footsteps of his piety; in so much that wheresoever they went, their
religion, and piety gave a clear testimony unto what Pastor, and Parish they
belonged. Yet there wanted not some one (as it is ordinary in so great a
multitude) who nothing answearing the expectation of so good a Pastor, had
deceived him in the payment of their tithes. GILBERT having found out this
deceit, brought A rare example of zeal.
the deceiuer to such straights, that he compelled him to empty his barnes
again, and counting his corn sheff by sheff, to pay his due tithe to the
uttermost. This done, to begett in others a detestation, and horror of so
great an offense, he caused the ti^he so gathered, forthwith to be fiered and
consumed to ashes.

II. HE LIVED a while in the family of Robert Bioet Bishop of Lincoln, and
Alexander his successor, where much against his will, he was honored with the
sacred dignity of Priestood. From which He is made Priest.
time, allthough before he had followed a very singular, and pious course of
life, he bent his endeauours much more exactly to all manner of devotion, and
chiefly to the works of charity and giving of alms; being allwaies so far
from all thought of ambition, that he utterly refused to accept a worthy
Archdeaconship of the Church of Lincoln, when it was earnestly offered, and
almost forced upon He re^useth an A^chdeaconship.
him. He had a singular inclination and as it were a natural disposition of
mind, to help all poor people, but he chiefly excelled in succouring the
femal sex, of which he made choice of seven maids, to whom he might more
peculiarly show his charitable liberality. These he caused to vow perpetual
chastity, and, having before hand had the couusell, and authority of Alexander
Bishop of He instituteth a religio^^ o^ (...).
Lincoln, he enclosed them in such sort, that noe man could have any access
unto them, being only a window left open, by which they received their
provision of victuals, which was served in, by some poor women servants,
commonly called Lay Sisters: who afterward were likewise bound to the same
monastical vows: Then he provided men servants, whom he appointed for the
externe affairs, and husbandry of the monastery, who at length were bound by
a solemn vow, to live according to the prescript of the monastical rule of
the house.

III. THESE holy endeauours of S. GILBERT were worthyly entertained with the
great applause of the king, and Princes, who for his furtherance therein, gave
very large possessions of lands, and goods, Princes liberality toward him.
which he (compelled thereunto) partly received, and partly utterly rejected;
left the overmuch abundance of riches should choke the first spring of his
pious religion. In the mean time a great company of men, and women flocked
together, to embrace this new institution. When he out of his great humility
of mind, indging him self unworthy to govern such a pious company, made a
journey to the Abbey of Cisterce in France, where Pope Engenius at that He
goes into France.
time seiourned, that by his supreme authority, he might get the assistance
of some of the Cistercian monks to undertake the chardge, and care of his new
offspring. The Pope having made a curious, and exact inquiry of him, and his
manner of life, and understanding that Almighty God had ennobled him, with
many admirable works, was much grieved, that he had no sooner notice, and
acquai^tance with him, that he might have honored him with the Archiepiscopal
dignity of York. And now he judged noe man fitter then him self (though very
unwilling) to whom he might recommend The Pope approves his endeauours.
the pious chardge of nourishing, bringing up, enlarging, and governing of his
young flock. In this place he fell into the acquaintance of the famous
Archbishop of Jreland S. MALACHY, and S. BERNARD Abbot, by whose prudent
counsel, being much encouraged in his intended course, he returned into
England, and fervently prosecuted his pious beginnings. Then he appointed
Priests and other Clergymen of worthy life, and learning, to sing mass, to
preach, and minister the holy Sacraments unto the Nuns. These had their
lodgings, and dwellings a good distance from the Religious women, nether were
they permitted to enter into the monastery, The discip^ine of ^is monastery.
but when it was needful to minister the Sacraments to the sick, and that in
presence of many grave witness. Allsoe they were never permitted to see their
faces discovered, but allwaies vayled, for the better conseruing of religious
modesty. A wonderful, and chaste discipline; Whatsoever was to be carried or
related, from within, was performed by the voice or hands of two grave ancient
Matrones, and for the same use without doors, were deputed two old men, unto
whom their gray hayres had taught gravity: and only these four dispatched all
their affayers without seeing one and other. Unto the Nuns, he gave the rule
of our holy father S. BENEDICT, and to their Clergy the rule of S. AVGVSTIN.
Many other particular statuts, according to his own liking, he collected out
of the ordinances of other monasteries, all which he exactly set down in
writing; which afterward were established, and confirmed by the authority of
Pope Engenius, and others. And the religious of this order were from S. GILBERT
their author, called Gilbertines.

IV. AS he excelled all of his monastery in authority, and dignity, His exact
obseruace, and strict manner of life.
so likewise went he far beyond them in strictnes of life, and the exact
observance of monastical discipline. Noe man more sparing in his diet, for he
always abstayned from flesh, unless some great siknes forced him to the
contrary, and in lent, and Aduent from fish also, contenting him self only
with herbs roots, and such like, as his greatest dainties; in which, as in
all other meats, he was so sparing, that it was a wonder to the world how he
could keep alive in so great abstinence; when he notwithstanding all this
severity was wont often times to complain of eating overmuch. One pious
custom he ever observed, which was to have a certain vessel, or platter set
on the table in time of dinner, which he called JESUS DISH, into which, not
only the relics, but some A pious custom.
principal parts of all the meat, were to be reserved for the poor. He never
used any silver, or gould plate on his table, but had it decked only with
wodden, or earthen dishes, and spoones of horn; and often times sitting
thereat, he would season his meat with his own tears, which he shed for his
sins, and thinking of the vanity of the world and worldlings. He allwaies
wore a hair shirt next unto his skin, which very carefully he concealed from
others knowledge. Winter, and summer he used the same clothes, nether more nor
fewer, which seldom or never he put of, but took a small allowance of sleep
not in any bed but sitting in a chair, that he might be the readier at his
awake to fall to his prayer, and meditations. Having governed his troop a long
He takes a religious habitt.
time, him self remaining in his secular apparel, and not obliged by any vow
unto that profession of a monastical life, which he prescribed unto others;
lest perchance his successors might take example thereby, he wholely
submitted him self under the obedience of one Roger of Sempringham a Canon of
the Church of Malton, and received the religious habitt, and discipline, which
he had taught, and established; being now become of a master a scholar, ever
honoring the said Roger (who afterward succeeded him) as his Tutor and
teacher, during the whole remnant of his life.

V. BUT this holy man (God so ordayning it) escaped not to His subjects
accuse him falsely.
be assaulted with the rude storms of worldly troubles, and adversities, and
that from his own domestics, who according to their duty ought with all
reverence to have honored him more then any others. For amongst the layetie
which we spoke of, some there were, who weary of their strict manner of life,
maliciously plotted mischief against the holy man, falsely accusing him of
many feigned crimes, not only unto THOMAS of Canturburie afterward a martyr;
but even unto Pope ALEXANDER him self, in so much that they greatly
disquieted, and molested his peaceable course of life. The Pope committed the
examination of this matter, unto Henry Bishop of Winchester, and William of
Norwich, who (in the absence of Winchester by reason of sickness) made an exact
His innocencio is made Known.
inquiry, into the cause, and inquiring found out the truth, and made known
the Innocence of S. GILBERT unto the Pope. In whose behalf allsoe many other
Bishops, and Priors writ letters to Rome, but none so exactly as the king him
self, who took it very heinously that those Lay-brothers, who (as he said)
before their profession were mere rusticks, and clownes allotted only to the
plough, should so perfidiously swerue from that course of life professed by
so many learned, and wise men, and that they should unjustly complain of it,
as exceeding the due limitts of strictnes, and severity, and with such
impertinent boldness move heaven; and earth for a mitigation thereof. Herevppon
the Pope sent a decree which confirmed the Priueleges granted by his
predecessor Eugenius, and Adrian, and also commanded, that the whole order and
discipline which GILBERT had prescribed, should remain in the same force, and
power for ever: signifieing moreover in his peculiar letters unto the King, and
Bishops, and to GILBERT him self, that it was his will, that those obstinate
fellows should be by strong hand compelled to perform the duty of their
profession, and calling. Again he is falsely accu^ed.


VI. HE was molested which an other, though a smaller blast of adversity, when
in the bitter persecution of that worthy bucklar of the Church S. THOMAS of
Canturbury, he was brought in with some other of his fellows, as having,
contrary to the kings comaund, sent over moneys unto the Bishop in
banishment. At London therefore he is cited to appear, with the rest of the
Priors, and Procurators of all his monasteries, to answer there this bill of
complaint. But the judges, out of the great reverence they bore unto him,
offered, that if only by oath he would disaffirme the fault laid to his charge,
presently he should be dismissed the court. Which most constantly he refused to
do, so that now he could expect nothing but him self to be banished, and all
his monasteries to be sacked, and destroyed. When by the kings letters out of
Normandy, the Judges were commanded to defer the examination of his cause,
until his return home. Whereupon the holy man was dismissed; who now set
free, and at liberty and taking his leave, openly protested to the judges,
that he was most innocent of the fault laid against him. All were much
astonished that now he confessed of his own accord, that which before he had
refused N(...) are (...).
to do being in so great danger, when with the safety both of the truth, and
his own shamfastnes he might well have performed it. But his mind conducted by
a higher counsel, thought it could not choose but be a blemish, and imputation
to his own, and the Churches dignity, and an act of bad example, if at the
bar in so solemn a contestation he should have openly professed that he had
sent noe succor, as indeed he had not, unto his Bishop, to whom he supposed
him self obliged to have sent.

VII. THE pious holy man lived in this sainctitie of life above one ^.
hundred years, in which time he founded thirteen monasteries four of men,
stored with seven hundred religious persons; and nine of woe men which
contained one thousand five hundred Nuns. He died at Sempringham in the year
of our lord 1190. the fourth day of February, whose sainctitie, allthough the
course of his whole life do sufficiently testify, it pleased almighty god
notwithstanding to make it more famous, and manifest unto the world, by
wonderful miracles which he wrought by his means, both whilst he enjoyed this
mortal life and after his death, or rather departure unto the joys of
immortal happiness. For when yet he drew breath amongst men in this world, he
had these inferior creatures at command: fire, winds, and diseases after a
wonderful manner yielded him obedience. Nether did he want His many miracles.
the gift of prophecy, foreseeing by a divine power many adventures which
should happen, and especiallly, when he foretold the end of those horribles
broiles falling in the time of King Stephen.

VIII. AND allthough indeed these deeds and miracles be famous in number and
greatness, yet those which happened after his death do far excel them in
both, for during his life time, he sought by all All disease^ mirac^lously
cured at his tomb.
means, to suppress and hide his worthy deeds and virtues under the veil of
humility; but at his sepulcher the whole world was stricken with admiration,
to behold the blind, deaf, dumb, and mad persons restored to their senses,
to see dropsies, palsies, feauers and many other desperate diseases beyond the
skill of physic cured in a moment and the very devils, to fly out of the
bodies of persons possessed, exclayming against the great power of S. GILBERTS
sanctity. And lest the vanity of any fiction or invention might any way
disparage the truth of these famous accidents, and lest somewhat might be a
little hyperbolically spoken of them, they were all called within the arrest of
the strict examine and knowledge of witnesses, whose sincere testimony could
not without great temeritie be excepted against. At which inquiry, besides
many other men famous for piety, and learning, Hubert Archbishop of
Canturbury was not only present, but President. And having found all the
premises to be in truth most clear and manifest, with one voice they all
signified so much unto Pope Innocent the third (who before His cano(...)tion
by Pope Innocent.
had committed the exact inquiry of this matter unto them) and now being
fully informed of the truth, and greatness of S. GILBERTS famous miracles, he
enrolled him into the number of canonized Saints, in the year 1202. in the
reign of King John. The same year the eleauenth day of October his body was
taken out of the earth and translated into a rich shrine, in which it was kept
with great reverence, and devotion. His life is written by John Capgraue, and
Nicholas Harpesfield Hist. Ecel. saec. 12. cap. 37. whom we have followed. But
it has bin written more at large by some other authors whose names, I Know not.

The life of S. INAS King, and confessor, monk of S. BENEDICTS Order.
FEB. 6. Out of Nicholas Harpsfield hist. Eccl. saec. ^. cap. 10.
INAS descending from the royal stem of Saxon kings succeeded Cedwall in the
kingdom of the Westsaxons, about the year of our lord six hundred eighty
nine. He was a Prince accomplished with most heroicque virtues of mind, in whom
was an equal contention between a rare Knowledge of military, and politic
discipline, and a sincere devotion to Christian religion, that being excellent
in both it was hard to judge in whether he excelled. He was a lively pattern
of fortitude, the true image of prudence, and a virtuous model of religion.
With which, and such like virtues, having settled his kingdom in peace both at
home, and abroad, he then bent his whole endeauours to the enacting of good,
and wholesome laws, to bridle the corrupt, and dissolute manners of his
subjects, and to prevent such faults and offenses as are more incident unto
that age. Amongst others of his laws some were touching the prerogatives, and
His good laws and government
pollitick government of the Church, where, a grievous punishment is allotted to
such, as do not permit an infant to enjoy the Sacrament of baptism within
thirty days; and if by such neglect he chanced to die without baptism, the
father of the child incurreth the forfeiture of all his goods. Allsoe a servant
that by the command of his master should work on a sunday, was freed from
the bondage, or service of his Master, who was taxed over and above with a
forfeit of thirty shillings. But if a servant should attempt the same of his
own accord, he was to be punished with stripes. Many other good laws were
enacted by the prudence of this holy King, whose whole life indeed, was the
lively example of his laws.

II. FVRTHER tokens of his piety, and love to religion, are the monasteries
His piety in building Churches.
which he so sumptuously founded out of the expenses of his royal Exchecquer,
and chiefly the Abbey of Wells, which he built from the ground, and the
renowned Abbey of Glastenburie, which most stately he repaired for the monks
of S. BENEDICTS order, and dedicated the Church to our Savior, and S. PETER,
and PAVL: It stood in a marish, and fennie place, little commodious for the
preservation of bodily health, but very proficuous for Christian philosophers,
or monks, who defend, that the happiness of men does consist chiefly in the
spiritual health of the soul, and that they can with more attention apply
their minds unto the contemplation of heavenly things, the more remote they are
from the flattering allurements of the eyes of the world. He enriched a
chapel in this Church Note what wealth he bestowe^h on Glastebury.
with an incomparable wealth of gould, and silver, and gave rich ornaments
thereunto of an incredible value considering those times. For the building of
the chapel he gave two thousand six hundred forty pound weight of silver;
and to the altar, two hundred threescore and four pound weight of gold. A
chalice with a patin, ten pound of gold; a Censar eight pound of gold; two
candlesticks, twelve pound, and an half of silver; a cover for the
Ghospell-booke, or Missall, twenty pound weight of gould; vessels, and cruets
for wine, and water to the altar thirty pound weight of gould; an
holy-water-pott, twenty pound weight of siluar, Pictures of our Savior, our
blessed Lady, and the twelve Apostles, one hundred threescore, and fifteen
pound weight of siluar, and twenty eight of pure gould; besides what was spent
of both kinds, in the embroderie of the copes, vestments, and other ornaments,
and a great number of precious gemmes, and rich jewels embrouched therein. In
these, and such, like works of piety he spent his labor, time, and means,
following chiefly in all his doings the holy counsels, and precepts of S.
ALDELME a BENEDICTINE Monk, and Bishop of Sherburne, whom he all ways
honored, and reverenced as the father, and spiritual guide of his soul. His
wife persuades him to leave the world.


III. IN THE mean time, his holy wife Ethelburg, a woeman of a royal stock,
and of a mind as noble, never ceased daily with a pious importunity to
solicit him, that now at lest being well struck in years, and come, as it
were, into the winter of his age, he would quitte him self of the dangerous
incu^brances of this world, and worldly cares, and attend only unto God, and
divine matters. But finding (as before) that her words took little or not
hold in the Kings mind, she (as woeme^ never want inue^tion) practiced by a
plott of pious subtletie to win him to her good desires. And took her
opportunity, on a day when the King, in his palace adorned with the
glittering splendor of courtly rarities, his table loade^ with the po^pe of
gould and silver plate, had made a royal ba^quet amongst his Nobles, and
lauisht out much wealth in great mirth and iollity. On the morrow departing
thence, the Queen presently commanded the keeper of his lodgings, to defile,
and as much as was possible to deforme all that former show of glory Note the
subtletie of her inucution.
by daubing, and pargetting the walls and floores of the house with the
strong-sented plaster which cattle lay behind them, and to furnish the rooms
with great store of rubbish and rubble, and all such ill favored stuff that
was most loathsome to the eye: and lastly into the Royal bed, where the King
the night before had lain, an ugly sow, that had newly brought forth a litter
of pigges, was honorably placed. Being then in the way, when she thought all
this to be done according to her command, fayning some business of great
weight, and importance, which could not be without great danger omitted, she
easily hastened the Kings return, for as yet they were scarce a mile in their
journey. But entering his chamber of presence, and seeing the place, which but
yesterday might be compared with the delights of Sardanapalus him self, so
suddenly deformed, and changed into so ugly and horrid a spectacle, he was
thunder-strucken with admiration at this unexpected Metamorphose, and stood
staggering a while in the consideration thereof: When the Queen, taking her
time by the foretop, with a smiling countenance asked him: Whither (said she)
my souueraigne lord) is all yesterdaies glorious sple^dour vanished? where is
all that superfluous riot? What is become of all those curious and exquisite
cates sought for by sea, and la^d, to satisfy the inordinate appetite of
gluttony? Where are the gould, and silver vessels which but yesterday made
the table bow under their massy weight? Where is all the noise of our loud
Thus passes the glory of the world.
mirth and iollitie? Is it not vanished, like a blast of wind or a vain puff,
of smoke? and do not we that fill our selves more daintyly, and largely,
corrupt afterward more miserably? Behold then the true picture of the
glittering vanities, and allurements of the world, and learn at last to shun
and fly them. She said no more: When it was strange to see what a deep
incisio^ this made in the Kings heart, and how much more she had gained by the
rudenes of this visible spectacle, then by all her former persuasions, that not
without cause the Poet said: Segnius irritant animos demissa per aures, FEB. 7.
Horat. de art Poetica.

Quam quae sunt oculis subiecta fidelibus, and quae,
Ipse sibi tradit spectator.


IV. IN SVMME this strainge Pageant wrought so far in the good Inas
resolves to forsake the world.
Kings mind, that now he began seriously to consider with him self of the
vanity of worldly state, and finding one what sharp thorns of cares grew the
sweet seeming roses of a crown, he putt on a strong resolution with him self
to bid adieu to the world. And now when he had governed his common wealth with
a name of great praise, and prosperity, and showed many benefitts thereunto
for the space of thirty seven years and odd months, renouncing the
resplendent glory of his present and princely estate, he voluntaryly left his
temporal Kingdom, which with victory so long he had ruled, and for the love
of almighty God, and the gain of his eternal kingdom, he, that heretofore
had conquered princes, now got the upper hand and conquest of him self, and
with a greater glory then he had borne them he robbed him self of the princely
spoils of his body, the better to ennoble and enrich his soul. Which that he
might more conveniently and fructfully He goes to Rome.
bring to pass; he went to Rome the head of Catholic religion to visitt the
sacred tombs of the Apostles, under whose protection he hoped more easyly to
obtain the grace and favor of almighty God, whence his country had first
received the Christian faith; resolving to spend the remnant of his life, with
a quiet and contented mind, far from all worldly cares and troubles, in a
holy convent of Monks. Which with great piety he performed, putting on the
habitt of a Benedictine monk (unto which order He takes the habit of S.
Benedict.
he had ever bin a worthy benefactour) not in a public concourse of poeple
(which doubtless would have been great at so unwonted a spectacle) but
privately, before God alone, and the Convent of monks: giving hereby a lively
example of humility, and true contempt of the world, in not desiring to have
this his heroic act of piety any way to redounde unto his own glory, out
of the vain praises, and false honors of the flattering world.

V. HE was the first of our English Kings who to show his great His devotion to
the Roman Church.
devotion unto the Church of Rome, caused the annual tribute called Romescote
or Peter Pence to be paid unto the Pope, which was a penny out of ever ie
family in England, and was afterward duly paid for the space of many
hundred years: and which is most to be wondered at, noe sooner ceased this
payment, but our English Church was swallowed up into the gulf of heresy, and
together with the temporal, lost all spiritual subjection unto the Vicar of
CHRIST upon earth. Also this holy King INE built at Rome a Church in honor
of our Blessed lady, in which, all English that He built a Church at Rome
came thither, might hear mass, and receive the Sacraments, and be buried if
need were. With like piety he erected there a school giving yearly annuities
thereunto, wherein his Countrymen might And a free-schoole.
be brought up in all manner of good learning, and Christian religion, and
discipline. Which seems to have bin in that place, which now is called the
English Hospital, and is inhabited by English Priests, being of noe small
commodity for the entertaynment of Pilgrins which now adays flock thither out
of England.

VI. Now he that in former times had ruled a Kingdom, began in this sweet
school of virtues to find, that in rendering him self subject for The happiness
of a religious, life.
the love of CHRIST, he enjoyed a greater Kingdom, and that to be master over
his one passions, was the only best and truest dominion. Now he had time freely
to insist in the meditation of the divine goodness, wherein he found the truth
of that versicle of the Royal Psalmist. TASTE, AND SEE, FOR OUR LORD IS SWEET.
He found how sweet a thing it was to carry the yoke of our Lord, in the
Psalm. 33. 58.
continual exercise of patience, humility, and obedience, in which and other
pious offices of virtue, and religion, he spent the rest of his mortality,
until by the king of Kings, under whose ensign he had served, he was called
into the heavenly kingdom, to receive a His happy death.
crown of eternal glory, instead of the temporal crown, which for his love
he had left. He died a Benedictin Monk at Rome about the year of our Lord 727.
and lies buried at the Entrance of the Church of S. PETER, and PAVL as the
tables of the same Church do testify. His life me have gathered chiefly out
of WILLIAM MALNESRV^IE, de reg. Ang. and NICOLAS HARPFIELD. hist. Eccl. saec.
8. cap. 10. Polidore Virg. lib. 4. Matthew westminster an. 727. Baronius, and
all our English Historiographers make very honorable mention of him, and he is
highly commended of all, for his wonderful contempt of the world, and love to
piety, and relig ion.

The life of S. ELFLED Virgin and Abbess of the holy order of S. BENEDICT.
FEB. 8. Taken Out of venerable Bede.
SAINT ELFLED was daughter unto Oswy King of the Northumbers, who after many
cruel invasions of the merciless Penda; was forced to sue unto him for peace
with proffers of infinite treasure, and very rich jewels: all which the
barbarous Tirant rejecting, pursued his deadly enterprise, protesting utterly
to extinguish him and his country. King Oswy, humane means failing him, had
recourse unto a higher power, making a sacred vow unto the almighty god of
armies, that he would consecrate his daughter ELFLED to the profession of
perpetual chastity, and give twelve V^wes of chastity pleasing unto God.
farms with the land thereunto belonging to the erection, and foundation of
monasteries, if by his divine assistance, and to his greater honor he should
overthrow the insolent pride of his Barbarous enemy. This said, with a heart
full of confidence he prepared him self, and his small army for the battle.
The number of his adversaries are reported to have redoubled thirty times his,
all well repoynted, and old tried soldiers: against whom bouldly marched King
Oswy, with his son Al^frid. The battle was fought were the river Junet, which
at that time ouerflowed his banks, so that the Victory falling with Oswy,
more by flight were drowned in the water, then King Oswy victorious over Penda.
slain with the sword. And herein proud Penda paid death his due, with the
overthrow of all his Mercian power. This noble victory, being by gods holy
assistance so nobly, or rather miraculously won, King Oswy gave infinite
thanks unto almighty God, and for performance of his vow made, he delivered
his daughter ELFLED, as yet scarce a year old, to be brought up in a
monastery of Benedictine nuns, called Heretheu under the pious conduct of S.
HILDA; And withal he gave the lands of one hundred and twenty families, for
the building and maintayning of monasteries. But two years afterward, S.
HILDA purchased the possession of ten Elfled takes the habit of S. Benedict.
families, and built the monastery of Streanshall, where ELFLED being come to
age first received the habit of S. BENEDICTS order; and having bin long trained
up in this holy school of virtue in the continual exercise of monastical
discipline, she afterward succeeded S. HILDA, being for her holy life chosen
Abbess of that place, and became a mistress of virtue unto the whole co^uent,
governing her virgin subjects in the joys of virginity with the care of a
motherly piety, and inuiting them to the true observance of religion, by the
virtuous, and pious example of her own life.

II. WHILST thus she ennobled the nobility of her stock, with the greater
nobility of virtue, she fell into a grievous sickness, that made her almost
taste the bitterness of deaths pangs; and when the skill of physic could nothing
avail her, suddely by the grace of the She falls sick.
divine physician, she was taken out of the gates of death, and freed from all
her inward pains, yet still remained in so great weakness of her limbs, that
she could nether stand, nor go, but was forced to creep on all four: in so
much that with sorrow she began to fear a perpetual lamenes, having long
since despayred of the physicians help. Till one day sitting pensiuely in the
anguish of her sorrowful thoughts, the great sainctity of S. CVTHBERT who^ she
loved dearly, came into her mind, and presently, she wished to have something
from him, firmly believing, and trusting thereby to receive perfect health.
Not long after there comes one which She recouereth by miracle.
brought her a linen gyrdle sent from S. CVTBERT: She greatly rejoiced with
that present, and understanding that her desire was made known by divine
revelation unto the holy man, gyrt her self with the same gyrdle,, and one the
morrow after, she became able to stand on her feet, and the third day, she was
restored to perfect health to the great admiration of all. Within a short time
after being desirous to communicate to others the great blessing bestowed upon
her self, she applied the same gyrdle unto one of her Nuns, that was almost
dead with an insufferable pain which daily increased more and more in her
head; but noe sooner had this holy Virgin of CHRIST bound her about the temples
with that gyrdle, but the pain ceased and perfect health succeeded. Afterward
B. S. CVTHBERT Bishop of Linsdisfarne came him self in person to visitt this
holy Virgin, and to consecrate a Church. Where, as the holy man sat at table,
he saw in a vision the soul of a servant that died at her monastery at that
very time. The holy virgin being desirous to know who it was: to morrow
(replied S. CVTHBERT) before I go to mass thou will tell me his name. She
sent to know, and on the morrow, as the bishop was dedicating the Church, she
came running Mass for the dead.
to him in a womanish amazement, as if she had brought some great news. I
desire you my Lord (said she) to be mindful in your Mass of Hadwald (thas was
his name) who died falling from a tree as he was cutting wood.

III. WHEN this most noble, and holy virgin of CHRIST, ELLFED had for many
years ruled her monastery in great Sainctitie, and preserved the sacred
treasure of her virginity from her tendrest infancy to the age of threescore
years, she delivered up her pure soul to the most happy and long desired
marriage of her heavenly spouse, about the year of our Lord 714. She was buried
in the Church of the same monastery dedicated to S. PETER, together with her
father King Oswy, and Queen Enfleda her mother. But by the Danish fury, that
as many other monasteries, was utterly destroyed; till afterward it was
again reedified for monks of S. BENEDICTS order, and called by the name of
Whiteby. And lastly is was translated to the walls of the city of York, and
dedicated to our Lady. But after the reign of William conqueror, the sacred
relics of S. ELFLED with others, being found amongst those ruins, were
honorably placed in a more eminent degree, worthy the meritts of so great a
saint. Thus much of S. ELFLED we have gathered chiefly out of S BID de gest.
lib. 3. c. 24. William malmesbury de gest. Po^t. Ang. lib. 3 Matthew Westmin an.
655. NICHOLAS HARPSFIELD hist. Eccl. saec. 7. cap. 27. and other English
writers.

The life of S. THELIAN Bishop and confessor.
FEB. 9. Out of an ancient Author
SAINT THELIAN an ancient Britan borne of noble parents' much more ennobled
his stock by the splendour of his virtues. He was Scholar unto Dubricius bishop
of Landaff, under whose holy care he attained unto that height of wisdom, and
learning, that as yet He was called (...), and way?
but a youth he obtained the name of Helios, which in Greek signifies the
Sun, for his sacred doctrine shined like the sun, and dispersing the
darkness of sin, and infidelity, lightened the hearts of the faithful poeple
of his country, with the sacred beams of true religion, and virtue. But
hearing the fame of a prudent and holy man called Paulin he went unto him, and
conferred with him concerning the more secret and abstruse places of the holy
scripture: where he entered into acquintaince with great S. DAVID Bishop of His
love to S. David
Meneuia, between whom the grace of the holy ghost tied so strict a knott of
true love, and friendship, that they were esteemed in those days as a noble
pair of friends of one mind and soul. But while they lived together in a
delightful and mutual accord of sainctitie, certain barbarous poeple (who
either from their painted garments, as from some marks in their eyes were
called Picts) landed with a great navy upon the coasts of Britannie, and
being taken with a love of the country, set upon the Brittans, more by
deceit then force, and for a time, bore a tirannous sway amongst them. One of
their princes murdring the country before him, and burning Churches, and
howses at he went, arrived at length near unto Meneuia, where he built him
self a palace. And perceauing Envy plotteth mischief against him
the lives of S. DAVID, and THELIAN to be so holy and so contrary to his
proceedings he greatly envied them, and spitt much of his venom in opprobrious
and reproachful speeches against them, whom he could not justly condemn of
any fault. And at length to make his malice bring forth the child of
wickedness, he commanded his wife to send her mayds, and make them the
instruments of mischief, by their lewd art, and lascivious allurements and
motions of their naked bodies to at^empt the overthrow of the holy men's good
purposes. But as those wanton things followed their mistresses A just
punishment of malice,
directions, and in the dishonest execution thereof exercised a kind of feigned
frenzy, or madness in presence of the saints, suddenly they became mad
indeed, and returned to their commanders without sufficient discourse to
relate their own misfortune. Which being seen of that cruel persecutour,
turned all his fury into meekenes, and both he and his whole family received
the faith of CHRIST, and were washed in the sacred font of Baptism.

II. NOT long after S. THELIAN together with S. DAVID made a He goes to
Jerusalem,
journey to Jerusalem, where they spent some time in continual prayer, and
visitation of the sacred places, wherein our dear Savior wrought the miracles
of his bitter passion, and our dear redemption: in those places they were
wrapped in holy contemplatlon, that they had noe memory or thought of any thing
that was in this world. Unto S. THELIAN as he returned home they gave a Cimball
of more worth then greatness, and more precious then it was fair, for the sweet
tunes thereof seemed to excel the sound of an organ; it rung at every hour
of its own accord. And this was a true figure of S. THELIAN who like unto a
cimball, or bell which rayseth men from the dullnes of sleep, and sloth, to
praise and serve God in the Church, did he, by his virtues, and holy sermons,
stir up By his prayers he expels, the plague
the hearts of the poeple unto God, out of the dungeon of sin and wickedness.
Being returned prosperously into Wales, by his prayers unto almighty God he
freed the poeple from a cruel plague, which miserably wasted and devoured the
country. Afterward, succeeding Dubritius in the Bishopric of Landaff in that
sacred dignity he spent the whole remnant of his life; governing his diocese
rather with his sainctitie, and example of good life, then by the exercise of
his poewr and authority. At length laden with merits and old age by the
happy loss of this fading world, he purchased an everlasting dwelling in
heaven, the ninth day of February about the year of our Lord 563. The many
Churches in South Wales dedicated to S. THELIAN which to this day retain his
memory by the Many Churches dedicated to his name.
name of Llanthilo, or Llanthilio, are vnresistables witnesses and proofs of
his great Sainctitie, and as yet his praise is fresh in the mouths of all
faithful Whelchmen, allthough the greatest part of that wretched nation do
live in such blindness, that they would rather pluck him out of heaven, then do
him, or any other of Gods Saints any honor at all: contemning herein the
counsel of the kingly prophet who inuiteth us to praise God in his Saints
with Psalm. 150. v 1.
whom he lives for ever. Amen. Thus much of this Saints life we have gathered
out of IOANNES ANGLICVS recited by JOHN CAPGRAVE in his legend. and NICOLAS
HARPSFIELD saec. 6. cap. 27.

The life of S. TRVMWINE Bishop and Confessor of the holy order of S. BENEDICT.
FEB. 11. Out of venerable Bede. de gest. An. lib. 4.
TRVMWINE a man of very holy life was by Theodore Archbishop of Canturbury
ordained Bishop of the Picts then subject to the English; But after the
overthrow and death of Egfrid king of the Northumbers caused by the same Picts,
S. TRVMWINE together with many other monks of the monastery of Ebbercune in
the co^fines of the Picts, and English, retired him self out of that Province;
and having recommended the greatest part of his monks to diverse monasteries
according as he was able, he him self chose his habitation at the Monastery of
Streanshall, where under the holy rule of S. BENEDICT, with a few of his
companion-monks, he led a most strict monastical life, profitable not only to
him self, as tending to the height of perfection, but to many others allsoe.
The Princely virgin S. ELFLED (of whom the eigth of this month) was the
Abbess of that monastery, who by the coming, of this holy Bishop received
great helps in her regencie, and much comfort for the directing of her own
life in the way of piety. The place where the Bishop with his monks lived, was
separate from the monastery of enclosed Nuns, but not so far but that
they were ready in all occasions, to help them with the sacraments, and all
other spiritual comforts of their priestly function and dignity. The most
holy Bishop TRVMWINE Hist. l. 4. c. 2^.
(as venerable BEDE styles him) having lived there in great holiness of life the
space of many years, at length yielded up his Blessed soul to make One in
the glorious quier of Benedictin Bishops in heaven. His body was buried in the
Church of S. PETER according De gest. Pon. l. 3.. de Pont. Eborac.
to the honor due unto his blessed life, and degree of sacred dignity. His
holy relics (says Malmesburie) together with others were found in the quier
of that Monastery, and translated to a more eminent place becoming the
sainctitie of so great a Saint: Of him make honorable mention, besides the
aforesaid authors, Matthew Westminster, Trithemius in his 3. Book of the famous
men of S. BENEDICTS order chap. 167. Arnold Wion and all our English
historiographers. He flourished about the year of our Lord 700.

The life of S. CEDMON confessor and monk of the holy order of S. BENEDICT.
FEB. 10. Taken out of Ve nerable Bid.
AS THE divine gifts of tongues, wisdom, learning, and such like wherewith
it pleased allmigtie God to furnish his holy Apostles, and adorn the primitive
Church, have not been wanting in later ages, so have they not failed in the
time when our Englishmen first received the Catholic faith. An abundant, and
worthy example hereof we may behold in this holy Benedictin monk CEDMON, He
becomes learned by miracle.
who out of the rudenes of ignorance, and mere simplicity in matter of
learning, by the special grace of God, became so notable and so religious a
poet in his mother tongue, that whatsoever he could learn out of the holy
scriptures by the help of interpreters, he would presently turn into verse,
with such a sweet and moving strain, that by the force thereof, many were
oftentimes incited to contemn the world, being thereby enflamed with a pious
desire of a heavenly and everlasting life. Many others there were amongst the
English which essayed to imitate his holy poetry, but noe man was comparable
unto him. For he learned not this art by any man's help, but received it
gratis by the special gift and grace of the divine goodness. Whence it was
that he could not make any frivolous or vanie poem, but such things only
which belonged unto piety and religion, could become his religious and godly
tongue. He received this divine gui^t upon this occasion.

II. WHILST he lived a secular man in the world, which was till he was well
struck in years, and was servant to the monastery of Benedictine Nuns of S.
HILDA, having never before learned any thing touching either verses, or
finging, he chanced to be in a banquet, where for their greater merriment and
recreation it was agreed upon by the whole company that every one should sing
a song in his course, but CEDMON when FEB. 12.
he saw the harp come near him, being guilty of his own ignorance in that
quality, arose from the table, and went home to his own house. The like he
had practiced diverse times, till once it fell out, that going out of the
company upon the same occasion, he went into the stable, to take care of the
cattle which that night were committed to his chardge: where when the time of
the night compelled him to give his body to sleep, he beheld as it were in a
dream, a man standing by him, that saluted him and called him by his name
saying: CEDMON, I pray thee sing me a song. I cannot sing, (answered be,) and
He enjoys a strange vision.
for that cause I forsook my company, and came hither, because I could not
sing. But yet (replied the other) thou have somewhat to sing unto me. What
(said he) must I sing? The beginning of all creatures, (answered the other.)
At which word presently in praise of God the creator of the word, he began to
sing verses which he never had heard before; whereof this is the sense. Now
must we praise the author of the heavenly Kingdom, the power of our Creator,
his counsel, and wisdom, and the works of the father of glory. How he bring
God (...) was the author of all miracles, who first created heaven to the
children of men for the top of their dwelling, and next, the almighty
guardian of He has the art of singing, and ver^isying by revelation.
mankind made the earth, for the floor thereof. At his rising he perfectly
remembered whatsoever he had soug in his sleep, whereunto he added afterward
many excellent verses more of the same matter: and coming in the morning to
the baylife of the monastery, who was his master, he revealed unto him the
great gift he had received, and being brought to the presence of the Blessed
Abbess S. HILDA, he was commanded to relate his dream unto many learned men
that were present, and to repeat his verses, that by the general judgment of
them all, it might be tried and examined, what it was, and whence that which he
reported did proceed. Which done, it seemed unto them all to be most certain
that the divine goodness had bestowed some heavenly grace, and gift upon him.
And for better trial thereof they expounded unto him the process of a
history out of the sacred scripture, commanding him, if he could, to turn
that likewise into the shape of true meeter, and verse. He undertook the task,
and brought it admirably well performed against the next morning. Wherevppo^
the Abbess admiring so great a gift in a secular man dealt earnestly with
him to forsake the world, and to embrace the monastical habitt, and profession
of a monk.

III. WHO fearing to be ungrateful for those divine benefitts, which God so
largely, and beyond all hope had bestowed upon him, and that he might the more
increase his divine talent by a quiet, and He takes the habit of S. Benedict.
contemplative manner of life, he betoke him self to the same monastery of S.
HILDA called Sthreanshall, where amongst the other brethren he received the
habitt of S. BENEDICTS order, and straight, by the commaundment of the holy
Abbess, he was taught the sacred story of the divine scripture, which he made
to run in such sweet lines of meeter, that his masters were glad in that art
to become his scholars. He made poems in English of the creation of the world,
of the origin of mankind, and of all the other histories and sacred mysteries
of both Testaments: and lastly of the terror of the universal judgment, of the
horror of hells dreadful torments, and of the sweetness of the neuer-dieing
joys of heaven. By which, and many other his noe less elegant then devout
poesies, he reduced many from the downfall of (...), and wickedness, to the
amendment of their lives, and the divine love of heaven.

IV. FOR he was a man very religious most free from all counterfeit His
religious observance.
color of vanity, and with a sincere plainnes, and humble simplicity (the
chief arms of the Benedictin order) wholely subject unto the rules of regular,
and monastical discipline: but enflamed with a pious zeal of great fervor
against those, that did any way seem to disobey the good order of the
monastery. When it came pass that the almighty ruler of life, and death,
gave him the grace to finish the course of his godly life, with an end worthy
so great sainctitie. For the hour of his death being at hand, fourteen days
before he was visited with a corporal disease, by which, allthough it were
very moderate and gentle, he foretold his neere-ensuing end. And therefore the
night before he departed he desired to have a bed provided him in the
Infirmarie, which was a place for such only as were in a mortal disease. The
brother that attended him, wondering why he, that seemed to have noe more signs
of death in him should desire such a remove, obeyed his will, allthough he
judged it to little or no purpose. Being placed in the Infirmarie, when
together with those that were there before, the time was spent in merry
discourse till after midnight, CEDMON on the sudden, demanded if the holy
sacramet The blessed acramen. reserved for the sick.
of the EVCHARIST were within; You that are so merry) answered they) need
not so to hasten to the sacrament, for death cannot lay hold on a heart so
joyful and lusty as yours yet seems to be. Again he instantly desired to
have the holy sacrament: Which being brought, before he would receive it, he
humbly desired pardon of all his brethren if in any thing he had offended
them, and imparted the like courtesy unto them, earnestly craving it of him;
and then with great reverence, fortifieing him self with that heavenly
Viaticum, he prepared his pious soul to enter into the happy voyage of
everlasting life.

V. THIS done, he asked the assistants how long it was to the hour that the
Monks should rise to Mattins. They answered, that the time was not far of.
Well then (said he) let us quietly expect that Blessing with the sign of the
Cross.
good hour. And within a while, when the standers by nothing suspected his
death, arming him self with the sign of the holy cross (the only sign of our
redemption) and softly inclining his head upon the pillow, he took a sweet
slumber, and therwithall in great His death correspondent to his life.
silence, and tranquillity both of mind, and body, he delivered up his still
soul into the hands of his redeemer. So that by the divine providence it came
to pass, that even as he served our Lord in his life time, with a pure, and
quiet devotion of mind, so leaving this world, he went to enjoy the clear
vision of him he had served, by a peaceable, and untroubled death. And that
elegant tongue which had sung so many sweet lines, and poems in praise of his
creator, did close up the breath of his last words to gods honor and glory,
when blessing him self with the sign of life, and reco^mending his soul into
the hands of his dear redeemer, he changed this temorall life for an eternal.
He died about the year of our Lord 670. After the time of King William
conqueror, his body was found among the ruins of the monastery of
Streanshall, and honorably shrined, and set up in a Invention of his body.
place worthy so great a relic, where the many miracles wrought through
his meritts are evident witnesses of what high esteem he was in the favor of
almighty God, who is ever gloriousi n his saints. Amen. His life we have
gathered out of Venerable Bede de gest. Ang. lib. 4. cap. 24. Nicholas
Harpsfield saec. 7. cap. 36. William Malmesbury de gest. pont. Aug. lib. 3.
Arnould Wion l. 2. cap. 62. and other grau^ authors make honorable mention of
him. And be is highly commended of all, for his great virtue, and holy life,
and conversation.

The life of S. ERMENILD Queen, and Abbess of the holy order of S. BENEDICT.
FEB. 13. Gathered out of diverse Authors.
SAINT ERMENILD was daughter to Erconbert King of Kent, and S. SEXBVRG his
queen: naturally and from the womb, she inherited her good mothers propension
to works of piety, compassion, and relieuing of every ones necessity. Both
mother, and daughter used the same bounty, and charity toward all, and being
both queens on earth, they had both the same pious desires, and affections to
the King and kingdom of heaven. ERMENILD was given in mapiage unto Wulfere King
of the Mercians, and by that means the kingdom of Kent was happily united to
that of the Mercians. At that time, her husband Wulfere being but newly
baptized, his poeple were but rude, and scarce well settled in the Catholic
faith, but S. ERMENILD, who had bin trained up from her infancy in true
virtue, piety, and religion, with her care, and singular example of holy life,
her wise, and prudent exhortations, and many benefits liberally bestowed upon
them, tamed the obstinate hearts, of that rude, and unlearned poeple, and
brought them under the sweet yoke of JESUS CHRIST, by a mild force, and a
forceble mildnes, subduing those perverse and rebellious minds, to the
obedience of the Catholic Church.

II. SVCH and so great was the fervor, and zeal of this holy woema^ to the
service, and honor of almighty God, and propagation of Christian religion,
that she was wholely careless of all other affairs in respect thereof, never
ceasing until she had quite destroyed Idols, rooted out all the devilish
rites of Idolatry, and furnished her Kingdom with churches, and Priests for
the comfort, and salvation of her poeple whom in the end she accustomed
diligently to frequent the divine services and sacraments, and all other duties
of Christian piety, and devotion. And this her godly zeal was much promoted
by the royal power and authority of the king her husband, who invited by her
pious example, much advanced her good endeauours, and did many good works him
self, admiring to see the whole intentions and mind, of his wife amongst the
turbulent broiles of the world, to be allwaies so truly fixed on the
contemplation of heaven, and heavenly things. Besides she did abound in
charity, and compassion toward the poor, and all such as were in necessity,
and affliction, in so much that never any came to her that departed without
consolation, and her liberal alms, to relieve their want.

III. AT length after the death of her husband, with whom she had She takes
the habit of S. Benedicts order.
lived seauenteen years, and been mother of S. WEREBVRG, (whose life you may
read the third of this month) having hither unto overcome all others, she now
overcame her self; for goeing to the monastery of Benedictin Nuns at Ely,
she renounced all mortal pomp and glory, for the pure love of the immortal,
and putt on the habit of S. BEMEDICTS order, under the government of her holy
mother S. SEXBVRG then Abbess of the same place: Where by humility and
obedience she became queen of her own passions, and spent the remnant of her
life in continual fasting, and prayer, and all other austerities of a virtuous
and religious life. And after the death of the Abbess S. SEXBVRG, S. ERMENILD
was chosen in her place, in which office whilst she dischardged the duty of a
very religious and virtuous Matrone, inciting her subjects by her own good
examples to embrace the rules of true religion, she was delivered out of this
mortal prison, and called to receive the everlasting reward of her labors in
heaven; the thirteenth day of February about the year of our Lord 685. and was
buried in the same monastery. Where, after her death, it pleased almighty
God for the honor, and glory of this saint, to work many miracles at her
tomb. Whereof one was, that a Saxon condemned for some offense to be bound
with iron chains, or rings, being on a time present at Mass in the monastery
of Elie, and as he prayed before the body of S. ERMENILD, about the time the
gospel was reading, his irons, forced by some secret, and divine power, fell
suddenly from his arms, to the great admiration of many that were present at
the said mass. Her life we have gathered out of Ioannes Anglicus recited by
John Capgraue, William Malmesbury de gest. reg. Angl. lib. 2. cap. 13. and de
gest. pontif. lib. 4. Matthew Wistminster anno. 676. and Wigorniensis an. 675.
mention is made of her by Molanus in his additions to Vsuard, Peter, in his
catalogue of saints, Arnold Wion in his Martirologe, and many others.

Of the translation of S. EDWARD King, and Martyr.
FEB. 18. Out of the Author of his life recited by Surius.
THE body of glorious King EDWARD the martyr, when he had suffered a most
unjust death by the malicious and wicked tirannie of his stepmother Alfrith,
was by her commaundment most ignobly buried and hidden in a watrie marsh, or
fenne near Warrha^, hoping thereby to blott out all memory both of him, and
her own impiety. But within the compass of a year, the high allseer and
ouerseer of men actions determining to make his Martyr famous to the world, and
to make known of how great meritt he was in his sight, voutchased to reveal
unto some faithful Christians that devoutly sought it, the place where that
worthy relic was unworthily A Pillar of light ap peareth over his body.
concealed. For a pillar of light sent from heaven appeared over that part of
the marsh were the body lay, and filled a great piece of the ground near
adjoining with the glittering beams of a glorious and heavenly luster. This
being perceived by many devout me^ of the next village (for it appeared
oftentimes) they met together, and having by diligent searching found that
sacred treasure, they carried, it into the village of Warrham. Great was the
concurse of poeple pitifully bewayling the death of their most pious King, and
faithful protector; and in the noise of these lamentations the venerable
body was transported into the Church of our Blessed Lady in the same town,
and buried on the East side thereof, with great reverence, the thirteenth day
of February; and over his sepulcher some devout persons built a little cabin
which remained there a S Edwards Well cures diseases.
long time after. But out of the place where he had layne before, there sprung
up a fountain of most sweet, and pure water which was called S. Edwards well,
by virtue whereof many sick persons to the greater glory of CHRIST and his
martyr received afterward the wished benefitt of their health.

II. But now by the trumpett of flieing fame, the impious deceit of Queen
Alsrith was diuulged all over England, the innoce^cie of the murdered King and
his virtues, and high deserts were by the general acclamation of all extolled
to the skies. The news arrived at length to the ears of Duke Alferus, who
(allthough heretofore he stood for the Queen against his King and together
with her had much wro^ged and grieved the monks in destroyeing many of their
monasteries) yet now being willing to do some satisfaction for his Duke Alfere
prepares for his translation.
faults past, and to show at left his faithful service unto the dead body of
his master whom alive he had nor honored as his duty required, he determined
to translate his holy relics into a more honorable place, and to that end
he exhorted the Bishops, Abbotts and other peers of the realm as many as he
could draw to his side to lay their helping hands to his pious endeavors. He
sent likewise a messenger unto the Benedictin Nuns at Wilton in Wiltshire,
where holy EDITH Kings EDWARDS sister at that time, led a religious life,
earnestly entreating Wilfred the Abbess thereof with her devout Convent of
Virgins, not to be wanting at the exequies of so holy a King. Herevppon the
bishops, abbotts, and many others meeting together, with great care, and
reverence, Duke Alferns having gathered a huge multitude of men and women out
of Dorsetshire, came with great devotion to Warrham, where that royal body
His body is found uncorrupted.
was but poorly buried: And in presence of the company his sepulcher being
opened, the body (which had lain there for the space of three years) was
found to be as entier, and whole from all corruption, as if it had been buried
but the same day. Which being perceived by the bishops, and the whole
multitude, with one voice they sung himnes, and praises unto allmigthie God,
who by so manifest a token had declared, and brought to light the innocence,
and worth of his holy martyr. But saint EDITH his sister being noe longer S.
Edith his sister.
able to contain the pious love of her brother within the limitts of her
virgin-breast, ran to his dead body, and falling down on her knees, clipped
it with her loving embracements, honored it with her religious kisses, washing
his seeming-liuely race with the streams of her joyful tears, as one not
able to be satiated with that so great glory of her glorious brother. But
then by the hands of some venerable and reverend men, these sacred spoils were
lifted up, and carried with great reverence, and the wonderful gratulation of
the Clergy, and poeple, to the famous monastery of Benedictin Nuns, at
Shaftesburie in Dorsetshire, which King Elfred father to S. EDWARDS great
grandfather, for love of his daughter Ailene who became a nun there, had
erected and enriched with very ample gifts, and possessions.

III. In the mean time being yet in their journey with that sacred treasure,
many persons of both sexes flocked thither, and among the rest two poor
creatures (whose sinews were so shrunk, and contracted that with great
difficulty they were able to creep along the ground upon their hands, and
thighs) came to pray unto Two Cripples cured at his body.
almighty God, and S. EDWARD, for the recovery of their limbs: and drawing
near unto the holy biere, the bearers thereof stayed, to give them license to
touch it and do reverence unto it; when on a sudden, to the great admiration
of that infinity of beholders, they were both restored to perfect health, and
received a full cure and recovery of their long unserviceable limbs. Great
was then the joyful acclamations of the poeple, that highly extolled the
meritts and praises of S. EDWARD, till the news and noise of these miracles
came to the ears of the Queen his murdresse, who thereby touched to the heart
with a sudden compunction and sorrow for her wickedness committed, presently
mounted on horseback and began her journey toward the sacred body, with
inte^tion to beg pardon for her offense. But her sudden have received as
sudden a stopp by the way, for her horse, that at other times was Behold a
strainge miracle.
wo^t to run away with his load as swiftly as the wind, by the beck of the
divine providence stood stock still, whilst her servants earnestprouoked the
unwilling beast with sharp whippes, and threatening cries, but all in vain,
for he seemed most insensible of both. She blaming her horse as being tired,
caused a fresh one to be provided, which in like manner refused to carry the
author of so foul a murder. Till at length her brutish heart understood what
this unusual accident might portend, and therefore by the means of a third
person she performed this intended visitation, which her own un worthiness
could not personally effect.

IV. The holy body being brought to Shaftsburie, which was the place destined
to be the sacristie of so rich a treasure, it was received by those holy
virgins of CHRIST in most honorable, and stately manner, and reverently
entombed on the north side of the high His body is eushrined at Shaftsburie.
altar the eighteenth day of February. And afterward, by reason of the many
miracles wrought at this holy martyrs tomb, that monastery was commonly
called S. Edwards. And the miracles wrought there, were such, so great, and
so authentical esteemed by King Ethelred, that in respect thereof he adorned
the monastery of Shaftsbury with many rich gifts and possessions, and in the
donation thereof, made in the year 1001. he acknowledges Gods scourging of
his Country by the Danes to have befalne them for the unjust murder of King
EDWARD: whom, together with the bishops and Abbots of that time he honors
with the title of Blessed martyr. Part of his relics were afterward brought
to enriche the monastery of Lemster in Herefordshire. This history we have
gathered out of the author of his life in an aunciet manuscript recited by
Surius tom. 3. William Malmesbury de reg. Ang. lib. 2. cap. 9. John Capgraue in
his legend. Nicholas Harpsfield saec. 10. cap. 4. and other English
Historiographers, who do all largely speak his praises.

The life of S. VLFRICK Confessor, and Hermit.
FEBR. 20
THE worthy champion, and brave follower of a monastical, and solitary life
S. Vlfrick, was borne in a village called Lenton, or Litton, eight miles from
Bristoll, of a mean, yet an honest parentage. In the same place he was bred,
and brought up till he came to such age, and learning, that he was made
priest. Which office he exercised His manner of life in his youth.
for some years space, having (as it was thought) received it in the fervor
of his youth, more out of a youthful leuitie incident to that age, then any
way guided by the raynes of true reason. For as yet being not well acquainted
with the true spiritual knowledge of almighty God, he was ruled more by the
impetuous motions of wordly pleasures, and delights, then by the inward
inspiration of the soul. Whence it came to pass that he stuck not to stain
his priestly function, by daily employing of him self in the gentleman's
slavery of keeping hawks, and Dogs, and following the toilesome sports those
dumb beasts could allow him, when he had better, and more befitting his
calling, been quietly busied in study, and contemplation. But being on a time
in hott pursuit of this A poor man foretells him of his future life.
kind of a game, he met by chance with a man that bore the habitt, and
countenance of a poor beggar, who very humbly demanded for an alms a piece
of new money, which as yet, by reason of the newnes of the coin coming out of
the mint of Henry the first, was not very common in England. Therefore VLFRICK
answered him, that he knew not whether he had any of that Kind or not. Look
in thy purse (replied the other) and there thou shall find two pence
halfpe^nie. VLFRICK being amazed at this answer, opened his purse and finding
as the poor man had said, he devoutly gave him what he asked. Who receiving
his penny; let him reward thee (said he) for whose love thou give it. And I
in his name declare unto thee, that shortly thou shall depart from this place
where now thou live, unto an other dwelling, and thence again to another,
where thou shall, find a quiet habitatio^, till after long perseuera^ce in the
service of god, thou art called to enjoy the joyful society of the saints in
heaven.

II. VLFRICK therefore after a while, lived like a poor Priest in He
abstayneth from flesh.
the house of one William Lord of the village where he was borne, and had his
diet daily at his table, where he laid the first foundation of a new life, and
entered into a perpetual abstinence, from flesh. Till at length, his good
purposes, and devotion still increasing, he was greatly taken with an earnest
desire to embrace an eremiticall, and solitary life, and to that end the
foresaid Lord, doubtless not without the particular inspiratio^ of the holy
Ghost, sent him to a village called Hasleburrow in Dorsetshire, distant
eastward from Excester His austeritie of life
about thirty miles. There in a little cell near adjoining unto the Church,
setting aside all thoughts sauouring of the world, with great austeritie, and
mortification of his body, he purchased the grace, and favor of JESUS CHRIST
to his soul. For with such an exact and severe an observance of abstinence,
fasting, and watching he mortified his body upon earth, that the skin only
sticking unto the bones, he appeared unto the behoulders as the true picture
not of a carnal, but of a spiritual man, in a human shape. His daintiest
His poor diet, and clothing.
meat was oaten bread and a kind of gruell, or pottage made of oatmeale. He
never drank wine or any other drinks which cause dronkennes, but only on
principal feasts, and then he would taste a little, more for the solemnity of
the feast, then any contentment of body. In watching he was so diligent, and
unwearied, that he passed many nights without any sleep, nether would he
ever give himself to any rest but when extreme necessity, and weakness of
nature compelled him: and then not in bed, but leaning his head to a wall, he
took a short allowance of sleep, out of which presently rowsing him self, he
would much blame, and chastise his body, as yielding unto overmuch niceness.
His pillow (if that may be called so) which he used to putt under his head was
made of rowles, or ropes of hay wound up together. He was content with poor
simple clothing, lined next to the skin with a rude shirt of hayre-cloath.
Till after a while, being grown from a freshman to be an old beaten soldier
of Christ, instead of his hayre-cloath, he wore next unto his skin, an iron
coat of maile, which his old lord, and master, understanding his desire
thereof, had sent unto him, consecrating that warlick armor His mortification
of body.
to the warrefarre of heaven. To these his daily austerities, he added others
by night, far exceeding them in rigor, for in the sharpest cold of winter,
he was wont, having first putt of his iron coat, to entier naked into a
vessel of cold matter, where he would remain reciting psalms and himnes in
praise of almighty God, until he had thoroughly mortified and quenched those
dishonest fires, and importune motions of the flesh, which very furiously and
often assayling his mind, sought the ruin of his chastity: but his breast was
a firm rock of pure marble that utterly denied entertaynment to any such
uncleanness. And in all this rigor so unmercifully exercised upon him self,
both in discourse and behavior, he was ever humble, and pleasant unto all
others, and allthough he seldom or never spoke to any man, but unseen, and
with his window shutt, yet his sweet speeches yielded the sound of a kind of
heavenly harmony to the ears of his hearers. The fame of his sancti^ie is
discovered


III. WHILST thus the holy man exercised him self in the discipline of a
rigid-deuout life, known only to the allseeing deity, he brake forth at
length to the knowledge of the world, like a fair morning of good health, and
happiness unto his country. For his coat of maile hanging down somewhat below
his knees, with the rudenes thereof hindered him to kneel at such times and
so often as he desired: whereof having admonished the knight his old master,
who was only privy to this secret, he demanded his counsel therein. The
knight would have persuaded him to send it to London to be cut according to
his desire: But he being impatient of such delay, and fearing thereby to lay
open a gate to vain gloire gave him a pair of sheares, and bad him in the
name of God dispatch that work with his own hands. The knight staggering in
his obedience, and judging it to be dotage in the holy man that set him on a
task (as he thought) quite impossible, knew not what to say. Be constant
(replied VLFRICK) and fear nothing, behold I go to recommend this business
unto God, in the mean time endeavor confidently to finish this work. The one
falls to his prayers, the other endeauours with iron and steel to cut iron,
and steel: when both their labors took prosperous effect, to the admiration
of the one, and great joy of the other. For the knight Note a strainge miracle.
in his cutting work seemed rather to divide a piece of cloth, then a piece
of iro^, with so great facility the sheares ran through that steely
garment. But the holy man rising from his prayers before the work was
finished, the knight was forced to hold his hands; when VLFRICK coming to the
window where he labored, and asking how he had succeeded in his business; Well,
and prosperously (said he) hitheru^to, but now at thy coming, the sheeres
turn edge, and are at a stay. Be not moved thereat (replied the saint) but
with the same sheeres, finish thy work so happily begun. Then resuming his
former confidence, with the like facility he went through the rest. And from
that time, the holy man in the strength of his own faith, without any
sheeres, pulled asunder the little rings of that part of his coat cut off,
and distributed the^ charitably to all that desired, by virtue whereof many
The parcels of his coat cure many diseases.
diseases were cured, according as it is recorded of the chains of the holy
Apostles, PETER, and PAVL and many other Martirs. But the Knight much amazed
at so great virtue, sell prostrate, at the holy man's feet, whereat greatly
confounded he lifted him up, coniuring him not to reveal that miracle as long
as he lived. But the fame thereof grew so famous; that it could not be hidden,
when many religious, and devout persons were glad to enjoy a ring of his iron
coat, whereby the glory and sweet odor of his sainctitie was blown over all
parts of the Kingdom.

IV. WHILST our worthy champion of CHRIST thus nobly The devils raise war
against him.
fortified his mind with the armor of a generous virtue and showed so great
confidence in almighty God, and such incomparable rigor in chastising and
afflicting his own body, and beating down the dishonest rebellions thereof,
the common plotter, and worker of all mischief to mankind, greatly enuieing
such rare goodness, assailed him on all sides with wonderful troubles, rude
vexations, and almost mortal torments, not inferior to those raised against
S. HILLARION S. ATHONIE, and other ancient Hermites, to batter, and beat
down the constancy of his virtuous mind and resolution. Once those infernal
spiritts appearing visibly in most horrid shapes, with violence dragged him
into the Church, and round about the pauement thereof in great fury, till by
the unexpected coming of a most reverend Virgin, he was relieved out of the
hands of those hell hounds, whom she chased suddenly away. He understood
afterward that this was a holy Virgin, of whom he^ had made a commemoration in
his Mass the same day. An other time the holy man being sick, his ordinary
enemy entered into the room where he lay, and casting a terrible look upon
him, with a staff he had in his hand gave him three great blows on the head,
and departed. And further it pleased almighty God to give the Devil so great
power over his body, that like an other Job, he infected his flesh with such
horrid ulcers, that his arms, quite up to the shoulders, became a loathesom
spectacle, rotten, and full of ugly His wonderful patience
worms, and corruption. All which as visitations sent from God, he endured
with infinite great patience, and joy, ever yielding humble thanks unto his
divine goodness, that gave him so fair an occasion of meritt in this world. He
was noe sooner recovered of this strainge malady, but the same engine of
mischief cast his body into such an intolerable, but invisible heat of fire,
in so much that he called for a Priest, and began to recommend his soul
unto his creator, till after a while, that hellish tormenter chainged that
intolerable heat, into a contrary cold so insufferable, that every minute
he expected with patience the disuniting of his soul from He ouercometh the
vexations of the devil.
his body. But he triumphed over all these hellish afflictions, and
diabollicall temptations, in the approved armor of an undaunted patience of
mind, and made all these occasions but stepps to clime the height of virtue,
and perfection by.

V. ONE Easter eve at night, the hellish spirit of uncleanness having cast the
holy man into a deep sleep, by a filthy dream, and illusion, allbeit in a
body dry, and half dead, triumphed over the frailty of his flesh, and caused
him to suffer some such uncleanness, as the weakness of man's nature is subject
unto in those occasions: where upon he became so overthrown with grief, and
sorrow of See a wonderful example of humility.
mind, that he pined away at his disastrous chance. And on the morrow morning
being Easter day, he went into the Church, where publicly before all the
poeple present at that holy solemnity, he made open confession of what had
befalne him, and burst out into a miserable complaint of his mischaunce. And
woe be unto me wretched VLFRICK, (said he) whom mine enemies, in revenge of my
sins, have this sacred night so filthyly disgraced, so unhappily deluded,
and so vilely euerthrowne. I confess my offense unto God, and to you all,
desiring, and hoping to obtain pardon from his divine goodness, by your good
prayers, and intercession. Having in these and such like words proclaimed his
misfortune, he returned sorrowful to his cell. Which his wonderful deiection,
and humility of mind, wherein he nether spared his own shamefastnes, nor the
diminishing of that renowned opinion of sainctitie, which be had gotten in the
world, nor despised others in respect of such virtue, seems by many degrees
to excel both the wonder of his coat of maile, and whatsoever else in him (as
truly there are very many things worthy great praise, and admiration) was
most notable, and famous, And as almighty God sent him these sharp
visitations to make trial of his constancy, so on the other side his divine
goodness did so highly confort him with heavenly benefitts, gifts, and graces
of prophefieing, and doing many wonderful cures, and ennobled his worthy
patience with such renowned triumphs against his infernal enemies, that he
might truly Psalm. 9 3. 19
with the royal prophet say of him self: According to the multitude of my
griefs, thy consolations have rejoiced my soul.

VI. FOR HE chainged water into wine; and by his holy benediction he increased
and multiplied one little loaf of bread to so His many miracles.
great a quantity, that he satisfied forty poor poeple there with. The water
which he hallowed cured very many dangerous diseases. He restored light, and
perfect sight unto one whose eyes were dug out of his head. He saw many
things that were done in far distant places, as distinctly as if they had
passed within the command of his corporal sight. And often times he foretold
things to come, and namely to King Henry the first, setting forth in his last
journey to Normandy, that he should never more return. And in the Kings
absence he revealed unto the Lord of the village the very day of the kings
death. And count Stephen coming upon a time unto the holy man, he saluted him
as king, to the great admiration of all that heard it; and ingenuously told
him that he should be souueraigne Lord of England, giving him pious admonitions
carefully to maintain peace, and justice, and defend the rightes of Gods
Church.

VII. WHAT now shall I say, that the holy Angels, yea and the king of angels
CHRIST JESUS have appeared unto him, and comforted his habitation in this world
with the heavenly and unspeakable splendor of their presence. And being on a
time at the altar executing that dreadful sacrifice of Mass, having past the
Pater noster, The wine in his chalice appears in form of blood.
being suddenly stricken with a doubt whether he had mingled (as the custom is)
water with his wine, or not, and having defired almighty God to free him from
that scruple; behold the chalice appeared unto him full to the very brimme of
fresh rosy blood, which the unspotted lamb, shed for our redemption: and
returning straight again to the form of wine he devoutly consummated, that
heavenly draught. And allbeit sometimes by the permission of almighty God, to
try his servant, he was (as we have said) cruelly deluded, vexed, and
tormented by the mischievous envy of hells inhabitans, yet many times he
triumphed most nobly over them and their diabolical practices: When by his
holy prayers he not only banished them out of the bodies of possessed persons,
but sometimes held them so fast bound, that they could not depart but by his
license. But of all that ever he did in that kind, this which A poor ma gives
his soul to the devil.
now you shall hear was the most notably famous.

VIII. IN THE North parts of England dwelt a mise rably-wretched man, who not
able to endure the poverty of his own fortune, had renounced the Christian
Catholic faith, and in a horrid covenant had wholely consecrated, and
bequeathed him self to the Devil: who having for a time sat abroode upon
that prey, to hatch his soul for hell fire, the wretched man coming a little
to understand his more then miserable estate, began to be ashamed, and repent
him of this horrible act, deliberating, and debating with him self, to what
Patron, or protection he should committ the care of delivering his engaged
soul out of the jaws of eternal death. Till at length having heard the great
fame of S. VLFRICKS holy life, he resolved to make use of his counsel in this
weighty affayre: and being very sollicitous of his good success herein, and
having opened his mind to one of his nearest, and dearest friends, the devil
with whom he had made this hard bargain, appeared to him in his known, and
accustomed shape, and with show of extreme unkindness, accused him of
disloyalty, and threatened him with most cruel punishment if he dared but to
attempt any such treason again. The poor man, The devil knows not the
secrets of man's heart
perceauing that this hellish merchant had noe knowledge of the intentions of
his heart, till by word of mouth he had revealed them unto his friend from that
time kept close his good purposes under the veil of silence, and meaning (as
the proverb says) to cozen the old (ourtier he) dissembled for a while his
intended penance; till at length, when he thought his enemy sleeped, he entered
into his journey toward S. VLFRICK, wherein he had prosperous success, till
he came near unto the Village of Haslebury, where entering the foord of the
river that ran thereby, with great hope to receive help from the holy man,
his ancient enemy the devil suddenly laid violent hands upon him bellowing
in his ears with a hellish, fury and anger, such rude and rough speeches,
that struck terror into the poor man: O thou traitor, (said he) what meanest
thou to do? In vain thou endeauourest to break off our former bargain, for
as well for they first treason in reuouncing God, as now for seeking to
renounce me, to whom thou belongest, thou shall presently suffer a just
punishment in this water. And withal he held him so fast in the midest of the
river, that he could nether stir forward nor backward. In the mean time S.
VLFRICK, who had a revelation of all this passage, called his Priest unto him,
and bad him presently take the cross and holy The virtue of holy waer.
water in his hands, and make great have to succor a poor man whom the devil
held captive in the river at the towns end. Who speedyly obeying his command,
ran thither, and found, (as the holy man had foretold,) a man sitting an
horseback in the midst of the river not able to move, on whom presently in
the name of JESUS CHRIST, and in virtue of his master having cast some of his
holy water, he redeemed the prey, and patt the t^eefe to flight. This done he
returned with joy to S. VLFRICK together with the poor man, whose company
the devil being very unwilling to loose, followed after his late prey, and
seeing him stand before the holy man, he said fast hold on him, who cried
maynly out, to the servant of god for succor. The^ S. VIFRICK taking him by
the right hand, He freeth one given to the devil.
the devil was so bold as to shake him by the left, striving as much as he
was able to draw him away with him, till the Saint throwing with his other
hand some of the holy water, which him self had blessed against that ugly fiend,
he drove him away from the house with great confusion. And then leading the
poor man, newly redeemed out of the jaws of death, quaking, and tre^bling
with fear into his inner cell, he disposed his soul with good instructions
for Auricular con^ession.
the better receiving of the sacrament of peanance. Which done, the poor man
falling down on his knees before the holy Saint, proclaimed him self guilty
at the sacred bar of confession, by which he clearly purged his conscience
from all the infectious veno^ which the devil had planted therein, and having
received his absolution pronounced by the mouth of S. VLFRICK, he desired
likewise, to communicate the blessed sacrament of the Altar at his hands. Who
houlding that dreadful mystery before his face at the Altar, demanded if he
did truly, and sincerely believe the body of CHRIST to be really under that
form of bread. I do believe, and confess it (said he) for, (wretched sinner
that I am) I see the body of my lord JESUS in thy hands, in the true form of
flesh. God be for ever praised, (replied Behold the ^eall presence in the
sacrament.
the holy man:) and presently at his prayers the sacred Eucharist returning to
the usual form of bread, he gave it the poor man, who from this time
forwards was ever free, from the burden of that diabolical yoke and from all
trouble, and vexation of those hellish monsters.

IX. A PIOUS woeman on a time sent three loaves of bread unto S. VLFRICK, by a
messenger, who hid one by the way, and delivered Note a rare miracle.
the other two only; but goeing back, he found his loaf to be chainged into a
stone so hard, that his iron and steel turned edge as he endeavored to cut
it asunder. But that hardness melted his heart with sorrow, for returning in
great have to S. VLFRICK, he discoured this strainge accident, humbly desiring
pardon of his temerarious offense. Who not only forgave him, but making the
sign of the cross upon that stonnie bread, he brake it with great facility,
and giving part thereof unto the messenger, sent him away greatly edified to
have seen such virtue.

X. A GREAT noble man of king Henry's court having heard of the A Nobleman
punished by God for detracting S. Vlfrik.
fame of S. VLFRICK, said that the King might do well to send some officers to
the Cell of that crafty seducer, to take away his money, whereof he could not
but have great store such a mighty concurse of poeple daily flocked unto him.
These words were noe sooner spoken, but by his divine power who is ever zealous
in behalf of his saints, the mouth of that rash man was writhen and stretched
to his ears, and he him self dashed violently against the ground, where he lay
for a time sprawling, and foaming in misery. The king upon this occasion,
went to the holy man's poor habitation, and carefully reco^mending him self
unto his devout prayers, earnestly petitioned withal for the noble man. I
impute not this sin unto him (replied the Saint) but do heartily desire that
he may have pardon at the hands of almighty God, being my self, in the mean
time, most ready to do whatsoever is convenient for me. And at the same
instant, one of the standers by took the holy Saint by the hand, and applying
it to the face of a sick person there present, restored him to perfect health
with the only touch of those holy fingers.

XI. THIS Blessed Saint (as you have heard before) prophesied unto His gift
of prophecy.
count Stephen, then a private man, that he should be owner of the realm of
England; during whose reign, many warlick commotions, and troubles molested
the common peace, all which likewise S. VLFRICK foretold, unto the lord of his
village, as allsoe of the captivity of the same King, and of his delivery. At
length, King Stephen coming to his cell on a time, the holy man after many
zealous rebukes, and profiteable exhortations foretold him among other things,
that he should reign during his life time, admonishing him by all means to
do worthy penance for the same, for otherwise he should never enjoy either
surety in his Kingdom, or peace from those rude broiles, which to his cost, he
had long experienced. Whereupon King Stephen confesses to S. Vlfrick.
the King, with tears trickling down his cheeks, witnessed the inward sorrow
of his mind, and making a sincere confession of that sin, willingly performed
the penance, which the prophetical Saint enjoined him. See the wonderful
force of Gods grace, that gives power to a poor silly creature, to make the
stubborn hearts of kings to relent, and return from the wild deserts of
iniquity to the direct high way of justice. I can never too often repeat that
saying of the prophet; God is wonderful in his saints.

XII. ABOUT a year before his death, sitting one day in his cell Psalm. 67. v.
38.
the ioints of his iron coat miraculously dissolved, and it fell down to his
knees, which he presently took up, and fastened again about his shoulders
with more strong stays. And his whole body, which before seemed to imitate
iron in hardness, began to swell with little blisters, and plainly to show it
was but flesh; so that his coat and his flesh with a like token foreshewed
the time of his warrefare in this world to draw near to an end. Therefore
after a while he called his priest unto him, and told him that the hour of
his departure was at hand, for the next saturday (said he) I must provide my
self for my last and happiest journey, which so long I have desired. And in
the very hour which he foretold, joining and directing his hands and eyes
toward heaven whither he was goeing, he delivered up his blessed soul out of
the thraldom of this world He foretells the time of his death.
to the never dieing joys of heaven: the twentieth day of February in the year
of our Lord 1154. shortly after the coronation of Henry, the second King of
that name in England. His life is written by Ioannes Anglicus or John Capgraue,
Matthew Paris in Henrico 2. fol. 88. and Nicholas Harpsfield saec. 12. cap. 29.
out of whom we have gathered this present history. Henry Huntington, and
other English Historiographers make honorable mention of him.

depiction of Saint Milburga S. MILBVRGA FILIA MERWALDI REGIS IN ANGLI^ Virgo
ac Abbatissa Ordinis. S. Benedicti. Feb. 2 3. M^^^.

The life of S. MILBVRG virgin and Abbess of the holy order of S. BENEDICT.
FEBR. 23 Written by Gotzeline monk.
ETHELBERT king of Kent, and the first of our English kings that received the
Christian faith, was S. MILBVRGS great grandfathers father, she was daughter to
Merwald king of the Mercians, and his queen Dompne^e, by some called
Ermenburg. Milburg therefore Her royal pa^^nts.
inheriting the royal splendor of two princely kingdoms, Kent, and Mercia, as
the ornament of her birth, and having the prerogative of senioritie among her
Fathers children, was so far from glorying therein that for the only dear
love of almighty god her creator, and the pure desire of heaven, she
utterly contemned those honors which worldlings so highly admire, and
wholely settled, and tied her self with all the thoughts, studies, cares,
desires and powers of her soul to find out the best and readiest means, to
attain to that kind of virtuous life, in which being free from all broiles,
and troubles of the vain world, she might spend the short time of her
mortality in the contemplation of almighty God, and his heavenly gifts, and
graces; thereby to ennoble the royalty of her blood, which the nobility of
perfection, and virtue. And the better to put these her good thoughts, and
purposes in perfect execution, she ^^^^ged her fath(...) littering, and
princely palace for a mona^^erie; her royal^ (...)irple for a hayre-cloathe,
her princely diadem for a little black veil, and in sum, instead of her
worldly dowry, which could not but be exceeding rich and honorable, she made
a happy choice of IESVSCHRIST to be the only spouse, and spiritual ornament
of her soul.

II. ALL this she performed in a monastery which her self had built She
becomes a Nun of S. Benedicts order
at Wenlock in Shrops^ir^ where at (...) hands of S. THEODORE, a Benedictin
monk then Archbishop of Canturburie, she received the veil of perpetual
virginttie, and was ranged into the order of Nuns of S. BENEDICTS or d^^ ^^d
(...)er made Abbess of the virgins that she had gathered together in the same
place, and under the same rule. This monastery her father, and her uncle,
Merwald, and Wulfere both kings of Mercia very richly adorned afterward, with
large, and ample possessions of lands, many precious relics of Saints, and
diverse other great privileges and prerogatives. And now by reason of that
holy society so worthyly addicted to the divine service of God; and chiefly
for S. MILBVRG her self a mother worthy such a progeny, or for that holy
progeny worthy so good a mother, that sacred place began to represent a
new kind of little paradise, in which amongst the inhabitants was a holy
contention, striving who should get the prize in the advancement of true
piety, chastity, and humility, to triumph over the vain delights, fond
pleasures, and fading glories of the world.

III. BUT yet S. MILBVRG far excelled the rest, especially in all humility,
and demission of mind, preserving her self, for the spiritual union which her
heavenly spouse, most chaste, pure, and unspotted in all, and through all her
actions. And as a bright A young man taken with love of her.
sun to the lesser planets, she gave light unto her other sisters, by the
rare example of her virtues, to show them the high way to perfection. In this
her holy course of so great virtues, CHRIST was not wanting to his pious
virgin, nether did he only give her daily a greater ardour of will, and a fresh
supply of force, to further her progress in the path of virtue, but allsoe
honored her with famous testimonies of his care, and love toward her, and
bestowed by her many excellent documents to posterity. Amongst which one, and
not the lest was, that being on a time out of her monastery in a village
called Stokes, a young gallant son to a prince of that country, was so taken
with her beauty, that he had a vehement desire to carry her away by force,
and marry her. And having gathered a band of men together to putt his wicked
thoughts in execution, he endeavored to make the holy virgin his prey, but
she, that had intelligence hereof by revelation from her heavenly spouse,
presently with her company betook her self to flight; when the rash young man
fiercer then any wolf, followed the pure lamb of CHRIST, till coming to a
little shallow brook called Corse (through which the Virgin with her company
had easily waded) his fury received a stopp; for the water (as it were
displeased at so bad an enterprise) suddenly She it miraculously preserved.
swelled up, and filling his banks with angry streams, seemed to threaten
those passengers with destruction. The young gallant much confounded and
astonished herewith, declared, by his cessing to persecute the holy virgin any
further, that the flames of his unchaste affection were utterly quenched with
the sudden inundation of that cool water. In like manner as the water, the
fowls, which we call Wild-geese, did obey the will, and commandment of S.
MILBVRG; for when those creatures The fowle^ of the air obey her.
made great spoil, and hauock in the corn fields near unto her monastery,
the holy Virgin full of faith (which as our savior says (can remove
mountains) commanded them presently to be gone, and chardged that nether
they, nor any other of the same kind, should ever dare to trespass those
fields any more. To whom, a Syf they had been capable of reason, the birds
forth with obeyed, and never more endomaged those places: and this miracle
lasted not only during her life, but allsoe to our later ages, as it is
recorded both by the testimony of the inhabitants thereabouts, and many
ancient writers. Whereby you may see how it pleased the divine goodness to show
a miraculous favor in our England to this his blessed Virgin, like unto that,
which in times past he showed to S. ANTHONH the Hermit, when he gave him power
and command over the wild boares in the desert.

IV. MANY other wonderful works are related of this holy Virgin, which the
brevity of this discourse will not permit us to rehearse, of which these are
that she restored sight unto a blind man, and life unto the dead son of a
poor widow. Which deeds, as in the^ selves they are very great, so in
respect of those other benefitts, and graces (wherein by her pious
exhortations, and holy example of life, she restored unto many desperate
persons the heavenly light of the soul, which they had lost, and life
everlasting whereof their sinful actions, and unworthiness had deprived them,)
they seem to be of far less account; in as much as the spiritual light
and death of the Soul, does excel the mortal light, and death of the Body.

V Now this holy spouse of JESUS CHRIST S. MILBVRG having made so worthy a
progress in all kind of goodness, and virtue that Her speech to her Nuns before
death
even in the winter of her old age, the sweet flowers of her good works ever
flourishing and increasing more, and more in perfection, she became to desire
and aspire unto nothing more, then by the end of her labors in this world to
attain to the joyful fruition, and presence of the only dear spouse of her
soul, who through the burning and purging affliction of a long and teadious
fever, called her at length unto him. But during the time of this her last
sickness, having gathered her Nuns about her, with great devotion she
reco^mended that holy society to the protection of the divine goodness and the
B. Virgin MARIE, earnestly desiring them to make choice of such a gouernesse
after her death, whom they judged for true piety and religion, to be the
fittest among them to undergo that charge FEB. 25.
and withal exhorting the^ chiefly to preserve, true peace, and pureness of
heart, she often repeated the words of CHRIST her spouse unto the^: Blessed
(said she) are the peacemakers, for they shall be called the children of God.
Blessed are the clean of heart for they shall see God. Having given the^ Matt.
5. v. 8. 9.
these, and such like pious admonitions and religiously armed her self, and her
death with the holy sacraments, she happyly yielded up her unstained soul to
enjoy an everlasting kingdom, with her sacred spouse in heaven above, for whose
sake she had contemned the kingdom, and pomp of this lower world: she died the
three and twentieth day of February, and was buried in her monastery of
Wenlock. Who, as she is by a pious certainty thought gloriously to reign with
her dear spouse JESUS, so, lest perchance any small cloud of Her happy
death.
mistrust might darken that pious belief, all mighty God him self has showed
many clear testimonies of his love to his holy spouse, able to convince the
most incredulous. When many ages after the death of this holy Virgin, in the
year of our lord 1101. and the reign of Henry the first, her holy body was
discovered, and brought out of the ruins of oblivion, to the open view, and
veneration of the world. It happened in this manner.

VI. THE monastery of Wenlock being destroyed afterward by the violence of
Englands savage, and barbarous enemies, the holy virgins body lay for a long
time hidden amongst those ruins, till by the mnnificence of Roger Earl of
Mountgomerie it was reedified, and turned to a Priorie of Benedictine Monks of
the Congregation of Cluny, about the year aforesaid, when by the special
providence of almighty God, S. MILBVRGS body came to light, upon this
occasion.

VII. A workman called Raymund being at work in the monastery The miraculous
invention of her body.
of the holy Trinity, he happened to find an old chest, or Box, in which was
contained a writing written by one Alstan a Priest, which testified that the
body of the holy Virgin lay buried there, near unto the altar. But noe
remnant of the altar appearing, was cause that yet there was noe certainty of
any thing. Till he that gouerns all things with certainty, soon after took
away all this uncertainty, for as two children played together upon the
pauement of that Church, suddenly the earth opened; and they both sunk in up
to the knees. This accident being a cause of great admiration amongst the
Monks, gave them occasion to have the earth dug up deeper in that place,
by which means they found some bones, which sent forth a wonderful sweet
savor over all the Church, and the next day after, they lighted on the
foundation of the altar spoken off before. To the greater creditt Miracles
wrought by her relics
and evidence hereof, and more clear manifesting of the glory of God, and his
holy spouse S. MILBVRG, many other very worthy, and notable testimonies
concurred. For by the only touch of those sacred relics, but then new raked
out of earth, and dust, two women were cured of most horrid leaprosies, an
other was restored to her sight lost, and a boy that never saw light before,
received perfect power to distinguish of colors. In sum, such and so famous
where the miracles which God allwaies wonderful in his saints, whrought there
by the merits of this glorious Virgin, that whole inundations of poeple flocked
thither in such troops, as the open fields thereabouts were scarce sufficient
to receive them: where rich, and poor were in equal contention to obey the
guide, and conduct of their pious faith. Nether was the labor of their piety
spent in vain, for none returned without comfort, sick persons receiving a
perfect recovery of health, and a cure of many such mortal diseases, which
had given the foil to physicians, and their skill had left in desperation. Of
which one, and not the lest was, that a woeman dwelling in the village hard by
called Patton, having, for the space of five years, been cruelly tormented
with a very desperate disease incureable by physic, drank only of the water,
wherein the holy virgins relics had been washed, and presently she shaked of
her teadious sickness, and withal disburdened her stomach of a filthy worm,
ugly, and horrible to behold, having six feet, two horns on his head, and
two on his tail. The woeman being freed of this monstrous guest, had the
happiness of her perfect health restored, and in testimony, Note a strainge
miracle.
and memory of the fact, that worm was shutt up in a hollow piece of wood,
and reserved afterward in the Monastery, as a trophie, and monument of S.
MILBVRG, until by the lascivious fury of him that destroyed all goodness in
England, that, with other religious houses, and monasteries, went to ruin,
that whereas before our fruitful I Will, for true religion, piety, continency,
and other virtues, was the miracle of the world, so now for atheism, heresy,
and many other vices it yields to no other realm in Christendom. The life of
this holy Virgin S. MILBVRG is written by Ioannes Anglicus recited by John
Capgraue, and Nicholas Harpsfield out of whom we have gathered it. But of the
inmention of her body, and miracles thereat, we have taken chiefly out of Ato
Bishop, and Cardinal of Ostia who writ the miracles that happened after her
inmention, and William Malmesburie, de Pont. Angl. lib. 4. and de gest. reg.
Angl. l^. 2. cap. 15. The Roman Martyrologe, Camden in descriptione com.
Salopiae Polidore Virgil lib. 4. de regno Merciorum, Vincentius Lirinensis, in
speculo lib. 25. cap. 33. Matthew Westminster anno 676. Florentius Wigorniensis
anno 675. and many others make ample mention of her.

The life of S. ETHELBERT King, and Confessor.
FEB. 24 Out of Venerable Bede de gest. Angl.
THE divine wisdom, whose almighty power only, is able to produce light out
of the midst of darkness, and good out of evil, during the reign of
ETHELBERT fifth king of Kent, voutchafed to set Ethelbert the first Christian
King of England.
a period to the diabolical rites of Idolatry in England, and called
ETHELBERT out of a race of Pagan Ancestors to be the first English king that
sound the true Christian way to the kingdom of heaven. And whatsoever gain of
souls our holy Apostle S. AVGVSTIN the Benedictine monk, and his Evangelical
brethren reaped in the spiritual harvest, and vineyard of our lord (excepting
allwaies the premotion and prevention of Gods grace) is wholly due unto holy
King ETHELBERT. For in as much as it lay in humane power, unless his royal
grant, and assistance had stood with those divine laborers, nether the
tilling not fruict of true salvation had then arrived to our English His royal
courtesy.
land. He, being as yet incredulous, received CHRIST in his legates, commended
the messengers of eternal happiness whom yet he mistrusted, harbored those
strange guests in his eittie of Doner, whom he knew not, and at first gave them
a dwelling with necessary sustenance for a time which afterward he confirmed
for ever unto them, whose profession of faith and religion he did not yet
admit off. He did not abhor the strangenes of their habitt, nor manners, he
did not repel them as straingers, nor contemn them as humble, and dejected
persons, nor condemn them as men that utterly condemned the folly of his
gods, and ancient laws, but out of the sweet meekenes of a royal mind,
favored their sacred labors, and with a clement patience, suffered them to
convert whom they could to their faith, showing himself always courteous to
Christians, being yet but a Heathen. Till at length having himself received the
Christian faith, and washed away the filth of Idolatry in the sacred font of
baptism, he confirmed with his royal authority whatsoever S. AVGVSTIN and
his fellows preached, and what they Apostolically planted, he royally
increased, sweetly drawing and winning his subjects His zeal in promoting the
Christian faith.
to abandon their Idolatry, and embrace the Christian religion with his pious
exhortations, and promises of eternal happiness without any force, or
compulsion, and ranging them under the banner of the holy warrefarre of CHRIST
as troops of Voluntaries and not pressed soldiers. He allsoe encouraged other
Princes, who were either his subjects, or colleagues, with all courtesy and
mildnes to the faith of CHRIST, heartyly loving all true believers as his
brethren, kinsmen, and fellow-citezins of the Kingdom of heaven; so that in a
short time, his holy endeauours took so good effect, that the honor, and
worship of the true God flourished over all his Kingdom, many Churches were
erected, the temples, and aultars of Idols were destroyed, or consecrated for
the use of divine service.

II. IN THE mean time the holy Pope S. GREGORY, with wonderful affection did
congratulate this good Kings piety, encouraging him with the sweet lines of
his Epistles, as so many heavenly salutations, to proceed in his Christian
zeal, inciting him to embrace true piety and virtue, and stirring him up, by
the example of Constantine the great, to aspire to the unspeakable reward of
those who strive to enlarge, and amplify the Kingdom of JESUS CHRIST. Moved
herewith, and the labor of S. AVGVSTIN, and the propension of his own piety
inclining him thereunto, he built a goodly Church in Canturbury, in honor of
our Savior, commonly called Christ Church, and without the walls of the same
town, he He builds Churches.
erected a monastery in honor of S. PETER, and PAVL called afterward S.
AVGVSTINS, to be a place for his own burial, and of his successor-Kings of
Kent, and the Archbishops of Canturbury. Both these places were furnished with
Benedictine monks, the first Conuerters of England from Idolatry, to
Christianity. S. PAVLS Church in London was allsoe the work of this worthy
King, where MELLITVS a Benedictin monk was first Bishop. He allsoe founded the
Cathedral Church of Rochester, and dedicated it to the honor of S. ANDREW the
Apostle. He is likewise reported by antiquity to have been the Author of the
monastery of Elie for Benedictin Nuns, allbeit S. ETHELDRED a nun of the
same order, did reedifie it afterward, and restore it after long desolation to
the former state, and glory. All these monasteries, Churches, and bishops seas
this pious king not only built, but enriched with many large possesions of
lands, gifts, and ornaments; omitting nothing which did any way tend to the
propagation, and aduanoement of true Christian religion.

III. BUT amidst all these good works, and all the glory of his Princely
diadem, seeptre, and large command of his Kingdom extending His great piety,
and humility
it self to the river Humber in Yorkshire, he so honored Christian poverty
in the magnificence of his royalty, that in possessing all things he seemed to
enjoy nothing, only making use of his greatness, thereby the better to exercise
and dilate his goodness. A most glorious sight it was to see, or rather to
admire him that held a scepter over so large a dominion carefully to serve the
poor; to behold him that terrified Kings, and Princes of the earth to fear
the humble Priests of CHRIST JESUS, and to see the ruler of the poeple to obey
the clergy and reverence the lest, and lowest, members of his holy flock. In
sum, in repressing of vice, advancing of virtue, fulfilling the commaundments
of God, and in exercising all manner of works of piety and devotion, he
excelled beyond the power of weak words to express. At length when he had
raygned over his poeple in all sainctitie of life the space of one and twenty
years after his conversion, he left his temporal Kingdom, and gave up his
blessed soul to enjoy the never dyeing happiness of the Kingdom of heaven; the
four and twentieth day of February in the year of our Lord 616. All
antiquity, and the authority of ancient Saints, are irresistable witnesses
of his holy life, for from the time of his death he was numbered in the
Catologue of Saints, and his festiuitie was honorably celebrated in the
English Church. The neglect whereof he is reported by an apparition after his
death to have blamed, and caused to be amended.

IV. AMONGST many other virtues, which do so highly set forth this good
King, one was, that as he promoted the Christian religion, His good laws.
so likewise he established his common wealth with many excellent laws,
which he published in English, and were of great account amongst Englishmen;
wherein among other things he had a special care to preserve the common good
of the Church, commanding under great penalties that none should either by
theft or any other means alienate, or deprive Gods Church, or the Bishops
thereof, of any thing whatsoever that was bestowed upon them, and allotted ^o
the divine service. But o miseriel how directly Contrary to this our first
Christian King are now our modern kings, whose laws and endeauours have and
do tend mainly to the destruction of Churches, abbeyes, and religious he uses,
robbing them of their ornaments, and riches dedicated to God service, and
leaving them to stand with four bare walls like so many empty barnes,
placing in stead of the holy image of CHRIST crucified, the pictures of bears,
leopards unicorns or some such beast houlding ^p in a scu cheon lions or
flower de luces, as the ensigns of their destroiers. O if our first Christian
king the noble E^HELBERT lived now, what would he say to see the pious labors
of his hands thus miserably demolisht, his aultars destroyed; his laws
contemned? Verily he might justly cry out with the Royal prophet. O Lord the
Gentiles have entered thy inheritance, they have polluted thy Psalm. 7^. v. 2.
holy temple, They have cast the dead bodies of thy servants for meat to the
birds of the air, the flesh of thy Saints to the beasts of the earth. God of
his infinite goodness voutchafe once more to look with a merciful eye on this
wretched country, and deliver it out of the deluge of sin and Heresy. The
life of S. E^HELBET is written by Venerable Bede degest, Ang. lib. 1. Ioannes
Anglicus recited by John Capgraue, Nicholas Harpsfield saec. 7. cap. 4. and
other English writers, whom we have followed. The Roman Martirologe makes
mention of him this 24. of February.

The life of Saint WALLBVRG Virgin and Abbess of the sacred order of S.
BENEDICT.
FEB. 25. Written by Wolphar dus, a Monk.
SAINT WALBVRG borne of English parents of a royal race, sister to the two
holy Benedictine Monks S. WILLIBALD, and WINEBALD, was from her tender years
first trained up in England in the exercise of the monastical discipline of S.
B^NEDICT, and afterward, by the appointment of that great ornament of the
Benedictine order BONIFACE Apostle of Germany, she was sent for into that
country She is made Abbess in Germany.
of Germany to plant there the roots of those holy monastical virtues, which
she had gathered in England. And in the monastery of Heydenbeim which her
Brother S. WINEBALD built in the Diocese of Eistat, S. WALBVRG was made
gouernesse, and abbess of a convent of nuns, which charge (S. WIN BALD him
self governing an other of monks both of saint BENEDICTS order) the brother
and sister dischardged with so great sainctity, and good example of life, that
by their means that holy order flori^^ed wonderfully in those parts, and S.
WALBVRG became in so great favor with almighty God, that by the virtue of
her prayers she obtained all her desires.

II. ONE night through the negligence and malice of him that A heavenly light
caused by her prayers.
should have lighted the la^pe in the Church, the convent of Nuns was left in
darkness: whereupon the holy virgin, being more in pain for them then her
self, made her prayer unto her dear spouse the only true and indeficient
Light, and at the same instant, they saw a wonderful great luster in all parts
of the monastery which dured till the next morning, to the great ast
onishment, and comfort of that chaste family, who together with S. WALBVRG
gave humble thanks unto almighty God for so great a remonstrance of his
favor, and love toward them.

III. AN OTHER time she stole privately out of the monastery in the evening,
not perceived of any of her religious women, and went to the gate of a very
rich man not far off where she stood like a poor unknown pilgrim, till
being brought in by some of the servants, she made known to the man of the
house who, and what she was. He admiring how she had passed through the fury
of the mad dogs about his house, so quietly without hurt, entertained her
with great joy, and reverence; and brought her (as she desired) into the
chamber, where at that time, his daughter lay languishing of a cruel disease,
expecting every instant when her soul would yield up her house of clay, to
take her last journey, when her doleful parents, despayring of her rerouerie,
with tears, and sighs had allreadie prepared for her funeral rites. But the
divine goodness of him that kills, and reuiues, strikes, and heales again, A
sick woeman cured by her prayers.
through the prayers, and intercessions which the holy Virgin S. WALBVRG
powered out all that night to his infinity mercy, recalled that dying gyrle,
out of the jaws of her threatened death, and restored her again unto perfect
health, against the next morning. Her parents, seeing this wonderful miracle,
gave great thanks unto that heavenly physician, and offered many rich gifts,
and presents unto the holy Virgin, as an acknowledgment of the great favor
they had received by her means, but she that long since had forsaken the
world, and the vain wealth thereof for the pure love of heaven, refused to
receive any worldly favors for a spiritual, and divine benefitt. Therefore
returning again to her monastery, she followed on the course of her virtuous,
and holy life, and the more she perceived the divine clemency to extend it
self with greater favor unto her, the more she increased, and advanced her
self in the exercise of religion, and piety, and showed more excellent
examples of Sainctitie and perfection to her religious subjects, and inferiors.

IV. AT LENGTH this holy Virgin and dear spouse of CHTIST having passed
through the course of a most happy life, and settled her self wholely in the
pure love her creator, having conquered the world, and the desires thereof,
strong in faith, excellent in her Her happy death.
behavior, stored with charity, beautified with wisdom, enriched with
chastetie, grounded with humility, and furnished with the ornaments of all
virtues, she received the embassage of death by the calling of her dear
spouse, and departed out of the miserable thraldom of this world to receive the
everlasting rewards of her good works in heaven; the five and twentieth day of
February about the year of our Lord 776. And immediately after her departure,
her dead body appeared to many of the standers by in form of a creature
allreadie glorified, and a wonderful sweet and fragrant odor issued from that
holy vessel of chastity, and filled the whole house. Moreover, when her body
was carried into the Church, that heavenly light which obeyed her in her life,
served her likewise after her death, and lighted all the candles in the same
Church without any humane help, to the glory of this holy Virgin, and great
admiration, and comfort of the beholders. She was buried in the same monastery
where she had lived, near unto her brother S. WINEBALD, by the hands of her
other brother S. WILLIBALD Bishop, that the same earth might contain them,
whom the like love of religion, virtue, and piety, truly made to be brother,
and sister. V. HER body was afterward honorably translated to the Benedictin
monastery at Eistadt. And in the year 893. her sacred tomb being again
opened her holy ashes seemed all bedewed with water, which might be pressed out
dropp by dropp, and yet not one mite of the dust would stick to their hands
that touched it. At this time a great part of her holy relics, was translated
to the monastery of Benedictine nuns at Monheim in Germany; And at both
these places, many rare miracles have been wrought by the merits of this
glorious Virgin, which for brevity we omit. But one is so wonderful, that I
cannot pass it over in silence. For out of those chaste relics (says
Phillipp Bishop of Eistadt the author of her life) issues a sacred oil,
which by the grace of God, and the intercession of the blessed S. WALBVRG gives
sight to the blind, hearing to the deaf, cures the lame, and restores the
wished recovery of health to all that devoutly ask it. The sovereign virtue
whereof (says the same Author) I my self have experienced: for being
overthrown with a grievous sickness and arrived at deaths gate, calling to mind
the divine favors which S. WALBVRG incessantly showed to her beloved servants,
I commanded some of the sacred oil which flowed from her body to be brought,
of which at a most desired draught I dra^ke up a little bottle full devoutly
saying these words. O Blessed virgin WALBVRG, for reverence of thy most beloved
brother S. WILLIBALD Bishop whose unworthy successor am I Phillip a sinner,
make worthy intercession to our Lord form according as my sins require, and
that I may recover out of the grief One cured with the oil that flows from
her body.
of this my sickness, to the praise of almighty God, and his unspotted mother
the Virgin Marie. This done, to the great admiration of all, I recovered
perfectly out of a disease, which had given the foil to all humane art of
physic. Many other miracles of the same oil are reported by the authors of
her life; and are wrought yet in these days, at Eistadt where her body lies;
to the great confusion of heretics, the glory of God, and our holy Father S.
BENEDICT, under whose rule she ruled being alive. The Reverend Father James
Gretser has set forth a book in the year 1620. in which he recites many
famous miracles done at her tomb authentically examined and proved true, with
the testimony of eyewitnesses. So that this glorious Virgin like unto a
fruitful and fair oliue-tree growing in the fields of Gods Church under the
happy shade of the Benedictine order, dilateth the name and fame of her
sainctitie over the world by the effusion of a precious oil, which cures, and
heals all diseases, by the mighty power of him, who has, and will be
wonderful, and glorious in his Saints for ever. Ame^. The life of this
glorious Virgin is written very largely (and Faithfully says Baronius) by
Wolphardus a monk, and Phillip Bishop of Eystat in Germany, out of whom we
have gathered this history. The Roman Martirologe, Baronius tom 9. anno. 735.
Trithemius in his work of the famous men of S. Benedicts order lib. 3. cap.
150. Arnould Wion in his martirologe Molanus in addit ad Vsuardum, John
Capgraue, and others make honourarable mention of her.

The life of S. MILGITH Virgin, and Nun of S. BENEDICTS order.
FEB. 26.
MILGITH, or MILVIDE daughter to Merwald king of the Mercians and S. ERMENBVAG;
and sister to the most holy Virgins MILBVRG and MILDRED, is much commended by
our English historiographers for her great holiness of life in the conservation,
and consecration of her virginity to CHRIST. But in what monastery she
professed I cannot certainly affirm. Yet some write that she lived a Nun in
a monastery which S. ETHELBERT built in Kent not far from Canturburie. It is
likely that she lived either with one of her holy sisters, with S. MILBVRG at
Wenloke or with S. MILDRED in the I Will of Tanet in Kent. Certain it is in
whatsoever monastery she lived, that she was a Nun^ne of S. BENEDICTS order:
seeing that noe other rule but his was in those days received in England. Of
her and her two sisters Polidore virgill gives this testimony. These most
excellent virgins. (says he) partly out of their holiness of life, partly out
of their service Lib. 4. hist. Ang
in religion, in which they exercised them selves with continency, were sound
worthy to be by our fathers numbered afterward among the S^^^cts. This holy
Virgin flourished (...) the year 675. Florentius Wig. Matthew westminster
Ranulphus Cicestrensis and others speak honorably of her virtues.

depiction of Saint Oswald S. OSWALDVS EPISCOPVS WIGORNIENSIS IN Anglia
Monachis Benedictinus. Feb. 28. Mart. Ba^

The life of S. OSWALD Bishop of Worcester confessor of the holy order of S.
BENEDICT.
FEB. 28. Written by senatus Branonius a monks of VVorcesler.
THE glorious Bishop and ornament of the Benedictin family S. OSWALD, borne of
a most noble English race, and endowed with a very rare, and beautiful form
of body, began from his very infancy to avoid all such childish toies, and
follies as are incident to that age, and wholely to apply him self to the
sacred study, and exercise of true piety, and religion, thereby to ennoble
the nobility of his birth, whith the nobility of virtue. S. O^o Archbishop of
Canturbury was his uncle, a man of wonderful wisdom, S. Odo Archoyop of
Cant^rbury, his uncle.
and discretion, of a grave behavior, a most just and upright mind, and
circumspect an all his actions: unto whom OSWALD was committed by his parents
to be trained up in the school of learning, good manners, and virtue. Under
this so excellent a master, our worthy scholar became so good a proficient
in all profane, and divine learning, that he was promoted to a Canonrie in the
Church of Winchester. Where, when others, not regarding the institute of their
order, and calling, let loose the raines to the lewd desires of their minds, he
constantly confined him self to the prescript rule of a canonical life. So
that within a short space of time he was chosen Deane, in which office, all
though as yet he were but young, yet he zealously endeavored to correct the
corrupt manners of the ancient, and to reform their youthful minds to the
exercise of a celestial rule and discipline. But they, grown old in their bad
customs See how hurtful a bad custom is.
would by noe means be recalled to the obedience of any good order. Therefore
OSWALD despising all secular pomp, and riches of this world, determined to
pass over into France, to the Benedictin Monastery of Florie, where the body
of our holy father S. BENEDICT is said to rest. S. ODO his uncle (who before
he would undertake He takes the habit of S. Bentdict.
the Archbishopric, had received the habit of a monk in the same place) being
desirous to further his pious intention herein, gave him letters of
commendation with tokens to the fathers there of his acquaintance. OSWALD being
safely arrived into the port of his desires, putt on the habitt of S. BENEDICT
amongst those French monks; And presently he that came thither to be
instructed, behaved, and fashoned him self in such sort, that others, who
thought them selves his masters, might in him read a lesson for their own
instruction, His virtues
and find many examples of virtue worthy their imitation. For he was a man of
great mortification, of a little sleep, sparing in his diet, wise and moderate
in his speeches, and continual in his prayers. But how rarely he was endued
with patience, humility, curresie, humanity, meekenes and other virtues we
may easily guess out of the sincerity of his burning charity, wherein, it is
beyond the force of weak words to express, how highly he excelled.

II. THE Abbot granted him the privilege of a secret place in the Church,
where with more freedom and familiarity he might apply his mind to the divine
service of allmigtie God. In which place The devil ennieth, his study of
virtue.
being removed from the noise, and disquiet of others, he bent all the
endeavor, and power of his soul to prayer, meditation, and contemplation of
divine, and heavenly mysteries; which his pious exercise served as bellows to
blow the coals of the Devils envy and hatred against him. For as the holy man
was one night earnestly bent O^wald vaquish^h his diabolical practices with
the sign of the cross.
to his prayers, and meditations, the wicked spirit raised the most horrid
noyses and cries, that humane ears ever heard, intending thereby either to make
him desist from his holy enterprise, or at lest to perform it more
slouthfully, or never more to attempt the practice of any such devotion. But
he was deceived in all, for OSWALD keeping fast his footing, under the
approved protection and bucklar of a firm and constant faith, was noe more
terrified with the roaring of lions, the hissing of serpents, and the horrid
cries, and howling of other beasts, which that wicked author of mischief did
feign, then if he had heard the silly bleating of so manies innocent lambs,
or sheep; and therefore he contemned, and scorned all those ugly cries,
together with the diabolical author of them. The devil confounded hereat,
suddenly vanished away, and straight appeared unto him tra^sformed into the
shape of an angel of light. When he (that knew a good angel would not be
troubled at the sign of the holy cross) presently armed himself therewith,
which the wicked tempter noe sooner perceived, butihe be trayed himself to be a
Messenger of darkness, vanishing out of his sight like a puff of smoke, and he
remained free ever after from his hellish practices.

III. NEAR unto his private oratorie was a place where twelve poor men
received their daily sustenance from the monastery, one of which daily
assisted S. OSWALD at the dreadful sacrifice of Mass. It happened one day
that as the holy man being past the gospel, lifted up his eyes to heaven in
his prayers, his servant saw a person of a very reverend countenance houlding
with great reverence a little piece of white bread in his hands, lifted over
his head. The poor man allthough wonderfully terrified with this vision, yet
he stood stiffely to it, and would not offer to run away. But perceauing the
same bread to increase more and more, as the Priest went forward in his mass,
and at length to become of an unaccustomed bigness, he durst stay noe longer,
but fled out of the Church with all the have he could. Therefore S. OSWALD the
Priest remained alone, with the Angel on his right hand, that seemed to assist
him. In the mean time, the poor man would ever now and then trembling peep
in at the Church door, to hearken, and epsy what was done about the altar:
and when the seruanr of God, as the manner is, pronounced; Per omnia saecula
saeeuloru^, and other such like, he heard the Angel answer him distinctly to
every thing, and saw him very officiously waiting upon him. Mass being ended
his fugitive servant returned, and perceauing the Angel to be gone, he ran
quaking to S. OSWALD, and related the cause of his running away, inquiring of
him if he likewise had seen the Angel. Truly (said he) I both saw, and heard
what thou do rehearse: all mighty Gods name be for ever blessed, who did
not forsake me, being destitute of help in his holy sacrifice. And I strictly
command thee, never to reveal this vision while I live.

IV. SAINT ODO Archbishop of Canturburie hearing the fame of S. OSWALDS holy
conversation and manner of life, gave infinite thanks unto the author of all
goodness, and with many gifts sent to the monastery, showed, and declared him
self in name, of his nephew, very grateful, and thankful both to the Abbott,
and Monks thereof: withal fignifying unto them, that he greatly desired to
enjoy his presence in England, as well for that now being tired with old age he
supposed his death to be near at hand, as allsoe for that he was determined by
his means, to order, and train up those of his own Country in regular and
monastical discipline. This message sorely troubled the monks of Fleurie, who
were very unwilling to part with OSWALD, and OSWALD was as unwilling to leave
them, so desirous he was to live a private retired life. But nether daring to
contend against the Archbishops will, they obeyed, and sent him back with due
honor, and respect: But before he arrived at Conturbury his uncle S. ODO had
taken his journey to heaven.

V. But he had an other Uncle called Osketill, who at that time governed
Osketill Archbishop of York.
the Church of Dorcester, and hearing of Oswalds arrival, not only entertained
him very courteously, but gave him so high a seat in his favor, that he made
him of his counsel in the more secret affairs of his soul. Till not long
after Osketill being elected to the Archiepiscopall sea of York, S. DVNSTAN,
with his praises and commendations of OSWALD, brought him into great grace, and
familiarity with noble King Edgar, who caused DVNSTAN to advance him to the
Episcopal sea of Worcester. In this sacred dignity he behaved him self
worthyly both for the benefitt of the English Church, and restoring William
Malm. de gest. reg. Ang. cap. 7.
of monastical disc pline, which by the barbarous incursions of the Danes, and
the lascivious fury of late king Edwy, who totally favored the vices of the
secular Clergy, was much impaired. And first in the village of Westberie he
gathered a little Convent of twelve Benedictin monks, whom he used very often
times to visitt, and confort with his pious exhortatio^s, and together with
them to labor him self in the pious exercise of a retired life, in watching,
fasting, and prayer. Afterward he built the Benedictine Abbey of Ramsey among
the fennes of Huntingtonshire which flourished from that time to the unfortunate
age of Henry the eight. It was first founded upon this occasion.

VI COUNT Ailwin, a near kinsman to King Edgar, had for many Records of
Ramsey.
years endured the cruel torments of the gout. When a certain fisherma^ of
his called Vulget, entering with his boat into the water of Ramesmere (so the
place was called) endeavored to take some fish for his master: but having
labored a long while in vain, at length much wearied, he fell asleep; when
our holy father S. BENEDICT appeared unto him with these words: at the rising
of the morning (said he) cast thy netts into the water, and according to thy
desire thou shall take great store of fish, of which take the greatest called a
Pike The vision of a Fisherman.
and present it to Alwin thy master in my name, bidding him that he receive my
gift courteously, and out of hand build a monastery for monks in this Island
to the honor of the most holy Mother of God, mine, and all the holy virgins:
and let him observe where his cattle rest by night, and in the very place
where he shall see the bull as he rises beat the ground with his right foot,
let him erect an altar. But that he may give more creditt to these my
commands, behold I will bend thy finger crooked, which he, being freed from
the gout that so vehemently afflicts him, shall presently restore to place
again. The fisherman awaking cast forth his netts into the deepes, and drew
out great store of fish; he presented the fairest to the Count, rehearsing at
large what he had seen. and what was given him in charge to say: entreating
him withal to make good his crooked finger. The Count being healed of his
gout, straightened Count Alwin cured of the gout.
his finger, and went in all have to the Island, where he beheld the bull rising
out of the midst of the other beasts, that in their lying made the form of a
cross, beat the earth with his foot. Whereupon giving creditt to the
Fishermans relation, he gave thanks unto almighty God, and erected a chapel
out of hand in the same place. Where not long after, Alwin giving very ample
possessions thereunto, S. OSWALD within the compass of five years erected a
goodly monastery for Benedictin Monks, and in the year of our Lord 974. he
dedicated the Church with great solemnity to the honor of the B. Virgin
MARIE, and the great Patriark of monks S. BENEDICT; and made a monk of his
called Ednoth the first Abbot thereof. The Abbotts of this Monastery in times
past were Barons of the realm, and Parliament men. Anno 97^. A Council in
England against the incontinencie of the ^ecular Clergy. Matthew Westminster.
Baronius and Osbern in vit. Dunst.


VII. ABOUT the same time the worthy prelate of Canturbury and mirror of the
Benedictine order S. DVNSTAN, by the supreme authority of Pope John, summoned
a Council, wherein it was firmly decreed, and ordained that all secular
Canons, Priests, deacons subdeacons and others of the secular Clergy should
either conform the^ selves to a chaste life according to their calling, or be
dismissed from the Churches, which by their lewd manner of life they rather
polluted, then governed. And in this expeditio^ S. DVNSTAN, had the famous king
Edgar his faythfuil Coadiutour, and worthy Defender. The execution of his
decree was committed to the two bright ornaments of the Benedictin family S.
OSWALD Bishop of Worcester, and S. ETHELWOLD of Winchester. Therefore S. OSWALD
(of who only we are now to speak) repaired, built, and restored seven
monasteries, within his own diocese, to the Monks, ordayning to each one an
Abbot, having first cast out the secular Clergy for their insolent lewdnes of
life. Amongst those Abbots there was one called Fulbert Abbot of Persore, a man
of very examplar life, and a fervent zealer of monastical religion, but too
severe toward his subjects, A fearful ^xample or vn^isre^ Ruler^
which fault was much to be reprehended in him. For coming to his last end, and
being laid dead on the biere, he suddenly lifted him self up, to the great
terror of the beholders, crying out that he was led by S. BENEDICT before the
dreadful sight of the supreme judge, and that God with difficulty had
pardoned him his sins, through the meritts of his beloved servant OSWALD, for
the declaration of whose sainctitie he was thus miraculously revived. At these
words he was silent, and having received the sacred Viaticum of our lords
body, he lived half a day, and returned to death again.

VIII. ALLSOE in many other places of England S, OSWALD Oswald rest^^reth the
monks to the^r Churches
having expulsed the secular clergy for the self same cause of incontinencie
he delivered the government of the Churches to monks, of the Benedictin
institution, to whom they truly belonged: to wit, the Churches of S. ALBANS,
of S. ETHELDRED virgin in Ely, and that of Beamfled. In S. ALBANS he made one
Elfrick Abbot afterward Archbishop of Canturburie, he ordained Abbots at Ely
one Brithnot, and Gorman at Beamfled. And all the monasteries which thus he
instituted he was wont often times to visitt, and out of a fatherly affection
to furnish them both by word and deed, with whatsoever appertayned to the
health, and salvation of their souls. In the Abbey of Ramsey he placed one
Abbo a Benedictin monk of Fleury in France, a man famous both for sainctitie
and learning, to Abbo of ^^^ury.
teach, direct, and govern the monks in their schools, and together with the
endowments of learning, to advance them in the exercise of regular, and
monastical discipline. This Abbo at S. DVNSTANS entreatie writ an exact
relation of the life and passion of S. EDMUND King and martyr, which you may
read the twentieth of November. At length returning to his own Abbey of Fleury,
he was there made Abbot, and afterward martired by some unruly monks whom he
labored to reform.

IX THVS labored blessed OSWALD in the reformation of Ecclesiastical
affairs, redeeming and working the virginal Church and spouse of CHRIST out
of the sacrilegious hands of her loose gouerners, and clensing his sacred
harvest from the impure tares of lasciuiousnes. But after what manner he
reduced the Benedictines into their ancient Cathedral Church of Worcester,
let William Malmesburie tell us. S. OSWALD (says he) considering by little,
and little that in the minds of the clergy there residing, there remained yet
some small sparks of goodness, which might be bettered if a man knew how to
animate, and shapen it aright, did not expel How (...) re^^ored the monks to
their Church of Worcester.
them forcibly, but entrapped them with a most pious slight. And because the
Cathedral Church was dedicated to the honor of S. PETER, he erected an other
in the same Churchyard, to the name of the blessed mother of God: in which,
having placed a Convent of monks, he more willingly conuersed, and more
familiarly executed the divine office amongst them then with the secular
Clergy. Which the poeple perceauing, who held it a great offense to want the
daily Benediction of so religious a Bishop, flocked all thither. So that the
Clergy left alone, chose rather to putt on the habitt, and manners of the
monks, then otherwise to be a damage to them selves, and a mockery to the
common poeple. But those (says Wigorniensis) that refused to take the
monastical habitt, he quite expelled the monastery, and over the rest which
consented to a monastical life, he made one Winsinure, a virtuous Benedictin,
monk of Ramsey, Prior in place of the Deane. The rumor of S. OSWALDS prudent
carriage of this business coming to the ears of noble King Edgar, got him
wonderful great friendship, and favor both with him, and all the Peers S.
Oswald made Arch bishop of York.
of his realm. And the pious King, by the authority of a royal Charter,
greatly praised and commended this act of S. OSWALD, and confirmed the
monastery of Worcester to the possession of the Benedictine monks for ever.
Afterward, the Archbishop of York being dead, S. OSWALD by the means of King
Edgar and S. DVNSTAN Archbishop of Canturburie, and the consent of the whole
clergy, was compelled to undertake the government of that Sea also. But lest
the monks of his diocese, who yet were but newly settled in that Church, being
so suddenly left destitute of the spiritual nourishement of so good a
father, should begin to waver for want of a constant prelat and pastor to
uphold them, by the authority of S. DVNSTAN the Metropolitan of England, and
worthy Pillar of the Benedictine Order, he was held likewise in the government
of the Church of Worcester, together with the Archiepiscopall Sea of York;
so great was the estimation of his excellent worth, incomparable virtue, and
wonderful zeal, piety, and devotion, in the reforming of the bad customs,
and establishing of good laws for the maintenance and propagation of
Ecclesiastical discipline.

X. IT PLEASED the almighty wisdom, while this Blessed Prelat thus exercised
him self in these good works of piety, and zeal toward his Church, to
confirm his holy endeauours, and testify them to be pleasing and acceptable
to his divine majesty, by many miracles, which he wrought through his
meritts, both in his life, and after his death. When the Church of our Lady
which Behold the Spirit of S Benedict in S. Oswald.
we have mentioned before was in building, there lay not far from the place a
great square stone necessary for that work, which when the workmen
endeavored to make use off, as if it had taken root in the ground, it stuck
so fast that by noe means they were able only to move it. All greatly amazed
thereat, the matter was brought to S. OSWALD, who coming to the place, wondered
to see so many men strive in vain in so small a labor: and straight
offering up his prayers privately unto almighty God, he saw an ugly
Blackamoore sitting upon the stone, with obscene gesture scoffing at the
laborers. And presently brandishing the sign of the holy Cross against him,
he suddenly vanished away. Then the stone which fowerscore, The virtue of the
holy Cross.
men before were not able to stir, was with ease carried away by a few, and
putt into the building: The like accident S. GREGORY relates of our holy
Father S. BENEDICT him self, when his monks were erecting a monastery, whereby
it appears how great an opposer the Devil is to the works of Benedictines,
and that their malice which oppose that holy order comes but from a black
master.

XI. THE monks of Ramsey abbey, (OSWALD standing on the other side of the
river) endeavored to pass over to him in a boat, He saneth his monks from
drowning.
which being over laden, began to sink, when they poor souls suddenly
astonished with such an imminent danger of death, cried out for help unto him,
who making the sign of the cross upon the^, the boat presently returned from
under the water, as if it had been without any burden, and carried them safely
over to the shore on the other side.

XII. IT WAS told him on a time, that a monk of Ely busied in the repayring of
the Church, died by a fall from the topp thereof. Whereat, because he knew that
monk had not led a life alltogeather without fault, he was much grioued, and
calling the monks of Ramsey abbey together, he related unto them the accident
of his sorrow, exhorting them to pray earnestly unto almighty. God for his
soul. Prayers for the dead meritorious.
They obeying his pious desire, sung Dirges, and Psalms for their deceased
brother; sorrowfully knocking at the gates of the divine mercy. At length as
the holy Bishop was at his prayers, that dead monk appeared visibly unto him,
who inquiring what he was: I am he (replied the ghost) for whom thou so
fervently do pray. And how (said the holy man sighing) have thou done
hitherunto, Purgatory which Heretics shall never feel.
and yet, how is it with thee? Truly (answered he) hitherunto very ill, but
now most well: for through thy meritts, and prayers I was yesterday delivered
by gods holy Angel out of the insufferable pains, which did torment me. And
this I came to tell thee, and render many thanks for thy charity, and
withal to admonish thee how grateful thou ought to be for this and many
other graces and benefitts, which it has pleased his divine majesty to show
unto thee. This said, he vanished. And the holy man gave infinite thanks unto
almighty God for his goodness.

XIII. HE WAS, wont at fit times to make a progress over all his Diocese,
and feed their souls with the heavenly learning of his sermons, ever
co^forming his own life to his words and whatsoever he could find in the
manners of his subjects, which might offend the eyes of the divine ouerseer of
all humane actions, with a fatherly corection he endeavored to see amended. In
this his pious visitation he happened to come to Rippon, where in former The
Bodies of Saints miraculously found.
times the holy Benedictine monk S. Wilsrid had been buried in a monastery
which him self there erected, and which afterward for the most part was
destroyed and ruined by barbarous poeple, and changed (as now adays our
monasteries are) to dens, and lodgings forwild beasts. Here the holy man
watching by night at his devotions, learnt by revelation that the bodies of
some saints were buried there, which doubtless by diligent search might be
found. The next morning he caused the earth to be dug up, whereby the holy
bodies were found, and a table with this inscription. Here rests S. Wilfrid
Bishop of York, and the reverend Abbotts, Tilbert, Boruin, Albert, Sigred, and
Wilden. In the mean time he placed those relics in a convenient place: but
afterward, understanding this S. WILFRID to be a kinsman of the great S.
WILFRID founder of that monastery, he caused his body to be enshrined, and
honorably reserved according to his worth. For the body of that great S.
WILFRID was long since translated thence to Canturburie by S. ODO the
Archbishop. And now S. OSWALD sent these other relics honorably unto
Worcester.

XIV. MANY other miracles were wrought by the meritts of this Many Miracles.
holy Bishop. The bread which he had blessed, cured a great man of a fever;
and a ratt that chanced to eat the crummes thereof as they fell from his
table, was choked, and died presently in the same place. A monk which presumed
to sit and sleep in his seat, was cruelly tormented by a horrid crew of
devils for his temeritie.

XV. HOW charitable he was to the poor, it exceeds this weak His notable
humanity, and charity toward the poor
pen to rehearse. He was wont every day, besides innumerable others which
daily he nourished, to exercise his charity more peculiarly to twelve poor
men, washing their durtie feet, drying them with a towell, and kissing them
with his holy mouth; pouring water on their hands, covering them a table
providing them meat, and drink, waiting on them at table; and lastly having
well satisfied their hunger he bestowed on each a piece of silver, and
dismissed them. Unto these at Easter he gave new clothes, and retained them
with him in his hall as his principal guests for certain days. Noe sickness
could detayne him from these pious offices, nay the weaker he found his body,
the more he forced him self with greater diligence to execute his service to
these poor men: worthyly following herein the humble example and exemplar
humility of our dear Redeemer washing the feet of his twelve Apostles.

XVI. AT LENGTH, having for the space of many years ruled both his
bishoprics, with great wisdom, and sainctity, to the wonderful He fore^^eth
his ^^ne death.
admiration of England, the notable increase of Gods Church, the reformation of
vice, and the worthy advancement of monastical discipline, having outliued his
two Brethren in religion, and noble Equals in sainctitie, Dunstan and
Ethelwold, the first five years, the other ten; the day before his departure
out of this life, goeing forth with his monks out of the Church into the open
air, he stood with his eyes most attentively bent toward heaven, making his
prayer with a mouth and heart full of piety, unto JESUS CHRIST whom so
fervently he desired to enjoy. Nether did he (as at other times) quickly draw
back his eyes from looking upwards, but as if he did comtemplate with great
pleasure of mind some strange novelty, he remained very long fixed on what he
beheld. Being demanded what he saw. I contemplate (said he) the place whither
I am goeing, which to morrow next you shall plainly understand. For the
eternal happiness is now at hand, to attain which I have hitherunto labored
on earth; nether shall the morrow-sunne be set, before my Lord, as he has
promised, will call me into the joys of his ever flourishing paradise.
Therefore returning into the Church he called his monks together, and
exhorted them to give him the He receaueth the last Sacraments.
sacrament of extreme unction, and the sacred viaticum of our Lords body. The
night following, forgetting this his sickness, (so attentive he was to prepare
for his happy journey) he went into the Church and having finished his divine
office, he spent the rest of the night in prayers. In the morning, according to
custom, he gyrt him self with a towell, and washed, dried, and kissed the feet
of his twelve poor men; and having performed the fifteen psalms which he
used to recite in that pious service, he added thereunto; Gloria patri etc. and
the poor rising as their manner was, to give thanks, In his piou^ exercise he
happyly departs.
at those words, (Spiritui Sancto) in sight of them all, he yielded up his
blessed soul into the hands of his dear Redeemer; the twenty eight day of
February in the year of our Lord 992, having been bishop thirty years. When
his body was carried to burial, a white dove appeared to descend from heaven,
and flieing gently over it, covered and protected it with her wings. Allsoe a
fiery globe seemed miraculously to hang over the biere whereon his holy body
was laid. And when his sacred relics were placed before the high altar, that
fiery vision, as it were to design the place for his burial, wauered to the
south side of the Church over against the altar, and suddenly vanished out of
sight. His Body was committed to the earth in the Church of our blessed Lady
which him self (as we have said before) had erected. And Count Alwin after the
death of this holy man, being oppressed with an vnspeabeable anguish, and grief
of mind, departed out of this teadious life, and was buried in his Abbey of
Ramsey with this Epitaph.

Here rests Alwin cozen of the famous King Edgar, Alderman of all England,
and the miraculous founder of this sacred Monastery.

The holy Bishop Saint OSWALD, as in his life he was wonderful, so after his
death, it pleased the almighty worker of wonders, to show many miracles at
his tomb by his holy intercession, and meritts, whereof we will speak more at
large on the feast of his translation the 15. day of October, when his greatest
festiuitie was celebrated in the English Church. It rests only now, that we
pray unto his glorious Saint who is so potent and powerful a favorite with
almighty God, to obtain his divine grace for us in this world, and to be
partakers of the glory of his blessed Saints in the next, through our lord
JESUS CHRIST, who be for ever blessed, praised, and glorified. Ame^. His life
was written by one Senatus Brauonius a mo^k of Worcester about the year of our
Lord 1170. which is recited by Laurence Surius in his tenth tome, and praised
by Baronius for a history saythfully written. We have only added thereu^to
some few things out Malmesbury, Baronius, Harpsfield. The very same history
with this of Surius is recited by John Capgraue out of Ioannes Anglicus, only
different in the style which Surius corrected. The mouths of all
historiographers, English and others, are full of the praises of S. OSWALD.

The life of S. AIDO, or Aidus, Abbot, and Confessor.
FEB. 28. Out of an ancient author recited by John Cap grave.
AIDO borne in the province of Conaght in Jreland, and given to his barren
parents by the special favor of almighty God, when he came to such age that
he was able to make choice of a course of life, he departed to the Province of
Leinster, where he led a solitary life in all manner of virtue and holiness.
Afterward, he came into Wales, where living under the discipline of great S.
David, he daily showed many strange examples of miraculous works, and
virtues, in so much that during the time of his abode there, the Saxons (then
mortal enemies to the Britans) durst never presume to invade their dominions
fearing the power and virtue of this Saint. Returned as he was again into
Ireland, he built a monastery He builds a monastery in Ireland
wherein he became the spiritual father, and teacher of very many monks,
whom he instructed in all good learning, and the monastical discipline of
those times. Many strange, and almost incredible miracles, are reported of
this holy man, which I willingly omit. It suffices, for proof of his
Sainctitie, that he lived in the continual exercise of virtues, and died laden
with the meritts of many good works, as he did this twenty eigth day of
February. At S. DAVID'S in Meneuia he was called Mo^dock that is, Jrish: and
there his feast was celebrated with very great reverence and devotion. Thus
much of his life I have gathered out of Ioannes Anglicus recited by John
Capgraue, with whom only let the truth of his relation stand, for I find noe
other Author that makes mention of this Saint.

The end of February.
depiction of St. Swibert S. SWIBERTVS EPISC. WLRDENSIS, APOSTOLVS Frisia,
Monachus Anglus Ord. S. Benedicti. M. ba^. f.

The life of S, SWIBERT Bishop and Confessor, Apostle of Frizeland, and Saxony
monk of the holy order of S. BENEDICT.
MAR. 1 Written by S. Mar celline priest, his companion, and fellow preacher.
IN THE year of our Lord six hundred forty seven, S. SWIBERT was borne in
Northumberland of noble and princely parents, count Sigebert, and Berta his
wife. Before his birth, his devout mother had a vision, The vision of his
mother.
as she lay in her bed, wherein she beheld one star in the heavens far
excelling all the rest in brightness, whose glittering beams, seemed to give
light to the whole country, and presently the same star appeared to fall
upon the bed where she lay. This was then interpreted by S. AYDAN bishop of
Lindisfarne to be a presage of the child that she bore in her womb, who (as he
said) should be a light unto his Country, and the whole Church of God. And in
confirmation hereof, at the very hour she was delivered, A strange light
appeared at his birth.
a wonderful great splendor shined in the chamber, whose beams seemed to
dazzle the days light, and much astonish the beholders. The Child being borne,
the same light decreased by degrees, and vanished. In baptism he was called
SWIBERT, and being from his very Cradle trained up in the fear of God, and
good learning, he so carefully avoided all vices incident to that age, and so
manfully embraced the hard ways of virtue, that he gave great hopes of his
future greatness, which caused many allreadie to prognosticate wonders of his
sainctitie. And to the end he might daily He embraces a monastical life.
proceed the better from virtue, to virtue, a^ the age of fifteen years, he
departed with the good leave of his parents to the Benedictine abbey of
Bard^^^^ in Lincolne^^ire, where he forsook all worldly hopes, and became a
monk of the holy order of S. BENEDICT, under the government of the good Abbot
Higbald. In this virtuous school, our noble youth carefully endeavored to
ennoble his mind, with all manner of virtue, in all things behauing him self,
with such prompt obedience, humble modesty, and sweet innocence of life, that
in short time he grew to he much loved, esteemed, admired, and reverenced even
of the greatest, and auncientest monks in the house. Having lived nine years
in the same monastery, in continual continency, abstinence, and the exercise
of regular, and monastical discipline, he was advanced to the sacred dignity
of Priesthood, in the execution of which holy function He is made Priest.
worthyly corresponding with his virtuous actions, he offered daily to
almighty God a most acceptable sacrifice. For in true piety and religion he
was second to none, adorned with the glory of all Christian virtues, most
attentive and frequent in his prayers, and most exactly rigid in fasting, and
mortifying his own body: in so much that he gave great examples of
edification to his brethren, and the famous report of his virtues was
published, and admired throughout the Country.

II. WHILST thus he shined in the excellency of a religious life among his
other brethren, as a bright sun amongst the rest of the planets, the Bishop
of York, having understood the incomparable Benedictine Monks sometimes Canons.
praises of his virtue, rejoiced much thereat, and sending for him made him a
Canon of the Cathedral Church of S. Peter's at York. Whereat the reader need
not wonder, since heretofore is has been a laudable custom, much practiced in
the Church of God, for Monks of S. BENEDICTS order, to govern cathedral
Churches as Canons, and were indeed monastical canons; and of this kind S.
SWIBERT was ordained one at York. In which CONVENT (says the author, to show
that they were monks, since a quire of secular Canons is called a CHAPTER and
not a CONVENT) he lived for the space of two years in so great austeritie of
life, and such strict observance of Monastical discipline, that he seemed to
lead an angelical life upon S. Swibert of a Benectin Canon made Abbot of
Monks.
earth. And now being come to that height of perfection that he was fit to be
proposed as a mirror to all such as professed a regular life, he was created
abbott of the monastery of Dacore, so called from the river Dacor running
thereby. In the mean time, the venerable man S. EGBERT a Benedictin monk (of
whom see April the 24.) wonderfully zealing the gain of souls, and the
promulgatio^ of CHRIST'S holy Ghospel, (his own resolution to go into those
countries being hindered by revelation from heaven) made choice of twelve
learned English monks all zealous of the Catholic cause out of diverse
monasteries Twelve English Benedictins sent to preach in Germany.
of England and Jreland to preach the Christian faith in Frizela^d. One and not
the lest of these elect preachers was our S. SWIBERT, and S. MARCELINE that
wrote his life an other: they were eleven priests, and one decon, who having
all happyly passed the sea toward the vineyard of CHRIST allotted to their
holy charge, they arrived at Vtreicht about the year 690. And following the
same institution, order and conversation of life that the Apostles, and
disciples of CHRIST used in the primitive Church, noe man presuming to call
any thing his own, but all observing the rules of the monastical, and
religious poverty, which they professed, They began with very great
constancy, and resolution, to preach the Christian faith amongst those
barbarous poeple; But the Frisons that were men of an untamed and stubborn
nature, stood stiffely in defense of their Idoatrie, refusing to listen to the
sacred tidings of the true Gospel; so that these holy preachers being
threatened with death for annou^cing the words of life, were compelled to depart
thence, having at first reaped little or noeprofitt at all.

III. THEREFORE they went into an Island called Fosteland where Radbode the
persidious King of Friseland (being beaten out of his Kingdom by the most
Christian Prince Pepin of France) the^ remained. And in this (it being a place
of very great, and solemn resort among those Pagans, by reason of the
superstitious Idolatry used there to a God of theirs called Foste, from whom
the Island took name) the Preachers of CHRIST began to announce the holy
gospel, and having destroyed the profane aultars of those stoniehearted Gods,
Jupiter and Foste, they labored to convert the poeple to the knowledge of the
only true God creator of the world; where their pains were rewarded with the
conversion but of three souls only. But Radbode understanding hereof, caused
one of them Wigbert martired.
called Wigbert to be cruelly putt to death (a glory which long before he had
desired) and banished all the rest out of the Island. When they, perceiving the
tirannie of the worldly prince, to withstand their good endeauours in preaching
the sweet gospel of the king of heaven, retired them selves to the forenamed
worthy Prince Pepin, who sent them to preach in the lower parts of Frizeland,
with a strict charge to all the Pagans under his dominion to hear them with
patience. By this means, many were daily converted A Church dedicated to the
holy Cross.
to the faith; in so much that they procured a Church to be built at Vtreicht
in honor of the holy Cross, in which they consecrated a font, that such as
received the Faith, might have free access to be there baptized. And now the
harvest of our Lord beginning greatly to increase, and the laborers, being but
few, these holy men divided them selves, and went by two, and three together
to preach in diverse parts of lower Germany. But S. SWIBERT (of who^ only now
we treat) accompanied with Weresrid, and Marcelline, came to the great village
some two miles distant from Vtreight, called Duerstat, where constantly
preaching CHRIST crucified, and proouing their worshipped Idols to be nothing
but houses of devils, he was straight apprehended S. Swibert beaten, and
imprisoned
by the Pagan Priests, who feared the utter ruin of their Idolatry, and being
cruelly beaten, he was cast into prison, meaning to put him privately to death
the next morning: for publicly they durst not do it, fearing the French
Christians, under the yoke of whose government they were. When we (says the
Author) werenfrid and I Marcelline, with tears and lamentations followed him
to the prison gate. Which S. SWIBERT perceiving, with a merry countenance
comforted, and exhorted them courageously to Delivered by an Angel.
remain in the faith of CHRIST, and not to fear death for his sake. But the
same night, as he prayed in that darkesome lodging, a bright Angel appeared
unto him with lightsom news of comfort, following the luster of whose fair
countenance (like an other Apostle PETER, he was delivered out of that irksome
iayle, in the very sight and view of his astonished Iaylours. Then coming
again to his two companious, they fell all together on their knees, and gave
humble thanks to almighty God for this great token of his love, and goodness.

IV. THE Pagans, and specially the Priests of the Idols understanding the
manner of his straing delivery, began to stagger in their faith, and call in
question the power of their weak Gods. Before whom S. SWIBERT preaching again
the next day, and worthyly extolling the omnipotent power of JESUS CHRIST, bred
a general amazement in their blinded souls, and converted very many to the
true Catholic faith, noe man offering to lay hands on him. Which done, he
returned again to Vtrei^ght, making his fellowe-brethren partakers of what had
happened; who with tears of joy received him, and gave infinite thanks to the
almighty worker of his freedom. Afterward he went through diverse towns and
Villages of Frizeland, Holland, and Teisterband, founding, and breathing noe
other Many converted to the faith.
words or accents but of Christ and his holy Gospel; and allbeit he found
many great difficulties, and endured strainge afflictions from the fury of
the Infidels, yet allwaies sustained by the divine help, he constantly
perseuered in his holy enterprise of preaching; whereby great store of poeple
were converted to the knowledge of the true faith. He arrived at length at a
village in Holland, called Hagenstein, where (it being a principal festiuitie
among the Pagans) he chanced to find the poeple very busily employed in the
worshipful exercise of their diabolical sacrifices, rites, and ceremonies
before See the constant ^eale of S Swibert.
their stony Gods. and thrusting him self into the midest of that barbarous
press of people, he cried out in the spirit of his zeal, and very eagerly
reprehe^ded the blindness of their ignorance, in worshipping those stocks and
stones for Gods, preaching unto them the true faith of CHRIST crucified, whose
power was infinite in heaven, and earth, and who only it was, that ruled the
course of the world, and produced miraculous effects therein. The Pagans
admiring so great constancy and boldness in the man, and being curious to make
experience, whether it were true that miracles could be wrought in the virtue
of him whom he preached, flocked presently about him, offering him a young man
called Giselbert, that from his birth had never seen the light: whom (if by
the power of the Crucified God he so highly extolled) he could restore to
perfect sight, they would be content to give more ear to his doctrine,
otherwise he was to expect a sudden and cruel death for his hire. The holy
man, compelled by the iustnes of this necessity, fell presently on his knees,
and having devoutly powered out his humble prayers to almighty God, he arose,
and making the sign of the holy Cross on the unprofitable eyes of the blind
person, cried out with a loud voice: In the name of the true God our Lord
IESVE-CHRIST crucified whose gospel I preach, I command thee to receive thy
One borne blind he cures with the sign of the cross.
sight, and confess the power of thy creator. At which words the young man
opening his eyes found the perfect use of his desired sight; to his own great
comfort, and the wonderful astonishment of the beholders, that heard him
openly proclaim that there was noe other God but JESUS CHRIST, whom his
servant SWIBERT preached.

V. THE Pagans (as blind of faith as he had been of sight) much Many receive
the Christian faith.
amazed at the strangenes of this miracle, began to be touched to the quick
with a true compunction of heart, and horror of they own ignorance, and first
the Sacrificer of the Village, with great store of poeple fell humbly prostrate
before S. SWIBERT, to demand pardon for the wrong offered. Whom when the B.
man with many pious exhortations had confirmed in the true faith, the next
day, almost all the poeple of that Village being gathered together in the
profane temple of their Idol, by the same holy man's perswas on, believed, and
were cleansed from all their sins in the sacred F(...)t of Baptism, and their
Idolatrous Temple was chainged into a Christian Church, and consecrated
afterward by S. SWIBERT (when he was made Bishop) to the honor of God, and
the unspotted Virgin his Mother. The glory of this miracle being blown over
the country, through the trumpet of flying fame many that had known the young
man blind, came willingly to S. SWIBERT, and being by him instructed, they
believed and were baptized.

VI. THEN the number of Christians daily increasing in many parts of Germany,
through the fruitful preaching of S. SWIBERT, S. Swibert made Bishop.
and his other fellows, and being in want of bishops to exercise more eminent
authority over them, to consecrate Churches, for the divine service, to give
holy orders, and supply all others functions belonging to Ecclesisticall
affairs, they made choice of two, WILLIBRORD that went to Rome, and SWIBERT
that came into England, both to be adua^ced to the Episcopal dignity. S.
SWIBERT was consecrated Bishop on S. BARTHOLOMEWS day, by the hands of the most
excellent flower of the Benedictine order WILFRIDE Bishop of York, who then
wrongfully expelled from his bishopric, led a private life in the Kingdom of
Mercia or Middle England. This done, our holy SWIBERT adorned with episcopal
authority, and fortified with the comfortable speeches of S. WILFRID, returned
again to Utreight He i^ famous over the country
courragiously to follow on his pious enterprise, adorning his new received
dignities, with a new list of virtues, behauing him self from hence forth with
great humility, meeknes, simplicity, justice, and all other degrees of
perfection: and making these virtues (as it were) the baits to take and win
souls out of the deluge of Idolatry, to the secure and quiet shore of CHRIST'S
Church by the force of his divine learning, and unwearied labor of preaching.
Which took so good effect, that in diverse parts of Friseland, and almost all
the country of Teisterband, the poeple were converted to the faith, and many
Churches raised and built on the ruins of Idolatry, were consecrated to the
service of JESUS CHRIST. So that S. SWIBERT growing to be of great fame, and
estimation in all those countries for his singular virtue, and miracles, and
being an amazement to the Pagans, and Pagan priests, it pleased the divine
goodness to glorify him more, and more with wonders, to the confusion of the
^^ntils, and great advancement of his Church.

VII. FOR being to dedicate a Church at Malsen, in the County of Teisterband,
upon the river Linghen, a young gentleman called Splinter van Andengin,
desiring out of curiosity to see the rites, and ceremonies which the
Christians used in the dedication of Churches, and chiefly to see SWIBERT their
bishop, of whom he had heard such wonders, coming over the river Rhene fell by
chance out of the boat and drowned, leaving both the shores full of the
fruitless lamentations and tears of his fellows, and servants, that
dolefully bewailed their loss. The same day about noone, he was taken up by
certain fishers, and brought as dead as a hearing, to Duerstat, to the
sorrowful house of his vnconsolable parents, who through the persuasion of
their Idolatrous Priests caused him to be carried to the Temple of Mars,
trusting that he could cure the wound given by Neptune: and to that end they
besought his warlik power, with The God mars called upon in vain.
many sacrifices, to restore the young man to life; but all in vain. Which his
father perceaui^g, and considering that their poor Gods were not wont to
bestow gifts of life so liberally, he was persuaded by some devout
Christians, to entreat B. SWIBERT to come to his ay de, who was the likelier
to prove, a better Advocate in his behalf, in that matter of life and Death.
To him therefore^ he went, and falling at his feet, he began to open his
misery; when a flood of tears so stopped the current of his discourse, that in
them and his sighs the whole force of his eloquence seemed to consist. But the
holy Bishop S Swib. entreated to ralsea dead man, refuses.
gathering his meaning out of that doleful speech, was very unwilling to
undertake a matter of so great presumption: till overcome with the weeping
rhetoric of his importunity, and the prayers of Werenfride, and Marcellin his
fellows, he went with him, whom an infinite multitude of poeple stood
expecting on the banks of the River Rhene. When entering the village Duerstat,
the doleful mother of the drowned youth, carried beyond all degrees of sorrow,
ran to meet him, and falling at his feet in the midst of the street, cried
out: O servant of the true God help me, and revive my son by the power of
thy God, for our Gods are all too weak to do it. S. SWIBERT applying a salve
of comfort to the deep wound of her sorrow went to the house where the dead
body was laid: and commanding his fellow-disciples to fall heartily to their
prayers, he also betook him self earnestly to his, in the midst of that
weeping, multitude of poeple, and trembling Flamins of the Pagans. His prayer
ended he arose, and putting his whole confidence in our Lord JESUS CHRIST, he
said; O thou only comforter of our sadness, who did once affirm with thy
sacred mouth; whosoever believes Joan. 14. v. 12,
in me the works that I do, he allsoe shall do, and greater then these he
shall do; voutchafe to show the power of thy Divinity, in raising this man
from death to life. And taking him by the hand he said: (...) He rayseh a dead
man to life
the name of our Lord JESUS CHRIST crucified, I bid thee rise, and live, and
praise thy creator. At these words he that before was dead, opened his eyes,
and waking, as it were, out of a profound sleep, he arose; and embracing the
holy Saint, cried out with great sighs; there is noe other God in heaven and
earth but IESVSCHRIST crucified whom SWIBERT preaches. O the wonderful life
of this blessed Saint, whose prayers banished death from the body of an
other, and spoiled hell of its pray. And presently all the beholders, much
astonished with the novelty of this great miracle, highly extolled the divine
piety, with loud shouts of joy, and thanksgiving, that daigned to ennoble his
servant with so miraculous a remonstrance of his goodness. And the Heathen
Priests together with the parents of the new revived youth, and a great
multitude of poeple renouncing the errors of Idolatry, believed in
IESVSCHRIST; so that there were baptized 126. persons besides women, and
children. When so great a noise, and clamor was raised in 126. persons
converted.
the street by the Pagans that desired to see the newly revived young man, that
S. SWIBERT (compelled thereunto for the greater honor and glory of God) lead
him out amongst them in his hand, as a living trophie of his own virtue, to be
seen of all that pressing multitude of poeple; who when they beheld him
walking in the street, with loud shoutes, and cries, they made the heavens
resound with the Ecchos of these words. Great is the God of the Christians. and
many believed in CHRIST the worker of miracles, through the persuasion of the
holy Bishop, and had their souls revived in the sacred font of baptism. With
whom S. SWIBERT remained a good while feeding, and confirming the weakness of
their faith, with the solid food of his learning, till the whole village of
Duerstat was thoroughly converted to the truth.

VIII. IN the mean time S. WILLIBRORD ordained Bishop of Frizeland by the
special authority of Pope Sergius, returned from Rome, and placed his
episcopal sea in the town of Vtreight, in a Cathedral Church of Benedictin
Monks-Canons; dedicated to S. MARTIN Willibrord Bishop of Vtreight.
Bishop of Tours, unto whom the Benedictines were allwaies peculiarly devoted.
And Radbod king of Frizeland being dead, the two holy Bishops obtained greater
liberty publicly ^opreach the gospel of CHRIST throughout the whole
country, whereby their holy labors took so good effect, that the cou^tie of
Teisterba^d, almost all Holla^d, and a great part of nether Friseland, were
awaked out of the sleeping blindness of Idolatry to behold the clear light of
CHRIST'S holy gospel. Which done, and all those parts well grounded, and
settled in the Catholic faith, S. SWIBERT took leave of S. WILLIBRORD and all
the Church of Vtreight, and went with some others to spread the seed of the
gospel in Westphalie, and lower Saxony, where he reduced many from the
madness of Paganism to the sweet peace of Christ's Church, destroying as he went
all Idols, and erecting Christian Churches, out of their ruins. And hither
unto he had for his companion B. Marcellin the author of his life, who now
returned back into Frizeland, when S. Swibert went on to Minimigard, now called
Mounster, S Swibert cures the Palsy, and Squinancie
where preaching allsoe the Cath. faith with his accustomed zeal and fervor,
he converted many thereunto, and cured a woman in the same town that had bin
long sick of a most cruel palsy. And in memory of the fact, the same woeman
built a chapel hard by her house in honor of S. PAVL the Apostle, on whose
feast she was healed. Likewise he restored to health an other named Adelbert
that lay mortally sick of a disease, called the Squinancie, or swelling in the
throat, whereby he and many others were converted to the faith. Afterward
returning again to Mounster, at the earnest request of the poeple of that
town, by the way he gave sight to a blind man with the sign of the holy
cross, that asked alms of passengers; All his miracles still increasing the
number of the Christian flock.

IX. HAVING within a short time converted many infidels in Mounster, he went
into Saxony, and first at the city of Brunswick, he preached, and converted
many. In the same town there was a noble man sick of so cruel a disease in
his lest side, that he was not able to move hand or foot of that part of his
body, nor had any use of his left eye. His sickness had allreadie given the
Note the virtue of the holy Cross.
foil to all antidotes, and art of physic, when S. SWIBERT with the sign of
the holy Cross (the chief arms of our redem ption) restored him to perfect
health again: which miracle caused many to forsake their Idolatry, and
hasten to be washed in the sacred fo^t of Baptism. Herevppo^ the blind
ministers of those blind Gods, were exceedingly incensed against the holy
Bishop, and assembling the poeple together went with a great troop of Pagans
to the chief officer of the town, complaining and exclayming, that unless the
public enemy of their Gods, who with witchcraft and sorcerie seduced the
poeple, were banished, the whole town would fall from their ancient
profession, and perish. But the officer, being allied to the noble man before
cured by S. SWIBERT, favored him, and his proceedings in all things: and now
persuaded him to save him self from their fury by flight. Which he did
(leaving one Priest there to confirm the new Christians in their faith) and
traveled him self through diverse provinces, still houlding on his course of
preaching, converting, and baptising. Till at length the Heathens together
with S Swib cruelly beaten by the Pagans.
their hellish ministers, perceauing their religion to go down by the
preaching of this holy man, ran violently upon him one day as he was in his
sermon, and cruelly beat him with staves, and buffetted and kicked him, with
their fists, and heels, that had he not been relieved by the valor of some
true hearted Christians, he had been likely enough to have perished in that
skirmish of cruelty. But being delivered out of their hands, he lay hid for
some few days yet not ceasing from his holy trade of preaching, so that daily
more and more stray sheep, were brought into the secure fold of CHRIST'S Church.

X. AT THE same time, in a town called Welsenberch, lived a rich and potent
man named Ethelhere, who before had been one of the first and forwardest to
set upon S. SWIBERT with his staff, and now for his punishment was hideously
possessed by the devil, He delinereth a possessed person.
that daily most cruelly tormented him, and by him, all that came nigh, so
that they were constrained to bind him fast in chains of iron. But saint
SWIBERT coming thither at the entreaty of his friends, made the sign of the
holy Cross upon him, and presently that hellish Monster was disinherited of
his desired habitation. Whereupon it came to pass, that both he, and many
more, to the number of forty two besides women, and children, demanding
pardon for their former injuries, submitted them selves to the sweet yoke of
CHRIST'S glospell, and were baptized. And now this glorious saint having for
the space of many years preached CHRIST to these Barbarous poeple, wrought
many miracles to confirm what he preached, destroyed their Idols, and built
many Churches for the service of almighty God, compelled partly by reason of
war, and tumult raised in that country, but chiefly moved by divine
revelation, he retired him self to the city of Cullen, where he was joyfully
entertained by the virtuous Heretire^h him self to Cullen.
Duchess Plectrude, wife to the Christian Prince Pepin, who highly honoring,
and admiring the venerable Sainctitie, and virtue of S. SWIBERT, detayned him
with her for some time, to make use of his pious counsel in the guyding of her
own soul. During which time, the holy Saint cured a great man of Duke
Pepins, of a dangerous, and mortal disease in the throat: and delivered an
other that was cruelly possessed with the devil. These, and other his
excellent signs of heavenly sainctitie, moved the religious Duchess
Plectrude to send him with letters of high commendation to Duke Pepin, then
remaining in Herstall, entreating him withal to give the town of Werdt upon
Rhene to S. SWIBERT, to build a monastery in. Pepin received him with great
joy, and honor, and kept him a Pepin besteweth words upon S. Swibert.
while with him to be by him instructed in the rules of good life. And at
length, gave him not only the town of Werdt, but allsoe good store of gold,
and silver to defray the charge of building the monastery. Therefore S.
SWIBERT returned back to the Duchess, by whose power, and industry he began
presently to erect a monastery in Werdt upon Rhene, to the honor of the
glorious, and ever B. Virg. MARIE. Where with how great humility, devotion,
and zeal, in the mean time he preached the faith of CHRIST among those rude
poeple, and with how great purity of mind, and body, he celebrated daily the
dreafull Sacrifice of Mass, and other divine offices, it excels this weak
quill to rehearse. And there he raised an other from death to life.

XI. AT length the monastery being finished, he placed therein a He gathers
a co^ue^t of Benedictin monks.
Co^uent of Monks of the Sacred Order of S. BENEDICT out of whose holy rule him
self (as is said) had first sucked the sweet milk of a religious life. But in
the beginning (because it was to consist chiefly of Nouices both in faith, and
virtue, that came thither moved with the great fame of his Sainctitie to be
brought up in the right way of good life) he was not so strict, and rigorous)
in prescribing them the laws of regular discipline, following the words of our
Saui our: My yoke is sweet, and my burden light. But him self with certain
other old beaten disciples of his, led a far more Math. 11.
rigid, and austere kind of life, thereby to draw the young beginners by little,
and little, to the same straightnes of monastical discipline. In the mean time
S. SWIBERT ceased not daily to preach to those rude stiffe-nekt people, whereby
maine were converted to the faith, and baptized. He was wonderfully inclined to
give alms, a great contemner of worldly pomp, and vanities with hope of
eternal rewards, his mind was aspiring in nothing but to the love of God, the
kingdom of heaven, and heavenly things; and therefore he was specially endowed
by God with so many divine gifts, virtues, and graces, whereby he appeared
most grateful to the whole world, and shined as a precious gemme amidst his
monastical clergy. And as among the Gentiles he wrought famous deeds for the
advancement of the holy Gospel, our lord him self cooperating, and confirming
his speech with Mar. 16.
signs (of diverse miracles) following; so likewise in his monastery at Werdt
he worthyly profitted both him self, and others in the continual exercise of
monastical rule, and discipline, daily proceeding from virtue, to virtue, to
come to the clear vision of the God of Gods in Sion. Psalm. ^3. v. 7.
At length when he had most worthyly governed his monastery the space of three
years, almighty God the superabundant reward of his servants, who through a
corporal death translateth the lively stones of his Church to his heavenly
building, voutchafed to call this glorious champion of the Catholic faith S.
SWIBERT, out of this He falls sick.
earthly conflict, to receive the euerflorishing crown of his labors in
heaven. For in the year of our lord 717. replenished with all manner of
virtues, and good works, burning from the very bottom of his heart with an
extreme desire to enjoy the vision of almighty God, on the feast of S. PETER'S
chair in February, having celebrated the dreadful sacrifice of the Altar, he
was taken with a grievous disease, which confined him to his bed; and feeling
it daily grow more, and more upon him, he assembled his Convent of Monks
together, and with a dieing voice admonished them to remain in the true
observance of mutual love, and charity, and of monastical and regular
discipline, letting them know withal that the hour of his departure was near
at hand. Which words, caused a shower of tears to bear witness in them, how
dearly they loved, and what a greef is was to them to be separated from so
good and pious a Father. But he cheering them up, said; They ought rather to
rejoice then weep for that he was goeing to receive the most glorious reward
of his labors, desiring them to arm the departure of his frailty with the
charitable duty, and protection of their prayers. At length the happy hour
being come, he caused mass to be celebrated before him, encompassed round with
his holy monks, and strengthening him self with the sacred viaticum of His
happy death.
our Lords body, he gave his benediction to all the assistance, and in a sweet
sleep of death, gave up his blessed soul into the hands of his creat our. His
face seemed presently to shine with beams of glory, and the chamber was
replenished with most sweet, and comfortable perfumes, to the great joy, and
admiration of the assistants. He died in the threescore and ninth year of his
age, the first day of March, being friday, at noone, the same hour that the
Savior of the world reviving us sinners with his bitter death and passion,
laid open the gates of heaven unto us.

XII. HIS holy body being placed in the midst of the Church, Miracles at his
dead body.
whilst the monks executed his funeral office, one possessed with the devil,
by touching the biere whereon he lay, was perfectly delivered from that hellish
guest. And by the same means, and at the same time, a blind man recovered his
sight, and one that was quite madd was restored to the perfect use of his
senses, to the great joy, and comfort of the beholders. The sunday following
with great devotion and solemnity his sacred body was committed to a house of
clay, by S. WILLIBRORD Archbishop of Vtrieght, and S. WILLEICK his companion,
in the Church of his own Monastery at Werdt. Many other miracles done at his
to^be are very authentically recorded by S. MARCELLINE, which for breuities
sake me omit. Only one I will briefly rehearse, of which, (as of all that has
been said) the same author S. Marceline was an eyewitness.

XIII. A YOUNG man of Werdt called Sweder chancing to dine in the company of
some wicked Westphalians at a Pag^ town named S(...), the whole discourse of
those bacon-fed Wes^phalians grew to be of the generous power of their
Pagan-Gods, and the impotencie of CHRIST the God of the Christians, which
Sweder, who was a Christian not able to endure, very honestly began to rehearse
in his defense the virtues, and miracles which our Lord had, wrought and did
daily work at Werdt by the merits of S. SWIBERT. The Pagans (whose heads were
now a little too full of the virtues, and strength of their God Bacchus) finding
Sweder to be a Christian, rose up in great fury against him, and having with
many blows laid on his back, and sides, made him feel some part of the
strength their gods had given them, they cut out his tongue, that had been so
nimble in praising the God of the Christians, hoping thereby to get them
selves crowns of baies from their own Gods. This done, they returned Diverse
stricken blind for biasphemie.
in iouiall triu^ph to their dinner, where as in their winie conference they
vomitted many opprobrious blasphemies against CHRIST, and his holy Bishop S.
SWIBERT, they were suddenly stricken with blindness, and the loaves of bread
before them (which they could not see) were turned into so many stones.
Whilst poor Sweder, the enemy of their gods, lay as a miserable creature in
the durtie streets, wallowing in his own blood, being not able (for want of a
tongue) to call for any help in his misery; but in heart he devoutly prayed
unto S. SWIBERT for the conu^rsion of those blasphemous Heathens: who now
finding (but not seeing) that the r^uengfull God of the Christians had given
them a remembrance of his power, they began with repentant tears to call upon
S. SWIBERT for aid, desiring withal to have the poor Christian, whom so
roughly they had handled, to be brought in, to demand of him pardon for their
fault. But noe man gave ear to their crying, all the servants of the house
running out like so many madd things, terribly amazed at such an unusual
accident. And the captain blasphemer of all the Host, blinded not only in
corporal sight, but in mind too, began to curse both God, and man. This
miracle published by the clamours of that blind company, drew all the
neighbors, and a great part of the city thither to be spectatours of that
miraculous tragedy. At length some friends of the Host took up poor Sweder
out of the dirt, and brought him before that blinded crew. When it was a rare
spectacle to behold seven blind men (for so many they were) fall down upon
their knees, and with blind tears crave pardon of him, whom them selves had
made so dumb that by word of mouth he could not answer their petition, but by
signs; and by signs he did: withal persuading them by writting to forsake
their Idolatry, and use means to go along with him to Werdt, where at S.
SWIBERTS Are restored to sight at S. Swiberts? To^b.
tomb they should undoubtedly recover their former sight. On the morrow they
took their journey toward Werdt, in a wagon, accompained with the Hosts
wife, and some of his kinsfolks, who brought with them the loaves turned into
stones. Being all come to the holy tomb, Sweder made a mental prayer to the
holy saint, recommending him self, and those wretched souls to his piety.
Unto whom (as he prayed) S. SWIBERT visibly appeared, and anointing his mouth
with a strainge ointment, he perfectly recovered him to his speech, most
devoutly breaking out into the loud praises of almighty God, and his Saint.
When the blind men heard the young man speak, and praise SWIBERT for the
recovery of his language they began to conceive greater confidence to have
their cause heard, and therefore earnestly imploring the help of CHRIST, and
his blessed Saint, presently they had their fight miraculously restored, to
the great joy and admiration of their friends that were present. The loaves of
bread, or rather the stones of bread, they left at the sepulcher in memory of
the miracle, as trophies of SWIBERTS glory. And they them selves, staying
there three days, were converted to the faith, and baptized, and by that
means cured of a double blindness. But returning to their own town again,
their cl^ere seeing, was cause that many Pagans were made to see their own
blindness, and for^ake their Idolatry. God grant that this example may so
withold our daily contemners, of Gods Saints from their wicked practice of
blasphemy, that seeing their own errors, they may gi^e due honor to God,
and his Saints, in whom he is allwaies glorious, and wonderful. Amen.

In the year of our lord 803. S. SWIBERT was canonized by Pope Leo the third
then present in person at Werdt, and eyewitness of some miracles done,
together with the Emperor Charles the Great, who gave many rich gifts unto
the monastery. And the feast of his Canonization and exaltation of his holy
body, is celebrated in Germany on the fourth day of September. Besides the
foresaid S. MARCELINE, S. LVDGER Bishop of Mounster in an epistle written to
RIXFRID Bishop of Vtreieght, makes worthy mention of S. SWIBERT, and recites
many miracles done at his tomb. All^oe S. BID lib. (...). c. (...).
TRITHEMIVS of the famous men of S. BENEDICTS order 3. book. chap. 165. BARONIVS
tom. 8. and 9. HARPSFIELD saec. 8. cap. 4. the ROMAN Martirologe, and others
d^e largely speak his praises.

The life of Saint DAVID Bishop and Confessor.
MAR. 1. Written by Kentigerne Bishop.
S. DAVID borne of the noble race of ancient Brittanes, and uncle to famous
Prince Arthur; was revealed unto S. PATRICK Apostle of Ireland thirty years
before his birth. Being brought up from his infancy in piety, and learning,
he was a child of so great towardnes, that he far excelled all his fellows
in both. His masters were S. ILTVTE, and one Pauline both famous*men in virtue,
and learning; whose footstepps, like a good scholar, were so faithfully
imitated by this worthy youth that he not only paraleld them, but in his time
went far beyond them both in the discipline of divine religion, and secular
learning. He kepp close in the study of holy His study of holy scripture.
scripture for the space of ten year^s before he would presume to make him
self public to the world, in the instruction of others. When at length, like a
fair ship laden with the balast of a well grounded virtue, and fraught with
the treasure of admirable knowledge, and learning, he floted with full sails
over the world, with the favorable wind of great fame, and renown; daily
manuring the sacred vineyard of our lord, and sounding the hearts of his
people, with the fervent, and flourishing eloquence of his exhortations, and
sermons. By which and his v^matchable piety, he utterly ruined, dissolved, He
vanquisheth the Pelagian horesie.
and extinguished the rebellion of the Pelagian heresy, which in those days
began to take head, and clearly purged all the stinking dregs, and corruption
thereof, out of the hearts of that people. That we may boldly say he was sent
into this world by the particular providence of almighty God, who allwaies
has care of his faithful flock, to be such a Pastor thereof, who with his
admirable, and almost incredible works, and miracles should preserve, and
deliver his Church, from the diabolical infection of this pestiferous heresy.

II. Amongst other worthy scholars, and followers of his learning, and virtue,
the most famous were these Saints* Aidan, Paternus, and Th^lian, who
endeavored as far as they were able, to perfect them selves by his holy
manner of life, and virtues. With these he traveled over the country,
allwaies preaching, and teaching the poeple as he went. He built many
monasteries, for the habitation of such as desired to live a more retired life.
At the place now called Glastenburie, he built a Church new from the ground.
And coming He built Glasteuburie Church
thence to Bath, he cured the infection of the waters thereabouts, and with his
holy prayers, and benediction gave them a perpetual heat, and made them very
healthful, and souueraigne for many diseases ever after, as to this present
day is experienced, to the wonderful comfort, and commodity of all England.
Coming at length with his company, which was no small one, to Me^e^ia in
Pembrookshire, he began to build a monastery in that place, far from all
worldly tumults, meaning to make it his principal abode whilst he remained in
this mortal life. But the devil, who from the beginning was an envious
hinderer of monks, and monasteries, stirred up a wicked member of his, a Tiran
of that country called Baia, with A Tiran plotteth his death.
his accomplices, to putt the holy man, and his company to death. And by the way
as they went to the execution of this mischief, he and his fellows were
suddenly shaken with such cruel feauers, that they were not able to perform
their wicked intentions. When in the mean time, the wife of this ring leader
of mischief, comes crying after them with news of greater misery; that an
infectious disease was suddenly fallen among their cattle, which killed them
so fast, that she feared, if some aid were not gotten, they should quickly
have more empty hides then beasts. Whereupon, they resolved to return to the
servant of God, and humbly to Who (...) stly punished.
implore his assistance, both for them selves, and their cattle. Which done,
they obtained their desire, and in recompense, and acknowledgment of that
benefitt, the Tiran gave unto S. DAVID all that Valley where the Cathedral
Church of Menenia now stands, for the use of him, and his fellows, and
successors for ever.

III. BUT THIS Tirans wife could not so soon depose her malice, for meaning
with a deuilish practice to ruin the chastity of those poor monks, she sent
a lascivious company of naked wenches, to exercise all manner of uncivil
embracings, and wanton actions in their sight, which made some of their minds
begin to stagger with so evident a temptation, others, to be a little
troubled, and indeed all being impatient of such an immodest injury, cried out
unto saint DAVID to be gone out of the fight, and reach of so foul a sight.
You know (replied the holy man) that the world hates us. And you must know
allsoe A good lesson.
that the poeple of ISRAEL traveling to the land of Promise with the holy Arc
of covenant, were resisted with continual dangers, and battles, and yet not
overcome, but through all their journey, remained victorious over that
incircumcised poeple, which does manifestly betoken the triumph we must have
in these our conflicts. For he that seeks to enjoy the promise of the
heavenly Paradise, the true land of Promise, must necessarily be assailed, but
not vanquished, with the battrie of temptations, and adversities until by the
assistance of CHRIST his chief Captain, he shall utterly have ruined, and
overthrown all the unclean bullwarkes of vice, and inquitie. Therefore we
must not be overcome with evil, but overcome evil with goodness, for if CHRIST
he with us, who dare stand against us? Be valiant then (my dear brethren) in
this conflict, and let not our enemies take joy in your flight.

IV. HAVING thus encouraged their minds, he built up the monastery, He
builds a Monastery.
and ordered it with good laws, and rules of monastical discipline. Where
every one lived by the labor of his own hands, rightly following that
Aposticall rule, He that will not labor, let him 2. These. c. 3 v. 10. The
manner of life of the ancient Monks.
not eat. And after their labor, at set hours they fell to their. prayers,
meditations, and reading of holy Scripture: which done, again they fetled to
their labors, never tasting any food till the stars appeared in the sky,
when their ordinary diet, was so far from all delights, that only bread,
herbs, and pure water were the chiefest dainties, which quenched their hunger,
and thirst. After a slight refreshing herewith, they returned again to their
prayers, then to their rest, whence they were raised at the first crowing of
the Cock, and prolonged their prayers until the morning, when with the rising
of the sun, all betook them selves to their daylabour. By this means they
gave the world not only a worthy proof, and example of all manner of virtue,
and continency, but allsoe of liberality. For allthough they would not take
any thing given them, but with much difficulty, yet were they so far from
want of necessaries, that by their own labor, and toil, they succored the
necessities of very many poor orphans, pupills, widows, and pilgrims. In
sum, in their manner of living, they were lively paternes of the Apostolical
life of those ancient fathers, which lived at Alexandria under the institution
of S. MARK the Evangelist.

V. S. DAVID was the governor, and President of this holy company, not only
in authority, and dignity, but by his own due deserts; For he would impose
nothing upon others which him self refused to undergo. Nay by how much he was
above them in dignity, by so much he excelled them all, in the greatness, and
continuance of diligence, continence, fasting, and prayers and the most exact
observance of all religious offices, and duties. S. David chosen Archbis hop of
the Britains.
After mattins when the rest of his Monks returned to their beds, hiscusto^ was
to enter into the cold water, to extinguish the unlawful heat of his body. At
length, the excellence of his virtues being carried over the world with the
wings of fame, by the common suffrages of the country he was chosen Archbishop
of all Wales: and so great honor bestowed upon him, that the Metropolitan
sea, which till then had been at Chester, was for his sake translated to
Menenia, now called Saint David's. In this dignity he behaved him self so
worthyly, that he became a rule, and form of good life to all. He was the
food of the poor, the life of orphans, cloth to the naked, the School of
the ignorant a Father to his country, and an Example to his monks.

VI. THE miracles which he wrought in his life were such and so admirabler
that the incredulity of these our times does not deserve to hear or read
them; and therefore we will only relate one, which is, that as he preached
upon a time against the Pelagians abrod under noe other canopie but heaven,
such an infinite of poeple were gathered to hear his sacred eloquence, that
the holy preacher could not be seen but of a few, on a sudden the earth
whereon he stood swelled up in form of a little hill, and raised him to such
a height, that to the wonderful great comfort and admiration of his auditors,
he was both seen, and heard of then all. And in memory hereof a little
chapel was built upon the same hill, which is said to remain unto these our
days.

VI. AT LENGTH this blessed Bishop the great patron, and Protector His
glorious death.
of the Britans, having governed his Church many years in great sainctitie,
and virtue of life, till he came to the age of one hundred forty seven
years, and the^ understanding by revelation the day and hour of his departure
out of this world, from that time he ever lived in the Church in continual
prayer and preaching until that long desired happy minute was come in which
he yielded up his blessed soul into the hands of his redeemer, who together
with whole quires of angels, came in person happyly to receive him, and
gloriously to lead him, into the never dying joys of his heavenly Kingdom.
He was buried at Meneuia in his own Church, which allthough at first it was
dedicated to the Apostle saint ANDREW, yet afterward, by reason of the great
fame this saint had in those places, and so many wonderful miracles and
signs of holiness, it took the name of S. DAVID'S, as it is called at this
very day. He died about the year 550. the first day of March, which day not
only in Wales, but all England over, is most famous in memory of him. But in
these our unhappy days the greatest part of his solemnity consists in
wearing of a green leeke, and it is a sufficient theme for a zealous
VVelchman to ground a quarrel against him, that does not honor his capp with
the like ornament that day.

VII. THE miracles which were wrought by his meritts, after his death are such,
and so many, that they far exceed the limitts of this short discourse: we
will only relate some, which have the testimony of an eyewitness to prove
them true. In the reign of King Stephen Gyrald. Cambr. in Topogr. Camb.
I^^uers miracles.
the brook which runs above the Church-yarde of Meneuia, or S. DAVID'S,
flowed with wine: and the same time, out of a Well or fountain there, called
Pisteldewy, that is, the Conduit of David, sprang forth a great quantity of
milk. And this is reported by him, that lived at the fame time, and most
exactly was acquanited with the matters of that country. A little portable bell
called S. DAVID'S, Note a strange miracle.
was of great fame and admiration in Wales: which when the soldiers presumed
to retain at the Castle of Raidnock, contrary to the desire of a woman that
brought it, suddenly the night following the whole town was deuowred with
fire, the wall only excepted where that bell was hanged. A boy that endeavored
to take young pigeons out of a nest in S. DAVID'S Church of Lhanuaos, had his
fingers so fastened to the stone, that he could by noe means get loose. All
much amazed at this miracle, specially his parents and friends, who together
with the boy before the altar of the same Church gave them selves to
continual watching, fasting, and prayer the space of three days, and as many
nights; when to the great joy of all, the stone fell from his hand. The Author
of this story, not only lived at the same time, but both saw, and spoke to the
man to whom it happened, who confessed him self that it was so. And which is
more, that stone being conserved in the Church, remained as an everlasting
witness of the miracle, with the plain form of his fingers imprinted in it, as
in a piece of wax.

VIII. MANY thousands of other miracles have been wrought by the meritts of
this holy man, both in his life, and after his death, which for breuities sake
me omit. And here now could I willingly enter into a large field of this holy
Saints praises, did not fear of being over teadious withould my pen, as
unworthy to be the tru^pett of the same of so renowned a man. I will only
desire all true hearted VVelchmen allwaies to honor this their great Patron
and Protector and humbly desire him, that as in his life time, he overthrew
with his learning all the bullwarkes of the Palagian heresy, so now with his
prayers, and intercession to almighty God, he would supplicate the divine
Goodness to cast a merciful eye upon his poeple, and reduce his sometimes
beloved country, out of the Blindness of Protestancie, groueling in which it
languisheth more lamentably, then ever it did in the former error, that once
again those hills and valleies may resound with the Echoes of Gods divine
praises, sung in such monastical quiers, as have been the ornaments there of
in former ages, and now are only the sad monuments of their ancient glory.
God of his infinite mercy, by the intercession of this glorious Saint, give
strength to those few that are in the truth so to remain, and grace to the
rest to acknowledge the same truth, and forsake their present errors. The life
of S. David was written by S. Kentigerne but whether the same be extant it is
uncertain. Ioannes Anglicus, and Giraldus Cambrensis, have written the same
allsoe, out of whom, and Nicholas Harpsfield me have gathered the foresaid
history. Many other authors make worthy mention of him.

The life of Saint CHAD Bishop, and Confessor, of the holy order of S.
BENEDICT.
MAR 2. Gathered out of Venerable Bede de gest. Ang.
SAINT CHADDE borne in Northumberland, brother to S. CEDDE Bishop of London
(of whom you may read the seventh of January) was at first scholar unto S.
AIDAN Bishop of Lindisfarne, in whose virtuous schole he made a great
progress, in learning, and good manners, being allwaies very careful to
execute in deed, whatsoever he learned by study. In his youth he went into
Jreland where tohgeather with S. EGBERT, he led a strict monastical life in
continual continency, exercising him self with great diligen^ in the pious
art of prayer, and meditation of the holy scripture Returning into England,
(after that famous controversy, betweeue S. WILFRID the Benedictine monk and
Bishop Colman concerning the due celebration of Easter, and other Church-rites,
was decided, together with his brother S. CEDDE he received the rule of our
holy father S. BENEDICT, and succeeded his brother in the government of the
Benedictine Abbey of Lesting in Yorke-shire. Which charge he discharged with
great sainctitie, and example of good life, till in the year of our Lord 664.
when S. WILFRID being chosen Bishop of York, and sent into France to be
consecrated by the Bishop of Paris, stayed so long beyond the seas that Saint
CHADD, by the means of king Oswy, was consecrated; and installed in the
Episcopal sea of York, by the hands of Wini Bishop of the West Saxons, and
the only He is cousecrated Bishop of York.
Bishop lawfully ordained Bishop extant then in England.

II. SAINT CHAD being advanced to this height of dignity, began presently to
make the piety, and virtue of his life correspond to the eminency of his
sacred function, bending all his endeauours for the conseruing of the
Ecclesiastical verity, and ordinances of the Catholic Church, and making his
own daily exercise, a true pattern of devotion, humility, and continency,
unto his subjects. He was wont to read much, preach often, and travel abrod
(after the true Apostolical manner) allwaies on foot from town, and village,
piously furnishing the whole country with the sacred doctrine of CHRIST'S
ghospel. At length, S. THEODORE being consecrated Archbishop of Canturbury,
made a visitt over the Churches of England, correcting as he went whatsoever he
found amiss, when amongst the rest he chanced to rebuke S. CHAD as not
lawfully consecrated. See the wonderful humility of the Saint! If thou His
great humility.
know (answered he very modestly) that I have not rightly undertaken the
bishopric, I most willingly give up my office, for indeed I allwaies judged my
self far unworthy thereof, and it was mere obedience which forced me at
first to take this sacred charge upon me. But THEODORE being overcome with
the resigned humility of this answer, replied that it was not necessary to
leave his bishopric, but only to have his installement approved after the
Catholic manner. But S. CHAD after three years government of that sea, being
more desirous of a private, and quiet life, resigned up the Bishopric unto S.
WILFRID, and returned again to his beloved solitude, in the monastery of
Lesting, where he remained in the continual exercise of piety, till Wulser
King of the Mercians desiring the assistance of a Bishop in his country,
Theodore of Canturbury, He is made Bishop of the mercians
who would not grant him a new one, obtained of Oswy King of the Northumbers
to have S. CHAD sent into Mercia. And because it was all ways S. CHADS custom
(as we have said) to travel on foot to preach, and teach the gospel, S.
THEODORE finding him to be a very holy man, commanded him hereafter to
perform his longer iourneyes on horseback, and he him self lifted him on his
horse, and forced him, (who out of the desire and love of his pious labor on
foot, made great resistance) to ride where soever his occasions should call
him.

III. BEING therefore installed in the bishopric of the Mercians, and
Lindisfarne, he endeavored according to the example of the ancient fathers,
and masters of virtue, to administer his office with admirable great perfection
of life, and example. The King Wulfere admiring the sainctity of the man, gave
him in the province of Lindisfarne or Lincoln the lands, and possessions of
fifty families, for the erecting of a monastery. He held his episcopal seat
at Lichfied, where, for his own private use, he built a place not far
distant from the Church, in which together with seven or eight of his monks,
he was wont more secretly and earnestely to exercise him self in devout prayer,
meditation, and reading holy scripture, at such times as his ordinary
employments and labor of preaching, and divine service did give him leave. But
amongst many other his notable examples of A notable example.
virtue, and piety, he bore in heart such a lively impression of the fear of
God, (which the royal prophet calls, the beginning of wisdom) Psalm. 110. v. 9.
and was in all his works so mindful of the terrible and dreadful day of
judgment, that whenever there arose a more vehement, and violent blast of
wind, and tempest, he would straight fall most earnestly to his prayers: and
if the storm were such that it were accompanied with the terror of boisterous
thunder, or lightning, he would instantly get into the Church, and never cease
from praying, and reading of psalms, until the heavens were cleared from
those tempestuous commotions. Being demanded the Psalm. 17. v 15. 16. A good
Lesson.
reason hereof: Have you not read (answered he) that our Lord has thundered
from heaven, and the most high has sent forth his voice: He threw his darts,
and dispersed the people; he redoubled his lightnings, and troubled them. For
our Lord shakes the air, stirs up winds, darteth lightnings, and
thunderbolts from heaven, to stir up mortals to fear him, to give them a
remembrance of his dreadful judgment to come; that he may overthrow their
pride, confound their presumption, by putting them in mind of that terrible
hour, wherein, heaven and earth being on fire, he will come with mighty
power; and majesty to judge the living and the dead. It is our parts therefore
to correspond to these his heavenly admonitions, with the duty of fear, and
love; that as often as, by such violent commotions of the air, and heavens, he
lifts up his threatening hand to strike, and yet does not let fall his blow
upon us, we ought straight humbly to implore his mercy, and by a diligent
discussion of the secret closetts of our hearts, to purge them from all
uncleanness of vice, lest at any time we be stricken unawares. With these
terrible remembrances did this blessed Saint endeavor to sharpen the minds of
his monks, and other subjects, to give them a greater appetite to follow the
sweete-hard way of virtue, and good works.

IV. AT LENGTH when he had most gloriously governed his Bishopric for the
space of two years, and a half, some days before his holy departure out of
this world, that happy minute was revealed unto him. For being one day alone
in his oratorie, a holy monk of his called Owen heard a most rauishing consort
of celestial tunes The Vision of a certain Monk.
over and about the place where the Bishop prayed, whi^ch dured for the space
of half an hour. After this the holy man opened his window, and with a knock
(as his custom was) called some from without unto him. Owen, whose office it
was to attend upon him, entered into his chamber, whom he sent to call the rest
of his brethren, who were but seven. Then he admonished them faithfully to
conserve the virtues of love, and peace with one and other; and with an untired
diligence to follow and observe the rules of regular The day of his departure
is re(...)led unto him.
discipline, which he had planted amongst them. For (said he) the day of my
departure is near at hand, that beloved guest which was wont to visit our
brethren, voutchafed allsoe this very day to give me, warning of my long
desired end. Desire then the rest of our brethren to recommend my departure, in
their prayers to almighty God; allwaies remembering with fasting, prayer, and
good works to prepare themselves for their own end, the time whereof is so
uncertain. But the rest being departed out of the chamber, the holy monk Owen,
who had seen, and heard the vision above mentioned, fell prostrat at the
blessed Bishops feet, humbly entreating him to declare the meaning of those
heavenly ditties, which that holy troop of angels sung over his oratorie.
Indeed (answered he) those blessed spiritts came to summon me to the holy
court of heaven, there to receive the unspeakable rewards, which so long I
have aspired unto, and after seven days are past; they have promised to
return to fetch me thither. But I command thee in the name of our Lord, that
thou presume not to reveal this vision before my death. And it fell out
according to this reuclation, for the seventh day after he yielded up his pure
soul to the hands of his redeemer. At which very instant one Egbert a monk
saw S. CEDDE S. Cedde comes in glory to mecte him.
his brother encompassed with a blessed troop of angels, descend from the
celestial vaultes, and carry up the unspotted soul of this glorious Bishop,
into the everlasting ioies of the heavenly Kingdom. He died the second day of,
March, and was buried first near to the Church of our Lady, but afterward, a
Church being erected there to the Prince of the Apostles saint PETER, his
sacred bones were translated into it; in both which places for the greater
testimony of his virtues many, miraculous cures of diseases were wrought.

V. A MAD man, who lead by the lightness of his frantic brain A mad man cureed
at his tomb
ran wandering up and down, happened one evening (as it were to stu^ble
happily on that place, unawares of the watchme^ that kept it, and having rested
there all that night, in the morning, to the great admiration, and joy of all,
he made known by the soundnes of his wit and understanding, that he had there
received the cure of his madding frenzy. The place of his burial is enclosed
with a wodden chest, which has a hole on the one side through which those that
came thither for devotion, were wont to reach forth some of the dust, and
having dissolved it in water, it cured both man, and beast that drank it, of
what disease soever they were infected. The life of this B. Saint we have
gathered chiefly out of S. Bedes History of England. John Capgrane has the
same in his lines of English Saints. Trithemius, in his treatise of the famous
men of S. Benedicts order lib. 3. cap. 117. Arnould Wion, Baronius, Camden and
others make worthy mention of him. In the Provincial Co^stitutions of England
his feast is ordained to be celebrated with nine lessons, and so it was
observed in the Sarum Breuiarie. But since Breuiaries were made treason in
England, all goodness was banished the Psalm. 150. v. 1.
public view of that unhappy Country, and God (whom the Psalmist bids us to
praise in his Saints) is deprived of his due honor, and glory, and his
Saints are quite robbed of their part therein.

The life of Saint WILLEICK Priest, and Confessor monck of the holy order of
S. Benedict.
MAR. 2. Out of Marceline in the life of S. Swibert.
S. WILLEICK borne in England went over into lower Germany, S. Willeick a
Monk-Canon of Vtteicht in low Germany.
where together which S. SWIBERT, and other English Benedictine Monks he
preached CHRIST'S gospel to the Pagans, and converted many to the true faith.
He was one of the first Monk-Canons of the new Cathedral Church of Vtrei^ght,
where, he who had left the world with a pure intention, so sincerely
endeavored to perfect him self in the service of CHRIST JESUS, that he
appeared as a sweet vessel of virtues to the rest of his brethren. For from
his youth he had lived allwaies with the great S. SWIBERT, in the continual
exercise of prayer, continency, and meditation of the holy scriptures, ever
striving to make him self as pure wax, to receive the impression, and seal of
that worthy Saints virtues. He was skillfull in holy scriptures, and well
practiced in the Latin, and Dutch tongue: very cloquent in his discourse, but
meek, and humble in his behavior, a conqueror of wrath, and covetousness, a
despiser of pride, and vain glory, and a comfortable father to the poor, and
sickly. For whom carefully to provide, he was inclined not only out of an
innate piety of mind, but made that appear by his great labor, and pains
taken in providing, and succouring their necessities him self. He converted
allsoe many Heathens, through the Provinces as he traveled, from the venom of
Idolatry, to the sweetness of CHRIST faith.

II. AFTERWARD being made Priour of S. SWIBERTS Benedictine monastery at
Werdt, he became a true mirror, and pattern of all He is made Priour of the
Monastery of Werdt.
true virtues to his brethren, whereby many by his example, and authority,
were curbed within the rules of a regular life. Neither was he profitable with
his virtues, and good example to the monastery only, but by his devout
exhortations, and pious sermons, he converted the neighboring poeple from the
sottish customs of their Idolatrous life, to the love of CHRIST, and heavenly
things. And the greatness of his virtue, and meritt was testified by miracle.
For being on a time at Cullen with the most devout Duchess Plectrude (of whom
mention is made in the life of S. SWIBERT) one Gothebald a chief man of the
town lay languishing under the pitiless burden of such a cruel disease,
that deprived of all use of his limbs, he seemed indeed to be quite dead; when
his funeral rites were allreadie prepared, and his grave gaped to receive him.
In the mean time Marie (that was his wives name) obtained of the Duchess to
have Willeick the disciple, and priest of great S. SWIBERT to come visitt He
cures a sickman.
that diyng man. Who coming into the chamber; and having made his prayers to
almighty God, he gave him his benediction; when presently the sick man arose
in perfect health out of his bed, gave thanks to the supreme giver of all
goodness, and sat at table with the rest in great joy, and alacrity, and S.
Willeick (whose company he much desired) could hardly be drawn from his
devotions of thanks giving to take his repast with the rest. Herevppon the
devout Duchess Plectrude held this holy man in far greater honor, and
esteem, the^ before, yielding infinite praises to the omnipotent worker of
wonders. But S. WILLEICK, having governed his monastery His death.
the space of thirteen years in all, ten after the death of his master S.
SWIBERT, in great holiness of life and conversation, gave up his blessed soul
to the neuer-dieing rewards of his labors, to bear a part in the quire of
Benedictin Monks in heaven. He died the second day of March, in the year of
Our Lord 727. At whose tomb in testimony of his virtues, and holy life, were
wrought maine miraculous cures of diseases. Of him make mention, besides the
foresaid Marcelline, Trithemius in his 3. book and 167. chap. of the famous
men of S. Benedicts Order, Molanus in his additions to Vsuard, Wion in his
Benedictine Martirologe, and others.

The life of Saint WINWALOKE Abbott, and Confessor.
MAR. 3. Gathered by Surius out of ancient manuscripts.
SAINT WINWALOKE son to Fracanus cosen germane of Cotton king of the
Britains, began from his tender age to give great signs of his ensuing
virtue, and good life, despising the pleasures of the world, and wholly
bequeathing him self to the divine service of allmigthy God His desire of a
devout life.
. And the better to put his good purposes, and pious inspirations in execution,
he desired leave of his father to go to a holy man of that country, to
perfect him self in that divine school in the study of virtue, and learning.
But his father, who desired rather to see him advanced to worldy preferment,
and honor, flatly denied his godly request. Whereupon this blessed young man
appealed to his almighty father in heaven, earnestly craving his assistance
in this case. And his prayers were not in vain; for not long after his father
being abroad in the plain fields, in a sayre sunny day, on the sudden there
happened such a horrible tempest of rain, hayle, and snow, seconded with the
roaring of such dreadful thunder, and flashes of lightning falling thick about
him, that stricken with the exceeding terror thereof, he fell flatt on the
ground, where musing with him self what might be the reason of such an
unexpected storm, it came into his mind, that perhaps it was a punishment sent
him from God above, for detayning his son in the tempestuous world, out of
the sweet haven of his divine His father gives him to God.
service. Herevppo^ he bequeathed him in his mind to almighty God at the same
instant, and within a week after, went him self in person, and presented him
to the charge of a holy man to be instructed according to his own desires. In
that good school of united virtue, and learning, WINWALOKE profitted so
exceedingly, that in a short time he became very learned in holy scripture,
and most devout in the service of almighty God.

II. HIS master happening to be absent upon a time the scholars fell to
sport, and recreate them selves in the fields, whereby some misfortune one of
them chanced to break his leg, which turned By his prayers and the sign of
the Cross he cures a broken thigh.
all their mirth into morning, and their play into earnest condoling their
fellows unhappiness. But WINWALOKE, exhorting them to take courrage, and
comfort, caused the whole company to fall to their prayers for the repayring
of this disastrous loss, and he him self heartily beseeched the omnipotent
worker of wonders, to grant this their humble request. Which done, he made the
sign of the cross on the wound, saying: In the name of our Lord JESUS CHRIST,
rise and give thanks unto almighty God: and at the same instant he arose
prefectly cured of his wound, and restored again to the use of his leg, as
sound as he was before it was broken. WINWALOKE earnestly desired, and coniured
his companions to conceal the miracle in silence, but the will of God was
otherwise, whereby it was made known, and public to the world, for the
greater honor both of him, and his Saint.

III. HE WAS so wonderfully pitiful, and co^passionate on the poor, His
compassion to the poor.
that when he saw them beg an alms, he would sigh, and weep with the grief
he suffered in their misery, and not having wherewithal to feed their bodies,
he would at lest with the comfort of his admonitions endeavor to enrich their
souls, in which pious exercise he daily employed some part of his time,
allthough he wanted not some wicked spiritts, who spitefully reviled, and
reproched him for this piety; saying, that he spent the best part of his time
idly, amongst lazy beggars. But he took all their blows on the buckler of
patience, rendering, sweet words for their rude exclamations, and humble
answeares for their insulting reproaches. And meeting on a time, among those
poor poeple, with one that was blind, to make known that his service was
grateful to God, by his prayers he restored him to perfect sight.

IV. HE grew at lenght so perfect in virtue, and learning, that With hallowed
oil he cures on^ stung with a serp(...).
from a scholar; he became a master, when many were glad to putt them selves
into his school, and under his discipline to learn the divine mysteries of
the holy scripture. One of his scholars falling asleep in the fields, as he
sat musing on his lesson, happrened to be so greiuously stung by a venomous
serpent, that the poison, dispersing it self over all his body, caused it to
swell in a most strange manner, and putt him in iminent danger of death. But
WNIWALOKE, gining him oileto drink which he him self had hallowed, the
swelling was forthwith assuaged, the venom expelled, and the man perfectly
cured. Not long after, he understood by revelation, that it was the will of
almighty God, that he should depart with some of his associates to live in an
other place. Therefore taking leave of his master, he departed with eleven
others, not knowing as yet, where to take up his dwelling, but with a firm
faith, and confidence in almighty God, he committed him self, and his
company to his sacred conduct. At length he arrived into an Island, where
together with his disciples for the space of three years, he led a very
retired, and solitary life. But finding that place to be very subject to
stormy, and tempestuous weather, and withal so barren that it was almost
inhabitable, he went to seek an other habitation beyond the sea, whither by a
divine revelation he was appointed to go; and there he found a place so fit,
and commodious for his purpose, that he settled him self, and his fellows
therein, with intention never to stir more while he lived. One discomoditie
it had, which was want of water, but that his devout prayers supplied, for the
indeficient By his prayers he obtayneth a fresh fou^tai^e.
fountain of all goodness, that made water spring out of the rocks for the
Jsraelites, furnished his Servant in this necessity, with an abundant spring
of sweet cristall streams.

V. IN THIS place he began to lead a most celestial, and angelical A
summarie of his virtues.
life, shining unto his scholars like a bright star of devotion virtue, and
perfection. He was of a very venerable aspect, sweet, and modest in his
discourse, allwaies paynfull, and unwearied in the service of almighty God;
of a pure body, a sincere mind, a sharp wit, a sound judgment, and very
provident, and wise in his advise, and counsel: most firm, and constant in
hope, and excellently perfect in charity. From the twentieth year of his age,
to the last hour of his life, he was never seen to fit in the Church; noe
man ever found him either fondly merry, or idly given to melancholy. He was
mild, familiar, and courteous to all. In body he walked on earth, but his
mind, and soul was allwaies fixed in heaven. His custom was to read over the
psalter of David every day, and to kneel in his prayers to God a hundred times
a day, and as often by night. His clothing was poor, made of goate-skinnes, his
bed hard, his diet only barley bread, and pottage of herbs. Saturdaies, and
sundaies he added thereunto some small quantity of fish, and a little ch^ese.
In lent he eat but twice a week, he never drank wine nor any other liquour
He vanquisheth the Devil with the sign of the Cross se.
which might intoxicate the brain. The Devil envying so great sainctitie,
endeavored with his hellish plotts to trouble, and molest his pious labors,
appearing unto him as he prayed in his oratorie, in the most ugly, and horrid
shapes that master of wickedness could inuet, vomitting out of his infernal
throat many reproachful words against him: when he, nothing dismayed
thereat, courageously proceeded in his devotions, and brandishing the chief
arms of life, the holy cross, against that black messenger of death, he
compelled him to vanish away in confusion.

VI. Now the excellency of his virtues began to be so famous all over
Britain, that many blind, lame, leaprous, and other diseased persons flocked
unto him as to an Oracle, whom he not only wonderfully cured in body, but with
the sacred baulme of his pious advise, and counsel, healed the sinful
infections of their souls. His fame arrived at length to the ears of a king
of that country, whose lewdnes of life did little answer the dignity of his
calling; but coming in a poor habitt unto the holy man, he fell prostrate at
his feet, humbly desiring his prayers for the remission of his sins. The
Saint lifting him up, encouraged him with a familiar exhortation, to the
contempt He connetteth a King to good life.
of the world, and the divine love of heaven, with such a lively, and moving
discourse, that the king received wonderful great comfort thereat, and
returning again to his palace, reformed his bad life ever after. Many other
miracles are reported to have been wrought by the meritts of this blessed
saint, which exceed our brevity to relate; our discourse hasteneth now
toward his death, which as it could not come unto so holy man in an ill
season, so it could not befall him in a better time then it did. For the night
before his departure, having had a revelation of that happy hour, he made it
known unto the rest of his brethren, who with bitter tears, witnessed the
sorrow they conceived for the loss of so good a father, and entreated him to
appoint one to succeed him in the government of the Monastery, whereunto he
willingly consented. And on the morrow, having celebrated The mann^r of his
death.
the holy Sacrifice of Mass, and received the sacred body, and blood of our
lord, standing yet at the altar, he sweetly rendered up his blessed soul, into
the hands of his dear redeemer, without any appearance of sensual pain at
all. After which quiet separation, his body by the hands of his brethren, was
reverently committed to a poor house of clay in the earth, and his unspotted
soul freed from her terrene habitation, was conveyed into the heavenly court
of almighty God, by a Sacred Conuoy of celestial spiritts. He flourished
about the year of our lord. 459. and died the third day of March, in the first
week of Lent. His holy relics were translated afterward to S. PETER'S Abbey
of Benedictin Monks in the city of Gaunt in Flanders, The memory of which
translation is celebrated the first day of August. His life is found written by
Joannes Anglicus JOHN Capgraue, and other ancient manuscripts sort down by
SVRIVS ont of which me have gathered it. VSVARD and MOLANVS do make mention of
him.

The life of Saint OWEN Confessor, and Monk of the holy Order of S. Benedict.
MAR. 4. Out of venerable Bede de gest. Ang.
SAINT OWEN being chief steward of the royal family of S. ETHELDRED wife to
Egfrid King of the Northumbers, increased so excellently in the fervor of
virtue, that forsaking that princely service, and all the pleasures, and riches
he enjoyed in the world, he putt on poor apparel, and went to the monastery
of Lesting, where the holy Bishop S. CHAD then lived. He brought nothing with
him, but an axe in his hand, to show that he came not to the monastery He
forsakes the world.
to live idly as many do, but to get his living by the labor of his
hands, which afterward by his great industry he proved: for having received
the habitt of a Benedictin monk in the same place, by how much his want of
learning did disfurnish him of ability to meditate on the mysteries of the
holy scriptures, by so much the more he employed, and applied his whole
endeauours, to serve the monastery, with the labor of his hands. But when the
holy Bishop S. CHAD removed his seat to Lichfield, he took this holy monk
along with him, and judged him worthy to be one of those eight, whom (as we
have said in his life) he made his more familiar companion; in that little
retiring place of his devotions, which he built near adjoining unto the
Church, for his more private exercise of piety. There S. OWEN, being for
reverence and respect of his devotion numbered a among the other brethren, when
the rest were earnestly busied at their prayers, and meditations, he labored
abroad in making provision of such things, as were necessary. He was a man of
very great meritts, and one who had left the world with a pure intention and
sincere desire of the eternal reward promised to such, as follow the
footstepps of CHRIST, and his Apostles. And therefore he His gift of
revelation.
was esteemed of almighty God to be in all things most worthy, to whom he
might more peculiarly reveal his heavenly secrets, being for his sincerity,
most worthy to be believed in his relations. For this cause the glorious
vision of the Angelical troops which came from heaven with their melodious
tunes, to bring news of the neere-approching death of S. CHAD, was showed unto
this holy Monk, as he labored without, when the holy Bishop was at his
prayers within. This you may read in the life of S. CHAD the second of March.
And this only testimony of alimightie Gods particular favor unto this holy
saint, may serve for a sufficient proof of his great virtue, and sainctitie,
who after the death of the holy Bishop, having long exercised him self in the
execution of his His happy death.
pious vocation, left the world the second time, to receive an everlasting
reward in heaven, for having renounced it at first, and yielded up his pure
soul into the hands of his most dear redeemer. Thus much of him we have
gathered chiefly out of S. BEDES-historie of England. Trithemius in his third
book and 118. Chapter of the illustrious men of S. BENEDICTS order, and Arnold
Wion in his Appendix to his Martirologe do both make worthy mention of him.
What day he died it is not known.

The life of Saint PIRAN Bishop and Confessor.
MAR. 5. Written by Joannes Anglicus, recited by John Capgraue.
SAINT PIRAN borne in Jreland of a noble race, for the love of God contemned
the riches of the world, and became an Hermit in the same country, leading
the space of many years, a very strict and rigid manner of life, by which,
and his concontinuall preaching and working of many miracles, he drew diverse
out of the blindness of Idolatry, to the true faith of CHRIST. He was His
virtuous life.
wonderful sparing in his diet, continual in watching, and prayer, and from
his very childhood to the hour of his death, allwaies employed in reading,
teaching, and practicing, the works of charity, humility, co^tinencie, and
all other virtues. Being made Priest, he omitted noe duty belonging to that
dignity, feeding the hungry, clothing the naked, instructing the ignorant,
restrayning from vice, and moving to virtue. At length he departed out of
Jreland, and came into that part of England called Cornwall, where with some
others in a poor little habitation he prepared himself for death: the hour
whereof being The manner of his death.
partly by a grieuious sickness, (of which never in his life he had tasted
before) and partly by a divine inspiration, made known unto him, he caused his
grave to be opened, and entering him self into it, yielded up his blessed soul
out of that house of clay, to be carried up to the never dying joys of
heaven, in the glory of a great light, and splendor, that appeared at the
same instant. He died the sixth of March, and was buried in Cornwall, in a
chapel in the town of Padstow which chapel remains there to this day. He
is reported to have wrought many wonderful miracles in his life time, which
because they tend rather to breed an incredulous amazement in the readers, then
move to any works of virtues or piety, we have willingly omitted. His life
is written by IOANNES Anglicus, and recited by JOHN CAPGRAVE, and mention is
made of him in the Chronicles of Ireland, and other anncient monuments.

The life of Saint KYNEBVRG queen, and Abbess, and of Saint Kineswide, and
Tibbe Virgins, all of the holy order of S. Benedict.
MAR. 6. Taken out of diverse grave Authors.
SAINT KYNEBVRG, and KYNESWIDE daughters to wicked Penda the Heathen king of
the Mercians, inherited so little of their fathers impiety, and were so
far from following the blind ways of his Paganism, that contrariwise like
two bright stars they shined in the true profession of Christian religion,
and virtue: So that their father, though ever rebellious against almighty
God Kyneburg marieth King Alfred.
yet in them he furnished his heavenly Kingdom with two most sacred branches of
sainctitie. KYNEBVRG, to get out of the reach of his cruelty, married Alfred
King of the Northumbers: which was rather an advancement then a hindrance to
her, in the continual exercise of virtue and piety. The poor, needy, and
afflicted had so pious a mother of her, that she seemed to be borne for noe
other end, then to relieve their misery. And yet did she not so excel in
this one grace, as if she were dead to all other virtues, for there was almost
noe praise due unto a pious-noble woeman, wherein she might not justly challege
her part, all ways performing with a singular care, and diligence whatsoever
appertayned unto God, and his divine Her desire of a chaste life.
service. The fervor of her piety daily increasing, she became at length so
ravished with the sacred love of her immortal spouse, the King of heaven, that
she earnestly desired to renounce her terrene King, and Kingdom, thereby to
bear the sweet yoke of CHRIST with more freedom: and loathing all mortal
embracements, she aspired only to unite her soul with almighty God, in the
sacred linkes of his divine love. Which, that with more liberty, and profitt,
she might bring to pass, she never ceased with her pious persuasions to
solicit the King her husband, until he had granted her license to live
according to her own free will. The King at length, honoring, and admiring
so great fervor of piety, and religion in his wife, as it were violently
forced, and compelled him self, contrary to the inclination of his own will,
to forgo his power of matrimony, otherwise lawful, and not only gave her way
to follow her own desires, but him self allsoe putt on a constant and settled
resolution and purpose to keep perpetual continency ever after. Therefore
within a short time, the Kings Palace it self (contrary to A royal
r^so^ution of chastity.
custom in such places) was changed, as it were, into a monastery of religion,
and a shop where was practiced all manner of discipline of more exact virtue,
and piety. The King, and his queen lived as brotheir and sister, united
together in a stricter union of minds, then before they were of bodies.
KYNEBVRG not a little glad hereat, when after a while she perceived the King
her husband to be sufficiently confirmed in this new course of piety, she
departed with his leave to a monastery, which she had prepared for her self
and other virgins, where changing her kind of life, she made the splendor and
greatness of her former estate, stoop to the plainnes of humility, her riches
to grow richer by a volu^tarie poverty, her delights to be an ordinary
slender diet, and instead of the ambitions train of her noble ladies of
honor, she was accompanied with a few poor Virgin-Nunnes, with whom she led a
virtuous and religious life under the, rule of our most holy father Saint
BENEDICT. This monastery was built at a place then called Dormundcaster, and
afterward Chineburgcastle, some two miles distant from the famous Benedictine
Abbey of Peterborrough.

II. IN THE mean time her sister KYNESWIDE, as yet but young, had S. Kyneswide.
not attained the sacred veil of religion, but waiting, as it were, at the
chamber door of her divine spouse, admired, and imitated the sainctity of her
sister, so well, that she gave great signs, and tokens of her own future
sainctity. When S. KYNEBVRG served her for a true pattern, or sampler, whence
she might take out the pious works, and flowers of virtue, and religion; being
brought up under her government, in the sacred school of a virtuous good life.
S. Kyneburg. made Abbess.
Afterward S. KYNEBVRG being made Abbess of the same monastery, it far
exceeds the force of weak words, and this poor pen to express, with what
love she gained souls to CHRIST'S service, with what care being gained she
nourished them in the bosom of her charity, and how watchful a guardian, and
teacher she was of the divine laws, and monastical discipline: daily heaping
up a new increase of virtues to her former: till at length, she left this life,
and Her death
made a happy journey unto him, for whose sake she had forsaken the world, and
the vanities thereof; leaving unto her doleful sisters many worthy examples
of charity, and religion. She was buried in the same monastery, which she had
built.

III. AFTER the departure of this sacred Virgin, Offa King of the East Angles
became wonderfully affected to the holy Virgin, Kyneswide her sister, and
earnestly desired to make her his wife, and queen. But KINESWIDE, who was
quite of an other mind, and had allreadie betrothed her self to be a spouse of
the King of heaven, utterly refused to yield unto his desires. And being with
much importunity solicited thereunto, by the persuasions, yea and threatenings
of her brethren, she had recourse unto the Mother of all purity the Blessed
Virgin MARIE, whom with prayers and tears she earnestly implored to ridd her
of these troubles. The B. Virgin appearing in a The Virgin Marie appears to
Kyneswide.
vision unto her, gave her counsel courageously to persist in her purpose of
perpetual chastity, promising withal to obtain of her son CHRIST-IESVS,
whom she had chose for her spouse, to grant strength, and help to her holy
intentions. Herevppon KYNESVIDE receiving new force, and courage, sent
messengers to give a defiance unto King Offa, and break of all hope of any
such league to be betwixt them; beseeching, and coniuring him, by the dreadful
name She refuses the marriage of King Offa.
of our Lord, not to solicit her any further with his love, which she judged
to be violence, nor to make war against heaven, to take her from CHRIST her
chosen spowse, nor to trouble his angels the lovers of virginity; but
peaceably to permit her with an untouched freedom to serve almighty God,
unto whom she had allreadie consecrated her self to live a perpetual Virgin.
At this news (the divine providence so disposing) the King approved of her
counsel, and in his answer, promised that her sacred vows should be
ratified. Thus then this holy virgin being freed from these troubles, held on
her pious course and purposes, and having received the sacred veil of
virginity, in the same monastery that her sister, she endeavored, with great
care, and vigilancie, to observe the rules of a monastical life in all purity
both of soul, and body. And at length King Offa him self, being overcome with
the invincible virtue of the holy virgin, blushed to see a tender gyrle so
stoutly Off a becomes a Benedictin Monk.
refuse such glory and riches, and grieuing at his own subjection to vanity,
and reputing him self but as the slave of his Kingdom, he forsook both it, and
all the pomp of the world, and went to Rome where he became a Monk of Saint
BENEDICTS order, and happily ended his days in that holy state.

IV. BUT S. KINESWIDE serving almighty God all her life time in continual
watchings, prayers, and good works, was called at Of S. Tibbe Virgin.
length out of the thraldom of this world, to enjoy the happy company of her
dear spouse CHRIST-IESVS, among the pure quiers of his angels in heaven. She
was buried in the same monastery by her sister S. KYNEBVRG. These two sisters
had a Kinswoman called TIBBE, who lived many years in the same monastery, in
so high a degree of sainctitie, that after her death, she was numbered in the
catalogue of Saints. The sacred relics of these three Saints were
afterward translated to the Benedictin Abbey of Peterborough, where their
feast was celebrated the sixth day of March; Allthough saint TIBBE died on saint
LVCIES day the thirteenth of December, as she her self revealed in an
apparition after her death. Other particulars of the lives of these blessed
Saints were burnt and lost, in that outrageous ransacke committed by the Danes
against the monastery of Peterborrough; when (...) Abbot) as Ingulphus a grave
author says) with the greater part of his Convent and the sacred relics of
the holy Virgins Kineburg, Kineswide, and Tibbe fled to Thorney for succor.
And William Camden (out of an ancient Author Robert Swapha^^) reports, that
saint KYNEBVRG and KYNESWIDE conferred not a little to the first foundation,
and building of the famous Benedictine Abbey of Peterborough. The lives of
these Saints we have gathered chiefly out of Ioannes Anglicus recited by John
Capgraue, and Nicholas Harpsfield saec. 7. cap. 23. Besides these, Rannlphus
Cicestrensis lib. 5. cap. 18. Polidor Virgil l. 4. william Malmesbury de g^st.
Pont. l. 4. Matthew West. an. 705. Arnold Wyon lib. 4. cap. 14. and others do
make honorable (...)tion of them.

The life of saint ESTERWINE Abbot and confessor of the holy order of S.
BENEDICT.
MAR 7. Written by venerable Bede
ESTERWINE borne in Yorkshire of noble parents, was near allied to saint
BENNET Bishop Abbot, whose life we have written the twelfth of January, wherein
something has been said of this holy man saint ESTERWINE, a virtuous
proficient in the aforenamed saint BENNETS Benedictin school of religion. For
when he (as we have said in his life) had built two monasteries, one in honor
of the Prince of the Apostles saint PETER, at the mouth of the river Were, and
an other to the name of the Teacher of the Gentiles saint PAVL, not far from
the mouth of the river Tine, in the town Esterwin made Abbot.
(...) Yarrow, and placed Sigfrid in the government of saint PAVLS, about the
year of CHRIST 682, at the same time he made choice of ESTERWINE then a Priest
of S. PETER'S monastery, and gave him the government of the same, that the
labor, which alone him self was not able to under(...) ^ight be made more
easy by the helping virtue of so beloved a(...)lleague. Nether need it seem
strange to any (faith venerable BEDE) that one monastery had two abbotts at
once, (to wit S. BENNET Bishop, and S. ESTERWINE) S. BENNETS Two Abbo^^ of one
^onasterie
often iourneies over the seas, for the good of his monastery, and the
uncertainty of his return was cause hereof. For our histories recount, that
the most Blessed Apostle S. PETER, upon an instant, and just cause, appointed
under him two Bishops one after an other at Rome, to govern the universal
Church. And the great Abbot S. BENEDICT him self (as S. GREGORY Pope writes of
him) ordained twelve abbots under him, to rule his disciples, as he throught
best, without any detriment to charity, yea to the great increase and
conservation thereof. S. ESTERWINE therefore undertook the chardge to govern
that monastery, the ninth year after the foundation. And he remained in the
same as long as he lived, and he lived but four years after.

II. HE WAS a man by birth noble, but he did not make use of the nobility of
his blood (as some do) to suggest matter of arrogancy, and contempt of
others, but (as best befitted the servant of God) he turned it to the greater
ennobling of his mind Greatness of virtue, not birth to be respected.
with virtue. For being cozen german unto saint BENNET Bishop they were both
so truly allied in the nobility of the world, that nether ESTERWINE entering
into the monastery, did expect any greater honor in regard of his nobility
of birth, and Kindred, nor BENNET judged it fit to be offered him, upon those
respects. But living in an equal measure of his good purpose with his other
brethren, he rejoiced chiefly, that in all things he punctually observed the
rules of regular discipline. And being before, one of the royal train of King
Egfrid, having once ridd him self of worldly affairs, laid by his arms, and
entered into the spiritual warrefare, he remained allwaies so humble, and so
equal with his other brethren, that together with them he would labor, in
the harvest, winow corn, look to the cat(...) (...) good ^^ample of humility.
and in all base inferior offices and drudgeries of the monastery, he was
joyful and glad to exercise his obedience and humility. And which is more,
being raised to the degree and calling of an Abbot, he remained in the same
mind as before toward all; according to a wise man's admonition that says; Have
they ordained thee to be a governor? do not grow proud, but be among thy
^^^^ects at one of them, meek, affable, and courteous unto all. Nether did he
yet neglect to bridle offenders with regular discipline, but he choose rather
out of his innate custom of love, to govern by fair means, and to win his
subjects with his pious admonitions from offending, and entreating them not to
hide from him the bright light of their countenances, with the clowd of their
unruly disquietnes.

III. OFTEN times goeing abroad to ouersee the affairs of the monastery, when
he found his brethren at their work, he was wont presently to set his helping
hands thereunto, either in guiding or houlding of the plough, or any other
such labor. For he was a young man of great strength, of a sweet discourse, a
merry heart, bountiful in good works, and of an honest, and decent aspect. He
allwaies cate of the same meat, and in the same place that his other brethren
did; and slept in the same common dorter that he did, before he was made Abbot.
Yea when he fell fick, and foresaw by certain signs that death was at hand,
yet he remained two days after in the dorter of the other Brethren. And other
five days before his He takes leave of his monks.
departure, he was placed in a more secret house a part: till goeing forth one
day into the open air, he assembled all his monks together, and took a
solemn leave of them, imparting to every one a charitable salutation of peace;
they, in the mean time, pitifully weeping, and wayling to depart from so
holy a father, and so pious a pastor. He died the seventh, day of March, in
the night, when the monks were singing mattings in the Church. He was twenty
four years of age when he came to the monastery, he lived twelve years
therein, seven whereof he exercised the function of Priestood, and four His
death.
he governed the Monastery with the dignity of Abbot, till at length leaving
his mortal limbs, he took a happy flight to the Kingdom of heaven, saint
BENNET Bishop being then absent in his fifth journey to Rome. The life of this
Saint is thus written by saint BEDE, as we have found it in an ancient
manuscript together with the lines of other Abbots of the same monastery,
where saint BEDE him self lived a Monk. Besides him, FLORENTIVS WIGORNIENSIS
an. 682. MATTHEW WESTMINSTER an. 703. NICHOLAS HARPSFIELD. saec. 7. cap. 37.
JOHN CAPGRAVE and others do northily speak his praises.

The life of saint FELIX Bishop and Confessor.
MAR. 8. Out of diverse Authors.
FELIX was the first Bishop of the East Angles, But a man of how great piety
he was, it appears chiefly in this He leaves his country to preach in
England.
one famous example, that being native of Burgundis and understanding how few
laborers there were in so fruictfull an harvest of CHRIST as England, of his
own accord he left his Bishopric, friends, Kindred, and riches, and all other
maintenances, and promotions of his state, to come into our country, and employ
his best endeauours in so pious a work. Whose holy purpose, being understood,
and admired by Honorius Archbishop of Canturbury, he allotted him the Province
of the East-Engles, which having He conuerteth the East Angles.
forsaken the Christian faith before received, was fallen again into the
blindness of Idolatry. But FELIX, being in effect correspondent to his name
which signifies, Happy, with so great happiness discharged the province he
undertook, that in a short time, he wholly, and happily reduced it from the
Idolatrous bondage of the devil, to the sweet freedo^ of CHRIST'S sacred
Gospel. He held his Episcopal sea in a town then called Dimmock, but
afterward from his name it was named FELIXTOWE, or FELSTOWE. In which place
and dignity, happy FELIX having discharged the part of a good pastor, for
the space of seauenteene years continually laboring with invincible patience
for the advancement of CHRIST'S holy Ghospel, laden with virtue, His death.
and good works, made a most happy journey to the eternal happiness; the
eigth day of March, and was buried in the same town: but his relics were
after wards translated to a place called Scha^, where appears yet (says
Malmesbury) some signs of a Church destroyed and burnt by the Danes. But the
Sacred body of this saint being sought for, and found a long time after, was
again translated to the famous Abbey of Benedictin Monks at Ramsey. This life
we have gathered out of S. Bid de gest. lib. 2. c. 15. Nicholas Harpsfield,
saec. 7. cap. 16. and William Malmesbury de Pontif.

The life of Saint BOSA, or Boso Bishop and Confessor, Monk of the holy Order
of S. Benedict.
MAR 11. Out of ve nerable Bid de gest. Ang.
BOSA from a monk of the Benedictin monastery of Streanshall in
Northumberland, was at the insta^ce of Egfrid king of that Province, elected
Bishop of York in the place of the most reverend Bishop He is made Bishop of
York.
S. WILFRID, then unjustly banished out of that sea and country, by the means
of the forefayd king, and the authority of Theodore Archbishop of Canturbury,
in the year 678. This sea he governed in great holiness of good life and
learning, till by the death of king Egfrid, his brother Alfrid obtained the
kingdom; who recalled S. WILFRID out of banishment, and restored him to his
Bishopric again. But after the space of five years, Alfred expelled saint
WILFRID again, and BOSA was once more restored to the sea of York, in the
government whereof, and the continual exercise of all true virtues belonging
to a holy Bishop, he rendered up his blessed soul to the never dying joys of
heaven, about the year of our Lord. 700. but what day he died it is
uncertain, this eleventh of March, is made a commemoration of him, whom S.
BID calls a man well beloved of God, of great holiness, and humility;
Besides whom, WILLIAM MALMESBVRY, TRITEMIVS in his fourth book of the famous
men of S. Benedicts order cap. 64. MATTHEW WESTMINSTER an. 678. ARNOLD WION lib.
2. cap. 23. and others, do make worthy mention of him, a^ allsoe Pope IONH
the seventh in his letters written in behalf of S. WILFRID.

The life of the most Glorious Pope, and Doctor of the Catholic Church S.
GREGORY. surnamed the Great, Apostle of England, and glory of S. BENEDICTS
Order.
MAR 12. written by Paulus Diaconus.
SO great, and so many are the incomparable deeds, and virtues, wherewith
this thrice happy Saint has adorned the The translatours Prolo^ne.
Church of God, and so many holy, and learned men have endeavored by their
writings to make him famous to posterity, that we find our wits far to
weak to comprehend the one, and this poor pen far to barren to set
down, among so many worthies, any thing worthy so worthy a subject: Yet
on the other side, because the benefitts, which not only the Benedictin Order
in England, but allsoe all England it self has from him received are so
infinite, we cannot choose but strain according to our power, to make some
small show of acknowledgment thereof, imitating those herein, who in a little
map, or card, to the great pleasure, and profitt of the beholders, do
describe the mighty compass of the whole world. And here now (o Rome^) do
thou first acknowledge thine happiness, and diligently endeavor to imitate so
great a worthy. Many everlasting monuments there are, which have eternised thy
name to posterity, thy Kings, thy Dictatours, thy Consuls, thy Emperors, thy
Trophies, yea and the Empire of the world seated in thy bosom. All which, and
all other thy monuments of antiquity, diverse have so largely, elegantly,
learnedly, and exactly searched into, that there is scarce a stone, a marble,
or a sepulcher extant within thy walls, which has not been particularly
noted, marked, and examined. But I would not have the stick here to long. I
would not have thine eyes, and throughts fixed on these trophies of vanity. I
inuit thee to behold more noble, and more excellent glories of thine, and
(omiting all other) thy only, and chiefest ornament, thy GREGORY, who alone,
(next to the two lights of the world the Apostles) excels all the rest of
thy wonders. Nether yet is he thine so much, as Ours too, Ours he is indeed,
not only because he shined unto as with the bright luster of his authority,
and virtues, as to the rest of the world, but allsoe, and principally, because
by his disciple S. AVGVSTIN, he brought us out of the blindness of Idolatry to
see the light of the truth, and made us that were the sons of wrath, become
the children of CHRIST, in the unity, and peace of his Church: Thine too he
is, because in thee he was begotten, borne, and bred, and in thee ennobled with
the sacred dignity of Supreme Pastor of the Christian world. Acknowledge
therefore this thy great happiness, thy native, and domesticque glory. Honor
this most generous branch bred out of a noble and holy root. And thou
(wretched England) acknowledge likewise the inestimable benefitts received from
this thy spiritual father, and Apostle. Look upon this bright sun that
first sent thee the light of truth, have regard to this thy pious fosterer, who
first fedd thee with the sweet milk, of the ghospel, Search exactly into his
life, works and actions, and even therein thou shall see how far thou have
swerued from that faith, and religion, which through his means, was first
planted within thy dominions, and which, as at that time thou did embrance
for truth, so yet I hope thou art not so impudent, as to deny for such. If
thou find then by the manner of this thy first Apostles life (which was ever
conformable to his doctrine) that the present state of thy life and religion,
is contrary, or other wise mainly differing from that which first he delivered
unto thee, be then most assured that thou have erred, and gone astray from thy
first foundation, and principles of the true religion, which is, not can be but
one only. This life was written in Latin by P^ul^s Dia^^n^^ a Benedictin Monk
above 850. years ago; and for the antiquitle we have made choice of it rather
then any other.

I. GREGORY borne in Rome son to Gordian, and Siluia, descended His birth and
Parents.
from a noble race of Roman Senators, in whom nobility was adorned with
religion, and religion ennobled with virtue. For Felix chief Pastor of the
same sea Apostolicque, was father unto his great grandfather, and a man of
great virtue, and integrity, and in his time the glory of CHRIST'S Church. But
yet GREGORY, in his pious conversation and manners was an ornament to the great
nobility of his birth. In fine (as clearly afterward it appeared) it was not
without some great presage that this name was allotted him, for Gregorins, in
Greek signifies as much as Vigilant or Watchful, in English. His name
expounded
and in very deed, he was Watchful over him self, whilst exactely adhering to
the commandments of God, he led a virtuous, and laudable life here on earth: He
was Vigilant over the faithful people of Gods Church, when by the force of his
fluent doctrine, he made plain unto them the straight way to heaven From a
child he was so well instructed in the liberal sciences, that albeit at that
time the study of learning flourished much in Rome, yet he, was judged second
to none in the whole city. In his age, which as yet was but little, and
unripe, there was a mind full of mature studies, and manlike endeauours: to
wit, to stick to the sayings of his ancients, and when he heard anle thing
worthy of notice, he would not by neglect committ it to oblivion, but rather
commend it to the strongest hold of his memory. So that then with a thirsty
breast he sucked up strea. mes of learning, which afterward with a
mellifluous voice, he might utter in due season.

II. IN the very time of his youth (when that age is wont to enter The
conversation of his youth.
into the dangerous paths of the world) he began to settle him self in
devotion toward God, and with all the desires of his heart, to aspire to the
country of everlasting life. But while he defferred the grace of his
conversion somewhat long, and thought best after he was inspired with that
heavenly desire, to hide it under his secular apparel, and to serve the world,
as it were, in outward show, so many difficulties out of that little care of
the world arose against him, that now he was not detayned therein only in
outward show, but almost in mind too, as he him self affirms. Till as length
the death He builds many monasteries.
of his parents giving him free scope to dispose of him self and his affairs,
he made that openly known, which before lay hid under the secrecy of his
mind: and that which before was only in the sight of him that sees all things,
he manifested now to the public view of the world. For distributing all his
te^porall goods in pious works, to the end that in the state of pouertic he
might follow CHRIST, who for our sakes became poor, he built six monasteries
in Sicilie, and furnished the^ with virtuous Monks to sing the praises of
almighty God. The seventh he erected within the walls of Rome, in which
afterward, having gathered together a great Convent of Monks, and forsakesn
the Pomp of the world, he him self lived in regular discipline under the
command, and obedience of an Abbot. Unto these monasteries he allotted so
much yearly rent out of his own means, as might suffice each one for
necessary maintenance. All the rest of his temporal goods, howses, and lands,
he should, and dealed the money to the Poor, turning hereby (by a divine
inspiration) all that glory, and nobility which he seemed to have in the
world, to purchase the happiness of the euer-florishing city of heaven. And he
that before was wont to walde through the city of Rome clothed in silks,
and laden with glittering gemmes, afterward covered with a poor simple
weed, became a poor servant to the poor.

III. FOR having changed his secular apparel, he went to the He takes the
habit of a Benedictin. Monk.
monastery, and made a naked escape out of the shipwreck of the world. There
he began to live in so great grace of perfection, that even then in his very
beginning, he might be reckoned in the number of the perfect. So that within a
while, being chosen by the common consent of the Convent, he refused not to
undertake the charge of Abbott. To be short, he was so abstinent in his diet,
so vigilant in his prayers, and so untired in his labor of fasting, that out
of over much weakness in his stomach, he was searse able to subsist. He
sustained besides, a continual sickness of body, and chiefly he was grieved
with the trouble of that disease, which the phistians call Syncopa, in Greek;
the cruelty whereof so tormented his vital parts, that being taken with
frequent, and sudden agonies, he seemed every moment to be ready to yield up
the ghost. But what manner of man he was in his monastery, and with how
commendable an exercise he led his life, we may gather out of his own words,
which with weeping tears he uttered, when he was Pope, His speech to Peter
Deacon.
to Peter his Deacon, saying: My wretched mind being stricken with the wound
of its own present necessary employment, remembers in what state it was in
the monastery, how all sleeting things then See the happiness of a Religious
life
were subject unto it, how eminent it was above things that were tossed in the
world; that it was accoustumed to think on nothing but heavenly matters, that
being yet detayned within this body, in contemplation it surpassed that
inortall prison it self. Yea and that (which is a punishment almost to all
men) it was in love even with death it self, as being the entrance to life, and
the reward of labor. But now by reason of this heavy pastoral charge, it
suffers, in the affairs of secular men, and after so swcet a sorme of its
own quietness, it is defiled with the dust of worldly business. I consider
therefore what J do endure, J consider what J have lost: and when J behold
that which J have lost, the burden which I undergo grows more greuious. For
now, behold Iam tossed in the waves of a huge sea, and in the ship of my mind,
I am dashed, and beaten with the storms of a mighty tempest: and whilst J
call to my remembrance the tranquillity of my former life, castling back my
eyes to what is past, J sigh at the sight of the desired shore. And which is
yet more irksome, whilst I am discontentedly tossed in these huge waves, I have
scarce the happiness to see the haven which I left. Thus he was wont to relate
of him self, not bragging of his proficiencie in virtues, but rather bewayling
his deficiencie; which he ever feared, to run into, through his pastoral
charge. But allbeit he spoke in this manner of him self, out of a mind full of
profound humility; it becomes us notwithstanding to believe, that by reason
of his pastoral dignity, he lost nothing of his monastical perfection; Yea
rather that he received thereby a greater advancement in perfection, by his
labor in the conversion of many, then he had in times past in the
tranquillity of his own private contemplation.

IV. But by what means this blessed man was raised first to the office of
Deacon, and after to the high dignity of Chief Bishop, the ensuing speech
shall declare. The Roman Bishop who then governed the Church, preceauing
GREGORY to clime up by the degrees of virtue He is made Deaco^, and the Po pes
Legate.
to the height of perfection, having called him out of his beloved monastery,
heraysed the office, and dignity of Ecclesiastical orders, made him the
seventh Leuite, or Deacon for his assistance: and not long after directed him
as his legate, or Commissarie to the city of Constantinople, for answeares
touching affairs of the Catholicque Church. Nether Yet did GREGORY allbeit he
were conversant in a worldly palace, intermitt the purpose of his heavenly
manner of life. For the divine providence so ordained, for his greater good,
that diverse of the Monks, out of an obligation of fraternall love, followed
him from the monastery, to the end that by their example, as a ship with
Anchor, he might be stayed at the pleasing shore of prayer, and contemplation;
and that, whilst he was tossed with the continual blows of secular affairs,
he might fly to their company, as to the bosone of a most sure haven, after
the volumes, and waves, of his worldly employment. And allthought that office,
with the sword of his externe labors, now being abstracted from his
monastery, despoyled him of his former tranquillity of life, notwithstanding
among them, the aspiration of his daily remorse, through the discourse of their
earnest reading, did give him new courage of life. Therefore by the company of
these, he was not only fenced from worldly assaults, but allsoe enkindled more,
and more to the exercises of a heavenly life. Then, at the earnest request of
those his brethren, and chiefly of that Venerable man LEANDER Archbishop He
writteth moralls upon Job.
of Civil (who at that time was come legate to Constantinople in the cause of
the Visigothes he was compelled to explicate the book of holy Job, so
intricate in mysteries. Nether had he the power to deny a work, which at the
request of charity, brotherly love did impose upon him, for the profitt of
many: but in a course of thirty five books, he thoroughly instructed us, how
the same book of Job is to be understood literally, how to be applied to the
hidden mysteries of CHRIST and his Church, and in what sense it may be fitted
to every Christian in particular: In which work of his, he discourses after
such an admirable manner of virtues, and vices, that he seems not only to
express those things in naked words only, but after a manner to demonstrate
them in visible forms. Wherefore, there is noe doubt, but he had truly
attained to the perfection of the virtues them selves, whose effects with so
much efficacy he was able to declare.

V WHILST yet he remained in the same Royal city of Constantinople, He
overthrows the heresy of Eutichius.
by the assistant grace of the Catholic truth, he overthrew a new budding
heresy of the state of Resurrection, in the very first appearance, and
beginning of it. For indeed Eutichius Bishop of the same city held an
opinion, that our bodies in the glory of the later resurrection, should be
impalpable, and more subtle then either the wind or air, Which S. GREGORY
understanding, he proved both by force of reason, and truth, and the example
of our Lords resurrection, that this assertion was wholly opposite to the
doctrine of the Catholicque faith; which houldeth that this our very body
raised in the glory of the resurrection, shall indeed, not only be subtle, by
reason of its spiritual power; but palpable allsoe, to show the truth of the
nature: according to the example of our Lords body, of which raised from death,
him self said to his disciples: Palpate, and videte quin spiritus Luc 24. v. 39.
carnem and ossa non habet, sicut me videtis habere. Feel, and see, for a
spirit has not flesh, and bones, as ye see me have. For the assertion of
this, the Venerable Father of our faith GREGORY, fought with so great pains
against this breeding heresy; and with so great instance (having allsoe the
helping hand of the most pious Emperor Tiberius Constantine) he utterly broke
in pieces that opinion; that no man yet was ever found that offered to revive
it.

VI. THEN, within a short time, after the venerable Leuite or Deacon GREGORY
was returned back to Rome, the river Tiber swelled over his banks with so
great an inundation, and grew so powerful, that his raging waters flowed over
the walls of the city, and took violent possession of many streets
therein, in so much that it overwhelmed many monuments of ancient building.
And with the outrage of this flood, the barnes of the Church were ouerturned,
in which many thousand bushels of wheat was lost. Then a multitude of
Serpents, with a monstrous Dragon floted down the gulf of this river, like
unto a mighty beam of timber, into the sea: and many beasts were drowned,
and cast on shore by the brinie waves of the troubled waters. Presently
herevppon followed a pestilent disease, of which first died Pope Pelagius
(acording Pope Pelagius dies. ^^^ch. c 9. v. 6.
to that, A Sanctuario meo incipite, Begin from my sainctuarie) and then
there fell so great a destruction of the common poeple, that in many parts of
the city, houses were left without any inhabitants. But because the Church,
of God could not be without a ruler, all the poeple made choice of Blessed
GREGORY, who by all means possible Gregory is chosen Pope.
resisted against it. And endeavoring more waryly to avoid the height of that
dignity, he often proclaimed him self unworthy of such honor, fearing
indeed, lest the glory of the world, which he had cast off before, might by
some means steal upon him again, under the color of Ecclesiastical
government. Whence it came to pass that he directed an Epistle to Mauritius
the Emperor (unto whose son he was Godfather) entreating, and coniuring him,
with many prayers, never to grant consent to the poeple, to advance him to
the grace of so great a dignity. But the Prefect of the city called German,
intercepted his messenger, and hauig apprehended him, and torn his Epistles,
he directed the election, and consent of the poeple to the Emperor; Who giving
God thanks for the friendship of the Deacon, because, according to his desire,
he had found an occasion to bestow an honor upon him, forthwith gave a
command for his installement.

VII. AND THE time of his consecration being at hand, when that pestilent
disease still made great hauock amongst the poeple, he His speech to the Poeple.
began to exhort them to do works of peanance in this sort. It behooves (most
beloved brethren) at least that we fear the scourges of God, now come and made
present among us by experience, which we ought to have feared coming. Let
grief open us the gate of our conversion, and let that very punishment which
we feel, dissolve the hardness of our hearts. For as by the testimony of the
Prophet it is foretold. Pernenit gladius vsque Ier. c. 4. v. 10.
ad animam. The sword is come even to the soul. Behold all the poeple are
smitten with the sharp point of heavens wrath, and all are destroyed with
sudden and unexpected ruin. Nether does sickness prevent death, but death it
self (as you see) preuents the delays of sickness: every one that is stricken,
is suddenly taken away, before he can be converted to tears of peanance.
Consider therefore, Brethren, what manner of man he appears before the fight
of the dreadful judge, who had noe leisure to bewail what he has done. Whole
families tumble into destruction together; their houses are left empty,
parents see the burial of their children, and their heirs go before them to
the grave. Let us all therefore fly to tears of peanance for refuge, whilst
we have leisure to weep, before the blow of ruin fall upon us; let us call
to mind whatsoever through error and negligence we have committed, and
chastise our default with sorrow and repenrance. Let us go before his face in
confession, and as Psalm. 94. v, 1.
the royal prophet admonishes, Let us lift up our hearts and hands to our
Lord; for to lift up our hears with our hands, is to raise and stir up the
endeavor of our prayers, with the merit of good works. He gives, in very
deed, he gives great confidence to our fear, who cries out by the Prophet, I
will not the death of a sinner, but Ezech. c. 33. v. 11.
that he be converted, and live. Let noe man then despair out of the
immensitie of his sins; for the inueterate faults of the Ninevites were
washed away with three days peanance: and the converted thief purchased the
rewards of life, even at the very sentence of his death. Let us therefore
change our hearts, and presume that we have obtained what we ask: the judge
will sooner incline to our prayer, if our minds be recalled from their
wichednes. The sword then of so severe a punishment hanging over our heads,
let us earnestly labor with importune lamentations; for that importunity
which to men is wont to be grateful, is pleasing to the Judge of truth;
because our pious, and merciful Lord, who will not be angry, according as we
deserve, will have things exacted from him by prayers. Hence he tells us by
the Psalmist: Call upon Ps^m. 49. v. 16.
me in the day of thy tribulation, and I will deliver thee, and thou shall
magnify me. He him self therefore, is a witness for himself, that he desires
to have mercy on such as call upon him, and exhorts us to call upon him.
For this cause (most dear brethren) having our hearts contrite, and our works
amended, from wendsday morning next, let us come in a devout manner with
tears, to the Litanies for seaue^ days space that when the severe judge
means to punish us, and our offenses, he may mitigate the sentence of
damnation, and spare us. We thought fit to set down here this exhortation of
S. GREGORY, that we might show, on how great height of perfection, he laid the
foundation of his preaching. Therefore when a great multitude of Priests,
Monks, and others of all ages, sexes, and conditions were gathered together,
at the day appointed, according to the holy man's command, to call to God for
mercy; the siknes waxed so cruel and outrageous among them, that within the
space of own hour, whilst the poeple made their supplications to our Lord,
fowerscore persons fell to the ground and died. But the holy Priest ceased not
therefore to preach to the poeple, and that they would not cease from their
prayers, until through the mercy of allmighty God, the pestilence it self
ceased. Gregory (...) to (...) the Popedom.


VIII. AND BEING afterward to be raised to the Episcopal dignity when as he
did yet seek means to conceal him self by flight; for the preventing of his
desires, watch, and ward was appointed at all the gates of the city, until
(as so sacred an order required) all the divine rites, and ceremonies might
duly and gloriously be accomplished toward him. But he found means to be
secretly He is miraculously betrayed by a pillar of fire.
conveyed out of town by the help of certain merchants, and so hidd him
self in uncouth places, for the space of three days, until the poeple of Rome
with fasting, and prayer obtained the discovery of that lost treasure, by a
bright pillar of fire sent from above; which glittering a good part of the
night in a direct line from the heavens over his head, revealed their wished
desire to those that sought him. And at the same time, there appeared, to a
certain Anachorite living near the city, angels descending and ascending by
the same fiery pillar, upon him. Hence the Anachoret taking a sacred, and
happy signification of that ladder, which holy Jacob saw in his sleep, cried
out that there was the house, of our Lord, and that he shoud be the ruler of
Gods house, which is the Church: yea the temple of God (said he) lies hidden
there. At length the elect, and beloved servant of God was found, apprehended,
and brought to the Church of Blessed PETER the Apostle, where he was
consecrated in the Office of Episcopal authority, and made Pope of Rome.

IX. AT THIS time, being, reprehended by John Bishop of Rauenna, that he so
fit a man by concealing him self would seek to His writings.
avoid that Pastoral charge, he took this occasion to write that excellent
book called, the Pastoral care, wherein he made it manifestly appear, what
manner of men ought to be chosen for the government of the Church, how the
rulers them selves should govern their own lives, with what discretion they
were to instruct their subjects of all kinds, and with how great consideration
they were bound, daily to reflect upon their own frailty. He writ allsoe
the four books of Dialogues, at the request of Peter his Decon, in which, for
an example to posterity, he collected the virtues of the Saints of Italy,
which he either knew, or could hear to be the most famous: and as in the
books of his homelies, and expositions he taught what virtues are to be
practiced, so in his writings of the Saints, and their miracles he would
demonstrate how great the excellency of the same virtues is. Allsoe in twenty
and two homelies, he expounded the first and last part of the Prophet Ezechiel,
which seemed to contain greatest obscurity, and declared how great light lay
hid therein. Moreover he writ upon the Proverbs, and the Canticles; of the
Prophets; of the books of Kings, of the books of Moses, and many others,
with very many Epistles, which for breuities sake I omit to cite in
particular. And that which most of all I wonder at, is, that he could compile
so many and so great volumes, when almost all the time of his His many
afflictions with sickness.
youth (that I may use his own phrase) he was tormented with such cruel
gripings, and pains of his entrailles, that every hour and moment, the
virtue and strength of his stomach being overthrown, the fainted. He gasped
allsoe with the pains of feauers, which albeit they were but slack, yet were
they continual: and oftentimes he was vehemently tormented with the gout.

X. BUT IN the mean time, while he carefully considered that (as the scripture
witnesses) every child that is received in scourged, by how much the more he
was more rudely depressed with present evils, so much the surer he presumed
of his eternal reward. Moreover, he was tired with a continual care in
ordained a watch His great care of the Church.
over the city, to guard it from enemies. Allsoe he bore a mind full of fear
daily, by reason of the dangers he often heard his ghostly children and
subjects were in. But being besett on all sides with such and so many
encumbrances, yet he was never idle, or at rest, but either did somewhat for the
increase, and furtherance of his subjects, and spiritual children, or writ
something worthy the Church, or else labored, by the grace of divine
contemplation, to make him self familiar with the secrets of heaven. In sum,
when very many, almost out of all parts of Italy, fearing the sword of the
Longobards, flocked on all sides to the City of Rome, he His great piety and
charity.
most diligently cared for them all, and feeding their souls with his divine
sermons, he provided them allsoe with sufficient succor, and nourishment for
the body. For his soul was so conquered with the love of pity, that he did
not only give comfort and succor to those that were present with him, but to
such as lived far off, he would likewise impart the pious works of his
bounty; in so much that he sent helps to some servants of God that lived in
the Mount Sinai. For indeed other Bishops bent their endeauours chiefly in
building and adorning Churches with gould, and silver; but this allbeit he was
not wanting herein: yet did he in a manner omit those good works, that he
might wholly, and entirely apply him self to the gayning of souls; and what
soever money he could get, he was careful to distribute, and give it to the
poor, that his righteousness Psalm. 3. v. 8 Job. 29. 13.
might remain ever, and his authority be exalted in glory. So that he might
truly say that of holy Job: The Benediction of one in distress came upon me,
and I comsorted the heart of the widdowe. I am clothed with justice, and I
have clothed my self with my own judgment, as with a garment, and a diadem.
J was an eye to the blind, and a foot to the lame: J was a father of the
poor, and most diligently J searched out a cause, which J knew not. And a
little after: See if I have eaten my morsel of bread alone, and the orphan
has not Ibid. c. 31. 18.
eaten of it; because from my infancy pity grew together with me, and came
with me out of my mothers womb.

XI. ON AND not the lest of his works of piety, and zeal was the delivering
of the English Nation, by his preachers thither sent, out of the servitude of
the ancient enemy, to be made participant of the everlasting freedom. For
whosoever faithfully adhereth unto our Lord, shall of his bountiful reward
have aduanceme^t daily to higher matters. Therefore while this holy man
labored with ardent desire to gather together by parcels an harvest of
faithful souls; our pious Lord gave him the great grace to convert the whole
nation of the English. Of which conversion (performed without question by the
special providence of almighty God) this was the occasion. As upon a time
some merchants came to Rome with diverse kinds of merchandise to be sold, and
that many poeple flocked to the Market place, some to buy, others to see, it
happened that GREGORY, before he He finds Englishmen to be fould in Rome.
was adorned with the Papal dignity, came amongst the rest, and saw among
other things, children of very dainty white bodies; fair complexions, and
lovely hair, exposed to sale; Whom as he beheld, he demanded (as it is
reported) out of what country or land they were brought: and it was told him
they came from the Island of Britain, the Inhabitants whereof shined all with
the like beauty: Again he asked whether they were Christians in that Island,
or entangled in the error of Paganism: That they were Pagans, it was
answered; Then fetching a deep sigh from the bottom of his heart, O
lamentable case (said he) that men of so bright faces should be in the
possession of the author of Darkness, and that so sweet a comlines of
countenance should bear minds void of inward joys. Again therefore he
demanded, what was the name of that nation: It was replied, that they were
called ANGLES. Rightly they are termed so, (said he) for they have ANGELICAL
faces, and it is fit, that such be made coheires with the ANGELS in heaven.
Out of what Province (pursued he) are these brought hither? It was resolved
him, that they were called, DEIRI. With good reason (said he) for thy are to be
delivered from IRE, and wrath, to be called to the mercy of CHRIST-IESVS. But
the King of that Province how is he called? ADDELLE (replied they.) And
alluding to that name he said; that to the praise of almighty God? ALLELVIA
should be sung in those parts. And goeing to the Bishop of the Roman Apostolic
His zealous desire to convert the English
Sea, he earnestly requested him to send some Preachers of the Gospel into
Britain, to convert the English nation to to CHRIST'S Church, affirming him
self to be most ready, by the help of God, to undertake that sacred work, if
so it might stand with the good liking of the Apostolicque Sea. To which
request, the Pope at first denied his consent, till at length overcome, and
wearied with his unwearied entreaties, he yielded against his will. But he,
concealing the business of his goeing from the citizens, who, had they known
would never have consented He begins his journey toward England.
thereunto, with as speed as he could, having received the Apostolical
benediction, began his journey. In the mean time the news was blown into the
ears of the Romans, who all with one mind, and voice, as well the citizens, as
those of the suburbs, met with Pope Pelagius, as he was goeing to saint PETER'S
Church, all crying out with a terrible noise and repeating these words. Alas,
Apostolical man, what have thou done? Thou have offended saint PETER,
overthrown Rome, thou not only have dismissed, but expelled Gregory. The Pope
being moved herewith (for he feared the poeple) sent letters to recall
GREGORY out of his journey. But before the messengers had overtaken him, he
was got three days journey on his way. In the mean time, (as the manner is
with travelers) about the sixth hour, some of his companions took their rest
in a fair meadow, or were busied other ways, whilst he read to those that
sat by his side, when a locust came leaping about him, and lighting on his
book sat upon the very page he read. GREGORY perceauing her sit so
quietly there, turning to his fellows, Locusta (said he) may be etimologised
with, Loco-sta; that is stand in the place. And you must know that we may not
proceed any further in our intended journey; rise notwithstanding, and
prepare our horses, that as long He is called back by the Pope,
as it is lawful, we may hold on our way. And whilst they discoursed thus
together, the Popes messengers came suddenly upon them, with their horses
sweating out of have; and delivered their letters; which being read; It is even
so (said he to his fellows) as unhappily I foretold, for we must presently
return to Rome. And so they did.

But as as soon as he was invested in the Papal dignity, he accomplished
this long desired work, and sent other preachers; he him self (that their
preaching might take good effect) fortifying their mission with his pious
exhortations, prayers, and rewards. In sum, he sent into the same Island the
servants of God AUSTIN, MELLITVS, and JOHN, with many other Monks that feared
England converted by S. Augustine a Benedictine Monk.
God, who in a short space converted the chiefest King that inhabited the head
of the same Island, together with all his poeple. And herein God granted them
so great grace in doing of wonders, that they confirmed the doctrine of faith
which they preached with their mouths, with the force, and efficacy of strange
signs and miracles: whence it came to pass, that within a few years, the
other Kings of the same Island, with their whole number of subjects, received
the Christian faith. Of whose deeds, conversion, and the wonderful miracles
done therein, saint GREGORY speaks thus in the books of his Morals. Behold
the Britain tongue that heretosore knew nothing else, but rude accents of
barbarism, began now lately to warble forth the divine praises in the Hebrew
language. Behold the Ocean in times past swelling with rage, becomes obedient,
and calm under the feet of the Saints; and they, whose barbarous valor the
Princes of the world could not subdue with the sword, are by the fear of God
calmed with the simple words of his Priests; And who seared not whole troops
of armed infidels, and fierce soldiers, do now tremble being faithful at the
lest words of humble men. For having understood the divine tidings of the
Gospel made manifest with many miracles, the virtue of heavenly knowledge is
infused into them; that bridled with the terror of his divine majesty, they
are afraid to do ill, desiring with all their hearts by docing well, to
attain to the grace of enerlasting life. All which that it might be brought to
pass, almighty God granted it unto S. GREGORY in such sort, that
deservedly the English poeple ought to call him their APOSTLE: for allthough to
others he is not an Apostle, yet to them he is; for they are the seal of his
Apostleship in our Lord.

XII. BUT NOW, to ask whether this man of so great merit, has been likewise
famous in doing of miracles, is a superfluous question, since it is as clear
as the day, that he by his own merits was able to show signs of virtue, who
could through the bounty of CHRIST, obtain the like for others, if occasion
had required. But for the better satisfaction of those allsoe, who together
with the Jews require visible signs, to show sainctity; and for the greater
edification of those, that by the example of saints, seek to stir up and
advance them selves to higher degrees of virtue, I am determined to set down
some few miracles, which our Lord wrought at his intercession, thereby to rowse
up the slothful dullnes of our minds, and strengthen the feeblenes of our
hearts, inclined rather to want of belief, then ignorance of what we rehearse.

XIII. A NOBLE woman in the city of Rome, out of her good affection to
devotion, and religion, was wont to make offering breads for the altar, and
every sunday to bring them to the Church, and deliver them to the holy Pope
him self, presuming on her custom and familiarity in so doing. One day it
happened that when she came (as the manner is) to receive at the hands of the
Blessed Pope, and he offered to give her the sacred Eucharist saying; Corpus
Domini noflri Jesus Christi etc. She smiled, and that so broadely, that the
holy man perceauing, refused to give her the communion, but turning again to
the altar, laid that sacred particle by it self, commending it to the Deacon
to be reserved, until the rest of the poeple had communicated. And the Sacred
mysteries of Mass being ended, B. GREGORY demanded of the woman, what was in
her mind, which moved her to laughe being about so dreadful a work. I
perceived (said she) that particle to be of the same bread, which I made with
my own hands, and offered unto thee; and understanding it to be called the
Corpus Domini, the body of our Lord, I could not but laugh. Then the holy
Bishop made a speech to the Poeple herevppon, earnestly exhorting them to make
humble prayers unto our Lord, that for the strengthening of the faith of many,
he would make that visible to corporal eyes, which the misbeleef of this
woeman, ought to have beheld with the spiritual eyes of the soul, and the
light of faith. And prayer to this effect being publicly made, the holy man
together with the poeple, and the woeman, arose, and returning to the altar,
in the public view of the poeple, that pressed on to behold that heavenly
spectacle, he discovered the Pall, or Corporal, where he found the Sacred Host
turned The Sacrament appears in true form of flesh.
into the form of flesh, and part of his little finger, which touched it,
stained with fresh blood; in the mean time the whole multitude of poeple, and
the foresaid woeman her self looking on. Then turning to the woeman; Learn now
(said he) at least to believe the truth, bearing witness for it self. The bread
which J Joan. 6. Proof of the real presence.
give is my flesh, and my blood is truly drink. But the foreseeing Creator of
our weakness, by the same power, by which he created all things of nothing,
forms unto him self (the holy ghost concurring thereunto) a body, out of the
flesh of the euer-Virgin MARIE; and by the Sanctification of the same holy
spirit, and virtue of the Catholicque prayer, he daily conuerteth Bread, into
his Body, and wine mingled with water, into his blood, for the reparation of
our infirmity. This said; he commanded the whole company to beseech the
divine power to reform that Sacred Mystery, into its former shape, whereby it
might be made communicable for that woeman; which was presently done. And she
afterward increased in strength to her faith, and religion, being consecrated
in the participation of that blessed Sacrament; and all that beheld this
miracle, grew more fervent in the love of almighty God, and more fortified in
the Chatholicque belief.

XIV. ALLSOE a man noble by birth, and as powerful in authority, according to
the manner of his royal magnificence, had by many between-messengers obtained
the familiarity of the Apostolicque A nobleman sends to him for Re^icks.
sea, and been sufficiently instructed in the worship of God, and his saints,
by the frequent admonishments of S. GREGORY, in his letters to him; sent some
lusty men of his, with Gifts unto the holy Pope, desiring to receive back
some relics of the blessed Apostles, and Martirs bodies. The Pope honorably
entertayning those Ambassadors, stayed them some while with him, he in the
mean time, never ceasing to visitt, and go about the sacred tombs, and
monuments of the holy Apostles, and Martirs; and after the old fashion,
celebrating his holy Sacrifices to this purpose, when he had finished the
Masses of these Saints, whose Relics were demanded, he reserved every
linen corporal a part, on which he had executed those Sacred mysteries, and
putt each of them into a box by it self. This done, he sealed them with the
seal of his Apopostolicall authority, and delivered them to those petitioners
for Ecclesiastical uses. Who with due reueerence received his benediction, and
departed merryly away. But having spent some days in A rash curiosity.
their journey, the chiefest amongst the^ told his fellows, speaking out of
an over curious folly, that in vain they had undertaken the labor of so
great a voyage, returning ignorant of what precious stuff they brought back to
their Lord: therefore breaking up the seals of the Apostolical dignity, they
opened the boxes, and found in each of them, nothing but a poor parcel of
linen cloth. Therefore returning in a great fury to Rome, thy made their
complaint to the Archdeacon: For what cause (said they) does our Apostolic
Lord the Pope, so basely esteem of our Lord and Master, who was in hope he
had gained so high a place in his favor, that he would thus delude him, and
purchase to us dishonor, and blame in his sight? For indeed we thought our
selves the bearers of some present worthy the worth of our Master, as the
bones of the holy Apostles or Martirs, from so great a Prelate as this,
especially having taken so long, and hard a journey to find it, and yet we
have received noe other treasure then some small parcells of cloth, as if such
kind of rags were not to be found with us. Surely had not our own careful
warines been our aid, to make us find out what we carried, we had returned
like fools to our Master, and not without the great impeachement of our
credditt, and favor with him. But the Archdeaco^ gave a modest check to their
presumptuous boldness for aduenturing, in a matter of such moment, to violate
the Papal feales, exhorting them to return, and with honor present what they
had received to their Master. But by noe means would they listen to his
counsel, till they were brought to the presence of the holy Pope, who having
found the matter, had great patience with their folly, and commanded them to
be present at the Sacred mysteries of Mass. Which done, and come to the place
where he accustomed to preach, he persuaded the poeple to supplicate for so
much favor at the hands of almighty God, and his Saints, that he would
voutchafe so to manifest his power herein, that those who less evidently, and
who alltogeather ignorantly believed, might know of how great meritt true faith
was. The prayer being ended, he took a knife from him that had violated the
seals, and upon the altar of S. PETER'S body thrusting it into one of those
pieces of linen, cut it in two: whence straight there issued a stream of
blood that sprinkled the linen all over. But the straingers, and all the No^te
a wonderful miracle.
poeple seeing this wonderful, and hidden miracle of our faith, fell flatt to
the ground, adoring our Lord the worker of miracles, and crying out with the
Psalmist: God is wonderful in his Sainsts, the God Psalm. 67. v. 38.
of Jsrael he will give virtue, and strength to his poeple; Blessed be God. And
silence made, B. GREGORY among others documents of faith, said to those that
before so lightly esteemed of holy relics: Know Brethren, that in the
consecration of the body, and blood of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, when for the
Sainctifying of relics in honor of his Apostles, or Martirs, to whom they
were specially assigned, in the oblation of that Sacrifice on the holy altar,
their blood shed for the name of JESUS CHRIST, entered these clothes. All that
had seen being much edified, and strengthened in their faith, he sealed up the
boxes again with his own signet, and delivered them the incomparable rewards
of his good wishes: who returning joyfully home, made a formal relation unto
their Master of what had happened, and gave him the accomplishment of his good
desire. For he receiving the precious patronages of the Saints with great
reverence, and honor, set them up in an eminent place, where even to this. day
it has pleased allmighty God, to the praise, and glory of his sacred name, to
work more frequent miracles, then in S. PETER'S Church at Rome.

XV. THERE was a man in Rome powerful in riches but poor in A man that
diuorceth his wife.
religion, who abounded noe less in vices then in goods; for having conceived
a displeasure at his wife, contrary to the precept of our Savior, he gave her
a bill of divorce. This could not lie hid from B. GREGORY, for the greatness of
the fact, and the persons, quickly betrayed it. Therefore he earnestly, and
incessantly endeavored to persuade this wretched man, first with mild
admonitions, then with the terours of the district judgment of God, to return
again into grace with his wife, from whom he could not be separated, but either
by death, or the mutual consent of both parties. But he, being prevented with
a diabolical stubbornes, contemned his good admonitions; Whom S. GREGORY, by
apostolical authority, segregated from the communion of the Church, till he
recanted. But the Is excommunicated by S. Gregory.
wretch slighting that excommunication, and taking it very ill, heaped sins
upon sins; for breathing revenge against the holy man, he hired two
magitians with money, to exercise the skill of their black art against him.
Therefore as one day the B. Pope went in procession, they stood waiting a far
off for his coming, but not knowing him, they were told that to be him riding
in Pontifical dignity, with troops of Churchmen on all sides. Then looking
upon him, they began with their sorcerie, to vex his horse; and straight the
holy man calsing upon the name of our Lord JESUS Two magitians miraculously
punished.
CHRIST, with the sign of the Cross drove away those diabolical practices;
and casting his eye aside, as soon as he beheld the Magitias, they were
suddenly stricken blind, and fell down backwards, being them selves assaulted
by the same devils. Whereby the Blessed man understood, that mischief to be
wrought by them: and being brought before him, they betraved the whole course
of the Matter: For ever (answered the holy Pope) you must remayme in your
blindness, left seeing make you attempt your former wickedness again. But in the
name of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, and the help of S. PETER the Apostle, be ye
hereafter freed from the affliction of the devils. Being imediately delivered
from those ill spirits they belecued in CHRIST, and were purged in the sacred
font of Baptism: and remaining for ever in the sentence of their blindness,
from thence forward by the command of S. GREGORY, they were maintained with a
stipend from the Church.

XVI. A Tyrant that with an insufferable importunity wrought See the force of
his Eloquence.
great mischief to the peace of the holy Roman Church, most cruelly wasting,
and spoiling her lands, and tenantes, being often admonished by messengers from
the holy Pope, he not only neglected those warnings, but grew into greater
madness in so much, that he adventured to sack the City it self. Against whom
as he came toward Rome, B. GREGORY went him self in person, and having spoken
unto him, he found (God so disposing) so great efficacy in his divine words,
that he gave most humble satisfaction unto the Holy Pope, and promised ever
after to be his obedient subject, and a devout servant unto the Roman Church.
The same man falling afterward into a mortal disease, he sent to entreat the
prayers of the holy Pope: and it was answered him, that our Lord would as yet
give him time to repent, and that being morefully recovered, he should be able
to fall to his meat, as strongly as he had done before. Who obeying his
commands, received his former health, and lived faithfully ever after.

XVII. As the same most perfect, and grateful servant of God GREGORY, went one
day into the Market place of Traian the Emperor, The Emperor Traiaue.
built with such magnificent workmanship, he found that memorable accident;
that in times past when that Prince of the world, entrenched about with thick
troops of armed soldiers, went on a hasty expedition, he met there a poor
widow fallen away with old age, and grief, who with a weeping voice cried
unto him: Most pious Prince Traia^e (said she) behold here the men that have
slain my only son, the only staff, and comfort of my old age, and now
desirous to kill me too, they will not deigne to give me any account, or
recompense for him. To whom he, hastily passing by, as his business required;
when I return (said he) tell me of this, and thou shall have all justice. My
Lord, (replied she) and if thou do not return, what shall I do! At that word
he stayed, and caused the guilty persons to be brought before him: And would
not stirrea foot from the place, (allbeit much pressed by all his followers,
with the great have of his journey) until out of his own exchecquer, he had
caused to be paid unto the widow all that was adjudged unto her by the
decrees of the law: and at length being bowed to mercy with the repentant
tears, and prayers of those supplicant offenders, not so much out of his
souueraigne power, as by their entreatie, and his own gentleness, he freed them
out of the chains of the Praetor. For this cause the venerable Pope GREGORY
much grieved in mind, began with weeping lamentations as he prayed, to ponder
with him self these Prophetical, and Euangelical oracles. Thou (o Lord) have
said; Judge ye for the Orphan, Isa 1. 17.
and defend the widow, and then come and argue me. Forgive, and ye shall be
forgiven: For the names sake of thy glory be not unmindful (and I am allsoe an
unworthy sinner) of thy most faithful promise, in the just deeds of this
devout man: And goeing, to the holy shrine of S. PETER, he prolonged his
prayers with weeping, till falling, as it weere, into a sweet sleep, he was
rapt in an ecstasy, in which, he understood by revelation that his prayer was
heard, but that he should noe more presume to make the like petition for any
that died without Baptism, he deserved to be punished Upon which matte^r
curious wits that have perfect faith, may move some questions, and more such
as believe the truth faithfully related: those things, which among men, are, or
seem to be impossible, are easy with almighty God, and profitable to be
declared. Yet in this act the safest way for all, is to reverence the secret
judgment of the divine power, and piety, and noe man to discuss, and examine
the same.

XVIII. To conclude, after his death it has been faithfully related unto us by
Peter Deacon, a virtuous, and religious man, and Peter Deacon sees the holy
Ghost in form of a Dove ou^r S. Gregory.
for the deserved worth of his religion, and service, very familiar with this
our most holy father, that when the never enough named vessel of election, and
house of the holy ghost GREGORY did interpret the last vision of the Prophet
Ezechiel, the curtain being spread between him, and the same Peter, who writ
as he did dictate; the holy Doctor being silent at times, his servant bored a
little hole in the curtain, and spying through it by chance, he saw a dove
whiter then any snow sitting on his head, that held her beak along time close
to his mouth: and when she withdrew it thence, the holy Pope began to speak,
and his scribe to write what he said. But when that Sacred organ of the holy
ghost was silent, again his servant Peter laid his eye to the hole, and he
beheld him, his hands, and eyes lifted up to heaven, as at his prayers,
receiving the beak of the white dove into his mouth, as before. Which the holy
man at length understanding by the revelation of the same B. spirit, he became
wonderfully sad, severely threatening, and forbidding him by Apostolicque
authority, ever to reveal to any man what he had seen, during his life.
Which command he faithfully observed, till after the death of the Blessed
Pope, being compelled thereunto by the envy of some wicked persons (who did
condemn the holy man of pride, and presumption, for speaking such, and so
great matters touching the mysteries of heavenly secrets) he faithfully
revealed that he had seen all these things, which are here related. After the
holy Popes A famine in Rome.
death, when a migthie famine raged too too much not only in the city of Rome
it self, but in all the adjacent countreies there abouts, and the Pope his
successor opened the barnes of the Church to those that would buy corn; and
shutt them to those whom B. GREGORY had ordered to be maintained with
Church-stipends in the monasteries, Deanries, and hospitals, in and about the
City, they began (compelled with extremity want) to cry out unto the Pope:
My Lord, let not your holiness suffer those to perish with hunger, whom our holy
father your predecessor S. GREGORY, endeavored hitherunto to nourish. He
grieuing at their lamentations, answered; that albeit GREGORY, to the renown
of his praise was careful to maintain all the poeple, yet we are not able so
to do; and so he let them depart void of comfort. Which answer having been
often times repeated to those that cried unto him, B GREGORY appeared thrice in
a vision unto him, and S. Gregory appears to the Pope.
rebuked him with a mild chiding, for detracting of him, and his own
niggardlines, warning him withal of the extreme want of those poor poeple.
But he was nether moved therewith to fulfill his commands, nor refrained his
tongue from those ill reports, nor yet opened his hands to the exercise of
bounty toward the needy. Whereupon S. GREGORY appearing the fourth time
unto him, gave him a horrible check, and threatningly struck him a blow on the
head, with the grief whereof he died not long after.

XIX. THVS much briefly of the life, and deeds of S. GREGORY. But as long as
the sphere of this world shall hold its course, his memorable name shall
allwaies receive increase. For doubtless it is ascribed to his glory, that
the English Church becomes allwaies fruictfuller with a new offspring of
sainctitie, and allsoe that by his divine learning, many throughout the world
forsaking their offenses, are converted to the mercy of CHRIST, and others
incensed with his pious admonitions, more earnestly labor to attain to the
Kingdom of heaven. Which most Blessed Pope when he had gloriously governed the
sea of the Apostolicque Roman Church, thirteen years, six moueths, and ten
days, being taken out of this mortal light, he was translated to the
indeficient glory of the Kingdom of heaven. His body was buried in the Church
of S. PETER the Apostle before the Sacristie, the thirteenth day of March, to
rise hereafter in glory with the others Pastors of the holy Church. On his
tomb was written an Epitaph which because it comes short of the worth of so
great a Saint, we omit.

AND This is the life of S. GREGORY as it was briefly written The Authors of
his life.
by Paul Warenfrid commonly called Paul Deacon; much more might be said of this
glorious Pope, and much more is said of him by many grave authors of his
life, Onuphrius Panuinus in his Epitome of the Roman Bishops; S. ILDEPHONSE a
Benedictin monk Archbishop of Toledo, in his book of the writings of famous
men, Photius Patriark of Constantinople; and more amply then all John Deacon a
Benedictin Monk has written four books of his life; in a word the world is
full of grave authors and learned men which endeavor to speak his praises,
but in the end all confess their pens far too weak, and unable worthyly
to write, what he so excellently was able to do. He is styled by them to be,
A man of wonderful A worthy commendation of S. Gregory.
learning, Prince of the Divines, light of the Philosophers, splendor of the
Orators, Mirror of Sainctity, and Organ of the holy Ghost. But out of a large
Catalogue of other famous writers the trumpets of his glory, I will only
recite some few words which Saint ILDEPHONSE before named says of him: Saint
GREGORY, full of a seeling of the fear of God, and exceeding in humility, was
through the grace of the holy Ghost endowed with so great a light of science,
that not only these present times, but nether could the time past ever show
his equal. For so highly he excelled in the perfection of all deserts, that
setting aside all comparisons of famous men, antiquity can show us nothing to
parallel him: For he overcame ANTHONY in sainctity, CIPRIAN in eloquence. and
AUSTIN in science etc. And saint ISIDORE writes that not any doctor of his
time, nor of the ancients nether, was comparable to him. And as it is in the
8. Council of Toledo, that saint GREGORY in moral matters ought to be
preferred before almost all the doctors of the Church. He died the twelfth
day of March in the year of our Lord 607. the third of Phocas the Emperor.

But that I may end where I began, how far is the greatest part of our
wretched Country fallen from that religion which this The conclusion.
holy Pope first planted therein? Nay such as he him self, and the Apostles he
sent were, that is Priests and Monks, are now held for wicked traitors, and
whatsoever slanders worse can be uttered against their holy profession and
function. O what would Blessed Saint GREGORY say if he lived now to see his
pious labors come at length to so unhappy a periode? to see Churches pulled
down, Monasteries robbed, priests tortured, imprisoned, and hanged, all
goodness, piety, and religion expelled, and beatten into corners, all vice,
impiety, and heresy set abroach, to lead men hedlong into the bottomless
gulphes of damnation. But let us hope at lest for better, and expect till the
goodness of almighty God shall please to receive us again into his favor,
whose eternal providence doubtless, has permitted us to fall into these
miseries, being pulled thereunto with the weight of our own heavy sins, and
offenses. Let us make our daily prayers unto our Lord I. C. that by the merits,
and intercession of this glorious Saint, our first Father, and Apostle, whom
he so highly exalted both in heaven, and earth, that he would grant us the
grace to imitate that pattern of life and religion, which he has laid before
us in his own works, and sent us at first by his disciples. Whose care of our
Country as in his life it was very great, so since his death eue^ to this
day, he has not forgotten us, for, as then he sent his Benedictin Monks to
bring the first tidings of catholic religion amongst us English, so yet he
cease not to send from a monastery lately built and dedicated to his holy
name, many learned men of the same Benedictin order, and religion, to labor
in the conversion of souls to their ancient catholic and Apostolic faith.
For whom, I the unworthiest amongst them, dare bouldly avouch so much, that
they are all ready to seal the writing of that faith and religion which they
preach, with the testimony of their own dearest blood. God of his infinite
mercy through the merits of this glorious saint, grant grace unto our
wretched country, so to listen unto those, and others her teachers, that she
may return again to the unity of our holy mother the Catholic, and
Apostolic Church. Amen.

The life of S. PATRICK Bishop and confessor, Apostle of Jreland
MAR. 17 Written by Ioceline a Monk of Furnes
SAINT PATRICK, for the excellency of his virtues worthyly surnamed the
Great, was borne of the race of ancient Britans, in that part of Wales now
called Pembrookshire; but the glory, and fame of his divine learning, life,
and miracles, shined chiefly among His parents
the inhabitans of Jreland, who then were called Scotts. His fathers name was
Calphurnius, his mothers Conquessa, sister to the great Saint MARTIN
Archbishop of Tours. In his Youth, together with his two sisters and a brother
he was taken Captive, and like an other Joseph, sold into Ireland to a king
named Milcho. And as Joseph He is sold into Ireland
being a Slave in Egypt, was after a long ^uffring of adversity, raised at
length to the supreme power and Princedom of the country, so PATRICK having
endured the affliction of his sale and slavery in Ireland, received the
dignity, and primacie of the spiritual government of the same. Joseph
furnished the hunger-starud Egiptia^s with grain; PATRICK in his time,
nourished the poor Jrish languishing in the blindness of Idolatry, with the
wholesome food of the Christian faith. They both tasted the smart of bodyly
affliction, for the greater good of the soul, and were as gould in a furnace
purified in the scorching flames of adversity. Then by the command of the
Prince, PATRICK was made guardian of the Kings hoggs, in the north part of the
Country; when it was strange to see He keeps swine
the wonderful increase of that ffock, under so pious a guide. The holy youth
bowing humbly to his fortune, turned that necessity His exercise of piety
being in mi^erie.
into a virtue, and having by this office purchased to him self a solitarines;
he piously labored in the sauation of his own soul. Dwelling in the
mountains, woods, and caves of a desert, he exercised him self in prayer,
fasting, and meditation, wherein he tasted the divine sweetness of almighty
God; being amidst these afflictions, often visited, and conforted with angels
from heaven. It was not the cruelty either of heat, cold, frost, or snow, or
any other roughnes of weather that could fright him from his spiritual
exercises: But he still went on corragiously in his pious course, daily
increasing, and profitting more and more in the way of virtue, and growing
stronger in faith, and the love of JESUS CHRIST.

II. AT LENGTH, the almighty goodness, that freed the children of Israel out
of the bondage of Egypt, delivered his servant Patrick, by special miracle,
out of this affliction, and restored him after six years servitude in Ireland,
to his native country and friends He has a vision.
again, to the great joy, and confort of his parents, and kinsfolks. He
remained some days with them, till by the occasion of a dream or vision, he
was inspired otherwise. For he saw a man in his sleep, who, as he throught,
came out of Ireland with many letters in his hand, whereof he gave him one,
which began thus: This is the voice of the Irishmen. And having read so much,
he seemed at the same instant to hear the voices of many infants in Jreland
crying out of their mothers wombs: We beseech thee holy. Father come walk
amongst us, and deliver us. And a waking, he gave thanks unto allmigtie God,
judging for certain, that God had called him to convert that country.
Therefore, he resolueed to settle him self to the study of holy learning, and
the better to putt his resolution in practice, like an other Abraham, he left
his country, parents, friends, and all, and went over into France, where,
under the learned tutorship of He studieth in France under S. German.
S. GERMANS Bishop of A^xer, he spent eighteen years in the continual study,
and reading of holy scriptures. And at length, the fame holy bishop seeing the
great signs of virtue, learning, and religion in PATRICK promoted him to the
sacred dignity of Priesthood. Then he departed to his uncle S. MARTIN
Archbishop of Tours, with whom he stayed some days reading, and conferring
what he had learned: And because S. MARTIN was a monk, he gave likewise the
monastical habit to his cozen, together with all his manner of regular
observance, which PATRICK not only received with devotion, but perseuering ever
after therein was an orname^t to the habitt he wore with the corespondencie of
his virtuous life and actions. And in all things showed him self worthy of so
noble, so virtuous an uncle, and so excellent a master. This done, he
returned to S. GERMAN with whom he had not stayed long, before he revealed unto
him an earnest desire he had to go to Rome, the fountain and head of all true
religion, and Ecclesiastical discipline. S. GERMAN He goes to Rome
approved his good purpose, and gave him all the furtherance he could for his
journey. But by the way he chanced to meet with an holy Hermit who gave him a
staff, which was said to have been in the sacred hands of JESUS CHRIST; and by
virtue of this staff, he wrought many miracles afterward, and it was held in
great veneration among the Irish, and is to this day, by the name of
Iesus-staffe. But S. PATRICK being safely arrived at Rome, was very honorably
entertained by Pope Celestin the first, who then governed the sea Apostolic,
and finding him to be of a most perfect, and approved faith learning, and
virtue, first gave him the name of PATRICK (for before he was called Suchar, or
Suchet) and having invested him with episcopal dignity, afterward he sent
him to preach the faith of CHRIST He is sent to Preach in Ireland.
to the rude inhabitans of Ireland. Not long before, he had sent thither for
the same purpose, one Paladius his Archdeaco^; but the Jrishmen, refusing to
receive him, and his doctrine, he was forced to return back to Rome; and
afterward coming into England died in the confines of the Picts. Therefore S.
PATRICK not only succeeded him in that holy embassage, and labor, but far
exceeded him in the fruict he reaped out of both. And truly the works and
miracles which are reported of him in the conversion of that country, are so
many, so infinite, and some so beyond the degrees of admiration, that they
seem almost to be beyond faith too. At lest they are far beyond the limitts
of this short treatise, and therefore I wittingly omit the greatest part of
them, not that I think the^ void of all truth, (God forbid) but because, some
are reported with overmuch piety, or credulity, and by such authors at
first, whose names are unknown, and consequently their testimony cannot
carry his just weight in the balla^ce of true history. But before we enter
into S. PATRICKS preaching in Ireland, let the great S. HIEROME tell us what
manner of men he had to deal with. That nation (says he) had The rudenes of
the Irish poeple.
not proper wines, but as if they had read PLATOS. Policy, and followed the
example of CATO, like beasts they satiated. their lust according a^ every one
thought best. He likewise affirms that he him self being in France had seen
lib. 2. contra Jouin. cap. 6.
those poeple cate man's Flesh, and that they were wont when they did light on
shepherds. that kept their flocks in woods and desert places, to cut of the
buttocks of men, and the paps of women, affirming those to be the only
delights of all other meats. Noe wonder then, that it pleased almighty God
to show such strange signs, and miracles, by S. PATRICK; as so many
necessary instruments to work the conversion of that rude, fierce, and
barbarons poeple, whose iron hearts could not be mollified, but in the
powerful flames of wonderful great virtue, and sainctitie.

III. S. PATRICK therefore and his fellows coming a shore amongst this rude
poeple in the north part of the Country called Vl^ter, found His entrance into
Ireland.
a multitude of Pagans expecting his arrival, come to meet him. For their
Magitians, and Negromancers had foretold his coming before, and therefore, the
chief king of the Country Leogarie by name had provided that watch thinking to
make his entering into the Island, his goeing out of the world. Against whom
presently that dogged crew let loose a cruel mastiffe, to give the gripes of
death unto the holy Bishop. But the dogg^ forgetting his wonted fiercenes, was
stricken so dumb, and stark at the sight of the holy man, that he stood like
a stone, without any show of motion: giving an evident token, that his setters
on, who worshipped Idols of stone, were like the Gods they worshipped. Which
being perceived by one Dichu One Dichu endeavors to kill S. Patrick.
a man of mighty strength, and stature, he straight lifted up his sword to
give the holy man his death. But his strength became feeblenes, having the
force of the Almighty opposing it; for his arm, and whole body grew in a
moment so stiff, that he could nether move his foot to go on, nor bring
down the Dichu co^uer^ed by miracle.
threatening blow he intended. Whereupon, by the preaching of saint PATRICK, he
presently became a new man, renounced his Idolatry, and was washed in the
sacred font of baptism, together with all his family. So that he, who in
that Province was the greatest and chiefest impugner of Christianity, became
the ringleader, and first professor thereof: and constantly remained in the
same whilst he lived. And as at that time, his soul was released out of the
bonds of sin, so likewise all the parts of his body were restored again to
the function of their wonted strength, and vigor. Therefore he gave unto saint
PATRICK, as an argument of his newly conceived devotion to Christian religion,
that land with the appurtenances, where this miracle happened, to build a new
Church thereon: and this Church (according to the desire of Dichu) was not
built from East to west (as the manner is) but from North to south; perhapps,
that from the Northern coldness of Paganism, those Idolaters might be incited
by the mystery of this edifice, to the meridia^ fervor of Christian faith,
and charity. In this place afterward S. PATRICK built a famous monastery,
into which he introduced a convent of perfect monks and ordained S. DVNNE his
disciple abbot thereof: with whom he him self returning from his labor of
preaching, was wont somes times to remain.

IV. AS ONCE he celebrated the divine sacrifice of mass in the same Church, a
wicked Magitian maliciously thrusting a long rodd in at the window, ouerturned
his chalice and shed the most precious Ransom of our Redemption upon the
altar. Whereat the holy man being exceedingly troubled and grieved in mind,
burst out into tears, when on the sudde^, behold by the divine handy work of
God, the chalice A magitia^ miracu^ously punished.
appeared again standing upright in the place before him, and noe ^igne could
be seen on the aulthar clothes of that divine offering. But the diabolical
worker of that mischievous act escaped not a just punishment for his temeritie,
for at the same instant, the earth it self (as it were weary, and ashamed to
carry such a hellish monster (opened her bowels and swallowed him up alive,
to send him to his grandmaster of darkness in hell. And in the same place, as a
token of Gods revenge, there remained a hollow ditch ever after. Then S.
PATRICK went to Milcho, under whom he had lived before in servitude, and Milcho
burns him self, and his goods.
now he hoped to deliver him from the servitude of the Devil, to the sweet
freedom of CHRIST'S ghospel. But he hearing of his coming, those rather to give
him self a perpetual slave to hell, then to seem to become subject to him,
that before had been his servant For having gathered all his wealth and goods
together into a heap, and putt him self into the midst, he set all on fire,
and having so burnt his body in sacrifice to the devil, he made, as it were,
a torch of his riches to light his soul the direct way to hell. This being
seen and understood by Saint PATRICK, he sighed, and wept grievously for the
space of two hours; and at length opening his prophetic mouth, he foretold,
that in punishment of this wickedness, none of his children, or generation
should ever enjoy the government of their fathers estate, but should live as
slaves all their life time; as after wards it fell out. And S. PATRICK,
returning back to his beloved friend, Dichu, stayed somes days with him,
continually preaching teaching, and strengthening the Christian faith with his
wonderful learning, He overthrows the Magitians.
zeal, and miracles; so that the Idols of Paganism began every where to be
destroyed, and the number of Christians daily increased. And allbeit his good
endeauours were most cruelly resisted by the Magitians (whereof that Country
was full) yea by the maine vpholder of magicians, the chiefest King of all the
Country, yet strengthened with the armor of Gods heavenly grace, and a secure
conscience, he passed through all those difficulties. For like unto an other
PETER, he called down a magitian, that in defense of his Idolatry was flying
toward heaven, to receive deaths rude salutation on the earth: And as an other
Moses, who putt down the Magitians of Egypt, he overcame many doctors of
that black art, in showing of strainge signs, and miracles which discovered
and dissipated all the fantastical illusions, and deceipts of their hellish
practices.

V. BUT King Leogaires heart like a second Pharao was hardened The king^ malice
against S. Patrick.
so far, that the more virtues shined in S. PATRICK, the more he endeavored
to exercise his renengfull wrath against him, for seeing his magitians, whom
so highly he favored, by his means confounded, and especially to revenge the
death of his greatest diabolical favorite, he assembled a troop of men
together to murder him, which the holy man perceauing, with an undaunted
courage went toward them, using that verse of the Psalm. Let God rise, and
his enemies be dissipated: and let those that hate him, Psalm. 6^. v. 1.
fly from before his face. When on a sudden there arose such a terrible His
wicked troops are dispersed.
earthquake, such horrible thunder-clapps, threatening to shiue^ the vautes of
heaue^n into pieces appeared in the glittering skies, that some of that
euill-minded company were slain out right, others totally disheartened, and
the whole crew putt to flight. And such a spirit of giddines seized their
distempered brains, that they fell furiously one upon an other, friend and
brother against brother, till the greatest part of them were slain, only some
few escaped away sorely wounded. The King him self being shrewdly affrighted
herewith, fled secretly away, and hid him self out of the reach of that madding
multitude. The queen came humbly and reverently unto the holy Bishop, to
entreat peace, promising to induce her husband to receive the Christian faith;
And he according to the Leodegaires sayned friendship discovered.
agreement, came to the holy man, and falling on his knees, feigned in words to
adore Christ, whom his heart never thought on: and promising to obey all his
admonitions, he falsely invited PATRICK to voutchsafe the nextday to honor,
his house with hisprese^ce. Who all beit he knew by revelation the deceiptfull
heart of that Host, yet putting his whole confidence in almighty God, he
yielded to his request; and on the morrow, through all the death-threatning
watches, and ambushes laid for him by the way, he passed unknown, and unseen,
till he came to Taragh where then the king was, and entered the Palace hall as
they were at dinner; to the great admiration of the whole company. Then by the
instigation of the king, many damnable plotts were practiced against his life
by those magic professors of deuilishnes, all which, through the power of our
Lords holy protection, and the virtue of the holy cross, he not only
miraculously escaped, but utterly ruined and destroyed, by his contrary
signs, and miracles. But all this heat of virtue did nothing mollify* the
ironheart of Leogaire, but rather incensed him more, and more against the And
all his followers swallowed up in the earth.
holy man, seeing his works prevail so much over the power of his hellish
doctors. Therefore again he mustered a troop of damned ministers to murder
him. But before they could bring their wicked purposes to effect, the earth
(not able to bear such wickedness any longer) opened under the^ and swallowed
up their bodies alive, to send their souls to the merciless gulf of hell.
Which being seen, and understood by the inhabitans of that country, they were
strucke^ with exceeding terror and amazeme^t, and lest they should come to the
like mishap, they all believed in JESUS CHRIST, and thro^ged together to
receive the holy Sacrament of Baptism. And the king humbly demanded pardon
for his temeritie, which the saint easyly gave him, but could not persuade him
to embrace the Christian faith; therefore he left him to follow his own
ways, prophesying that for his hardness of heart none of his generation should
afterward enjoy his kingdom. But his queen believed, was Baptized, and ended
her days happyly.

VI. AND S. PATRICK having confirmed those new Christians in The queen
becomes a Christian.
their faith, took shipping, and sailed to the Province of Meth, where he came
on land at the mouth of the river Boin; But leaving those barbarous poeple in
the Blindness of their Idolatry, he went to one Conallus a great man in those
parts, and brother to the foresaid Leogaire, and him he converted to the
Christian faith. And thence he departed to the Province of Conaght, where being
at his entry much resisted by two magitians his ordinary enemies, at length
overcome with miracles, they believed in JESUS CHRIST, and were Baptized.
Therefore the holy man holding on his course of preaching, destroyed as he went
all Idols, and in a public assembly of a very great multitude of people,
where were allsoe present the seven sohnes of Amblaich, all famous for
nobility of birth, dignity, power, and riches, the man of God, that he might
in such a multitude gain many souls to CHRIST, got into the very thickest
of See the courage and confidence of S. Patrick.
the throng, and lifting up his spiritual weapons of the gospel, to cut
down the brambles of Idolatry, he began to preach the true faith unto them:
when a Magitia^ called Ro^hait rising up against him endeavored to cut of the
thread of his exhortation, and life at once. But the power of all mighty God,
who allwaies defends his servants, sent a thunderbolt sudde^ly from heaven,
which sent the soul of that minister of mischief, to the perpetual service of
his black master in hell. This so manifest, and so terrible a miracle being
seen and marked by all the multitude, the seven foresaid brethren, and twelve
thousand men besides, were converted thereby to the Christian faith, at the
preaching of S. PATRICK, and were all cleansed from the diabolical marks of
Paganism by receiving the Sacred character of Twelve thousand persons
converted.
Christianity in the holy font of Baptism. And leaving the gouuernment of
this poeple to a holy man called Mancenus, He him self traveled over all the
Province of Conaght, attending incessantly to his pious labor of preaching and
teaching those barbarous poeple, until by the helping grace of the holy ghost,
he had converted, and baptized the whole Country. He built Churches in many
places and ordained therein Priests, and other Ecclesiastical ministers by
whose prudence and piety the souls of the poeple might be governed in the
truth, and the divine office duly, and reverently performed.

VII. THIS DONE, S. PATRICK went again into the North part of Ireland,
preaching, teaching, converting, and baptising all the way as he went. Thence
through the confines of Mead, he traveled to the Province of Leinster,
leaving at certain places some of his scholars to execute the office of
Bishops amongst the poeple he had converted. But how great miracles he wrought
in all this and in other his iourneies over that rude country, how many sick
persons he cured, how many Magitians he confounded, how many dead he raised
to life, how many things to come he foretold, and upon how many his
adversaries almighty God powered forth the renengfull ire of strange
punishments, it far exceeds the bounds of this weak pen to set down, and
this short treatise to contain. He arrived at length at the city of Dublin,
where Aiphin the king thereof with his son, and his daughter called Dublinia
(from whom the town took name) and almost all the poeple, The town o^
du^lin converted.
were converted at once to the Christan faith. Hence he traveled to the
Province of Mounster where being kindly received of the King called Oengus, he
baptized him and the greatest part of his poeple. And there he is said to have
raised eighteen persons from death to life at once, besides other particulars.
But seeing so plentiful a harvest in Ireland, and but few workmen, he passed
over the seas into Wales, where with his learning, and zealous labor he
prevailed much against the Pelagian heresy then raygning, and made many
places there allsoe famous for his miracles and sainctitie. As he returned with
a new supply of holy and learned coadiutors toward Ireland, he diuerted into
the I Will of Man (the^ subject to the Britans) He conuerteth the I^e of Man
which by his preaching, and miracles he converted to the says, and left some
of his fellows there to conserve it in the same.

VIII. BEING returned into Jreland, he cha^ced to convert a noble man called
Darius, who seeing and admiring the wonderful virtues and miracles of the
Saint, gave him a large, and fertile piece of land in the province of Vister,
where S. PARTICK having considered the He builds the town of Armagh.
pleasantnes and commodity of the place, built a fair city now called
Armagh: into which he induced noe other inhabitant but such as him self knew to
be well, and soundly grounded, and instructed in the Catholic faith. He allsoe
adorned the same with Churches, Monasteries, and Nunneries, which he furnished
with a learned Clergy, virtuous monks, and religious women, who all lived
under the rules of Ecclesiastical, and monastical perfection, assigned unto
them by S. PATRICK. In the same town he ordained his Archiepiscopall sea,
which he desired to make the Metropolitan Siluester' Gyraldus in topagr. Hib.
of all Ireland; and to that end he made a journey to Rome, to have all
confirmed by the supreme authority of the Sea Apostolicque. The Pope received
him with great courtesy, as the Apostle of Ireland, gave him (...) Palle, made
him his Vicegerent, or Legate in that Country, and confirmed by Apostolical
authority, whatsoever he had ordained, disposed, or done in that Kingdom. And
withal gratified his pious labors with the treasure of many relics of the
Apostles, S. STEPHEN and other Martirs to enrich the Country at his return.
Moreover he gave him a certain linen cloth stained with the sacred Blood of
our Lord IESBS-CHRIST, which heesteemed above all. Load with this spiritual
wealth, the blessed man returned to his Province, and having made his
Archiepiscopall sea of Armagh the Metropolitan of all Ireland, those relics
he placed with great reverence in a shrine behind the high altar. And the
custom of that Church has been ever since the time of this glorious Relics
of Saints worshipped* in S. Patricks daics.
Saint, on the feasts of Easter, and Whitsunday, to produce those sacred
treasures to the public view of the poeple, to be reverenced and worshipped by
their devotion, according as the worth of such sacred things required. But in
his return from R^me, this unwearied servant of JESUS CHRIST made some stay in
his native Country of great Britain, where again he left many rare
memories, and monuments of his excellent virtues, and labors. And being in
Ireland he settled thirty bishops (which he had brought from beyond the seas)
in diverse places of that abundant Harvest, to cultiuate, and manure it with
their learning, virtues, and good works. These he him self was wont oftentimes
to visitt, as their Metropolitan, to call them to Council, to direct them in
the Ecclesiastical government; striving all ways to root out whatsoever was
found contrary to Christian law, and justice, and to promote what was
conformable to the holy Canons of the Church, and good manners: shining in the
mean time (as allwaies) with almost innumerable miracles, that whatsoever he
either taught or ordained by word of mouth, (like a true Apostle) he
strengthened, and confirmed with wonderful signs which followed. Among which
he showed in nothing so great, and general a benefitt to that country
(excepting their conversion to Christianity) as this which now you shall
hear. S Pa^rick fr^eth ^eland from three pest^^e^ troubles.


XIX. IRELAND from the first time it was inhabited grieuiously suffered the
continual troubles of three mortal discommodities: an infinite number of
venomous Serpents; visible troops of ugly devils; and a multitude of witches,
and magicians, their servants. For, the number, and power of poysenous
creat(...)s so prevailed in that Island, that men and other beasts were not
only infected with their venom, but many times slain, and devoured. The
Devils allsoe, who were masters of those superstitious Idolaters, appeared
visibly unto them both in the air, and on the land, and forced that wretched
poeple, with difficulty to purchase their own peace, by many Sacrifices,
gifts, and labors done in their behalf, and honor, and glad they were, that
so they could escape the fury of that hellish crew. And lastly so many
Sorcerers, Witches, Negromancers, and the like swarmed in all parts of that
Island, that noe history reports the like of any other country. But from
the danger of this threefold misery, the thrice happy Bishop PATRICK
delivered that miserable country by the virtue of his prayers, and
intercession to almighty God, in so much that it has remained free from all
venomous beasts even to this present day; nay the wood that grows there being
brought into other countreies, kills all venomous serpents that come near
it, as I my self have experienced on a ^oade: so that this is a perpetual
miracle, still visibly continued and maintained by almighty God, through the
merits of his servant S. PATRICK. Thrice Happy Jland had he obtained a
safeguard of defense from the sting, and poison of heresy, as he did from other
venomous serpents. Many of the Magicians he converted to the true faith,
others that remained obstinate their wickedness received just punishment from
heaven. And for the Devils their masters (whole troops whereof at his first
entrance he beheld, at is were laying a siege round about the country) he
banished them all, no^ only out of the hearts of these Idolaters, but allsoe
from appearing in their horrid shapes to terrify the poeple as they were wo^t.
But the passeport of their freedom from these furies was not for ever, it went
out of date, when together with heresy, the Devils, and their diabolical
ministers entered into the country again.

X. HAVING purged the whole Island in this so^t, as well from the He visits
the whole countroy of Ireland.
blindness of Idolatry, as allsoe from all other venom, and venomous things,
accompanied with a sacred troop of his holy disciples, (having with
accoustumed devotion celebrated the feast of Easter) he traveled all over the
whole country, every where teaching, and preaching the truth of the ghospel,
and either converting to the faith or confirming the allreadie converted in the
faith, with the force, and efficacy of his divine eloquence: In so much that
all the Irishmen, to who^, as much as the fame and knowledge of his name
arrived, by reason of that so renowned, and profitable a miracle, yielded them
selves, and all they had into his hands, and devoutly obeyed his doctrine,
institutions, and precepts, and were submitted to him as their true Apostle.
Therefore this excellent Husbandman, perceiving the stonnie hardness of our
Lords field to be mollified, by rooting out and destroying all the briers,
brambles, and rubbege thereof, made it more abundantly fruitful, with a new
supply of the most wholesome feed of the Evangelical precepts, and counsels;
whereby it might bring forth not only the thirtith or sixtith, but the
hundredth increase of fruit, and profitt. For he made the whole country, and
all the inhabitants He separateth every tenth head to out Lord
thereof, to be tithed, and divided; and every tenth head as well of men, and
women, as of all other beasts, he caused to be separated as the part, and
right of our Lord. All the tithes of the men, he made Monks, those of the
women, Nuns, for whom he built sufficient Monasteries, and assigned the
tenth part of the Land, and the beasts to maintain them in that sacred course
of life. Whence it was, that within a short time, there was scarce any
ermitage, desert, or other corner of the Island, never so remote, that was not
furnished with perfect monks, or Nuns, in so much that Ireland was by a
special name rightly styled the, ISLAND of Ire(...), the Island of Saints.
SAINTS, all the world over. They lived according to the rules, and statutes
prefixed them by S. PATRICK, till within some years after, all or most part of
them received the rule of our holy father Saint BENEDICT. In S. PATRICKS
days, and a long time after; noe man was either chosen Bishop, or promoted to
the spiritual government of souls, unless he were first marked out for that
purpose, by divine revelation, or some other evident sign of sainctitie.

XI. BUT having said thus much of his external labors exercised His own
private exercises of devotion and austeritie.
chiefly in the behalf of others, let us turn a little toward his own
private exercises of devotion, and manner of life; which was such and so
admirable, that it far exceeds the bounds of this treatise, and the weakness
of this pen to de^lare worthily. He was wo^t every day in the strength of
his devotion, to recite the whole Pfalter over, with many other himnes,
canticles, and prayers: he kneeled three hundred He kneeled 100. times a day.
times a day, and armed him self with the sign of the holy cross one hundred
times in every hour of the day: and noe one day passed, wherein he did not
most devoutly celebrate the holy Sacrifice of Mass. The first part of the
night, he spent in singing of psalms, during which, he kneeled down two
hundred times. Then entering naked into cold water, he finished the rest of his
devotions in that suffetance. Afterward lying down upon a bare stone, with a
pillow of the same under his head, he refreshed his wearied body with a little
shortsleepe; or rather he repaired his strength again to endure the labor of
his accustomed, and continual conflicts. Being in the mean time allwaies gyrt
about with the rudenes of a sharp hay^cloath, to keep down the law of his
body, from rising, and rebelling against the law of his mind. Till the fiftith
five year of his age, he allwaies traveled on foot, after the manner of the
Apostles; but coming afterward into Ireland when he was aduanted to the
dignity of Bishop, he was carried about in a wagon used then in that
country, by reason of his difficult iourneies and labors in preaching. Over
his other garments he wore a slender white cowle, that his habit it self might
inform, and color seem to represent him as a pattern His habit, gesture,
speech.
of monastical profession, and a pious student of innocence, and humility.
In his looks, his countenance, his speech, his gate, and in every other
gesture or motion of body, he bred great edification to those that beheld him:
and his discourse, allwaies seasoned with the salt of wisdom, was agreeable to
every age, sex, degree, and condition. For he was skillful, and ready in
^ower distinct languages, His gift of prophecy.
the Welsh, the Irish, the French, and the Latin; nether was he wholly ignorant
of the Greek. In the Jrish tongue he writ a book of Proverbs, full of good
learning: and an other great volume called, Canoin Phadruig, that is, the
Canons of Patrick, very sit to direct every secular, or Ecclesiastical
person in the exercising of justice, and obtaining of their souls health.
Besides all this, he was wonderfully endowed with the spirit of prophecy, by
virtue whereof he foretold very many things to come, and had the perfect
knowledge of things absent, as if they had bin present within the view of his
own corporal eyes. And namely of the Saints that should live in Ireland, and
specially within the Provinces of Conaght, and Munster, for the space of a
hundred years after, he foretold the names, virtues, and places of their
habitation. Whomsoever he either bound, or absolved, the divine justice
approved by evident signs to be bound, and absolved. Those unto whom he
imparted his benedictio^, received the Blessing of our Lord; and against
whomsoever he pronounced the dreadful sentence of his curse, appeared straight
replenished with the effects of malediction. And whatsoever sentence proceeded
from his mouth, seemed to remyane so irreuocably ratified, as if it had bin
denou^ced from the tribunal of the almighty Judge. Whence we may manifestly
gather, that the holy man firmly adhering unto our Lord, became, one spirit
with him. But albeit in some and most of his virtues, he either paralelled, or
excelled other His wonder full humility.
Saints of Gods Church, yet in humility he overcame him self: For in his
epistles, and letters, he was wont to nominate him self, the lowest; left, and
contemptiblest of all sinners. And making small account of the wonderful
miracles, and signs he wrought, he would not da^e, to judge him self equal to
any the meanest man in perfection. Nether amongst all these virtuous
employments did he omit to exercise him self in manual labor, as in fishing,
and tilling the earth; but chiefly in building of Churches, he would both with
word, and example incite his disciples to putt to their helping hands. When
nevertheless, he did most instantly insist in baptising of the poeple, and
ordering clergimen for Church-seruice. For he consecrated with his own hands,
three hundred and fifty Bishops, he founded seven hundred Churches: and
promoted five His infinite miacles.
thousand persons to the degree, and dignity of priesthood. But of other
clergimen of inferior orders, of Monks, and Nuns which he segregated from
the world to the divine service, none but he can tell the number, who knows,
and foreseeth all things. In this most holy manner, running over the days of
this present life to attain to the desired prize, and reward of the future, he
flourished with so many, and so great miracles, that therein he is second to
none of the Saints his predecessors. The blind, the lame, the dease, the
dumb, the lunatic, the leapers, and all other diseased, and grieved persons,
in the name of the Blessed Trinity, and by virtue, of the holy Cross of our
redemption, he restored to perfect health, and the natutall function of their
limbs. Among which, he is reported to have bin the marvelous rayser of
thirty three from death to life, a thing not read of any other saint of Gods
Church. Of which and other his miracles, and virtues, thereescore and six
books are said to have bin written, the greatest part whereof perished in the
violence of fire, during the raygne of Gurmu^d, and Turgesins. But four
treatises of his life written at diverse times, four of his disciples. S.
BENI^NVS his successor, S. MEL, and his nephew, LVMAN Bishops, and little S.
PATRICK his dear child, are found yet extant. And S. EVIN allsoe co^piled his
life in one volume, partly in Latin, and partly in Jrish. Out all which
Iocelinus a Monk of Furne the author of his life, who^ we have followed in
this history, makes profession to have gathered his whole treatise of S.
PATRICK.

XII. AT length, the beloved servant of almighty God S. PATRICK, He foreseeth
his own death
laden with age, and merits, having now faithfully, and strongly ended the
course of the charge committed unto him, foresaw, both by divine revelation,
and the dissolution of his own body, that the eue^ing of his life was at
hand. And being in the Province of V^ster not far from the city of Down,
and with him the precious pearl of Jreland S. BRIGITT, and a great number more
of Ecclesiastical, and religious persons, as the blessed saint preached unto
them of the heavenly glory of the saints; and the dwellings of the happy, a
glittering light appeared over the East part of the Churchyard of Down which
was supposed to deseigne the place ordained for his sacred burial. And this
being so expounded by S. BRIGITT, the same light presently returned out of
their sight toward heaven, to foreshew thereby that his Blessed soul should
in like sort ascend to the ioics of Paradise. Then S. BRIGITT, who had He
falls (...).
a desire he should be wrapped in a shroud which purposely she had made for that
end, hastened to her monastery to fetch it. When in the mean time the holy
man retired him self to the next monastery, where in the midst of a great
multitude of his devout monks, he laid him down on the bed of his last
sickness, expecting the end of this mortal life, or rather happily aspiring to
the beginning of the immortal. Until the disease growing still stronger
drawn on with the weight of old age, or rather, our Lord calling him to a
crown of justice; the most blessed, and happy bishop felt the hour of his
death to draw-neere, and reioysed that now he was arrived at the secure haue^
of life into which through the gates of death he hastened. Therefore being by
the hands of S. THASACK Bishop, his disciple, armed with the divine sacraments
of the Church; and lifting up his eyes His happy departure.
to heaven, like an other saint STEPHEN, he beheld CHRIST JESUS in the midst of
whole troops of Angels, expecting to receive him into the everlasting joys,
Into whose sacred hands, (blessing his disciples, and commending them to God)
he delivered up his most pure soul, passing out the th^^ldon of this world, to
the neuer-dying ^oies of heaven. O most blessed man to whom the heavens were
laid open, whom together with a lilly white company of Virgins, MARIS the
imaculate Queen of heaven received, whom legions of Angels admitted into their
divine quiers, whom the foreseeing troop of holy prophets do accompany, whom
the judicial Senate of the Apostles embraces, whom the laureat crowns of
sacred martirs bautifieth, the asse^blie of glorious confessors adorneth, and
whom an innumerable multitude of all Gods elect Saints, and heavenly burgesses
do honor, and glorisie for ever.

XIII. HE DIED the seaue^tee^th day of March in the year of our Lord 493. in
the first year of Anastasius the Emperor and in the hundred A summarie of his
life.
twenty third year of his age* At the age of sixteen, he was carried into
banishment; six years he lived therein; eighteen years he spent under the
tutorship of S. GERMAN and S. MARTIN his masters; at the age of fifty five
years, ennobled with the dignity of Bishop, he entered into Jreland to preach;
thirty five years he labored in the conversion of that, and other Islands;
and the other thirty three years, the remaynder of his whole life, he passed
over, attending chiefly to the sweetness of a contemplative life in a
monastery, sometimes at Armagh, and sometimes in others places. Nether was he
easyly drawn out of those sacred sainctuaries, but upon the urgent occasion
of some inevitable and weighty affayre. Nevertheless, once in a year he was
wont to summon a Provincial Counsel; to reduce those that swerued from the
truth, to the rules of the Catholic Church. Being shrouded in the Linen of S.
BRIGITS providing, he was buried with wonderful great reverence, honor, and
glory within the city of Down, in the very place foreshewed by the light
from heaven, on the east side of the Church. Over his tomb is writ a latin
distick which in English goes thus. At DOWN these three lie in own Tomb.
Patrick, Brigett, and holy Columbe.


Whereby it is manifest that S. BRIGITT whose life you have the first Psalm. 8.
of February, and S. COLVM^A Abbott of whom God willing we will treat the
ninth of June, were both buried in the same Tomb with The conclusion.
S. PATRICK.

XIV. AND here I inuit all that have read this history, to cry out with the
royal psalmist: O Lord, our how admirable is thy name through all the world,
who have crowned thy Saint with glory and honor, and seated him above the
works of thy hands. For these indeed are the works of thy hands, which so
much we admire, and wonder; the conversion of a whole Country, by the untired
labors and endeauours of this thy chosen and beloved servant: for, him thou
did appoint thy deputy, and lieuetenant in this holy, and wholesome
affair, wherein when diverse before had employed their greatest zeal and
industry, yet because he was specially elected, and selected by thee for this
holy purpose, thou did voutchase to adorn him with the working of many
strange and miracles, more then almost any other of thy Saints, that on the
rudiments, and foundations of those his predecessors, he might plant the
consummation and perfection of the whole work: These works and miracles are
thine (o Christ only worker of worders) who ever truly wonderful in thy
Saints daignest to glorify them with so great authority, and power, as they
are able to glory in the triumph purchased over the infernal enemies of
mankind, God of his infinite goodness make us partakers of the meritts and
prayers of the glorious, Saint. Amen.

An Annotation.
Many wonders are related of a place in Ireland called S(...)ICKS Purgatory,
which he is reported to have obtained of almighty God for the conversion of
those incredulous poeple, who refused to believe what he preached touching the
pain^^ of hell, and ^^ies of heaven, unless by some means they might see, and
taste of (...) ^^th, in this life. Into that place those that entered with a
strong constancy of says, and a true desire to do peana^ce for their sins,
felt unspeakable torments, after which they enjoyed most glorious visions of
the joys of heaven, and returned the third day again Many make mention of
this strange Purgatory, as (...) Bishop of Ossor and vice primat of all
Ireland, Henricus Salter an English Monk of the Gistercian Congregation who
writ a book expressly of the Purgatory of S. PATRICK dedicated to the Abbot
of Sart^s; he lived five hundred years ago; MATTHEW Paris an English monk of
S. BENEDICTS order; Dionisius Carthusta^^^ very learned and holy ^an in his
treatise dequatuor Nouissimis; and others. But because Jo^el^^^ the Author of
S. PATRICKS life whom we have followed makes noe mention of this his
Purgatory, we have likewise past it over in silence, yet judging for certain
that such a place is really ^^^^nt in Ireland* as experience has taugh^^^ in
man^e that (...) into it, and namely in one Owen a soldier, who in the reign
of King Stephen passed through those torments for peanance of his wicked life,
and at his return related many wonders he had seen and felt; as the foresaid
Authors do testify.

depiction of St. Edward S^ ^DWARDVS REX ANGLIAE ET MARTI^ (...)

The life of Saint EDWARD King and martyr.
MAR 18. Written in an ancient manuscript recited by Surius
THE NOBLE King EDWARD lineally descended from the royal and ancient blood of
our English Kings: and which is far more famous, being baptized by the most
holy Archbishop of Canbury S. DVNSTAN, he began from his tender years, to
excel in virtue, and piety of life. The incomparable King Edgar was his
father, a man renowned as well in feats of arms, as in peace; his mother was
called Eifled, daughter of a most, powerful duke of the East Angles. But noble
Edgar, having subdued not a few places of that land, and brought them under his
subjection so that he obtained the Monarchy over all England divided before
between many and diverse Kings, by exhortation of those two columns of the
English Church, and Benedistin religion S. DVNSTAN Archbishop The pieti^ of
Edgar. his father.
of Canturbury, and S. ETHELWOLD of Winchester, caused many Benedictin
monasteries in those vanquished Provinces to be repaired, and reedified at his
own cost and chardges, and some to be built new from the ground: and in some
of them he placed Monks of S. BENEDICTS order, in others nuns of the same,
all which he furnished, and founded with ample rents, and revenues to
maintain therein the service and servants of almighty God from the injuries
of necessity. He had allsoe by a second wife an other son called Ethelred.
But EDWARD, that was the elder, being a child of wonderful great towardlines,
carefully avoided all the lascivious and ensnaring pleasures of this world, and
endeavored so to behave him self toward God, and man, that before all things
he rendered him self most pleasing unto God, by his worthy integrity of mind
and body: and to men he became most grateful by his modest and courteous
carriage in all things; shining withal to the world with all industry,
wisdom, and prudence. These things so highly pleased his renowned father
Edgar, that he ordained him for his heir and successor in the government of
the Kingdom: and within King Edgar dies.
a while, all the affairs of the Realm being rightly settled, and composed,
the most pious, and glorious King Edgar, changed this life for a better, in the
year of our Lord 977. and of his reign the sixteenth, the eight day of July.

II. EDWARD, according to his fathers will, was by DVNSTAN, and other Peers of
the Realm, installed in the royal chair, and invested with the robes and
signs of royalty: But on his very Coronation day; many of the nobles, and
Lords made great opposition against him, in favor of his younger brother
Ethelred, whom they desired to advance to the crown. Nevertheless the good
resolution of saint DVNSTAN was Edward i^ crowned King.
nothing daunted herewith, nor moved from his sentence; but placing in the
midst the sign of the Cross which was wont to be carried before him,
together with other Bishops of the realm, he consecrated EDWARD their King:
and embraced him ever after while he lived, with a true paternall love, having
from his tendrest years, adopted him to be his child. EDWARD therefore having
taken into his hands the Scepter, and government of the Kingdom, was by CHRIST
the greatest, and chiefest King of Kings, directed in the way of truth and
justice; and albeit he were seated in the height of royal majesty, yet he
daily increased more and more in submission, and humility of mind. And the
better to rule his His prudence in governing.
Kingdom with the raines of prudence, he refused to use the counsel of young
Princes, and Lords of light and youthful heads; but obeyed in all things, the
admonitions of the worthy Prelat S. DVNSTAM, and following his, and other
grave religious men's counsel of approved life, he would pronounce his sentence
in judgment. And inheriting the virtues of his thrice His love to Monks.
worthy father, with great strength and magnanimity of mind he behaved him
self in managing the affairs both of warlick, and Ecclesiastical discipline:
allwaies appearing severe, and terrible to his enemies and other wicked
persons, but (according to his fathers lesson) most courteous and humble to good
men, and especially to monks, and religious persons, whom allwaies he defended
from all trouble, and vexation. Moreover, his daily exercise was to feed and
mayntaine the poor, to cloth the naked, and to esteem that his greatest
gain, which he bestowed in these pious works. Whereupon, through the goodness
of almighty God, great joy, steadfast peace, and wonderful abundance of
wealth, and riches, flourished all over England: to behold their king in the
flower of his youth given to such pious endeauours, so affable to all men,
venerable in chastity, pleasant and comely of countenance, and most excelling
in prudence, and good counsel.

III. BUT THE common enemy of mankind being envious at so The malice of his
Stepmother Alfrith.
great virtue and piety, endeavored by all means to overthrow his happy
deseignes, and to disturb the general peace and ioies of the whole realm:
and to this end, he enkindled the wrath of Alfrith his Stepmother against him,
who from the beginning, took it in ill part that he was preferred to the
crown, before her son Ethelred. And therefore this detestable ambitious
woeman could noe longer keep fecret the wicked intentions of her mind, but
communicated the^ unto her impious consellers, desiring, and entreating them to
favor her designs, and invent some way whereby they might depose EDWARD out
of his lawful throne, and putt the scepter of the government into the hands of
her son Etheldred; and all this her factious mind endeavored to bring to
pass, not so much, that he might govern, but that he being but a child
governing, she her self might get a fair pretext to take the sovereignty
into her own hands, which was the main mark of her endeauours. But who were
her favorites, and Hist. Eccl. sec. 10. cap 4. Gulmalm 2. de reg. cap. 9
Baron. an. 975.
counselors in this practice of mischief? Those chiefly (says Nicholas
Harpsfield, following other Ecclesiastical writers) were the secular Clergy
men, and their adherents, who grieved to see their chops bereaved of so
worthy a morsel by the monks. And among others Alfere Duke of Mercia stood
stiffely for her cause. But when he perceived that he could not satisfy his
impotent desires, this champion of wickedness, turned all his wrath, and
unbridled cruelty, to the ruin, and destruction of all the Benedictin
monasteries within his dominions. Till God, the allmigtie defender of his
servants, sent him afterward a deserved punishment, by the means of worms,
and lice which swarmed all over his body in such abundance, that they eat him
up alive. But the importune Queen (who therein chiefly played a woemans part)
not able so soon to disburden her mind of her Duke Alfere punished.
preconceiued mischief, expected still a fit occasion to putt her impious
desires in execution.

IV. AND NOW the holy King EDWATD had reigned three years, and eight months,
when it happened one day, that he went on hunting into a forest near the
town of Warrham in Dorsetshire, which at that time was great, and full of
godly wood, although now there appear nothing but bushes of brambles, and
rubbish. Where having King Edward goes to visit his Brother Ethelred.
wandered a while up and down after his game, he had a great desire to go see
his brother Ethelred, who^ he loved dearly, and who was brought up in a castle
of his mothers called Corfe, but three miles distant from Warrham. Thither-ward
the good King, accompained with some few of his followers bent his course; but
his company, foolishly wandering after the pleasure of their own game, and
pastime, left the King alone, who being within view of his Stepmothers house,
like an innocent lamb thinking nothing of the mischief and treason prepared,
and knowing his own conscience most free from offense of any man, went
securely thither alone. The Queen was presently advertised of this coming; who
rejoicing to see a long expected occasion brought so to her hand, and making
courtesy the outside of mischief, with a face as meaning noe guile, ran forth
to meet him, and cherefully saluted, and bad him welcome, desiring him to
grace her and her son with his presence that night. The good King refused to
light from his horse, saying that his coming was merely to salute his brother,
and talk with him. Then the false-hearted woeman, caused straight a He is
martired by the command of Alfrith.
cupp of wine to be brought him. The wine being come, the cupp was noe sooner
at his mouth, when thinking noe harm, he felt a Knife in his back, which one
of that treacherous Queens servants bolder in wickedness then the rest, and
readier to execute a mischief, fayning to salute the King, as Judas did our
Savior, had violently stricken into his body. Having received this mortal
wound, with all his strength remaining, he set spurs to his horse thinking
to return to his more faithful company. Till fainting through loss of much
blood, he fell from his horse, and one foot being entangled in the stirropp,
he was pitifully dragged up and down through woods, and lands, leaving all
the way as he went, bloody signs of his death to those that followed him. The
bloody scene of this barbarous fact, was acted in the year of our Lord 981.
Baronius says 978. and (which is horrible to be spoken) within the sacred time
of lent, that is the eighteenth day of March. And doubtless it fell out so,
by a particular dispensation of the divine providence, to the greater glory of
his holy Martyr, that he, who according to the laudable custom, and
institution of true Christians, did worthyly prepare him self to celebrate the
most sacred time of our Lords Resurrection, in mortifying his body with the
annual fast of lent, and other exercises of piety and devotion, meeting with
a happy end, might be received into the palace of everlasting ioies, laden
with the fruicts of his good works. But when the Queen understood His body
i^ hidden.
that he was fallen dead from his horse (envying him dead of Ecclesiastical
burial, as alive she did of his princely diadem) she caused his body to be
cast secretly into the next cottage, lest her wickedness might come to light.
Her cruel servants obey their mischeeuous mistress of impiety, and
contemptibly cast it where they were commanded, and covered it with a little
straw.

V. IN that house where the body lay, was none but one poor woeman borne in
blindness, and she they supposed would tell noe A blind ^oe n^u ^ur^d at his
body.
more then she could see: who, the night following watching at unawares by the
Sacred body, suddenly by the meritts of this B. Martyr so recovered her long
desired sight, and saw a great light, which filled her little house, with a
wonderful splendor: in memory whereof, afterward the Christians built a
Church in the same place. On the morrow, the cruel Queen having learnt of the
woeman what had past, she began very pensiuely to fear lest the murder
whereof she was mother, should come to be known. And therefore she commanded
those Sacred relics presently to be cast into a marsh near adjoining, where
together with his body she hoped to bury all memory of him. And then among
her own servants, and followers she made public mirth, and banquet, strictly
commanding His holy relics are bur^ed in an obscure place.
every each one to make noe show of grief or sorrow for his death. This done,
to avoid all suspicion of the murder committed, she went to an other house of
hers some ten miles distant from thence. But Ethelred her son (allthough
herein nothing like his Mother) so mournfully bewailed the death of his dear
brother, See the cruelty of a wicked* woeman.
that he could nether contain his tears, nor would admit any consolation,
or comfort. Which the cruel Queen took so ill that in a ragefull fury she
fell upon him, (finding nothing else at hand) beat him with a handful of wax
candles so long, till she forced him, if not to qualify, at left to bridle,
and disssemble his grief. But how almighty God discovered the body of this
Glorious Martyr, and brought it to be made famous, and miraculous to the world,
we have allreadie said on the feast of his translation the eighteenth day of
February, whither I remitt my good reader. It only remains no, that we make
our daily prayers to this Glorious Saint, who is so powerful with almighty
God, to be mindful of our sinful wretchedness in this pilgrinage of misery,
and to obtain pardon and grace for us in this world, and life everlasting in
the next. And chiefly all those of the Benedictine family, and profession,
ought more peculiarly to power out their devotions to this Blessed Saint, who
was murdered in the defense, and protection of them, by the adversaries,
enemies, and enuiers of their order, and glory. This life we have gathered out
of the author thereof in an ancient manuscript recited by LAVRENCE SVRIVS
tom. 2. and out of WILLIAM MALMESBVRIE lib. 2. de reg. JOHN CAPGRAVE. NICOLAS
HARPSFIELD see. 10. cap. 4. BARONIVS an. 987 and 978. and others. The Roman
martirologe makes mention of him this 24. day of March; and in the Sarum
Breuiary he has an office of nine lessons, and in an ancient manuscript
breuiary of S. BENEDICTS order which belonged to the monastery of Burton upon
Trent he is celebrated with on office of twelve lessons.

decorative device
depiction of St. Cuthbert S. CVTHBERTVS EPISCOPVS LINDISFARNENSIS (...)

The life of Saint CVTHBERT Bishop, and Confessor Monk of the holy order of S.
Benedict.
MAR. 20. Written by venerable Bede, in two books.
THE holy Prophet Jeremie furnishes us with a very fit beginning for the
life of this most Glorious Prelat S. CVTHBERT, bright ornament of the
Benedictin family, when extolling the state of an anachoreticall life, he
says: It is Thren. 3.
good for a man to have carried the yoke (of our Lord) from his youth. He will
sit solitary, and be silent, because he will lift him self about (...) self.
For the B. man of God S. CVTHBERT, moved with the sweetness of this so great
Good, sub(...)red his neck to the yoke of a (...)asticall profession, from
the beginning of his youth; and takin^ (...) him sometimes as ^^casion served,
a^ Anachoreticall co(...)on; he was delighted to sit in solitarines, and
through the del^^^ous pleasure he found in (...), to keep his lips silent
from all worldly discourse. But to the end that in rip^^ years he might more
profitably (...) these (...) he (...) with a heavenly grace by (...) and (...)
to embrace the ways of truth, and Goo^^^^. (...) the (...) of eight years, he
was only delighted in all (...) sports, and pasti^^es which that age His
childhood.
is wont to follow, ever desiring to be with the first at boyish meetings, and
(...) And being of a (...) wit, and by nature (...) wont for the most part to
g^tt (...) all his (...) in ^eaping, running, wrestling, or ani^ other such
exercise: in so much that when they were all wearies, he like an vn^amed little
champion, and Victour of (...)ll, would (...) ani^ were disposed to buckle with
(...) ani^ in(...) the fields in the heat of these (...) sports (...) pleased
(...) God to touch him with a (...) contrary spirit For a little child but
three years old C^^^bert being a c^^ld, i^ diu^nely warned by a child.
as it seemed, ran to him, and with an aged constancy began seriously to
exhort him to forsake those childish exercises, and to betake (...) a more
modest, and grane manner of life. But he slighting (...), as he thought, ba^^^^
admonitions, repayed them home ^ith injurious words: when the child fell flat
on the earth, and with a ^ittifull countenance blubberd with tears, spoke to
CVTHBERT who came to comfort him, with these words: O most holy God is (...)
his saint.
Bishop CVTHBERT, it is not seemly for thee to play the child amongst children,
whom almighty God has ordained, and destined to be a master of virtue unto
ancients. CVTHBERT gave diligent ear hereunto, and this speech remained fixed
in his mind, the same holy spirit instructing him inwardly in his soul, that
by the mouth of the infant spoke openly to his hearing. And to give him a
further warning, he was suddenly taken with such an exceeding pain and
contraction in one of his knees, that by no means he was able to go. Till
being carried forth one day into the fields a little to recreate his spiritts
with the sight of those green carpets of nature, and reposing him self under
the open heavens he preceaued a horseman exceedingly shining in apparel, come
toward him, who demanded if he would show any service or duty to such a
guest; most willingly (replied CVTHBERT showing his knee) did not this pain
hold me prisonner for faults past. For this is a grief, which exceeds all art
of physic to remedy. Hereat the horseman lighted, and diligently viewing, and
reviewing the sore, Boil (said he) some wheaten flower in milk, and apply it
hott to the swelling, and thou shall be He is cured of a pain in his knee
cured. This said, he ridd swiftly on his way, and at the same instant CVTHBERT
came to know that he was an angel sent from God. And from that time, this
devout child (as he him self was wont to assure his familiar friends) being
oftentimes besett with adversities, through his prayers to almighty God,
deserved to be guarded by an Angel; and by the same means, to deliver others
out of the streights of many eminent dangers.

II. BUT it happened afterward, that he was turned to the wild mountains to
become a sheapheard; where as one night, all his fellows being asleep, he
watched carefully over his flock, and passed over the teadious hours of the
night in prayer, he beheld a glittering light, which dispersed the nights
horrid shades, and a great troop of bright shining creatures which came down
from heaven, and carried up the soul of S. AIDAN Bishop of Lindisfarne, a man
of wonderful virtue, and piety, to the joys of everlasting happiness. Being
greatly astonished, and rejoiced with this vision. If for one nights watching,
and prayer (said he to him self) I have deserved to behold such wonders, what
reward shall I receive, if I bend all the forces of my soul, wholly to the
contemplation of divine things? And at the same instant he resolved to forsake
his flocks, and embrace a monastical life. Therefore, shaking off the fetters
of the world he departed thence, and entered into the way of heaven, traveling
night, and day alone without either meat or drink, to find out a quiet haven
wherein he might securely harbor at the sweet shore of contemplation. At
length he arrived at a Village, where he stayed only to refresh his wearied
horse, for he him self could not be entreated to taste any food, because it
was Friday which he fasted in honor of our Lords passion. Thence therefore he
Fasting on Fridaies.
departed fasting, and held on his journey through deserts, and forlorn
places, which he could not overcome before he was overtaken with night, so
that he was constrained at length to lodge in a poor forsaken cabin,
expecting the next daylight. Where falling to his prayers, as his custom was,
greatly moved with compassion to see the poor beast his horse quite toiled,
and tired out with the journey, almost fainting for want of food, he gathered
up a handful of hay which the wind had blown of that weak cottage, and gave
it him to eat: which done, again he betook him self to his prayers, for the
space of a long hour. When in the mean time, he saw his horse lift up his
head, and (hunger compelling him thereunto) He is fed miraculously.
he began to vnthatch that poor cabin, still drawing it down by morsels,
till at length there fell out a white linen cloth wrapped up together; which
the holy young man perceiving, having ended his devotions, he opened it, and
found therein half a hott loaf, and as much meat as was sufficient for one
meal. Being greatly astonished hereat, he lifted up his hands, and eyes
toward heaven, and gave thanks unto almighty God: I acknowledgs, o Lord,
(said he) that it is the bounty of thy goodness, which has voutchafed to feed
me in this forlorn sollitude; as in times past thou did nourish Elias in
the desert.

III. AT length he arrived at the desired end of his journey the monastery of
Mailros, where at his first coming, he was prophetically commended by a holy
man named Boisil, who noe sooner beheld CVTHBERT, but he cried aut to the
assistants; Behold a true servant of God: and having understood his pious
desires, he made them He takes the habitt of a monk.
known unto the holy Abbot Eata, who presently gave him the Benedictin habitt,
and tonsure; whereby being ranged under the spiritual warrfare of JESUS
CHRIST, he became straight an invincible champion therein, excelling all his
other brethren in watching, fasting, and prayer, and other exercises of a
monastical life. And after some years, king Alchfrid having bestowed some
land at Rippon for the building of a new monastery, Eata made choice of
CVTHBERT, with other religious Monks, to furnish the same, under the same rule,
and monastical discipline as the other. And within a while, he was put into
the office of receiving and entertayning the guests, and other poor pilgrims
which came to the monastery, wherein he discharged his duty with so great
joy, and diligence, that every one highly commended their good entertaynment,
and his extraordinary good will. Goeing forth early one morning to visitt He
entertayneth a^ Angel in a human^ shape.
the cell of his guests, he found amongst the rest, a young man of a very
beautiful countenance, and taking him to be a man indeed, he entertained him
after his sweet manner of courtesy, gave him water for his hands, washed and
dried his feet, covered the table, and let pass noe duty of his charitable
office. And as he urged him to eat, and repair his forces weakened with
traveling, the guest refused. I conjure thee by the name of almighty God
(replied CVTHBERT) to refresh thy felf a little, whilst I go fetch thee a
loaf of He receaueth three loaves of an Angel.
bread newly bakt. He went, and returning with all speed possible, found that
his new guest was gone: whereat being much amazed, he sought, in the snow newly
fallen, to trace which way he was gone; but finding no sign of him, he was
more amazed then before; and casting his eyes about, he perceived that he had
left three milk white loaves behind him, from which came a most sweet odor,
and then, with trembling he began to imagine, that it was an Angel he had
entertained, who came not to be fedd but to feed. And from that time, his
virtues all ways increasing, he was daily adorned more and more with heavenly
favors; for he deserved often times to see, and converse with angels, and to
have his hunger refreshed with heavenly meats, seasoned by angelical hands.
And because he was affable, and pleasant in his discourse, and behavior, for
the most part when he proposed the pious works of the ancient fathers for
patterns of good life to his brethren, he was wont allsoe humbly to
intermingle what special graces, and favors the divine goodness had bestowed
on his own person. And this he would do some times openly and plainly, and
some times more hiddenly, under the name of a third person, according to the
example of the great Doctor of the Gentiles S. PAVL.

IV. BUT within a short time, Ea^a the Abbot was compelled to leave the
monastery he had built, and return with CVTHBERT, and the rest of his Monks
to Mailros. Where CVTHBERT holding on the pious course of his monastical life,
governed him self, and his actions chiefly by the good counsel, and
admonitions of the most holy man Boisil, Priour of that place. At that time a
great plague making He is stra^gely recovered of the Plague
houock all over the country, laid hold of him allsoe; for whose health, as a
most necessary, and profitable member of that monastical body, all his
brethren fell night, and day to their prayers. Which coming to the holy man's
knowledge: And why (said he) do I keep my bed any longer? For doubtless the
prayers of such, and so many holy men, cannot be void of effect before
almighty God. No, no, give me my staff; and rising at the same instant, he
committed his weak body to the supportment of his legs, and staff, when to
the great admiration of all the assistants, he straight recovered his strength,
and perfect health. Afterward S. BOISIL being dead, CVTHBERT succeeded in the
government of the monastery: Which office de discharged with wonderful great
example of virtue, and diligence, not only for the spiritual profitt of his
own domesticques, but allsoe by his fruitful endeavor in converting the
common poeple thereabouts, from the bad ways of their vices, and fond customs,
to the love of heaven, and heavenly joys; partly by the good example of his
virtuous, and holy life, partly with his wholesome sermons, and exhortations, and
partly by the miraculous curing of many diseases. For diverse of that country
had profaned their faith, and religion, with their wicked and unjust practices,
and some neglecting the Sacrament of their Christian baptism, made use of
diabolical, and magical physic, to ridd them selves, and their country of
the plague. To remedy these evils, the holy man trauclled through that
country, preaching, and teaching the way of truth, and justice unto all, with
very great profitt, and fruict of his pious labors. For he had so great
skill in teaching, such an amiable Confession of sins, and enioyning (...)
penance
force in persuading, and bore such an angelical majesty in his cou^tena^ce,
that many forsaking their wicked life, of their own accord, would reveal,
and confess their most secret, and hidden offenses (for they imagined nothing
could lie hid from him) and being confessed willingly underwent the works of
peanance, which he enjoined them for satisfaction of their sins. But he was
wont chiefly to visitt those His labor in preaching.
places, and preach in those villages, which were seated in the rude and rugged
mountains, and hard to come at, where by reason of the rusticitie of the
poeple, and barrennes of the places, they were in great want of teachers. In
these places, which bred a horror to other men, were his greatest delights,
and in these, he would stay sometimes a week together, sometimes two, three,
yea a whole month, never returning to his monastery, but laboring with his
daily preachings, and examples of good life, to reduce that rude poeple, to the
true knowledge, and love of almighty God.

V. IN THE mean time, the holy man began to excel in the spirit of
prophecy, to foretell things to come, and to declare things absent. For being
upon some important necessity of his monastery to take shipping, with two
other monks to pass over into the land of the Pists, called Niduars, and the
fair calmnes of the weather putting them in hope to make a speedy return,
they went forth wholly unfurnished of provision in victuals: but it fell out
otherwise, for they were noe sooner on land, but there arose such a blustering
and tempestuous wind, that the sea, moved with those furious blasts,
began-allsoe to be puffed up into whole mountains of outrageous waves, which
hindered them quite from thinking how to return: so that being there among the
cruelties of cold, and hunger for the space of some days, they were almost
starued to death through want of victuals; when the holy man was never idle,
but watching night and day in prayers, comforted his fellows with pious
discourses, invited them to fall to their prayers, and committ them selves into
the hands, and protection of almighty God, He feeds him self and his
follows by mir^cle.
who doubtless would succor them in this necessity, as he did the children
of Israel in the desert. And now (said he) let us go to find out what
sustenance our Lord has sent us, his servants. Then leading them under the
ba^ke where he had prayed a little before, they found three pieces or portions
of dolphins flesh, ready cut to be boiled; with which, they satisfied their
hunger, and gave thanks unto almighty God for his benefitts. You see, dear
brethren (said he) how great a grace it is to be confident in allmighty God.
Behold he has He forelleth things to come.
not only sent food to his hungry servants but by the number of three,
signifies how many days we must yet remain here, before the tempest cease.
And it fell out as the holy man foretold.

VI. GOEING forth one day to preach, accompanied only with a little boy, and
being both wearied with their journey, and destitute of any food to repair
their weakened forces; Tell me child (said the holy man) what courage thou have
by this time seeing that we have nether meat nor drinck to satisfy our
hunger, nor noe place whither to retire our selves for shelter. That is it
(replied he) which greatly troubles me, since we have nether victuals, nor
money to buy, not friend to assist us. Be confident An Eagle furnishes him
with meat.
my Child, in the goodness of almighty God (answered CVTHBERT) and rest
assured that he will never abandon those in time of necessity, who give them
selves faithfully and with all their hearts to his divine service. Do thou
see that Eagle yonder which flies in the air, mark her well, for by her
means our Lord will send us succor in this extremity. With such like
discourse they held on their journey by a river side, when the Eagle having
taken a fish laid it for them upon the bancke: the own half whereof, the holy
man caused to be left for their divine puruey or, and with the remainder he
refreshed himself, and his companion in the next village; yielding most hearty
thanks to the divine goodness for his benefitts, where he allsoe sed the poeple
with the spiritual food of the gospel.

VII. BUT AS he preached in one of those Villages, the Devil The devil
seeking to hinder his preaching.
a perpetual enuier of goodness, fearing left he should draw his ministres out
of the stench of their vices, to the sweetness of piety and devotion, cast a
fantastical fire into a house near to the Church, during the time of his
sermon. But the holy man, instructed by the divine spirit, that is was but a
deceit of his hellish malice, warned his auditors to listen only to the word
of God, and not to suffer them selves to be deceived with those vain
illusions. But the giddie multitude terrified with the apprehensio^ of that
fantastic danger, ran almost all out of the Church, to quench those false
flames; which they could not do, allbeit they powered on true water, until by
the prayer of S. CVTHBERT the author of those fallacies being putt to Is putt
to flight.
flight, his vain flashes vanished together with him into the air. Whereat
the poeple much astonished, and ashamed, humbly on their knees acknowledged
their folly, and demanded pardon for that so great lightness, and
inconstancy. Nether did he only command these fantastic fires, but allsoe
true flames too, which when a whole Village could not quench with great store
of cold water, were by the seruent streams of his tears, and prayers, utterly
extinguished, and many houses delivered, that at once were in danger to be
devoured by that merciless Element. Whereby in these two miracles, he worthyly
imitated the virtues of two worthy ancient Saints; in chasing away the
feigned fire, that of our most holy father S. BENEDICT, of whom S. GREGORY the
Great reports the like; and in the other the act of M^ircellinus the most
venerable Bishop of Anchona, who when the same city was all in fire, by his
prayers miraculously delivered it. Most fitly therefore unto these holy men,
that of the prophet Esaias may be applied: When thou shall pass Esaias. 43.
through the fire, thou shall not be burnt, and the flame shall not burn
against thee.

VIII. BUT LET us now see of what power this holy man was against the open
fury, and war of this hellish fiend. Hildmer Prefect unto A woeman possessed
with the devil:
King Egsrid, had a very devout wife, very much given to religious, and
Catholic works; who one day being bufied in exercises of piety, giving of
alms to the poor, at the same instant, she was suddenly possessed with the
devil, which made her roar out with such horrid cries, and howlings, that
they gave sufficient testimony of the great danger she was in. Her husband,
that was well beloved of S. CVTHBERT, posted unto him in great have, and told
him into what a perilous disastre his wife was fallen, entreating him again
and again, by all the force of his affection, to be mindful of her in his
prayers, and to send a Priest to minister the venerable sacrament of the
Eucharist unto her, who was now come to the periode of her life, Thus he said
meaning to hide her disease, being ashamed to let him understand that she was
possessed by the devil, (as supposing it to be a punishment for some secret
enormious crime.) The holy man foreseeing the perplexity of his soul, and the
torments of his wife: Wherefore (replied he) have thou conceived so bad an
opinion of thy wife? Not only the wicked, and such as have quite forsaken the
service of almighty God, are in this life subject to the tortures, and racks
of the devil, but the innocent allsoe, and such many times as are endowed
with great sainctitie of life, by the secret judgment of God, are tried and
exercised in this world, with such like torments. But be of good courage, I
will go my self along with thee, and before we be there, we shall find thy
wife delivered Is delivered by to (...) ching his bridle.
out of this distress. And as they drew near to the house, where that poor
captife lay languishing, sudainly the wicked spirit, (being not able to abide
the approach of the holy spirit which inhabited his virtuous soul) fled away,
and left the woeman released out of those deuilish bands: who rising as it were
out of a deep lethargy, ran joyfully to salute the holy man, and taking
hold only of his bridle, she was presently as sound and perfect as ever, which
caused her to break into infinite joy, and thanksgiving; testifieing withal
that then first she was prefectly cured, when she touched his horses bridle.

IX. IN THESE, and such like works of virtue the holy man having spent many
years in the monastery of Mailros, his good Abbot Eata sent him to the
monastery of Lindisfarne, to plant there allsoe the Rule of monastical
perfection and made him superior thereof. For Lindisfarne, allbeit it were a
bishopric, yet the Bishop and all his clergy were monks, from S. AYDAN their
first Bishop who was a Monk: but S. CVTHBERT was the first that reduced them to
the rule and order of S. BENEDICT. For coming (says S. BID in his life) to
the Church or Monastery of Lindisfarne, he presently Here forms the Monks of
Lindisfarne to S. Benedicts rule.
delivered monastical institutions to the monks there, both by word, and work,
But there were some brethren in the monastery, who chose rather to follow
their ancient custom, then obey a Regular observance. Whom he notwithstanding
overcame with the modest virtue of his patience, and by daily exercise
converted them by little and little to a state of better purpose. But disputing
oftentimes in the co^uent of the Rule. (Which was that of S. BENEDICT, since at
that time there was noe other rule extant in the latin Church) when he His
great patience.
was toyled with most sharp injuries of those that contradicted him, he would
rise from his seat, and without any show of discontent, either in mind, or
countenance, depart and dismiss the Convent for that time. But on the morrow,
as if he had endured noe resistance the day before, he would repeat the same
admonitions to the same auditors, until by little and little (as we have
said) he had brought them to his own desires. For he was a man very excellent
in the virtue of patience, and most invincible in enduring courageously all
adversities, which opposed them selves against him either in soul or body; and
noe less bearing a merry countenance in all disastrous and sad mischances:
so that he gave the world to understand, that being armed with the internal
consolation of the holy ghost, he contemned all externe misfortunes. Moreover
he His wonderful was ching.
was so wonderfully given to watching and prayer, that sometimes for three or
four nights together, he took no sleep at all. And if perchance (as man's
nature is) sleep forcebly seized upon him, he was wont to shake off both it,
and teadiousnes in his prolixe prayers, either with manual labor, or goeing
about the Island, diligently searching how all things were carried, and managed.
And when some others of his brethren did complain, and take it very
grievously, if any one chanced to awake the out of their mightly, or noonly
sleeps, he contrariwise was wont to say, that such an one calling upon him,
was far more grateful then troblesom. For he is cause (says he) that
shaking of sluggishnes I settle my self to some Rare examples of goodness.
good work, or meditation. He was so exceedingly given to co^punction of
heart, and so ardently inflamed with heavenly desires, that he never
celebrated the holy solemnities of mass, but with an abunda^t shedding of
tears: worthyly imitating thereby the mystery he had in hand; when offering
up the sacrifice of our Lords bitter passion, he allsoe sacrificed him self to
God by inward contrition of his devout soul. He was fervent and severe in the
zeal of justice to correct sinners: but very mild in pardoning the penitent;
in so much, that many times hearing the confessions of sinners, he him self
pitying their pittisull estates, would burst out into tears, showing the
sinner what he ought to do, by his own example. With these and such other
spiritual exercises, this Venerable man engraffed in the hearts of good men a
singular affection to imitate his virtues, and recalled those that were
stubborn and rebellious to a regular life, out of the obstinate opinions of
their error.

X. AFTER he had spent some years in that monastery, he He embraces a
solitary life.
obtained leave of his Abbot and brethren, to betake him self to the sweet
lonelines of a long desired solitude, rejoicing that from the exercise of an
active life, he was thought worthy to ascend to the leisure of divine
contemplation. He departed therefore into the Island FARNEN, so infamous by the
habitation, and infection of deuilish spiritts, that none durst ever before
dwell there alone. But this Ice our holy CVTHBERT brake, when like a worthy
champion, armed with the helmet of health, the bucklar of Faith, and the sword
of the spirit, which is the word of God, he opposed him self against that
hellish crew, and dissipated, dissolved, and putt to flight all their,
infernal troops. And this cha^pio^ of CHRIST having subdued the forces of
these black Tirans, and now made monarke of that little land, he built a city
befitting his empire, and houses therein agreeing unto it. Which was a little
poor cottage with mudd walls made of turfe, and covered with straw, and in
that earthen lodge this holy domesticque He obtayneth a foutaine by his prayers.
lead a heavenly and angelical life. But his habitation being destitute of
water (following an other miracle of our great father S. BENEDICT) he obtained
by his prayers to Almighty God, to have a sweet cristall fountain spring out
of the hard rock, with which, and a little bread, which was sometimes bestowed
upon him, he satisfied his thirst and hunger. In this place being visited by
his brethren, he would go out of his cell to meet them, and wash their feet
with warm water and sometimes, being compelled thereunto, he would permit
them to wash his feet. For so far he had turned his mind from the decking
of his body, to labor in the adorning of his soul, that sometimes for a
whole month together, nay for the space of a year, he did not once putt off
his shoes. Whence it was, that through his continual praying, and kneeling a
great thicknes of hard skin was grown over his feet. Then his desire of
perfection His extreme solitarines.
daily increasing, he shutt him self close prisoner in his house of clay,
leading a most solitary life, in continual watching, fasting, and prayer,
admitting very few to talk with him, and that but through a window, and upon
some important necessity. He lived by the labor of his hands digging and
tilling the earth, and sowing it first with wheat, which his brethren brought
him, but that his weak la^d would not bring to good; therefore he sowed it
with barley, which increased in great abundance. When the byrds, that in great
troops sought to devour his li^le harvest, were forced at his only co^mau^d to
depart, The byrd o^ the air obey his command
and never more touched his corn. The like he commanded, and was obeyed by
the crows, and dawes, which labored to tear off the thatch of his humble
buildings. But one of them returning again to the holy man, lame^tably
spreading her wings abroad, bowing down her head, and making a pitiful
noise, seemed by all signs possible, to entreat pardon. Which the holy man
understanding, gave her leave to return, as presently she did, bringing a mate
with her, and for a present to the Saint, the one half of a hoggs grease,
which the holy man The seas, and elements serve him.
was wont afterward to show oftentimes to the monks his brethren, and give them
part of it to liquour their shoes or boots. See here again the spirit of his
great Master S. BENEDICT, in the obedience, and service of the crows. But not
only the creatures of the air, waters, and earth, but the very elements
themselves, obeyed him, yea and the vntuly waves of the seas did serve him,
when they cast upon land a piece of timber just of the length he desired, with
which his brethren, contrary to promise, had forgotten to furnish him before,
and weere now much abashed to see an insensible eleme^t, more careful to serve
him, then they. Whilst thus he lived in his solitary course, many out of all
parts of England drawn thither with the fame of his virtues, came to visit
him: whence none ever returned but very well satisfied, comforted, and
delivered from what anguish or trouble soever, either of mind or body. Unto S.
ELFLED Abbess, he foretold the time of King Egfrid her brothers death, and
who should be his successor, with many other particularities, all which truly
fell out afterward.

XI. BUT a Council being held at Adtwiford under S. THEODORE Archbishop of
Canturbury in the presence of King Egfrid, by the common present and desire of
all, CYTHBERT was chosen bishop of Lindisfarne. Who being by many letters, and
legates sent from the King and He refusoth a bishopric.
Council called to the Sinod, and to receive that charge, he would not stir
a foot; so unworthy, he that was most worthy, judged him self of that
dignity. At length good King Egfrid him self together with the most holy
bishop Trumwine, and many other religious, and noble persons, went over into
the Ila^d, and falling all upon their knees before the holy man, with weeping
tears, and humble entreaties they besought him, and coniured him by the name
of our Lord not to resist the wishes and desires of so many, and to oppose
him self to the common good of the Church: nether did they cease until
CVTHBERT, He is compelled to take it.
as full of tears and sorrow as an honest heart could be, suffered him self to
be drawn, out of his beloved cell of solitarines, and brought into the
Council: where being vehemently urged of all, he was compelled much against
his will, to yield to their desires.

XII. THE Easter following, he was consecrated Bish. of Lindisfarne, in
presence of the King, blessed Theodore of Ca^turbury and 7. other bishops, at
York. In which office, he so worthily dischardged him self that he omitted
nothing of those duties, which are wont, or ought S. Cuthbert made Bishop of
York.
to be performed of the perfectest, and holiest prelates of the Church,
protecting his flock with his daily prayers, feeding it with his virtuous, and
piousad monitions, and (which best becomes all teachers) making his own
example and outward manner of conversation the perfect rule of what he taught.
And of his internal virtues and perfection, the signs and miracles which he
wrought as he traveled over Many miracles.
his diocese preaching, teaching, and confirming his poeple, gave sufficient
testimony. One Baldhelm a servant of one of King Egsrids noble men, and the
wife of a great Count, drinking only of the water hallowed by his prayers, were
both suddenly and perfectly cured of most grievous, and mortal diseases, when
all men quite despayred of their health. An other holy Virgin, who a long time
had layn languishing of a grievous pain in her head, and side, being anointed
with holy oil hallowed by S. CVTHBERT, felt her self better at the very same
instant, and within a few days was perfectly cured. And Hildmer an officer of
King Egsrid, in drinking a little water into which was putt some bread hallowed
by S. CVTHBERT, received a perfect recovery of a disease incurable by any
humane skill.

XIII. As ONCE he visited his diocese, he chanced to come among the rude
mountains and rocks, to teach, and confirm those rustic poeple; who not
having any Church near to receive the holy man into, they erected tents, and
boothes in the way, such as they could make of boughs, and branches cut from
the green trees: where he remained for the space of two days, preaching, and
ministering the The sacrament of confirmation given by S. Cuth He cures two of
the Plague.
sacrament of Confirmation, to such as had not yet received it: when in the
midest of all, behold there came some women to him carrying a youth
grievously infected with the plague, humbly desiring the help of his holy
prayers and benediction; by virtue of which presently he restored that diseased
person to perfect health, whose disease had allreadie given the foil to all
the skill of physic. But having received his holy benediction, he whose
weakness was carried thither walked home with the rest in health and iollitie.
In like manner he cured an other child dying of the plague by giving him a
kiss, and making the sign of the Cross upon him. And by virtue of the same
Cross he turned water into wine. But we should never have an endyf we rehearse
all his virtues in particular.

XIV. THEREFORE having exercised the office, and dignity of a Bishop for the
space of two years, with an admirable applause both He leaves his Bishopric,
and return to the desert.
of holiness, and miracles; foreseeing by the spirit of prophecy, that the
hour of his death was at hand, he resigned up his pastoral charge, and
withdrew him self again to the beloved habitation of his solitary, and
eremiticall life, there to consume with the flames of his ancient compunction,
whatsoever stains he had contracted in the managing of his worldly care, and
charge. At that time of his departure being demanded by one of his ancient
monks, when they should hope for his return: He answered; When you shall
carry my body hither. And having passed over almost two months, in the
great joy of his recovered quietness, bruising his mind, and body with the
rigor of his accustomed peanance; being taken with a sudden infirmity, he
began through the fires of a temporal grief, to prepare his way to the sweet
ioies, and refreshments of eternal happiness. Three weeks together he was
continually afflicted with sickness, upon a wednsday he fell first into his
disease, and upon a wednsday he died. But what sore grieuances he endured all
this time as well by his sickness, as the infernal spirits, it is not easy to
express; especially for the space of five days, in which being destitute of
all humane help, and company, he was not able to move out of the place; and
being tormented with an extremity of thirst, he had nothing wherewith to
refresh him self and quench it, but one poor onion, of which in those five
days space, he had scarce consumed the one half. Then he desired his brethren
to bury him in the same Island of Farne, on the East side of his Oratorie nere
unto a Cross, which him self had there erected: but being overcome with the
vehement persuasions, and earnest entreaties of the monks of Lindisfarne, with
much difficulty, he consented they should bury him in their Church. And at
the same time, a monk which only touched Touching the holy Bishop cures the
bloody flux.
his body, as he assisted him in his sickness, was cured of an otherwise
incurable disease of the blouddie flux. At length coming to the extremity of
his infirmity, which scarce allowed him strength to speak, he began to bid
his last adieu to his brethren; earnestly recommending unto them the observance
of mutual peace and charity, the care of keeping hospitality; and above all
things, he strictly chardged them to remain in the unity of the Church, and
in noe sort to have any communication with those, who contrary to the rites,
and custom of the same Catholic Church, swearued from the Scismaticques must
be avoided
true observance of Easter: and he wished that they should rather leave their
monastery, and go seek an habitation where it should please God to direct
them, then to unite with such who like Schismatics, celebrated the feast of
Easter at a wrong time. Moroeuer, endeavor most diligently (said he) to
learn, and observe the Catholic statuts of our forefathers; and particularly
be very careful to follow those institutions, of regular life, which by my
means, the divine goodness has voutchafed to bestow upon you. For His
departure, and burial
I know, allthough in the judgment of some I have lived contemptibly, yet
after my death, it will appear what manner of man I have bin; and how my
doctrine is not to be contemned. With these, and such like words, this holy man
having exhorted his doleful brethren, and the night following having armed him
self with the Sacred Viaticum of our Lords body, lifting up his hands, and
eyes toward heaven, he yielded up his Blessed soul to the everlasting ioies
of heaven, the twentieth day of March; in the year of our Lord 698. as says
Baronius, but 687. according to Sigebert. His Sacred body was brought to
Lindisfarne, and there received by the convent of Monks, singing the prayles of
almighty God, and with the resounding notes thereof, it was buried with great
solemnity in S. PETER'S Church, in a coffin of stone, on the right side of the
altar; where with working of new miracles, he witnessed the greatness of the
glory, and favor he enjoyed before the face of almighty God.

XV. THERE was a child so vehemently oppressed, and tormented by A Child
miraculously dispossossed by the merit^ of S. Cuthbert.
the devil, that noe prayers nor exorcismes could work any good toward his
delivery from that wicked guest, until a priest having compassion on his
doleful parents, took some of that earth, whereon the water was shed
wherewith S. CVTHBERTS body was washed, and powered it, being dissolved in a
little water, into the mouth of that tortured infant, when presently after
many fearful cries, and lamentable howlings, he that before breathed nothing
but fury, and madness, fell into a most quiet, and sweet sleep; and the next
morning, he found him self wholly released from his accustomed rage, and
frenzy, professing that he was freed from that servitude of the devil that
oppressed him, by the meritts, and intercession of S. CVTHBERT. Surely it was a
miracle, and a spectacle most delightful to all good men, to see that child
walk the round of the holy Sepulcher with his father, and with a sound mind
and judgment, render thanks unto the Saints for their assistance, who but the
day before, through madness, rage, and fury, nether knew him self, what he was,
nor where he was. The place where the foresaid water was powered, is by the
Church where he was buried, toward the south. And from that time, many
miraculous cures were wrought with the sam^ earth, a long time after. But to
the end that the sai^ctitie of this glorious soul might be made more notable,
and famous over the world, it happened (God so disposing it for his greater
glory) that eleue^ years after his decease, vppo some occasion the mo^ks
would needs take up his Sacred bones (imagining the flesh to he turned to that
it came off) to set the^ in a more eminet place, or monument above ground.
Whereunto holy Eadbert his successor After 11. years his body, and vestments
are found uncorrupted.
very willingly consented, and caused his sepulcher to be opened on the very
day of his deposition, where to the great admiration of all they found his
body whole, without the lest blemish of corruption, his joints pliant, and
flexible, as if he had bin alive, and in a word more like unto a man asleep,
then to one that were dead. Likewise all the vestments about him were not only
entier, and sound, but shining as fresh, and new, as when they were made.
Whereupon all the living that beheld this unusual miracle, through fear, and
amazeme^t, became for a while more like dead me^, then the dead body they
looked on, not daring scarce to speak, or behold the miracle, which appeared
so manifest. At length coming a little to the^ selves, by the council of the
Bishop S. EADBERT, they wrapped that sacred treasure in new garments (for the
old they had taken off) and putting it into a light shrine, they placed it over
the pauement where he had been buried.

XVI. THE clothes which had been worn about that Sacred body either alive or
dead, were not void from working many miraculous cures. And among others, a
monk of a monastery not far from Lindisfarne, so grievously tormented with
a cruel palsy, that he had lost the use of all his limnes, and on whom the
physicians had proved all their skill to be vain, had recourse to the divine
physician, who cures all diseases. For he desired his servant to bring him
some particle of the garments, which had been about the holy body of S.
CVTHBERT in the grave, for thereby he hoped, by the power of almighty God, and
the merits of that Saint, to have help. The holy man's Shoes, which he had
worn eleven A paraliti^que cured with the shoes of S Cuthbert.
years in the earth, without consuming, were brought; which the diseased
person had noe sooner putt on, but recommending him self unto the prayers of
the holy man, he fell into a sweet slumber; and at midnight, when it rung the
first pulse to mattins, he arose whole, and sound, and went joyfully into the
Church with the rest, yielding infinite thanks to almighty God, and S.
CVTHBERT. And if such wonders are wrought by his shoes, which were but as a
defense to the lowest part of his body, what cannot his glorious, and thrice
happy soul that is in heaven obtain before the face of her almighty
Creator? This is an abridgement of what Venerable BEDE has written, of the
life, death, and miracles of the moct glorious Saint, thrice worthy Prelat,
moct religious obseruer of monastical discipline, and bright ornanament of the
BENEDICTIN family S. CVTHBERT. That which follows we have carefully gathered
out of JOHN CAPGRAVE, SIMEON of DVRRHAM de Episc. Dunel. NICHOLAS Harpsfield
saec. 7. cap. 34. and others. A history o^ the incorruption of S. Cuthber^s
Lodie.


XVII. WONDERFVLL surely are the miracles, wrought by the almighty power of
God, at the tombs, and relics of his Servants, which by the relation of the
most approved histories of the Church, do demonstrate, and prove unto us,
with how great meritt, and favor their blessed souls are adorned in the sight
of God. But of all other, none, is more wonderful, or of more efficacy to
confirm our Christian belief of the resurrection of the dead, then that many
bodies of the Saints have remained, and do yet remain whole, and
uncorrupted, of which strange kind of spectacle, I know not whether there have
appeared in any other Province of the Christian world, more worthy, and
notable experiments, then in this our Island of Great Britain. Our English
Histories relate many wonders of this kind, of the bodies of S. EDWARD king,
and Confessor, and S. EDMOND king, and martyr: and S. ETHELDRED, S. WERBVRG,
and S. ELPHEGVS Archbishop of Canturbury all three glorious branches of the
Benedictine order; But whether these have remained in that integrity to this
our age, it is not certain: But of S. CVTHBERT, it is a thing most known, and
certain. And first, we have showed before, how after eleauen years he was
found entier, at the first opening of his Sepulcher, as Venerable BEDE, a
witness without all exception, does affirm. But afterward, when the Danes
fury cruelly wasted and spoiled all monasteries, and Churches in England,
Eadulph Bishop of Lindisfarne, hardly escaping their bloody hands, transported
that untainted body with him self to an other place. When, through the
imminent slaughter, which those Barbarians outragiously committed in the
country, he could not find a secure abode to rest in; he wandered secretly up
and down, allwaies carrying with him that Sacred body, for the space of
seven years, having Edred the Abbott, and some others of the Clergy
compartners of his flight, and pilgrimage. At last having lost all hope of
conseruing them selves, and that Sacred monument in England, after a mature
consultation, they resolved to sail over with it into Ireland. But finding the
rage of the seas, through the horrible tempests that arose, to be as much
against their desires by water, as the sword of the Barbarians by land, they
were compelled suddenly to return from their adventure that way. But in this
their entreprise at sea, Two admirable accidents.
there happened two things very wondrous: for the waves of the sea, which in
a storm furiously flowed over the decks ready to over whelme the ship, were
suddenly chainged into gore blood, and a goodly book of the holy ghospels,
covered with gould, and rich gemmes, by the inclining of the ship on the one
side, fell accidentally into the water: and afterward the sea retiring it felf
for the space of three miles, was again found in the bottom, without any
damage by lying in the waters, which was preserved with great care in the Abbey
of Durrham, unto the Authors time that writes this history.

XVIII. BUT peace and tranquillity succeeding the turmoiles of war, and
slaughter, in the reign of Cuthred; and the Bishopric of Lindissarne being
translated to Cunicacestre, there Eadulphe settled him self with his company,
and holy relics of S. CVTHBERT. Till after one hundred, and thirteen years,
the Danes making a new invasion into the country putting all to fire and
sword; Bishop Alwin together with his Clergy, and the same sacred body, went
to Rippon. And after three or four turbulent months were past, he resolved to
transport that treasure to its ancient seat of Lindisfarne; but being in the
way His Sacred relique^remay^^ ^^moueable at Durrha^.
near Durrham together with a great multitude of poeple, the chest wherein
the Sacred body was carried, could by noe means nor forces nether of men nor
beasts be moved any further, noe more then a mountain. All much astonished,
and grieved at this strange spectacle, the Bishop persuaded the poeple to give
them selves to watching and prayer to almighty God, to make known his will
and pleasure in this. In the mean time, it was revealed to one Eadmer a holy
monk, that they should transport the never enough named body, to Durrham: and
thither it was carried without any difficulty or resistance. At that time
Durrham was a desert, and horrid place, filled and encompassed round about with
vast woods, and groves, allthough by nature fortifieable enough. The Bishop
presently built a Church in great have only of slender timber, wherein the
Sacred body was conserved for the space of three years. In the mean time, by
the wonderful great care, diligence, and labor of him, and of Vtred Earl of
Northumberland, and the poeple, that vast, and thick wilderness of woods was
cut down, the place it self made habitable, and a goodly Church all of stone
erected, into which the unstained body of the Saint was translated with great
reverence of all. And The Bishops sea placed at Durrham.
the Episcopal sea, erected first at Lindisfarne, remained at Durrham
together with that Sacred monument ever after, which was the three hundredth,
and ninth year after his happy deposition. Where many famous miracles were
wrought through his meritts, and intercession: of which allsoe the place whence
first he came was not deprived. Among others, a woeman, whose feet, and thighs
were by a contraction of the finews, writhen, and turned backwards, in so much
that as a miserable spectacle she crept from place to place on her hands,
praying at this holy tomb, recovered the strength, and use of all her limbs.
And goeing afterward to Rome, and into Ireland, to pray, and give thanks for
her health received, she diuulged all over the world as she went the great
benefitt she had received by the meritts of S. CVTHBERT. Which the author
hereof does affirm out of the mouth of diverse Priests that had seen, and
spoken with her. The same man (Simeon of Durrham) rehearses many wonderful
miracles wrought by his holy meritts, after his body was brought to Durrha^.
We will only make a brief rehearsal of some few.

XIX. ONE Osulphe, a man of most wicked life, was set upon by Miracles
wrought at S Cuthberts tomb at Durrham.
a snake which way soever he went, and albeit he rejected her very often, and
sometimes burst her in pieces, notwithstanding (by what means it was unknown)
she would hang about that wretched creatures neck, though without hurting him
at all. But as often as he entered S. CVTHBERTS Church, he was free, and coming
forth he was presently attached again. Which being a cause of great
astonishment to all, and of wonderful calamity to the poor man, he went to
S. CVTHBERTS, where shrine having perseuered three days, and as many nights,
earnestly imploring the help of God, and the Saint, he was ever after
released from that fearful anoyance. Which story this author asseuereth from
their words that had seen the man. About the same time, one that had stolen
some pieces of money from S. CVTHBERTS shrine, and to conceal his theft putt
them into his mouth, on a sudden his chops were miserably tortured with such
an sufferable pain, as if they had bin seared with hott irons. And
endeavoring to spitt the money out of his mouth, he was not able, no nor, to
speak a word. He ran up and down the Church nodding, staring, and showing
all other strange motions of countenance, and body, seeking to make known his
torment, which he could not utter. At length, hoping to gain a remedy where
he had found his ill, he ran to the Sacred shrine, and falling prostrate on
his face, humbly craved the pardon, and assistance of S. CVTHBERT, offering
interest of his own, to expiate the offense committed: where as he embraced,
and kissed that Sacred treasury, with the very kiss, the money fell out of
his mouth, and he was released Many punished for injuries done to his tomb.
from his pain. But as men afflicted with diseases, and miseries, who humbly
implored his aid, received oftentimes present and wonderful remedies; so
those that were injurious to this B. Saint, and his Church, were paid home for
their temeritie with present, and grievous punishments. And among others,
Osbert, and Ella, both kings slain by the Danes, may witness; and Duke Haden a
Dane, whom besides madness a most cruel sickness attached, which infected his
whole body with such an horrid stench, that the army not able to endure his
presence thrust him out of the camp, and flying from Tinemouth with three
ships, he, and all his company were swallowed in the reuengfull billows of
the sea.

XX. AN other wicked Dane Oulasbald by name, when he endeavored Others, for
injuries done to his Church.
to spoil the Church of S. CVTHBERT, and to wast her lands, and possessions,
being admonished by the Bishop to abstain from his temerarious attempt, lest
he should incur the heavy revenge of the Saint: What (said he) do thou
think to terrify me with the vanie buggs of thy speeches, and with a death to
be feared from a dead man? I vow and protest by all my Gods (he was a Heathen)
that hereafter I will be a cause of greater mischief to thee, and all thine,
when this CVTHBERT of thine in whom thou have so great confidence, shall
avail the nothing. He had scarce said thus much, when goeing over the
threshold, suddenly he became immovable, and falling down to the ground,
vomitted forth his wretched soul. William Conqueror sent one called Ranulphus
to Durrham, to exact tribute out of that country (which hitherto had bin
allwaies free.) To whom S. CVTHBERT appearing in a dream, with cruel
threatenings and a disease which grievously tormented him, terrified him from
the execution of his exigent. In whom one thing was wonderful, that as long as
he remained within the Bishopric of Durrham, so long he felt the torments of
his sickness; but he was no sooner out of those bounds, the^ he was freed. By
these, and many other such like wonders, wrought by the meritts of this B.
Saint, many kings, Princes, and Peers of the land, were moved out of an
immensitie of love toward him, to adorn his Church with riches, and to
enlarge it with many great possessions, for the greater honor of him, and
comfort of the Benedictin mo^ks, that sung the praises of almighty The kings
that enriched Durrham.
God therein. And amongst other kings, his and the Benedictins greatest
benefactours, were Egfrid, Alured, Ethelstane, Guthred, Cannt; and William
Conqueror, moved chiefly out of that which we have related to have happened
to Ranulphus his officer. One thing more, much to be admired we cannot omit,
of the hair of his head which no fire could consume, but like so many threads
of gould, they shiued in the burni^g flames, and being taken out, returned to
their former shape. So that by experience we way apply to him the truth of
our Saviors promise in the Gospel: Not a hair of your head shall perish.
Luc. 21.


XXI. BUT let us proceed to the last proofs which witness the integrity of his
unstained body. In the reign of Henry the first Ranulphus then governing the
helm in the sea of Durrham, this sacred body was publicly exposed to the
common view of all beholders. Which my author saw him self, as he witnesses
in these words: We will render thanks (says he) to him that by a divine grace
gave us power, allthough unworthy, to behold, and touch his uncorrupted Simeon
Dunel li. 1. ^. 11. This was anno. 1104. An. 1537.
body, in the four hundred, and eighteenth year after his sacred deposition
Four hundred and twenty three years after, a new proof was given us of the
same uncorrupted body. For when by the command of that unhappy King Henry
the eight, the sacred chasses, and shrines of the Saints were broken up, and
robbed throughout England, and their holy relics cast by sacrilegious hands
into ignoble places, the wodden chest of this sacred body, which was covered
with white marble, was likewise burst open with the rest. And when the bloody
executioner, to whom this work of mischief was committed, with a mighty blow
brake up the chest, he pierced to the holy body of the Blessed Saint, and
cut a gash in his leg, where presently there appeared a manifest sign of a
wound in the raw flesh. Which being seen, and all the rest of his body found
entier (excepting that the extremity of his nose, I know not by what chance,
was wanting) the matter was brought to Cuthbert Tunstall then bishop of
Durrham, whom they consulted what was best to be done with that body: Who
commanded it should be buried under ground, in the self same place where his
sacred shrine stood before. And not only his body, but the vestiments he had
on, were found to be whole, and entier, and free from any the left spott or
sign of corruption. But on his finger was found a gould ring set with a
saphir stone, which I (says Nicholas Harpsfield my author) sometimes saw, and
handled, embracing, and kissing it with great affection as a sacred monument,
more precious then the greatest treasure. At this last elevation of his sacred
body, were present among others, Doctor Whitehead, president of the
monastery, with Doctor Spark, and Doctor Tod, and William Witham Keeper of
the sacred shrine. And by this, it is manifest, that the sacred body of this
glorious Saint had endured inuiolate, and uncorrupted for the space of eight
hundred and forty years. A thing, which we have not read of any other Saint
in the Church of God who only knows, whether at this hour it remain in the
same integrity or not. And here now perchance the virtuous reader may wonder,
how it comes to pass that the almighty justice who is ever wonderful in his
Saints, and who heretofore, as this history does witness, was so jealous of
this his glorious Saint in particular, that not a man could offer any injury
either to his body, his Church, or any thing thereunto belonging, but straight
he incurred the revenge of very sharp punishment, and yet now at the last, he
permitted his sacred relics to be mangled and abused, his Church to be
spoiled, the lands to be alienated, and all other violence and cruelty, which
the wicked hearts of men could almost invent, to be exercised against all his
Ecclesiastical persons and dignities without showing any outward signs of
revenge for his defense! But all these things are scourges for the sins of
our wretched Country; and our Lord it seems hates sin in so high a
degree, that he will rather take away the honor due to his Saints in this
world, then let sin pass unpunished. O that S. Paul said truly? his
judgments are incomprehensible, and his ways, unsearchable? Let us make our
daily prayers unto his divine majesty, that through the merits of this B.
Saint, he would be pleased at length, to sheath the sword of his revenge, and
shine upon our miserable Country with the pleasing looks of his mercy, that
the Echoes of our English quires may again resound the notes of those
delightful words so often repeated in the Psalms. Quoniam in aetornum
misericordiaeius. Amen.

The life of Saint HEREBERT Priest and Hermit.
MAR. 20. Out of Venerable Bede in vita Cuth and alibi.
SAINT HEREBERT a Priest of venerable conversation, and virtue leading a
solitary life in an Island of Yorkshise within that great lake whence the river
of Derwent takes head. This holy man was in great league of friendship, and
familiarity with blessed S. CVTHBERT whom he was wont every year to visitt,
to receive his His friendsh^p with S. Cuthbert.
instructions in the way of eternal life. It happened that coming once to him
according to custom, to be more and more kindled by his plous admonitions to
the desire and love of heaven: Saint CVTHBERT; after some virtuous discourses:
Remember Brother HEREBERT (said he) that now thou make known thy wants, and
ask me whatsoever thou stand in need of: For after this time, we shall see
one and other noe more in this world; I am certain that the time of my
departure is near at hand. At these words B. HEREBERT falling prostrat at his
feet, pouring out many sighs and tears: I beseech thee (said he) by the holy
name of our Lord, not to forsake thy most faithful friend and companion, but
to beseech the divine goodness of almighty God, that as together we have
served him, so together we may pass out of this world, to enjoy him: For
thou know I have not lived, but under the government of thy pious words and
institutions, and in whatsoever through ignorance or human frailty I offended,
I allwaies referred to thy discussion to be corrected. Saint CVTHBERT much
moved here with, fell earnestly to his prayers, and having understood by a
divine inspiratio^, that his prayer was heard: Rise brother (says he) and do
not weep, but rejoice; for the heavenly clemency has granted our request.
The truth of which promise, and prophecy was brought to light by the ensueing
event: For departing at that time, they met noe more, till in one and the same
twentieth day of March, their souls departing out of this world, were by the
hands of Angels translated to a perpetual union in heaven. But Saint
HEREBERT, by a particular privilege, and dispensation from God, passed through
the surnace of a long and teadious sickness, that if in meritt he were inferior
to S. CVTHBERT the punishment and pain of his disease, borne with a virtuous
patience, might supply that defect: whereby made equal in grace with his
intercessour, as he deserved to depart at one and the same time with him, so
he might be worthy to be received into one and the like throne of happiness.
This holy man (as it may be throught) was a Monk of S. BENEDICTS order, as well
for that he was wholly instructed in all his spiritual life by Great S.
CVTHBERT a Benedictin, who would not teach but as he had learnt him self; as
allsoe, because in those days, the true custom of proceeding to an
eremiticall and solitary conversation, was to beginn first with noe other life
then a monastical, as saint BEDE does witness: Out of whom we have taken his
life, who both in his history of England, and in the life of S. CVTHBERT
relateh the foresaid story to a word. Nicholas Jnvit. S. Cuth. cap 46.
Harpsfield has the same.

The life of Saint EDILWALD Priest and Anachoritie of the holy order of S.
BENEDICT.
MAR. 23.
SAINT EDILWALD was first a monk of S. BENEDICTS order in the monastery of
Rippon, where having received the dignity of priesthood he adorned the same
with a pious conversation of life, well becoming his degree and calling. But
afterward beeng taken with the desire of a more solitary and retired life, he
went to the hermitage of the Island of Farne, which saint CVTHBERT had first
built and inhabited, and there became saint CVTHBERTS immediate successor, as
well in habitation, as holiness of life; of whose virtuous life that it may the
better appear to the world of how great meritt it was I will only rehearse one
miracle out of Saint BID. Gudfrid a venerble Priest, and afterward Abbott of
the Benedictin monastery of Lindisfarne, desiring to have some conversation
with saint EDILWALD went By his prayers he asswageth a tempett.
over into the Island; whence, much refreshed and comforted with his godly
discourse he returned with his companions homewards. But being at the Sea,
their fair calm was suddenly changed into such a blustering storm, what with
the force of the winds, and the rage of the waters struggling together, that
indeed their incuitable ruin (as they thought) seemed to be the wager of the
others contention. Till being come to the point of despayring to have any
longer time of life in this world, behold B. EDILWALD hearing the tempestuous
noise of this storm, and sollicitous of their safety, came running in all
have out of his Cell to see what was befallen them; and finding in what
imminent danger and despair they were, he fell presently to his prayers for
their lives and safeguard: which done, the swelling seas were appeased, and the
cruelty of that tempest gave way to their shipp to pass quietly till they
were all safe on the dry shore. And then the winds and seas, as if they had
gathered new courage, began to raise the same storms again, which furiously
dured all that day: to the end we might more plainly understand that the small
intermission wherein they escaped, was granted from heaven for their sakes by
the prayers of the holy man. And this story was related to me (says saint
BID who writes it) by one of those monks that was in the same ship and danger.
Other miracles were wrought by the meritts of this Saint: who when he had
lived in great holiness for the space of twelve years in this solitary kind of
life, he was called to the joys of heaven to receive the desired rewards of
his meritts, and labors. He was buried in saint PETER'S Church of Lindisfarne
by saint CVTHBERT. Thus much out of saint Bede hist. A^. l. 5. c. 1. and
Nicholas Harpsfied. hist. Eccl. saec. 7. c. 35. He flourished in the reign of
Alfrid who succeeded to Egfrid in the kingdom of Northumberland.

The life of S. ALFWOLD Bishop and Confessor of the holy order of S. BENEDICT.
MAR. 25. Out of William Malmesbury.
SAINT ALFWOLD from a Benedictin monk in the monastery of winchester, was
raised to the Episcopal dignity of Sherburne. He placed a goodly picture of
the most holy bishop and monk S. SWITHIN of Winchester in the Church of
Sherburne. It is certain that he was a man of most reverend and godly life,
and one (that amongst the most prodigal shows of exquisite banquets, which
from the time of the Danes were used in England) followed the rules of ancient
piety, and severity in his diet His spare diet.
, using only a wodde^ dish without any luscious ordaintie meats, a little
cup of beer, so drowned and mortified with water, that the danitiest pallat
could not find any taste of beer. My author in this affirms, that he heard
a Priest of good creditt, and then laden with gray hairs, report with tears
of joy, much good of this holy man. One thing was, that noe man ever after his
death presumed to sleep in his bed unpunished: For presently he was forced to
leap out of it, being amazed with strange ugly visions, which not only
terrified him from his rest, but allsoe sorely rebuked him for unworthily
usurping the holy bishops place. This was a strainge spectacle unto many.
Earl Godwin (having it is uncertain upon Godwin punished for iniuring S.
Alfwlod.
what occasion, grievously exasperated this holy man) fell presently into such
a tormenting sickness, that he lay languishing without any hope of life; so
that he was compelled to send a messenger in poast have to the Bishop, humbly
to desire pardon for his temeritie; who out of his own pious lenity, gave him
his benediction, and pardon, and there with all, he recovered perfect health.

II. THIS HOLY Bishop and monk was wonderfully much addicted in his devotion to
the excellent bishop and glory of the Benedictin ^rder, S. CVTHBERT, at whose
only name, he would burst into devout tears: And allwaies he had this Antheme
of him in his mouth.

The Holy Bishop Cuthbert a man perfect in all things, appeared amongst the
throngs of the world, a monk worthyly to be reverenced His great devotion to
S. Cuthbert.
of all men.

And as his daily love to this Saint took deeper root in his heart, to give
a greater demonstration thereof, he went in pilgrimage to Durcham; where in his
sacred tomb, he deposed a worthy gift, as a holy testimony of his devout
love; At length; after some years in his bishopric, coming to the last point
of this mortal life, as long as his voice would serve him, he sung his
accustomed Anthem of S. CVTHBERT, but his speech failing, with his hand he made
a sign to the monks to go on: and so he happily breathed forth the
testimony of his love to that Saint, together with his blessed soul, which
at the same instant, took her flight to receive His happy departure.
her prepared seat and reward, amongst the quires of Benedictin Monks in
heaven. Thus much out of Malmesburie depont. lib. 2. Harpsfield saec. 11. cap.
9. and others. He flourished about the years 1050.

THE END OF MARCH
The life of Saint RICHARD Bishop of Chicester, and Confessor.
APR. 3. Written by Radulphus Cicestrius about the year 1270
SAINT RICHARD of blessed, and never dying memory, was an Englishman borne of
honest parents in Worcestershire, at a Village which from the salt-pitts
thereabouts was called the Wiche; S Richards parents, etc country.
His fathers name was Richard too, and his mothers Alice. It was not without
some presage of his future excellency that he was borne in a town of salt,
for indeed he seasoned the whole country with the salt of his wisdom,
learning, and holy life. From his tendrest years (contrary to the custo^ of
that age) he so far abandoned dancing, His happy wit.
plays, and other such vanities, that his other fellows and equals in
years, could by noe allurements nor persuasions draw him thereunto: on the
other side, within a short time, he far excelled all his riualls both in
learning, integrity of life, and good manners. His elder brother during the
time of his nonage, was kept in ward, and by that means he came to his lands
in great poverty and want. Whose case RICHARD much pitied, and having not
any thing wherewith to comfort and succor him in that necessity, he He
serves his brother
gave him self wholly into his service, in which he spent noe small, time in
great poverty, and abiection, and with noe less patience, humility, and
modesty, toyling, and sweating now at the plough, now at the cart, and other
such hard employments and labors of husbandry. Whereby he won to him self
so great good will and affection from his brother, that by a sealed writing he
assured all his lands upon him. Then his friends and kinsfolks began to treat
of a marriage to be solemnized between him, and a young gentlewoman of that
Country. Which when his brother perceived, he began to repent that he had
resigned over his means, because he knew that with that gentlewoman he should
come in possession of a very large, and ample dowry. RICHARD having
intelligence hereof: He forsakes all for love of leaning.
You have noe reason dear brother (said he) to be afflicted at this, for the
same liberality, and courtesy which you have showed toward me, will I return
to you again. Therefore behold I not only surrender up your writings and
bonds, but allsoe all the interest I have in this my future wife, if so it may
stand with the good will and liking of her friends; and for mine own part, I
never once kissed her lips. He^ceforth, having abandoned all he had, his
lands, his spouse, and his friends, he betook him self to his studies, first
at Oxford, the^ at Paris in France, where he learnt his Logic. And he was so
violently carried away with a^ extreme love and desire to apparel his mind
with learning, that he scarce ever thought either offoode, or apparel for his
body. For, as him self afterward was wo^t to say, when he was one of the
three scholars, that lived in one chamber, they had but one capp or hatt
betwixt them, and each of them but one gown. So that (like some of our
courtiers now a days) when one of them went forth to lesson with the hatt, the
other two remained barcheaded at home: And so the same capp served them all by
turns to go hear their lectures. Their ordinary food was bread, and a little
herbe-pottage, or some such poor dish. For their poverty would not allow them
to eat either flesh or fish, unless it were upon sundaies, and high days,
and when their friends, and comrades did inuit them. And yet the holy man was
wont to say, that in all his life times, he never enuoyed merrier, and sweeter
days then those.

II. IN THE mean time, our hopeful young man prositted so excellently Hefs
made master of art.
in his studies, that by the public, applause, and acclamations of all men, he
was judged worthy to be honored with the title of master. But refusing to
take any degrees at Paris, he returned again to his Country, and to the
University of Oxford, where within a short time, he was promoted to be Master
of the liberal arts: He studies Canon law
when liberally he imparted that learning to others, which before with much
labor he had purchased to him self. And goeing afterward into Italic, for
seaue^ years space, he gave his mind to study the Canon law in the university
of Bolognia, and that with so great increase of learning, that his master
falling sick, made choice of him amongst all his other scholars, to supply
his place and continue the lecture begun. Which for more then half a year he
performed, with so great modesty, and readiness of wit and judgment, that he
purchased to him self great affection and praise throughout all the
university; and got so high a place of favor and good will with his master,
that he desired, and aspired to nothing more willingly then to give him his
only daughter in marriage. But RICH. (who moved by a divine inspiration, was
far otherwise bent) gave him very humble thanks for his noble love,
courteously pretending some reasons for his excuse, adding withal, that for
the present he had a long journey to make; promising that at his return (if
so it pleased God) his duty should be yielding to the level of his desires.
And taking leave of his master, and his daughter in this sort, he returned into
England, to the university of Oxford, where he led a very rigid, and austere
life, in He is made Chancelour of oxford.
continual labors, watching, and other bodily afflictions. When his fame, and
renown increased to such a height in the ears of the world, that by the
consent of all, he was made Chauncelour of the University.

III. ABOUT the same time, S. EDMOND sat at the helm in the government of the
metropolita^ sea of Canturbury, who long before had had certain intelligence
of his great prudence, and integrity; and Robert surnamed gross test, a man
famous for holiness was the^ bishop of Lincoln, who both being wholly ignorant
of one and others meaning herein, And to the Archbishop of Cauturbury.
at one and the same time, earnestly labored each of the^ to make RICHARD his
chancelour. At length, the Archbishop of Canturbury, because he had first
signified his will and desire to the holy man, obtained to have him in his
service who with great reverence and duty obeyed him in all things. Then B.
EDMOND delivered unto him the great seal of his office and committed to his
chardge the managing of the grauest, and principallest affairs of his whole
Diocese. Therefore RICHARD began according to his wonted diligence to clime
daily higher, and higher in the exercise of good endeauours, faithfully and
exactly to perform his office without any pride or state, to keep free his
hands from bribes, knowing, that according to scripture, gifts do blind the
eyes of wisemen, and vary the words of the just. One might behold in him, an
unspeakable equity, a courteous mildnes, and modest simplicity, all seated
and grounded in an excellent Dent. 16. v. 19.
prudence, and humility: his gesture and actions well composed and tempered.
Moreover, he stuck constant to his holy bishop in all his adversities, and
afflictions, as well at home as in his banishment, being not ignorant that
those who have been companions in suffrance, shall all soc be companious in
time of consolations. But S. EDMOND of Canturbury Cor. 1. He studies divinity.
being dead, RICHARD, freed from Court and courtly cares and affairs, went to
Orleans in France, where in a religious house of Dominicans, he gave him self
to the study of Divinity, not as most do that only hear with their ears,
and do not apply their mind, to understand; but bent an inward hearing to
whatsoever he heard, to putt in practice more effectually what he heard. There
he was He is made Pricst.
promoted to the sacred dignity of Priesthood, to sacrifice the beloved son
of God to his almighty Father. And from that time, he began to adorn that
heavenly function with a more humble plainnes, and neat humblenes in his
habitt. But after he had been long conversant in the studies of sacred
scripture, he returned into England, to feed the small flock committed to his
chardge; for he had but one parish wherein he would bestow his necessary care
in doing the office of a good Pastor

IV. BONIFACE, a very venerable man, had allreadie succeeded blessed EDMOND in
the sea of Canturbury who desired allsoe to enjoy the conversation, and
familiarity of RICHARD, that was so gracious in the world. Unto whom, (making
great resistance) he He is chosen bishop of Chicester.
recommended his ancient office of chauncelour. In the mean time, Radulph
Neuill bishop of Chicester being dead; the Canons, having first, as the custom
was, obtained leave of the King then Henry the third, made choice of one
Robert Passeleff (who from a mignion at Court was become a Canon of that Church)
to be their bishop. But that election (according to the decrees of the Canons,
by the authority of Boniface of Canturbury, and other bishops his suffragans,
among whom was Robert the venerable bishop of Lincoln) was utterly disanulled,
and declared to be of noe force, because the person elected was in learning
life, and manners judged to be little correspondent to so high a dignity: and
by the common consent and sentence of all, RICHARD was chosen in his place.
Which proceedig very much exasperated the King, to see the former election The
King inuadeth the goods of Chicester.
cut off, and RICHARD substituted in the place, whom he esteemed his utter
enemy, in that he stuck so close to S. EDMOND, in all the controversy
between him, and the King. Therefore in a fury he commanded all the goods of
Chicester Church to be confiscated. When S. RICHARD, according to the counsel
of the others Bishops, got the letters of the Archbishop of Canturbury, and
went to the King, humbly entreating his Majesty, to suffer a restitution to be
made of all that belonged to the Church of Chicester. But all his humility
could nothing remove the headstrong King from his stubborn resolution: so
that, when the holy man had much tired and wearied out him self in vain, and
endured many contumelious, and scornful injuries, he was constrained at
length to have recourse to Richard appealeth to Rome.
the last refuge (under God) on earth, the Sea Apostolic. When the Kings
Ambassadors had prevented him with the Pope of Rome, for he found them there
all ready, ready provided against him. Innocent the fourth, then governed the
Roman sea, who very courteously entertained RICHARD, and having heard the
reasons of both parties, he confirmed his election by Apostolical authority,
and moreover, by the imposition of his sacred hands, consecrated him Bishop,
(with an other of that Country) in great solemnity.

V. BUT a wonderful thing happened at his consecration. For coming to give
them sacred unction, for the first the Pope couid hardly squeeze one dropp of
oil out of the box; but when RICHARD came to be anneild, there appeared as it
were a new representation of Elias his oil and miracle, for the sacred liquour
ran in such abundance out of the viole, that the attendants had enough to do
to stopp it with linen clothes, from flowing over into his neck, and
shoulders. The Pope and Cardinals and all the assistants A strange miracle.
were much amazed, and not without cause: when one of the Cardinals said:
Certainly this man abounds with a fullnes of divine grace. Then S. RICHARD
returning into his Country with the Popes letters, by the way visited the
Sepulcher of S. EDMOND, allreadie flourishing with miracles, at Pontoise in
France: and coming into England he found all the goods and means belonging to
his Church of Chicester, utterly dissipated, and spent by the Kings ofsiceers.
And for an increase of misery, the King had commanded by public edict, that
noe man should lend him a penny, to supply His afflictious in the Bishoptick.
his wants. But when he exibited the Popes letters, and commands before the
King and his nobles, he not only failed to get a gracious favor, but contrary
wise, rather purchased to him self much more hatred, and indignation.
Wherefore, departing from before that incensed Majesty, he went in poor, and
bare array, to his Diocese, where he lived as a private guest at an other man's
house, and table. In the mean time, he omitted not oftentimes to take a
circuit about his diocese, visitting the flock committed to his charge, and
ministering the sacraments as occasion required. And lest he should be accused
as a slothful, and sluggish forsaker, and traitor of his own right,
sometimes he would make a journey to the King, and humbly demand the
restitution of the goods, wrongfully taken away, allbeit he allwaies suffered a
scornful repulse, and returned laden with injuries, and reproaches. It happened
once that the Deane and Canons of Chicester, were much trobled and afflicted in
mind, with the kings sharp and biting answers but the holy man, putting on a
cheerful, countenance, would comfort them with calling that saying of the
scripture to their remembrance. The Apostles went rejoicing from the face of
the Council, because they were esteemed worthy Act. 5.
to suffer contumelic for the name of CHRIST-IESVS. And I confirm you in the
same, that these crosses, and afflictions will one day The Church of Chicestet
restored.
be changed into mirth, and joy. But within a while he made the Pope acquainted
with the kings stubborn answer and proceeding: who wonderfully much pitying
the holy man's case, sent a thundering command unto two bishops of England, to
admonish the King to make restitution to the Church of Chicester within such a
time, or that they should publish and denounce the heavy sentences contained
in his letters, over the whole Kingdom. By which means, after two years
affliction patiently endured, the Church with her demaines, and torn
buildings, ready to tumble into ruin, were with difficulty restored again
to their true owner.

VI. AND the holy man being now seated in his Episcopal chair A summarie of
his virtues.
became in prayer more fervent then ever, more bountiful, and liberal in
giving of alms, and more severe in chastising his own body. Hence forth, he
was more attentive and careful toward the poor, more negligent in decking,
and trimming his own body, and more modest in his speech and behavior. At
his table, he all ways used a spiritual lecture, wherewith he fed his soul,
as well as his body with food; and sometimes, the reader intermitting a while
from his lesson, they discoursed either of those things that were read, or some
other pious and wholesome matter. His custom was as he traveled over his
diocese, to make diligent inquiry after all poor and sick persons, to whom
he did not only give large alms, but allsoe out a of gracious and innate
courtesy he would visitt them him self in person, and very carefully comfort,
and encourage them, with the heavenly food of his pious admonitions. And when
his own brother, unto whom he had committed the managing of his temporal
affairs, complained that all his yearly rents, and revenues were not
sufficient to give alms so largely, and to such a multitude of poor; Dear
brother (replied the holy Bishop) do thou think it fit and reasonable that
we eat and drink out of goulden and filuer vessels, and that CHRIST be
tormented with hunger, in his poor? As my father did before me, so can I eat
out of an ordinary platter, and drink in a plain goddart. Therefore, let the
gould and siluar plate be sold; yea, and the horse I ride one of so great
value let him go too, and let CHRIST'S poor be succored with the money.
Nether was he wont to maintain the poor His wonderful liberality to the
poor.
only with meat and drink, but also to give clothing to the naked, and
bury the dead with his own hands. Sometimes he would give an alms before it
was asked: and being demanded why he did so: It is written, (answered he) O
Lord thou have prevented him in the blessings of this sweetness: and indeed,
that which is obtained by asking Psalm 20.
is bought but at a dear rate. He appointed an hospital for poor aged
priests that were blind, or otherwise impotent, and feeble of body: and that
they should not purchase infamy to their holy function, by public begging
abroad, he provided them with sufficient victuals and clothing, within the
same house.

VII. THIS his sainctitie, did not want the testimony of many worthy The
wonderful mul tiplication of aloafe.
miracles, among which one and not the lest was, that one loaf was so
increased by his benediction, that beyond the hope and expectation of those
that were present, three thousand poor people received their accustomed
quantity and portions, and so many pieces remained, as according to the
proportion of that distribution, were sufficient to satisfy one hundred more.
Nether was it once or twice only, that by virtue of his holy benediction, such
an abundant and miraculous increase of things was caused, but many and sundry
times, the like happened through his divine power and bounty, that opens his
hands, and fills every creature with his blessing. Next to his skin, for
the greater chastising of his Psalm. 144.
body he used sometimes a hair shirt, sometimes a coat of maile. His apparel
and shoes, not so neat that they inferred an affectation, nor yet more abject
then was fitting, but in a mean, well becoming his degree, wherein he avoided
all The m^a^nes of his appared.
signs of any curious novelties. Nether would he endure to have his horse
trappings and furniture glittering with gould and silver, nether would he
carry about with him a superfluous chainge of apparel, not only for the
shunning of pomp, but fearing lest the poor should cry out after him with
that sentence of S. BERNARD: What does gould in the bishops bridle whilst we
poor wretches suffer cold and hunger.

VIII. HAVING on a time excommunicated one John Allen for an injury executed
against the Church of Chicester, and the same man coming often times to his
court, he would entertayne him very familiarly, and make him stay dinner;
saying, that as His charity toward his adversary.
long as he was with in his hall he would not have him tied with the censure of
excommunication; but when he was gone, unless he would satifie and make amends
to the Church, he absolutely held him for an excommunicate person. He was wont
allsoe to say, that if there were strife and contention of law betwixt parties,
each one striving to recover and defend his own right, the signs of charity
used among Christians ought not therefore to be omitted or denied. For be it
(said he) that I must, recover my own by law, I ought not therefore to
withdraw from my adversary, that which it Gods right and my duty, Love and
Charity. And after this manner indeed he carried him self toward the Abbott
of Fecam, and Richard Earl of Cornwall, and the Countess of Kent, with whom
he had suits and controversies touching his Church, allwaies repaying the
contumelies and reproaches of these great persons, with honor, and their
enmities, with good will. His severity against the de^iourer of a sacred
Virgin.


IX. ONE of the Clergy that had enticed a Nun out of her monastery, and
deflowred her, was by the authority of this holy Bishop most ignominiously
deprived of his ecclesiastical benefice, and dignity which he enjoyed within
the Diocese. And herein he was so rigorous, that when the King him self, the
Archbishop of Canturbury, and many other Bishops, Peers, and Nobles of the
realm, made great suit and entreatie for his pardon, the man of God showed him
self wholly inexorable in the execution of divine justice; and striking his
breast, he said: No no while the breath remains in this body of mine, such a
ribald villain, that durst presume to violate a Virgin consecrated to God,
retayning her with him yet as a whore, shall never by my consent have the
government of souls, within my diocese. And because he has appealed to my
Lord of Canturbury, for my part, let him do according as he will answer
before the most just and dreadful tribunal of CHRIST. This courageous
constancy of the blessed man, putt them quite off, from ever more attempting
to move him in that matter. In like manner he proceeded against three Vicars
who were convicted for public keeping of concubines. For when they refused to
dismiss those lewd mates, he gave sentence against them, whereby they were
quite discarded from their benefices. He compelled others that had violently
drawn a thief out of the Church to the gallows, to dig up his stinking
dead carcas after fifteen days lying in the ground, and carry him on their
own shoulders into the Church, from whence they had taken him at the first.

X. NEWS being brought him of a great damage he had received His contempt of
wordly goods.
by fire, which had consumed noe small quantity of his buildings and household
stuff; when his whole family was filled with weeping, wayling, and lamenting,
he was nothing moved at all, but with a smoothe and pleasant countenance, gave
thanks to almighty God, and bad them be of good courage saying: Do not
grieve nor afflict your selves, there is yet left sufficient and abundantly
enough, to maintain us in our necessities. And truly I think this loss has
befallen us, in that we have not used such care and liberality to the poor as
we ought. Hence forth therefore I command, that our alms be more large, and
frequent. O treasure of a generous mind, Which in wanting knew not how to
want, and in loosing, was ignorant how to loose, but out of the very loss of
his own goods, knew how to heap up a new increase of virtues unto himself. He
was wont severely to command all the stewards, and other officers of his
diocese, calling the divine judgment to witness He forbids v^^^st exactions.
and on pain of the utter ruin of their souls, that they should not exact
any thing contrary to justice, nor molest his Diocesans with the uttermost
extremity of any debt or duty. And he him self, would oftentimes, out of his
mildnes and clemency, remitt a debt otherwise due, to those that asked him.
Furthermore, he would never by any means admit his kinsfolks, and allies
(allbeit well deserving) to ecclesiastical Benefices, knowing that the Lord
and Prince of Pastors, CHRIST JESUS, did not deliver the universal government
of his Church unto his cozen by blood S. JOHN the Evangelist, but to saint
PETER, who was nothing allied unto him at all. Matt. 16.


XI ALLSOE, he used so great moderation, and courtesy toward his Clergy,
that rising many times very early to perform the office of Mattins, and
finding his Clergimen yet lying under the heavy wings of sleep, he would in
the mean time betake him self to his private deuotious, permitting them to
take their sweet rest, and repeating with him self those words of our Lord, and
savior; Dormite iam, and requiescite: sleep ye now, and rest. Otherwise
indeed he was wonderfully delighted to see the divine office religiously and
devoutly performed; Math. 26.
which may sufficiently be proved, with this one example; that when he either
visited religious men, or entertained them with a holy salutation when they
came to him, he was wont to say: It is good to kiss those lips, which yield
a sweet perfume of their holy prayers offered unto almighty God: which
saying, as him self did often witness, he learned of his old master saint
EDMOND, who was wont to use the same.

XII MOREOVER, with how great care and diligence this blessed man preached the
word of God in other diocesses, with what piety and clemency he cherished
repentant souls, heard them confess their sins, instructed their ignorance,
absolved them, imparted his good counsel unto them, withheld and encouraged
the desperate from falling into desperation, exhorted the stronger sort to
perseverance, strengthened the vnco^stancie of weaklings, and in fine, how in
all things he conformed him self to all sorts and conditions, what pen is
able worthyly to express? For the raising of an expedition of aid and rescue
for the holy land, he undertook the preaching of the holy cross, recommended
unto him from the Bishop of Rome: and beginning at his own Church of Chicester
he took his progress along by the sea side, till he came to Canturburie. But
ten days before he arrived at the famous haven town of Dover, he fell into
a sickness, which he suffered not to hinder his pious interprise, for he ceased
not to labor on in the vineyard of our Lord, all ways preaching, confirming
children, hearing confessions, giving holy orders, till he exhausted almost
all the strength of his body. Coming at length to Dover, he was received as a
guest into a certain hospital called Gods-house, and at the entreaty of the
master of the same Hospital, he consecrated a Church with a Churchyard for
the burial of the poor, in honor of his old lord saint EDMOND, where he
declared publicly in his sermon the same day, that from the first time he was
made bishop, he had allwaies a longing desire, to consecrate before he died at
the lest one Church, to the honor of that holy saint his ancient Lord and
master: giving there hearty thanks to almighty God, who had not frustrated
his desire therein: Adding withal that now he knew that the time of his
departure was at hand, and therefore he earnestly recommended him self to the
suffrages of their good sacrifices, and prayers.

XIII. THE day following being sunday, allbeit he was almost quite as a man
spent and overthrown with sickness and labors, notwithstanding, Heapplieth him
self to diui^^ e^^rc^^es beyond his forces.
at his accustomed hour of rising, he made noe delay, but got into Church,
where with great devotion he began to sing his office: And being present at
the holy sacrifice of Mass, his sickness still increased so strongly upon
him, that not able any longer to bear up his feeble limbs, he fell flat on
the ground. Then he was carried back into the Hospital, by some of his
servants, and laid on a bed: Where to one William his Chaplain, with whom he
was ever very familiar, he declared that he should not escape that disease,
commanding him to prepare things necessary for his funeral, but privately,
lest family perceauing, might be troubled: and to Simon Terringes he foretold
the day of his death. Then he desired them to bring a Crucifix: which most
devoutly he embraced, piously kissing the place of the wounds, as if then he
had beheld our Lord and Savior dying: and breaking forth into these words: I
give thee infinite thanks O my Lord JESUS CHRIST, for all thy benefitts
bestowed upon me, for the pains and reproaches which for my sake thou have
suffered, which were such and so great that thou might worthyly say that of
thy Prophet: There is noe grief, like my grief. Thou know, O lord, that if
it be thy blessed will, I am most ready to endure all Thren. 1.
reproaches, and torments, and death it self for thy sake, and as thou know I
speak the truth, so I beseeth thee to have mercy upon me, for into thy
hands I commend my soul. And he repeated often times that of the Psalmist.
Into thy hands O Lord I commend my spirit. Turning him self allsoe to the B.
Virgin MARIE Psalm. 10,
Mother of God, he said: Maria matter gratiae, matter misericordiae, tu nos ab
host protegs, and hora mortis suscipe: commanding his Chaplains continually
to sound those words in his cares. And so between the sighs of his pious
devotion, and the words of sacred prayer, in presence of many religious,
priests, and Clergimen, and other faithful Christians, saint RICHARD yielded
up his His blessed death
soul into the hands of his Creator, to live in the most happy society of
the heavenly citizens for ever, about the six and fiftith year of his age, the
9. year of his bishopric, the third day of April, about midnight: At what
time, the heavenly spouse is said to Matthew. 25.
come to the eternal wedding. His soul was noe sooner departed but his sacred
body, which in his life time had been tired with The beauty of his dead body.
much watching, worn out with lying on the ground, consumed with fasting,
torn, and afflicted with stripes, and other voluntary punishments beyond
humane suffrance, appeared most clear, and beautiful, in so much, that it
seemed to bear a notable sign or token of the future resurrectior: and next
his skin was found a sharp hayre-shirt and many other iron girdles. He was
buried in the Church which he had newly consecrated, a huge concurse of people
coming from all parts of England to the celebration of his venerable exequies:
every one thinking himself happy, that could but get to touch either the
biere he was carried on, or the lowest hemme of his sacred garments. Rings, and
bracelets, that had but touched his body, they held for very holy things and
kept as relics.

XIV. AFTERWARD, his sacred body was translated to Chicester according to his
desire, and buried in a mean place before S. EDMONDS Altar, which himself had
erected in the north side of the Church; Where, as in his life time, God
allwaies wonderful in his Saints, had wrought by him many miracles, curing
the blind, lame, Many miracles.
and diseased, so after his death, he showed by the merits of this holy man,
noe less, but rather more wonderful signs of holiness: when besides many
other benefitts, and strange cures, he restored three men from death to life:
and one child borne dead, but revived by his meritts, was presented at the age
of four years, before the Inquisitours that were appointed to take the
information of saint RICHARDS life and miracles. Nay his apparel, being worn
or but touched, cured many diseases; and the sick persons that lay in his bed,
presently recovered their health. All which miracles, and many more for
breuities sake here omitted, were written in those days, as manifest and
certain truths, and the book was reserved in the Benedictin Abbey of saint
Albans Which moved Pope Boniface the fourth to enroll him into the number of
canonized Saints, about 20. years after his death, in the reign of Edward
the first, and his feast was celebrated in the Breuiarie of Sarum, with an
office of nine lessons, this third day of April. This history of his life is
gathered out of that which is written at large by Radulph Bocking his
confessor, about the year 1240. Matthew Paris an. 1259. Matthew Westminister an.
1262. Nicholas Harpsfield. saec. 13. cap. 17. Camden and other grave authors
make very worthy mention of his virtues. And Baronius says that Urban the
fourths letters for his canonization are extant in the Vatican library at Rome.

The life of Saint ELSTAN Bishop of Wilton, and Confessor of the holy order of
S. BENEDICT.
APR. 6. Out of William Malmesbury de gest. Pont. Anglo.
ELSTAN first a monk of the holy order of S. BENEDICT in the monastery of
Abington, under the government of the famous S. ETHELWOLD afterward bishop of
Winchester, was a man of wonderful simplicity, and obedience. A rare proof
thereof, is seen in this accident. For being commanded by his foresaid Abbot
to see that the workmen, and artificers of the monastery, were daily, and
duly provided with necessary victuals, he undertook that labor with great
devotion, and played the cook himself, in the preparing of their accustomed
diet; and served them very diligently, and afterward washed the dishes, and
other vessels with his own hands, whilst the Abbot all ways thought he had
performed this duty of obedience, by the help of a servant. Till one day,
goeing about the offices of the monastery, (as his custom was) he cha^ced
unawares to to find ELSTAN standing by the cauldron that boiled on the fire,
and all the vessels very neat and clean, and the room newly swept. The
Abbot much delighted hereat; Brother ELSTAN (said he) this Not the virtue of
Prompt obedience.
obedience thou have stolen from me. But if thou art such a champio^, as thou
seem to be, putt thy bare hand presently into the boiling cauldron, and
fetch me a piece of meat out of the bottom. The command was noe sooner out of
his mouth, but FLSTANS hand was in the boiling water, whose irresistable heat,
yielded to the courage of his true faith, and obedience, and did him noe hurt
at all; to the great admiration, and comfort of the holy Abbot. ELSTAN
afterward was made Abbot of Abington, and lastly Bishop of Wilton, in both
which charges, he discharged the part of a holy Prelate, and ended his days
very happyly, to receive the reward of his obedience in heaven. He flourished
about the year of our Lord 980. Thus much of him we have gathered out of
William Malmesbury de Pont. l. 3. Nicholas Harpsfield saec. 10 cap. 9, and
Wolstan in the life of S. Ethelwold the first day of August.

The life of Saint GISLA, and Saint RICTRVDE, Virgins of the sacred order of
Saint BENEDICT.
APR. 9. Out of diverse Authors.
GISLA and RICTRVDE borne in Kent of noble parents, but much more ennobled with
virtue, and good learning, from their very youth gave them selves to the
study of the elegancie of the latin tongue, and other sciences, under that
excellent master S. ALCVINE a Benedictin Monk. After whose departure out of
England, they lived in a monastery at Canturbury under the holy rule of S.
BENEDICT, laboring, and profitting daily in the continual exercises of virtue
and learning, diligently imitating S. MARIE Magdalen^ in the sweetness of a
contemplative, and MARTHA in the labors of Their skill in learning
an active life. Being careful first to profitt them selves in mortifications,
and meditations, and then to show external works of charity to their
neighbors, and peculiarly to comfort the afflicted. Whence it was, that having
attained to a sufficiency of learning (a rare thing in their sex) they writ
many spiritual and consolatorie works, which envious time has suffered to
perish; but some epistles of theirs, and specially one to S. ALCVINE, and his
answer thereunto, are extant amongst his works. The inscription of his to them
is thus: To the most noble in holiness of Christian religion, the most devoted
to the study of wisdom, the two Virgins consecrated to God, Gisla his
sister, and RICTRVDE his daughter, the humble Brother, and Father, ALCVINE
wishes the health of perpetual Blessedness. At length, these holy Virgins,
after the long exercise of virtue, and good works, est this world toreceiue
the crown of their virginity in heaven, amongst that glorious quire of other
holy Benedictine Nuns. They flourished about the year 770. in the reign of
Alrick King of Kent. Thus much we have taken out of Nicholas Harpsfield soec.
8. c. 6. Arnould Wion, John Pitts de scrip. Aug. an. 770. and others.

decorative device
depiction of St. Guthlac S. GVTHLACVS MONACHVS ET EREMITA ORD. S. Benedicti.
April. 11. (...). f.

The life of S. GVTHLAKE Priest, and Anacherite of the holy order of S.
Benedict.
APR. 11. Written by Felix a Benedictin monk of Croyland.
THE WORTHY servant of JESUS CHRIST Saint GVTHLAKE borne of noble parents
Guthlakes Parents.
P^nwald and Tecta descended lineally from the royal stem of the Mercian
Kings: but he ennobled his princely progeniture with the nobility and spendour
of religion, and virtues. Which his future excellency, and incomparable virtue
a strainge and admirable presage seemed to make known, and A strange
apparition at his abyrth.
manifest at his very birth. For the same hour that his mother lay in
childbed of this holy offspring a fair yellow hand, as it were of a man,
appeared by the cross which stood^ opposite to her house, casting forth
wonderful beams of brightness. And when the poeple of the country flocked
together in great troops to behold that miraculous apparition, the same hand
made the sign of the Cross on the house door of the laboring woeman, and
presently vanished. A happy sign, and precursour of his birth, foreshewing
that in his life time he should allwaies carry in his body the peanance of
Christ's holy cross. But the multitude of poeple much astonished, and amazed at
this unaccustomed spectacle, began (as the manner is) with diverse, and doubtful
opinios to waver in their sundry expositions of that divine miracle, the
greatest part affirming that surely it betokened some great and heavenly
mystery: when the mid wiue came forth with news that the child, for whose
sake that wonder appeared, was borne. In baptism he was named GVTHLAKE, and
during the time of his childhood, he appeared to bear in a clear and loving
countenance so grateful and acceptable a grace, that his sole looks were of
force sufficient to purchase love in the minds and hearts of all men.

II. AT THE age of twenty four years, he began very hotly to follow, and
practice the noble acts of military discipline, to defend him self and his
whole race against the adversaries, which took head against them: and being
set forth in warlick ornaments and having mustered together some troops of
soldiers, he began cruelly to He gives him self to the wars in his youth.
invade his enemies, to besiege to w^es, to overthrow castles, in soemuch that
out of his worthy deeds of arms, he purchased to him self many titles,
trophies, and monuments of fame throughout the country. But in the midest and
heat of all this cruelty, he was not so far corrupted with a desire of
military glory, but even in that blouddie kind of life, he gave some fignes
of true piety; for oftentimes he would restore back the third part of his
spoils to those he had vanquished, thereby ouercoming his enemies the second
time with courtesy, as before he had done with the sword. At length calling to
mind (by a divine inspiration) the lamentable ends of many great kings and
princes of his ancestors, and considering that the secular pomp of the world
is but as a puff of smoke, and a vapor quickly vanishing: and remembering the
shortness of man's days, the vneertaintie of his death, the terror of his
departure out of this life, the severity of Gods tribunal, and the eternity
of the pains in the life to come, he resolved to give over that course of
life: and calling his fellow soldiers together he bad them adieu in these
words: Hitherunto (my dear friends,) I have waged war in the regiment of the
worlds vanities, from hence forth I am determined to bear arms only under the
ensigns of JESUS CHRIST, our true and dearest captain. Choose your selves an
other leader, whose colors ye may follow, for I will follow the banner of our
Lords holy Cross, sainctified in his pretions blood. And noe reasons nor
prayers being able to turn him from this pious resolution, he cast of his
martial arms, and went to the famous monastery of Benedictin monks at
Ripendown, in the Kingdom of Mercia, where having taken the habitt He becomes
a Benedictine monk.
of a monk under the holy rule of S. BENEDICT, he entered into a very strict
and severe manner of life, depriving him self not only of the superfluous but
almost of the necessary use of meat, drink, and sleep. The Psalms,
himnes, and other knowledge of holy scripture he learned with a wonderful
facility within the space of two years. He was of a pleasant countenance,
humble in his behavior, and gate, religious and full of the fear of God in
his works, constant in faith, His manner of life in the monastery.
perseuerant in hope, abounding in charity, prouidet in his counsel, and
very circomspect, and mild in his words. And living amongst his brethren, he
imitated the diligent and laborious be, which avoiding all infectious weeds,
sucks whatsoever is good and profitable out of all the sweet flowers round
about and brings it to her hiue. For as he highly detested all manner of vice,
so he striued and endeavored with a great contention of mind, to express in
him self, not only one, but all the good manners and virtues of those with whom
he lived. Therefore, whatsoever was excellent, or notable in each of the^, he
heaped it all to him self; the learning of one, the continency of an other,
this man's patience, the others submission, and humility, the silence of some,
the strict diet of others, and their night and day watchings; and in a word, he
ranked into him self alone a goodly train or lift of all others virtues, and
pious actions.

III. Now when he had made good trial of, him self for the space of two
years, and showed a worthy example of virtue and holiness in that excellent
school of religion, he began to aspire His desire of a solitary life,
to a higher manner of perfection, being taken with a wonderful desire of an
eremiticall and solitary life. Therefore, having communicated his purpose with
his Abbott and brethren, with their good leave, and well-wishes, he was
dismissed to his own choice; and he chose him self an habitation in the Island
of Crowland in Lincoluethire, a place at that time most remote from all humane
company, and which (as well for many fennes, marshes and rude groves thereof,
as allsoe through fear and horror of devils, and goblins that molested it)
was never before inhabited by any. Into this desert, our famous champion being
wafted over in a little boat with two other youths in his company on the
very feast of saint BARTHOLOMEW the Apostle (in whose meritts he had a He
enters the horrid (...) of Crowland
particular confidence) began, to lead a solitary and strict life. Having
built a little cottage, he used for his clothing the raw, and rude skins of
beasts: his diet was a small quantity of barley bread, and water, which he did
not taste till after sunnsett. But the common enemy of mankind, envying so
great virtue, and goodness, assaulted him with such a vehement spirit of
temptation, that he brought him even to the very brink of falling into the
bottomless gulf of despair, for being much overthrown in mind, and troubled
more then can be expressed, he begann to think of flying away and forsaking the
desert: when the almighty helper, and comforter of his servants in affliction,
sent him his divine assistance, by the means of the holy Apostle saint
BARTHOLOMEW, who appearing In temptation (...). conforted by S. Bartholomew.
visibly unto him, revived his weak spiritts with such like words: Be of good
comfort, my son, and resume thy strength and courage: thou have entered a
mighty battle; it does not become a professor of so great and worthy a
purpose, to be overthrown with a little blast of tentation. Therefore go on
courageously, for allbeit our Lord permit the to be tempted, notwithstanding
he will make thy temptations redound to thy greater good. Thou art cruelly set
upon to be overthrown, but I have made intercession for thee, that they faith
do noe fail; thou art assisted from above, our Lord has putt to his helping
hand. It is his will and pleasure that those whom he loves be tempted and
tried; in all which thou must behave thy self as his servant with patience: and
if thou abound with tribulation suffered for CHRIST, thou shall receive a
superabundance of consolation through CHRIST. Fear not therefore thy own
weakness, for the spirit of God it is that helps and strengthens thee. Putt
they whole confidence then in him, for he is the only health of his servants,
he will be to thee as a tower of fortitude against they enemies. At these words
the holy Apostle vanished out of his sight, and he remained much comforted, and
strengthened in our Lord, and from that day he was never more tempted to
despair: allthough the wicked spiritts never ceased to molest him other ways.

IV. FOR at an other time, two infernal spirits tranformed like The
dec^^^^fall counsel of the devil.
angels of light, began with very earnest persuasions to counsel him to
fast all the week long without any food at all, promising that by that
means, he should attain to the height of perfection. For disallowing of his
biduall, and triduall fasts, they proposed unto him The e^^ects of (...)derat
^^sting.
the fast of Moses, and Elias, and the abstinence of other ancient fathers,
that lived in Scety, for an example. But the scope of their deuelish pupose was
this, that abstaining wholly from all meat, by the continuance of his fasting,
he might be the cause of his own overthrow. For fasting, when it exceeds the
bounds and rules of a moderate discretion, causes the body to languish, the
spiritts to faint; the desire to devotion waxes dull, the effects of good
works are taken away, and the intellectual eye of conte^plation is dimmed.
Therefore B. GVTHLAKE, perceauing the falsehood and guile of this deuelish
counsel, calling upon the name of CHRIST, cried out with the royal psalmist.
Let God arise, and his enemies be dissipated, and let (...) Psalm (...)
that hate him, fly from before his face; At which words those hellish
monsters filling the air with mournful houlings, and lamentations, departed
to their house of darkness: And GVTHLAKE ever after despised all the assaults of
the devil, and easily suppressed all his wicked suggestions.

V. BUT by how much the more invincible his holy purpose grew He is cruelly
(...)ested by the devils.
daily in strength and constancy, by so much those enuiers of all virtue and
goodness incessantly labored to ruin his godly intentions; sometimes
terrifying him with ugly sights, lashing his naked body with most cruel
stripes, violently carrying him out of his cell into the air among the horrid
shapes of hellish monsters, casting He sees the paine^ of the da^ed.
him into the bogges, and puddles of the fennes, dragging him and tearing him
through the briers and brambles, and lastly lugging him even to the mouth of
hell it self, where not without grief and sorrow he beheld the souls of the
damned tumbling among those sulphurous flames in the fuffrance of unspeakable
torments, into which they insultingly threatened to cast him allsoe, unless he
would forsake his habitation in that Island, which they termed theirs. All which
injuries and cruel practices, he bore off with the shield of patience; using
that of the Psalmist: O Lord God in thee I have hoped, save and deliver me from
all that persecute me; And as they thought to have got the victory, the holy
Psalm. 7.
Apostle S. BARTHOLOMEW his peculiar patron appeared in great light and
splendor, and commanded those damned furies to restore him again to his
cell, without doing him any further injury: Which as they gently and quietly
performed, a quire of angels from above was heard singing that versicle of the
Psalm. Ibunt Sancti de virtute in virtutem videbitur Deus Deorum in Sio^^
Psalm. 83.
Thus triumphing over his infernal enemies, out of their vexations he learned
to be more humble, fervent, careful, powerful, and wary in all his actions.
He drives away the (...) with the sign of the Cross.


VI. AGAIN, as once he was saying his mattins, he saw two ugly devils
miserably weeping, and lamenting, of whom asking the cause, Because thou
(answered they) preuaylest against us in all things, insoe much that we dare
not presume to touch or come near thee. But the blessed man, making the sign
of the Cross, they vanished out of his sight. Yet ceased not therefore to
trouble and molest him, by almost all the means their deuilish envy could
invent. Sometimes making a sallie into the Island in great troops as if whole
armies of the Britta^s (who at that time cruelly destroyed the Englishmen and
among whom heretosore he lived in banishment) The subtle deceip^^ o^ the devil.
had invaded him: other whiles making the whole Ilad tremble with their hellish
noise by coming in great multitudes to his cell, in the forms of brute
beasts, when he should hear the bleating of sheep, the bellowing of oxen,
the hissing of serpents, the neighing of horses, the howling of wolves, the
roaring of lions, the braying of asses, the groaning of bears, the grunting of
swine, and diverse other most horrid noises, which furiously encompasled him.
Against all which he used as brave patience, and virtue, as in times past those
He confounds the devils that assault him.
famous Ermites of Egypt so much praised by S. HIEROM, S. ATHONIE, S. HILLARION
and others, and not long since our most worthy and memorable S. CVTHBERT, in
the Island of Farne. For being besieged, as is aforesaid, he armed him self with
the sign of the holy Cross, saying: It is in vain, Satan, for thee to tempt
me: our Lord is my assistance, and I will despise mine enemies. It this the
similitude of the Most-High, which in times past thou would assume to thy
self in heaven? art thou he who the^ through pride did aspire to the form
and liknes of God him self and now do vilely and filthyly transform thy self
into the ugly shapes of brute, and unclean beasts? Verily thou do persecute
CHRIST'S poor servants to thy own great damage: for by how much the more thou
endeauourest to build upon their backs, by so much the more resplendent
crowns of glory thou heapest on their heads, to thine own confusion. But
turn into what shape thou will, I am certain, that nether death, nor Romans 3.
life, nor angels, nor powers, nor principalities, nor any other creature
shall be able to separate me from the charity and ^oue of God. With these and
such like words he putt to flight all those troops of infernal monsters, and
ever after he not only overcame all their hellish delusions, plotts, and
sleights, but allsoe got absolute power, and command over them, as his slaves.

VII. THEREFORE those wicked spiritts, seeing they could not prevail against
him with their own practices of mischief, they incensed a clergiman that lived
under his spiritual rules and government, called Bertheline, with a wicked
cogitation and temptation, secretly to murder his holy master, thereby to
enjoy, as it were, by inheritance that little house, and whatsoever else
belonged unto him. But Bertilines He sees the wicked practices of Berteline.
impious meaning being revealed unto the Saint, he sent for him, and
discovered unto him all his secret counsels and purposes, to wit, where, when,
and by what means, he had determined, to execute that bloody exploit. Who
presently falling prostrate at the holy man's feet with repe^tant tears humbly
craved and obtained pardon, and ever after, he was very faithful to S.
GVTHIAKE, and remained with him until death, and had the honor to lay him in
his grave. Furthermore whilst he lived in this solitude his excellent counsel
was ven profitable unto many for the good both of soul and body, being
famous allsoe for expelling devils, and curing diverse corporal diseases. Many
things done a far off he saw, and declared as present: and by the spirit of
prophecy he foretold many things to come, long time before they happened. He
lived in this solitarines for the space of fifteen years, in which time, all
his actions, words, and ininwardest His virtues in this solitarines
cogitations, breathed nothing else but sweet odours of piety toward God, and
peace and charity toward men. Noe man ever saw him give the lest signs of
pride of mind, or make the lest show of anger in his countenance; but in both
he allwaies observed one self-same settled, and unremoved constancy. His aspect
ever calm and quiet, courteous and affable in his speech, very prudent in
giving counsel, of a singular humility of mind, and a wonderful continency
in his diett, clothing, and all things. But allbeit the greatness of the
labors and afflictions whereunto he exposed him self in The love of God
ouercometh all difficulties
this desert seem after a manner to exceed all humane strength and power, yet
out of his immense love to almighty God, and the almost undoubted, and tried
hope of future glory, they seemed very light and pleasant unto him. All
which, God the only crown of his saints, and their labors, did wonderfully
assuage, and moderate, with many externe and interne consolations: when
besides others allreadie named, the fowls of the air, and fishes of the
waters, were seruicable and obedient to his commands: and twice a day, (after
he had been two years in the Ermitage) morning and evening, he He discour seth
with an Angel.
deserved to intermingle most heavenly and inexplicable discourses with an
Angel: which a little before his death (being coniured thereunto) him self
confessed to Berteline, who before had often heard him discourse, but knew not
with whom.

VIII IN the mean time, he was visitted in this rude place by many He is made
Priest. He comforts King Ethelbald and ore relleth the restitution of his
kingdom.
great men, by Hedda bishop, who promoted him much against his will, to the
sacred dignity of Priesthood: by Ethelbald, the^ a banished man, afterward
King of the Mercians, who coming often to receive some comfort in affliction
from S. GVTHLAKE, had great confidence by his prayers to be delivered from the
bloud-seeking hands his enemies. Nether did his hope deceive him, for the holy
man with the efficacy of his good counsel, not only gave new courage to his
mind almost quite overthrown with sorrow and afflict ion; b^ allsoe by a
propheticque spirit, foretold that through his prayers, he should obtain his
kingdom and glory again, and that his enemy had not long to line. Only (said
he) be mindful that when almighty God shall have done well for thee, thou be
not ungrateful. A certain Abbot allsoe that came to visitt S. GVTHLAKE, had
given leave to two of his clearks, fayning some necessary business, to go to a
village hard by, where in a widows house, they most wickedly gave themselves
to the works of gluttony, dronkennes, and dishonestie. In the mean time all
their actions were revealed to the holy man, who told the Abbot where they
were, what they said and did, as distinctly, as if he had feene them. The Abbot
returning to his monastery, told his clerks where they had been, with all
other circumstances of words and works that had past, whereby being much
ashamed, they humbly craved pardon for their fault.

IX A noble man belonging to the foresaid King Ethelbald, and a young man of
Eastanglia, both violently vexed, and possessed by the He freeth two possessed
persons.
devil, but the later so extremely that he was madd allsoe, in so much that
he would set upon all that came near him with stones and staves, and
whatsoever else he could lay hold on, whereby he slew three men that sought to
bind him: nether in his fury did he spare his own body, for with his teeth,
and nails he would tear his flesh in pieces. At length, having been led by
his friends to many holy places, all in vain, he was brought to S. GVTHLAKE,
who by a triduall perseverance in fasting and prayer, springling him with holy
See the virtue of fasting and prayer.
water, drove away all power of the devil, and restored him safe and sound to
his friends. The other was freed by gyrding him self with S. GVTHLAKES Gyrdle.
About the same time, the venerable Abbess Eaburga sent a leaden coffin, with a
fine linen shroud to S. GVTHLAKE, humbly and earnestly entreating him to
permit his body to be buried therein after his death, desiring withal to
understand, He foretells his successor.
who should succeed him in his hermitage. The holy man unwillingly receiving
the present, sent her word back that his successor was as yet a Heathen, who
shortly having received the sacramet of baptism, should inhabit that place,
as it came to pass: for one called Cissa, after his decease, received the
faith of CHRIST, and became his successor.

X. AT length the day of his death drawing near he called Bertelin^ unto him:
And now (said he) my dear son, I am goeing to receive the rewards of my
labors; I desire to be dissolved to reign He foreseeth his own death.
with CHRIST my beloved Lord, and Savior. And after many speeches he enjoined
him to salute his sister Pega in his name, and entreat her to come to the
burial of his body. I have (said he) avoided her sight hitherunto in this
mortal life, that more securely we may enjoy one and other in the immortal.
And as he pronounced these and many other words full of piety, and
consolation so great a sweetness proceeded from his mouth, that Bertheline
seemed to smell like flowers of roses scattered in the air, or the distilled
liquour of baulme. But almighty God, as he had adorned him living in this
world with many worthy favors and benefitts, as well for his own, as for
the health of others; so at the very hour of his death, and after his
departure, he made him famous to the world with many singular graces. For
falling sick, the wendsday before Easter, and departing this life the seventh
day following; allbeit his forces were His denotion in his sickness.
weak, yet he forced him self beyond his weakness, to celebrate the dreadful
sacrifice of our saviors Passion at the altar, on Easter day. And from
midnight until the morning before he died, a bright shining light encompassed
the little house where he lay. At sunrising having strengthened him self again
with the viaticum of our Lords sacred body; he spoke to his faithful disciple
Berteline saying: The His death.
time is come, my dear son, wherein I must pass to CHRIST, and lifting up
his hands and eyes to heaven, he yielded up his most pure soul to receive her
reward in the heavenly paradise of all purity; the eleauenth day of April.
When at the very instant Berteline saw, as it were, a fiery tower reaching
from heaven down to the earth, the brightness whereof was so wonderful that
the pale sun might envy so great a luster. And the whole Island seemed to be
spread all over, The Angels (...) at his burial.
with a most pleasant sweet smell of heavenly odours: whilst the Angels them
selves were heard to sing melodious tunes of joy, to the honor and increase of
his glory. In the mean time, his godly sister Pega, rejoicing more then can
be expressed, at so great glory of her brother, buried his holy body with
great reverence in his own oratorie: and at his burial, a blind man washing
his eyes with the water whereinto was putt some salt hallowed before by S.
GVTHLAKE, received perfect sight.

XI. HE DIED at the age of forty seven years, at four and twenty he began
to follow the wars, eight years he remained in that fierce His body is
found uncorrupted.
life, and fifteen years he lived in the service of God in the desert. But a
year after his death, his sister desiring together with many other reverend,
and holy Priests, to translate his body to a more decent and eminent place,
they found him most whole and entier, more like a man asleep then dead. For
all the joints of his body were flexible, and agile, as if the humors had
run through the veins by force of the vital spiritts: and all the clothes
he was wrapped in, were as fresh and fair, as the first day they were laid in.
Then the body was honorably placed in a tomb above ground with great joy,
reverence, and devotion of all. But the exiled King Ethelbald spoken off
before, having understood the death of the holy man, came in mornefull manner
to the sepulcher, where pouring out many tears he complained that now he was
truly left forsaken and desolate more the^ ever, humbly desiring the Blessed
Saint by his meritts and intercession, to obtain his deliverance out of those
miserable afflictions. Unto whom S. GVTHLAKE appeared one night inco^passed
with resplendent bcames of glory commanding him to set aside all He appears
to king Ethelbald.
care, for that very shortly all things would succeed according to his own
desire. Which prophecy was not spoken in vain, for within a year his
aduessarie died, and he was restored again to the free possession of his
kingdom.

XII. IN THE mean time, S. GVTHLAKES tomb began to flourish with wonderful
miracles; for as many faithful Christians as came thither to demand help in
their necessities, through his meritts and intercession, were not frustrate of
their desire. Nether was Ethelbald being restablished in his kingdom,
unmindful of his beloved Patron, For in the same place he built a goodly
Church, and a monastery for the Benedictine Monks, and enriched it with
abundant rents, King ^thelbald buil(...)a the Benedictin Abbey of Cro^^and.
and revenues: which was after called the Abbey of Crowland. And in the same
Church he erected a very sumptuous and rich tomb over his sacred body. Where
allthough the place were full of fennes and marshes being seated between the
river Nine and the I Will of Elie, that it could not be come at but by boat, yet
that house was allwaies most open to the hospitality of all men, in so much
that it ^as honored with the litles of bounty, civility, and courtesy even
to the leter times. Afterward many other kings and Princes endowed Jngulphus
Hist Croiland
the same monastery with almost innumerable riches, and reuenews, as
appears by the history of Jngulphus a Mo^k of the same Abbey In which allsoe
it is to be noted, and not without cause, that in all the variable chainge, and
declining of the times, in so long and furious an outrage of the Danes, which
ruined all such other monasteries, this remained allwaies inhabited, allbeit
the Church and other buildings were quite ruined and burnt with fire. For in
that time when the barbarous Danes spoiled wasted and robbed all the
Monasteries of England, the Abbot of Crowland called Theodore understanding of
their neere-approching ruin, and threatened destruction, sent all the young
monks to the number of thirty, with the riches and relics of S. CVTHLAKE,
and others, to shift for them selves abroad, retayning only the aged men in
the monastery, and a few children, supposing belike that their weakness would
move Crowland destroyed by the Danes.
the Barbarians to compassion. But it fell out far otherwise, for when the
same venerable Abbot had solemnly sung high Mass, and made the remainder of
his devout Convent participant of the most sacred body and blood of our Lord,
suddenly a barbarous route of the Danes broke into the Church, and having
martired the Abbot before the high altar, with the like cruelty they murdered
all the rest of the monks, some in the refectorie, some in the Chapter, some in
the Cloister, so that noe room of that sacred Monastery remained, that was
not full of blood and horror. Only one young Monk called Turgar, whose
beautiful form of face and body (allbeit he desired earnestly to bear his
seniors company in that expedition of death) conquered the cruel mind of one
of those blouddie Princes, was saved, and reserved for the company, and sake
of a young Count of the Danes called Sidrock. Then those ministers of cruelty
breaking up the tombs of the saints there buried, committed all their bodies,
together with the Church and the whole Monastery to the merciless power of
the devouring flames. But Count Sidrok pulling young Turgars cowle over his
head, gave him a Danish iacket, and made him wait at his heels wheresoever he
went: till the holy youth finding an opportunity afterward, fled from that
Barbarous master, and returned again to Crowland, where he found his fellow
monks that had returned the day before, laboring and sweating to quench the
insatiable flames that yet raged among those doleful ruins, where he and
four other monks, having according as they were able repaired a little
habitation of defense only against the violence of the weather, made choice of
one Godrick for their Abbot, and lived in a religious poverty, and a pious
expectance to be restored to their ancient state, for the space of an hundred
years and more. Till an aged man called Turketill, Chancelour to worthy King
Edred passing by Crowland as he went on business for the King to York, was met
by those blessed old monks, and with a pious courtesy compelled to lodge in
their ruined Monastery. And hearing The monastery of Crowland reedisied.
the woeful story of their miserable desolation, he was so moved to
compassion, that having with much difficulty obtained leave of the King, he
became a Benedictine Monk in the same place, and began in his old age to bear
the yoke of our Lord in the profession of a monastical life. When by his
means (King Edred helping thereunto) that Monastery was gloriously reedified,
and the lands, livings, and Lorships anciently belonging unto it; restored, and
confirmed unto it, by the royal charters of the two Noble Kings Edred, and
Edgar, to the great consolation of those good aged Monks, who now gave thanks
unto almighty God, that he had given them the grace and patience, to see the
destruction, and restoration of that worthy Monastery; whereof the venerable
man Turketill was afterward made Abbot. And herein may be seen a rare example
of the wonderful providence of almighty God, who from so small beginnings
brings to pass works of such greatness and excellency; as from the dwelling
of one poor man saint GVTHLAKE, in that abject and horrid place, first to lay
the foundation of so mighty an Abbey of worthy monks as this was; and then
to conserve the succession thereof so strangely in those ^^ue^ old men; of
whom one called Clarenbald lived to see the age of an hundred threescore and
eight years, an other named Swarling, to the age of an hundred forty two, and
the third, Turgar, to an hundred and fifteen, all venerable in gray hair, and
the profession of a monastical life. The life of S. GVTHLAKE was saythfully
written by one Felix a monk of the same monastery, as he received it from the
forenamed BERTELIN his companion, and CISSA his successor in the Ermitage; and
dedicated to king Elwald of the East Angles. Out of which we have gathered the
foresaid history. All other English Historiographers do worth^y speak his
praises. This Felix flourished about the year of our Lord 730. and S. GVTHLAKI
about 706. of whose glorious meritts God of his infinite merci^ make us all
partakers.

Amen.
The life of S. PATERNVS Bishop and Confessor.
APR. 15. Out of Ioannes Anglicus.
PATERNVS borne in little Brittanie of noble parents, when he came to ripenes
of years judging all true nobility to be seated in the lap of virtue, he
contemned all those things which the world so much admireth, and in the
nakedness of religious poverty followed CHRIST naked. And lest his friends and
kindred should hinder his pious resolutions, he willingly banished him self from
his country into Jreland, where he led a most holy monastical life in
watching, fasting, and prayer. Afterward, he came into South Wales, where he
built many Churches and monasteries in the Country now called Cardigan-shire,
and ordered them according to the monastical rules and disciplines of those
times; in so much that in that country, he gained his greatest opinion of
sainctitie, and authority. But some iarres arising between the kings of
Southwalles and North Wales, which were ready to be decided but by the sword,
by the mediation of S. PETERNVS they were easily pacified, and the He makes
peace between. Princes.
princes entered again into a strict league of friendship. Great was the
familiarity and friendship which grew between these three Saints, DAVID,
TTELIAN, and PATERNVS: And they three divided all Wales into three bishoprics,
one whereof fell to the share of S. PATERNVS, in a place then called
Mauritania; where as he exercised the office of a good Pastor, teaching and
preaching to his poeple, he was called back into little Britanie; and there
through his strictnes of life, and doctrine, which many would not endure, he
Sampson Bishop.
suffered much affliction of false brethren with patience. But Sampson Bishop,
who above all other was magnified in that province for virtue and holiness of
life, used him with great honor, and reverence, as well becomed so great a
saint. And allbeit by the instigation of some of his brethren he once yielded
to make trial of S. PATERNVS his obedience, and sainctitie, (which was then
testified unto him by a wonderful miracle) yet afterward he humbly craved
pardon, and became his very great friend, and defender against the other
bishops, that impugned him, commanding that the Episcopal sea of S. PATERNVS,
which was in the town called Guenet, should be free from all externe
authority. At length, when peace was concluded on all sides, S. PATERNVS
having governed his Church many years in a miraculous sainctitie of life in
this world, he departed hence to receive an immortal recompense of his
labors, the fifteenth of April. The Inhabitans of little Britanie observe
three festival days in honor of this saint, the day of the peacemaking with
the other bishops; the first of November; the day he was made Bishops; and this
day of his deposition; which is allsoe yearly celebrated with great honor
among the Welchmen; in a Church dedicated to him called in Welsh, Llanpaternan
that is saint Paternus Church. Thus much of his life we have gathered out of
loannes Anglicus recited by John Capgraue, and Nicholas Harpsfield: that at
lest the memory of so great a saint unto whom our Welchmen are highly bound,
might not perish.

The life of Saint STEPHEN Confessor and Abbot under the holy rule of Saint
BENEDICT.
APR. 17. Written by William Mal mesbury. lib. 4. reg. Ang. cap 1.
STEPHEN surnamed Harding borne in England of noble parents, was brought up
from his very childhood in Dorset-shire in the monastery of Sherburne, under
the holy rule of S. BENEDICT, till being now in the flower of his youth, when
the nettles of the world began to sting his mind, far otherwise inclined; he
fled out of the danger into France, where carefully laying the grounds of true
learning, he received the first efficatious motive to ver tue, and the love of
God. For when his riper years had banished all boyish inclinations, he took a
journey to Rome, with one other in his company; In which (allbeit the way were
long and difficult and their poverty little able to defray that charge) both
going and returning they daily recited and sung the whole psalter. Having
piously visited the sacred tombs of the Apostles they returned into Burgundy,
where STEPHEN, in a new built monastery of S. BENEDICTS order called Molismus,
putt on the habitt and conversation of a Benedictin Monk. And at very first,
he grew easily He takes the habit of S Benedict.
familiar with the precepts of S. BENEDICTS Rule, in which he had bee^
conversant long before, but finding other statuts proposed which he had not
read in the rule before, he began (all ways keeping religious modesty) to
demand the ground, and reason of those laws. All things (said he) are
governed with reason, but because through sloth and negligence humane frailty
oftentimes falls from reason, many laws were made in times past, and from our
holy father S. BENEDICT we received a Rule, to recall the scattered mutabilitie
of nature to the bounds of reason. In which, allbeit many things be for which
I can give no reason, yet the authority of the Author (who questionless
received them from heaven) bids me yield thereunto. Therefore show an instance
out of the Rule vpheld with reason, and authority, and dictated by him, who
was replenished with the spirit of all just men: this if you cannot do, you
do in vain make profession of his prerogative, whose doctrine you refuse to
follow.

II. THIS opinion creeping from one to an other, much moved their hearts that
feared God, lest perchance hitherunto they had, or might hereafter follow a
wrong course. Therefore after a frequent disputation thereof in Chapter, S.
ROBERT, the Abbott approved STEPHENS opinion, and concluded that they should
surcease from following superfluous statutes, and search only into the marrow
He departs to cifterce.
of S. BENEDICTS Rule. But many, refusing to leave their old customs, some few
only embraced S. STEPHENS opinion, and departed thence with him to the
hermitage of Cisterce, which at that time was a desert uninhabited place, but
since, through his means, so flourishing with a worthy convent of holy monks,
that it might seem a little paradise on earth. Here together with his
fellows, he began to lead a very holy life in the strict and punctual
observance of saint BENEDICTS Rule, so that ROBERT Abbott of Molismus hearing
the same of their holy conversation took with him twenty four other monks,
and went thither, as well to be made a partner of their holy purpose, as a
promoter of their intended course. But his own monks caused him shortly after
to be recalled back to his monastery, by the authority of the Pope. And
Alberick was created abbot of Cisterce in his stead: after whose death (and he
lived but eight years more) our STEPHEN succeeded in the government of that
new borne-Conuent, in whose time the holy Congregation of Cisterce began to
extend it self, and flourish He is made Abbot of Cisterce.
with a great name of religion, and all by the virtue and prudence of S.
STEPHEN, who with the alms of devout poeple (and happy was the man that
through his hands offered his money to God) built sixteen monasteries in his
life time, of all which he was General. So that indeed he may be justly
termed the chief founder of the whole Cistercian Congregation, which afterward
flourished all the world over as may be seen at this present day; for that
Boore beginning, in time of his predecessor Robert, and Alberick, was so
small, and so unsettled, that excepting the wonderful and peculias providence
of almighty God, and this holy man's prudent care, and endeauours, it was
likely to have taken no^great hold in the Church: that as at the first he was
the occasion and cause of the first planting, so now he was the author of the
great propagation of this famous reform of the Benedictin order. When among
other titles of his praises it is not the lest, that he gave the Benedictin
habitt He gave the habit to S. Bernard.
to that bright Ornament of the Order S. BERNARD, who under the obedience of
our STEPMEN sucked the sweet milk of his mellifluous learning and devotion. And
the same S. STEPHEN composed, and left to his brethren as his last will and
testament, that worthy writing called CHARTA CHARITATIS (the Charter, or card
of charity) wherein is contained an admirable manner of maintayning a
connection of true peace and charity in all the monasteries of that
Congregation, throughout the whole world; that all exhibiting honor to each
other, their whole multitude of Abbeys, and monks should make all but one Body
or Chapter, under one head, and Superior. And this was called, Charta
Charitatis, because it chiefly tended to the conseruing of love, and charity
amongst them.

III. AT LENGTH, when this blessed man had settled, established, and confirmed
this new plantation with many holy laws of order and discipline, and worthyly
governed his stock according to our Lords true example of humility, till old
age had quite deprived him of his sight, he gave up his pastoral chardge,
desiring wholly to betake him self to the contemplation of divine things,
according to the royal prophets counsel; taste, and see for our Lord is sweet.
In this holy Psalm. 33.
sweetness, he spent the remaynder of his life, allwaies expecting the approach
of the happy minute, wherein he should be released out of that prison, to the
enjoying of the eternal freedom. Therefore his time drawing near many of the
Abbots of his new erected Congregation, and a great number of the monks came to
offer him the last service of their love, and duty. Who talking amongst them
selves (as the holy man say gasping for breath) that a man of His wonderful
humility.
so great meritts, and good works in the Church of God, might securely pass
out of this world to God. Peace, Brethren peace (said he) for I am as fearful,
and careful, of this my journey toward God, as if I had never done good work
in all my life. For if by the assistance of divine grace, any good has been
in me, or any fruit proceeded from my weakness, I greatly tremble, and fear
lest I have not conserved the same grace with that reverence, and humility as
was necessary. And armed with the shield of this prefect humility which his
dying words testified to be well grounded in his heart, he sweetly reposed in
our Lord, the 28. day of March, but his feast is celebrated this seventh of
April, which is the day of his canonization. This life is taken chiefly out of
William Malmesbury who lived in the same time with S. Stephen. The Roman mart.
makes mention of him this day. Baronius tom. 11. Sigebertus in Chron. ann.
1107. Arnould Wion lib. 1. c. 42. Nicholas Harps field, and many others do
amply speak^ his praises.

depiction of St. Elphege S. ELPHEGVS ARCHIEPISCOPVS CANTVA^ Martyr (...)

The life of S. ELPHEGVS Archbishop of Canturbury, and Martyr, of the holy
order of S. BENEDICT.
APR. 19. Written by Osborne a monk of Canturbury.
ELPHEGVS desce^ding by birth from most noble Ancestors ordered the whole
course of his life according to the rules of excellent prudence, and humility.
His parents much admiring the inocencie of his industrious mind and life, putt
him to be worthyly brought up in the knowledge of good learning, and the true
wisdom of He takes the habitt of a Benedictin Monk.
Christian religion. When this godly youth made it the whole study of his
philosophy to learn how to lo^^ God, desiring only to know, and obey him, and
all wales to sub^^^^ him self and his actions to the sweet yoke of his divine
service. Being touched therefore with a spirit of majesty, neglecting his
fathers inheritance, and forgetting his mothers grief, who dearly love ^im* he
forsook the vain world, and putt on the habitt (...) of a monk of S. BENEDICTS
order in a little monastery called (...)st: where he began to set aside all
the self-will of his own private des^^es, humbling him self to the service and
obedience of all his brethren, whose only instrument, as it were, the s^^wed
him self ^o be in a^^ occasions: allwaies stri^^^g with all to profitt more
(...)ore in the love of God, and by much watching and fasting* to (...) the
rebellious motions of his body, to the rule and subjection of reason. And
indeed, not only to him self but to whom soever else he was able to do good,
he endeavored carefully to perform it: which if he could not to some, (...)
^e abstained from doing them harm. Having piously spent (...) years in a
monastical life^ partly in the monastery af^^esayd, (...) partly in famous
Ben(...) Abbey of Glasenbury) when he (...)aued the flourishing time of youth to
steal away, he resolved to undertake a stricter course of life, and to enter
into a single c^^bat^ with the ancient enemy of mankind. Therefore goeing out
of h^s monastery, he came to the place He undertakes a solitary li^e.
called Bathe, (where the warm strings that rise out of (...) earth, are
profitable against many diseases) and there he remain(...)tt close up in a
little lodge, which he built him self, chastising his body with fasting, and
abstinence after an incredible rigorous manner. Within a short time many of
the better sort of the country flocked unto him, to discover the spiritual
wounds of their souls, desiring to have them tented with the sharpnes of his
pious correction, and cured with the salve of his good counsel. Whence it came
to pass, that within a short time he had gathered together no small Convent
of monks in the same place, which him self governed according to the
Benedictin rule and discipline which he had learned before.

II. HE WAS wont greatly to blame, and rebuke those who did chainge their
secular habitt, but would not chainge their life. Does not that man (said he)
seem to be full of falsehood, who makes Against those that change their
habits, and not their manners.
show to be what he is not indeed, whilst he conterfaits one thing in his
habitt, and bears an other in his heart? For it is better not to chainge our
habitt at all, then having chainged, to neglect the conversion of our manners.
But having erected an ample house for his disciples, and prescribed a perfect
law of sobriety, and continency unto them, and taught them how to bridle and
curb their carnal desires; he remained him self shutt up in a little narrow
lodging, where be attended only to the more important and weightier affairs of
his monks. In the mean time, many of his subjects being unmindful of their
promise and profession made to almighty God, the raines of obedience being
let loose, began to spend whole nights and days, in employments unworthy
their holy profession. Against whose greuious offenses, almighty God sent a
reuengfull punishment. For as one night S. ELPHEGVS (as his custom The divine
punishment of a negligent monk.
was) stood a holy sentinel at his prayers, he heard a great noise, and
clamor within the Monastery. And goeing forth, found one of the brethren
lying along in miserable affliction; upon whom stood two men of most horrid
looks, and filthy apparel, who cruelly scourged him with whippes, and
fiery serpents. And as he awaked, and roared out loud witnesses and signs of
his extreme pain, his tormentors did vpraid him; that as he had not obeyed
God, nether would they obey him. With which words they continued their
cruelty, till they had beaten his soul out of his body. At this woeful
fight the holy man quite resolving into tears, returned back to his Cell. But
the rest of the brethren, being terrified with this accident, confessed their
faults, did worthy peanance, and amended their lives ever after.

III. BUT the incomparable S. ETHELWOLD Bishop of Winchester being dead, a
great contention arose between the Monks and the A contention about ele^ting a
^ishop of Winch^ster
secular clergy, touching the election of a successor. For the Clergy of
that Church, that before led a most wicked life, contrary to the decrees of
the holy canons, and being oftentimes rebuked for the same by the forenamed
Bishop, they not only refused to correct their lewd manners, but labored with
an obstinnate spirit to defend their lewdnes, it was decreed by a Regal law,
that they should be expelled, and their function committed to others that were
more worthy. Therefore, the clergy being driven out, the Benedictin Monks
that feared God were introduced again. Whence it came to pass, that in the
choosing of a bishop, the secular Clergy a Clergy man, the Monks desired to
promote a Monk to the place, each striving to advance a man of his own coat.
Which great S. DVNSTAN Archbishop of Canturbury perceauing, had recourse to the
refuge of prayer, making an humble suplication to the all-foreseeing wisdom
of God, to voutchafe to show whom his divine majesty judged worthy for the
government of that Church. And as he devoutly and often repeated over his
prayers, S. ANDREW the Apostle appeared to him with these words. Why art thou
so sad? why do make such lamentable complaints? Arise, and place the Abbot
ELPHEGVS in the vacant Episcopal sea of that desolate Church. Nether let any
contrary power withstand thee in this; for not from any man, but from God him
self this sentence of him has proceeded. And left thou distrust any thing in
me, know that I am He is made Bishop the year 984.
ANDREW the Apostle of JESUS CHRIST, and a most faithful guardian of thy
health and salvation. DVNSTAN much encouraged herewith, consecrated Blessed
ELPHEGVS bishop, as he was commanded, and sent him honorably to the sea of
Winchester.

IV. BEING installed in that sacred dignity, he so wisely framed and The
severity of his life.
conformed him self to the manners, and humors of all men, that he became most
beloved of all, and (which is rare among mortals) noe man envied at his glory.
He was most merciful unto all others; but to him self he appeared most cruel,
and severe. For in the very dead time of winter, amidest the frost and snow,
at midnight when all his poeple lay buried under the heaviness of sleep, he was
wont secretly to rise out of his bed, and go out barefooted with one single
garment See the holy man's wonderful ^eannes.
a bout him, to busy him self at his prayers and meditation till morning. In
his diet he was so extre^ly sparing that he would rise from table all most as
empty as he sat down, whence it came to pass that his body was taken down
to such a low degree of leannes, that when at Mass he elevated the holy
sacrament, the cleernes of the light might be seen through the joints in the
palms of his hands. He knew how to temper, and fashion his mind, and speech to
all kind of men. He permitted none of his diocessans to beg publicly from
door to door, nether did he suffer the poor of other places to depart
without an alms, judging it an vnreafonable, and horrible offense for a man to
usurp that as a property of his own, which nature ordained to be common to
all. Wherefore he carefully maintained that he was noe true member of our Lords
body, that did not succor the necessities of the poor. For if when one
member of the body is in pain, the rest out of a co^passio^ do not suffer
with it, it is manifest that that is not a member of the same body, which in
the suffrance of an other, is not disposed to compassion. But when those means
were exhausted, which by right of the Church belonged to the maintenance of the
poor, he caused the many treasures which he had laid up for that purpose to
be distributed amongst them: giving posterity a lesson hereby, that Churches
were endowed with store of riches, to serve in time of plenty for an ornament,
and in time of want for profitt.

V. BUT when that worthy Pillar of our English Church S. DVNSTAN perceived
death to be at hand; and feared by the succession of some wicked person, the
coming of trouble into the Church which now was well settled in peace, and
tranquillity, he solicited with many prayers the divine mercle, that he
might have E^PHEGVS his successor in the sea of Canturbury. His petition was
heard in the holy court of heaven, and a grant promised: allbeit the promise
were not straight fullfilled. Which perchance was deferred, that more clearly
it might appear unto the world, how highly S. DVNSTAN was beloved of God, who
so truly performed a long time after his death that which he promised in his
life time: and that S. ELPHEGVS might fall into such times, as should advance
him to the glorious crown of martyrdom. Therefore, in the year of our lord
1006 and from the coming of the English into Britalne 578. S. ELPHEGVS in the
two and fiftith year of his age, when he had governed the sea of Winchester
twenty two He is made Archbishop of Cant urburie.
years, was raised to the Archiepiscopal dignity of Ca^turbury. Who
trauayling toward Rome to obtain his Palle, as he entered to lodge in a
certain town by the way, the townsmen perceauing him to be a stranger, and
being very greedy of their own gain, brake into his lodging, robbed him of
what he had, and with stripes compelled him poor and bare as he was to get
out of their town. Which Injuries man bearing away with patience, only a
little grieved for his companies sake, returned the same way as he came. When
he had not gone far from thence, but horrible cries were heard from the walls,
which proclaimed the sudden ruin of the whole town. For an outrageous flame
laid hold of the buildings, which furiously began to consume all to ashes: and
seeing it still so vehemently ^ncreasing that there was scarce any hope of
escaping a general destruction, and suspecting that it might be a punishment
for that rude violation of hospitality, they ran after the holy man, humbly
confessing their fault, and desiring pardon. The saint present taking
compassion on their misery, made his prayers to almighty God, He receaneth
his pall of Pope John the 19
and these horrible flames were presently extinguished, and their fury ceased.
Therefore, his goods being restored, be happily ended the rest of his journey
and returned again into England with his Palle. And being settled in the
Metropolitan sea of Canturburie he excellently performed whatsoever belonged to
the dignity, and function of a good bishop. The virtue of chastity commanded
so high a seat in his soul, that noe man in his hearing durst bring forth a
word any way drawing to obscenitie, nor as much as relate any dishonest
story. He was the comfort of the poor, the relieuer of the oppressed, and the
sole refuge of the afflicted.

VI. BUT o the variable condition, and inconstant state of this world! The holy
man had governed his Church but four years, The Danes spoil England These
miseries were re^ealed to S. D^nstan long before.
when behold two Danish Princes called Swane, and Turkill, entered into
England, using great outrage in some parts thereof, as a punishment for the
poeples sins. But Swane being by the secret disposition of god terribly
slain, Turkill having obtained the principality of a wicked inheritance,
wasted and spoiled many Provinces in England with fire and sword. For king
Etheldred being a weak impotent man not given to warlick affairs, made show
in his actions rather of a monk then a soldier: and the people of the Country
corrupted with the possession of their riches, and tied to their own
pleasures, thought nothing honorable but the sole private commodity of their
own bodies. Therefore, every one caring only for him self, and his own
goods, all refrayned from making war and noe man undertook the common cause
and quarrel of the whole country: since therefore it was to be fought, that
every one should win that glorionsly with the sword which he desires to be
master off. But among all these dangers, our courageous holy bishop, S.
Elephegus precheth to his enemies the Danes.
was wont to preach the word of life to these enemies, the barbarous messengers
of death, to ransom captives, and prisonners, and carefully to feed those whom
hunger had almost brought beyond necessity. Wherevppo^, by how much he was
honored and reverenced by the faithful, by so much he was contemned and
abhorred by those infidels. But he chosing rather to be called Beelzebub with
our Lord, then Rabbi or master with the Pharisee, ceased not to follow on his
pious work, endeavoring to comfort, and encourage the Christians in their
faith, and to couuert the infidels to the faith.

VII THE king had ordained one Edrick prefect over the whole realm; a man of
base parentage, but one that with his tongue had purchased both riches, and
nobility; (if that may be called nobility) of a subtle wit, a pleasing
discourse, and one who had gone beyond all mortal me^ in the crooked ways of
envy, falsehood, pride, and cruelty. This ma^s, brother being slain by the
nobles of Canturburie, and his house burned, for playing the pick-thanck in
detracting them before the king, and violently by unjust means inuading many
of their hereditaments, Edrick demands justice and revenge, the king denies
his petition, affirming that his brother justly suffered death. Therefore this
prefect having gathered an army of ten thousand men, endeavored to revenge
his brothers death by the sword which he could not by law. But his attempts
taking small effect, he desired aid from the Danes, not only to destroy the
city of Canturbury, but to invade the whole realm of England, which after
the victory should be divided amongst them by lotts. The match is made, they
shake hands, and take solemn oaths for the performance and first they
resolved to destory Canturburie. Which the holy bishop understanding, he called
the poeple together saying: Be of good courage, my dear brethren, and place
the majesty of almighty God before your eyes: fear nothing, but him who
Matt. 10. Joh. 13. and 18.
has power to destory both body and soul into hell: arm your selves with
true humility, and patience: For CHRIST him self when he was God, and his
father had given all things into his hands, would not be revenged on his
enemies, but commanded the sword embrewed in the blood of Malchus, to be
sheathed again into the scaberd of peace and patience.

VIII. AT length, the city of Canturburie having been besieged The year
1011. the Dane^ besiege Ca^t^rbury.
by the Danes the space of twenty days, and the greatest part of their
victuals and prouifion within being spent, the holy bishop sent a messenger to
advise those barbarians to cease from that wicked enterprise, and save the
lives of the innocent poeple, lest too insolently they abused the scourge of
Gods divine wrath, granted for a time to chastise of his children. But the
enemies scornefully despising his commands began rather to double their fury
then any way to relent; raising of bulwarks, battring the walls, and casting
of wild fire into the town. Till by the treason of Elmerick the Archdeacon
(whose life S. ELPHEGVS had saved before) one part of the city was set one
fire. The it was a pitiful spectacle to see how that devouring element, being
blown with the fury of a south wind, did disperse it self, consuming all the
buildings as it went. The^ the citizens entered into a woeful deliberation
with them selves, whether they should forsake the defending of their walls, to
run to their own houses, or neglect them, and stand stiffely in defense of
the city. But the common good was overthrown with private affection, the
sweet remembrance of their children, and a natural co^miseration to defend
their family made them leave the defense of the town. They run therefore,
to deliver their wives and children Canturbury miserab^y sacked
from a midst the ravenous flames, to reserve them for the butcherie of the
Danish fury whose edge they shall quickly feel. For in the mean time, the
walls are broken down, the furious army enters with such a horrible noise
what with the clamor of voices, and sounding of trumpetts, that the very
foundation of the city seemed to shake, fearing to be oppressed with the
ensuing ruins. Then they began to reap a bloody harvest in a field of
miserable disorder and confusion: the whole city was a woeful stage full of
nothing but blood and horror: some were cut of with the prince of weapons the
sword, others consumed with fire, whose outrageous flames seemed to envy that
some part of their prey was snatched Inhumane cruelties
out of their jaws by the sword, many were thrown hedlong from the walls
that died before they came to their iourneys end; Matrones compelled to
discover treasures which they had not, are dragged by the hair of the head,
and cast into the insatiable flames. Little babes snatched from their mothers
breasts, are pierced with their lances, or cruelly bruised to death under cart
wheels. In the mean time, S. ELPHEGVS, who grieved to see such a general
ruin amonst his poeple, being then in the Church with his monks, brake
suddenly out of their hands that held him, and with a courragious resolution
ran into the very midst and thickest of The wonderful courage o^ Sell phegus.
that murdring army, crying out with a loud voice: Spare spare, (said he) and
as ye are men cease to persecute this poor innocent age. I^ is not a victory
wherein the innocence of sucking childr^^ is slain: nether is there any
praise or glory purchased by exercising deaths cruelties upon the meek and
humble. Look upon me here that have all ways given my tongue free scope in
chastising your impious crimes, I am the man, that so often have nourished,
clothed, and redeemed the captives and poor prisoners by you punished. Rather
let the whole fury of your wrath and anger be quenched in my blood, then in
the slaughter of poor innocents. O sacred courage of a generous mind! o
invincible Pastor of the faithful, whom noe entreaties nor prayers of his
chiefest friends could persuade to leave his flock for the fasegard of his own
life! How worthyly may that sentence of our Savior be applied to this glorious
Prelate? Bonus Pastor animam suam ponit pro ouibus suis. A good Pastor sets
his life at the stake for his sheep.

IX. THEREFORE he was presently apprehended, and the He is apprebended and
emprisoned.
thread of his speech cut of by their violent hands that took him by the
throat, his hands were bound behind him, his cheeks were rent and torn with
their deuilish nails, his sides endured many a sore blow laid on with their
fists, and heels: the Church is committed to the flames, and all the flock of
CHRIST slain with the edge of the sword. For the monks, and all the poeple men
women and children throughout the whole town were tithed to the butcherie,
after a most cruel manner: nine were slain, and the tenth saved, so that of
all the monks there remained but four, and of the rest but eight hundred in
all the town. The holy bishop was committed to the horror of a close prison
where he lay the space of seaue^ months. In the mean time, almighty God
powered forth his reuengfull wrath against that barbarous poeple, so that
within a a short time two thousand of them died miserably, through most cruel
torments in their gutts, and all the rest being suddenly stricken with the same
disease were sooner in danger of death then they were a ware of chainge. Then
they were admonished by the faithful poeple to do peanance for their sins,
and make satisfaction to the bishop; which the^ refused to do, imagining that
afflction to have befallen them b^ ^haunce only. But their destruction still
increasing, and preuayling against all those that had endeavored to deprive
the holy man of life, and now ten, now twenty being suddenly sent to follow
their fellows to death, through most terrible torments of the head, and
entrails, struck such a terror into those that remained alive, that they
ran straight to the bishop, and with tears desired pardon for their impiety
committed: and having with honor led him out of prison, to the public view of
the poeple; he spoke these words unto them: Although your insatiable cruelty
deserve noe pardon, yet by the example of our Lord, we are taught what we ought
to do: who His speech to the poeple. Joan. 13
when he voutchafed to wash the feet of his disciples, did not exclude him,
whom he foresaw would betray him into the hands of his enemies, nay he fedd him
with the most sacred banquett of his body, and blood: And having with the sole
power of his word over thrown the officers of the Pharisees that came to
apprehend Joan. 18.
him, he presently raised them again, and cured them: and which is a notable
sign of his great goodness, those, whom he perceaueth daily with a stubborn
mind to resist his divine admonitions, he suffers notwithstanding to live, yea
and to excel their betters in humane goods and prosperities. Wherefore,
because I desire to be an unworthily devour follower of his sacred examples,
forgetting the burning of the city, the shedding of so much innocent blood
forgetting, I say, all the crimes of your former impiety done aagainst me, as
our Lord entreated his father in behalf of his Crucifiers, L^u. 23.
so will I make intercession to him for you my tormentours. Bring hither then
some bread, which forthwith shall be made wholesome, and sovereign against your
infection: that being refreshed therewith, and receiving your desired health,
you may either render thanks unto the supreme giver of all health, or remain
more impious in your blasphemy, and sacrilege. And having given to With holy
bread he cures the infected Danes They re^nder bad for good.
them all, some of the bread which he had hallowed, they were delivered from
that death-threatning infection.

X BUT o barbarous ingratitude I all this goodness could not draw a dram of true
courtesy from those bloud-thirsting hearts. For they were noe sooner restored
to health, but presently four princes were sent to the bishop, first to give
him some slight thanks for his benefitt, and them to (...) of him to ransom
his life and liberty, if he would enjoy either, with the sum of three
thousand marks. Which when he refuse (...), as being a thing against all
justice to give the goods of the Church to Pirates; they bound him again in
retters, and being on the very festival day of Easter, afflicted with most
exquisite torments, he was again shutt up in a prison. Where, as in a pensive
solitarines he gave thanks to almighty God, in that he was found worthy to
suffer for a good cause, a See the subtle false hood of the devil.
wicked spirit appeared unto him, in form of an Angel of light, who being the
father of all lies could not but tell a lie at the first word, and say that he
was sent from the court of heaven to deliver him out of the horror of that
prison, for the common good of his poeple. Nether needed he to fear (said that
agent of Hell) to be reproved with the name of a cowardly Champion for Act. 9.
Act. 12.
this, since he could not think him self humbler then the Apostles PETER who
was led out of prison by an Angel; or valianter then saint PAVL, whom was
stolen out of the midst of persecution in a baskett. And CHRIST him self, to
escape the hands of those that would have stoned him, went out of the Temple,
10. 8.
and by an evangelical precept gave license to his disciples to fly from the
face of persecution. The holy bishop deceived Matt. 10
with these faire-seeming speeches, yielded to follow his deceiuer out of the
prison. And having past over many ditches and brooks, of water, through the
dark and horrid shades of the night, on a sudden the wicked spirit vanished,
and left the holy man in the midst of bogges and marshes; who now perceauing
the guiles of his false leader, fetched a deep sigh of grief from the very
bottom of his heart, and casting him self into Behold a miserable case
the midst of those mirie places earnestly implored the assistance of our Lord
in that misery. O Fountain of all life, (said be pouring out woeful streams
of tears) o sole refuge of the children and stock of Adam, why has thy
heavenly grace forsaken me in my old age, whom in the flower of my youth it was
never wont to fail? Will thou suffer him who^ so long thou have mercifully
preserved, to be cast away, and perish at the last? O my beloved Lord, how
often in the shiphrack of this mortal life have I had thee my deliver? Let me
now again, I beseech thee, have experience of thy consolation in this unhappy
illusion of my enemy: be my aid in this unlucky hour of my affliction. The
prison is behind me, a river before me, darkness round about me, and the horrid
author of darkness by me, so that wretched ELPHEGVS thy servant stands
encompassed on all sides with troops of miseries, and left poor to thy
mercy, thou I hope wilt be an aid to thy forlorn Orphan.

XI. WITH these and such like speeches, the woeful witnesses of his afflicted
heart, he ceased not to callvppon the divine mercy, S. Elphegus comforted by
an Angel.
when behold there appeared a young man clothed in most bright shining
apparel, bearing the ensign of CHRIST'S passion in his hand: and whither (said
he) do thou wander? whither do thou desire to fly? Whither does thy
envious conductour lead thee? Is it the way to purchase a crown by flying out
of the lists of the battle? Or how can he glory in the prize of the victory,
who would not run to the end of the race? To whom, when the bishop had
answered, that he did not fly, but obeyed the command of heavens messenger:
This was not a message from God (replied the other) but a false invention of
the devils malice, who did not so much desire to educe thee out of prison, as
to seduce thee being out. For he is shrewdly netled with the pious works of
thy life past, and to see thee allwaies enjoy the present consolation of the
holy Ghost in all thy afflictions: whose presence gives constancy to all men,
constancy getts victory, and victory purchases everlasting glory. Return
the^ to the place deputed to thee from above to obtain thee a crown, and know
that to morrow our heavenly father will honor thee in heaven, with that
eternal happiness to live with his son for ever.

XII. Now that Saint ELPHEGVS was brought back to the Again he is cruelly
tormented
place of his trial, with great joy he expected the hour wherein he should
receive the crown of martirdom. But being come near to the prison gate he was
apprehended by a troop of those butchers, who having cruelly beaten him with
stripes, and hurt his brain with greuious blows upon the head, locked him up
in a prison almost half dead, where every hour of the night they cast on a
fire made of purpose whatsoever they could imagine would yield the filthiest
stink, and smoke, to annoy the holy man in that close room. But a good part
of the night being past, the gates of heaven opened, and those glorious spirits
began to be compartners in The Saints come to visitt him.
his sufferings, and to breath forth the sweet odours of eternal life,
resounding with their melodious voices himmes of celestial joy and melody.
Whom, as S. ELPHEGVS heard, and considered to the great comfort of his painful
soul, he beheld saint DVNSTAN late Archbishop of Canturbury, glorious in
countenance, and habitt, asisting amongst them, who stretching forth his hand,
spoke to him in these words: To thee; o Invincible Champion of our eternal
King, to honor thee with our duty we come, sent from him, who has granted
thee victory over thine enemies, and prepared thee an euer-florishing crown
in heaven. Behold what company thou shall perpetually enjoy after this
mortal life, the citizens of our heavenly Jerusalem, and the most glorious
domestiks of God; if thou overcome with patience, what remains to be suffered
for the love of CHRIST. For we have beheld the manifold labors of the city,
the burning of the Churches, the slaughter of our children, thy chains, and
reproaches, and the redoubling of thy torments after benefitts bestowed upon
them. Armed then with the power of heaven, do thou willingly undergo what
remains, knowing that the suffrances of this time are not Romans 8.
wort ie of the future glory, which shall be revealed in us. For the time of
torment is but one day and that a short one too, but that of reward is
infinite and without any end. Take good courage then, and fight manfully, to
obtain the eternal glory promised to those that for the love of God overcome
the world. At these words those glorious spirits vanished.

XIII IN THE mean time his fetters and chains fell off, and all his sores All
his wounds are healed miraculously.
and wounds were perfectly healed. When it was an excellent sight to behold
ELPHEGVS singing with those heavenly quiristers, and rejoicing amongst their
joys. But the next morning had noe sooner made a glorious show of a good
meaning, but he was led out of prison with an armed band of soldiers, and
carried ca horseback to receive his sentence, before the judgment seat of
impious tyranny. Where this choice was given him; Either pay gould for thy
ransom, or this day thou shall be made a miserable spectacle to the world: I
offer you (answered he with an undaunted courage) the gould of divine wisdom,
which warnes you to leave the vanity you His indgement.
love so dearly, and turn the whole care, and endeavor of your minds, to the
true service of the only living God, which divine counsel so o^en proposed,
if yet obstinately ye despise to follow, ye will perish by a worle death then
ever Sodom did, nether shall you or your succession take any long-during root
in this land. At these words those officers of hell leaped furiously upon him,
and having beaten him, with their halberds to the ground, they began to lay a^
him with stones, and whatsoever else came to hand. Whilst he being got upon
his knees, powered out this prayer to almighty God. O JESUS CHRIST only son
of the eternal father, who came into this world through the womb of the
imaculate Virgin MARIE, to save sinners, receive my soul in peace, and have
mercy on these my tormentors; with that he was stricken flatt to the ground,
but rising again he went on; O good Pastor, O only Pastor, defend the
children of thy Church, which with a dying voice I recommend unto thy divine
care. Then one called Thrum, whom the day before he had confirmed, ran
violently upon him, and with a cruel blow fastened his merciless axe in his
sacred head: whereby that conquering spirit was set at liberty to receive a
glorious and triumphant crown of martirdom in heaven. But the Princes of the
Danes desiring to hide the wickedness of their own fact, and darken the luster
of the Martirs glory, decreed to drown He goes to heaven a martyr.
his dead body in the river; supposing thereby that the foulnes of their crime
would so much the more easily be kept close, by how much the more the memory
of the Saint was blotted out of the minds of the poeple. But what the Danes
intended for his reproach, CHRIST turned to his glory. For all that multitude
of poeple, which by his preaching had renounced their errors, stood up in
arms for his defense, choosing rather to accompany him in death then to
suffer his dead body, by whose means while it lived, they had received the
ablution of life, to be buried in the insatiable A controsie about his body.
gulf of the waters. Therefore that sacred relic, being a cause of
controversy between two poeple of disageeing opinions, remained unburied and
vndrowned. But the consellours of both parties meeting in the evening with the
force of reason to decide the cause of that contention, it was concluded by
common consent of both sides jointly to make intercession to the Saint him
self, that if he were of any power or estimation before the face of almighty
God, he would show the strength of his authority, in the decision of this
doubtful question. Behold (said the impious Danes) a bough cut from its
nourishing stock, deprived both of bark and moisture; if this embrewed in
ELPHEGVS his blood, shall appear the next morning flourishing in the green
weeds of summer, it shall be granted that we have putt to death a just, and
holy man; and you shall have power to bury him with as much honor as you
please. But if this wood remain dry, and withered, as now it is, it shall be
lawful for us to say, that you have been blind in your affection toward him,
and it shall be in our power to dispose of his body as we think best.

XIV. THE condition being willingly accepted on both sides, to A notable
miracle.
the end it might manifestly appear to the world that S. ELPHEGVS his death
was not a death but a beginning of a better life, that withered branch in the
space of one night began to flourish, and wax green, and allbeit it were
planted in the ground, but the evening before, yet it was found adorned with
the green liueries of spring, the next morning. Whereupon their obstinate
minds beginning to relent, they strove to prevent one and other with embracing
and kissing the dead body, humbly bowing down their stubborn necks, and
bathing his deaths-wounds with the floods of their repentant tears. Therefore
his body being lifted on the shoulders of his enemies, was carried in triumph
to the newborn tree, as to the flourishing trophie of his glory; accompanied
in the way with almost innumerable miracles sent from heaven as testimonies of
his cause, and goodness. For the sick received their health, the blind their
sight, the deaf their hearing, the dumb their speech, and the Many miracles.
lame the perfect use of their limbs. And in a chapel of devotion built over
him in the same place, many of the Danish nobility became ennobled with the
Christian faith, and newborn in the sacred font of baptism. But when the
Londoners understood all these passages, they obtained by the means of a sum
of money, which commands all things, to have his sacred relics transported
to London, where by the hands of the bishops Ednoth of Lincoln, and Alfhune of
London, it was very honorably interred in the Cathedral Church of saint PAVL.
This Blessed Saint was martired the ninteenth day of April, being the
saturday after Easterday, in the year of our Lord one hundred and twelve, the
seau nth year of his bishopric in Canturburie, and fifty ninth year of his
age. But God, the almighty defender The divine punishment of his murderers.
of his servants, showed so great examples of reuengefull punishment against
the authors of his death; that one of the captains was the blouddie cause of
his one death, an other cut his own throat to avoid further inconvenience;
a priest that hid the holy Martirs cross was crossed out of this life with the
sword; and one of the same function that presumed to wear the holy Saints
pantafles, was before all the poeple cruelly tormented by the devil. And so
horrible a terror seized on all the Dauish princes, that not daring to trust
them selves on the footing of the lands they would needs aduenter their lines
at sea, immagening there to escape the holy Martirs anger, whom the earth could
not keep in safety from it. But they found the sea a far more implacable
element to suffer such impieties, for they were noe sooner launched into the
deepes, but the blustering winds raised such tumults in those floting
Kingdoms, that of an hundred and threescore fail, all suffered shipwreck
excepting threescore and five ships, which being driven to strainge countries,
all the men were miserably slain by the inhabitans, who took them for spies
sent to invade their dominions. But the wicked ringleader of mischief Turkill,
stayed a while in England to play the Pirate, likely at length to become a prey
to the damned spiritts.

XV. FOR NOT long after, Canutus King of the Danes came Turkill worthyly
punished.
with a great navy into England, where falling out with Turkill for some
wicked and perfidious actions of his, he destroyed the whole remnant of his
impious adherents, and followers, and compelled the Captain him self to fly
with six sail into Denmark: where being suspected by the princes to become an
author of some civil dissentions, and broiles, he was persecuted all over the
country, till at length, being murdered by the base common poeple, his soul
was sent to the rewards of her impiety, and his body thrown into the open
fields to be buried in the gutts of ravens and wild beasts. But after this,
Canutus perceiving his poeple to be continually slain by the English army,
and finding that the neighborhood of necessity compelled him to think of
yielding, he consulted with some of the wisest Englishmen, that had fled to him
for refuge, to know what might be the cause of those many mischances that had
befallen him; they all with one voice said that it was according to the
prophecy of the holy Martyr S. ELPHEGVS, who in his afflictions by the Danes
his predecessors, foretold that they should take noe sure root in the
kingdom of England, but should perish by a worse death then Sodom. Now
therefore (said they) if thou desire to pacify that holy Saint during the
time of thy reign, promise him, that thy affairs succeeding well, thou will
cause his sacred relics to be honorably transported to his own
archiepiscopall seat of Canturbury, and buried Can^tus promises to trauslate
his body to Canturbury
there amongst his predecessors. Which promise faithfully made by Canntus
(having within a while obtained peace, and after peace the own half of the
kingdom, and after the half, the whole) was as faithfully performed. For ten
years after the holy martirs death, Canutus sent for Egelnoth Archbishop of
Canturbury, who coming to London went directly to the Cathedral Church of S.
PAVL where the king presently gave him the meeting, and declared that the cause
why he sent for him was, to make use of his authority and counsel, in the
translation of S. ELPHEGVS his body to Canturbury.

XVI. THE Archbishop much amazed at the breath of this proposition, answered;
that surely his majesty had not taken mature deliberation, and considered
sufficiently the reasons and grounds of aduenturing on so great an enterprise.
And moreover, that for his part he feared lest he would be torn in pieces by
the Londoners, who would rather loose their lives, then be deprived of so
great a treasure, and Patron. And you see (said he further) that we have here
only our selves and two Monks, and the stone that couers his monument is of
that weight and bigness, that some yoke of oxen are scarce able to move it.
But the king, armed with the shield of a most invincible faith, answered, that
Gods, and the holy Martirs assistance (if that translation were pleasing unto
them) would not be wanting in a time of such necessity. Therefore the labor
was committed to those two monks; one of them was called Alsward in times past
of familiar acquaintance A strange m^racle.
with S. DVNSTAN; and the other Godrick, with Egelnoth now present. But for
want of other instruments, they broke up the cement, and lesser stones which
fastened the tombstone, with an iron candlestick found there by chance. Then,
putting all their confidence in God, and the holy Saints intercession, they
fell upon their knees, and set upon a work, which they knew far exceeded
their own strength; and laying their shoulders to that huge stone, with great
ease they moved it to the other side. When presently they beheld that sacred
body to be most entier, and uncorrupted; and Willam Malmesbury affirms for
ceataine that it remay: ned in the same integrity, for the space of one
hundred years after. Deg^t. Pont. lib. 1 and de gest reg. l. 1. cap. 16.
But now an other thought troubled our two busied monks, which was that they
wanted a board to carry the holy body to the boat; in which perplexity as
they composed, and wrapped it in linen clothes, they found under the body a
board, as it were prepared for the same purpose. Then lifting up that sacred
treasure on their shoulders they carried it to the water side, the king and
Archbishop following after: who in the mean time had disposed garrisons
throughout the city, and on both sides of the river Thames, to prevent all
occasion of tumult among the citizens. Being wafted over to the next shore,
Canutus with his own hands putt the body into the wagon: and thus with great
pomp, and honor, guarded with a mighty troop of soldiers it was transported
to Canturbury, and there received with great reverence, and joy of the whole
city. His body translated to Canturbury.
And the third day after, Queen Emme, with her some Hardecaunt, very devoutly
visited it, leaving behind her many very ample, and rich offerings as evident
witnesses of her faith and devotion.

XVII. NETHER was there wanting store of divine miracles, which at that time
honored this translation, and allsoe in after ages: and from thence forth he
was held, not only for a most holy bishop, but for a Martyr too. Wherein, when
S. LANFRANK Archbishop of Canturbury made some doubt; (because he did not die
directly for the confession of the faith, but in that he would not satisfy the
covetousness of the pirates, and ransom his own life) and proposed the reason of
his doubt to the worthy S. ANSELME then Abbott of the Benedictin monastery of
Bec in France, who afterward succeeded LANFRANK in the Archbishopric; S.
ANSELME most gravely, and elegantly handled that question, affirming that it
was a thing not to Eadm. in vita Anselmi. l. 2.
be doubted but that ELPHEGVS, who was enflamed with so great love to wards
God, and his neighbor, that he chose rather to suffer a cruel death, then to
see his neighbors unjustly deprived of their goods and money; would with a
far greater inclination and burning desire have embraced a death offered him
for the profession of CHRIST, and his Gospel. Therefore the love and desire
he had to see justice exactly defended, and maintained, brought him to those
strieghts. Now CHRIST, who is both justice, and Verity, pronounces those all
so to be blessed that s^ffer persecution for Justice. Again, the martirdom
of S. IONH Baptist (endured not for the Math. cap. 1.
Faith, but for the truth, in reprehending Herod for adultery) is of most
famous memory throughout the whole Church: and why not that of S. ELPHEGVS
suffered for the maintenance of justice? which, and the works of all other
virtues, as they are referred to almighty God, may be true causes of
Martirdom. These, and such like reasons moved LANFRANK not only to honor hi^h
ever afterfor a Martyr, but caused his life to be faithfully written by Osberne
a monk of Canturbury (whom we have followed) which he confirmed by his
authority, and made to be read in the English Church. The day of his glorious
martirdom was celebrated the ninteenth of April, on which he was martired. The
history written of him by the foresaid Osberne, S. Thom. 22. qu. 124 art. 5.
is recited by Laurence Surius tom. 4. The particulars of his translation we
have taken out of Nicholas Harpsfield saec. 11. cap. 9. The Roman martirologe
makes mention of him. And Baronius tom. 10. and 11. Malmesbury de gest. reg.
lib. 1. and de gest. pontis. lib. 1. Roger Houedon priori part Annal. an. 1011
and 1012. Matthew Westminster an. 1011. John Capgraue, and all our English
writters are full of his praises. In the Breuiary of Sarum he has anoffice of
three lessons: But in an ancient manuscript of S. BENEDICTS Order which
belonged to the monastery of Burton upon Trent he is served with twelve
lessons.

depiction of St. Anselm S. ANSELMVS ARCHIEPISCOPVS CANTVARIENSIS. Monachu^
Benedictinus. April. 21. (...)

The life of S. ANSELME Archbishop of Canturb. of the holy order of S. BENEDICT.
APR. 21. Anno. 1080. Written by Edmerus a mo^k. of Cant. that lived in the
same time with S. Anselme.
IN WRITING the excellent life, and incomparable virtues of the worthy Prelat
S. ANSELME, who from the humility of a Benedictin monk, was raised to the
Metropolitan dignity of Canturbury, we most perforce imitate the art of
Geographers, who in the comof a little card describe the globe of the whole
world: I will co^prehe^d APR. 2^.
in a few words, that which well deserves a volume, and give you a brief
pourtraict, or a bridgeme^t of the works of this glorious Saint, this great
doctor, this mirror of Bishops, this ornament of our English Church, and
bright sun of the Benectin family. Unto who^ (that nothing might be wanting
for the making up of a man perfect in all things) was added the nobility of a
godly, and honorable parentage. He was borne in the city Augusta near the
co^fines of Burgandy. His His worthy pare^tage.
father was called Gundulphus, by nation a Lumbard, who using much to the
city of Augusta married there a lady called Ermerberg, by who^ he had the
happiness to have ANSELME. They were both of noble blood, and rich, but very
contrary in life, and manners, for his fathers greatest care was to spend his
time in worldly mirth, and pleasure, and to live merrily: when on the order
side, his wife carefully governed her house, constantly perseuering in the
continual exercise of pious, and virtuous works, to the last gasp of her
life: But Gundulphus, being by the death of his good wife, freed from the bonds
of matrimony, His father becomes a monk.
it pleased almighty God to make him enter into more pious considerations,
and reclaim his old age, tired with sailing among the turbulent pleasures of
the world, to retire to the quiet shore of a monastical life, wherein he
spent the rest of his days happily. But ANSSELME, the worthy branch of this
noble stock, in who^ from his tender age it seemed virtue was incorporate, to
become visible to mortal eyes, with the silver innoce^cie of his sweet
carriage and behavior purchased the love and affection of all men. Well doing
which other men get by labor, and industry, seemed to be in him by nature,
since he had consecrated his infancy through the ignorance of vice, and
emulatio^ of virtue. Being set to school, he profitted beyond all his other
fellows. He had scarce seen fifteen years of age, but straight he began with
a grave prudence to consider with him self of the dangers, and miseries of the
world, plotti^g how he might better settle him self in the true service of God;
when he resolved that noe manner of life was comparable to that of monks, and
religious men. Therefore being desirous to leave the world, and become a monk,
he asked the S. Auselme asking the habitt of a monk, is denied.
habitt of an Abbot of that country, who fearing his fathers displeasure that
was ignorant of ANSELMS inte^tion herein, refused to grant his request. But
ANSELME constant in his holy purpose made his prayer to almighty God to send
him some corporal sickness that so at lest he might become a monk and a
Patient in Religion, to cure the diseases (or rather conserve the innocence)
of his soul. His prayers were heard and his request granted: when languishing
in his desired sickness, he sent to the Abbot with many earnest entreaties to
be admitted into his order, for that now he feared death was at hand. But he,
upon the same humane respects as before, again denied his petition.

II. AFTERWARD, his health returning again, worldly pleasures and
prosperities so sweerly smiled upon him now in the flower of his youth, that
the fervor of his former purposes and desires, began by little a little to
grow cold (especially after the death of his good mother, whom he highly loved
and respected) and he took again to him self free scope to follow the
inclination and desires of his sensual appetits; not only forgetting the
spirit of his first Vocation, but allsoe omitting his study in sciences,
which before he had so carefully His fathers anger against him.
followed. But while thus he hunted in the train of his own passions, it
pleased almighty God to look upon him with the ey of a merciful clemency,
and permitted his father to enter into such an extreme dislike of him, that he
could not afford him as much as a good look, hating, and disdayning in his
son, as well the good, as the evil: when on the other side, nether his
filial humility, or duty, was of power to appease, or any way satisfy his
angry father. Whereupon he chose rather to renounce all his worldly
inheritance, then to endure the storms of such fury, fearing to run the
hazard of further inconvenience. Therefore, judging his friends and
domesticques to be his greatest enemies, he forsook his fathers house to seek
his content and repose elsewhere. He departed with one only companion, and
partly in France partly in Burgundy, he spent the space of three years. But
the worthy fame of Lanfranks piety and learning coming to his ears, he
ranged him self into the list of many other young men of his virtuous school,
in the Benedictin Abbey of He becomes schol ler to Lanfrank.
Bec in Normandy. When it was rare to see, how ANSELME was not so joyful to
be a scholar of so excellent a master, as Lanfrank was glad to be a master to
so worthy a scholar. The masters care and labor in teaching, was rewarded in
the scholar with an extraordinary diligence of learning what he taught, in
so much that in a short time, he not only made a great progress into the
knowledge of holy scriptures, and other good doctrine, but allsoe exercising
him self in watching, and prayer, and other acts of devotion, he became very
desirous to attain to the height of virtuous perfection. For the familiar
conversation he used with his good and virtuous master S. LANFRANK caused the
light of his ancient resolution toward a monastical life, again like a
fair morning of piety, to break out through the clouds of worldly vanities,
wholly to dedicate him self to Gods service: True it is that he was much
perplexed with difficulties to attain the end he aimed at. On the one side he
found him self greatly inclined to lead a solitary life in the desert, thereby
to apply and employ his thoughts more securely in divine co^te^plation: on the
other side, he thought it a more secure way, to live under the rod of obedience
in a monastery: again (his father having left him heir of great lands, and
goods) he was in doubt, whether he might not do God greater service, living in
the world, and yearly distributing the best part of his means to the poor,
and pious uses. In these perplexities this prudent young man would not of him
self resolve any thing, in a matter of so great moment, but consulted his
master LANFRANK, sincerely laying open the secret thoughts of his heart, fully
He consulteth Lanfrank of choosing a course of life.
resigning his will into his hands, with intention to follow the dictamen of
his good counsel. The master was unwilling to resolve his scholar, in a
matter of such importance, but referred it to the judgment of the venerable
Prelat Maurill Archbishop of Roane: unto whom they went both, and proposed
their difficulty: who, having heard the cause, counseled ANSELME to embrace a
religious and monastical life, as the most perfect, and assured way to heaven;
and following this advise he resolved to humble his neck under the sweet yoke
of CHRIST in the holy order of Saint BENEDICT.

III. BUT THERE remained yet an other difficulty, of choosing the place,
whether he should take the habitt at Cluny, or Bec: at the first, he thought
his labor, and learning might be to many profitable, at the other, he feared
it would, like a little star before the sun, be darkened with the bright
splendor of LANFRANK, and so become of little or not service at all. While
his thoughts were tossed with these wavering opinions, he began to discourse
with him self in this sort: Why ANSELME what do thou mean? what do thou
think on? Do thou inte^d to make a monastical life the first stepp to
obtain fame, glory, renown, and superiority? God forbid: For the true scope
of a monk, must be to humble him self to others, and He takes the habitt of S
Benedict.
utterly to despise all titles of honor and dignity. And this thou will
attain to at the Abbey of Bec, or not where. Therefore without all delay, he
went thither and putt on the habitt of S. BENEDICTS order in the said
monastery, where the venerable man Hurluin was Abbot, who out of his own
means and patrimony had first built, and founded that Abbey. ANSELME was then
at the age of 27. years, when he became so careful, and attentive to imitate
the virtues of his other brethren, that at the term of three years, he became
him self to be a bright mirror of religious perfection, and monastical
discipline to the whole convent. So that B. LANERANK being taken from the
Priorship to be made Abbot of the monastery of Cane, ANSELME much against his
will was created Prior in his place. Which title of He is made Priour.
honor did not only, not hinder him in the way to perfection, but was rather a
means more freely to apply him self thereunto, by the continual practice of
divine conte^plation, and heavenly discipline followed with so great fervor,
that he attained to suchan height of speculation, that he discovered, and
maintained with evident reasons, many questions, and assertions of the divine
nature, never heard off before his time. Lying one night awake in his bed, he
had many doubtful thoughts, how the Prophets did not only see things present,
but things to come allsoe, foretelling them as distinctly as they had been
present. And being not able to perceive how this might be, his understanding
labored with an incredible desire to be resolved in this point: when on a
sudden fixing his eyes toward the Church and dorter, by the means of a
divine light, the beams of his eyes pierced through all the walls interposed,
and showed him the monks (whose office it was) adorning the altar, preparing
the quier for the singing He s^eth through the walls.
of mattins, lighting of candles: and at the knock of the bell be beheld the^
all rising out of their beds, and goeing to the divine service. Being much
amazed hereat, he understood by this heavenly luster, that it was a very easy
matter with God to make the Prophets foresee things to come, since he permitted
him with corporal eyes to see what passed through the resistance of so many
walls.

IV. FVRTHERMORE, being replenished with the clear light of wisdom, he had
such a certain discretion of spirits that he easily pierced The geat light of
his f^^le.
the ma^ners and inclinations of all that came to him, even to the knowledge of
their secretest thoughts. He discovered allsoe the vetie source, and root of
virtues, and vices teaching with wonderful rules, and examples, how to
purchase the one, and avoid the other. His virtuous exercises.
Out of the continual contemplation of the celestial happiness, and an ardent
desire of the everlasting life, he would oftentimes power out whole floods of
tears, equally bewayling other men's sins, as his one. He had so great force
and efficacy in giving of counsel that the very spirit of all good counsel
seemed, as in a throne, to rule and reign in his breast. His continual
exercises in fasting, watching, prayer, and other mortifications of body to
bring it subject to the spirit, were such, and so great, that they deserve
rather to be admired then written. In fasting, he had got such a natural
habit, that he was nether molested with hunger, nor delighted in satisfying his
hunger with eating. He slep very little, employing all his time in the careful
execution of his office, in comforting the afflicted that had recourse unto
him, in praying, in meditating, in studying, in composing many devout books,
and corecting such as were corrupted.

V. THE prudence, charity, and meekenes he used in governing His prudence in
governing.
his subjects, and trayning them in the study of true virtue and religion, was
admirable, especially toward those, who were less obedient then was
requisite; Among whom were some, who greatly envied that he was preferred
before them, to the Priorship, and others who did carpe, and back bite all his
sayings, and doeings. Against these and their malice the prudent holy man,
fought with so great discretion, in showing them all duties of fraternall
charity, that with the sweetness of his demeanor, he brake their stonic
hearts, and with the majesty of his humility and modesty, he reclaymed them
to the level of his own will. This sweet, and meek spirit, which our Lord
bestowed upon him, appeared more clearly in that which passed between him and
a young monk called Osberne, one of a piercing wit, and good ability, but a
very libertine in his manners; of a turbulent, and detracting spirit, and in
all things so contrary to his superior that he disdayned to give him a good
look, when he was admonished to follow the rules of modesty, and virtue. Him,
running headlong into the ruin of his One osberne i^ateth S. Auselme.
own soul S. ANSELME undertook to cure, which he performed with wonderful
great art and prudence. For perceauing his course to be in a desperate violence
inclined to vice, he did not presently thunder against him with the terror of
sharp words, and correctio^s, Anselms pious craft to reduce him to good.
but first shined in all love and meeknes toward him, giving scope for a time,
to the raines of his inordinate passions; when OSBERN^ perceiving how he
enjoyed his pleasures under the wings of his allowance, began exceedingly to
love him, and wholly to putt him self into his hands: Off which desired
occasion the holy man taking hold, he began with a little more seuetitie to
curb his depraved manners, to cut off all his boyish actions, and to admit
nothing worthy reprehension in him, which was not sharply revenged both with
words, and stripes. Whereby it came to pass, that he who before was on the
brinke ready to tumble into a precipice of vice, was brought to the firm land
of religious, and regular observance, whereon he kept sure footing, to the
hour of his death, which followed shortly after. During the time of his last
sickness, S. ANSELME waited him self upon him, and after his death, either said
or caused (when he could not) a mass to be said every day for the health of
his soul the space of a whole year, and by his means, many other servants
of God did the like. A good example for all Superiors to learn how to carry
them selves in winning, and correcting the sometimes turbulent spirits of their
subjects, how to deal with their sick, and lastly how they ought to pray for
those that die under their A good les^o^ for Superiors
charge.

VI. HE SHOWED noe less charity toward an other monk, gray in old age, but
green in virtue, who by the instigation of the devil, was grievously ince^sed
against the holy prelat, so that he could not affoor him a good word, or
look. This poor monk happened to fall sick, and coming to such extremity,
that he expected nothing but death, he seemed to behold two cruel wolves,
which took him about the neck, and endeavored to strangle him; whereat he
roared and cried out so dreadfully, that S. ANSELME, then busied in the
cloister, ran toward the Infirmarie, to know the matter, and entering See the
virtue of the ^oly Cross.
into the chamber, made the sign of the holy cross upon the sick man,
saying: In nomine patris and filij and spiritus Sancti: and straight he was
quiet, confessing that when ANSELME made the sign of the Cross, he saw, as it
were a fiery lance shot out of his mouth, which feared away those ugly
wolves that sought to devour him. Then being exhorted to penance for his
sins, he confessed, and was absolved by S. ANSELM, who allsoe foretold him
the hour of his death: all that heard, and saw what passed being greatly
edified, with so great charity of the Saint, and amazed at the wonderful
light of his soul. The like bounty and goodness shined in him at other times
in his great care toward the sick, visiting, co^forting, rejoicing, and with
his own hands serving them, and doing the part not only of a true Father but
allsoe of a most charitable Mother amongst the^. So that in all their
necessities, the monks had recourse unto him with as great confidence, as the
child has in his mother; laying open before him all the secret passions and
wounds of their souls, which he like an holy Physician (because he knew the
root and origin of them all) easyly cured. This union of the parts of the
body with their head, and subjects with their superior, is the Nurse, and
Soul of all religion.

VII. HE willingly employed him self in bringing up young youth of Young
gentlemen brought up in monasterics.
a middle age, judging his pains therein, to be so much the more profitable,
as that age (like unto soft wax) was apt to receive, and conserve all the
lineaments of virtue imprinted therein. It was a venerable custom in those
times to nourish and bring up Gentlemen's sons of the best sort in Monasteries
of S. BENEDICTS order, either to become Religious, if they were so addicted, or
by that vertuons education, to make them more capable in their riper years, to
profitt the common wealth. An abbott, in great reputation of holy life, came
one day to vistt S. ANSELME, and discoursing with him of the government of
monasteries began greatly to complain of the liberty and disobedience of the
young gentlemen under his charge: and that he watched night and day over them,
and made their faults to be severely whipped and chastised, and yet, it seemed,
that the more he kept them under, the worse and more incorrigible they grew.
And what (said S. ANSELME) became of these children when their were at age, or
what profitt reaped you out of all this whipping and scourging? Gentleness most
requisite in bringing up youth.
For the most part (replied the Abbott) they grow to be great ignorant Dolts.
Then S. ANSELME. This manner of education of youth seems to me most
uncertain, for eue^ as if one who by hedging in of young plants, does so
choke them up with thorns, that they can nether grow, nor putt forth their
boughs, will consequently bring noe fruict, nor profitt: so in the nourishment
of children who are rich, and delicate plants, to bring them to good one must
use a fatherly love toward them, giving them a gentle, and discrete liberty,
and not allwaies making them slaves with fears, threatenings, and stripes.
Because, when they do not acknowledge and find in their tutours and masters
that guide them, the cordial affection and love of a father, they think
whatsoever is said, or done to them proceeds out of chollar, hatred, and
malice. And as they grow in age, they grow allsoe in a greater defiance of
their masters, of whom they have as great horror, as a thief of his
executioner. Rules for superiors in their government.
In fine, S. ANSELME taught the ABBOTT, that true government ought to know how
to temper sweet with sower, clemency with severity, and to cure wounds not
only with the sharpnes of wine which closes up, but with the supplenes of oil
allsoe, which softens and opens the soars. For allthough hard bread and crust,
be good for those that have good teeth, yet sucking children cannot eat it.
And if a superior will guide all his Inferiors the same way, without
discerning the different conditions and inclinations of the persons whom he
governs, he will certainly committ many gross faults, to the great
affliction, and loss of his suiects. The fame of S. Auselme draws many
chollers.


VIII. S. ANSELME then, environed with the glittering beams of excellent
virtues, his renown was carried on the wings of fame over all Normandy,
through France, into Flanders, and England; so that many learned and pious
men, came to the monastery where he was Prior, to range them selves into the
spiritual warrefare, under the colors of S. BENEDICT, striving to receive the
habitt at his hands, and to live under his correction, and discipline.
Nevertheless, he was so prudent and reserved, that he never solicited any man
to give him self to God rather in his monastery, then in any other, but all
ways left it to their choice, to enter into what Convent they best liked; to
the end that if afterward they happened to repent they should have noe just
occasion to murmr, or coplaine against him. But they came so thick of their
own accord that the Abbey of Bec, was in a short time wonderfully increased in
te^porall, and spiritual goods, of many good religious monks; and Abbott
Herluine being dead, ANSELME, by the common suffrages of all the Convent, was
chosen to succeed in his place; allbeit he labored with prayers and tears
against it, throwing him self prostrate at the feet of the monks, and
coniuring them by the dear passion of our lord ISSVS CHRIST, not to charge his
weak shoulders with such a weighty He is chosen Abbot of Bec.
burden. In fine, when all his resistance did but increase their importunity,
he yielded, sincesuch he perceived was the will of God. Being therefore made
Abbott, he governed the monastery with such holy prudence, and prudent
holiness, that this new increase of dignity, was in him, as a discovery of a
new mine of shining virtues whose beams amazed all behoulders.

IX AT that time, there were many possessions in England belonging He comes
into England
to the Abbey of Bec, to visitt which saint ANSELME went over into England. At
Canturbury (where LANFRANCK his old Master was Archbishop) he was with
wonderful great honor received by the Benedictin monks of that city which he
no less ingeniously then elegantly putt off, affirming the greater honor, and
greater affection of charity, to reside in them that performed it, then in him
to See his great humility.
whom it was performed. Because he, who unworthily received that undeserved
duty, could expect for it noe reward from God. For what (said he) can be due
to me from God in that any one shows love toward me? But to them from who^
this love proceeds, he owes a reward for their pious affection, and he will
not fail to lay up store of grace for them. But the more he sought to avoid
honor, the more still was thrown upon him: when poeple of all orders, sexes,
and conditions, striued to do him the highest honors they could, and amongst
the rest, King William the Conqueror, who albeit otherwise a Norman of a
fierce and barbarous nature, yet toward saint ANSELME, beyond all men's
expectation, he behaved himself with an unaccustomed courtesy and kindness, to
the great admiration of all. But the Saint quickly wearied with these honors,
thought his journey in nothing so well spent, as in the sight and conference
he had of his old Master LANFRANCK the Archbishop, between whom discoursing of
many grave affairs, fell, at this time, that famous disputation (mentioned in
his life) of S. ELPHEGVS the Martyr. Afterward, he returned again to his
Monastery, and governed the same the space of fifteen years, with all virtue
belonging to a good prelate. In the mean time William Conqueror died, leaving
the crown to his onne William Rufus, who by all indirect ways possible,
sought to oppress and empouerish the Clergy and Church, thereby to satisfy
his own unbridled covetousness, and with their gould to give a glorious outside
to his own wickedness. Whereupon S. ANSELME, at the earnest entreatie of the
nobles, resolved to come again into England. But in the mean time Lanfrank
being dead a rumor arose of the advancing of ANSELME to the Archiepiscopall
sea of Canturbury; which made him (o wonderful conte^mpt of honor!) to
defer his journey for five years space. How many be there now adays that
would have taken post in this case?

X. COMING at length to Canturbury he was saluted by the Benedictine monks, and
others, as their future Prelate, which he took so S. Anselme refuses the
style of Archbishop
heynously, that the next day, he departed before the sun was guilty of his
being in town, allbeit it were the very feast of the Nativity of our Lady,
refusing to be won by any prayers, to celebrate there that solemnity.
Thence he went to King William and dealt freely with him to amend his manner of
life, to order the common wealth in better fashion, as well in Ecclesiastical,
as temporal affairs, telling him withal, what an ill opinion of his bad life
was blown over the world. But the king was deaf to all good counsel; till
falling into a grieuoussicknes, he began to make him remember him self, and
hearken a little more to his pious persuasions. His is chosen Archbishop of
Cauturbury.
In the mean time being putt in mind that the sea of Canturburie was void of a
Pilot, and that that Mother Church of England had many years been a widow,
he proclaimed ANSELME to be the most worthy of that dignity, that the
disciple might succeed his master. And this his proposition was presently
accepted with the common consent, and applause of the Benedictin monks of
Canturbury (unto whom the election of the Archbishop belonged) and the general
liking of the poeple. Only ANSELME with might and maine resisted this election,
and obstinately refused to undertake the dignity, with tears alleging many
reasons, and excuses, he made many protestations that it was a very foolish
and overthwart proceeding to join to the plough an old sheep yoakt with an
untamed bull, (by the bull meaning king William) But all in vain, for the
pastoral staff was forcibly thrust into his hands, him self violently drawn
into the next Church was proclaimed Archbishop, and his election witnessed with
many joyful acclamations, and singing of the himme Te Deum Laudamus etc. And
now the day of his consecration and installation at Canturbury was prefixed to
the fourth of December, when by the opening of the bible this Sentence fell to
S. ANSELMES lot. Homo quidam fecit caenam magnam, and vocanit multos etc.

XI. AT THE first King William showed goodwill and friendship Note the
covetousness of the king.
toward S. ANSELME, in hope that being now advanced to so great dignity, he
would bestow some worthy present upon him: but as soon as he perceived that
ANSELME had noe such meaning, he began to repent him self of this one,
allbeit a rare, good deed, and being wholly given by hook or by crook (as
they say) to get money, he not so required as exacted a friendly gift of a
thousand pound sterling for a gratuitie for his advancement to the
Archbishopric. But saint ANSELME hating that vnroyall covetousness in the King,
was determined not to send him a penny. Till swayed by the counsel of many
friends, lest he should greatly exasperate the king to the greater detriment of
the whole English Church, he sent him five hundred pound promising to gratify
his Majesty more largely when occasion served. William utterly refused to
accept that present as too slender and sparing a reward for a king. Whereat S.
ANSELME greatly rejoiced, because by this means he cleared him self from all
stain of honor, which for this fact malice might have laid to King William
moved against S. Anselme
his charge. And without any delay he distributed that whole sum of money to
the poor. Afterward, he began to call upon the King to have a Council
assembled for the reforming of the Clergy and establishing of Ecclesiastical
discipline in the Church. But his good inte^tions received a sharp rebuke from
the king, who sought by all means to break all the liberties of the Church,
in persecuting the Clergy, inuading the Ecclesiastical goods, and other such
outrages, that the holy man could nether hinder his unjust proceedings, noe
execute his function in peace. So that allbeit he were wholely disposed to
stand strongly in defense of the truth, and the freedom of the Church, yet then
he judged it more expedient for the avoiding of greater inconvenience (which
even the other bishops, and country, backed with the authority and power of
the King might cause) to absent him self a while out of England, imagining that
to be the safest way both to appease the enraged king and qualify the tempest
of the country.

XII. THEREFORE he made a supplication to the king to permit him to go to
Rome to obtain from Pope Urban the second, the Pall due unto his
archiepiscopall seat. The king, amazed at this demand, answered that noe man
in his kingdom should acknowledge any Pope of Rome without his consent, and
that he him self was after a fashion Pope within his own dominions. Which
answer infinitely afflicted the holy archbishop, who to extinguish this spark
of infernal fire before it went any further, assembled a Council He
summoneth a Council
of the Bishops, Abbbots, and peers of the realm, wherein having declared the
kings mind, the consequence and importance of the matter, he found the greatest
part of the bishops inclined to subscribe to the Princes will: (so great is
the power of flattery and ambition, joined with the authority of a furious,
and resolute king:) for they cried out alowd that he was a person impious, and
rebellious to the king and state, whosoever would attempt to maintain any
obedience in England to be due to any but king William alone, as well in
Ecclesiastical, as temporal matters; robbing the Pope hereby of his primacie
and sovereign power over all the Catholic Church. S. ANSELME seeing this
unlawful proceeding, and that he could not resist against so horrible a
stream, desired leave of the king to leave the kingdom, and go to Rome; but
he received diverse times a bitter denial. The king allwaies affirming that he
would hold him as an enemy to his crown and the common wealth, if the
attempted that journey. And that at his first installement in the
Archbishopric he had bound him self by oath to observe the laws, and customs
of the country which forbid goeing Rome without the kings leave. The holy man
answered; that it was not the part of a Christian prince to cut of any He
appealeth to the Pope
appellation to the Roman sea of PETER: and that he had engaged him self to the
observance of noe other laws then what stood with the honor of God, and good
reason. When the King, and his replied; that there had been no mention made
either of God or Goodness. To which ANSELME. O goodly doeings! (said he) that
shun the name of God or Goodness. Which words putt all his adversaries to
silence for that time. But the kings anger and hatred against him increased
more and more every day; which also so terrified many of the other bishops,
that they began openly to forsake their Metropolitan, and not to defend his
cause: although in their hearts they did not utterly disprove it.

XIII. IN the mean time saint ANSELME constantly told the king that
notwithstanding all this opposition, he would go to Rome and before his
departure (provided that he king would not reject it) he promised to give him
his benediction, which done, he went to Canturbury, where after one days stay,
having with an oration He goes to Rome like a pilgrim.
full of piety and affection exhorted his monks to follow the train of
virtue, and to putt on the armor of constancy and patience against the
imminent dangers that threatened to follow, he putt on the habitt of a pilgrim,
to the great grief of all his friends, and especially of the monks of
Canturbury, and went to take shipping at Dover; and with him went Eadmerus a
Benedictin monk of Canturbury who writ his life. They passed over into France,
and to Lions where S. ANSELME was entertained with wonderful magnificence and
respect by Hugue Archbishop of the place. The Pope understanding of his being
there, sent for him to come to Rome with all speed. Where he was honored by
all the court, and so highly praised by the Pope in presence of the
Cardinals, and Lords of Rome, for his great learning, and piety, that the
holy man much confounded and ashamed therewith, durst not lift up his eyes
before the company, which humility made them all judge him to be an other
manner of man in the presence of almighty God then he appeared by his
outside. Then he solicited the Pope in nothing more, then to get leave to lay
aside his Episcopal dignity, for the love of a private life. But Pope Urban
would by no means grant his request, but advised him to seiourne a while in a
monastery of Benedictine Monks near the city of Capna; where by the prayers
of Saint ANSELME a lively fountain of water sprung out of a hard rock, which
is called, A fountain out of a Rock by his prayers.
the Bishop of Canturburys Well, and the water cured many diseases.

XIV. S. ANSELME was present, by the command of the Pope, in the Council of
Bar, where he made show of his knowledge and prudence in the conuincing of the
Greeks, and proving the holy Ghost to proceed from the father, and the son,
as from one Beginning. And mention being made in this Council of king William
and of his outrages committed against ANSELME, and the Church, his crimes
appeared so heinous, that all proclaimed him worthy to be cut off from the
Church, by the sentence of excommunication, had not ANSELME interposed him
self, and falling on his knees, The wonderful humility, and meeknes of S.
Anselme.
craved a time of respite, which with difficulty he obtained. And this his
meekenes, and humblenes of mind gained him a wonderful great favor amongst
them all. The Pope being returned to Rome is met by an ambassador from king
William, to defend the Kings cause against ANSELME, who but newly came from
playing the part of an advocate in his behalf. And by the importunity of this
ambassador the cause was committed to be heard in a Council held at Rome;
where S. ANSELME him self was present, and certain seat was allotted to him,
and his successors of Canturbury, if any should afterward chance to be
present in a Roman Council. And here the Pope by the consent of all the
Prelates, thundered an excommunication against all lay persons (for many
princes at that time were over busy in those affairs) that intruded them
selves in challenging the inuestitures of bishoprics, and against all
Ecclesiastics that received them at their hands. This done, ANSELME returned
to Lions in France, quite hopeless of coming into England, during the reign
of King William. Where as he was exercised in his The death o^ William Rufus.
accustomed works of piety, and virtue, news was brought that by the
permission of almighty God, his greatest enemy was robbed of his power to
hurt him, for king William being on hunting the second of August, in the midst
of his game was shot through the heart with an arrow, which gave a miserable
end to his miserable life. It is not credible how greatly S. ANSELME was
afflicted with this news, and chiefly at the manner thereof, professing with
many sighs, and tears, that he would willingly have redeemed his unhappy
death, with the loss of his own life.

XV. HENRY the first of that name, and brother to William succeeded, who with
the great applause of the whole country recalled King Henry recalle^h S.
Anselme.
S ANSELME into England, and endeavored to gain his favor thereby, promising
together with almost all his Lords and Bishops of the realm, that all things
should be carried according to his own liking. But when ANSELME was come, and
the king understood of the Popes decree made in the sinod of Rome, touching
the inuestiture of bishoprics, he was wonderfully enraged, and conceived so
great hatred against S. ANSELME, that unless he would receive his
Archbishopric, as restored unto him by his only authority, there should he
noe place for him in the kingdom. And this ANSELME absolutely refused to do,
as being contrary to the late decree of the Roman Council. So that the
matter being tossed and disputed a long time to and fro, the king at length
persuaded him to go to Rome together with his Ambassadors, to get this act
recalled by Pope Pasehall the second, who now had succeeded Urban. S. Ansel.
goes again to Rome.
The holy man, to avoid greater inconveniences, undertook the journey,
foretelling before he went that the Pope would do nothing contrary to the
liberty and decrees of the Church. Nevertheless he went, and being arrived at
Rome was received with far greater honor and respect then ever before. Then
it was hottly disputed at the Lateran, of the kings affairs, and many reasons
brought in by William procuratour of the kings cause, in defense thereof. Who
came at length to such a vehemency and heat in his pleading, that with sharp
and threatening words he affirmed, that the king would rather hazard the loss
of his whole kingdom, then be deprived of this right. Nether would I (answered
the pope) grant him this power allthough it were to save my own life. And
with this resolution he dismissed the Ambassadors, who returned toward
England. But by the way, the fornamed William declared by the kings command
unto S. ANSELME, that he must cease from entering more into England, unless he
were resolved to obey the Kings will. So that saint ANSELME diuerted to his
old lodging at Lions, where he remained the space of a year and four months.

XVI. IN the mean time king Henry seized on all the goods and lands belonging
to the Archbishopric, and challenged them for his own use. When the Pope
seeing noe hope of reconciling the King to S. ANSELME; purposed by
excommunication to cut him off from the communion of the Church Which
resolution of his being made known to the king touched him to the quick, and
made him begin more exactly to take saint ANSELME cause into his consideration.
And at length he called him to him out off France into Normandy, where they
came to a parely, at the Abbey of Bec: In which the King patiently taking the
holy Archbishops reprehension for many abuses, promised a future amendment,
and never more to disturb the peace or exact any fruits belonging to the
Church, or Churchmen; and herevppon he received S. ANSELME into his favor and
sent him in peace to his Archbishopric, to the great contentment and enjoy of
the whole Kingdom. Here now we may see of what power the constancy of a good
Prelates is, when purely and sincerely for the only love and service of God,
they defend the authority of the Church, without any pretense of temporal
respects by flattering kings in their injustice, and suffering them selves to
be carried away with the wind of wordly favor. We may see allsoe the great
grace which God showed to kings that respect his Church and Churchmen, for as
soon as King Henry had submitted him self, our Lord gave him a noble victory
against his Brother Robert, by means whereof he got the Seigniorie of the
Dukedom of Normandy. Of which victory he presently made saint ANSELME
acquainted by letters, ending thus. Werefore Venerable father W^ll. Malm. l. 1.
de Po^t.
(said he) humbly and devoutly prostrate at the feet of thy sainctitie: J
beseech thee to pray unto the supreme judge, by whose will and arbitreme^t J
have gained this glorious and profitable triumph, that it be not to my damage
and detriment, but for a beginning of good works and the service of God, to
settle and confirm the state of Gods-holy Church in peace, and tranquillity,
that from hence forth it may live free, and not be shaken with the tempest of
wars.

XVII. AFTER the kings return out of Norman-die, a famous Synod A sinod held
at London.
was held at London in which in presence of S. ANSELME, and all the bishops and
Abbots of England, he resigned all the power (which hitherunto he had usurped
in creating, and ordayning bishops) to the Pope and Clergy. S. ANSELME
therefore being installed again in his Church, in great peace and quietness,
performed the part of a most holy and vigilant pastor the space of about three
years; S. Anselme falls sick
when laden with old age, labors and merits he fell into a great sickness, and
specially in his stomach, which made him abhor all sustenance, till by little
and little the forces of his body being exhausted, he fainted. And when the
infirmity of his body was such that it would not suffer him to go to the
Church, notwithstanding he was carried thither every day in a chair, to be
present at the sacred mysteries of the mass, whereunto he bore a singular
great devotion, pierie, and reverence. At length, seeing him self to draw near
his end, he received the holy sacraments of the Church, and gave his
benediction no the assistance humbly recommending the king, queen, and all the
whole Kingdom to Gods holy protection: and lying on a hayre-cloath strewed with
ashes (according to the pious custom of those times) he rend r^d, up his
blessed soul to the everlasting possession of all blessedness; on wensday
morning His happy death.
before Easter, the one and twentieth day of April, in the year of our Lord
1109. the sixteenth since he was made bishop, and the threescore and sixth of
his age. He was buried in great solemnity, and lamented by his Church, and the
whole Kingdom of England, which lost a Master, a Father, and a Pastor so
holy, so wise so courageous, and so venerable.

XVIII. Our Lord ennobled this glorious Saint with many miracles His
wonderful miracles.
both during his life, and after his death. 1. As he was one night at his
prayers, he was seen to be encompassed round about with the brightness of a
heavenly splendor. 2. One that drank only of the water in which he had washed
his hands, was cured of a most pitiful leaprosie that raygned all over his
body. 3. By the sign of the cross he quenched a mighty fire that was ready
to devour the chamber where he ^ay. 4. One of his religious most cruelly
possessed with the devil, was cured only by the well-wishes of S. ANSELME. 5.
Many diseased persons were cured by his prayers, or eating only the relics
of his dinner. 6. The shipp which carried S. ANSELME, allbeit a board brake out
of it, yet the water was miraculously hindered from entering. 7. At his death,
the balsome which anointed his body, like unto the flower of Holy, was
miraculously increased. 8. And the stone, in which his body was to be buried
being not of sufficient capacity to receive it, was suddenly enlarged without
humane help, to the great admiration of the beholders. Many other miracles we
omit; But the greatest miracle that ever God wrought by saint ANSELME was
saint ANSELME himself, and his life, more divine then humane. He writ many
admirable works, with which he enriched the Catholic Church, and with the
singular reach of his understanding, and doctrine, and a peculiar gift from
heaven, he gathered together His admirable writings.
the subtilitie and excellence of many Theological questions, seasoned with
the sweetness of piety, and devotion. Of whom a grave author Trithemius in his
work of the famous men of S BENEDICTS order says. That he was a man well
acquinted in holy scripture, and the learnede^st of his time in humane
doctrine, most holy in i^ life, and con(...)tion, most devout in his soul,
eloquent in his discourse and full of effi^^^^ (...) his works. He was of an
angelical countenance, of a grave gate, of an exemplar life, continual in the
study of holy scriptures, and one in whom lay hid a goulden mine of virtues,
and goodness. He was mirror of Prelates, the glory of his country, a pillar
of Gods Church, and a bright ornament of the Benedictine family; and he is one
of the four renowned Doctors of the same order that have written in praise
and defense of the B. Virgin, and consequently are The Benedictine Doctors of
our B. Lady.
styled and called by the name of the four Doctors of our Lady, the other
three are S. HILDEPHONSE Archbishop of Civil in Spain, B. RVPERT Abbott of
Twy in Germany and S. BERNARD Abbott of Clareuall in France. And our S.
ANSELME second to none of the rest, was the first that caused the feast of our
Ladies immaculate Conception to be celebrated in the Church the seventh of
December, when he had learned, by the revelation of an other Benedictin monk,
from the same Virgin, that such was her will and pleasure. God of his infinite
mercy make us partakers of his glorious meritts. Amen. His life we have
gathered out of Eadmer a monk of Canturbury and the companion of all his
troubles, and Edmond monk of the same place, who added a treatise of the
discord between S. ANSELME and the two unruly Kings. William Malmesbury. de
Pont. lib. 1. the Roman martirologe, Baronius tom. 11. an. 1109. and
innumerable others do highly speak his praises.

The life of saint MELLITVS Bishop and confessor of the holy order of saint
BENEDICT.
APR. 24. Out of venerable Bede.
AMONGST the holy Benedictine Monks which S. GREGORY Pope of Rome sent into
England to supply the want of Preathers in so great an harvest, and to help
S. AUGUSTINE and his fellow- Benedictins in the conversion of that Kingdom,
MELLITVS an abbott of the same order was the first and chiefest. Whom about
three years after his arrival S. AVGVSTIN Archbishop of Canturbury made
Bishop of London the principal head city of the East Angles, where Sebert
nephew to Ethelbert King of Kent kept his royal Mellitus first bishop of
London.
Court, allbeit he were under the power of Ethelbert, whose authority over the
English stretched to the river Humber. But when this province by the
industrious preaching and labor of saint MELLITVS had received the Christian
faith, King Ethelbert built that famous Church of saint PAVL the Apostle within
the walls of London for the Episcopal seat of Mellitvs, and his successors.
But how greatly this holy man was beloved of God, and the whole court of
heaven, manifestly appears in the consecration of the Church of Westminster,
which office of his S. PETER the Apostle performed for Bishop MELLITVS, with
his own hands; as may be seen more at large in the life of S. EDWARD the fist
of January. S. AVGVSTIN being dead, Mellitvs bishop of London went to Rome to
co^sult Pope Boni^ace the fourth touching many necessary affairs of the
English Church. And namely for the good establishment of the new-built Baron.
an 610.
monastery of Westminster, as also to know whether the consecration of a
Church performed in the aforesaid manner, were valid. The Pope in a Synod held
at Rome, in which S. MELLITVS had a place, ordained many laws for the peace
of the Benedictine mo^ks, and conservation of monastical discipline; and
decreed against the envious, that monks were the fittest instruments in Gods
Church for Apostolical functions: which decrees Mellitvs brought with him into
England for the confirmation and establishment of the Benedictine order and
Mission in that country.

II. BUT the death of the two good Kings Ethelbert, and Seb^^^, was cause of
great damage to the tenden beginnings of that new See in S. Laurence 2. of Febr.
Church; for the three sons of King Sebert (who during the time of their
father dissembled a little in religion for fear of him) fell after his death to
flatt Idolatry, and gave license to all their subjects to do the like. And
when they saw the holy bishop MELLITVS (having celebrated the sacred
solemnities of Mass) give the Eucharist to the poeple; Why (said they swelling
with Look, prorestant our first Apoles said mass.
a barbarous foolishnes) do thou not give us the white bread, which thou
did give to our father Saba (so they were wont to call him) and do yet
give to many of the poeple? If you will be washed (answered MELLITVS) in the
same sacred font as your father was, you may be partakers of the holy bread as
well as the but if you contemn the Bath of life, you can by noe means receive
the Bread of life. But they refused to enter into the font of baptism, as a
thing unnecessary, but desired earnestly to eat of the sacred bread. Till at
length, when the holy man's persuasions could not draw them from this s^nd
request, they banished him out of their Province, because he S. Mellitus
Banished from his Bishopric
would not give them blessed Sacrament of altar before haptisme. Verily I am
of opinion (to my great grief) that at this present our Protestant-Bishops have
so little respect to that which they call the Lords Supper, that rather then be
forced with their wives to leave their bishoprics, they would give their
sacrament of bread to a -- so far (alas) they are fallen from the religion of
our first Apostles.

III. SAINT MELLITVS went to Canturbury to consult S. LAVRENCE and IVSTVS the
other bishops, what was to be done in these troubles. And finding no other
means nor hopes of redress, MELLITVS and IVSTVS went over into France, to
expect the calm of this tempestuous See in S. Lau. 2. Febr.
motion. Till Edbald King of Kent renouncing his Idolatry, and baptized by
saint LAVRENCE Archbishop of Carturbury, recalled the two bishops out of
France, and restored IVSTVS to his seat of Rochester; but the Londoners refused
to receive their bishop Mellitus, over whom Edbald had not such absolute and
coercitiue power, that he could force them to it, as his father could. In the
mean time, Saint LAVRENCE departing this life, MELLITVS succeeded in the sea
of Canturbury, whence he cast forth the bright beams of his virtue, faith, and
learning over all England, with which noble ornaments he greatly ennobled the
country, and He is made Archbishop of Canturbury.
excelled the nobility of his birth and parcentage, which was very honorable.
In body he was wonderful weak, and sickly, specially being grievously
afflicted with the gout: but most sound in mind, cherefully despising all
terrene things, and still aspiring to the love, and possession of the Kingdom
of heaven. And here I will relate one example of his excellent virtue, and
confidence in almighty God, which may serve as a witness of his other noble
virtues.

IV. A MIGHTY fire happened to make hauock in the city of Canturbury which
so furiously devoured whole streets as it went, that noe force of water could
quench the rage of that irresistable element. And now with great violence it
drew near to the place where the holy Bishop was: who would not give way to
those devouring flames, but trusting in the divine goodness He quenches a great
fire by his prayers.
where humane help was wanting, caused him self to be carried thither, where
the fire came on with greatest violence. Which done, this weak man began with
his prayers to drive that away, against which the force of many strong
laboring hands could not prevail. And suddenly as if he had been the
moderatour, and ruler of the winds, the wind that blew out of the south and was
as the bellows of those flames, chainged into the North, and so constrained
that outrageous element to forsake the food which so eagerly it hunted after,
and turned it back to feed on its own ruins; whereby the city was freed
from the imminent peril of ruin; and the citizens, ascribed the preservation
of them selves, and their fortunes to their holy Archbishop MELLITVS. who
because he vehemently boiled with the fire of divine love, and was wont by his
often prayers and exhortations to drive away the storms of the ayrie powers
from hurting him and his, he was found worthy, to whom God gave power to
prevail against the forces of the fires, and winds of this world. At length,
when this Blessed Archbishop (whom Trithemius a grave author in his work of
the famous men of saint BENEDICTS order, calls, a man of most holy life, a lib.
3. cap. 56. and lib. 4. cap. 50.
contemner of the world, a lover of God, the rule of all religion, and a
mirror of virtue) had governed the Sea of Canturbury the space of five years,
he left this mortal life to ^^ke his long desired journey to the immortal;
the four and twentieth day of April, in the year of our Lord, 624. He was
buried in the Benedictin Monastery of saint PETER and saint PAVL in Canturbury
by his predecessors. And in his Epitaph is made mention of the foresaid
miracle of the fire, in these two verses, speaking to him. Laudibus aeternis te
predicat vrbs Dorouernis.
Cui simul ardenti rest as virtute potenti.


His life we have gathered chiefly out of saint Bede de gest. Ang. lib. 1. cap.
29. and lib. 2. cap. 3. 4. and sequ. Ealred, abbot of Rhienall, Baronius tom.
8. Malmesbury de pont l. 2. the Roman Martirologe, Nicholas Harpsfield see 7.
cap. 7. Vsuard, Ado, Arnold wion, and others make honorable mention of hi^^.

The life of S. EGBERT Priest, and monk of the holy order of saint BENEDICT,
APR. 24. Out of Venerable Bede.
THE admirable master of humility, and most zealous aduancer of Christ's
Gospel saint EGBERT, borne of a noble race of English parents in the south
parts of England, spent the flower of his youth in the monastery of
Lindisfarne, or Holy-Iland. In which school of virtue he received the first
grounds of true religion under the holy Rule of saint BENEDICT, which
afterward he communicated to other places, to the great honor, and increase
of the Benedictin order. It was the manner in those days of many of our
English, to go over into Ireland, there to apply them selves in a more strict
course of holy meditation, watching, fasting, and prayer, and other exercises
of a monastical life. Amongst the rest, holy EGBERT forsaking friends and
country, went thither, with a fervent desire to piety, accompanied He goes
into Ireland.
with an other noble Englishman called Ethelune. And huing together in
Jreland, in a monastery called in Irish Rathmelfigi, they were both infected
with the plague, which at that time mustered whole troops of poeple under the
black banner of death. When holy EGBERT expecting nothing but to be enrolled in
the same number of deaths servants, went one morning out of that mournful
lodging where the sick monks lay expecting their end, into a secret and
solitary place, where sitting down to entertayne him self with his own
throughts, he began to cast up a strict account of his former life, wherein
he found many Items whose remembrance begott such contrition in his heart,
that the tears trickling down his cheeks were worthy witnesses to prove it
excellent. Then in the heat of true devotion he humbly besought almighty His
petition to Allmigh tie God.
God to grant him a little longer respite in this world, as well to bewail the
sins of his youth, as allsoe more abundantly to exercise him self in the
works of religious perfection: vowing withal never more to return into his
native conntrey of England, but to live a pilgrim all the days of his life.
Moreover, besides his canonical office he was wont (if sickness did not hinder
him) He daily recited David's Psalter.
to recite every day the whole psaker of David in honor of almighty God, and
to fast one whole day and a night every week, without any food at all. But
when his prayers had set a periode to his tears, and his vows to his prayers,
he returned back to his lodging, where he found his fellow Edelhune (that
labored with the same disease) fast asleep, and he him self laid down his
feeble limbs to recreate them a while with rest. But long he had not reposed,
when his companion awaked and looking pitifully upon him; O brother Egbert
(said he) what have thou done? I had hoped we should have gone joyfully
together to the Kingdom of heaven; but now by thy desire we must be separated,
for know that thy request is granted. It had been revealed unto him in a
vision what EGBERTS request was, and that he had had a grant there of from God.

II. THE night following Edelhune died happily, and EGBERT by a He is
miraculously cured of the plague.
special favor of divine grace recovering his health, afterward adorned his
monastical vocation with the dignity of priesthood, and ^nnobled that
dignity with worthy actions of virtue, and good life. Allwaies governing him
self with the rules of perfect humility, sweet meeknes, pure continency,
plain simplicitte, and candid innocence. His example of life, his labor in
teaching, his authority i^ reprehending, and his liberality in bestowing what
the charity of the rich gave him, was of wonderful great profitt, and
edification to all the country, where he lived in voluntary banishment. And
His rigid fasting.
to increase the austeritie of his own life he added to the vows aforesaid to
make but one small meal a day throughout all the Lent, which was a little
bread, and a poor quantity of thin^e milk, which he did eat cold after it
had stood a whole night, and when the cream or fatter substance thereof was
skimmed off. This manner of fasting he observed like wise forty days before
Christmas, and as many more after Whitsuntide. Upon these well settled
foundations, and grounds of holiness, in a short time saint EGBERT raised a
spiritual building of virtues to the very height of monastical perfection,
so that the same of his sainctitie was blown into the royal ears of Kings,
of whom some much admired and honored the man, others that contemned his pious
admonitions felt the heavy punishment of him, that allwaies defends the cause
of his true servants: as appears by that which venerable BEDE recounts of
Egfrid King of the Northumbers. Who in the year of CHRIST. 684. having sent an
De gest. Angl. 4 cap. 26.
army into Jreland which lamentably destroyed that innocent country, was
dissuaded from that bloody enterprise by the means and entreaties of saint
EGBERT, but contemning to yield to his pious admotions, he received his
punishment, being miserably slain the year following, among his fatal
enemies the Picts.

III. BUT this holy man, having spent many years in a He resolves to preach
in Germany.
rigorous monastical life, being desirous to labor not only for him self, but
for the good of many other souls, resolved to preach the faith of CHRIST to
those that lived in the blindness of Idolatry, under the bondage and slavery
of the devil. Of this kind he understood many to be in Germany, whence the
English or Saxons had their beginning; and therefore to them he prepared him
self to announce the glad tidings of the Gospel. Or if he could reap noe
profitt thereby, he determined to go in Pilgrimage to Rome to visitt the
sacred shrines of the Apostles. But in all these pious intentions he was
hindered by the special providence of almighty God, who had otherwise
disposed of him. For having made choice of men sufficient both in virtue and
learning to accompany him in that holy enterprise, and all things being
prepared for their sea-voyage, saint BOISILL, in times past Abbot of the
Benedictin monastery of Mailros in England, appeared to an other monk, and
commanded him to bid EGBEGT to desist from that design, He is miraculously
hindered from his enterprise
for that it was not the will of almighty God that he should proceed therein,
because he was ordained to instruct, and reform the monastery founded by
Saint COLVMBE in the Isle of Hay. EGBERT advertised of this vision, commanded
it to be kept close, fearing lest it was but an illusion of the devil, that
endeavored to hinder his good resolution. But considering more exactly of the
matter, he felt in him self a secret fear that told him it might be true.
Notwithstanding, he ceased not to further his intended voyage toward Germany.
But within a few days saint BOYSILL again appeared to the same monk after
mattins; and sharply reprehended him for his flacknes in fullfilling his
command: And therefore now (said he) go tell EGBERT again, that will he nill
he, he must go to the Monastery of saint COLVMBE, because their plough goes
not straight: and he must reduce them to the right way. EGBERT hearing this
second reply, again commanded the monk to keep it secret. And howbeit he
were almost certain of the truth of the vision, yet such was his conceit of
his foretaken resolution, and so great was his zeal to gain souls to God,
that together with his fellows prepared, he adventured to begin his journey.
When having expected some days at sea to have a ^ind blow with their desires,
there arose one night a cruel tempest, which rudely tossed them on that floting
element, till with the loss of some part of their lading, they were forced to
return, and desist from that adventure. But whatsoever belonged to saint
EGBERT and his fellows was saved. And he (as it were alluding to that saying
of the holy Prophet Jonas, because for my sake this tempest happens)
withdrew him self from that voyage, and resolved to stay at home. But one of
his fellows Wigbert by name (of whom we will speak the twelfth of August)
went into Frisia, where having preached two years without reaping any
profitt, he returned back into Jreland.

IV But Saint EGBERT perceauing that himself was detayned from preaching the
faith of CHRIST amongst the Paynims, to profitt the Church other ways, and
that Wigbert had spent his labor in vain amongst them, he attempted again to
send a mission of virtuous and industrious men to preach the gospel in the
same country. And to this end he chose out of diverse monasteries twelve
learned and devout English Benedi^tin monks, the chiefest whereof was the
Egbert se^deth 12. Benedictctines into Germani.
worthy S. WILLIBRORD (of whom see the seventh of November) and these he sent
into lower Germany, by whose pious endeauours (as more largely shall be showed
in their lives) most part of those countreies were reduced out of the blindness
of Idolatry to the grace of CHRIST'S Gospel. And some of these apostolical
men (which greatly redounds to the praise of Saint EGBERT) were his
scholars, bred, and brought up to that eminent calling, with the sweet milk of
his learning, virtue, and discipline. Afterward in the year of our Lord 716.
saint EGBERT following the divine oracle sent from heaven went to S. COLV^BS
monastery in the Isle of Hay, on the west side of Scotland, where the monks
received him with honor and reverence well becoming the worth of so holy a
man. These monks erred in the observation of Easter and the Ecclesiastical He
reformeth the Monks of the Island Hay.
tonsure then used in the Catholic Church. But saint EGBERT being a most
sweet master of all truth in virtue, and religion, and one whose actions were
the execution of his own co^maunds and lessons, was most willingly heard of
them all, till by his pious adonitions and exemplar life, he drew them from the
inueterate tradition of their forefathers, to observe the Catholic Easter and
to wear their hair shaven in form of a crown. And at the very same time, by
the means of S. EGBERT those monks received the holy rule of S. BENEDICT,
which they observed ever after. He remained the space of thirteen years in
the same monastery which with the beams of a new grace of the Ecclesiastical
discipline, and the society, and peace of CHRIST, he had consecrated to his
honor. At length, upon Easter day it self when he had celebrated the
solemnities of mass, in memory of our Lords glorious resurrection, he
departed out of the sepulcher, of the flesh to rise to the never dying glory
of Paradise; and to see him face to face in heaven whom in the morning he had
received under the forms of bread and wine in the sacrament. He died the 24.
of April in the year of our Lord 729. and the nineteenth year of his age.
And surely it was not without the peculiar providence of almighty God, that
this venerable man not only passed out of this world on the feast of Easter,
but allsoe on that feast of Easter, which never before was celebrated on that
day, in those parts. Whereupon the monks rejoiced that they were come to the
knowledge of the certain and Catholic observance of Easter, and that they
had gained the patronage of their father in heaven, by whose industry they
were first instructed therein. This life we have gathered wholly out of S. Bid
de gest. l. 3. and 5. John Capgraue has the same: besides whom Trithemius in
his work of the famous men of S Benedicts order, Baronius, Nicolas Harpsfield.
sec. 8. cap. 4. Molanus, Marcellinus in the life of S. SWIBERT, the Roman
Martyrologe, and others do worthyly speak his praises.

The life of S. ERKENWALD Bishop and Confessor of the holy Order of S. BENEDICT.
APR. 30. Written by Gotzelinus Morimnensis.
ABOUT the year of CHRIST 676. (says Baronius) the English Church flourished
as a Paradise of our Lord, abounding with the lillies Tom. 8 an. 676.
of sacred virgins, and the violets of whole troops of holy Benedictin monks
lying hidd in the humble valleies of the cloisters. It was allsoe fraught with
an abundance of most worthy Prelates taken from under the veil of monastical
humility to be i^^ested with the Pontifical robes of dignity: among whom
saint ERCONWALD (of whom we now treat) shined as a bright sun of the
Benedictin family in all virtue and sainctitie. And that nothing might be in
him wanting for the making up of a man in all things most perfect, he was
ennobled with the splendor of an illustrious parentage, being son to Offa
King of the East Angles, Who allthough he defiled all his princely nobility
with his own perfidiousnes, and impious worshipping of Idols, yet ERKENWALD as
the holy branch grown out of a rotten stock, amplified, and ennobled the
greatness of his race, with the true profession of Christian faith, and the
advantage of many noble virtues. For being first grounded in Catholic
religion in the time that S. AVGVSTIN our Apostle the Benedictin preached in
England, he adhered ever after to the doctrine of S. MELLITVS Bishop of London,
following his precepts and manner of life in all things. Till at length
desiring to draw him self out of the vanities of this world, and wholly to
enter into a contemplative life in religion, out of his own royal patrimony,
he built two monasteries, one at Chertsey in Surrey, for him self and other
monks, and the second at Berking in Essex, for his sister S. Ethelburg with a
convent of Nuns, both of the holy order of S. BENEDICT. And so he made a
happy change of his terrene dignity and wealth, to become the holy
inheritance of CHRIST and his Church. At Chertsey he putt on the habitt of a
Benedictin monk, where his virtues so answered that monastical profession,
that Theodore Archbishop of Ca^turbury moved with the fame thereof, called
^rconwald made bishop of London.
him to preside in the bishopric of London. This Benedictin Abbey of Chertsey
greatly flourished in religion, till the fury of the Danes (who spared no
religious houses) committed the Church, with the Abbot and monks thereof, to
the merciless power of the fire. But the incomparable prince King Edgar (whom
the peculiar providence of almighty God ordained the great aduancer of the
Benedictin order) not content with the new monasteries which by him self and
others he caused to be built in diverse parts of England, unless he repaired
the old: restored the Abbey of Chertsey to its former splendor, and dignity,
searching out the ancient writings, and Charters, by the testimony and power
whereof, he recalled the goods and possessions that thereunto belonged, out of
the hands of many noblemen, which either by force, or the power of antiquity,
had holden them as their own rights.

II. BUT let us return to saint ERKENWALD, who now seated in the Episcopal
sea of London, so worthyly discharged himself of that function, that he
omitted nothing belonging to the duty and praise of an absolute good pastor:
being a man of so great virtue, that his working of many miracles (the
irresistable witnesses of holiness) deposed him and his service to be most
acceptable and pleasing to allmigtie God. Being fallen so Note a strange
miracle.
sick and weak toward the end of his days that he could not visitt his
diocese to preach and teach to the poeple, but carried in a little wagon, one
of the wheels (and it had but two) it is uncertain by what chance, happened
to fall off the beam, when to the wonderful great admiration of all the
assistants, the wagon went on upon one wheel, the other side being sustained
(by the divine power of him that wheels about the frame of this world) for the
declaration of the great virtue and holiness of the holy bishop that was
carried. And herein the air seemed to attend this holy man, supplying the want
of that wheel; and by the touching of the same wagon, many sick persons
(after the holy man's death) were cured of feauers and other diseases which
human skill had given up for incurable. The water allsoe obeyed A great river
gives way to his passage.
him, when in the same wagon being to pass through a most swift river, too
deep for his humble coach to wade in, the curresie of those streams was so
great, that they stopped the violence of their own furious have, and expected
till the saint (like an other Josue) passed through on the dry bottom: and
then the river (which all this while had made (as it were) a collection, or
uniting of its own forces, more lowdly to proclaim and roar out the praises
of the virtue and holiness of the glorious Bishop Saint ERKENWALD) ran in his
accustomed and wonted manner. The hour of his death re^ealed.


III. AT LENGTH, when he had governed his bishopric for the space of many
years in the continual exercise of virtue and holy life, the blessed man
goeing for his devotion to the monastery of Berking, and staying there some
time in the continual exercise of divine contemplation; it pleased almighty
God to reveal unto him the hour of his departure, which he truly foretold,
and to the last gasp, comforted all that were about him, with the words of
life, that flowed from his dying voice. And at the very instant that his
blessed sold left her house of clay and misery, to fly to the glorious
dwellings of the happy, so sweet an odor filled the whole house where the
body lay that the hearts of all the assistants were wonderfully stirred up in
the praise of almighty God and devotion toward this holy saint. The news
of his death being spread abroad, the Clergy and His body is translated to
London.
poeple of London came to Barking to fetch thence the sacred relics of their
bishop, to bury them solemnly in saint PAVLS Church. But coming with their
holy loading to a river called Hesord, they found the waters increased and
swelled to such greatness, that they were feign to lay down their sacred
treasure, and fall to their prayers to obtain passage by the meritts of the
glorious saint, which otherwise was impossible without a boat. When behold
to their great admiration and comfort, the water which in his life time had
given A strange miracle.
him free passage, now allsoe divided it self into two parts, that (like unto
the Israelites laden with the Arc of our Lord) they passed dry foot through
the midst of the river. And that noe sooner done, but an other miracle
followed, for the candles by his body, which had been extinguished were
suddenly lighted without man's help, by a light from heaven. So that two
elements at once gave a double testimony of his great virtue and sanctity.
And as in his life he was replenished with many wonderful spiritual graces
and virtues so at his death as many sick as touched the biere whereon his
body lay received perfect health and were cured of all diseases.

His body was buried in saint PAVLS Church at London, by the high altar,
where it lay many years covered with a palle of very He is buried in S.
Paul's of London.
mean value. But almighty God decsared an length by a wonderful miracle
that the relics of this glorious Saint deserved greater honor and
reverence. For during the reign of William Conqueror in the year of our Lord
1087. a most cruel fire said hold on the city of London by night, which
consumed all before it, from the west gate to the East, at which horrid
spectacle the citizens greatly affrighted, were glad to save their own lines
by flight some of them leaving their cuill-gott goods to the mercy of those
London fiered.
merciless flames; which having entered the Cathedral Church of saint PAVL,
and so entered, that there was noe hope to dispossess those outrageous guests;
the people were stricken with greater grief with the thought of loosing the
sacred relics of so great a Patron, then with the sight of their own
harms. But almighty God was zealous and careful of the glory of his
Saint; For when His tomb miraculously preserved from fire.
the Church was wholly in flames when the lead powered down on all sides, when
whole beams of fire came tumbling to the earth, amidst all this doleful wrack
of ruin, where the conquest was the death of the conqueror, the sacred tomb
of saint ERKENWALD, allbeit of dry wood apt to take fire remained most free
and untouched. And which is more, the cloth that covered it (when the two
Bishops of London and Wincester, came to be eyewitnesses of this miracle) was
found most pure without any hurt; where the piercing force of the melted lead,
and eating fire, was of noe force against the virtue and meritts of this
worthy saint. O wonderful sight whatsoever was in the Church within the
power of fire, was turned to ashes, and yet in the midst of all, the palle of
his sepulcher was not one thread the worse, either in matter, or color. The
poeple flock thither in troops to be witnesses of that strainge spectacle,
giving many thanks to almighty God for his goodness; when the novelty of
this miracle banished out of their minds all thought of their own misfortune
received. Mauritius then bishop Mauritius Bishop of London.
of London laid the foundation of the mighty Church of S. PAVL now extant,
which by his successors was brought to that wonder of perfection in which now
it is. And six and thirty years ago (as I have learned from faithful
witnesses that saw it) there was in the upper end of the Quire in Paul's Church,
a table which testified where the holy body of S. ERKENWALD lay, in these
words; Under here lies the body of S. ERKENWALD fourth Bishop of London.
Many other miracles were wrought by the merits of this glorious saint which
here we omit. He died about the year of our Lord 690. His life is written by
Gotzelinus Morimnensis, saint Bid William Malmesburie de Pont. lib. 2. John
Capgraue, Nicolas Harpsfield saec. 7. cap. 13. and others, out of whom and the
records of saint Paul's Church we have taken this history. Polidore Virgil,
Trithemius amougst the Saints of S. Benedicts order, Baronius, Matthew Paris,
the Roman Martirologe and all our English writers do highly speak his
praises.

The end of April.
The life of Saint ASAPH Bishop and Confessor.
MAY 1.
SAINT ASAPH borne in that part of great Britain now called His country, and
youth.
North Wales, was from his youth brought up under the government, and
discipline of great saint KENTIGERNE in the monastery of Elue in Flint-shire,
where amongst nine hundred and three score other monks his fellow-schollers, he
s^ined in all manner of virtue, and bore the prize of obedience, and sainctitie
from them all. He descended from a noble race, and seemed to have the roots of
virtue engraffed in his soul from the cradle, which, by his diligent and
careful managing, brought forth a worthy baruest of pious fruits at their
time. He putt forth him self in nothing so much a sin laboring to make his
own conversation, and manner of life conformable to the austere pattern of
virtue and mortification, which appeared in his holy Master saint KENTIGERNL.
To whom his obedience was such, that it deserved to be witnessed for excellent,
by miracle. For saint KENTIGERNE coming one night out of the cold water, in
which (as his custom was) he had recited the whole psalter of David, and being
so extremly frozen, that he was almost quite deprived of heat the necessary
companion of life, he The strainge virtue of prompt obedience.
sent his holy disciple ASAPH for fire, to recover the forces of his decaying
body. He (that had noe lesson so perfect as obedience) ran hastily to the
fiery oven, and finding noe other instrument to carry his fire, took the
hott scortching coals into his lapp, and without any sign of burning in his
coat, brought them to his master: who admiring so great virtue in his
scholar, held him in great estimation ever after, and committed to his charge
the whole regiment of the monastery, and made him his successor in the
Bishopric of Elue, now called S. ASAPHS, retayning allwaies the name, but
far wide of the virtues, and faith of saint ASAPH. Who when he had governed
his sea for the space of many years in great sainctitie and miraculous
works, in venerable old age he gave up his blessed soul to receive the crown
of everlasting life, the first day of May, about the year of our Lord 569.
whose name to this day is very famous throughout Wales in the mouths of all
true-hearted Welchmen; to the great confusion of our Protestant-Heroticks, who
are not ashamed to honor the saints by calling their Churches by their names
to whom in catholic times they were dedicated, and in their confession of
faith to deny any honor at all to be due unto them, contrary to the
general doctrine of the Catholic Church, and all ancient fathers. Thus much
we have gathered out of Molanus in his additions to Vsuard, Arnold Wion, John
Capgraue, and others. The Roman martirologe this first of May makes mention of
S. Asaph.

The life of S. EADBERT Bishop and Confessor, of the holy order of saint
BENEDICT.
MAY. 6. Out of Venerable Bede hist. de gest. Ang. lib. 4.
EADBERT surnamed the Almner a man as excellent in learning and the knowledge
of divine scriptures, as in the observance of Ecclesiastical and monastical
precepts, and most excellent in the virtue of giving alms, was raised from the
humility of a Benedictine monk in the monastery of Lindisfarne, to succeed
that glorious ornament He is made bishop of Lindisfarne.
of the Benedictine family Great S. CVTHBERT in the government of the same
Episcopal sea. In which dignity he most worthyly discharged the office of a
good prelate, exactly observing withal the rigor and severity of monastical
discipline. He was wont to spend the whole time of lent, and forty days
before the nativity of our Lord, in a secret place separated from his Church,
where he exercised him self in the continual practice of prayer,
contemplation, and bitter penance, with all other religious virtues. And this
was the same place in which his excellent predecessor S. CVTHBERT, had for a
time led a solitary life, before he went to the Island of Farne. The eleventh
year after the deposition of the neuer-enough named S. CVTHBERT, when the
monks of Lindissarne opening His death and burial
his grave, had found his body uncorrupted (as is said in his life the
twentieth of March) they brought part of his clothes to saint EADBERT, then
living in his solitary place of devotion which he both received very
gratefully, and reverenced with wonderful affection. And (said he) let that
sacred body be wrapped in new clothes in steed of those you have taken off,
and place it honorably in the shrine which you have prepared; for most
certainly I know, that the grave which his holy relics have consecrated with
such admirable miracles, will not long be empty of an inhabitant. And how
happy is that man, to whom our Lord the Author, and bestower of all happiness,
shall voutchase to make worthy to rest therein. These and such like words the
holy bishop uttered with a trembling tongue, whilst the tears that trickled
down his cheeks witnessed the feeling compunction of his heart. The monks
presently performed his command, and placed the sacred body of S. CVTHBERT in
a chest over the sepulcher, wherein he had been buried. In the mean time, the
beloved servant of God S. EADBERT desiring of almighty God, that for better
satisfaction of his former life he might pass out of this world through His
death and burial.
the parching furnace of a long-during sickness, fell into a most grievous
disease, which increased daily more and more, for the space of more then a
month; when the vehemency was so great, that it forced his blessed soul to
leave her mortal lodging, to make a happy flight to the immortal habitation
of happiness: the sixth day of May. And out of the prerogative of his great
Sainctitie he was judged worthy to be buried in the grave which his
predecessor S. CVTHBERT had consecrated eleven years with his incorrupted
body; and so alive he became S. CVTHBERTS successor in the episcopal Sea,
and in his sepulcher being dead. Where Venerable BEDE affirms, that he shined
with same of working many miracles. But whether they were wrought by his
meritts, or saint CVTHBERTS, whose body was placed in a chest over the same
grave, it can be judged by none but him, who searches the hearts, and reins
of all men; whose name be for ever blessed. He died in the year of our Psalm. 9.
Lord 698. Besides S. BID whom we have followed, William Malmesbury, Molanus,
Nicholas Harpsfield, and the Roman martirologe (...) honorable mention of S.
EADBERT,

The life of S. JOHN of Beuerley Bishop and Confessor, of the holy order of S.
BENEDICT.
MAR 7. Out of Venerable Bede hist. de gest. Ang. lib. 5. c. 2. and (...)
SAINT JOHN surnamed of Beuerley borne of noble English parents in the north
parts of great Britain, was sent in his youth to Canturbury to be instructed
by the two Oracles of Learning and virtue S. THEODORE the Archbishop, and S.
ADRIAN Abbott of the Benedictine Abbey of S. PETER, in the same city. In this
holy school of virtue, and learning, JOHN not only profitted in the knowledge
of holy scripture, and good manners, but allsoe was kindled with a desire to
embrace the same monastical rule of S. BENEDICT which his masters professed.
And to this end, having soundly perfected his understanding with learning, he
departed to His Inclination to a religious life.
the Benedictine Abbey of Streanshall, where putting on the habitt, and
profession of a Monk, he both exercised him self in the perfection of
monastical discipline, and greatly promoted the observance of S. BENEDICTS
rule which great S. WILFRID had introduced into the same monastery. Moreover,
the worth of his learning is worthly witnessed by the excellency of his
scholars, amongst whom were S. BRITHVNE afterward Abbot of Beuerley, S.
WILFRID the Lesser, that succeeded him in the Archbishopric of York, both
Benedictine monks, and above all, the glory and ornament of his Country and
the Benedictine order, Venerable BEDE; all which with others saint JOHN not
only instructed in divine and humane knowledge, and incited to piety with his
godly admonitions, but also inflamed them much more with the example of his
own life and virtue, to undertake the high journey of religious perfection. He
bore a singular affection to S. BID, whom when he was bishop he advanced to
the dignity of deaconship, and priestood. Alfred King of the Northumbers moved
with the fame He is made Bishop of Hagustald.
of this holy man's Sainctitie, made him successor to Eata in the Episcopal
sea of Hagustald, otherwise called Hexham. But after the death of Bosa he was
translated to the Archiepiscopall chair of York. In which sacred function he
performed his duty with g^e^ praise and admiration of all. When all the minds
and eyes of England were fixed wholly upon him, both for his excellent virtue
and equally rare learning, as allsoe for his wonderful, and miraculous deeds,
which worthily witnessed the piety of his life and conversation.

II. BUT during the time of his regencie in the Church of Hagustald, or Hexham,
at a place somewhat more then a mile distant from His retired life in Lent.
thence in a chapel dedicated to S. MICHAEL, he went often times and
specially in time of Lent, to lead a solitary and contemplative life
separated from the affairs of the world, attending only to things divine and
heavenly. Beginning this holy exercise on a time, he conmaunded his companions
(as his custom was) to seek him out some poor creature more miserable then
ordinary, who^ he might maintain there with the charity of his daily alms.
They brought him a poor boy dum-borne, with a cappe of scabbes and scurffe on
the topp of his head instead of hair, about which grew a thin hedge of
frighted hayres; the sight whereof begott an horror in the behoulders. The
holy bishop (much rejoiced that he had found so fit a subject upon who^ to
exercise his accustomed office of charity) caused presently a little lodging
to be built within the precinct of his own habitation; where that wretched
poverty was daily refreshed with the stipend of his piety. But the first
week of Lent See the virtue of the sign of the Cross.
being past, he commanded them to bring the poor man before him, and making
the sign of the holy cross upon his tongue, he received not only the perfect
use of his speech, but also was cured of the scabbie scuruines in his head.
So that he that before bore the shape or dumb-shew of deformity, was suddenly
become ready in his speech, quaint and fair in his countenance and curled
locks, and glad to hear himself play the crier of his own happiness.

III. ALSO with his benediction he cured a Nun of a great swelling Many
miracles.
and cruel pain in her arm, caught by letting blood. And being by an Earl
(whose countess lay languishing in a mortal disease) invited to consecrate a
Church, he sent her of the holy water which he had used in that act of
consecration, and she noe sooner dronk thereof, but presently rising sound out
of her bed, she came (like S. PETER'S mother-in-law cured by our Savior) and
waited on them Luc. 4.
at the table, showing thereby, that she had not only recovered her health, but
her lost forces allsoe. The like benefitt he showed to a young man, of whose
health his friends were so hopeless, that his grave was allreadie prepared;
when contrary to all expectation, by the prayers and benedictio^ of the holy
bishop, and drinking a cupp of wine by him hallowed, he was restored again to
perfect health. But one Herebald who sometime had been his scholar received a
far greater benefitt at his hands, being by his means preserved from the
ruin both of body and soul; as him self being afterward Abbot of Tinemouth)
related to venerable Bede in this manner.

When in my youth I lived under the tutorship of the B. bishop JOHN Note this
miraculous history.
to betrayned up in the studies of Ecclesiastical discipline and learning, my
mind being at that time carried away with the wild and untamed sports of an
youthly ardour; we happened being one day in a journey with the holy man, to
come into a fair plain and large way, which seemed to inuit us to ru^ne a
course with our horses. And the secular young men of the company began
earnestly to entreat the Bishops leave to have a course; whereu^to he was
loath to consent, till overcome with their importunity, he yielded to their
request, but The punishment of disobedience to S. John.
upon condition that Herebald should abstain from that sport. But then I began
earnestly to plead my own cause, that I might try my horse with the rest,
knowing him to be of very good speed; but could by noe means prevail to get
his consent. Whereupon being no longer able to contain my untamed desires
within the limitts of obedience, I set spurs to my horse and ran amongst
the rest; when I could hear him behind me fetch a great sigh and say: O what a
grief thou give me in so riding? Notwithstanding I held on that forbidden
course, till leaping over a hollow place I caught a fall which left me as dead
without any sense or motion, a just punishment of my disobedience. From seven
of clock till the evening I lay there for dead, and then reviving a little, my
companions carried me home, where I passed that night without speaking one
word. But the holy bishop, who bore a singular affection to me, grieved
exceedingly at this mischance, and that whole night he spent only in watching
and prayer for my recovery. In the morning he came to me, and out of a divine
instinct, asked if I were certain of my baptism; to whom, having now
recovered my speech, I answered, yes; and named the Priest that had washed me
in the sacred Font. If that were the Priest that did it (replied he) thou art
not rightly baptized: For he is both of wit and understanding so dull, that
he could never learn the true manner of catechizing or baptising, and for that
reason I have commanded him to cease from the exercise of that function, which
Se the ancient ceremonies of baptism.
he could not execute in due manner. This said, he began presently to
catechize me: and it happened that breathing in my face (as the manner is) I
straight began to find my self much amended of my hurt. He caused the
Chirurgean to settle and compose aright the dissolved joint of my skull, and
having given his benediction to the work, at the same instant I recovered foe
well, that the next day I was able to ride an other journey with him, by whose
meritts I was restored to health. And within a while after, being fully
recovered, I received the sacrament of baptism; so that I am indebted the
salvation both of soul and body to Blessed Saint JOHN. Thus was Herebald
wont to relate of him self to Venerable BEDE.

IV. But S. JOHN having governed his bishopric the space of S. John. leaves
the Bishopric
thirty three years, between Hagustald and York, desiring now after so
many labors, to retire his unserviceable old age out of the manifold affairs
of the world, to the sweet and quiet harbor of his ancient religious life,
the better to prepare him self for his neere-approaching end, he departed to
the Benedictin monastery which him self had built at Deirwood, or Beuerley,
where amongst the monks he led a holy and angelical life the space of four
years, famous for virtues and miracles. At length loade^ with merits and good
works, he was called out of this mortal life, to the happy enjoying of the
immortal; the seventh day of May, in the year of our Lord God seven hundred
twenty one. Which place, and the memory of this glorious Saint was
afterward ennobled with so many wonders, that scarce any place in England
is comparable unto it, for the familiarity of miracles, or enlarged with
greater privileges and exemptions from Princes. One therefore, and not the left
of those signs Bull^ straingely tamed.
which commend the piety of saint JOHN, and the sainctitie of this place, is
that strainge spectacle which was wont often times there to be exhibited.
Bulls, otherwise most fierce and untamed, being with great pains and sweat
brought bound to the Churchyard of Beuerley, as soon as they entered therein,
deposed all their fiercenes, that they seemed rather to be meek lambs then
madd, and unruly bulls. All^oe in the year of our Lord one thousand three
hundred and twelve, on the feast of saint BERNARD, a wonderful oil issued
miraculously out of his sepulcher for the space of a whole day, which was very
medecinall and sovereign against many diseases.

V. KING ETHELSTAN^ being much molested by the frequent incursions Ethelstan^
molested by the Scots.
of the Scotts, gathered an army together and went to Beuerley, where falling
on his knees at the tomb of this Blessed Saint, he humbly recommended him
self and his cause to his sacred protection. And having ended his prayer he
drew out his knife and laid it on the altar saying: Behold (most glorious
Saint) I putt this for a pledge before thee, that if by thy meritts I return
victorious of mine enemies. I will enrich thy Church with ample gifts and
revenues. Then causing a banner of that Church to be carried before him, he
marched courageously against the Scotts, who hearing of his coming fled over
into Scotland, and there expected him. Ethelstane having fixed his tents on the
other side of the river Ethelstane victorious by the merits of S. John.
S. JOHN appeared to him, and bad him go over courageously, and assault his
enemies. Which the next morning he performed, and in that conflict many of the
Scotts were slain, and their whole army discomfited. Then King Ethelstane
having humbly desired of saint JOHN to have some sign which might serve as a
perpetual testimony of the King of Englands prerogative over the Scotts, he
struck his sword into a hard rock near Dunbar castle, where for many ages
after remained a mark the length of a yeard made hollow in the same stone,
with the blow. And for proof hereof we have, that king Edward the first (when
there was question before Pope Boniface of his right and prerogative over
Scotland) brought this history for the maintenance and strength of his cause.

VI. KING ETHELSTANE having obtained the foresaid Beuerley a Sainctuarie
victory honored saint JOHN ever after as his peculiar Patron and Guardian:
and ennobled the Church of Beuerley with many great freedoms, granting unto
it the right of Sainctuary, to be a safe refuge for all criminal, and
suspected persons of what offense soever. Many other famous miracles (here
omitted) have been done by the meritts of this glorious Bishop* all which moved
Alfrick the seventeenth Bishop of York after him, Translation of S. John.
to take up his holy relics, three hundred and sixteen years after his
death, and place them in a precious and rich shrine the five and twenty day of
October, which is the feast of his translation; on which very day in the year
of our Lord one thousand four hundred and fifteen the most invincible King of
England Henry the fifth of that name, won the memorable battle of Agi^court
against the French, Which the King ascribing to the meritts of the most blessed
Bishop saint JOHN, at his triumphant return into England, caused the feasts
both of his deposition and translation to be solemnly celebrated throughout the
Province of Canturbury, as it was allreadie in that York* And in the
Provincial Tit. de script.
Constitutions of England made in a Provincial Synod under Henry Chicheley
Archbishop of Canturbury, is found a decree hereof, made at the instance of the
same most Christian King Henry the fifth. Whereby it appears that this most
holy Bishop saint JOHN of Beuerley has been an aid to the Kings of England in
the necessity of their wars, not only in ancient, but allsoe in these later
ages. God of his infinite Mercy make us partakers of his glorious merits. His
life we have gathered out of Venerable Bede de gest. Aug. lib. 5. cap. 2. 3. 4.
5. 6. William Malmesbury de gest. Pontif. Aug. lib. 3. Matthew Westminster anno.
680. 686. 721. Nicholas Harpsfield saec. 8. cap. 22. Thrithemius of the famous
men of saint BENEDICTS order lib. 3. cap. 129. lib. 4. cap. 68. and 170. and
John Capgraue or Ioannes Anglicus. The Rom^^ Martirologe, Polidore Virgil,
Vsuard, Arnold Wion, Camden, and all our English writers do worthyly celebrate
his praises.

The life of Saint WYRE Bishop and Confessor, of the holy order of Saint
BENEDICT.
MAY. 8. Out of an ancient manuscript recited by Su rins.
SAINT WYRE borne of worthy parents in Scotland having passed his infancy was
set to school, when being prevented by the inspiration of an heavenly grace,
he began in his tender His virtues and exercises.
age to bear the years of a man both in mind and manners, proposing to him
self the examples of his elders to be the rule and guide of his youthly
actions. In the mean time he increased in years, but more in mind, never
yielding to any vain allurements nor drawing back his foot once set forward
in the stepps of virtue; contemning all transitory and wordly things, aspiring
with all the forces of his soul to the love of the eternal; so that his
holiness of life increasing daily with his years, he became grateful and
beloved both to God and man. He was nether broken with adversities, nor exalted
with prosperity, never tired with watchings; Herefuseth a bishopric
prayers were his food, and fasting his delights, in sum nothing could move
him from the desire and pursuit of virtue. Not long after whilst thus he
shined to the world in all kind of true religion, and holiness of life, the
Church of that country was void of a pastor, when all with one voice desired
WIRE for their bishop; him the clergy, him the people, him all the world
proclaimed to be a man sent from heaven to govern his native country with
episcopal dignity. But the holy man being quite of an other mind, far from
desiring to clime the slipperie degrees of fading honors, lay close under the
wings of humility, and utterly refused to accept any such charge: affirming
that he had more need him self of a Master, then to become a teacher and ruler
of others.

II. AT length overcome with much opportunity of the poeple, he yielded to go
to Rome to be consecrated, rejoicing for so good an occasion to perform that
so desired pilgrimage. And thither he went not out of an ambition of worldly
dignity, but of a desire he long had had to undertake that journey of
devotion. Being come to Rome together with saint PLECHELME a venerable
priest, and monk, and Otgerus a deacon, they all three visited with great
devotion the sacred shrines of the Apostles, watring the pauements with the
holy baulme of their devout tears. The Pope understanding of them, sent
presently for saint WYRE, who together with The Pope compells him to be
bishop.
his fellows came before him, where he was received with wonderful great joy
and familiarity. When saint WYRE having first plainly told the cause of his
coming, fell prostrate at the Popes feet, humbly craving to be freed from the
charge of the Bishopric. But the Pope nothing moved with his prayers, chose
rather to provide Gods poeple with a holy prelate, then to hearken to saint
WYRES private devotions; and therefore he ordered him Bishop much against his
will, and sent him back into the country with a strict command to cease from
undertaking any pilgrimage before he returned to his poeple. Whose precept the
holy man obeyed, and returned straight over the frozen Al^es, and swelling
waves of the sea, to come again into his count^ey, where he was received His
return from Rome
with great joy, honor and solemnity. Then it was wonderful to see how he
shined in all virtue, religion, and piety amongst his subjects, making
allwaies his own lif^ correspondent to the doctrine, he preached unto others.
And allthough then he, none could better discharge the office of that high
calling with all parts belonging to a good bishop, yet in his mind there
remained allwaies a pious desire to go in pilgrimage; which his intention
allbeit hidden from man's knowledge, yet to God it was most known, whose divine
goodness showed him the favor at length to attain the end of his wished
desires.

III. FOR finding a fit opportunity, he left his bishopric, and He forsakes
his bishopric
together with his ancient companions Plechelme and Otgerus, he traveled
into France, choosing rather to lead a poor and humble life amongst
straingers, then to live in pomp and glory in his own country. But the more
he sought to fly the glory and honors of the world, the more they followed
him; for in France, King Pepin hearing of his great sainctitie, received him
and his fellows with He is honorably entert ayned by King Pepin.
wonderful joy and honor; And having understood of their desire to a private
manner of life, he gave them a place proper for that purpose called
Peter-mount, in the Diocese of Liege near Ruremond, where was built a
chapel dedicated to the B. Virgin MARY, and a famous monastery of saint
BENEDICTS order in honor of the Prince of the Apostles saint PETER. In this
place saint WYRE, finding him self seated according to his own desire,
began again to enter into the course of a monastical life under the holy
rule of S. BENEDICT, which long since he had professed in England amongst His
holy exercises.
the English monks: setting forth him self and his fellows as lively patterns
of religion and virtue to be imitated. CHRIST only was the end of all his
actions; his tongue spoke nothing but CHRIST, his heart was acquainted with no
other thought but of CHRIST, for whose love he daily sacrificed him self to
his service in watchings prayers, fasting, and all other mortifications and
virtues belonging to a true religious and monastical life: Shining to the
country both in learming, and holy conversation. And being adorned with many
virtues, in body he lived on earth, but in mind he was wholely conversant in
the divine contemplation of heaven. In fine, it were too long worthyly to
rehearse all the virtues of this holy man.

IV IN THE mean time King Pepin held him in so great veneration, that to him
only as the spiritual guide of his soul, and the King Pepins humility in
confession.
patron of his life he was wont to confess and reveal the sins and
deformities of his soul. Nether was this good Prince ashamed to go barefooted
to confession unto him, and humbly to submitt him self to the arbitrament of
his will, so highly he esteemed his sanctity. Moreover, he often made use of
the mature counsel of this holy man in the managing of the chiefest and
weightiest affairs of his Kingdom. At length Saint WYRE began to perceive the
near approach of death, by the feeling of his two harbengers old age and
sickness, that came upon him. When decreasing daily in strength he still
increased in virtue courageously expecting that blessed minute which should
set free his soul to fly to the eternal reward of his meritts: till by the
violence of an ague, he chainged the fall of his mortal body with the rising
of an mmortall life, and gave up his holy spirit into the hands of his dear
redeemer; the eight day of May, about the year of our Lord 763. His body was
honorably buried in the foresaid chapel of the B. Virgin, were many
miracles are wrought through the meritts of this glorious Saint. His body, or
the greatest part thereof was afterward translated to Ma^stricht, in Germany
into the Cathedral Church of that city, where it is kept with great
veneration of the inhabitants, and his feast celebrated with an office of a
double. His life we have gathered out of the author thereof recited by Surius,
tom. 5. and Molanus in indic. Saint. Belgii. The Roman Martyrologe this day,
Baronius tom. 8. anno 631. Trithemius of the famous men of S. Benedicts order
lib. 3. cap. 63. Arnold. Wion lib. 2. cap. 53. Vsuard, and m^nie others do
make a^ple mention of S. WIRE.

The life of Saint FREMVND King and Martyr.
MAY 11. Written by Burchard a Monk of the same time.
FREMVND descending from a royal stock, inherited the government of the
Kingdom, when his father Offa was so overthrown which old age that he was
unfit to manage those affairs any longer. But FREMVND when he had raygned a
year and an half, ruling his state by the balance of true iustistice, He
forsakes his kingdom
he so little esteemed the vain pomp of the world, in respect of the love of
heaven, that unawares of his parents, and subjects of his Kingdom, with two
only in his company (whereof one was Burchard that writ his life, and lived
with him while he lived) he departed to a secret and unknown Ermitage, in the
Island called Ilefage, which at that time was inhabited only by devils, and
wicked spirits. In this place, having built a little cottage, and an oratorie in
honor of the B. Virgin MARY, he spent the space of seaue^ years, in
continual watching, fasting, and prayer, daily sacrifycing himself to God by
the rude mortification of his body, and ouercoming the rebellious passions of
the mind. When the devil envying so great sainctitie in saint FREMVND, with
many grievous batteries of temptations sought to overthrow his godly
resolution; bringing into his memory the pomp and glory of the world ly
dignity which he had forsaken, and filling his mind with many thoughts of the
great good which his youtfull days might have brought to his country. But he
found this soldier of CHRIST so firm a rock, that all his vain assaults
could nether shake nor stir him from the seat and ground of virtue: for
having his heart alltogeather erected toward heaven and heavenly things, he
loathed to return again to the vanities of the world once despised for the
love of CHRIST; therefore well might he be wearied with the temptations of the
devil, but overcome he could not be. He is sent for to defend the Country.


II. IN the mean time the Danes breaking into England wasted and spoiled all
with fire and sword as they went: and having martired King EDMOND, Offa much
fearing their power sent for his son Fremund home. Whom, when the messengers
had most straingely found out in his poor cell at his prayers, falling down
at his feet they bewailed, and declared the necessity of his friends and
parents, the arrival of their enemies, the threatened ruin of the Christians,
and the utter overthrow of their faith, unless by his prudence and courage the
country were defended against the fury of their barbarous enemies. The
champion of CHRIST much amazed at this news staggered in his resolution not
knowing what course to take. Till recommending the matter to almighty God by
prayer, he understood it to be his will that he should go. Therefore, armed
with the shield of faith, he returned Fremund returns to his country,
courageously into his country, where for his first welcome he found his father
and a great part of the Christian army slain by the Pagans.

III. BUT one Oswy, who formerly had been a great friend of saint FREMVNDS
father, and now had forsaken the Christian faith, cook part with the Danes,
hoping (as they promised) to inherit the Kingdom of Offa: and now fearing lest
by the arrival of Saint FREMVND into the country, he should be putt by his
hopes he came secretly unto him, and with a traitorous blow struck off his
head; when the blood that issued out of that mortal wound, and fell upon the
murderer, like so many drops of scortching fire, burnt his body with such an
intolerable heat that presently he repented him self of his wicked deed, and
fell upon his knees to demand pardon of the Martirs dead body. Saint
FREMVND was martired the eleauenth of May, in the year of our Lord 466. His
holy body was buried by Oswy his murderer, and others, in a place called
Offe-Church within the compass of the Kings palace: But afterward it was
translated to a place between Th^^ransl^^^n of his body.
Charmell and Bradmere, were (the divine prudence so disposing) it lay hid for
many years unknown, till the place was revealed to a holy man, and the body
taken up, and honorably buried at Redick. In the mean time many wonderful
miracles were wrought, through the merits of this B. Saint in all these
places. Saint FREMVND was enrolled into the number of canonized Saints in the
year 1257. during the reign of Henry the third. His memory heretofore has
been very famous in the Island of great Britain. His life is written by one
Burchard of Dorcester a monk, and his individual companion; and b^ John
Capgraue out of Ioa^nes Anglicus whom we have followed. Vsuard, Molanus,
Nicholas Harpsfied saec. 9. cap. 12. and Matthew Paris an 1257. make honorable
mention of him.

The life of S. DIMPNA Virgin and martyr.
MAY 15. Written by Peter a Canon of Cambray.
WE cannot better perceive the weakness of blind love, the horrible darkness that
possesses the Gentiles deprived of the true light, nor the understanding, and
strength which our Lord gives to the feeble sex of woeman-kinde to defend
their chastity, and shed their blood for his love, then in reading the life
and martirdom of this glorius Virgin saint DIMPNA. In Ireland there lived a
very potent King, but a Heathen, who had married a fair woman, whom, as well
in regard Her father a Pagan king.
of her beauty, as her other goods parts, he dearly loved. Out of this
marriage was borne a daughter called DIMPNA nothing behind her mother in
beauty, whom her parents very carefully and daintily brought up:
Nevertheless, as soon as she had attained to years of discretion coming to
the knowledge of JESUS CHRIST, she became a Christian, and vowed perpetual
virginity unto him, utterly She voweth her virginity to God.
despising all the Pompes, banquets, dances, and other vanities of the Court.
In the mean time, her mother being dead, her father, having dried up his
superfluous tears for her death, was desirous to marry a second wife, which
he would have to be a fair young maid like unto the former. But failing to find
such an one in the country, his flattring courtiers persuaded him to cast his
eyes upon his daughter DIMPNA, then whom, none could be fayrer, and in whom
(being very like her mother) he might revive the figure of his late Her father
^^keth her in marriage
wife. What more? this detestable counsel noe sooner arrived at his ears, but
straight the devil, who desired to bring DIMPNA to Idolatry, incensed the
king with the flames of an incestuous and impure love toward his daughter.
Here upon he began to sound her intention, with all manner of sweet
speeches, and allurements, promising to give her, her whole hearts desire, if
she would but marry him. DIMPNA stopped her ears at the hissing of this
venommous serpent, and answered that she would never consent to such an
abominable i^nceste. The king still earnestly urged, and she as courageously
resisted; till in the end, growing extremely angry, he could her, that he hold
marry her whether she would or no: Then recommending her self heartyly to the
dear spouse of her soul CHRIST JESUS, she answered her father, that since he
was resolved thereunto, she desired forty days respite, and to have all her
rings, and royal ornaments that she wanted, to set out her self for his
greater advantage. He most willingly granted her request, thinking that his
daughter had chainged her intention.

II. IN the mean time, there was a holy priest in the country called
Gerebert, who had been Confessor to the Queen, and had baptized DIMPNA, and
administered the venerable Sacrament of the Altar both to her mother, and her.
With him DIMPNA (...)ted, what was best to be done in this terrible case. The
Priest counseled her to fly away, for fear of being forced to such a
mischief; and offered him self to be her companion. So that they took
shipping privately, taking but one servant and his wife in their company God
permitted them to arrive at Antwerp, whence through uncouth ways they passed
from village to village, fearing to be noted and followed. At length they came
to a secret wood, where they cleansed a place grown over with thorns and
brakes to build a lodge in, and there lived securely, and unknown.

III. THE King her father ouercom with joy, and ravished with content, in the
impatience of love expected the desired weddingday The king her father goes to
seek her.
of his daughter: but when he understood she was escaped, being allreadie
drunk with the wine of his own affection, he began presently to make war
with himself, with terrible cries and exclamations of grief and fury. He
resolved to go seek her him self, and to search the very bowels of the
earth to find her, where soever she was hid. He traveled all his country
over, and found noe news of her. He passed over the seas to Antwerp where, he
made some stay, whilst his servants ferretted all the country over for his
daughter: when by mere accident, some of them, having lodged in a village
thereabouts, paid their host with their country money, who told them that he
had some money of the same kind, but knew not the value of it: These Jrishmen
demanded of the host how he came by it: he answered (not imagining to what
purpose they asked) that a very beautiful virgin, come out of Jreland to live
in those parts, gave it him in payment for such necessaries She is found.
as belonged to her maintenance: this gave them sufficient ground to suspect,
and indeed to presume that it was the kings daughter they sought, therefore by
the Hosts direction they went and found her, and returned with the glad news
thereof to her father.

IV. THE king like a man raised from death to life went with all his company,
and having found the holy virgin, and courteously saluted her, ravished with
the beautiful beams of her fair face, he began with these sugared words to
batter her pious resolution: DIMPENA my only daughter, my love, my desire, my
All, what necessity moved thee so to contemn the royal dignity of thy
native country, to live amongst strangers: and so to forgett all filial
love, as to forsake a king thy father, and follow this decrepite old Priest
obeying his commandments as his daughter. Why have thou thus despised the
royal court who art the only heyresse of the Kingdom of Ireland after thy
father? Be ruled therefore by my counsel, and return again into thy country
with us, for if thou will but consent to thy fathers affections, thy head shall
be crowned with a royal diadem, and thou shall have sovereignty over all the
princes, matrones, and Virgins of my kingdom. Moreover I will give thee a place
amongst the Goddesses, and cause a temple of white marble to be built, into
which an image of thy beauty curiously wrought of gould and precious stones
shall be set to be adored of all the country. To these words as the holy
Virgin thought to answer, the venerable Priest Gereberne took the word out of
her Gereberne reprehend^ the king.
mouth, and very sharply rebuked the king, with the titles of most wicked and
abominable wretch, in that he desired incestuously to defile his own daughter,
a thing scarce ever within the thoughts of the most lascivious lechers of the
world. Admonishing allsoe the then trembling Virgin not to consent to this
filthy king, lest she should incur the indignation of the eternal king her
spouse, whose sweetness she had allreadie tasted. Hereat the king, and all his
followers pronounced the sentence of death against Gereberne, as the author of
the flight, and subversion of Dimpna. Therefore with great fury they drew him
out of her sight, and with their swords cut him into pieces; whereby he
Gereberne is martired
received the glorious crown of martirdom, for the defense of justice.

V. THE KING having satisfied his fury on the body of this holy martyr,
returned again, to his daughter, and with a pleasing countenance began again
to persuade her to yield to his desire, using all the reasons and arguments in
loves Logic, to win her: all which were but as so many arrows shot
against a fair marble: for the holy virgin retorted them with S. Dimpna
answers her father.
these words: Wherefore, thou unhappy Tyrant, do thou endeavor with thy
wily promises to pervert me from my holy purpose of chastity? Do thou
think, thou wretch, that I will betray my dear spouse CHRIST JESUS, and give
up my body to be possessed by an other? Thy princely delights I contemn,
desiring with my whole soul to obtain the promises of my heavenly spouse,
which far excel all other desires, and in comparison hereof, I disdain to
be adored in thy country as a Goddess, therefore urge me noe more with these
vain frivolous speeches. Then the kings lust turned into fury, and his love
into a deadly hate; the more he found the fervor of Christian religion to
boil in the breast of his daughter, the more fiercely he endeavored to pervert
her. And do not think (said he) to weary and delude me with thy vain
answers, either suddenly grant what I ask, or expect to feel the smart of
thy fathers anger, as thy impostour Gereberne has done, who has lost his head
for the liberty of his tongue.

VI. WHEREFORE (replied she) most cruel tyrant, have thou slain the beloved
servant of God Gereberns, in whom thy malice could find noe fault? Surely thou
shall not escape the judgment of almighty God for this foul act: thy Gods
and Goddesses I detest, and wholly committ my self to the protection of JESUS
CHRIST. He is my spouse, my glory, my health, and my only desire. Torture me,
kill me, cut me in pieces, I am ready to suffer joyfully for his sake, all
the studied cruelties thou can imagine or invent. It was noe more hate and
fury, but rage and madness that now possessed the soul of that miserable king
hearing these words from his daughter, whom presently he commanded to be
beheadded. But all his company fearing to execute his Dimp^a martired by her
father.
cruel commaundment on so fair a subject; him self, quite forgeting all
royal nobility and clemency, with his own hands, armed with his own sword,
cut off his own daughters head; who, (when his cruel arm bent that deadly
blow against her) coursgiously implored, and reco^mended her soul to the
divine goodness, which by that cruelly-happie separation, was received into the
heavenly palace with the glory of virginity, waiting on the triumph of
martirdom. O barbarous cruelty of the father I Oglorious triumph of the
virgin! The father was not ashamed to defile his hands in the blood of his
daughter: and she was joyful to win by that means the possession of a never
ending glory.

VII. THE murderer with his followers returned into his country leaving the
bodies of those holy martirs in the fields, to be devoured with wild beasts,
and fowls; but CHRIST the king and crown^ of his martirs, did not permit them
to be torn whilst they lay exposed to the open air; having at length stirred
up some o^ the adjoining inhabitants, who moved with compassion, buried their
bodies in a cave; where our Lord began straight to magnify their glory with
many great miracles, which were daily done in that place. This gave occasion
to the neighbors thereabouts, Miracles at her tomb.
to seek those holy relics, and having dug deep in the ground, they
found two tombs of pure white marble (allbeit that country yields noe stones
but what are black and brown) and to show that it was the work of angels, the
marble was so curiously wrought, that both the tombs seemed to be of the same
piece, allthough they were separated one from the other. This miracle increased
the faith and devotion of the poeple, that flocked thither from all parts, to
obtain their health, and other favors of God, by the intercession of these
holy martirs, which were very liberally bestowed upon them. Afterward the
body of S. GEREBERNE was carried to Xaintes, and and S. DIMPNAS remained at
Ghole the place of her martitdom: till after some years, the Bishop of Cam^ray
accompained with all his Clergy, and an innumerable multitude of poeple,
translated Translation of her body.
her sacred relics out of the tomb of marble into a shrine of silver, guilt,
and adorned with many precious stones; the fifteenth day of May, her martirdom
was the thirtith of the same, about the year of our Lord 600. At this time
when the sepulcher was opened they found on the breast of saint DIMPNA a
precious stone like a rubie, in which was written, DIMPNA VIRGIN, AND MARTYR.

VIII. WHO can read this life without amazement in acknowledging the frailty
and misery of a man that should fall into such Consideration on this history.
extreme folly and blindness, as to seek to marry his own daughter; and that
a father should bath him self in the blood of his daughter, that resisted
against such a gulf of filthiness? O what Cimerean darkness compasses the
Gentills, in respect of the light that lightens the Christians! the impetuous
fury of passions is easily overthrown by the force, courage, and grace the
God bestows on his servants. He adorned this virgin with chastity, with an
inspiration to dedicate it to his service; he fortified her to ouercom, that
which of all terrible things is the most terrible, death: in sum he honored
her with an angelical tomb, and with the triumphant trophie which she gayneth
over the wicked spirits, by so many diverse miracles. Let us for ever praise
the author of so great wonders. Amen.

Peter a chanon of S. Auberts of Cambray writ her life, recited by Laurence
Surius tome 5. which we have followed. The Roman Martirologe makes mention of
her, and Cardinal Baronius in his Annotations, John Molanus in his upon
Vsuard, and in his catalogue of the Saints of Belgia; and many others.

The life of saint BRITHVNE Abbot and Confessor, of the holy order of saint
BENEDICT.
May 15. Recited by John Capgraue
THE venerable Confessor of Christ BRITHVNE (whom S. BID calls a most
reverend man) borne of English parents, was a long time deacon to the B. Bishop
saint JOHN of Beuerley, unto De gest. l. 5. cap. 2.
whom for his great Sainctitie of life, and holy conversation of manners, he
was allwais dear and familiar: and at length by means of the same holy man he
was made Abbot of the Benedictine Abbey of Deirwood, now called Beuerley, which
S. JOHN had built. S. JOHN being dead, holy BRITHVNE following the stepps of
his good Master, perseuered as long as he lived in all purity of life, in
watchings, fasting, prayer, and other monastical exercises. For he was a lover
of virtues, a conqueror of vices, a contemner of this world, a desirer of the
world to come, a faithful teacher of the flock committed A summarie of his
virtues.
to his charge, an untired executour of piety and justice, a great giver of
alms, and hospitallitie, and whatsoever he knew to be pleasing to almighty
God, in that he was continually busied. Till decrepite old age having overtaken
him in the service of our Lord, ending his holy life with an happy end, the
fifteenth day of May, he went out of this world to enter into that which never
ends. His body was buried with great honor in the same monastery, till in
process, of time the many signs and miracles wrought at his tomb, moved the
monks and poeple to translate it out of the earth, and place it in a shrine
near unto that of his Master S. JOHN of Beuerley, where it was kept with great
veneration. Thus much of him out of Ioannes Anglicus recited by John Capgraue.
Venerable Bede de gest. Angl. lib. 5. cap. 2. and Harpsfield hist. Eccl. saec.
8. cap. 22. make mention of him.

decorative device
depiction of St. Dunstan S. DVNSTANVS ARCHIEPISCOPVS CANTVARIENSIS Monachus
Benedictinus. May. 19. Mart. ba^. f.

The life of S. DVNSTAN Bishop and Confessor of the holy order of saint
BENEDICT.
MAY 19. Written by Osberne a monk of Canturbury. an. 1020.
THE almighty wisdom to make the worth and greatness of this renowned Prelat
(bright ornament of the English Church, and excellent Pillar of the Benedictine
family His parents
) S. DVNSVAN, more famous and manifest to the world, voutchsafed miraculously
to foreshew his future glory before he was borne, and to engraffe in the minds
of all men a wonderful expectation of him, which afterward abundantly he
repayed. His parents were ^^rstan and (...), (...) in the estimation of the
world, but much more ennobled with the splendor of (...) and (...). His
mother, whilst she (...) DVNSTAN in her ^omb (...) at that solemn The
ceremony of offering candles.
feast of the Purification of the blessed Virgin (...), when in remembrance of
the true and eternal ^^ght b^^aking forth to the darkesom world by CHRIST and
of the (...) ^^ of aged S^^^n, w^ (...) hands: (...) at Gl^seenbury amongst the
rest ^^^^ (...) a sud^^ine the (...) mayning calm and (...), all their lights
(...). With which accident the minds of that (...) being stricken with a
fearful amazement, presently with a new and woderfull miracle, they were
again encouraged, (...) admiration, when they beheld (...) (...) ^^ (...) with
light from A strange accident.
heaven; from whence all the company lighted (...): which made every own
divine that the child she (...) her wom^, would be a light to lighten the world
with the (...) of his holy life and learning: and therefore his mother was more
(...) and esteemed of all men ever after.

II. TIME at length brought to light that great light of the country signified
by the former, and in baptism he was called DVNSTAN, that is a
Mo^^taine-stone. As soon as he had passed the The vision of his parents.
years of his infancy, his parents brought him to the Church of the
Benedictine Abbey of Glastenbury, and there for his good success in virtue and
good life, they offered many prayers and gifts: where as they watched by
night in their devotions, they understood by revelation from an Angel, that
that monastery should afterward be worthyly instructed, reformed, and adorned
by the learning, labor, and virtuous life of their son DVNSTAN. Being set
to He falls sick.
school, he applied him self so eagerly to his studies, that he fell into a
grievous sickness, which brought him even to the last gasp. Nevertheless about
midnight when all despayred of his life, he was miraculously and suddenly
restored to perfect health, and to the great admiration of all, he leapt out of
his bed, and went into He is miraculously cured.
the Church to give God thanks for his recovery. But the devil envying so
great piety in the young man, endeavored to hind^^ (...) journey, by appearing
before him in the forms of a terrible ^^^panie of black enraged dogs. When
DVNSTAN calling on the He vanqui^heth the devils.
name of JESUS CHRIST, armed him self with the sign of the ^^ly Cross, and
with a little rod in his hand putt that engine of (...) chief to flight, and
held on his way to the Church door, which he found shutt: but climing up a
ladder that by chance stood reared ^^ the wall, he got to the very top of the
Church, whence by the hands of Angelical spirits, he was miraculously
transported into it, and placed before the high Altar. On the morrow, all the
doors being locked, he was found in a sweet slumber before the altar, to the
great astonishment of those that the night before had followed him, and seen
him fail to enter at the church door which was shutt. His great humility


III. NOW DVNSTAN had entered into the flower of his youth, when his goodness,
piety, and wisdom increased daily with his age, carrying him self with great
humility and submission toward all. And whatsoever honor, duty, or courtesy
was showed unto him, He takes the minor orders.
he wholly ascribed to the grace of the doers and not to any merits or deserts
of his, being most ready to serve others, and most unwilling to accept others
service toward him self. In the mean time, he is persuaded by his friends to
range him self into the service of the Church, and take upon him the Lesser
Orders: Which willingly he did, thereby to be able more freely to, frequent the
Church, to light the candles, to serve the Priest at Mass, to read and sing
in the office, and do other inferior duties belonging to the divine service.
All which with great devotion he performed, allwaies despising the vain
pleasures of the world, He escheweth worldly vanities
avoiding the toying sports of young men, delighting in the discourses of his
elders, carefully nourishing the poor, and most diligently busying him self in
the works of piety, and virtue. And when at any time he was invited by his
fellows in years to recreate with them in worldly vanities, he was wont to
excuse him self with his employment about such and such Church-affaires, and
that he must necessaryly look before hand over these and these Anthimes and
Lessons that were to be sung or said in the divine service. Thus this young
servant of God did both keep him self pure from the contagion of the world,
and by propounding a reasonable excuse, gave scandal to none nor suggested
any cause His pious exercises
wherein they might offend God. His only chief study and labor was in
prayer, meditation, in reading holy books: to adhere allwaies to Almighty
God, to carry him ever in his mind, reloycing to find out any thing that was
pleasing to his divine goodness. Whence it came to pass, that he obtained the
grace both to search out divine things, and trusting in the daily consideration
of God, avoided all spott of sin. So that being become near and familiar
with God, he became allsoe most dear and acceptable to all that lived devoutly
in God.

IV IN the mean time, hearing the fame of the venerable Athelme He goes to
the Archbishop of Canturbury.
Archbishop of Canturbury who was uncle, and seeing the many allurements of
the world to be dangerous blocks in a yongmans way that was desirous to walk
in the hard paths of virtue, having obtained the good leave of his parents, he
went to Canturbury, and settled him self under the conduct of that virtuous
Prelate. Athelme percauing the rich mine of virtues that lay hid in the mind of
his godly. Nephew, recommended him to King He li^eth piously in the kings court.
Ethelstane, to be by his royal authority and favor, protected from the
adversities of the world, and advanced in the pious way of virtue. The king
received him very courteously, and held him in greater esteem then many of his
courtiers desired (for Envy is the ordinary fruit that grows at Court.) Then
DVNSTAN, allbeit he were conversant in the palace of a terrene King, yet did
he nothing swerue from his exercise and resolution of true religion and virtue:
but by how much he preceaued him self to walk more dangerously amongst the
occasions of vice, by so much he endeavored more strongly, and carefully to
keep him self up from falling. And knowing idleness to be sworn enemy to the
soul, he applied him His practical exercises.
self to diverse honest practical labors, the exercise where of might keep
him doing, and the diversity avoid teadious loathing, For in the art of
writing, painting, engrauing in wood or bone and working in gould, silver, or
iron, he so excelled, that he was an admiration to many. Moreover, by his
skill on musical instruments he won not only him self, but the minds of
many others from the turbulent affairs of the world, to the medita^ion of the
heavenly harmony. And for these faculties he was frequented of many, unto whom
his charity was such that he would deny nothing that was demanded. But
laboring once in these mechanicque arts for a devout Matrone that had set him
on work, Note a strange thing.
his violl that hung by him on the wall, of its own accord without any man's
help distinctly sounded this Anthime: Gande^t in C^lis anime sanctorum, qui
Christi vestigia sunt secuti: and quia pro eius amore sanguinem s^^m fuderant,
ideo cum Christo gandent in eternum. Whereat all the company being much
astonished, turned their eyes from behoulding him working, to look on that
strange accident. Amongst whom, only DVNSTAN understood the sound of those
words. and what they intended: which was, that if he desired to live for ever
with CHRIST, he ought not fear, when necessity urged, to shed his blood for
his sake, and that his soul should not attain to the ioies of heaven, unless
he followed the footstepps of CHRIST our Savior. Therefore he took this as a
sensible lesson sent from God, to teach him what he was to do hereafter.

V. NOT long after, many of the Court that hitherunto had borne a kind of
feigned frie^dship toward him, began now greatly He suffers in the envy of
detractors
to envy at his progress and rising in goodness, using many crooked back
biting means to diffame his virtues with the black marks of Hypocrisy. And
the better to authorize their calumny they brought in this that happened in
the violl, affirming it to have been done by art magic. What more? this wicked
rumor increased daily, till the King and others of the Nobility taking hold
thereof, DVNSTAN grew odious in their sight. Therefore he resolved to leave the
Court, and go to Elphegus surnamed the Bald then Bishop of Winchester, who was
his cozen. Which his enemies understanding, they laid wait for him in the way,
and having thrown him off his horse, beat him, and draged him in the dirt The
dogs defend him
in most miserable manner, meaning to have slain him had not a company of
mastiue-dogges, that came unlooked for upon them, defended and redeemed him
from their cruelty. When with sorrow he was ashamed to see dogs more humane
then they. And giving thanks to almighty God, he sensibly again perceived
that the tunes of his violl had given him a warning of future accidents. The
neighbors running to the noise, took him out of the mire, and brought him to
a convenient lodging.

VI. HENCE he went to the foresaid Bishop of Winchester, who discoursing with
him of the perfection of a Monastical life, easily persuaded DVNSTAN
(allreadie greatly inclined to a course He takes the habit of S. Benedict
of virtue and piety) to forsake the state of marriage which he intended, and
wholly to dedicate him self to an Ecclesiastical course. Therefore without
delay he went to the famous Benedicti^ Abbey of Glastenbury, where he bid adieu
to the world, and putt on the holy habit of saint BENEDICT. And afterward in
due time, by the hands of the same Bishop, his cozen, he He lives in a mo^^
narrow cell
was promoted to the sacred dignity of Priesthood. Near unto the Church of
our Ladies of Glastenbury, he built him self a little Cell so straight, that
all that saw it were astonished, how a living man could dwell in it. For I my
self (says the Author of his life) have measured the place, containing but
four foot in length, and two and a half in breadth. The height was
proportionable to the ordinary stature of a man. In the midst of the door was
a little window. In this slender lodging he led his life in prayer, and
contemplation, working in such things as the narrownes of the place would
permit; but above all things laboring to please almighty God in all, and
through all his actions, He braue's vanquisheth the de uill.
daily gayning to him self an higher place in his divine favor. But the devil
envying his pious exercises, endeavored to disturb his devotions, presenting
him self one day unto him in the form of a maid, that feigned to be in want of
his help about some piece of work: and as the holy man prepared him self to
satisfy her demand, he perceived that enemy of mankind to transform him
self into diverse shapes, that he seemed to see the form, and hear the voice
now of an old man, now of a young man, and straight of some lascivious woeman
that stood before him. Then understanding what it was, he caught the fiery
tongues out of the fire, and took that hellish monster by the nose, and held
him fast. There then was to be seen a brave combat between the friend and
enemy of Almighty God. Till at length saint DVNSTAN remaining conqueror,
the devil fled away with confusion, horribly roaring and complaining that his
pride and cauie had received the foil: and never after adventured to molest
the holy man in that place. When from this time, DVNSTAN was endued with so
great purity of heart, and His rare purity of mind and body
such a rare chastity of body, that he more ressembled an Angel of heaven,
then a mortal man. Whence it came that many poor and rich flocked unto him
from all parts, to use his counsel for the health of their souls, and to be
by him informed, and directed in the way of good life, and virtue. Amongst
others that came to be instructed by his zeal and prudence, one was a virtuous
Matrone called Elsgine, whom when he had piously directed and well grounded in
the way of virtue for a long time, and armed at length with the last
sacraments, the happyly ended this life, and left all her goods and possessions
to the disposition of her pious Father saint DVNSTAN, who presently
distributed the moueables to the poor, Five monasteries built by his means.
and with the rest, and his own inheritance (being the only child of his
parents) he built and enriched afterward five monasteries, and filled them
with holy Conuents of Benedictine Monks.

VII. NOT long after king Ethelstan being dead Edmond his brother succeeded in
the kingdom of England, who understanding of An. 940.
the rare prudence, sainctitie, and discretion of saint DVNSTAN sent for him
to his Court, that by his worthy counsel and industry he Dunstan in great
favor with King Edmond.
might the easier rule the scepter of his kingdom with justice. DVNSTAN offering
this service to God, and the good of the common wealth, condescended to his
desire. When it was rare to behold how prudently he behaved him self in
disposing of the affairs of the realm, in composing of contentions that
arose, and establishing true peace and concord among the subjects, to the great
comfort and joy both of the king, and Nobles. Nevertheless within a while he
lost all favor and grace with them both, by the envious detractions By enui^he
he i. expelled the Court.
of those that could not support the luster of his resplendent virtues, nor
endure one alone to bear more sway, and be in greater credit then all the
rest, What shall I say? The malignant words of his adversaries prevailed so
far, that DVNSTAN was not only deprived of all ancient honor, but also
banished the Court. This done, after three days the King goeing on hunting,
and being carried by the untamed courage of his horse pursuing the game toward
a mighty precipice, that threatened both him and his beast with destruction,
seeing iminent death before him the injury done to DVNSTAN came suddenly into
his mind, whereat sighing from the bottom of his heart, he was much grieved,
promising straight in his mind that if by Gods help he escaped that danger
alive, he would again receive him into his favor. When to his great comfort
and admiration, his horse, which before noe force could hold, stopped suddely
on the ridge of that huge downfall, He is recalled to savor
and delivered him from his expected ruin. Then having related this accident
to his Nobles, and caused DVNSTAN to be sent for, he humbly demanded pardon
for his fault, did worthy peanance for the injury, and restored him to his
ancient honor, place, and dignity; faithfully promising to be his true friend
and protector ever after. Moreover, as a testimony of his future friendship,
he gave him the lands of Glastenbury where he was borne and bred, to be
disposed according to his good will and liking. Saint DVNSTAN by the kings
means built there a goodly Monastery, and gathered He builds the monastery
of Glastenbury.
into it a worthy Convent of Benedictine Monks, whom he himself governed in
quallitie of Abbot. So that by his good example and industry, that Abbey
increased wonderfully both in the excellency of monastical profession, and in
the abundant possession of temporal goods; And that place became a Nurserie of
learned and holy men that through all England cast the foundations of a
religious life under the rule of saint BENEDICT, like so many Pillars of the
Catholic Church. And now it came to pass, that as in this Church (as it is
about said) the whole multitude of people recovered light from saint DVNSTANS
Mothers candle; so out of this place thus instituted by the learning, and
industry of DVNSTAN him self, all the Churches of England received the light
of true Religion, and monastical discipline, by the example, and virtue of
many worthy men called hence to the dignity of Abbots, and Bishops in the
kingdom.

VIII. AMIDST these things, the holy life and conversation of saint DVNSTAN
purchased him wonderful hatred from the devil, the perpetual enemy to the
Benedictine order. But he allwaies found him to be as his name signifies, a
firm Rock of the mountain, He hearet (...) the songs of Angles.
whom all the hellish practices of that Master of mischief, could not move
from the ground of virtue. And by so worthyly triumphing over that infernal
monster, he deserved to to be partaker of the sweet harmony of Angelical
voices, which, at the instant, when King Edgar son of Edmond was borne, he
heard sing an Anthime foretelling peace to the English Church, by that happy
birth. Allsoe at the Church of Bathe, being very seriously detayned in his
prayer, he beheld the soul of a young Monk, whom he had brought up at
Glastenbury, carried up by troops of Angels into heaven. And it was found that
that youth The de^ill appear^th.
died at the same instant. Being afterward in his journey to the King who in
great have had sent for him, he was met in the way by the devil, who very
petulantly, and like a Buffoone rejoiced, and sported him self before him.
Being demanded the cause of his mirth: he answered, that the King DVNSTANS
friend would shortly die, which should be a cause of great trouble in the
kingdom, and he hoped that the next king would not favor DVNSTAN, nor his
adherents. But this Master of lies could The death of king Edmond, as. 946.
not utter two true tales together: for allbeit it fell out indeed that king
Edmond was slain in his Palace within seven days after, yet his Brother
Edred succeeded, a man worthyly fervent in the service of Almighty God, and
who honored DVNSTAN with noe less love, favor, and reverence then his
predecessor. Nay Elph^g^s Bishop of Winchester being dead, king Edred with
manic prayers solicited saint DVNSTAN to succeed in that Sea, whose absolute
refusal of that dignity much grieved the good kings mind, and made him deal
with good Queen Edgine his mother, to persuade DVNSTAN to accept it; but all
in vain, for nether the mothers nor the sons entreaties could prevail to
make him take it.

IX. AFTERWARD saint DVNSTAN went to visitt his The death of king Edred.
brethren at Glastenbury, where he had not stayed long, but king Edred being
fallen mortally sick, sent for him in all have. Who traveling speedyly toward
the Court, heard a voice from heaven that said; King EDRED rests in peace. And
at the very sound of those words his horse fell dead under him, without any
hurt to the rider. Then going sorrowfully to the sorrowful Court, together
with his fellows he committed the body of the King to the Mother The bad life
of king Edwin.
Earth. Edwin the son of King Edmond succeeded in the government of the
Kingdom; who filthyly defiled both the beginning and progress of his whole
reign. For, omitting the impiety, cruelty, and tyranny wherewith he
outraged all sacred and prosane things, he was a man so beyond measure
addicted to the pleasures of lust and lasciuiousnes, that he languished in the
love of the mother and her daughter both together, using both their bodies at
his pleasure. And, which is horrible to be spoken, on the very day of his
Coronation, dinner being ended, he forsook the company of all the Bishops,
Abbots, Princes, and Nobles of the realm, and went into his private chamber
where he sat in the midst embracing the mother and daughter, his ordinary
strumpets. Which act caused a great scandal and indignation amongst the
Princes, and Nobles then present. Whereupon (the rest excusing them selves,
out of fear to incur the kings anger) S. DVNSTAN was sent to draw Note the
great zeal of S. Dunstan.
him out off that lewd company. Who entering the chamber, and finding the king
(having laid by his royal crown) dallying on the bed between those two
naughty women, first with a stern look he sharply rebuked their
lasciuiousnes, and then with a low voice he humbly entreated the king to
redeem this public scandal, and to return to his Peers to gladden them
with his royal presence. But the King (anger and shame striving in his mind
for the mastrie) absolutely refused to come. Then DVNSTAN in the zeal of a holy
anger, took him fast by the hand, and clapping the Diadem upon his head, drew
him violently into the Hall amongst his Nobles. These wicked women were so
ashamed and offended herewith, that they persuaded the King (allsoe highly
enraged against S. DVNSTAN) to banish him out of the kingdom. Who not only
banished S. DVNSTAN, but sent wicked officers to the monasteries of Glastenbury
to seize upon all the goods that belonged unto it. The like injustice he used
to many other monasteries of England, not only despoyling them of their lands,
goods, and revenues, but banishing the Monks allsoe, that maintained the
profession and defense of a chaste life. Then the Abbey of Malmesbury (says
William a monk of the same place) which sor the space of two hundred
threescore and, ten years before, had been inhabited by Monks, Dereg. l. 2.
c. 7.
was made a stable of secular Clerks.

X. S. DVNSTAN therefore having received the decree of his banishment, departed
out of England, joyful in his heart that he was worthy to suffer for the
defense of justice, and love of cha^itie He went into Flanders, where the Lord
of that country courteously entertained him at the City of Gaunt, and there
in the exercise of true piety and religion, he expected how it should please
the divine See the cruelty of a detestable woeman.
wisedon to dispose of him. But the foresaid woeman, or rather infernal
furies, were not satisfied with his banishment, but plotted to have him
surprised by the way, and robbed of his eyes: which they failed to execute, for
when the instruments of this cruelty arrived at the Port, the Saint had
allreadie hoist sails, and was gone. Our Lord greatly conforted Saint DVNSTAN
in this banishment, by the means of his holy Apostle Saint ANDREW, to whom he
was ever peculiarly denoted, who visited him often, and appeared unto him, with
words, and promises of great consolation. In the mean time the almighty and
heavenly wisdom cast a merciful eye on the English nation; and used means,
for the perpetual consolation thereof, again to restore DVNSTAN the Father of
the country, into his former, and far greater degrees of place and dignity.
For the Northumbers, and Mercians withdrew themselves King Edwin justly
punished.
from the subjection of King Edwin, and made the Noble Edgar his brother their
Prince, under whose conduct they persecuted Edwin, and drove him beyond the
river Thames; so that all the country from thence to Humber, was wholly
subject unto Edgar. And with in a short time, death having ended the quarrel,
and taken away Edwin, Edgar remained Monarke of all England. Who being desirous
Edgar recalleth S. Dunstati.
to establish his kingdom with peace and justice, caused all the outrages
committed by his predecessor to be repaired, monastical and Church-goods to be
restored, and by messengers sent into Flanders, recalled S. DVNSTAN into the
Country with great honor and reverence, committing him self, and all his
affairs to be ruled He is made Bishop of Worcester.
and ordered by the prudence of his care and counsel. Moreover that greater
dignity might authorize all his proceedings, with many prayers he persuaded
him to accept the bishopric of Worcester, and he was consecrated at
Canturbury, by the hands of S. ODO the Archbishop. Then this holy Prelat
returning to his Church, discharged the part of a most worthy Pastor, using an
extreme vigilance over his flock, which he governed with wonderful integrity
unremoved constancy, and discrete severity.

XI. BUT the bishop of London being dead, after mature deliberation for a
successor, noe man was found so worthy, as S. DVNSTAN, And of London.
so that he was compelled to undertake the government of that Sea allsoe, when
how rarely he did the office of a holy Prelat in both these places, it goes
beyond the force of weak words to declare. At length, by the unanimous consent
of all, he was chosen Archbishop of Canturbury, when he went to Rome (according
to the custom of those times) and obtained his Palle of the Pope, who sent him
back with all the authority, and dignity belonging to the Metropolitan of
England. At his return, with great honor and applause he was received and
installed in the Archiepiscopall Sea of Canturbury, when assuming for his
armor of proof the word of God, he strengthened him self against the Prince
of the world, and began on all sides to destroy and ruin his members, with a
resolute constancy, and a constant resolution of true piety, virtue, and
religion.

XII. A COUNT noe less rich the powerful had unlawfully married He
excommunicateth an incestuous Count.
his own niece: against whom S. DVNSTAN (having the second, and third time
admonished, and sharply rebuked for that incestuous offense: and seeing noe
hope of amendment) used the sword of abscision, and by the sentence of
excommunication cut him off from the communion of the Church. The Count much
incensed herewith, had recourse to the King, and to the Pope to make his peace
with DVNSTAN, but finding that both their entreaties could nothing move the
holy Prelate, who remained firm as a rock, that could not be shaken with any
thing, admiring the constancy of the Saint, and fearing left his malediction
should cause the ruin of his soul, he divorced him self from that unlawful
wife; And when DVNSTAN presided in a National Synod of the whole realm, the
Count came barefoote Behold a rare example of public peanance.
into the place, clothed in a poor woollen habit with a handful of rods in
his hand, and casting him self in that full assembly at the feet of the holy
Prelate, with a woeful piety craved pardon of his fault, offering him the rods
to be chastised, and absolved from the excommunication, and admitted to the
sacraments of the Church. At which sight the whole company was moved to
pity and compassion, and DVNSTAN more then the rest. Yet observing all ways
the rigor of discipline in his countenance, a while he contained his urging
tears, but with difficulty: till being entreated by the whole Council, with
weeping words he gave him pardon and absolution.

XIII. BUT this was nothing in respect of that which he did to King King Edgars
offense
Edgar, whom so highly he honored, in the punishing of an enormious sin
which he had committed to the great scandal of the country. The King coming
once to the Monastery of (...) Nuns at Wilton, chanced to see a fair young
maid, excelling both in nobility and beauty, that lived there as a tabler
amongst the other Nuns, of whom he became fondly amorous, and desired to have
conference with her in a secret place. The Maid, being careful of her own
chastity, and fearing left the king might offer violence in such an
opportunity, took the veil from one of the other religious women, and putt
it on her own head, supposing that he would attempt noe dishonestie against
her thus vayled: Whom when the King beheld in that manner; Thou art quickly
made ^^ Nun, said he: and pulling the veil off her head, ravished her by
force (such cruel enemies to the soul our eyes are, that they rob us of our
hearts.) This fact was cause of great scandal in the Kingdom, till the news
arrived at the ears of saint DVNSTAN, who was stricken with great sorrow
thereat. Therefore hastening presently to the King, and he, as his manner was
coming to mee^e him, and offering to take him by the hand to lead him in with
honor, DVNSTAN with a frowning look drew back his hand, and Would not suffer
him to touch it. Whereat the King greatly amazed, demanded the reason of this
strangnes: To whom saint Note the zeal, and constancy of S. Dunstan.
DVNSTAN; Thou breaking all laws of shamefastnes, have played the adulterer;
thou despising God, and not fearing the sign of chastity, have robbed a
Virgin of her integrity; and do thou ask why I give the not my hand, that
sacrifices the Son of the Virgin to his almighty Father, to be polluted
with thy impure fingers? First wash thy hands from filth with the tears of
penance: and then, that thou may be reconciled to Gods grace, honor, and
embrace, the sacred hands of a Bishop. The King (who suspected nothing less
then DVNSTAN to be guilty of that secret) was The great humility of King
Edgar.
strangely amazed at these sharp words, and presently (like an other David) he
became penitent, and throwing him self prostrate at the Bishops feet, with
words full of tears and sighs acknowledged his fault, and desired penance.
DVNSTAN seeing so great an example of humility in the King, ran to him, and
having lifted him from the ground, began with a pleasing countenance to deal
familiarly His seven years peanance.
with him touching his souls health: and enjoined him seven years penance
for satisfaction. Who having obtained a Pontisicall absolution, joyfully
performed his penance, and exercised many other works of piety over and
above, by the instinct, and counsel of S. DVNSTAN. Moreover remaining ever
after constant in the love and service of Almighty God, he very worthyly
promoted both the civil and the Ecclesiastical discipline of his realm, was
very careful to see justice observed, to which end he established many good
laws, whereby he deserved to have his kingdom adorned with so many heavenly
benefitts, and blessings, that during his reign, nothing seemed to be wanting
that any way belonged to the commodity of a well-ordered, and happy
Commonwealth.

XIV. NETHER do I (says Harpsfield) believe this great felicity Saec. 10.
cap. 3.
to have flowed from any other fountain, then that Edgar from a child
(allthough sometimes in his youth he suffered under human frailty) was
allwaies piously affected to God and divine things, by which the rest of the
commonwealth, and all his happiness depended; and that he used these most
faithful, most friendly, most wise, and most holy Counselors, OSWALD,
ETHELWOLD, and above all DVNSTAN, who piously and holyly governed his youth in
the way of virtue and good life. And the holy documents which he sucked from
their mouths, he afterward fullfilled in his deeds, and examples. Whence it
came to pass, that by his royal means, and by the couns^ll and aid of these
three worthy Bishops, and Pillars of the Benedictine Order, the Mon^steries,
that from the beginning of the Christian faith in England, were built by (...)
AUGUSTINE our Apostle and others, were now again restored, and reedified, King
Edg^^ r^payr^^ 48 monasteries.
out of a long and cruel desolation and ruin into which by the violent
incursions of the Danes they were fallen^ and this King EDGAR built new and
repaired forty eight for monks, and (...) of saint BENEDICTS order. And in
them the monastical (...) was much impaired, was again restored to its (...)
and glory: King Edgar him self under taking (...) ction of the monasteries of
men; and in^oyning (...) wife to take the charge and custody of the houses of
the sacred Virgins and Nuns.

XV. FVTHERMORE, in thoses days the secular Clerks or Canons, (who in the
time that the Benedictine Monks were expelled out of their ancient seats by
the Danes, had by little and little crept into the Monks Churches) led a most
dissolute and corrupted life, in so much that either not at all, or very
negligently they performed the duties of their function and calling, unlawfully
making us of wives, and Concubines contrary to the prescrip^ rules of the
Church, and their order. Saint DVNSTAN being desirous to correct this
scandalous evil, obtained, by the authority of Pope John, to have the Secular
Clergy expelled, and the Benedictine monks introduced into the government of
those Churches. Then King Edgar, whose zeal was great toward the reforming of
Church Discipline, made this patheticall speech to the Bishops, and Abbots of
his Kingdom sitting in Council.

Because our Lord has magnified to work mercy with us, it is convenient (O
most Reverend Fathers) that with worthy Out of Alured of Rhieuall de reg. Angl.
Psalm. 4^. 4.
works we correspond to his innumerable benefitts: for nether shall we
possess the earth in the virtue of our sword, nor shall the strengh of our
own arm save us; but his right hand, and his holy arm, because he is pleased
in us. It is just therefore, that we labor with all diligence, to submitt our
souls unto him, who has made all things subject to our feet: and that we
strive to bring those, who^ he has made subject unto us, to be subject to his
divine laws. And indeed it is my part to rule the Layetie with the law of
justice, to give just judgment between a man and his neighbor, to punish the
sacrilegious, to bridle the rebellious, to deliver the weak out of the hands
of the potent, and the poor and needy from those that oppress the^: yea and
it is part of my care to provide necessaries for the Ministers of the Church,
the Conuents of monks, and the Quires of Virgins; and to look to their peace
and quiet. But to You belongs the examination of all their manners; to know
if they live contynently: if they behave them selves decently to those which
are abroad; if they be careful in the divine offices, diligent to instruct
the poeple, sober in their diet, mean in their habit, and discreet in their
judgments. With your leave be it spoken (Reverend Fathers) if you had made
diligent search into these things, such horrible, and abominable matters of the
Clerks had not come to our cares. I omit that they nether have appearence of
a Crown, nor a becoming tonsure; that lasciuiousnes in their habit, insole^cie
in their gesture, uncle annes in their words, do proclaim the madness of their
inward man. Moreover, so great negligence in the divine office, that they
scarce daigne to be present at the sacred watches, and seem to meet at the
solemnities of mass to sport and laugh, rather then to sing. I will speak, I
will speak that which makes good men grieve and the bad to laugh: with greef I
will speak (if indeed it can be spoken) how loosely they flow in banqueting,
and dronkennes, in chamber-delights, and dishonesties; that now the howses of
Clerks, way be thought to be common brothells of whoores, and conuenticles of
Players. There Is dice, dancing, and singing, there is riotous watching wish
clamor and horror protracted to midnight. Is it thus that ye do prodigally
consume the Patrimonies of Kings, the alms of Princes, yea, which is more, the
ransom of his precious blood? Wast For this, that our forefathers did empty
their treasures? For this has the Kings Exchecquer been pulled down, by the
taking away of many revenues? For this, did the royal munificence give many
lands and possessions to the Churches of Christ, to adorn strumpets for the
delights of the Clergy, to prepare lustful banquets, and to purchase dogs,
hawks, and other such lake toies? These things the soldiers proclaim, the
poeple whisper, fools sing, and reoyce at, and You neglect, You Spare, You
dissemble, and wink. Where is the sword of Leui, and the zeal of Simeon, Genesis
34. 2^
who cut off the Sichemites, even the circumcised (that bore the figure of
those that defile Christ's Church with unclean actions) when they abused as a
whore the daughter Exodus 32. 21.
of Jacob? Where is the spirit of Moses, who amongst those that adored the
Calfe, spared not the domestics of his o^^^. blood? Where is the dagger of
Phinees the Priest, who pearcing Number. 25. 7. Act. 5. 5. 8. 20.
the sides of one playing the harlot with the Madianit^, with this holy zeal
appeased the wrath of our Lord? Where is the Spirit of Peter, by whose virtue
avarice is slain, and the Simoniacall heresy condemned? Jmitate, Oyee
Priests, imitate the ways of our Lord and the justices of our God: It is now
time to proceed against them. that have dissipated the law of God. I have the
sword of Constantine, and You hold in your hands the sword of Peter; let us
join right hands, let us unite sword, to sword that the leprous persons may be
cast out of the ca^pes, that the Sainctuarie of our Lord may be purged, and the
Sons of Leui may serve in the temple, who said to his father and mother. I
know you not, and to his brethren, I am ignorant of them. Do carefully J
prayyee, lest it repent us to have done what we did, and to have given what we
gave: when we shall see it consumed, not in the service of God, but in the
lecberie and unpunished liberty of naughty persons. Let the relics of the
Saints move ye, to which they insult, the venerable aultars before which
they are outrageous: let the wonderful devotion of our predecessors move ye,
whose alms the madne^ of the Clerks abuses. My great Grandfather, as you
know gave the tenth of all his lands to Churches, and monasteries: and his
Grandfather Alured, spared nether treasures, nor patrimony, nor charges, nor
revenues, to enrich the Church. What my Grandfather Edward the Elder bestowed
on the Churches, your Paternitie cannot be ignorant: and what gifts my father
and brethren heaped on the aultars of Christ. it well becomes ye to remember.
O Dunstan Father of fathers, contemplate J beseech thee my fathers eyes darting
their beams upon thee from the bright clime of heaven: heart these plaintiff
words of his with a certain piety resounding in thine ^ares. Thou O father
Dunstan, An Apostrophe of King Edgars father to Dunstan
did give me bolesom counsel to build Monasteries, and found Churches: thou
wast my helper, and coadiutour in all things: J chose thee to be the Pastor
and spiritual father of my soul and manners. When did I not obey thee? What
treasures did I ever preserre before thy counsels? What possessions did I not
contemn at thy command? If thou did judge any thing to be given to the
poor, I was ready; if thou did affirm any thing to be bestowed, I
differd it not. If thou did complain that any thing was wanting to the
Monks or Clerks, I supplied it. Thou did asseuer alms deeds to be
eternal, and of them none to be more fruitful, then what was bestowed on
monasteries and Churches, whereby the servants of God are maytained, and the
remainder distributed to the poor. O the excellency of alms! O worthy ransom
of the Soul! O wholesome remedy of our sins! which hanging at the bosom of a
wanton Tibbe stinkes of musk, which adornes her pretty ears, which braceth
her delicate bedie in silk and purple. Js this the fruit of my alms, Father,
is the effect of my desire, and thy promise? Psalm. 49. 18.
What will thou answer to this complaint of my father? I know, I know, when
thou saw a thief thou did not run with him, neither did thou take
part with adulterers. Thou have Tim. 4. 2.
argued, thou have beseeched, thou bast rebuked: thy words ar contemned, we
must come to blows, Here thou have with thee the ^V;enerable father Ethelwold
Bishop of Winchester, and the most reverend Prelat Oswald of Worcester. To you
three I committ this business, and command that by episcopal censure, and my
regal authority, the lewd livers be cast out of the Churches, and those that
live soberly introduced.

XVI. THEREFORE saint DVNSTAN, and the other holy Bishops ETHELWOLD, and
OSWALD, being of them selves prompt enough to purge the Church of Christ and
free it from this (...) of uncleanness, and their own propension thereunto
being much See the particulars hereof in the lines of Oswald, and S. Ethelwold.
incited with this wonderful zeal of the King, never ceased, until having
expelled the secular Clergymen out of Winchester, and ^^cester, and other
Churches, they introduced the Benedictine Monks in their steed, unto whom
those seats anciently and truly belonged. O then truly bless^^ church of the
English (faith Alured of Rh^^^^) De reg. Angl.
which the integri^e of innumerable Monks and Virgins did adorn, which the
devotion of the poeple, the sobriety of the soldiers, the equity of the
Judges, the fruitfullnes of the earth, did make to rejoice. The most blessed
King did triumph with a pious joy, that in his time nature had sound the true
order of all things, when man to God, the earth to man, and the heavens to the
earth, did perform their duties, with justice, fruit, and temperance. But the
Clerks and secular Canons thus cast out of the Churches went poasting to the
King, and demanded judgment and justice for them selves in this expulsion,
wherein they thought they had received great wrong. The matter was referred to
the hearing of S. DVNSTAN the Metropolitan, who judged their petition to be
just, and reasonable. Thefore by his authority, a Synod of all the A Synod
held at Winchester
Peers and Bishops of the realm was assembled at Winchester, in the presence
both of the King and Queen, to determine the complaints of this affayre. Many
pleas were brought in on both sides, all which by the unshaken constancy, and
found reasons of DVNSTAN were destroyed: who resolutly affirmed, that the
secular Clergy which through lewdnes of life was fallen from the order of
Ecclesiastical discipline, could not justly challenge any part of that which
was given to the Churches in behalf of such only as lived according to the
rules of good life, and conversation. Whereupon, the whole controversy being
omitted, the King and many of the Peers, much moved to pity by the prayers
and petitions of the Clerks, interposed them selves, and made intercession to
saint DVNSTAN to spare them for this time, and restore them to their Churches,
having now understood how they should be handled if they did not amend their
lives. Then DVNSTAN was silent, and plodding with him self what was best to be
done in this business, all the whole company stood in silence and suspense to
hear his answer; Behold a strange thing.
when suddenly to the great astonishment of them all, a voyc^ came from the
Crucifix that hung in the same room, that said; It shall not be done, It shall
not be done: ye have judged well, ye would change not well. The King, and all
the assistants being much amazed, and terrified hereat, saint DVNSTAN inferd;
Brethren, what more will ye have? God has pronounced the sentence, and
decided the whole controversy. By this means all yielded to the voice of
heaven, the secular Clerks being deprived of their pretensions, durst attempt
no further appeal, and the Monks gave humble thanks unto almighty God, who
had so miraculously maintained them in the quiet possession of their own
right.

XVII. NEVERTHELESS, in success of time, the children and bastards of these
Clergiemen, attempted once more to recover the This happened in the raigue of
King Ethelred an. 979.
goods and benefices of their sacrilegious fathers: and to this end, with a
sum of money, they suborned a famous Orator called Berneline to undertake
the defense of their cause, and with the force of his eloquent tongue, to
persuade saint DVNSTAN to restore the goods of their Progenitors unto them.
Therefore a troop of this unhappy offspring being gathered together, they
set upon DVNSTAN and the King at a Village called Clane: where their
rhetorical Advocate, (in whom was the greatest hope of their victory) very
elegantly alleged his reasons in their behalf, with all the tropes and figures
he could invent. To whom saint DVNSTAN, with a smiling grave countenance,
briefly answered: Do not ye know that this controversy has long since been
ended, by the mouth of Almighty God? And therefore ought no more to be called
in question. Hitherunto I have endeavored to assist the Church with all the
little force I had, and now old age and labors have so exhausted my whole
strength that I desire to end that small remnant of life which remaynes, in
peace and traquillitie: I labored while I was able, and now I being not fit
to dispute and contest in controversies any longer, I wholly The Monks cause
again confirmed by miracle.
committ the cause of the Church to the protection of almighty God, who
undoubtedly will defend it from all unlawful and unjust assaults. At these
words that part of the chamber-floore where the Aduocat and his Clients stood,
fell down suddenly under them, whereby many of them were sorely hurt, whilst
the other part, where S. DVNSTAN and his adherents were, remained unshaken, and
moveable. And with this fall, fell likewise the cause of the secular Clerks,
and the Monks remained more firmly, and miraculously established, and
confirmed in the possession of their Monasteries. So that (as we have said) by
the means of saint DVNSTAN; and the assistance of the worthy Bishops saint
OSWALD, and saint Forty eight monasteries of Benedictines.
ETHELWOLD, the number of forty eight Monasteries of Monks and Nuns of the
holy Order of S. BENEDICT, were founded, and repaired, and replenished with
Conuents of religious persons, that night and day sung the praises of
almighty God, and lived a most holy and virtuous life.

XVIII. BUT allthough this most holy Bishop has deserved eternal How he
conformed the Benedictine Order.
praise and glory for his worthy endeauours bestowed thus in restoring the
Monastical Order, yet the chiefest title of honor is due unto him in that he
labored not only to repair the outward walls and buildings of monasteries,
and to replenish them with store of Monks, but allsoe made it the highest
point of his aim and study, to reduce the Monastical discipline it self to
the ancient and primitive rigor and vigor of our holy father saint BENEDICTS
Rule. And to this end he sent for many learned and vertuou^ Monks out of the
most reformed Monasteries of France to teach the true pactise of the
Benedictine discipline in England, and him self left written a notable monument
of monastical observance, and and ancient piety, which is called; A regular
Concordance of the Monks, and Nuns of the English Nation; whereby all the
monasteries throughout England (allbeit before they all observed the Rule of
the most holy Patriarch of monks saint BENEDICT, yet because almost every one
had some diverse customs and Ceremonies different from the rest) were reduced to
one and the same unanimous observance of regular discipline in all things; to
the great conservation and increase of charity and true religion. He that
desires to read this foresaid, Regular Concordance of saint DVNSTAN may find
it set forth not long since in the third Appendix to that worthy latin
treatise Entitled, The Apostleship of the (...) in England.

XIX. FVRTHERMORE, how zealous this holy Bishop was in the S. Dunstans zeal to
justice.
execution of justice, and rooting out of wicked persons out of the Country,
is made manifest by this example. Three false coyners of money being by the
laws of the realm condemned to death, the officers differred their execution
by reason of the feast of Pentecost: which the holy man understanding, refused
to celebrate his Mass, before justice was done: allbeit some thought this act
to be too rigorous and inhumane, yet our Lord made it manifestly appear, that
it proceeded from a true zeal of justice, and of the good of the
commonwealth; for as soon as those malefactors were dispatched, the holy
Bishop went to Mass, when being in the midst of that dreadful sacrifice, a
dove as white as snow was seen by all the A while dove ^uer his he^d at Mass.
assistants to descend from above, and sit upon his head, whence it did not
stir until he had finished that sacred Offering, with extraordinary tears
and devotion, in testimony that almighty God was pleased with the affection
of his servant, which was more just then severe, without which it is most hard
to conserve Kingdoms in peace.

XX. BUT the business, which had hindered King Edgar from being crowned in royal
manner, being now buried in oblivion, saint DVNSTAN, in presence of all the
Lords and Peers of the realm placed the Royal diademon his head, to the
wonderful great joy and exultation of the whole Kingdom. And after two years
space this noble King, and worthy Benefactour of the Benedictine Order, by a
happy death chainged his mortal Kingdom for an King Edgars death.
immortal reign in heaven: whom a grave Author affirms to have been no
less memorable among the English, then Romulus to the Romans, Cyrus to the
Persians, Alexander to the Macedonians, Arsaces to the Parthians, and Carolus
Magnus to the French. He was buried in the Monastery of Glastenbury, where, as
the records of the same Monastery do testify, his body was found without
any spott of corruption, after many years lying in the ground. EDWARD his
Son succeeded in the Kingdom, who being consecrated by S. DVNSTAN against the
will of his stepmother, Edward the Martyr.
and many of the nobles that took her part, was within few years cruelly
martired through her malice, as is above said in his life the eighteenth of
March. Ethesred, the son of that wicked mother inherited the Kingdom, being
endued rather with the ignominy of his mother then any good part of his
fathers. Unto whom, S (...) Prophesiet^^.
being installed in the royal throne, S. DVNSTAN opening his prophetic mouth,
foretold: that because he had obtained the Kingdom by the shedding of his
brothers blood, his whole government should be in blood, by the frequent
invasions of barbarous and foreign enemies. Which words, by time were too
truly verified. And not only in this but in many others saint DVNSTAN had the
gift of prophecy, by which he foretold to the Bishop of R^chester, and Saint
ETHELWOLD of Winchester, the time and hour of their deaths.

XXI. WE shall never come to an end if we go about to load this paper with
all the noble virtues and excellencies of this thrice happy and glorious
Prelate S. DVNSTAN: our discourse now hasteneth toward his blessed death, the
end and reward of his labors. It was on the celebration of that day, in which
our Savior having triumphed over death ascended gloriously into heaven, when
this holy Bishop, after the performance of the night-office in the quire,
remaining alone in the Church of CHRIST at Canturbury, more seriously A most
pleasant vi fion showed to S. Dunstan.
to contemplate those great ioies, and as it were to unite him self in soul to
the glory of our glorious Redeemer, he beheld a heavenly vision of a great
multitude of celestial citizens shining with inestimable sple^dour, to enter
into the Church, with glittering crowns upon their heads, who brought him this
message from JESUS CHRIST, that if he were ready and disposed, he might go
with them to celebrate the glory of that Solemnity in the triumpha^t city
of heaven. To whom the blessed man with inestimable joy and undaunted alacrity
See his great perfection.
of mind, answered: What honor, what hope, and what joy by this Ascension of
the Son of God, has happened unto mankind, it is well known unto you who
are participant of his unspeakable glory. Ye know allsoe that it is my duty
and office, who have the sheep of my Lord commended to my charge, to feed
them this day with the bread of everlasting life, and to inform them how to
follow his footsteps to heaven, and therefore I cannot come this day to the
desired place ye inuit me. The Saints finding his hindrance reasonable, bad
him be ready provided against the saturday following, to enjoy their company,
and sing with them: Holy, Holy, Holy, for ever. DVNSTAN promised he would: and
those glorious spirits vanished out of his sight. A holy Priest named Elfgar,
was at the same The witness of his vision.
time made participant of this heavenly vision, who afterward became a
faithful witness thereof unto the world.

XXII. THEREFORE S. DVNSTAN acknowledging that the time of his death was at
hand, and being secure of his eternal happiness, piously rejoiced in our Lord,
and was replenished with a spicituall mirth toward all men. And now the hour
of the divine office was come, when the holy Bishop went joyfully to the Altar
to sacrifice the Son of God to his eternal Father. The Church was filled
with a greater multitude of poeple then ever, drawn thither, by I know not
what instinct, as it were, to hear some strange news, that had not been
spoken off before. Therefore the Gospel at Mass being sung, the Bishop went
to preach unto the The excellency of his ^ast sermon.
poeple; when the holy Ghost governing his heart and tongue, he spoke more
excellently then ever he had done before. Then returning to the altar, he
finished that dreadful sacrifice, and being come to the Benediction at the end
of Mass (which by bishops is more solemnly given) he went again into the
pulpit, where so admirably he treated of the real presence, of the future
resurrection of our bodies, and of the ioies of everlasting life, that one
unacquainted The real presence.
with him before, would have judged those words to have proceeded from the mouth
of an Angel. This done, he returned to the altar, and solemnly gave the
poeple his benediction. But being much wounded in his mind with a pious fear,
lest his dearest friends and children being stricken with the sudden blow of
his death, should grieve more vehemently, then they would being forewarned of
that doleful separation, to the great admiration of all he went the third time
to the poeple: When he noe sooner opened The wonderful brightness of his face.
his mouth to speak, but like an other Moses his face shined with such
glittering beams of glory, that not one of all that huge assembly, was able
to fix his sight upon him. The inestimable sweetness, and joy that then
possessed the hearts of the assistants, noe pen is able to describe. But when
the Servant of God began to discover the day of his death, then all that mirth
was turned to mourning, and such mourning, that DVNSTAN him self, who was now
destined to everlasting ioies, being moved with natural pity and
compassion, seemed to bear a part in that doleful consort. But using violence
to him self weeping, he endeavored to comfort the weeping: affirming that they
ought not to be sorrow full for his departure, whom noe labor or pay^e but
eternal rest and glory would receive: and noe man that is grounded in the
root of true charity, should more esteem his own private and temporal
comoditie then the eternal benefitt of his neighbor. And allbeit he were
absent from them in body, yet The spiritual presence of the Saints
in spirit he would be allwaies present, to help and aid them with his
prayers. Having spoken to this purpose, he recommenced them all to CHRIST, and
left them, unwilling to be deprived of the sight of his glorious countenance.

XXIII. THE same day after dinner, accompanied with a venerable troop of
monks, and other his friends, he returned to the Church, and having designed a
place for his burial, he commanded S. Dunstan fal^eth sick
to have his grave opened. And then a cruel sickness seazing one his holy
body, confined his weak limbs to rest in bed, where he lay all the friday
following, incessantly attending to God and divine things, and inciting all
that came about him to adhere to the examples and footstepps of CHRIST-IESVS.
Thus conquering the strength of his disease with the weapons of a fir me faith
and devotion, he passed over that day, till the morrow (which was the last of
his labors and first of his desired rest) arrived. Then the Clergy and poeple
flocked about him with a fearful expectation of the event which he had
foretold of him self. And DVNSTAN being most desirous to enter into the joy of
his Lord, and having strengthened him self with the sacred body and blood of
CHRIST, joyful expected the happy hour foretold in He is miraculously
raised together with his bed.
the foresaid vision. When suddenly to the great astonishment of them all, by
the hidden power of the almighty Deity, together with the bed wherein he
lay, he was miraculously elevated three times to the top of the chamber, and as
often let quietly down again. Then the holy man behoulding a company of his
amazed monks and spiritual children about him, said; My most dear brethren,
His last speech.
the beloved sheep of my pasture, your own eyes have beheld whither I am
called and whither I am going. Ye are well acquainted with the path of my
footstepps; ye know the labor of my life past; behold now the consummation
thereof lifts me on high. Wherefore with the brief admonition of my dying
voice, I exhort and counsel ye, that if ye desire to come whither I am
going, ye be not flack to apprehend the way that I have walked in. Almighty
God him self, who has directed my journey to him self, direct allsoe your
hearts and bodies to fulfill his divine will in peace: And the whole company
having answered, Amen, that blessed soul passed His glorious departure.
out of this world, and by a sacred conuoy of heavenly spirits, was co^ducted
into the heavenly lodgings, to enjoy the ineffable vision of I^SVS-CHRIST God
and man, the glorious crown and everlasting reward of his labors.

XXIV. THIS glorious Prelate died in the year of our Lord 988. His burial.
when he had governed the Mettopolitan Sea of Canturbury twenty seven years.
He was buried with great reverence and lamentation of his Monks, in the place
which him self had designed, within the quire, before the degrees ascending to
the high altar in CHRISTS-Church. Which we doubt not to have been by him with
great affection of piety so disposed, that lying in body before the face of
his beloved children whom he had left in the turbulent dangers of the world,
they might confidently have recourse to him in their necessities, who in
spirit, according to his promise made, would allwaies be present amongst them.
And indeed the many miraculous effects wrought there at his intercession are
manifest testimonies hereof. Of which we will briefly relate some few only, out
of such authors as were Many miraces wrought at his Tomb
eyewitness of them. Five women, and one man received their sight as they
prayed at his tomb; others recovered their legs and other parts of their
body which had been a long time unserviceable. And one, who being
excommunicated by a Priest for his wicked life, making his prayer to this holy
Saint, was delivered from a devil that wonderfully and with a horrible
trembling tormented his afflicted body. He was seen sometimes by the Monks
to go out of the Church in the night; whom as they endeavored to stay; I
cannot (said he) remain here any longer, for the wickedness of men, and the
fi^thynes of impious persons buried in this Church. And not long after
CHRIST-Church was burnt with fire.

XXV. BUT for the bridling of the insolency of ungrateful persons, this
ensuing story is worthy of memory. A Priest called C^onulphe, noble and
rich, was oftentimes admonished by his friends to suffer him self to be carried
to saint DVNSTANS tomb, to make intercession for his recovery out of an
insufferable palsy which beyond all hope of humane help afflicted him. But a
long time he contemptibly refused to listen to their desires, disdayning to
join him self in company with the poor that daily flocked thither. Till at
length, the vehemency of his disease and misery compelled him to depose all
these proud flourishes of his haughty mind. Therefore he was brought to the
holy Saints One cured of a palsi^.
tomb, where by his prayer he obtained perfect health. He returned joyfully
home, and invited all his neighbors and friends to a banquet in gratulation of
his new received strength. Where, as among other praises of Almighty God, it
was declared, that now (as at other times the poor) saint DVNSTAN had cured a
great and famous man allsoe, he became very angry and disdainful: And do ye
reckon me (said he) among those wretched creatures? I see you are far
deceived; for setting aside all DVNSTANS help, nevertheless I had been
certainly See the punishment of ingratitude.
cured. Presently a horrible trembling over all his limbs followed that
ungrateful speech, and a palsy more terrible then the former seized upon
him, which he expressed with most horrid cries, and in which he straight
vomitted forth his miserable and ungrateful soul. And the author of this
gratefully shows, that as he had seen S. DVNSTANS benefitts bestowed upon
others, so in him self he felt of how great force his holy meritts were.

XXVI. FVRTHERMORE, two soldiers that had flaine the nephew of an Abbot called
Scotland, made humble suite unto him in a great assembly at the relics of S.
DVNSTAN, that for the sake and honor of so great a Saint, he would
voutchsafe to pardon that offense. Whom when they could not move to mercy,
behold at the same time a woeman, that from her cradle had wanted the use of
hearing, was miraculously cured. The night following, a Priest of a venerable
aspect appeared to the Abbot in his sleep, and sharply rebuking him for his
pitiless mind toward those supplica^ts, commanded certain ugly creatures
to cast him and his nephews into a boiling cauldron. The Abbot brought to
these streights, promised pardon, so that he might escape that torment.
Whereat those horrid creatures vanished out of his sight. But the next day
before the sun appeared the Abbot went to the holy tomb of Saint DVNSTAN,
where with tears trickling down his cheeks he declared to the monks, what
had befallen him, and gave public pardon to the Soldiers.

XXVII. Whilst Lanfrancke Archbishop of Ca^turbury celebrated the dreadful
sacrifice of Mass, a young monk that served him was horribly vexed with the
devil, of whom for the space of some days, he could by noe means be
delivered. Being brought A possessed person delivered.
afterward to the sepulcher of Saint DVNSTAN, it was wonderful to see how
that hellish fiend did abhor to come near those sacred relics: but ran
up and down that troubled little world, as if he would break out either at his
mouth, or through some other unclean part of his body. In the mean time a
monk called Eifwine, caught the cross which was wont to be carried before
Saint DVNSTAN when he was Archbishop, and applied it to the body of the
afflicted person, sorrowfully pouring out these words: Holy DVNSTAN look upon
this wretched creature, and show thy mercy. He had scarce spoken so much, but
the devil was banished out of that possessed lodging, and the monk with
tears of joy gave humble thanks unto Saint DVNSTAN, through whose merits he
was delivered from that hellish Monster. In the mean time a very memorable
thing happened. For this possessed creature being visited by some of the monks
whilst he was in extremity, seemed to be wonderfully See the great virtue of
Confession.
rejoiced at their coming, openly casting to their teeth many offenses by them
hiddenly committed, and triumphing that he should have them to be the
companions of his damnation. Which thing made them greatly ashamed, and
compelled them presently to make a sincere confession of all their sins to a
Priest, and humbly to desire absolution. This sacred expiation of their souls
being done, again they returned to the possessed person, who looking upon
them with a frowning countenance. And whence come ye (said he) or with what
ablution have ye so soon washed away your uncleanness, and robbed me of your
company? These words he bellowed out with great exclamations, dreadfully
fuming and foaming at the mouth. Whereby it appears that sins reucaled in
confession are hidden from the knowledge of the devil. But this wretched
creature being at length dispossessed, as is aforesaid, became more careful
and fervent in the service of almighty God, and died happyly; whose example
caused many of the other Monks piously to reform their lives ever after. And
of this tragedy, the Author whom me do follow, was an eye-witnes. Moreover,
when LANFRANKE Archbishop of Canturbury lay languishing Dunstan appears to
La^srank and cureta him.
of a desperate disease which in the judgment of the world was thought would
be his last, saint DVNSTAN appeared one night unto him and restored him so
perfectly to his health, that that day, which all men expected would be the day
of his funeral, he went joyfully to the Church, and celebrated the sacred
mysteries of our Redemption on the Altar. And at the same instant one that
served LANFRANCK at Mass was cured of a quartan ague, which had cruelly shaken
him the space of eight months before.

XXVIII. ONE Edward Archdeacon of the Church of London put him self into the
company, and profession of the Monks of Canturbury, with intention to serve
God more securely in that more sublime manner of life and perfection. But
having for some years A Monk reso^ueth to ^eaue the habit,
space worthyly answered to the dignity of his vocation, he began at length to
let loose the raynes of religion, and to lead a more negligent and dissolute
life. Wherefore incurring the reprehension of the Prior and Monks for this, he
became so offended and incensed against them, that he began to think of
flying away, and (as the saying is) to cast off his cowle to the hedge. But he
resolved with him self not to depart without the good leave and license of
saint DVNSTAN, which out of his deceived mind he falsely hoped for. Therefore
having settled the purpose of his flight, together with an other companion whom
he had made guilty of his intention therein, he prepared for that unhappy
journey; and taking his opportunity when the other Monks rested after dinner,
be went first to saint DVNSTANS Tomb, where he laid open many complaints of
the injuries he had received from his brethren, humbly desiring See if the
Saints are ignorant of mortal affairs.
him that he would not take this last refuge of his departure in ill part. And
going presently out of the Church, he met with a Monk of a very reverend
countenance who with a staff in his hand hindered his expedition, and
commanded him to return to the Tomb, and there to chainge his mind and
manner of prayer. He returned to the holy tomb, renewed his former petition,
and straight prepared him self for the flight. Again he happens upon the same
Moke, who gave him the same but a much sharper rebuke for that attempt,
threatening to make him feel his staff unless he obeyed. But he (allbe^t much
affrighted) returned to the Tomb, where again he repeated his old song, and
came back to the Churchdoore, and finding the Monk his opponent to be gone, he
thought that now he was right, and therefore hastened toward the monastery
gate to depart. But there he met with the same Monk again, who now the third
time stayed his euill-intended journey, and revealing him self to be DVNSTAN
the Archbishop, and careful prouisour of that place, he not only with words
chastised him, S. Dunstan beats back a f^gitiue monk.
as a light fugitive of his vows and religion, but allsoe with many sore
blows laid upon his head, back, and sides, he made him seele the piously
cruel revenge of his staff; and presently vanished out of his fight. The
poor Monk, who out of weakness could now nether go nor stand, was carried by
his brethren into the Infi^marie, where his griefs grew daily so vehemently
upon him, that the Monks despayring of his health, began with prayers to
recommend his departing soul to God and his saints. In which having recited
the seven Penitential Psalms, and being come to these words in the Litanies,
Sancte DVNSTANE, intercede pro anima cius, (which out of their devotion to the
holy Saint, they repeated) the Prayer to Saints, profitable.
sick man began to be better, and to look upon the assistants with more
lively tokens of life. and having sent for Henry the Priour of the monastery,
he made known unto him the whole manner of this story of his intended flight,
and how and by whom he was hindered, affirming that now he was grievously
sorrowful and repentant for his fault; from which he humbly desired to be
released by the power of his priestly absolution. Which done, finding his
conscience eased from the guilt, and burden of sin, he departed joyfully
Confession o^ (...) o^ a Priest.
out of this life. The Priour relating all these things afterward to the
monks, behold he that was guilty of this flight (of whom no man knew any
thing; nor he him himself hitherunto what had passed between Edward, and S.
DVNSTAN) fell prostrate before the whole Convent, and with tears trickling
down his cheeks, ingenuously confessed his fault, that he had allsoe been
consenting to the others desire of flight. And the Author of this story
allsoe is a witness beyond all exception, since he relates a thing which him
self both saw and heard.

XXIX. MANY other miracles are reported by very grave Authors to have been
wrought by the merits of this glorious Saint Of the traslation of S. Dunstan.
both during his life and after his death, which fearing to be over teadious I
omit. Only I will admonish my good readers, if perchance they light upon
those fabulous writings which affirm the sacred relics of Saint DVNSTAN to
have been translated from Canturbury to Glastenbury in the year of our Lord
1012 and about the four and twentieth year after his death, that they suffer
not them selves to be easily deceived. For Eadmer a man most worthy of credit,
and one very familiar with Saint ANSELME Archbishop of Canturbury does utterly
hiss out that fiction from the school of true history, and clearly shows
that he being a boy, by LANFRANK Archbishop, Gunduphe Bishop of Rochester,
Scotland Abbot of Saint AUGUSTINES in Canturbury, in presence of the Conuents
of both those Monasteries, and an infinite multitude of all order, sex, and
condition, that sacred body was translated out of the ancient Tomb (in which
it was found with the mitre, ring, palle and other pontifical ornaments, with
a plate of lead, and a writing which testified that it was Saint DVNSTANS
body) into the new Church newly built by blessed LANFRANK. Moreover, a few
years Sec. 10. cap. 7.
before I was borne (says Nicholas Harpsfield) that is the year 1508. William
Warham then Archbishop of Canturbury, caused this tomb allsoe to be opened.
when the head and all the bones were found, as allsoe the leaden plate spoken
off before. All which, many, besides the Archbishop men famous for dignity
and learning had the happiness to behold and reverence. And in the perpetual
testimony and memory hereof, by three public Notaries, John Barre^, John
Colman, and Willian Potkins, the mat^er was written testified and subsigned.
And the letters of the Archhishop to the Abbot and monks of Glastenbury (who
against so great and so certain proofs bragged that with them reposed the
relics of Saint DV^STAN, and not at Canturbury) are yet extant to be seen,
to the utter disproofe of that vain assertion.

XXX. To conclude at length the life of this most glorious The Conclusion.
Prelate, unshaken column of the English Church, incomparable restorer of our
Ecclesiastical and monastical discipline, worthy Pillar and ornament of the
Benedictine Order, undaunted Tamer of vices, and most zealous Aduancer of
virtue, religion, and justice, I think I can wish noe greater happiness to the
Christian world then that at this day it were adorned with many such Bishops
as, Saint DVNSTAN, and many such Princes as the noble EDGAR was, that so the
Spouse of Christ the Church might be purged from all spott of uncleanness, and
Kingdoms governed with true equity and justice, in the ways of all piety,
faith, and religion. But alas? where is that Bishop now that dare attempt to
rebuke or curb the vices of a king or a Prince, as DVNSTAN did? And where is
that king that being justly reprehe^ded will humble him self as our EDGAR did?
Surely the zeal and co^sta^cie of this admirable Bishop in curbing of vice was
excellent: and the humility of this noble king in obeying the reprehension of
the Church, was most memorable. God of his infinite goodness grant grace unto
the spiritual and temporal governors of his Church to imitate the worthy
examples of them both, and so to rule the flock of CHRIST committed to their
charge, that they may attain to the everlasting happiness which these enjoy in
heaven. Amen. The life of Saint DVNSTAN is written by Osberne a monk of
Canturbury who flourished in the year 1020. Surius recites it in his 5. tome.
Out of which and NICOLAS HARPSFIELD saec. 10. cap. 3. 6. and 7. we have chiefly
gathered this whole history of his life. The Roman martirologe maks mention of
him. And not long after his death, Canutus King of England in a famous sinod at
winchester, ordained amongst other things that the memory of Sainst DVNSTAN
should be yearly celebrated in the English Church, as it is in the Sarum
Berniarie. But in an ancient, manuscript Bre^iary of Saint BENEDICTS Order J
find the seast of his holy deposition celebrated the 19. of May with an office
of twelve tessons. Baronius tom. 10. Trithemius in his work of the illustrious
men of Saint BENEDICTS Order, lib. 3. cap. 221. and lib. 4. cap. 100. william
Malmesbury, de gest. reg. Ang. l. 2. and more amply de gest. Pont. lib. 1. and
ali our English writers do worthyly speak his praises. And glorious mention
is made of him in the lines of S. Edward king and martyr march the 18. of
Saint ELPHFGVS Archbishop and martyr April the 19. and elsewhere.

The life of S. ETHELBERT King, and Martyr.
MAY. 20 Written by Ioa^nes Anglicus.
ETHELBERT son to Etheldred king of the East Angles, from his very infancy
gave worthy signs of great towardlines and virtue, which in riper years he
brought to an higher degree of The exercises of his yout h.
Christian perfection. Coming to years of discretion he was set to school,
wherein he not only profitted much in learning, but allsoe avoiding all the
fond allurements and vain pleasures of the world (contrary to the custom of
children nobly borne) he spent his greatest endeauours in daily prayers, giving
of alms, and other virtuous works of Christian piety, excelling all his
equals in years as far in virtue and learning, as in the royalty of his
blood; for when they were sweating in the dustie exercises of their youthful
games, ETHELBERT was devoutly weeping in the Church He is made King of the
^^st-Angle^.
at his prayers. At length, death having robbed his father of the cares of this
world, ETHELBERT succeeded in the government of the Kingdom; when it was rare
to behold with what prudent counsel, merciful justice, meek judgment, and
all other virtues belonging to a good Prince, he ruled his subjects, liuelily
expressing both in word, work, and example, that by how much the more a man is
exalted to the height of dignity, by ^oe much he ought to bear a mind more
submissiue and courteous unto all, whereby he won a wonderful and singular
grace in the hearts of his nobles and people. To his mother the Queen he
allwaies dutiful love and respect as unto his gouernesse, and whatsoever was
pleasing to her desire, stood ever with his good liking.

II. IN THE mean time, allbeit of him self he were wholly bent His Nobles
persuade ^im to Martie.
to embrace perpetual chastity (so natural a propension he had to the love
of all virtue) yet being earnestly persuaded by the urgent prayers of his
Nobility, lest otherwise being destitute of an heir his Kingdom might fall
into some danger, he yielded to their desires, and gave his mind to marriage.
Then the name and fame of one Seledrid only daughter to a Prince rich and
potent in the south part of England, to whom after her fathers death that
Kingdom fell for a dowry being in the mouths of all men, her our noble
ETHELBERT was persuaded to take to wife, thereby to join the possession of
that principality unto his own Kingdom. But he refused to listen to this
counsel, affirming that Egeon her father, allbeit he were not unnoble, yet he
was reported to have been allwaies much inclined to guile and deceit, part
whereof (said he) he has in former time practiced against my father. At
length, after a long deliberation he made choice of Alfred daughter to Offa
King of the Mercians, and the more strictly to oblige her, and her father unto
him, this virtuous Prince went him self with a He takes his journey into
Mercia.
small guard of his own country, into Mercia or Midle-England, to fetch her
in pomp from her fathers court. But at his very entrance into this journey he
was terrified with many strange prodigies and accidents, as so many fatal
signs of his death to which he hastened. Ascending on horseback the earth was
shaken under him, and all the cleernes of the day was suddenly darkened with a
thick clowd, in which appeared a pillar of light breaking out by times, that
only gave him light to see his way: at length that being buri^d in those sad
^lowdes, the sun it self seemed to have forgotten his office of lighting the
world, becoming dreadfully dark, and black to the sight of him and his
company. Where many being much amazed deuined strangely what those signs
might portend: only the holy King ETHELBERT, in whose heart was engraffed so
pious a candor of nature, that he constered all sinister suspicions of deceit
in the best sense, and constantly perseuered in his proposed A free conscience
is void of fear.
journey, with a merry heart and speech comforting and encouraging his
company, to let a firm confidence in the mercy and goodness of almighty God
banish out of their hearts all vain fear of worldly dangers. And falling
down on his knees amongst them all, he made his prayer to our Lord, and
presently the sun dispersed those dark clouds, and gave them perfect light
again.

III. THEREFORE he arrived safely into Mercia, and to the court of King Offa,
at a place in H^refordshire called Sutton-Wallis, where he was at first most
courteously and royally entertained by Offa. But the night following, holy
ETHELBERT was much terrified and troubled in his sleep with many strange
dreams and visions presaging his ensuing death, as allsoe the immortal glory
which should follow. This King Offa had a wife called Quendred, who hearing her
daughter Alfrid highly extolling the Sea the envy of wicked woema^
nobles dotes, virtues, and riches of Ethelbert and his Kingdom, and
preferring them before her own fathers, was presently wounded to the heart
with the sharp thorns of a jealous envy, with which she labored so cruelly
that she could not be delivered but by the death of King ETHELBERT, and the
possession of his kingdom. Therefore going presently to King Offa her husband,
she dealt earnestly with him to further her damnable project in murdering that
innocent Prince. For behold (said she) how God has delivered your enemy into
your hands, that by his death his kingdom may pass unto the right and title of
you and your successors. In sum, whether Offa consented to her deuilish
purpose, as some Authors say he did, or whether he were utterly against it, as
others affirm, or whether at length he did wink at her wicked course, and
seem to be ignorant of her mischievous practice, as many asseuer, howsoever,
I say, it came to pass, certain it is that between them was shown an
example of as detestable perfidiousnes, as any that is recorded in history.
For breaking the sacred laws not only of hospitality, but allsoe of all
goodness and piety, they caused holy king ETHELBERT to be cruelly murdered in
king Offas own house, by the bloody hands of one winebert, who had been
brought up a servant Ethelbert cruelly murdered
under Saint ETHELBERTS father, and now to recompense his former favors
received, became the cruel Minister of his death, being drawn thereunto with
the covetous desire of reward. To what wickedness does not the insatiable
hunger of gould compel mortal hearts? This false winebert brought holy
ETHELBERT from his faithful company into a private room, who like an
innocent lamb suspecting noe harm at all went securely with him. Then having
bound him fast, with a most cruel blow he struck off his head, who with his
hands and eyes lifted up toward heaven yielded up his soul, so pure in
innocence, and so glorious with martirdom, into the hands of his dear
creator and redeemer; the twentieth day of May. Which being perceived by his
intended spouse Alfrid, with a mind quite overthrown with sorrow to see her
royal hope so suddenly dashed, she went forth to his company that without
doors expected the coming of their beloved Master, and with a lamentable noise
related the cruelty of this tragical scene. Who bearing this sorrowful
news, and being not able to revenge his death, returned in doleful manner
into their down country, being compelled instead of a wedding-song to sing an
Epitaphe for the loss of their holy King. Then Alfrid renewing her complaints
Alfrid becomes a Nun. Jngulphus in hist. Croyland,
foretold many miseries to her Mother, which afterward fell out accordingly.
And she her self refusing to admit any other mortal woers, consecrated her
virginity to her immortal spouse CHRIST-IESVS, and in the fennes of Crowland
she took the habit of a Nun and lead a solitary li^e under the holy rule of
saint BENEDICT, for the space of forty years after. But King Offa her father
(which much increased the suspicion that he had been allsoe consenting to saint
ETHELBERTS death) presently lead his army into the province of the East Angles
so suddenly deprived of their King, and by force of arms subdued it to his
own dominion.

IV. THE body of this holy King thus traitorously slain, was by the command
of Offa committed to an ignoble burial in the banks of the river Lugge, at a
place now called Marden. Whither as those cruel ministers carried it in great
scorn, it was found to be so light as if it had been allreadie ennobled with
the dotes of heavenly glory. But the almighty Goodness ever zealous of his
servants, suffered not the holy relics of this Saint to be buried in
oblivion in that base place, but miraculously testified his virtue and piety
to the world. For the night following was made glorious with a heavenly A light
appears over his gra^e.
light that appeared over the grave of this holy martyr, to the great
astonishment and terror of the country adjoining. And the third night after
his sacred Martirdom, saint ETHELBERT appeared in a vision to a simple man
thereabouts, and commanded him to transport his body to the monastery built
on the banks of the river Wye. Which was faithfully performed, and by the way
a blind man was restored to sight by the merits of the holy Saint. It was then
buried in a place aunciently called Ferne-wood, where now stands the town of
Hereford. And over his holy sepulcher, for the space of many years, glittered
every night a heavenly splendor, to show of how great merit his blessed soul
was in the sight of Almighty God.

V. BUT King Off^ greatly terrified with these miracles, and the A Church
dedicated to S-Ethel bert.
guilt of his own conscience became wonderful penitent for his former life;
and making his son Egfrid a King with him self, in great devotion went to
Rome, the better to expiate his foul and bloody deeds past. At Rome following
the zeal and example of INAS King of the West Saxons, he made his Kingdom
subject to a Tribute, then called Peter Pence, afterward Rom-scot. After his
retune into England, for the greater satisfaction of his sins, at a place in
Hartfordshire then called Holmehurst, now saint ALBANS, he built a magnificent
Monastery in honor of the worthy Protomartir of great Britain saint ALBANE,
whose sacred relics See more in the life of S Albane. June: 22.
after long lying hid, came miraculously to light about the same time, which
was in the year of our Lord 795. He allsoe endowed the same Monastery with
many lands and rich revenues for the maintenance of a goodly Convent of above
an hundred Monks of the holy Order of saint BENEDICT. Allsoe for a further
testimony of his penance, he gave the tenth of all his goods unto the Church
and the poor. He founded also the Benedictine Abbey of Bathe, and in
Warwickshire he built a Church where the adjoining town from it and him,
bears the name of Off-Church. But after the death of King Off^ (which was in
the year of our Lord 797.) Milfrid a petty King of the Mericans moved with
the continual and daily miracles wrought at saint ETHELBERTS Tomb, gave
infinite treasure thereunto, and built a famous Church of stone to his honor
which remains to this day in Hereford by the name of saint ETHELBERTS Church
and is the Cathedral of that city. S. Ethelberts well.
And then that place was first made a Bishops-sea. But out of the place where
the holy body of saint ETHELBERT had layne before issued forth a fountain of
most clear water, called saint ETHELBERTS well, over which now stands a
Church, which without doubt was built in honor of this holy martirs burial
there. For it must needs be some strange motive that made men build a Church
in that place, which is within ten yards of the river Lugge, which at every
flood ouerflowes it so, that it cannot be come at but by boat. The well I
have seen my self, it is of a most pure water, and much esteemed of all good
Christians thereabouts: In which one thing to this day is most strange and
miraculous, that when the river Lugge adjoining ouerflowes his banks, and that
within Note a strange thing.
the foresaid Church it is knee-deepe and more of that muddie-red water, this
Well of saint ETHELBERT, allbeit it be quite ^uer^lowne, yet it remaynes most
pure and clear amidst those ^roubled waters, unworthy to be mingled with the
purity thereof. And this I have heard constantly and faithfully affirmed by
many of the Inhabitants thereabouts, who are not ashamed to acknowledge a
miracle done by the meritts of this glorious Saint, and yet remain in the
blindness of heresy to deny the Saints of their due honor, and worship,
judging them as impotent creatures with almighty God, Whom of his infinite
Goodness we beseech to give them grace once to wash away their blindness in the
indeficient fountain of his grace, that they may behold and see the truth.
The life of this glorious Martyr we gathered out of Ioannes Anglicus recited by
John Capgraue, and Nicholas Harpsfield Hist. Eccle. saec. 8. cap. 9. Matthew
Westminster an. 793. Polidore Virgil lib. 4. Molanus in addi^. Gyraldus
Cambrensis and others do make honorable mention of him. He was martired about
the year 793.

The life of Saint GODRICKE Hermit and Confessor, of the holy order of Saint
BENEDICT
May. 21 Written by Nicholas a Monk of Durrha^ his Confessor.
THIS blessed man was borne at a village called Walpole in the County of
Norfolk, but adorned, polished, and brought to the perfection of virtue and
piety in Northumberland. In whom truly the almighty wisdom seems to have
imprinted and left to the world a most sound and wonderful figure of his
immense Goodness and mercy. For, from a man borne in a most poor and abject
place, and endued with noe learning at all, he advanced him to that known
height of virtue, prudence, perfection, and other heavenly gifts and graces,
that many of them do seem almost to be beyond the bounds of credit. Which
indeed I would not committ to writing, unless I thought my self secure and
certain He becomes a merchant.
of the truth of his worthy deeds. Therefore coming to the flower of his age,
he became a Merchant of petty wares which he carried on his back to sell over
the Country, from Village to village: Till his own industry having increased
his little means, he frequented the cities and Faires in the same trade. And
at length, his riches daily growing, he became master or at lest a patner in a
ship, in which he transported his merchandise into Scotland, Denmark, and
Flanders; so that by much practice he grew to be a man very skillfull in
governing those walking houses, and in all the art belonging to the floting
trade of sailors. In which being oftentimes ^ossed in most fearful and
dangerous tempests, He allwaies fled for refuge to the divine power of In
seadangers he has recourse to God and his Saints.
God and his Saints; and the danger being past, he was wont in sign of
gratitude to visitt the more celebrated places, where the memory of Saints
was-obserued, to recommend the safety of his journey and return to their
desired prayers. But going often into Scotland, he desired many times to
visitt the Episcopal Sea of Lindisfarne, and the Island of Farnen, in which
places our great saint CVTHBERT had lived a Bishop, and an Hermit: Where
having learned of the Monks the whole manner The first sparks of his
conversion.
of saint CVTHBERTS holy life, and devoutly visitted all the corners of that
Hermitage, and humbly with many tears implored the mercy of almighty God
in his own behalf; he heganne ever after to have his mind daily more and more
auerted from worldly things, and by a secret and inward motion of his soul to
be more vehemenly carried to a pious emulation of a solitary and perfect life.
In the mean time he was taken with a wonderful desire to go in pilgrimage to
Jerusalem, there to visitt and adore the sacred sepulcher of our Lord, and
other monuments of his dear passion. Thence he returned through Spain, where
at Compostella he visitted the sacred body of the great Apostle S. JAMES.
Being come again into England, he undertook He becomes Steward to a Rich man.
the charge and government of the house and family of a certain rich man of
his own country: where when he perceived the servants to live more
licentiously, and make daily banquets of meats stolen, as he feared, from
their neighbors, and that his friendly admonitions could not prevail to
dissuade them, the master of the house him self refusing to correct them, foe
they diminished not his own goods; Godrick soon after rid him self of that
office, not desiring to have to do with so depraved a family, or with so
remiss and negligent a Master.

II. AND because, allthough vawares he had sometimes been present and partaker
of their unlawful banqueting, the very thought thereof gave so deep a
wound of sorrow to his soul, He goes to Rome.
that for the better expiation of that innocent fault, he made a pilgrimage to
saint GILES his Church, and to the sacred shrines of the Apostles PETER and
PAVL at Rome, humbly to crave pardon. Yea the very memory of that mistake
would often times draw floods of tears from his eyes. Being returned, he
remained for a time at home with his parents; till not long He is more in the
way by a stranger.
after, together with his mother he began a new and barefoote journey to
Rome. In which they had for a companion a certain Virgin that of her own
accord came into their company a little beyond, London, and carefully waited
upon them going and coming, being unseen of all men but GODRICK and his
mother only. Till being returned into England, and to that very place where
first she met them, she departed out of their company, Nether did GODRICK in
all that journey ever ask her what she was, or whence she came, nor did she
once demand any such thing of him: Nor could GODRICK ever after resolve with
him self what to imagine her to be; nether would he ever relate this story to
any man, saving only at the later end of his days to our Author, who This
was Nicholas a Monk of Durrham his Confessor.
was his Counselor in the more secret affairs of his soul. And I would not
rehearse the same, did I not think that the lest suspicion of vanity could
not befall such a man, so virtuous and holy as he: In whom from this very time
it may be seen how excellently the seed of piety cast in his heart did
strive more and more to grow to the maturitie of perfection. And now amongst
all the other sacred admonitions of CHRIST which incite us to embrace an
absolutely perfect life, that voice of his; If thou will be perfect, Go, and
sell all that thou have, and give to the poor, like a trumpet Godrick
resolves to leave the world.
sounded such an alarm in our GODRICKS ears, that he never rested until he
had performed it in deed. And yet did he not unadvisedly make away with his
goods (as the Heathen Philosophers did) but to the end he might more easily and
freely follow CHRIST, and perform that part of his speech also, Give to the
poor, and follow me: which they did in no sort do.

III. THEREFORE with the good leave of his parents, who endeavored by all
means to promote his religious desires with their prayers, exhortations, and
well-wishes, he departed to the farthest parts of England, and to Carlisle,
where he retired him self into a certain He leads a most strict solitary
life.
vast and horrid wilderness, to spend his time in the devotion of a solitary
life. Having lived a while in that fearful place, he happened at length to
find the cave of an other very old Hermit living there, into whose society
according to his earnest desire he was admitted. This good old soldier of
CHRIST was a layman, ignorant almost of all booke-learning, but having been
conversant before among the Benedictine Monks of Durrham, he was so much the
fitter more exactly to direct our GODRICK in the discipline of a monastical
life. Then it was a rare spectacle to behold the most sweet and alltogeather
heavenly manner of life of these two holy men, night and day singing the divine
praises of almighty God; between whom was no other contention, then whether
more officiously should serve and obey his fellow. After the space of almost
two years, a deadly sickness seized on the weak body of the old man; during
which, it is almost incredible to be spoken with how great love and duty
GODRICK served Godwin (that was the holy man's name.) For the space of fifteen
days and as many nights, he took noe rest at all. And when the force of
human nature and infirmity compelled him to sleep, he coniured the soul of
that dying man by the dreadful name of almighty God, not to depart out of
his body, whilst he was asleep. He had his desire; for the strength of that
aged body being dissolved, he saw his soul He see^h the soul of his
companion dying,
more white then any snow, depart like unto a burning hot breath of wind, or
like unto a globe or sphere of most bright-shining cristall. The body was
buried in the Monastery of Durrham. And our holy GODRICKE having lost the
comfort of his beloved companion, pondering exactly with him self after what
manner to spend the remaynder of his life in that desert, and earnestly
imploring the help of his singular Patron saint CVTHBERT, suddenly the same
saint CVTHBERT appeared visibly unto him, and commanded S. Cuthbert appears
unto him.
him to go again to Jerusalem, to be made partaker of CHRIST'S Cross, and
after his return, to inhabit the desert of Finckley not far distant from
Durrham. Whose admonitions without any delay he obeyed, and performed a
journey so laborious and painful, that truly even out of this so great
labor and ardour of the way, he may justly be thought to have participated of
the Cross and Passion of JESUS CHRIST. For he used no other meat by the way
but barley bread, that now was well dried and hardened with age: His second
journey to Jerusalem
his drink was only pure water, and his clothes and shoes he never either putt
off or changed. So that the soles of his shoes being worn, and he neglecting
to mend them, certain lumpes of dirt, and gravel grown together stuck to
the soles of his feet, which gave him a feeling of most grievous pains.
Nether did he desist therefore from his journey, nor shorten his daily
accustomed length thereof. His admirable de^otion there.


IV. BEING come at length to Jerusalem, the long desired end of his painful
voyage, it is wonderful to be spoken, how great pleasantnes and agilitie of
mind and body he found and felt in him self, with how great ardour, piety,
and devotion he watched and prayed in those holy places, with what streams of
tears he watered the sacred sepulcher, and the other sorrowful monuments and
trophies of our Lords bitter passion, and our redemption. Then together with
others he entered into the river Jordan: which was the first time that he putt
off his garments since he began this teadious journey. He returned barefoote
home having there made a religious and solemn vow never more to wear shoes
while he lived After his return into England, he went to an Ermitage in the
North, at a place in times past Streanshall, but now more usually called
Whiteby, famous for the Benedictine Monastery of saint Hilda, where when he
had remained a year and some months, he departed to Durrham. And there he not
only frequented the Churches for his devotion, His desire to learn psalms.
but allsoe the Childrens schools, and diligently listened to hear them
recite their lessons to their Masters, whereby he learned many psalms,
himnes, and prayers: For he was bent with a devout earnestnes to learn the
Psalms by heart, and the book of them he allwaies carried about with him
hanging by a string to his little finger: whereby it came to pass, that that
finger was allwaies bended crooked all his life after. But now he was totally
carried toward his desired solitude, and at Durham he earnestly implored S.
CVTHBERT the chief captain and Foreman of his undertakings, that by the
help of his intercession and prayers, he might fight valiantly and fruit fully
for the health of his soul in the ermitage of Finckley allotted for his
habitation. In which, once entered, he remained afterward for the space of
threescore and three years, He lives threescore and three years an Ermite.
and never went out but thrice in all that time, which was to Durrham three
miles distant. The first time that he went, was on a Christmas night, to be
present at the divine office and sacrifices of the Monks. When there fell an
incredible abundance of snow, which being seconded with a most sharp and
bitter frost, so grievously wounded the bare feet of the holy man, that every
step he made left behind it a bleeding witness of his suffrance. At an Easter
again he came once to Durham, to receive the dreadful and venerable Sacrament
of the altar. And the last time, he came being sent for by Ranulphus the
Bishop.

V. Now if one would as the greatness of the matter requires, exactly set down
and describe all the manner of life of this thrice happy Saint whilst he
lived in this desert, he might fill whole volumes of wonders. Us it shall
^uffi^e to give the readers some little taste thereof, and to gather as it were a
short table of his famous deeds. In sum, this I will say, that in him there
appeared in England, a second CVTHBERT, a new HILLARION, and an other ANTHONY.
Will you know what clothing this worthy champion v^fed? Truly His rude
clothing.
to outward show he wore such, that allbeit they were corresponto his manner of
life, yet were they not tokens of so great austeritie. But under these next
unto the bare skin (o unspeakable rigor!) either a most rude shirt of
hayre-cloth (of which kind he wore out many in that desert) or an iron coat
of maile (of which he allsoe consumed three in the space of fifty years) or
both these rough garments together, night and day braced his invincible body.
Will you know with what dainty meats he lived? Verily for a time with noe
other then what the wild and horrid desert affoorded His hard and spare diet.
to him, living in Commons with other beasts. Till after some years, he was
wont to make his own bread of barley flower mingled with a third part of ashes;
which he would not use until it had been dried and hardened for the space of
three or four, yea sometimes six months, whereby it lost all gust and savor
of bread. Instead of herbs and sallets, he made him self a kind of strange
gruell or pottage of the wild and savage leaves and weeds of the desert
pounded and beaten together in water, and so boiled without either salt or
spice; which allsoe (fearing too dainty a feeding) he would nether taste,
before it was grown aged with hoarnes, nor make new, before the worms and
maggots began to take possession of the old. Nether did he ever use any other
food but this, nor any other drink but pure water, unless when the
extremity of his hunger or thrist was such, that it threatened him with the
loss of his life. Sometimes he continued his fasting for the space of three
whole days together, and sometimes more. To this so rare and spare diet his
sleep was allsoe correspondent: which he did not take in bed, but His manner
of sleeping.
lying upon the ground, or leaning his wearied limbs to a stone or wall,
never yielding to this short and hard allowance of rest, until the very
necessity of nature by force compelled him thereunto, after the heavy toils
of his day and night-labour^. His continual labors.
For he labored not only by the sun, but by the light of the moon also, as
well in the parching heates of summer, as through the rigid sharpnes of winters
frost and snow, being in the mean time allwaies laden with his coat of
maile. And in these exercises, as often as he was not busied in meditation and
prayer (allthough indeed at this time he was not idle from both) he spent his
whole nights and days, banishing from him self thereby all signs of sloth and
dullnes of mind and body.

VI. BUT amidst all these labors, he severely exacted and obliged His daily
and nightly prayers.
him self to certain set hours and times by night and day, in which
according to the custom of the Church he performed his whole and daily task of
prayer; as at midnight, at sunne-rising, at the third, sixth, and ninth hour,
and Euensong. At which times, no occasion or hindrance never so great could
withdraw him from his devotion, and the punctual observance of his times of
prayer and divine office, which was not that of the Church (to which his
learning would not reach) but such Psalms as he him self by a divine grace had
allotted to him self for his devotion. And to these times of prayer he called
him self and his fellows, by the sound of a little bell prepared for that
purpose. And because over and above this exercise he was wont to add a great
number of other prayers; at each of them, lest he should omit some through
oblivion, he laid by a little stone to signify how many were past, and how
many were to come: giving him self also a triple remembrance at the end of
each prayer, with three blows on the breast, the better to incline almighty
God to mercy. But of all these praises, nothing deserved more fame and
admiration then that, when not only in the summer, but allsoe in the cold
winter and chiefly those nights in His invincible patience.
which the waters were cruelly frozen, breaking the ice he would enter up to
the neck into a freezing pond, and watch a whole night therein in prayer,
tears, and a self-punishing suffrance. All which austeritie of cruel winters
cold, by the force and power of the flames of the divine love that inhabited
his soul, he easily either contemned, or patiently and courageously endured.
And when the vehemency of the cold made his teeth to chatter, and beat one
and other for heat; when all his limbs were stark and stiff with that
extremity, he used these words to him self; These sufferings are indeed
grie^ous enough, but nothing in comparison of Hells torments. Such a generous
He endured many diseases.
and unshaken mind this brave champion bore in the suffrance of worldly pains.
Of which, I know not whether he ever gave a more lively example, then in the
painful diseases which it pleased the goodness of almighty God to send him,
for the greater trial of his patience, and more glorious increase of his
heavenly crown and reward. Which divine trialls he was so far from taking
in ill part, that contrariwise he most dutifully rendered thanks unto
almighty God, as to a most indulgent father, who voutchased to chastise his
unworthy child and servant with temporal and light punishments, and mercifully
to free him from the eternal pains which he deserved.

VII. BUT what? He not only endured with a quiet mind these Note a rare example
of patience.
griefs of proof sent from heaven, but caused unto himself, a new pain noe
less grievous and painful then the former. For when his whole body was
covered over with loathsome ulcers, and clothed, as it were, in a horrid scurfe
of ugly scabbes, which opening and separating themselves in many places from
the flesh, set forth to be seen the picture of a most ill-faucured and foul
spectacle: How gently and courteously (said he) our Lord deals with me, by
preventing my eternal torments, with such mild and sweet remedies. But why am
J myself so remiss, and so great a sluggard in punishing, and expiating my
own offenses? And presently he caused salt to be brought and powered into those
gaping and open ulcers, and moved with a cruel piety he made his servant
rub and scour those places with a rope of rude straw, in most doleful and
pitiful manner. In which labor, when his Servant did sweat with tormenting,
and he was not wearied with suffering; he took the rope him self, and with much
more pitiless violence, he chafed and rubbed the same vexed sores. O
miraculous example of patience! In which and many other virtues His wonderful
hum^^^e.
allthough he were excellent, and great, yet he never seems greater in my
eyes, then when I consider the humble, meek, and low mind of the man, and so
far from all that vain human praise and glory, the only plague that many
times is wont to defile, yea and utterly to ruin the famous deeds and praises
of worthy and renowned men. But our GODRICK suffered not his prayse-worthie
deeds to come to light, and the knowledge of men, but endeavored by all means
to suppress them under the veil of humility. Nay to him it was a grief to
come in person to the sight and speech of men. Whence it was lawful for noe
man, but on certain days in the week, and that but with the good leave of
the Benedictin Prior of Durham, under whose obedience he lived, to have access
unto him. The Author of his life, a man very familiar with him, being his
Confessor, desired upon a time that with his good leave he might write his
life, entreating the holy man to reveal some things himself touching that
matter, which to men were unknown. See Godricks opinion of him self.
Indeed (answered he) thou have undertake a goodly piece of work: For behold
here thy wretched GODRICK, who in times past being in good state, lived as a
hog of Epicures flock, a Fornicator, an usurer, a Flaterer, and a perjured
creature, but now he is become a base and abject fellow of no reputation, a
conterfait Hermit and a deceiuer; the false picture of a religious person, an
idle snorting sluggard, one that unprofitably consumes the pious alms of good
men, ambitious of honors, and vnsufferably imperious over his servants. With
these and other such like titles of praise thou may adorn and set forth
thy GODRICK to the world. Which answer so amazed the other, that he durst
make noe further suit unto him in that matter. But some years after, he gave
him license to write, having first tied him in the bonds of a religious vow,
that during his life, all things should be sealed up under the lock of silence,

VIII. WHEN the Devils the ancient enemis of mankind The devils make wary
against him.
beheld these and other such famous virtues to shine in this B. Saint, they
were tormented with a new hell of envy against him, and used all their
deceipts, tiled all their engines, and made show of all their terrors, to
entrappe him and work destruction either to his soul or body. And as in
times past saint CVTHBERT, HILLARION, and ANTHONY, and other ancient fathers,
so did our GODRICK being assailed diverse ways by that hellish crew, gain at
length a glorious victory and triumph over them. When first he entered into
the Ermitage of Finckley, an ugly wolf, or rather the devil in the shape of
a wolf of greatness and fiercenes both unusual, horribly invaded They are
vanquished.
him: whom by prayer, the sign of the Cross, and a constant and unmoved faith
he easily vanquished, and putt to flight, as he afterward did other infinite
deceipts of those infernal monsters: and particularly when the devil
endeavored, but in vain, to smother him being at his accustomed prayers in
the cold waters. Who perceauing his diabolical wit and force could nothing
prevail against him, he took his clothes off the bank of the river, and
ran away with them: but being recalled by saint GODRICK he was forced to lay
them again in the same place. This wicked spirit chainged him self into a
thousand shapes to deceive him. See the deceipts of the devil.
Sometimes he putt on the form of an ox, other times of a bear, now of an
Eagle, then of a raven, anon of a poor pilgrim and a religious man, and at
last (to omit others of the same kind) of a fair woeman endeavoring to draw
him to naughtines; all which with the only form and figure of CHRIST'S holy
Cross, and the force of his faith and prayer, he easily vanquished. Sometimes
a huge troop of infernal spiritts provided and armed with fiery swords,
flaming torches, clubbes, hammers, tongs, and other diabolical weapons, with a
horrid noise and tumult would rushe in to fright him from his devout exercises:
all which vain mockery of theirs he would not so much as behold; but with
his eyes shutt up, contemned them, and all their hellish practices, which made
them depart with shame and sorrow. Once, when the two irresistable companions
of mankind, He fights with the devil.
sickness, and old age, had confined his weak body to entertain them both in
his bed for the space of five years together, in such sort that he was not
able without the help of a servants hand to rise out of his poor couch; yet
being terribly assailed by one of these importune furies of Hell, he rose
without help, and naked as he was, grapled and fought with that master of
mischief from one of the clock till nine, and at length putt him to flight.
Many years before this time the holy man was wont to sit continually by the
fire, when behold suddenly one of his ancient enemies gave him such a mighty
blow on the head, that he had almost laid him prostrate on the ground. Which
kind of vexations were often used against him: but he molested him in nothing
more cruelly, then in stirring up many dishonest and tickling motions of lust
in his mind, and often presenting him self unto him in the false form of a
most beautiful woman. Which hellish Goblin holy GODRICK putt to flight with
sprinkling the place with holy water.

IX. AND these most cruel assaults and skirmishes he endured for His great
d(...)u^tie in ouercoming unchaste temptatious.
the space of forty years after his first entrace into the camp of this
spiritual combat. Which unlawful and filthy thoughts, when he could not
repress nor overcome, neither with watchings longer then custom, passing three
and four nights together without sleep; nor with greater fasting, which he
sustained sometimes for three or four days sometimes for a week
vndiscontinued: nor by the power of his daily prayers: he mortified his naked
body (as we have said) in the frozen waters up to the neck night and day.
Neither did his rigor stay here, but that he might with more ease extinguish
those coals of filthy lust which the wicked spirit suggested: following the
example of our holy father saint BENEDICT, He ^ambleth naked in the briers.
he threw him self naked into a thick brake of thorns and briers, and tumbling
up and down therein, he miserably rent and tore his flesh rebellious against
his mind, that by that means at lest he might oppress all sensual pleasure
of the appetite, with the feeling of an outward pain. At length, after forty
years, he got so absolute a victory over this foul tempter and fierbrand
of dishonestie, that either he was not assailed at all with any such filthy
motions, or if he were, he easily repressed them with the only virtue of his
prayers, and by the sprinckling of holy water. And thus much of the troubles
and afflictions which the wicked spiritts raised against saint GODRICK, for it
were to long a thing to rehearse them all in particular.

X. NETHER ought any one either to wonder that this pious man was afflicted
with such grievous diseases, or assailed with these horrible deceipts and
vexations of the wicked spirits: since all these things, through his gentle
suffrance and patience, increased and heaped up in his soul new treasures, not
only of eternal reward and glory to come, but also of divine consolations,
virtues, and many heavenly gifts and graces in this his temporal and
transitory lise. With which the divine goodness so admirably ennobled him,
that he might sing that verse of the Royal Prophet: A^^^raing to the multitude
of my griefs, thy consolations have rejoiced my The wild beasts and serpents
obey him.
soul. Moreover, GODRICK obtained command and obedience not only over be wild
beasts of the desert, but allsoe a great multitude of serpents that without
any harm frequented his company, obeyed his desires: and these were not only
to him unhurtful, but fawning in a manner upon him, remained with him in his
cell, not without his consent: but lest their familiarity and aspect should
hinder and distract the intention of his mind fixed in the meditation of
heavenly things, he commanded all these vipers and serpents to depart, and noe
more to frequent his lodging. To which his command, as the wild beasts at
other times had oftentimes done, so now the serpents most exactly obeyed.

XI. FVRTHERMORE, he was endowed with such a rare gift of His rare gift of
prophecy.
prophecy, that with the spiritual eye and light of his clear soul he saw
thngs that were absent and distant in remote places, as plainly and distinctly
as if they had been within the reach and sphere of his corporal sight: and at
the very instant that many things were done in far distant places he would
faithfully relate them unto those that were present, as it was many times
found by experience. And so often he foresaw and foretold things to come,
that it were a great work to rehearse all the particulars. Amongst which one
and not the lest was that he foretold what should befall unto saint THOMAS of
Canturbury long before it happened. He foretells what should hap pen to S.
Thomas of Canturbury
For when that renowned bucklar of the Church flourished yet in great grace and
favor with King Henry, GODRICK foretold that he should shortly loose that
place, and be cast into banishment. And bad him withal to be of a courageous
and manly resolution, and not to droope under the good cause which he had take
in hand to defend; for it would come to pass that within seven years he
should return to greater honor out of banishment then ever he enjoyed before.
But the same year that saint THOMAS came out of banishment he sent a messenger
to this holy Hermit to know what he should now expect after his long exile,
and what would be the event of his tottering state that stood now almost out
of all hope. To whom GODRICK (in the presence and hearing of our Author)
answered, that a kind of verbal peace should be made between THOMAS and the
king, before the end of the next six months following, and that within nine
months more he should be restored to his Archiepiscopall sea, which he should
not long enjoy before a happy death (that should be to him healthful and
glorious, and to the whole country profitable) did end the whole controversy
between them. And at the same time this holy man He fore^e^leth his own death.
foretold that the time of his own death should be within the space of the
six months following. All which most certainly happened as he had foretold.
For saint THOMAS returned, being made Legate of the Sea Apostolic, an honor
which he enjoyed not before: and was crowned at his death with the glory of a
most happy martirdom.

XII. BUT now of how great reverence and admiration is this to He has the
gu^^c of tongues.
be esteemed in saint GODRICK, that both at other times, and principally at the
sacred feast of Pentecost he was suddenly by a heavenly grace adorned with the
gifts of tongues, which on that day was bestowed upon the Apostles, so that
he both understood those that spoke Latin (of which tongue he was wholly
ignorant before) and spoke many things in Latin very readily and distinctly.
Again, He commands the waters
how notable and excellent a wonder is this, that when the river Were with a
mighty inundation ouerflowed all the adjoining country, and possessed places
far higher and stronger, yea overwhelmed and ouerturned many trees and
houses: yet the humble and almost straw-built habitation of GODRICK was not
touched with one drop of water, standing safe amongst those confused streams,
to the great amazement of the whole country that judged him and house both to
be buried together in destruction. An other time when the same river began
furiously to run over the banks, he went forth, as it were to meet that
inundation, and setting up a little Cross three paces from his poor Cell, he
commanded those waters in the name of our Lord JESUS CHRIST not to come beyond
that mark: when it was strange to see the waters being come to that place
swell up in height like unto a wall: so that his humble cottage stood upon a
dry shore, entrenched round about with a bullwarke The fire obeyes (...).
or sconce of water. And in like manner as the waters, so did the fire
likewise obey the voice of this holy man, when having furiously laid hold of
his weak buildings it was suddenly deprived of its devouring force, and at his
only command, ceafed from making any further spoil. He raised a dead man.


XIII. AND now, if according to the dignity and worth of the matter, I should
set down the holy cures of afflicted and lost persons which by miracle he
performed, (in so much that he raised one to life that had layne three days
under the cruel arrest of death) that alone would require a long discourse
much exceeding the bounds of my purpose. The^ which, his so great good
exercised toward the souls of the dead (whom by his devout prayers, watches,
fasts, and other holy works he deliuerd from the clensing pains of Purgatory
to the possession of the ioies of heaven) seems to me to be a benefitt far
greater and more to be admired. But above all these admirable works of GODRICK
this holds the highest place in my opinion, that he was so divinely adorned
with such an heavenly grace, that being yet in this mortal state, he
understood and saw not only the soul of his fellow-champion (of whom we have
allreadie spoken) but allsoe the spirits of many other blessed men both
rewarded with eternal glory, and received into the heavenly dwellings: And
out of his divine manner of life which he led here on earth, he deserved to
enjoy the company and conversation of Angels and other heavenly citizens, and
especially of our great 8. CVTHBERT, S. NICHOLAS, the Prince of the Apostles S.
PETTR, S. His familiarity with the Angels and Saints.
JOHN Baptist, S. MARIE Magdalen, blessed MARIE the mother of CHRIST, yea and
CHRIST him self, of whom he received many heavenly and rauishing ^onsolations
far beyond the force of weak words to express: And namely by the blessed
Virgin MARIE he was taught a divine canticle or song, which afterward with
great devotion he used oftentimes to repeat. This allsoe was a most wonderful
and an unspeakable benefitt showed him by S. PETER the Apostle, who celebrated
the sacred mysteries of mass before him, S Peter gives him the B. Sacrament.
and having heard the Confession which GODRICK made of all his sins, gave him
a general and an Apostolical absolution, and ministered the dreadful
sacrament of the altar unto him. And when our Author came thither the same
morning to say Mass, and demanded in honor of what Saint he should
celebrate that divine mystery? Of the Blessed Virgin MARIE (answered Godrick)
for before thy coming saint PETER the Apostle has here offered the same
sacrifice in honor of the most blessed (...) But we should never come to an
end if we eudeauour to lo^^^ this paper with all the virtues, graces, and
wonderful works of this Blessed man.

XIV. THEREFORE, when he had lived in this admirable manner His last sickness.
in one and the other desert for the space of threescore and six years, and
was as an Oracle that astonished all England with his holy life, so great a
swelling took possession of his face and all the other limbs of his body,
that he appeared not to be like unto the former shape of a man. In his
entrails he endured a cruel griping pain, as it were of living worms which
ran up and down his belly and consumed him. For which punishment (as
heretofore for others more grievous) he gave humble thanks unto almighty
God, that so gently he voutchafed to purge him from his sins in this world:
And to good purpose (said he) do these worms consume my body in this life,
that the neuer-dying worm should not gna^ and tear my soul in hell. For the
space of almost eight years he lay languishing in bed, being not able to rise
but by the help of friendly hands. At length his sickness daily increasing, and
having now almost conquered his old age, he sent for his brethren, who being
come took him out of his bed, and (according to the manner of those devout
times) laid him upon the ground, on a haire-cloth strewed with ashes, putt on
his stamin and coule (for long since he had been a Benedictine monk of Durham)
and so that blessed soul departed happily out of the thraldom of this His
happy departure.
vale of miseries to receive the perfect consummation of that heavenly life
with CHRIST, which he had begun in this world. And at the same instant was
heard a most heavenly melody, ascending from his cell toward heaven. He died
the one and twentieth day of May, in the year of our Lord 1170. the same year
that the worthy Archbishop of Canturbury saint THOMAS suffered martirdom for
the defense of the Church. His body was buried in the chapel of S. JOHN
BAPTIST whom he ever worshipped with peculiar devotion, and in whose honor, by
the commaundment of God, he Miracles after his death.
had caused that place to be built. Within the space of a few years after his
death, two hundred and twenty eight miracles were wrought at his tomb, which
are faithfully reported by the Author of his life, but for breuities sake I
omit them.

XV. AND here now I will end the life of this admirable man with these words of
William Camden in the description of the bishopric of Durham. At Finckley
(said he) by the river Were in the reign of Henry the second, Godrick a man of
ancient and true Christian simplicity, fixed wholly to God, lived and
consummated a solitary life. Who gained so great admiration with this holy
simplicity (add, and with the sainctitie and austeritie of his life, and
many miracles before and A Church built to his honor.
after his death etc.) that Richard brother to the wealthy bishop of Durham
Hugh of Puteack, honored his memory with a little Church built to his name.
Thus Camden, who allbeit he were an Heretic, yet could not but speak
honorably of this glorious Saint. His life was written (as we have said) by
one Nicholas a Monk of Durham, and spiritual father unto Blessed GODRICK, out
of which, being a large history, Nicholas Harpsfield brings an abridgement
saec. 12. cap. 45. whom we have followed: John Capgraue has written the same,
and William of Newbery lib. 2. cap. 20. Matthew Paris an. 1170. Matthew
Westminster an 1171. Molanus in his aditions to Vsuard, and all our English
writers do make ample mention of him.

The life of saint ALDELME Bishop of Sherburne and Confessor, of the holy order
of Saint BENEDICT.
MAY 25. Writren by William malmesbu ry, and others.
THE worthy ornament of the English Church and the Benedictine family Saint
ALDELME borne of the royal stock of Saxon Kings (his father Kentenius was
near of kindred to Jnas King of the His noble parentage
West Saxons) with the generositie of mind, and greatness of learning and
virtues far excelled and outwent the nobility of his birth. Some affirmed
him to have been son to Kentenius brother of King Jnas, but it pleases not
us (says Malmesbury) to avouch that for truth which seems rather to flatter a
flying opinion, then agree De gest. reg. A^g. l 1, c, 2.
with the soundnes of true history, especially since it is not found written
in antiquity, and the Chronicles plainly asseuer that Jnas had but one brother
called Imgild, who died a few years before him. But S. ALDELME needs not to
be maintained with untruths, in whom abound so many famous things that are
out of all question. Having past over his Childhood, his father delivered him
to be brought up in the study of all good learning under the discipline His
youth and learning.
of the most famous Benedictine Abbot of saint AVGVSTINS at Canturbury saint
ADRIAN, who at that time happily adorned the whole country with all manner of
virtue and learning. In his renowned school our hopeful ALDELME made in a
short time so great progress in science, that he became a scholar worthy of
so learned a master. Then returning back into his own country laden with the
balast of true virtue and learning, he courageously forsaked all the flattring
allurements and vain splendo^r of the world, and resolved to undertake such a
course of life wherein he should meet with the lest impedime^ts to hinder him
in the continual service of almighty God, and the study of holy learning.
Therefore in the Benedictine abbey of Malmesbury (in which place He becomes a
Benedictine Monk.
from his very infancy he had been brought up, and instructed in the first
rudiments of learning) he bid adieu to the world, and made profession of a monk
under the holy rule of saint BENEDICT. This monastery was first founded by one
Medulphus an Irish-Scott and a monk well learned in philosophy; and from him
it was called Meidulphesbury, afterward Malmesbury. Which being but a small
slender thing, was by the means of saint ALDELME raised afterward to great
splendor and magnificence.

II. BUT within a short time ALDELME returned to his old master into Kent, to
better his understanding with more ornaments of true leaning and science; and
there he remained until the weakness and discomoditie of his health forced him
to return into his own country. How great and worthy progress he made in
learning, the His works, and writings
renowned monuments which he left behind him do abundantly witness. Many
whereof the envious injury of the times have robbed us off. For, for these
five hundred years past, that book of his, so much celebrated by Venerable
BEBE, of the right and true manner of observing Easter, which he writ against
the Britans, has not appeared. Which work of saint ALDELME was of great
profitt to many of them, to root out of their stubborn minds, that
inueterate error. Saint BID has allsoe in estimation his book of
virginity, in which he writes much in the praise of that heavenly virtue, and
proves by the examples of the Saints that embraced it, that it is nether hard
nor difficill to observe. In fine, saint BEDE S Bedes praise of S. Aldelme.
adornes him with this testimonial of his praise; man most learned in all
things, neat in his speech, and wonderful in the knowledge of Scriptures both
liberal and Ecclesiastical. And surely S. ALDELME was the first of our
contreymen that writ verses in Latin, as he him self does testify in these
two. Primus ego in patriam mecum, modo vit a super fit,
Aonio rediens, deducam vertice Musas.
First to my Country from the Romanhill.
I Will bring, if life me last, the Muses quill.


Allsoe in compounding, pronouncing, and singing verses and Aldesmes skill in
poesy and singing.
songs in his mother tongue, he was admirably excellent. And in King Elfreds
time (as the same King does witness) many of saint ALDELMES ditties were yet
sung in England. One thing related of this purpose by King Elfred, is most
worthy of memory. The poeple of those times being yet but rude rusticks, and
very negligent in the divine service, seemed to come to Church but for fashion
sake (as many now adays do) where they made noe long stay, but as soon as
the mystery of mass was done, they flocked homewards without any more ado.
Our prudent ALDELME perceauing this small devotion in the poeple, placed him
self on a bridge over which they were to pass from Church to their Villages,
where when the hasty multitude of poeple came (whose minds were A pio^s art.
allreadie in their beef-pott at home) he begane to putt forth his voice with
all the musical art he could, and charmed their ears with his songs. For
which when he grew to be grateful and plausible to that rude poeple, and
perceived that his songs flowed into their ears and minds to the great
pleasure and contentment of both, he began by little and little to mingle his
ditties with more serious and holy matters taken out of the holy Scripture, and
by that means brought them in time to a feeling of devotion and to spend the
sundaies and holy days with far greater pro^^^^ to their own souls. Now
let us go on with the course of his life.

III. THEREFORE when he had taken the habit and profession of a His exercises
in the Monastery.
monk, he bent all the forces and powers both of soul and body worthyly to
perform in deed what he promised by word. Wherefore he never moved a foot out
of the Monastery, unless some urgent necessity did compelle him; he spent
all his time in reading and prayer: that (as he him self does testify
elsewhere in an Epistle) by reading he might hear the voice of almighty God
speaking; and by prayer, he might speak unto him him self. His diet was poor,
and very sparing, thereby to force the body to the subjection of the soul:
to which purpose he used an other wonderful austeritie: For in a fountain
near adjoining (which afterward He recites the Psalter in the waters
bore his name) he was wont by night (according to the example of the auucient
Saints) to plunge him self up to the neck, whence he would not stir until
he had recited over the whole Psalter of David for his nightly task of
prayers. By which, and other such exercises he so tamed the sensuality of the
flesh, that if he happened at any time to feel the tickling motions and
stings thereof, he would not therefore, like a coward-souldier presently An
example to be admired not imitated.
avoid and fly from the presence of an object moving thereunto, until after
many prayers and psalms most devoutly offered to Almighty God, he found all
that unclean motion of body to be utterly extinguished and beaten down. A
rare, allthough to others, a dangerous manner of ouercoming, and questionless
much envied of the devils. But if any one chance to contend against the
truth of this history in so Christian a philosopher, I remitt him Dioge^.
Laert. l. 4. de vit. philosoph
to those profane writers who dare affirm of their Zenocrates, that having
slept a whole night with the fair Phrine, he was enkindled with noe manner of
lustful heat, and proclaimed publicly the day following that he had lain
with a statue and not with a woman.

IV. WHILST this holy man shined thus in learning and virtue, like a bright
sun amongst the monks of Malmesbury, by the common consent of them all, he
was chosen Abbot of the same monastery. He is made Abbot of Malmesbury.
Which dignity was not so much an ornament to him, as he was an honor to it.
For by his holy industry so great an increase of virtue and learning to his
brethren, and of buildings, lands, and revenues was added to the monastery,
that he may deservedly be esteemed as the father and builder of them. But the
greatest donation of lands came chiefly from Elentherius Bishop of the
West Saxons, from Kenfrith Duke of the Mercians, and from the three good Kings
Ethelred, Cedwall, and Inas; who all held saint ALDELME in great esteem and
veneration by reason of his wonderful virtue; as manifestly appears by their
charters and writings made to that Monastery for his sake, which I have read.
He built allsoe the Monasteries of From and Bradford, which either by the
cruelty of the Danes, or other such barbarous poeple, or else by the injuries
of eating age have been destroyed many years ago. S. ALDELME whilst he was
Abbot, writ that book, which we have spoken off, against the Britans error
in the celebration of Easter. He reduduceth the Britans to the true Easter.
For the matter being eagerly handled in many Sinods of the West Saxons, to
conclude by what means it was best to bring those erroneous poeple to the
practice of the Catholic Church, some were of opinion that they should be
compelled by force of arms, but the contrary and gentler opinon obtained,
that not with the sword but by reason and disputation they ought to he dealt
with. Nether was the victory judged to be of great difficulty if ALDELME did
but take the matter in hand. He undertook it, and worthily and fruitfully
performed it, as we have said before: So that the Britans, next after God, are
much obliged unto saint ALDELME in this behalf. Whose great piety toward them
is allsoe honorably to be observed; because he exactly made his prayers unto
almighty God for them, for whose amendment he writ, and his holy prayers
took a fruitful and happy effect.

V. BUT amongst the rest this Blessed man built a Church to saint Note a
miracle.
MICHAELL the Archangel, and an other far more magnificent to the Blessed
Virgin MARIE: in which work he is reported miraculously by his prayers to have
restored a beam that was too short, to a just length for the purpose, to the
great astonishement of all that were present. And that which increased the
miracle was, that all the rest of that Church being twice consumed with fire,
that beam only remained without injury amidst those devouring flames. But now
the renowned fame of saint ALDELME could not be contained within the bounds of
the Ocean, it was past over the seas, tran^ee^ded the Alps, and entered into
the Seauen-hill'd City of Rome. Whither, being sent for by Pope Sergius, he
went, and was very honorably received: where two memorable things happened.
One was, that having said mass one day in the Lateran Church, he putt off his
vestment, which the servant neglecting to take, was miraculously sustained from
falling in the sunne-beames that shined through the window, on which it hung a
while to the wonderful admiration of the beholders. And the same Vestment
being brought to Malmesbury Abbey was preserved there until our Authors time;
as allsoe a white marble altar-stone, which being broken was made sound again
by his prayers. And the other, that Pope Sergius being falsely accused of
incest by some euill-minded persons of He freeth the Pope from ^nfam^e by
miracle.
Rome, saint ALDELME caused the child, to be brought into the presence, and
commanded it in the name of our Lord JESUS CHRIST to confess whether Sergius
were guilty of the incest or not. When to the great amazement of all, and the
utter confusion of the detractors, the child, that was scarce nine days old,
spoke in the hearing of all the standers by, and plainly declared the Popes
innocence. Whereby saint ALDELME freed his friend from the imputation of
infamy, and purchased an increase of love, favor, and admiration to him self.
And these things are not only rehearsed for truths by our Author, and others
whom it were a temeritie to reject, but allsoe (which moves me more) these
amongst other the like, were curiously engraued in the outside of the old chest
in which his sacred relics were kept, long before our Authors time.

VI. THE Pope greatly honored saint ALDELME for the foresaid He is made Bishop
of Sherburne.
benefitt, and having liberally granted him very ample priueleges and
prerogatives for his monasteries, dismissed him to return into his Country.
Where his fame daily increasing, he was at length found to be the worthiest to
succeed Hedda bishop of Winchester, to whose government then all that Province
was subject, which now is divided into four bishoprics; Cicester,
VVinchaster, Sherburne (afterward translated to Salsebury) and Oxford. But
Hedda being dead, it had two bishops, Daniel of Winchester, and S. ALDELME of
Sherburne. To which dignity the more constantly and obstinatly he resisted,
the more eargerly and earnestly he was desired. At Canturbury therefore by the
hands of BRITHWAID the Archbishop he was consecrated and ordained bishop of
Sherburne. When going to Dover, he bought of some French merchants the new and
old Testaments, a thing of venerable antiquity, which remained at Malmesbury
until our Authors time. But walking then on the sea shore, the mariners, that
petulantly derided and scoffed at the humility and poverty of the holy man,
were suddenly, as they set out of the haven, taken with such a horrible
tempest, that they were sooner in danger then they were aware of change. So
that necessity and fear of death compelled them to acknowledge their fault,
and call to saint ALDELME for help. Who entering He calmeth a tempest.
into a boat to succor those distressed creatures, he had noe sooner
committed his holy body to the supportment of the waters, but the winds
ceased, the sea was calmed, and those wretched mariners were delivered out of
all danger. Afterward saint ALDELME being returned to his episcopal Sea of
Sherburne, he governed his subjects with all holiness of life, and learning,
omitting nothing that belonged to the office and duty of a most holy and
learned Prelate. And when he desired to have an other to succeed him in the
regencie of his monastery, his monks were so bent in affection to him, that
during his life they could not be drawn to admit any other to be their
Abbot. To whose will he yielded, because he knew not how to resist it, and
granted that he being dead they and their successors in after ages might
freely chose their Abbot according to the tenor and practice of saint
BENEDICTS Rule. Which decree of his was afterward ratified by the authority
of a Synod, and of holy King INAS.

VII. AT LENGTH this blessed Saint, when he had worthily governed his
bishopric for the space of five years, in the year of His happy death
our Lord seven hundred and nine, gave up his pure soul into the pure hands
of him who had created him for his glory. He died at a place called Doulting
in Sommersetshire, in a poor wodden Church, into which he had caused him self
to be carried being alive. Which being afterward built of stone, when it was
consecrated according to the Catholic custom, a blind woman running to the
altar recovered her sight. Yea and at the stone on which he fate there at his
death, many were cured of mortal diseases. That place was fifty miles
distant from Malmesbury. But EGVINE the holy bishop of Worcester being
admonished by a heavenly vision of the death of S. ALDELME, hastened ^o the
place where his body was, and caused it to be brought with great pomp and
solemnity to the Abbey of Malmesbury, and at every seven miles end by the
way where they rested Note the aune^^nt Pract^^e of setting up Crosses
with those sacred spoils, he erected a cross of stone as so many monuments
and memories of saint ALDELME. Which were afterward made more famous, because
many that flocked to them for devotion were wonderfully cured of diverse
diseases: and these trophies, and benefitts lasted to our Authors days. These
and su^^ like memorable wonders moved the King in the year of grace nine
hundred forty nine, to cause his sacred relics to be enclosed in a very
rich shrine, on the top of which stood a cristall with his name inscribed in
goulden letters. Till saint DVNSTAN miraculously foreseeing the ensuing
destruction of all humane ad divine things His body obscured for fear of the
Danes.
which the barbarous Danes should bring to our wretched country, translated
those sacred relics out of the rich shrine into a plain one of stone, lest
perchance the splendor and price of the other might give occasion to have the
relics taken away or injured. Nether was his divine prophecy false; for the
Danish fury broke allsoe into the Abbey of Malmesbury. Where as one of that
outrageous crew endeavored to violate his sacred body, he suddenly lost his
wits, which so terrified the rest of his fellow-robbers, that they had the
wit to run speedily away: So that, when all the Churches and religious
houses round about were made a prey to their fury, the Church of Malmesbury,
by the help and patronage of S. ALDELME, remained inuiolate.

VIII. Now if any one desire more largely to know other strange Many mi
racles wrought at his tomb.
miracles which have been wrought by the merits of this glorious Saint, I
refer him to the author of his life William Malmesbury, where he shall find
the blind recover their sight, the lame their limbs, the dumb their speech:
mad men restored to their senses, possessed persons delivered, and others
oppressed with many other mortal diseases beyond the skill of physic receive
their health, by the divine power of almighty God, and the intercession of
glorious S. ALDELME. Of which kind some were done in the time and memory of
our Author. Therefore Blessed Lanfranck Archbishop of Canturbury moved with
the greatness of these and such like miracles, solemnly decreed that the memory
of S. Aldelm^ should be honored amongst the other Saints of the Church,
throughout the realm of England. But in the year of our redemption 1078. the
thirteenth after the coming in of the Normans, all things being His body
translated to its ancient (...).
now safe from the incursious of the Danes and other fears of spoling, by the
hands of the Abbot Warine and Blessed OSMVND bishop of Sherburne, the sacred
bones and relics of S. Aldel^e were restored into their ancient shrine that
was so rich. From which time the number of many wonderful miracles increased
daily more and more. His life was largely written (as we have said) by William
malmesbury a very grave author, out of whom Nicholas Harpsfield sec. 8. cap.
11. relates this History. The same has allsoe been written by S. Eguine
bishop of Worcester, and S. Osmund of Sarisbury of both which the injury of
the times have robbed us. Trithemius of the famous men of S. Benedicts Order
lib. 2. cap. 23. lib. 3. cap. 141. lib. 4. 175. Cardiuall Baronius tom^. 8. an.
699. 705. and 709. and tom. 9. an. 734. Matthew Vestminster an. 704. and. 709.
Camden in discript. Com. Wilton. and all Historiographers both English and else
do make honorable mention of him.

decorative device
depiction of St. Augustine of Canterbury S. AVGVSTINVS. PRIMVS ARCHIEPISCOP,
CANTVAR. Aplus Angli^^, Monachus Benedictinus. M. Ba^^. f.

The life of Saint AUGUSTINE Apostle of England, Bishop and Confessor, of the
holy order of S. BENEDICT.
MAY 26. Written by Gotsellinus a Monk, and S. Bid.
THE fruitful country of England, in times past called Britain, being
oppressed and wholly subdued by the warlick power of the Saxons and other
poeple of Germany, was compelled not only to receive and bear their
governance, dominion, and name but also (which is much worse) to embrace their
impious Idolatry and the service of their false Gods. So that the Christian
Catholic religion which from King Lucius had flourished in that happy Island
for the space of three hundred years, was miserably banished and destroyed.
Till a hundred and forty years after, the eternal mercy of almighty God
cast a fouourable eye upon our wretched country, and putt such holy thoughts
into the mind of saint GREGORY the Great, Pope of Rome, that allthough our
country S. Gregory the great sends Augustine in to England.
were far distant, yet he embraced it with a pious affection, and seriously
cast about, how or by what means, he might reduce it again to the sweet
subjection of CHRIST'S holy Gospel. Which divine work when he himself (as is
said in his life) could not bring to pass, he committed the charge thereof to
this our glorious Apostle saint AUGUSTINE, who at that time was Prior of the
Monastery of saint BENEDICTS Order, which saint GREGORY bad built in Rome on
the side of the hill Scaurus, and dedicated to saint ANDREW the Apostle. Out of
this Monastery therefore, our saint AUGUSTINE (when he had led a holy
monastical life under the rule of the great Patriarch of Monks saint BENEDICT,
for the space of many years) was called by great saint GREGORY from the
sweetness of contemplation to labor for the advancement of Gods Church in an
active manner of life; and sent, together with other holy monks of the same
Order, to preach the Gospel of CHRIST to the English nation. Who obeying the
holy will of the Pope, undertook that great work, and began their journey
toward Augustine begins his journey.
England; and now they had passed over the frozen hills of Jtalie, and were
entered into the confines of France, when understanding the English nation to be
of a barbarous, cruel, and warlick disposition, and perverse in the profession
of Idolatry, being terribly affrighted from their attempt, after a
consultation had among them selves, they resolved rather to turn homewards
again, then to loose their labors amongst those fierce and barbarous poeple,
whose language they knew not.

II. THEREFORE, setting aside all delay, the whole company sent He returns
to Rome.
back AUGUSTINE to Rome humbly to obtain of the Pope in name of them all, to
have an exemption from that journey so dangerous, laborious, and so
uncertain of reaping any profitt. To whom the holy Pope, burning with zeal
to gain souls to the Church, sent letters of exhortation to encourage them in
their holy enterprise, whereof this is the tenor. GREGORY servant of the
servants S. Gregory's Epistle to comfort them in they journey.
of God, to the sernants of our Lord JESUS CHRIST. Because it had been better
never to have begun good works, then even in thought to fall from them being
once begun, ye ought with all diligence (^moct beloved children) to
accomplish the good work, which by the help of our Lord ye have undertaken.
Nether let the labor of the journey, nor the tongues of slanderous men deter
ye, but God being your ruler, perform with all instancie, and fervor, what
ye have begun, knowing that a greater glory of eternal recompense follows
the greatness of your labor. But in all things be humbly obedient to AUGUSTINE
your Prior to you returning whom we allsoe constitute your Abbot; knowing that
through all things it will be profitable for your souls, whatsoever ye shall
do by his admomtion. Almighty God protect ye with his grace, and grant me
to see the fruits of your labor in the everlasting kingdom: to the end that
allthough I cannot labor with ye, I may have a place with ye in the ioies of
your recompense, because indeed I desire to labor. God keep ye in health my
most beloved children. Given the third of the calends of August in the raygne
of our most pious Emperor Mauritius. Tiberius etc. At the same time this most
Blessed Pope sent letters allsoe to the Archbishop of Arles in France, wherein
he commended saine AUGUSTINE and his fellows to be by his charity courteously
received, and assisted in what was necessary for that holy enterprise.

III. SAINT AUGUSTINE and his company being strengthened and encouraged with
these pious lines of the holy Pope, joyfully undertook the journey, which
before they so greatly feared. But coming to Angeow in France, being there
much derided and scoffed at by the rude poeple of the Village and especially
the women, for their poor habits and humble manner of carriage, they were
compelled one night to take a hard lodging under a tree, in the open view of
the heavens, where almighty God, who is never forgetful of his servants, by
the prayers of S. AUGUSTINE sent them a clear fountain of water which
miraculously sprung out of the earth, to quench the extremity of their thirst.
Refreshed wherewith, they sung the praises of almighty God all that night;
over whom, in the A pillar of light over the Saints.
mean time, appeared a heavenly splendor which drove away the horrid shades
of the night, to the great comfort of his servants, and confused amazement of
those rusticks that flocked thither the next morning, ashamed and sorrowful
for their fault in so rejecting Gods servants. Near unto the fountain S.
AUGUSTINE writ these words in the earth: Here lodged Augustine the servant of
the servants of A Church bu^^ to S Augustine.
God, whom the Blessed Pope Gregory sent to convert the Englishmen. Whereby
the poeple understood who they were, and the cause of their journey, greatly
repenting for their insolency showed toward them. And in the same place
afterward, a church was built in memory of S. AUGUSTINE, into which entrance
was forbbidden to all women, because their sex had most of all injured the
holy man in that place. But a rich Matrone that by force, as it were, got into
that Church presuming on her own guiltlessnes toward the Saint, by the
miraculous and sudden loss of her own life, taught all men to believe, who
before would believe noe man, and she that thought with her presumption to
overcome all, by her example gave a plain interdict to all, never to presume
the like. But now let us follow our divine Legate AUGUSTINE entering the Ocean
toward England.

IV. HAVING performed therefore all this long journey by land on foot, he now
sails into the Ocean world of great Britain, till he arrived with his
fellows to the number of forty at the Island of Kent called Tanet, which may
worthily triumph that it was the first that received CHRIST in his legates. And
in the rock that S. AUGUSTINE first set his foot, he left the impression of
his steps as in a piece of wax, which place was of great devotion many
years after. Having taken interpreters out of France, according to the
direction of saint GREGORY, they marched into the land, carrying a silver
Cross for their ensign, with the Image of our Savior painted in a table,
finging litanies as they went as well for their own health as for the
salvation of those they came to instruct. Behold here (wretched England) in
what manner thy first Apostles brought thee the first tidings of the true
Gospel under the sacred banner of CHRIST'S holy An Apostrophe to England.
Cross and Image, which since thou have so oftentimes broken and defaced out
of thy dominions, and which at this present by the greatest part of thy
Inhabitants is held in so great scorn and contempt, that they will show more
injury thereunto then to the picture of the poorest of their own ancestors.
Can thou think of this and not be ashamed at thy own madness? What hope
can thou have of remaining still in the same truth of Christian doctrine
which they planted in thy land, since thou have not only rooted out of thy
bowels the sacred enfignes under which they brought thee the truth, but allsoe
art become a cruel enemy to men of the same profession as were thy first
Apostles and Preachers? How can thou glory with the Apostle PAVL in CHRIST
crucified, since so traiter ously thou destroyest the sacred Image of CHRIST
crucified? How can thou hope to be saved by CHRIST crucified, the image of
whose memory thou seeks to blott out of thy dominions? Return, return at
length out of thy blindness, and reform thy self to the life and manners of thy
glorious Apostle saint AUGUSTINE, who now marching with his company in the
Catholic manner of procession aforesaid, expects to have audience of the King
of Kent then called ETHELBERT, who kept his court at Ethelbert King of Kent.
Canturbury the head city of that country, and who had dominion over all the
land from thence to the river Humber in the North. This King had married a
daughter of the royal blond of Erance called B^rtha, who coming of Christian
parents, was given to him in marriage on condition to be let remain in the
profession of Christianity. And this good Queen was now as a gate to these
menssengers of CHRIST to lay open their way to the King.

V. THEREFORE saint AVGVSTYNE sent fit messengers unto King ETHELBERT to let
him understand that he and his fellows were Augustine sends to Ethelberts
come from Rome sent by the universal Pastor of the Church, to bring the
happiness of health and salvation to him and his poeple, if they would but yield
to those blessed tidings. The King, in whom the royalty of a courteous mind
seemed by nature to be incorporate, comman^ded them to expect him in the same
I Will of Tan^t, and gave order in the mean time to have them provided with all
necessary sustenance and entertaynment. And after some few days he went him
self in person to the Island to hear what news those strangers brought. Where
sitting in the open air without any other canopie of estate but the heavens,
be caused AUGUSTINE and his fellows to be brought before him; (for led with a
vain and ancient superstition he had purposely refused to let them come to
him in any house, lest they should deceive him with witchcraft.) But they,
came not to charm him with any such deuilish art, but to win him, being
allreadie charmed and blinded therewith, to Our first Apostles carried a Cross.
the divine knowledge of almighty God, carrying a silver Cross and picture
of CHRIST for their standard, and singing Litanies for the salvation of him and
his poeple. Then after many wishes of health and happiness to the King,
AUGUSTINE in a long speech discovered unto him the mysteries of CHRIST'S holy
Gospel, and the everlasting joys that followed those that truly believed
therein. To whom King ETHELBERT answered that indeed their words and promises
were very fair, but because to him they seemed to be Ethelberts answer to
Augustine.
new and uncertain, he could not so suddenly leave his ancient customs and
ceremonies so long before observed in his country, to yield his consent unto
their novelties. Notwithstanding (said he) because you are hither come out of a
far country, and with a desire (as it seems to me) to communicate those
things unto us, which you your selves judge to be in truth and worth the best,
we will not be troblesome or offensive unto you, but rather entertayne you with
courteous hospitality, and see you provided with all necessary sustenance,
not forbidding ye, in the mean time, by preaching to draw whomsoever ye can
of this country to the profession of your faith and religion.

VI. THEN with the Kings good leave, AUGUSTINE and his fellows went in
procession to Canturbury the head city of Kent, Augustine marches to
Canturbury.
still carrying the Cross and image of CHRIST before them, and singing the
Letanies; using amongst others, this pious form of prayer: When beseech thee O
Lord in all thy mercy, to take away and with-hould thy wrath and anger from
this city, and from thy holy house, because we have sinned against thee:
ALLELVIA. Humbly by this kind of confession putting them selves amongst
sinners, whom they came to release from sin, and reconcile to almighty God.
When this our Arch-Doctour leading his troop of Preachers under the triumphant
banner of the Cross into the city which in future is to be his Metropolitan,
did not the Angell-Guardians cry out to the citizens with those words of the
Prophet Esaias: Open the gates and let the just nation enter, observing the truth
of their embassage; the old error of Isaiae. c. 29. v. 2. 3.
Idolatry is gone, that from hence forth the peace of CHRIST and his Church
may be here maintained. Here now the walls of Hiericho seemed to go to ruin,
that the walls of Jerusalem might be built. Here on the ruin of paganism
our holy Apostle first planted the Cross of CHRIST, and laid the foundation of
the English Catholic Church. But o the heavenly and apostolical life that
these holy monks AUGUSTINE and his fellows led in the mean Their holy ^^se
in Canturbury.
time, what pen is able to express? watching, and prayer was their only and
chiefest exercise, allwaies keeping their souls most free from any the lest
thought of wordly desires or cares. They announced the words of life to all
they could, making their own lives so correspondent to what they taught, that
in them those Idolaters might even with their eyes read a lesson of heavenly
virtue and conversation, to see so many poor men so constantly announcing
the Gospel of CHRIST, that they seemed to be most ready to suffer all
adversities, yea and death it self in defense of the truth which they
preached. But what followed these beginnings? Some few believed in JESUS CHRIST
and were baptized, admiring the simplicity of their innocent life, and the
sweetness of their heavenly doctrine.

VII. BUT in the East part of the city of Canturbury stood a See Heretic our
first Apostles said mass.
Church dedicated to Saint MARTIN, built in ancient times by the Romans, in
which the Queen was wont to pray and receive the sacraments by the hands of
her holy Bishop Lethard, who was allowed her for that purpose, and stood our
Blessed Apostle S. AUGUSTINE in no small steed in the labor of preaching and
converting the country. In this Church allsoe AUGUSTINE and his fellow-Mo^kes
executed their divine service, there they sung their Office, there they said
Mass, there they prayed, there they preached, and baptized. When in the mean
time by the divine power of almighty God, saint AUGUSTINE endued with a
heavenly grace of working miracles cured all the sick and diseased persons that
were either presented unto him or that he him self visited in person So that
the poeple were thunder-strucken with amazement, at the sight of so great
virtue, crying out that either men were transformed into Gods, or that the Gods
in a humane shape were come to converse with men: whereby their hardness of
heart being overcome, many were received into the fould of CHRIST'S Church. And
at length King ETHELBERT also being astonished with so many resplendent
signs of virtue, by the daily instancie and persuasion of S AUGUSTINE, by the
continual prayers King Ethelbert is baptized.
of the Church, by the affectionate admonitions of the Queen, abiuring the
deadly powers of hell became a son of divine adoption in Christ. And now on
the sacred feast of Pentecost, all the Saints of heaven highly rejoicing, and
many troops of poeple flocking to that great solemnity, AUGUSTINE as a new
SILVESTER baptiseth ETHELBERT as an other Constantine. In him our faithful
David is anointed with the oil of Ioyfullnes, and meekly seated in a throne
of mercy. Our Ecclesiastical Solomon is crowned with a diadem of peace in the
chair of justice and wisdom. Our noble ETHELBERT descends from the state of
his royal authority, and shows him self as a servant to the servants of
CHRIST. A Prince of princes is changed to an Evangelical Little-one: and a
mighty commander of many poeple professes him self a companion to the
poor. AUGUSTINE rejoices, and much more his little Church, that now they had
gained him to be their Patron, whom before they feared as a persecutour. Haec
mutatio dextrae Excelsi: This is a chainge of the right hand of the most High.

VIII. THE King therefore being baptized labored him self to get The zeal of
King Ethelbert
all the Kings, Princes, Nobles and common poeple under his government to the
subjection of the sweet yoke of CHRIST; making it the chiefest part of his
own empire to dilate and propogate the Kingdom of Christ's holy Church.
Whereupon great multitudes of poeple flocked daily to hear the word of God,
and forsaking the blindness of their Diabolical rites, were purged in the
sacred font of Baptism. Of whose faith and conversion the good King greatly
rejoiced, yet compelled none by force to Christianity, but only embraced the
faithful believers with a more strict affection, as his fellow-citizens of the
heavenly Kingdom. For he had learned of the Doctors and authors S. August^^^
(...) of England.
of his own salvation, that the service of CHRIST ought to be voluntary, and
not constrained. In the mean time, the holy master of our faith saint
AUGUSTINE went to Arelas in France where by the hands of Etherius Bishop of the
same place, he was consecrated Archbishop of the English nation, according as
holy Pope GREGORY had pre-ordayned. Whom returning into England with this
sacred dignity, King ETHELBERT received with triumphant joy, and made him now
the Ecclesiastical President of his metropolitan city in which before he had
entertained him but as a guest; and ordained him the vigilant Guardian not only
of that City, but allsoe of all the little world of his whole dominions. The
throne of his own Kingdom he changed into a Bishops sea, and his royal
Palace by the reformation and consecration of saint AUGUSTINE, was turned into
a sacred Church dedicated to CHRIST our S^uiour, which to this day (but built
in a far more stately manner) retaynes the name of CHRISTS-Church, and is the
mother and Metropolitan of all England.

IX. BUT our new Apostolical Archbishop vehemently desiring to rejoice holy
Pope GREGORY with the news of his happy success, S. Augustine consulteth
Pope Gregory.
presently after his return from Arelas, sent his holy fellow-Monkes and
Preachers LAVRENCE and PETER to Rome, to make relation to saint GREGORY that
the English nation had admitted the faith of CHRIST, and that he was made
Bishop thereof: desiring allsoe to have his prudent counsel in many
difficulties that did arise in the plantation of that new Church. The joy that
the holy Pope received with the breath of this news, I leave to our hearts to
imagine, for doubtless it was such that noe tongue nor pen can express it.
Then he sent back with these holy legates, more preachers and laborers into the
new vineyard of our Lord: of whom the chiefest were these holy Benedictine
Monks, Mellitus, Justus, Paulinus, and Ruffinianus: and by them all things
necessary for the divine service, holy vessels, chalices, aultar-cloathes,
ornaments for the Church, Priestly robes and vestements, many holy relics of
the Apostles and martirs, and great store of books. He allsoe dispatched
letters to saint AUGUSTINE, in which he signifies the sending of the Palle
unto him; insinuating withal after what manner he ought to ordain Bishops in
England. Hear his Epistle.

X. GREGORY Servant of the Servants of God, to his most reverend Pope Grego^^e
^e^ter^ to S. August.
and most holy Brother, Augustine Bishop. Allthough it is certain that the
unspeakable rewards of the eternal Kingdom are rescrued for those that labor
^or almighty God, it behooues us nevertheless to bestow on such the
benefitts of honor, that out of this recompense they may be encouraged to
endeavor more abundantly in the exercise of their spiritual labor. And
because the new Church of the English, by the peculiar bounty of our Lord and
thy industry, is brought to the grace of almighty God, we grant to thee
there the use of the Palle in the performance of the solemnities of Mass only,
so that thou may ordain twelve Bishops in diverse places, all to be subject
The ancient use of the Palle.
to thy iurisaiction: because the Bishop of the City of London ought allwaies
hereafter to be consecrated by his proper Sinod, and receive the Palle from
this holy and Apostolic Sca, to which, by the authority of God, J serve. But
to the City of York we will thee to send a Bishop, whom thou shall think
fit to ordain, only so, that if that city with the country adjoining
shall receive the word of God, he may allsoe ordain twelve Bishops, and enjoy
the dignity of a Metropolitan: because to him allsoe, by the help of God, if
our life last, we resolve to give the Palle; whom notwithstanding we will have
to be subject to the disposition of thy Fraternity. But after thy death,
August has jurisdiction over all England.
let him so preside over the Bishops he has odayned, that by noe means he be
subject to the Bishop of London. But let this distinction be between the bishop
of London and York, that he be accounted the first, who was first ordered. And
with common counsel and peaceable dealing let them unanimously dispose those
things which are to be handled for the zeal of Christ: let them judge rightly,
and not perform their judgments with disagreeing minds. But let thy
Brotherhood have jurisdiction not only over the bishops by thee ordained, and
those ordained by the bihop of York, but allsoe over all the bishops and
Priests of Britain, by the authority of God and our Lord Jesus Christ. To the
end that from the tongue and life of thy Sainctitie, they may learn the form
both of rightly believing and well living, that executing their office with
true faith and good manners, they may, when our Lord will, attain to the
heavenly Kingdom God keep thee in health most reverend brother. Given the
tenth of the Calends of July, in the ninteenth year of the reign of our most
pious Emperor Mauritius Tiberius.

XI. BY this Epistle it appeases how our holy Apostle AUGUSTINE What the
Archbishops Palle is, and means.
received the dignity of metropolitan Archbishop and Primate of of all
England, and the Palle, the chief arms of that dignity, used in ancient
times to be sent from the Roman Sea to all Archbishops. But this Palle (to
satisfy the ignorant) is a little poor cloth in breadth not exceeding three
fingers, which Archbishops going to the altar putt about their necks after all
other Pontifical ornaments: it has two labels hanging down before and behind
adorned with little black crosses; all rude and unpolished, made of the very
wool as it comes from the sheep back, without any other artificial color:
and this, being first cast into the tomb of saint PETER, the Pope sends to
those that are designed to be Archbishops. This ancient ceremony fignified
chiefly two things: The first, that the Bishop shining and glittering at
mass, in glorious robes adorned with gould and gemmes, looking upon the
poverty of this cloth, should learn not to grow insolent with the greatness
of his dignity, but cast off all high-aspiring spiritts: The other, that he
should diligently and exactly observe the some faith, which S. PETER taught at
Rome (in whose tomb this cloth was thrown) and that which the other Bishops
of the same sea have followed. This much by the way, be said of the Palle.

XII. BUT our foresaid holy legates being departed from Rome the blessed Pope
GREGORY, sent letters after them worthy of memory, by which he manifestly
she weth with what an industrious and affectionate zeal he was carried toward
the salvation of our country, Other letters of S. Gregory.
writing in this manner: GREGORY servant of the servants of God to Mellitus
Abbot. After the departure of our Congregation which is with thee, we were held
greatly in suspense, because we chanced to hear nothing of the prosperity of
your journey. Therefore when almighty God shall have brought ye safe to the
moct reverend man Augustine our brother, tell him, that I have long discussed
with my self concerning the cause of the English: and am now resolved that the
Temples of the Idols ought not The use of holy water in o^^ first Apostles time.
to be destroyed in that country, but let the Idols them selves only be
demolisht. Let holy water be made, and sprinkled in those Temples, let altars
be built and relics placed therein: because if those Temples be fittly built,
it is necessary that they be chainged from the worship of devils to the
service of the true God: that whilst the poeple them selves seeing their self
same Temples undestroyed, may depose out of their hearts all error, and
acknowledging and adoring the true God, may more familliarly frequent their
accustomed places. And because their custom is to kill many oxen in sacrifice
to their God; in this matter allsoe some solemnity must be chainged that on
the day of the dedication or the feasts of the Saints whose relics rest
there, they build them selves boothes and harbors of boughs about the same
Church so chainged from a profane Temple, and with religious banquets observe
the solemnity therein: not sacrificing beasts to the ^^uill, but to the
praise of God killing them for their own eating, and giving thanks to the
Giver of all things for their plenty. For doubtless it is impossible, at once
to cut of all things from such hard minds, because he that endeavors to
clime to the highest place, must ascend by paces and degrees, and not by
leapes. etc. These things therefore it behooves thy charity to intimate to
our foresaid Brother, that being present there in person, he may consider how
to dispose all things. God keep thee safe most beloved son. Given etc.

XIII. ALLSOE at the same time this boly Pope sent letters S. Augustine famous
for great miracles.
to saint AUGUSTINE him self, touching the miracles which he had understood
were wrought by his means, in which he exhorts him in these words: I know,
most dear Brother, that almighty God shows great miracles by thy Charity
in that nation which he has disposed to be elected. Whence it is necessary
that thou rejoice with fear, and fear with joy for that heavenly guist. Thou
may rejoice indeed, because by thy exterior miracles the souls of the
English are drawn to an interior grace: But thou ought to fear, lest
among those signs which are done, thy weak mind be raised in presumption of
it self, and whence it is exteriourly listed up to honor, thence it fall
interiourly through vain glory. For it behooues us to remember, how the
disciples, when returning with joy from their preaching, thy said to their
heavenly Master. O Lord in Luc. 10.
thy name, the devils are allsoe subject unto us: They presently heard, Rejoice
not for this, but rather rejoice that your names are written in heaven. For
they had fixed their minds on a private and temporal joy, who rejoiced of
their miracles: but they are recalled from a private joy to a general, from a
temporal to an everlasting gladness, to whom it is said: Rejoice in this, that
your names are written in heaven. For all the elect do not work miracles, and
yet the names of them all are held written in heaven. And the disciples ought
to have noe joy but of that good which they have common with all, and in which
they have noe end of gladness. It remaynes therefore, most dear brother, that
amongst those things which by the power of God thou A remedy against vain
glory.
do outwardly work, thou do all ways exactly judge thy self interiourly,
and curiously understand both who thou art, and how great grace is in that
nation for whose conversion thou have received the gifts of working miracles.
And if at ame time thou remember that either by word or work thou have
offended our Creator, call allwaies those things to thy memory, that the
remembrance of thy own guiltines may keep down the rising glory of thy
heart: and whatsoever thou either shall or have received of doing miracles,
impute it not as given to thy self, but to them for whose salvation they are
bestowed. etc.

XIV. MOREOVER the same blessed Pope sent an Epistle also to King ETHELBERT
with many rich presents, endeavoring with temporal honors to glorify the
King, to whom by his industry the knowledge of the Kingdom of heaven was
arrived. In his letters he gives thanks to almighty God for his conversion,
admonishing and encouraging him with the example of Constantine the Great, to
maintain and advance the profession of the Christian faith in his dominions.
And amongst others he thus exhorts him to follow the direction and counsel
of saint AVGVS^I^E: Our S. Augustine pray sed by S. Gregory.
most reverend Brother and Bishop Augustine being tanght in the Rule of a
monastery, replenished with the science of holy scripture, endued by the
handy-worke of God with good works, you ought willingly to hear; devoutly to
perform, and carefully to keep in mind whatsoever he does admonish you.
Because if you hear him in what he speaks in behalf of almighty God, the
same god will sooner hear him making intercession for you. For if (which God
forbid) you contemn his words, how can almighty God hear him from you, whom
you neglect to hear speaking for God? With all your heart therefore bind your
self with him in the fervor of faith, and help his endeauours with the power
which God has given you, that he may make you, partaker of his kingdom, whose
faith you cause to be received and kept in yours. Therefore these and such
other writings and Epistles of the most holy and zealous Pope saint GREGORY
replenished King ETHELBERT with so great joy, that he was much more enkindled
to the advancement of the Catholic cause, and the desire and love of heaven.
Augustine builds a Mo nastery to the Apo^^^


XV. BUT Saint AUGUSTINE when he had placed his Episcopal Sea at Christ's
Church in Canturbury, and made it a perpetual habitation for him self and his
successors, he allsoe built a Monastery by the means of King Ethelbert
without the walls of the same town toward the East, dedicated to the Princes
of the Apostles PETER and PAVL, which he adorned with many gifts and
possessions, and ordained it to be the burial place of him self and all his
successor-Bishops, as allsoe of the Kings of Kent: which Church notwithstanding
was not consecrated by saint AUGUSTINE, but by S. LAVRENCE his successor. The
first Abbot of this Monastery was one PETER a BENEDICTINE Monk, whose life
you may read the thirteenth of January. And this Monastery with the
appurtenances was given, granted and confirmed to the Benedictine Monks by
the royal charters of King ETHELBERT, whereof this is one. King Ethelberts
Charter to the monastery of S. Peter and Paul at Canturbery.


I^ the name of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, be it known unto all men as well
present as future, that I ETHELBERT by the grace of God King of the English,
from an Idolater made a Christian by my Evangelical father AUGUSTINE, have
delivered by the same bishop some part of the land of my own right situate
under the east-wall of the City of Canturbury, to wit, where by the same
teacher in CHRIST I have built a monastery in honor of the Princes of the
Apostles PETER and PAVL, and together with the same land, and all things which
belong to the Monastery itself I have endowed with perpetual liberty: so
that it may not be lawful nether for me, nor any of my successor-Kings, nor
for any other person either Ecclesiastical or secular, ever to usurp any
thing from thence, but let all things be in the free power of the Abbot him
self. But if any one shall attempt to diminish or disannull any part of this
our donation, by the authority of God, and of the blessed Pope GREGORY, and of
our Apostle AUGUST as allsoe by our curse, let that person be segregated from
all the communion of the holy Church, and from all the society of the Elect in
the day of judgment. This land is encompassed with these bounds, etc.

In the year from the Incarnation of Christ 605. Indiction the 8. Note the
ancient manner of subscribing.
I ETHELBERT King of the English have confirmed this donation with the sign of
the holy Cross with mine own hand. I AVGVSTYNE by the grace of God Archbishop
have willingly subscribed. I EDBALD the Kings son have favored it. I
HAMEG^SILVS Duke have praised it. I HOCCA Count have consented. I AVG^^V^^DVS
the secretary have approved it. I GRAPHIA Count have strengthened it. I PINCA
have consented. I GEDDE have strengthened it


XVI. THE second donation of King ETHELBERT to this monastery which may be
seen in the ancient records of the same we here omit, fearing to^ be
teadious to the reader. Only one thing I will bring out of it, which is that
after many privileges and exemptions given thereunto, the King following the
tenor of the holy The M^nkes of Canturbury Benedictines.
rule of saint BENEDICT says these words: Let the Abbot him self that shall
be ordained with the counsel of his brethren freely go(...) and order it (to
wit the monastery) within and without according to the fear of God, that in
the day of our Lord he may deserve to hear that (...) voice of our most pious
Saniour, saying: Euge serve bone and fidelis quia in panca fuisti fidelis supra
multa re constituam, intra in gaudium dominitui. Also our holy Apostle saint
AUGUSTINE in his own name and by the authority of Pope GREGORY granted a
very large and ample privilege and exemption to the said Monastery, wherein
he freeth it from all Episcopal subjection, but that according to the Rule of
our holy father saint BENEDICT, the Abbot chosen by his brethren in the same
Monastery should be consecrated by the Bishop not to his service, but to the
ministry of our Lord etc. But the Benedictine The Benedictine Monks seated in
Christ-Church at Canturbury.
Monks from the beginning of Christian religion in England had not only the
possession of this Monastery of laint PETER and Paul in Canturbury, but were
allsoe seated in the Metropolitan sea of Christs-Church in the same city, as
appeare^ by holy Pope GREGORY'S, answer to the first question of saint
AUGUSTINE. For when saint AUGUSTINE, among other things, had demanded how the
Bishops should live and converse with their Clergy, and how many parts or
portions ought to be made of those things which were given to the altar from
the offerings of the faithful etc. S. GREGORY answered that the manner of the
Apostolicque Sea was to give command to the Bishops, that of every stipend
that fell to the Church ought to be made four portions or distributions, one
to the Bishop and his household for hospitality, an other to the Clergy, the
third to the poor, and the fourth to the repayring By the commau^d of S.
Gregory.
of the Churches. B^^ (adds the holy Pope) thy Brotherhood brought up in the
Rule of a Monastery, because it ought not to li^e separated from thy Clergy
in the Church of the English, which by the power of God is yet but lately
brought to the Faith, must institute the same conversation which was with our
fathers in the beginning of the primiti^e Church, in which none of them called
a^^e thing his own of those things which he possessed but all things to them
were common. By which words the most blessed Pope GREGORY enjoined a
monastical and cloister life to be observed by saint AUGUSTINE, allbeit a
Bishop, together with his subjects, who professing religious poverty by
possessing all things in common as saint GREGORY had prescribed, could be noe
other then Monks. Whence this manner of government was received throughout all
England, so that in the Cathedral Churches which were Monasteries, the
Bishop, who was allwaies a Monk, presided as Abbot over the Monks, and lived
monastically with them. Next to him was the Prior, who for distinction from
other Priors, was call A Cathedral Prior, unto whom and the Convent of Monks
allwaies belonged the Election of the Bishop. And of this kind there
appertayned aunciently to the Benedictine Nine Cathedral Churches in Engla^^^
belonging to the Monks.
Monks nine Cathedral Churches in England: to wit; the Metropolitan Sea of
Canturbury, the Churches of Winchester, Elie Norwich, Conentrie, Worcester,
Rochester, Durham, and Bathe. Whereat the reader need not wonder, for the
Benedictine Monks saint AUGUSTINE and his fellows having by the divine grace
been made the first Apostles and conuerters of England to Christianity, were
by good reason ever after the chiefest gouerners and rulers of that Church. The
errors of the Britan^.


XVII. IN THE mean time saint AUGUSTINE having by his continual labor in
preaching much enlarged and increased the faith of CHRIST amongst the English,
bent his endeauours to reform the Church and Bishops of the Britans, who
allbeit they had remained in the profession of the Catholic faith ever since
the time of King Lucius, yet was not their faith so pure but that it was
tainted with some errors, and especially in the observance of Easter, which
(contrary to the custom of the Catholic Church) they celebrated from the
fourteenth of the moon to the twentieth; and many other things they held, that
were repugnant to the unity of the Catholic Church. Therefore saint
AUGUSTINE, by the assistance of King ETHELBERT, summoned the Bishops and the
learned men of the next Province of the Britans to a parley, at a place called
afterward in the tongue of the English Saxons, by the name of Austens-Oke, in
the confines of the West Saxons. Where he began with a very gentle and
fraternall admonition to persuade them to embrace the Catholic unity, and
together Schismatics worse to be converted
with him to undertake the common labor of preaching the Gospel of CHRIST.
But he found by experience that it was easier to convert Heathens the Heretics.
that had noe knowledge of CHRIST or his Church, then to reduce Schismatics out
off their errors to the truth. For after a long disputation, those stubborn
Britans would not yield nether to the prayers, exhortations nor rebukes of
saint AUGUSTINE and his fellows; but rather preferred their own customs
before all the Churches of the world united together in CHRIST: Therefore
saint AUGUSTINE ended this laborious and long controversy, saying: Let us
beseech almighty God to voutchafe to show by heavenly signs which tradition
is to be followed, yours, or ours. Let a diseased person be brought in, and by
whose prayers he shall be cured, let his faith and works be believed and
followed of all. Which condition the adversaries unwillingly accepting, one
deprived of all sight was led in, and placed amongst them. And when the prayers
and labors of the Britans could nothing avail toward his cure, saint
AUGUSTINE compelled by a just necessity, S. Augustine cures a blind man
bowed his knees to the father of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, humbly beseeching him
to restore to that blind creature his lost sight, and by the corporal
illuminating of one, to enkindle with his spiritual grace the hearts of many
of his faithful. His prayer being ended, the blind man received his sight, to
the great confusion of his adversaries, and comfort of those of his side, who
with one voice extolled saint AUGUSTINE as the true preacher of the eternal
light. And the Britans them selves confessed against their wills that indeed
the way of justice which AUGUSTINE followed was true; but yet they could not
without the consent and leave of their country renounce their ancient customs.

XVIII. THEREFORE they required a new synod to be summoned in which more of the
learned men of their country might be present. Which being appointed, seven
Bishops of the Britans, and a great A Synod held in England.
number of the learned men (chiefly out of their famous Monastery of Bangor
then governed by an Abbot called Dinoth) coming to the place of the council,
went first to a certain holy and prudent man, that led an anachoreticall life
in that country, to consult him whether they should yield to the preaching of
AUGUSTINE, and abandon their own tradition? If AUGUSTINE be a man of God
(answered he) why do ye not follow his counsel without any more delay? And
by what means (replied they) can we prove this? It is written (said the other)
Take my yoke upon ye, and learn of me, Math. 11.
because I am meek, and humble of heart. If AUGUSTINE then be meek, and
humble in heart, it is likely that he carries the yoke of CHRIST, and offers
it to be carried by you also. But if he be proud, it is manifest that he is
not from God, and that ye need not care for his speeches. And how (replied
they again) can we be able to know so much? Be sure (said he) to let him come
first to the place of the Council, and if he humbly arise at your entrance,
know that he is the Servant of CHRIST, and to be of you obeyed; but if he
contemn you, and disdaigne to rise in curtesy to you who are more in number,
ye may boldly despise him too. What more? They did The Britans contemn S.
Augustine.
as he commanded; when coming into the Synod, saint AUGUSTINE sat quietly in
his chair. Which they noe sooner perceived, but judging it to proceed out of
pride, labored to contradict him in all things: refusing not only to correct
their ancient errors, but allsoe denying to receive him for their Archbishop;
conferring with one and other; that if now he would not daigne to rise to
salute us, how much more will he contemn us if we become his subjects? To whom
the holy man inspired He foretells their ruin.
with the spirit of prophecy foretold, that because they refused to preach
with him the way of life to the English nation, by their hands they should
feel the revenge of death. Whose words the event proved true: for after the
death of saint AUGUSTINE, Alfrid King of the Northumbers leading forth a great
army against the headstrong Britans, made a huge slaughter amongst them near
unto the town now called West-Chester. But goeing to the battle, when he saw
their Priests and a mighty troop of the monks of Bangor (where above two
thousand lived The Britans punished
by the only labor of their hands) standing in a place of defense, and pouring
out their prayers to almighty God against his success, he caused his
soldiers first to set upon them; of whom (being wholly unarmed, and
committed to the protection of one Brocmal who fled away with his fellows at
the first encounter) were slain one thousand and two hundred, and the rest
escaped by flight. Which done, he made head against the armed Britans, when not
without a great loss of his own army he utterly defeated. Whereby the
prophecy of S. AUGUSTINE was fullfilled.

XIX. BUT our most blessed Apostle saint AUGUSTINE leaving the rebellious
Britans to expect the coming of this foresaid punishment, traveled with his
holy company to the City of York; preaching the Gospel of CHRIST as he
went, and by the way he cured S. Augustine cures the palsy.
a wretched creature of a double disease, a palsy, and blindness not only of
body but of soul too: for being by his prayers healed in body, he believed,
and had his soul purged in the sacred font of Baptism. O most blessed man
full of the spirit of God, who when occasion was offered was as powerful to
work miracles for the salution, as to preach words for the instruction of his
poeple! For what pen is able to express with how many shining miracles he
illuminated the whole country in this journey? What tongue can number how
many troops of Insidels, in the confines of Yorkes and in all other places
where he went, he added to the number of the faithful, and reduced into the
should of CHRIST'S holy Church, when only in one day, and that on the feast of
the nativity of our Lord, which the whole multitude of heavenly Angels does
perpetually celebrate, he renewed ten thousand men in the sacred baptism of
life, besides almost an innumerable multitude of women and children. But what
number of Priests, or other holy orders would suffice to baptize so great a
multitude? Therefore having given He baptiseth ten thousand persons in one day.
his benediction to the river Swale, he commanded them all to enter, through
which (it being otherwise far too deep to wade) they passed to the other
side with no less miracle then in times past the Jsraelites through the red
sea, and as they went they were baptized by the holy Father of our Faith saint
AUGUSTINE in the name of the holy Trinity. A most strainge spectacle! In that
so deep a bottom, in so great a throng and press of poeple, in such a
diversity of age, sex, and condition, not one was lost, not one was hurt, not
one was missing. And which is most of all to be admired, A strange miracle.
all that labored with any infirmity or disease of body, left that allsoe
behind them in the water; and every lame or deformed person came out whole and
sound. O most pleasant sight! O admirable spectacle worthy to have Angels
spectatours, when so many thousand fair faces of the English nation came out
of the belly of one River, as out of the womb of one common Mother, and out
of one channel so great a progenic was borne and derived to the Kingdom of
heaven. Herevppon the most blessed Pope GREGORY Lib. 7. c. 30.
bursting out in joy together with the heavenly citizens, could not hold but
make his pen the trumpett of this admirable accident, in an epistle written
to Eulogius Patriarch of Alexandria. And in A church dedicated to S. August.
perpetual memory of the fact, a Church was built by the same river, and
dedicated to our wonderful Baprist saint AUGUSTINE, in which the petitions of
the faithful were miraculously heard and granted.

XX. RETVRNING again from Torke, by the way he cured one of a most horrid
leaprosie by making the sign of the Cross and calling upon his divine name
that cures all diseases. But coming into the County of Dorsett all ways
announcing CHRIST'S holy Gospel, His adversaries instly punished.
he arrived at a Village where the wicked poeple not only refused to obey his
doctrine, but very impiously and opprobriously beat him and his fellows out of
their Village, and in mockery fastened Fish-tayles at their backs: which
became a new purchase of eternal glory to the Saints, but a perpetual
ignominy to the doers. For it is reported that all that generation had that
given them by nature, which so contemptibly they fastened on the backs of
these holy men. And saint AUGUSTINE having left these wicked poeple to carry
the marks of their own shame, and traveled with his holy company about five
miles further through desert and uninhabited places, being cruelly oppressed with
the three familiar discomodities of travelers, hunger, thirst, and wearines,
he that sat upon the fountain wearied with his journey CHRIST JESUS,
voutchsafed to appear visibly unto him with words of heavenly comfort and
Christ appeare^h unto him.
encouragement. Then the holy man being refreshed with the sweet fountain of
eternal life, fell presently upon his knees and adored the place of CHRIST'S
footsteps, and striking his staff into the ground, there straight sprung forth
a clear fountain of cristall streams, in which all his fellows quenched the
extremity of their thirst, and gave infinite thanks to almighty God, who
had voutchsafed to help them in that necessity. And the same place The
monastery of Cernell.
was afterward called CERNEL, a name composed of Latin and He brew, for Cerno
in Latin signifies to see, and El in Hebrew signifies, God, because there our
holy Apostle AUGUSTINE was honored with the clear vision of him that is true
God and man. Moreover upon the some fountain in memory here of a chapel
was built dedicated to our Savior, which together with the fountain my
Author had seen, and the water cured many diseases. Afterward one Egelward
a rich man founded a fair Monastery of Benedictine monks in the same place,
dedicated to saint PETER the Apostle which was called the monastery of Cernel
and dured to the last fatal destruction of Abbeies in the unfortunate reign
of Henry the eight.

XXI. BUT Saint AUGUSTINE having traveled over the greatest He returns to
Canturbury.
part of England like a true Apostle allwaies on foot, and by the virtue of
his preaching and miracles converted infinity poeple to the faith (so that be
may deservedly be called our Apostle, who not only laid the first foundation of
Catholicque religion amongst us, but by his own preaching lightened almost
all the whole Island) he returned to his perpetual and Metropolitan seat of
Canturbury, where he was received by the poeple as the angelical messenger of
their peace and happiness, with great joy and triumph. When a troop of
diseased persons flocking about this divine Physician, behold a threefold
wretched creature, bound with a triple chain of calamity was presented. He
was lame of both his legs, dease, and dumb. His prayers were sighs, his
words bellowings, and his discourse, signs. But saint AUGUSTINE heard him
that could not speak, spoke to him that could not hear, and directed him that
could not go. For in the name of the blessed TRINITY he gave that thrice
miserable wretch a threefold cure. So that he was able to He cures one lame,
deaf, and dumb.
(...) firmly, to speak plainly, and to hear distinctly. But he, ouerioyed
with his new received health, became so vainly merry, that with his
troublesome tongue newly taught to speak, he molested the whole Church and
poeple with babbling, even in the time of the divine office, so that for
punishment he suffered a relapse into his former misery, till having done
worthy satisfaction for that fault, he was again released by the powerful
prayers of S. AUGUSTINE and together with the outward health of body, he was
restored also to the stablenes of a more settled government of mind in his
soul. The testimony of an old ma baptized by Augustane.


XXII. HERE it shall not be amiss to set down the attestation of a very old
man that lived in my Authors time, who affirmed that his grandfather had been
baptized by saint AVGVSTIN, and had often seen the holy man encompassed about
with troops of poeple preach and work many miracles. He had learnt allsoe
from his father and grandfather the form of body of saint AUGUSTINE, and that
he was of a very maiesticque person, and in stature tall: and that his
grandfather having been baptized by the hands of the holy man lived many
years above an hundred, and the blessing of old age descending likewise to his
father, and from his father to him, who now when he made this relation had long
outliued an hundred years. Thus this old man. But now our holy Apostle being
wholly wounded with the love of heaven, and aspiring to nothing more then out
of the tumults of this world to attain to the eternal rest of our Lord,
knocked daily at the heavenly gates with the continual peales of his prayers,
sighs, and tears, desiring to be dissolved to live with CHRIST. Till at
length understanding by divine revelation that his desire was heard, and that
shortly he should be delivered out of the thraldom of the flesh, he solemnly in
presence of the King and all his court, ordained the holy monk and his chief
fellow-preacher saint LAVRENCE to succeed him in the Sea of Canturbury, as in
times past the Prince of the Apostles saint PETER appointed CLEMENT for his
successor in the Roman Primacie. For long before he had made MELLITVS bishop of
LONDON (by whose means the country of the East Angles was converted) and
IVSTVS his suffragane in Rochester. So that almost all the dominion of King
ETHELBERT (which raught from Canturbury to the river Humber in Yorke-shire) was
wholly converted to Christianity by the labors of these holy Benedictine
Monks saint AUGUSTINE and his fellows.

XXIII. BEHOVLD now, o thou blessed Archparent of the regeneration An
Apostrop^^ to S. Augustine.
of the English nation, by leaving thy stately Mother Rome, thou have gained
England for thy Daughter, whom thou may nourish as a fair spouse for the
King of heaven. Now after the journey of the great world, thou have taken this
other world of the vast Ocean, breathing a most fair and temperate air, most
pleasant and fertile with fields, meadows, pastures, brooks, rivers, and
seas, most grateful with woods, hills, and plains, most abounding with
populous towns and foreign merchandise, most famous for fair poeple,
wealth, and riches. This huge and goodly Island was long since destined for thee
his elect Agent, by the divine providence of the mighty creator of all
things, who from the beginning having made the world perfect in beauty gave it
into the possession of man his creature. This nation so fair in face, but
black in soul with the filth of Idolatry, being by thee washed in the waters
of Jordan, ascends wholly pure and white, as the Blackmoore woman by Moses.
Now to the greater glory of God and thy own crown, that new pillar of light
which led the Israelites out of Egypt being erected in the faith and Cross of
CHRIST, thou leadest us Heathens out of the Egiptian darkness of infidelity and
out of the shades of death, into the true land of promise flowing with milk
and honey. For to thee, as our Apostolicque Captain, the divine grace of the
Gospel gave that which was denied to Moses the lawmaker of the Jews; and
that which he could not obtain in the law, thou art found worthy to accomplish
in JESUS CHRIST the End of the law. Now out of the spoils of the fettered
Tirant, and out of the Kingdom of the captive spoiler of our souls thou shall
make our God a Kingdom and a poeple of purchase; now next to the heavenly
Kingdom and those unspeakable rewards of thy labors, this country shall be
thy perpetual possession which by thee was purchased and gained to CHRIST: and
whose temporal commodities thou have forsaken, thou shall now possess the
hereditary gains. And being seated in the high towers of Paradise thou
(...)jest, as an holy sentinel, perpetually watch, and defend the whole
country dedicated to thy honor and glory.

XXIV. AT LENGTH this most victorious Champion of our Lord having run the
race of this mortal life in all sainctitie, and perf^ction His last (...).
of conversation, having labored in the conversion of our wretched country
with continual and un wearies diligence, care, and industry, came to the
goal and long desired rewards of the heavenly Kingdom. Now our Lord knocking
at the gates of his soul with sickness, he willingly opened with great and
unspeakable thanksgiving. Then with a courageous affection of a fatherly love
he exhorted as well the King, Queen, and princes, as the Clergy and poeple
allsoe, inuiolably to remain in the fear and service of almighty God, to
obey the divine precepts and obseruances proposed and preached unto them by his
Servants. Which done, the end of his worldly tempests approached, and the bright
morning of his eternal ioies appeared: and having given his benediction to the
King, and confirmed the infancy of his newborn Church in CHRIST, leaving
unto all many holy pledges of his perpetual love, and documents of his pious
fellows and disciples, in presence of S. LAVRENCE his successor and a
populous multitude of poeple, he gave up his blessed soul into the hands of
him that had created (...) happy dea^^.
it for his honor, and in the triumph and glory of the heavenly citizens he
was received into the ever lasting bliss of all blessedness: the 26 day of May,
about the year of our Lord 614. His sacred body was first buried without the
Church of saint PETER and saint PAVL, which me spoke off before, and which was
not yet finished nor dedicated. But soon after it was consecrated by saint
LAVRENCE, and his body was honorably buried in the north Porch thereof, where
the bodies of the Archbishops his successors were allsoe buried, until the
place would hold noe more. Over Saint AUGUSTINES tomb was written this
Epitaphe in pro^e.

Here rests Lord Augustine the first Archbishop of Canturbury, who His
Epitaphe.
being in times past sent hither from blessed Gregory bishop of the Roman
City, and sustained by God with the working of miracles, brought King
Ethelbert and his co^^trey from the worshipping of Idols to the ^^yth of Christ
and the days of his office being finished in peace, he died the seam^^th of
the Calends of June, the same King raygning.

XXV. THE miracles wrought at is tomb are such, so many, and Miracles at his
tomb.
so great that they would require a whole volume far beyond the limits of
our purpose. Gotzeline the Author of his life whom we follow makes mention of
very many, it shall suffice us to relate one or two briefly. When the Danes
were outrageous in England, the Benedictine Monastery of saint PETER and S.
PAVL without the walls of Canturbury, which was afterward called Saint
Augustines, became allsoe a part of their prey. But one of them as he
endeavored to steal the cloth that covered S. AUGUSTINES Tomb, it stuck so
close to his hands as if it had been his own skin, till having asked pardon
of the Saint, he restored it again to the place. Which miracle clothed him
and many of his fellows with the white robes of Christianity, and made them
devoted to saint AUGUSTINE ever after. Canutus King of the Danes and English
being Canutus freed from shiprack.
at sea in imminent danger of shipracke, calling upon saint AUGUSTINE for
help (whose patronage he had oftentimes proved most comfortable) the fearful
tempest ceased, and he arrived quietly to a secure haven: and coming afterward
to the tomb of his holy Patron, with the royalty of many grateful rewards
and praises of thanks, he witnessed the great favor he had received. The
Speech restored to the Dumb.
same benefitt was bestowed upon many others in the like case, that called to
this holy Saint for aid. A young gyrle that (by I know not what mischance) was
stricken dumb, when all art of physic had been foiled in curing her,
offering a candle at saint AUGUSTINES tomb, and in heart recommending her self
to his merits, perfectly recovered her speech. And the same favor was showed
to an other of her sex praying in the same place. In a word, all manner of
diseases were cured at his holy relics, to those that humbly and religiously
craved help. And as to such he was allwaies mercifully indulgent, so those
that endeavored to wrong him, his tomb, or his Church, escaped not the divine
punishment.

XXVI. BUT O England, England, how far art thou swerued An Apostrophe to
England. Thren. 4 v. 1.
from the religion of this thy first Apostle? How is the gould made dark, and
the best color chainged of thy first Faith and charity in JESUS CHRIST? In
times past thou did learn that Faith (only which is the beginning, head,
and foundation of eternal salvation) of those that were Catholic Roman
Priests and Monks, whom now thou do persecute; they celebrated the
dreadful solemnities of Mass, which now thou abhorrest; they honored and
called upon the Saints in heaven, whom thou despisest; they acknowledged the
supreme authority of the Bishop of the Roman and Apostolicque Sea, whence they
were sent to deliver thee out of the blind night of Idolatry to the bright day
of the true Christian faith, by thee then piously and dutifully received,
heard, and retained, and now, like a degenerate child, being fallen from the
obedience of thy mother-Sea of Rome, like unto a ship without a stern thou art
blown and tossed in the deepes of the mysteries of Faith, with every wind of
erroneous doctrine, being not able to steer into the haven of any settled and
well-grounded opinion. Again therefore I repeat those words of the Prophet:
How is the gould make dark, and the best color chainged? In very deed thou
have now left thy first faith Thren. 4. v. 1. Apocal. 2. v. 4. 5. Sermon. 92
and charity. Remember therefore whence thou have fallen, and do penance, and
perform thy first works. It is now in vain and unnecessary for thee to
dispute of matters of religion. Saint AMBRISE assures thee as much. We must
know (says that holy Doctor) that not without great danger we doubt of the
truth of that religion, which we see confirmed with the blood of so many
great men. It is a matter of mighty danger, if after the Oracles of the
Prophets, after the testimonies of the Apostles, after the wounds of the
Martirs, thou presume to discuss the anncient says as new, and after so
many manifest guides thou remain in error, and after the sweates of so
many dying teachers thou contend with an idle disputation. Therefore (my
beloved country) I beseech and conjure thee by the bowels of our Lord
JESUS CHRIST, thy dear redeemer, to consider well this sentence of the Prophet
Jeremie: Stand upon the ways, and behold, and inquire of the ancient Ier.
6. (...) 16.
paths, which is the good way and walk in it; and ye shall find a
refreshment to your souls. The holy Benedictine Monk saint AUGUSTINE who came
to thee from old Rome taught these ancient paths in CHRIST-IESVS, he showed
thee the true way, he shined in thy dominions with many heavenly signs and
miracles, as so many irresistable witnesses of the truth, he with his holy
labors rooted vpthe impious stocks of Idolatry out of the hearts of thy
poeple, and planted there in the Christian faith which he watered with his own
sweats and tears. Insist in his ways, follow his footstepps, walk in his
paths and thou shall find both in this, and much more in the world to come, a
sweet refreshment for the souls of thy poeple. That way which of late the
Apostata Luther, Calvin, or Beza begane to lay in the world, was never trodden
either by the steps of saint AUGUSTINE thy Apostle, or any other of his holy
fellow-preachers, but leads thee, if thou walk therein, the high way to
perdition. Return therefore to the counsel of the Prophet above said: State
Ier. 6. v. 16.
super vias, and interrogate de semitis antiquis quae sit via bona, and
ambulate in ca, and inueni^tis refrigerium animabus vestris. God of his
infinite mercy give thee grace once again to find the right way to him that
is Via, Veritas, and Vita, the way the Truth, and the life, who be ever
glorified and praised in his Saints. Amen. The life of S. Augustine is written
very largely by Gotzelinus a Benedictine Monk, the manuscript whereof we have,
out of which, and Venerable Bedes history of England we have taken it. The same
is written by many other authors, as Ioannes Anglicus, John Capgraue, and by
S. Bid him self in a large volume apart. The mouths of all our English
Historiographers are full of his praises. God make us all partaker of his
merits.

decorative device
depiction of the Venerable Bede VENERABILIS BEDA PRESBITER LT MONCHVS ORD^ S.
Benedicti. May. 27. Mart. ba^. f.

The life of Saint BID Priest and Monk of the holy order of Saint BENEDICT
MAY 27 Gathered out of diverse grave Authors.
AMONGST all the famous and holy men which have ever flourished in England, and
with which almighty God has adorned our sometimes happy Island, saint BEDE in
the excellency of learning both divine and humane does deservedly carry away
the prize; whom for this we may worthyly call the Phoenix of his time, that
lived in an Island separated from the rest of the world. He was borne in the
northern parts of England within the Bishopric of Durham, in a little Village
called Iarrow, not far from the place where the river Tine falls into the
maine Sea. His parents allbeit The place of his brith, and Pare^^s.
they were not famous for riches or Nobility in the country, yet was their
stock more worthyly ennobled by BID, then by the greatest nobility of blood
or descent, and not their country only but the whole world was more enriched
by this holy treasure of their race, then by the greatest wealth that could be
imagined. For, A Homer borne of an ignoble Spring,
Is Nohler then an Irus from a King.


Our Sainst BID then like unto an other Samuel, had noe sooner learnt to
speak, and outgrowne his infancy, but he was dedicated to the temple of our
Lord. For at the age of seven years, by the care of his friends and Kindred he
was delivered to the virtuous school of S. BENNET Bishop in the Benedictine
Monastery of Weremouth, which the same Abbot had built. Being planted
therefore At seven year old he is given to the divine service.
in the house of God from his very infancy, and watered with the fountain of
divine grace, like unto a fair palm tree he grew to the height of perfection,
and sent forth daily fruits and flowers of justice, and learning, announcing
the truth and mercy of almighty God with word, work, and example. For being
amongst holy men, and by holy men nursed and trained up in the school of
monastical discipline, and good learning, passing over the course of his age
piously with the pious, and innocently with the innocent, he endeavored with
all his power to preserve him self unspotted from the vanity and corruption of
the world.

II. HE happened into the happy and goulden times of the two most learned
Benedictines, THEODORE Archbishop of Canturbury and ADRIAN Abbot of saint
AVGVSTINS in the same city, in whom was an equal contention between the
excellency of learning and holiness of life. Under these holy masters our BID
became so great a proficient in laying the foundation of all learning humane
and divine, that afterward, what with his own daily study and diligent
labor, both proceeding from a sharp wit and sound understanding, he attained
to that height of perfection, that he excelled all the learned men that England
could ever boast off. From His naturull inclination to learning.
his very infancy he was extremly addicted and delighted with the pureness of
an innocent life, and the study of good sciences, that he seemed, as it were,
by the weight of his own natural inclination to be drawn and carried to
virtue and learning. And together with those natural seeds of virtue planted
in his soul, there shined allsoe in him, beyond the force of humane wit, a
certain divine beam of the assistance of the Holy Ghost. He never went to his
studies but from his prayers, and seldom to his prayers but from his studies.
For whatsoever time he had, that was free from his daily exercise of
monastical discipline, and from the continual care of watching, singing, and
praying night and day in the Church, he was wont wholly and most diligently to
spend in the study of good learning. Whence it came to pass, that with this
diligence of a greedy wit, he searched and pierced into the secrets of
almost all sciences. For beginning His ski^ in the liberal sciences.
from the first rudiments of learning, he was most ready in the Greek and
Latin tongues; most elegant in Poetry and Rhetoric; most subtle in Logic
and Metaphisick; admirable in Astronomy and the Mathematics, most exact in
Arithmetic and Church-accompts, most conversant in history, and most excellent
in all the liberal sciences, Philosophy and Deuinitie. In a word, he exactly
learned, soundly understood, firmly retained, and clearly taught all good arts
and knowleges, that I may boldly say, that not only England, but the whole
Christian world in that age could find but few to him comparable, and not one
that went beyond him in learning. This many learned Historiographers do
testify: this, his own deeds, and the books which he writ so full of all
good learning do manifestly avouch.

III. To the age of thirty years he lived under the tutorship and obedience
of his masters, the two forenamed Lights of Canturbury S. THEODORE and saint
ADRIAN, and S. JOHN surnamed of Beuerley bishop of York, all three bright
ornaments of the Benedictine Order, and therefore the fitter under whom S. BID
a Benedictine might suck the sweet milk of Religion and learning. Afterward
being by the command of his Superiors made Priest, he applied him self to
teach and write. And first at the entreaty of Acca Bishop, and the desire of
the Brethren of his Monastery, he began to make commentaries upon all the holy
Scripture. But let us hear his own most modest testimony of him self, and
how sweetly the holy Ghost speaks in him; let us experience how finely his
words come from him. In the end of his History of England, before the
catalogue which he made of his own works, he has this ensuing epilogue;
which because it contains an abridgement of his whole life, we do more
willingly set down.

Thus much (says he) I Bid the servant of God, and Priest of the S. Pedes
testimony of ^^msel^.
Monastery of the Blessed Apostles Peter and Paul which is at Weremouth and
Iarrow, have by the help of our Lord gathered of the Ecclesiastical historic
of the Britans and chiefly of the English nation, according as I could learn
it, either out of the writings of the Ancients, or by the tradition of our
Ancestors, or out of mine own knowledge. Who being borne in the territory of
the same Monastery, when J was seven years old, by the care of my friends and
Kinsfolks J was given to be brought up to the most reverend Abbot Bennet, and
afterward to Ceolfrid; and from that time, spenaing my whole age in the same
Monastery, I applied all my endeauours to the study of Scripture: and between
the observance of regular discipline, and the daily care of singing in the
Church, I was allwaies delighted either in learning, or teaching, or writing.
But in the nineteenth year of my age I took deacons hip, and the degree of
Priesthood at the thirtith, both by the ministry of the most reverend Bishop
John, and the command of Ceolfrid Deacon at (...)teen, and Priest at thirue,
Abbot. From which time of Priesthood received, to the nine and fiftith year
of my age, I have been careful to make these brief annotations upon the holy
Scripture, for the necessity of me and my brethren, out of the works of the
Venerable Fathers, or to add somewhat over and above, to the form of their
sense and interpretation. And having here set down the number of thirty six
volumes which he had written in seauentie eight books, he adds these words:
And I beseech thee, O good Jesus, that on who^ thou have mercifully bestowed to
conceive the words of thy wisdom and knowledge, to him thou would out of
thy bounty allsoe grant to come at length to the fountain of all wisdom,
and for ever to appear before thy face, who live and raignest God, world
without end. Amen. Hereunto he adds an Epilogue to the Reader, which worthyly
setts forth his rare virtue of humility, in these words: I humbly entreat all
of our nation to See his great humility.
whom the reading or hearing of this history may arrive, that they would often
remember to make intercession to the supreme clemency for my infirmities both
of bo^ie and soul; etc. Here our wit fayles us, and words are wanting; not
knowing, whether to praise first the great number of his books, or the sweet
modesty of his speeches, that doub^lesse almighty God had infused him with a
large draught of his divine wisdom, to make him able to enrich the world with
so many volumes, in so short a time, a midst the continual exercise of the
monastical rule and discipline of the monastery.

IV. BUT now the fame of his learning was so renowned and memorable, that
many flocked unto him, as unto an Oracle to learn Many flock to his school.
the liberal sciences, and to be instructed in the more difficult places of
holy Scripture: in so much that the monastery of Weremouth became an
university of learned Benedictine Monks, where all arts and sciences divine
and humane, were taught. And all by the means of saint BEDE, in whom lay hid
so great a treasure of learning, wit, and wisdom, that each one might take
as much as he was able to comprehend, and he remain nothing poorer. Others,
that could not in person, consulted him by letters, desiring the exposition of
such hard questions of the Scripture, as their own understanding could not
reach to. Nay so famous and renowned was the The fame of his learning.
name of this holy Doctor, that the Ocean was to weak a bound to contain it;
it was blown to the head of the world, Rome, whose lofty magnificence wanted
the Counsel of our BID, for the discussion of the more difficult points of
religion. But that he went ever to Rome, I dare not avouch, it is more probable
that he did not, but sure we are that he was sent for by Pope Sergius, as this
Epistle does testify.

Sergius Bishop servant of the servants of God, to the religious Abbot Pope
Sergius his Epistle.
Ceolfrid, health and Apostolical benediction. With what words or means can
we praise the clemency and unspeakable prouidencie of our God and give him
worthy thanks for his immense benefitts bestowed, who brings us that were
seated in the darkness and shades of death, to the divine light of knowledge.
And a little after: Therefore because of some questions of Ecclesiastical
causes risen, which can no longer be left without examination, we have need of
learned men to conserre with, we exhort the godly and He is sent for to Rome.
beloved goodness of thy piety, that as it becomes a devout maintayner of our
holy mother the universal Church, thou fail not to lewd obedient devotion to
this our desire, but without any delay send the religious servant of God Bid
the Venerable Priest of thy monastery to the shrines of the Princes of the
Apostles Peter and Paul thy lovers and protectours, and to the sight of my
meaunes: and by the grace of God, and thy holy prayers thou need not
mistrust but that he will return safely again unto thee, after the
celebration of the foresaid articles by the help of God are finished. For we
hope it will be profitable to all under thy charge whatsoever by his worth
shall be made famous, and imparted to the whole Church.

V. BUT does not this greatly redound to the praise and honor of our saint BEDE, that the Roman greatness should desire his counsel in matter of learning,
who lay hid in a poor cowle and cloister in the farthest corner of the world?
Surely William De gest. Reg. Ang. l. 1. c. 3.
Malmesbury judged aright when he calls him, A man whom one may with more ease
admire then worthyly praise, who borne in the furthest corner of the world,
dazeled all countreies with the lightning of his learning. Nay more, his
writings were of so reverend esteem and authority in the Christian world,
that during his life time (first by the ordonance of an English Synod, and
afterward the whole Catholic and Apostolic Church approouing it) they were
read and sung publicly in the Ecclesiastical office; a thing which after the
Apostles and their immediate disciples was never granted to any of the
ancient Fathers or Doctors of Gods Church. And hence it was (to omit other
fabulous Why he is called, Venerable
stories hereof) that both in his life time and after his death he was
qualified with the title of VENERABLE BEDE. For his homelies being to be read
in the Church he yet living, and a title of the Author to be prefixed before
the lessons (as the manner is) because they could not style him, Saint, Ante
obitum nemo Supremaque funera faelix,


They worthyly adorned him with the name of VENERABLE either by reason of the
singular gravity and modesty of his carriage, or else because that Pope
Sergius in the above cited epistle qualified him with that Epithete: And the
same title grew so universally then in use, that to this present day he is
commonly called thereby, and it remaynes still prefixed to all his Homelies
which are read or sung in the Church.

VI. SVCH then was the incomparable learning of this our famous Doctor of
England Saint BID, who living in a Benedictine Six hundred Benedictine Monks
in his Monastery.
Abbey in which were at that time above six hundred monks, he not only
excelled them all, and became a Master to them all, but an amazement to the
whole Christian world besides. But what? was BID so eagerly bent to the
studies of learning during the time of his life that he neglected the study of
virtue and piety? It can not be said. For (as an ancient author does
testify) a^ his very first entrance into the lists of the sciences, together
with his years the grace of spiritual gifts increased in his soul, that
with the spirit of wisdom and understanding he might receive allsoe the spirit
of the fear of our Lord, where with chastising his body and bringing it into
obedience to his mind, he learned to Malmesb. de reg. lib. 1. cap. 3.
possess the vessel of the flesh in sanctification and honor. Furthermore,
all doubt of the holiness of his life is banished from humane thoughts by this
irrefragable sentence which the Majesty of divine wisdom left to the world:
In animam maleuolam non introibit sapientia, nec habitabit in corpore subdito
peccatis. Wisdom will not enter into a malicious soul, nor dwell in a body
subject to sin. Which is not spoken of worldly wisdom, that enters
indifferently into the hearts of all men, and in which oftentimes wicked persons
and those that to the last gasp set noe limits to their wickedness are found to
excel: according to that of our Savior. The children of this world are wiser
then the children of light; But that the Wiseman calls wisdom, which auoydes
the faynednes of good discipline, and which separateth it self from thoughts
that are without the true understanding of well-liuing and wellsaying. Whence
it is that Quintilian rightly defined a true Orator when he said: Orator est
vir bonus, dicendi peritus, An Orator is a good man, skillfull in speaking.
Therefore this our Ecclesiastical Orator saint BEDE did first purify his
own conscience, that so he might worthyly attain to a divine knowledge to
discover the understanding of the mysteries of holy scripture. For how could
that man be subject to vice, who tasted the most inward marrow of those divine
writings, and employed all the thoughts and powers of his soul in the
continual explication thereof? This his own words do prove when he says,
that his expositions Lib. 3. sup. Sam
if they brought noe other profitt to the readers, at lest they were anayleable
to him in this, that whilst he applied his whole study thereunto, he set
aside and avoided the lightness of the world, and all vain cogitations.
Therefore this holy man being free from all vice, displayed the veil of the
hidden mysteries, and with a modest and devout eloquence laid open to the world
those divine secrets which he had learned.

VII. HIS custom was to be by his reading greatly enkindled to Trithem. de vir.
illust. l. 3. c. 155.
devotion and compunction, which he oftentimes witnessed with bitter tears
that flowed from him at his book. And after his reading and study our pious
Doctor betook him self to his prayers, having learnt that the way to attain
the knowledge of holy Scripture lay more in the grace of God then his own
forces. O man worthy to be honored of all ages, who enriched the treasure of
his mind with virtue and prayer, and adorned the Christian world with learning.
Noe man ever saw him idle, so vehemently he burned with the love of sacred
study and devotion. He had many famous scholars, whom he not only taught by
his own study and example the secrets of all humane and divine learning, but,
which is the chiefest, made them excellently perfect in religion and holy life.
He was a man in all things most worthy of praise, and (according to his title)
VENERABIE in learning and good manners. In charity toward God and his
neighbor most excellent, admirable in devotion, and glorious in chastity of
life. Of a decent and comely stature, grave in his gate, of a high voice, an
eloquent tongue, and a goodly aspect or countenance, in which a kind of sweet
pleasantnes shined through a venerable severity. Whereupon to good and devout
persons he was affable, but terrible to the negligent and high-minded: and yet
he carried him self with so great meeknes and humility to all, that in the
whole Monastery (in which were six hundred Monks) is was hard to find his
equal in true virtue and religion.

VIII. BUT above all, the pure holiness, and holy pureness of his life and mind
appeared more excellently at his death; the manner whereof we have related out
of. Cuthbert his disciple, afterward Abbot Cuthbert in ep. ad Cuth winu^
condiscipulum.
of the same monastery, who was present at his holy departure. He fell first
into sickness almost a fortnight before Easter, from which time until
Ascension-day he labored grievously with a weakness in his stomach, and the
shortness of wind: yet he ceased not to dictate daily to his scholars at his
accustomed hours, and spent the rest of the day in reciting of psalms and
prayers, and the whole night (unless when a little sleep did hinder him) he
passed over in spiritual joy and thanksgiving, striving by these pious
exercises to deceive the sharpnes of his disease. I confess truly (says the
Author) His employments during his sickness.
that I never saw or heard off any one other, that so diligently gave thanks
unto almighty God. O truly blessed man? During this sickness besides these
employments, he turned the Gospel of saint JOHN into English, and gathered
some memorable notes out of the books of saint ISIDORE: using these words to
his scholars: Learn my children whilst I am with you: for J know not how long
J shall subsist, or how soon my creator will take me away, that my soul may
return to him that sent it. J have lived a long time, my Lord God has well
provided for me in this space of life; now I desire to be dessolued to live
with CHRIST.

IX. ALLSOE a firm hope of the joys to come, and a pious fear of the
fearful judgments of almighty God being set in an equal proportion A
pions lesson.
in the balance of his mind, he used that sentence of saint PAVL: Horrendum
est incidere in manus Dei viuentis: It is a dreadful thing to fall into the
hands of the living God: and many other such like, out of the sacred
scripture, whereby he exhorted his scholars and brethren that were about him
to awake out of the dullnes of the soul, by the remembrance of the last
terrible hour, adding a speech in the mother tongue of the fearful
separation which death makes between the soul and the bodi^. Then he would
sing himnes and Anthimes to the great consolation of him self and all the
assistants, till tears of devotion trickling down his cheeks hindered his
pious music, and made the attendants, that endeavored to help him out, to
weep singing and sing weeping, striving (as it were) with their songs to serve
him singing, and with their tears to help him weeping. But he (allbeit he
wept) enjoyed so great comfort and spiritual joy in his soul, that when he
was most cruelly oppre sled with the burden of his disease, he gave thanks
unto almighty The security of his conscience
God for his goodness in so punishing him: Using those words of the Scripture:
God scourges every child that he receaueth: and alluding to the words of saint
AMBROSE dying. I have not lived so amongst ye that I need be ashamed of my
life, and nether do I fear to die, because we have a good Lord. Thrice happy
soul that could speak with so great security of conscience, that he was
nether ashamed to live, nor afraid to die! not fearing the sight of men in this
world, and with a quiet mind expecting the secret judgment of God in the next.

X. BUT on tuesday before the Ascension of our Lord, his sickness His siknes
encrea seth.
began more grievously to afflict him, and a little swelling appeared in his
feet, an undoubted presage of his neere-approaching death. Yet all that day he
passed over joyfully teaching, and dictating to his scholars, and the night
following he watched singing himnes and psalms of praises and thanksgiving to
Almighty God, till the next day (which was the last of his labors and first
of his rest) brought him the embassage of his ensuing happiness, when he still
diligently dictated to his brethren about him, whilst the bitter tears of the
writers, greeuing to be deprived of so good a Master, were as gauls to make
their ink more black and doleful. In the after noone he sent his beloved
disciple Cuthbert (who writ this history) to his Cell, to fetch thence such
small gifts as he had to be disposed amongst his more familiar friends for a
memory of him. Then a great part of the Priests and other monks of the
monastery being He receaueth the last sacraments.
gathered together, they fortified the holy man with the sacraments of Extreme
Unction and the sacred Eucharist: who having given the salutation of peace unto
all his Brethren, beseeching each one in particular to be mindful of him in
their Masses and prayers, he joyfully expected the happy minute that should
free his soul from the burden of her mortality to the immortal reward of his
labors. But (said one of his devout Scholars) my beloved Master yet there
remains one sentence unwritten. Write then quickly (replied the holy Doctor)
for my time is short. Which being done: now (answered he) I have written it,
and the whole work is ended. Thou say well (replied the Saint) that it is
ended, for now I desire to end also to live with my Creator. And causing them
to place him toward the oratorie where he was wont to pray, lying down upon
a hayre-cloath with perfect sense and a joyful countenance, he invited the
grace of the holy Ghost devoutly singing this Anihime: O rex gloriae, Domine
virtutum, qui triumphator hodie super omnes caelos ascendists, ne derelinquas
nos Orphanos; sed mitte promissum His last song of devotion.
Patris in nos Spiritum veritatis: and having added; Gloria Patri, and filio,
and spiritui sancto, he devoutly rendered up his blessed spirit to the
everlasting Kingdom of all blessedness: when such sweet and fragant odours
followed his swan-like soul, that the amazed assistants throught them selves
in a Paradise of heavenly baulmes: and all generally Sweet odouts at his death.
affirmed that they never saw any man end his life in so great tranquillity
and devotion. He died on the feast of our Lords triumphant Ascension into
heaven, the twenty sixth day of May, but his feast is observed the twenty
seventh of the same, because the twenty sixth was solemnly observed to the
honor of our glorious Apostle Saint AUGUSTINE, throughout all England. His
death was about the year 735. at the age of nintie (or as others say) of an
hundred and five years, for in the computation of his age and the year he
died in, our writers are very different. He was first buried in his own
Monastery of Weremouth, but afterward his holy relics were translated to
Durham, where together with the head of King Oswald, and the bones of King
Coolwulphe a Benedictine Monk of Lindisfarne, they were found in a linen
bag within the tomb of our great saint CVTHBERT, during the reign of
William the second, when Ranulphus the seventh bishop of Durham translated the
body of the same saint CVTHBERT into the new Church which he had built: where
the sacred bones of saint BEDE remain to this day, with this Epitaphe too
vnelegant for the shrine of so learned a man. Beda Dei famulus monachorum
nobile sidus, The Epitaphe of his Tomb

Finibus e terrae profuit Ecclesiae.
Solers iste Patrum scrutando per omnia sensum,
Eloquio viguit, plurima composuit.
Annos in vitater duxit Quinque
vitae triginta
Praesbiter officio, Maximus ingenio.
Iunij septenis viduatur carne Calendis,
Angligena Angelicam commeruit patriam.


They are in no sort to be borne with or believed, who have A false opinion of
his translation.
written, or rather dreamed, that his body was transported to Genua in Jtaly.
For hitherunto I do not find this affirmed by any approved Author. And not
a few asseuer that in his life time he never went out of the bounds of England,
and to say that he was transported after death into foreign lands, seems to
be a monstrous and strainge opinion worthy to be banished into far countries.

His life we have collected out of diverse grave Authors, William Malmesbury de
gest. reg. Ang lib. 1. cap. 3. Ioannes Anglicus recited by John Capgraue in his
legend of English Saints, and Trithemius in his work of the illustrious men
of saint Benedicts Order lib. 3. cap. 155. and lib. 2. cap. 21. But his life
has been written by Cuthbert his disciple a Benedictine in the same
Monastery, and one much auncienter then all those; being an eywitnes of what
he writes, out of whom, and an other ancient manuscript written by one that
suppressed his name, we have taken a great part of his life. Mention is made of
him in the Roman Martirologe, and all our Historiographers as well English as
others do highly sound forth his praises.

The end of May.
decorative device
depiction of St. Boniface S. BONIFACIVS MARTYR GERMANORVM APLVS Benedictinus
Anglu^. Junij. 5. M. ba^^. f.

The life of S. BONIFACE Archbishop, Apostle of Germany, of the holy order of
saint BENEDICT.
JUNE 5 Written by S. Willibald Bishop of Ei^^^^tadt in Germany.
WHEN the Englishmen that came out of Germany had conquered the Island of great
Britain and given it the name of England, the Catholic religion brought in by
King Lucius, was forced to give place to Paganis^^e till after an hundred and
forty years, by the preaching of S. AUGUSTINE the Benedistine Monk it was
again restored to Christianity. Then many holy men, of the same order and
profession allthough they thought them selves most happy in the purchase of so
great good, something notwithstanding they judged to be wanting for the making
up of their felicity, because their own ancient country of Germany which
they had left, was yet detayned in the black night The place of his birth, and
desire of a religious life.
of Idolatry. The care and cogitation hereof much troubled and exercised the
hearts of many, and chiefly of this holy Benedictine Monk WINFRID, afterward
called BONIFACE. Who being borne of very worthy parents at Kyrt^n in
Devonshire, was from his very childhood possessed with a wonderful love of the
heavenly wisdom, and a perfect monastical manner of life; in so much that
he opened the secret of this desire unto his father, Who greatly displeased
thereat, endeavored partly with flattering enticements, and large promises,
and partly with threatenings, to deter him from that pious course. But by how
much the more earnestly the father strove to reclaim his son to the love of
the world, by so much the more co^sta^tly the holy child full of the divine
grace, remained firm in his good purpose, and studied to attain to the
knowledge of heavenly learning. Whence, by the wonderful providence of
almighty God, it came to pass, that his father who was his only hindrance,
being taken with a sudden sickness, deposed all his former stubbornness, and
sent his son to the Benedictine Abbey at Excester six miles He takes the
Habit of S. Been dict.
distant from the place where he was borne, commending him to the care of
VVolphard the venerable Abbot of the same Monastery, by whom he was courteously
received, where he began to perform all the duties of a monastical life
that were agreeable to his tender age, growing daily, as in age, more perfect in
the exercise of virtue.

II. BEING gone out of the years of his childhood, he so entierly subjected
him self to the institutions of his ancients, and the exercise of sacred
reading, that every day his soul was enriched more and more with the divine
gifts of many virtues. In sum, when under the obedience of the forenamed
Abbot he had professed and observed all the discipline of a regular life
according to the Rule of the great Patriarch of Monks saint BENEDICT, for the
space of many years, and being not able there for of want teachers to satiate
his thirst of divine learning, according to the greatness of his desire, with
the consent of his Abbot and brethren he went to the Monastery of Nutscelle,
where under the discipline of Winbert the Abbot he made so wonderful a
progress in all manner of His great progress in learning.
learning and virtue, that his fame being diuulged over the country, many
flocked thither to become his scholars. When he, the more he was exalted to
the height of science, and excellency of other virtues, the more close he kept
him self within the ward of humility, ever honoring his iuferiours as his
equals, and embracing them with the arms of true love and charity, according
to the counsel of the wiseman, By how much thou art Eccl. 3.
greater, humble thy self in all things. At the thirtith year of his age he
was adorned with the sacred dignity of Priestood, when by reason of his great
learning and virtue, he was held in so great He is made Priest.
veneration in that country, that a Synod being assembled at the same time to
difcusse some ecclesiastical controversies, wherein some certain decrees were
ordained (which notwithstanding were submitted to the honorable suffrage of
the Archbishop of Canturbury) by the consent of the King and Council, BONIFACE
was chosen to be most fit to treat of so weighty a matter with the
Archbishop: which business he so bravely and solidly dispatched, that he
purchased to him self grace and favor with all men.

III. BUT retayning allwaies in his mind a pious desire to labor His ardent
desire to convert Insidels.
in the conversion of Infidells to the faith of CHRIST, and continually
ruminating with him self how to bring his desire to perfection, rightly
understanding every good thing to be so much the more absolutely perfect, by
how much it was more common, and of all things that to be the best and
excellentest by which men were brought from the blindness of Idolatry to the
divine and evangelical light of the truth; contemning all domestic hopes and
honors, and setting aside all dangers of health and body, he was wholly
carried to that holy work. Germany was the place at which he aimed, where
many had never, or very slenderly heard of CHRIST, or his Gospel, others had
indeed received the knowledge of the true religion and professed the Christian
faith, but were almost fallen again into Idolatry, and bore only the bare
name of Christians, as the Thuringians, and Banarians, and Frisians. To guide
the first in the truth, and reduce the others to the truth, was the height of
his desires. Therefore having with much difficulty obtained the free leave of
He sayleth into Germany.
his Abbot and brethren, whose prayers and tears waited upon his departure,
he fosooke his own friends and country, and sailed into Frizeland, in which
place he employed the first and last part of his holy labors.

IV. AT that time Ra^bod the impious prince of the Frisian^, having overcome
Charles King of France, returned newly from the victory, when the matter went
very ill with those in that country that professed the faith of CHRIST, whom
he out of hate to Charles and the Christian name, did grievously persecute. Him
therefore See the divine courage of the holy man.
swelling in the triumph of this victory, saint BONIFACE (allbeit unknown,
and abject in the world) was not afeard to meet in the very pursuit of his
conquest; desiring him to abstain from vexing those poor souls, and to
embrace ^lemencie as the greatest ornament of a Prince, and the Christian faith
as the only true religion. The prince reuerencing the boldness of this Christian
champion, abstayned from offering him any further wrong. But BONIFACE finding
after many labors that there was little or not hope of reaping any profitt
in Friseland, returned back to his own country. And Winbert his Abbot being
dead in the mean time, the Monks his brethren turned all their studies and
desires toward him, and earnestly requested him to undertake the government of
the monastery. But he desiring still to perfect his old desire, wished them to
think of an other ruler, and suffer him to live a Pilgrim, He refu^^th the
dignity of Abbot.
for the love of CHRIST, and the good of his poeple. Therefore having
communicated the matter with the venerable Daniel Bishop of Winchester, and
being strengthened with his commendatorie letters, he returned to his former
pilgrimage. And to the end that being armed with greater counsel and
authority he might disperse the evangelical seed, he went to Rome, the
head-Church of the world, and made known his holy purpose to Pope Gregory the
second. Which when he had approved, and perceived BONIFACE to be a man very
fit for that function, he sent him with letters into Germany, whereby he gave
him full power and authority to announce the faith of CHRIST to all the Pagans
throughout that whole country; admonishing him withal that whatsoever
difficulty arose, of which he could not conveniently discharge him self, to
refer it to the Roman and Apostolic Sea. The profitt of his first labors in
Germany


V. FROM Rome therefore he returned to Th^ringia in Germany, where he very
profitably employed his labor, both with the Princes of that Province, whom he
reduced to the knowledge of the true religion, and with the Priests that lived
far unworthy their calling, whom with his pious exhortations he caused to
amend their lives. Then hearing of the death of Radbod, he went again into
Frifeland, where together with saint WILLIBRORD Bishop of Vtreicht (an English
Benedictine Monk) he labored for the space of three years in preaching,
teaching, destroying of Idols, and building of Churches; whereby many were
reduced to the Christian faith. Then saint WILLIBRORD (whom old age had now
made unable to govern his Church) desired to lay the burden of his episcopal
charge on the shoulders of saint BONIFACE; but noe entreaties could move him to
yield thereunto, so ardent a desire he He refuses a Bishopric.
had to hold on the course of his preaching, to gain souls to CHRIST.
Therefore with the good leave and benediction of WILLIBRORD, he traveled into
Hassia (having first built a Monastery and stored it with Benedictine Monks in
Frifeland) and there, when he had converted many thousands of poeple, and
imprinted in their souls the Christian character of baptism, instead of the
black marks of Idolatry, by letters and a Messenger he rejoiced the Pope of
Rome with the glad news of his happy success; and not long after being sent
for by the Pope he went to Rome in person; whom the Pope received with all
courtesy and humanity, and admitted He goes again to Rome.
him often times to his presence, and spent with him sometimes almost a whole
day together in discourse.

VI. IN THE mean time, the Pope having exactly understood his happy progress
in promoting the Catholic cause, and received an account of his faith (which
he te^dered unto him in writing) that greater estimation and authority might
be added to his preaching, made him bishop, and gave him the name of BONIFACE,
for before He is made Bishop
he was called WINFRID. In receiving which dignity he religiously called to
witness almighty God, and the sacred body of S. PETER at which he stood, that
he would faithfully keep and maintain the sincerity of the Catholic faith,
as long as he lived, and humbly obey the Bishops of the Roman Church, as the
successors of S. PETER; and hold noe communication with those Bishops that
violated the decrees of the Canons and ancient Fathers of the The Pope
commends him to the German princes.
Church. Then Pope Gregory dismissed him with letters to the Prince Charles
Martellus, and to the Bishops, Clergy, Princes, and poeple of Germany, in
which he carefully recommended BONIFACE unto all, desiring them to advance the
good endeauours which he employed in promoting the Christian cause, and obey
his admonitions. And that he might be the better provided and instructed
exactly to exercise all the duties belonging to his episcopal function, he
imparted many precepts unto him touching ecclesiastical matters, and at his
departure gave him a book containing the decrees of the Popes and ancient
Fathers. Returning therefore from Rome, he went again into Hassia, where many
yet lay groueling in the night of Idolatry: and many that before had
professed the Christian faith, had now either perfidiously forsaken or wickedly
defiled it with the impious and detestable actions and superstitions of the
Heathens.

VII. THERE grew in that Province a certain tree of a mighty Jupiters tree
destroyed m^^^culously.
greatness called Ioues-Tree, which was superstitiously worshipped by the
Pagans. This, as a chief monument of their Heathenish superstition saint
BONIFACE endeavored to cut down and overthrow. Which his labors greatly
vexing the minds of those Infidels, made them take arms against him; when to
the great astonishment of them all, that tree, which by little and little he had
begun to cut, was by a certain divine power suddenly broken and shiuered
into four pieces. This spectacle so terrified the fierce hearts of the
Pagans, that together with their malice conceived against the holy man, they
deposed they errors and embraced the Christian faith, which from this time
wonderfully increased every day. To which happiness, by the labor of saint
BONIFACE, the Christian cause in Thuringia aswered with the like good success:
where allbeit the false Christians Dorth winus, Bertherus, Erimbertus, False
Christians excommunicated.
and Humedus, men wholly addicted to withcraft adultery, and all other vices,
cruelly afflicted and hindered for a time his holy endeauours, yet being at
length utterly convinced with the force of his divine arguments, they were
overthrown, and by the censure of excommunication cut off from the Communion
of the Catholic Church. Whilst he labored in preaching, teaching, and
baptising in this Province, and happened to pitch his tents near unto the
river Oraham, an heavenly splendor glittered all one night over the place
where the holy bishop lay, and in that light S. MICHAEL S. Michael appears to
S. ^oniface.
the Archangell appeared unto him with words of wonderful consolation and
encouragement. On the morrow having rendered thanks unto almighty God for so
peculiar a remonstrance of his favor, he celebrated the sacred mysteries of
Mass in the same place, where in great extremity and want of victuals a
strainge byrd unexpectedly brought him a fish of sufficient quantity to serve
him and his fellows for a meal. And here having afterward obtained a parcel
of land of one Hugo surnamed the Elder, saint BONIFACE built the Church and
monastery of Ordosse, to the honor and name of saint MICHAEL, and in memory of
this divine favor there received.

VIII. THEREFORE the Christian faith greatly increasing every He se^deth (...)
more preachers out of England.
day by the preaching of saint BONIFACE, and finding the laborers to be too
few for so large and ample an harvest he sent for more religious men and
women out of England, and divided the burden of his labor amongst them. The
chiefest of the men were B^rehard, Lullus, Willibald and Wincbald his brother;
Wit^^, and Gregory; and of the religious women Tecla, Lioba, and Walburg, all
Monks and Nuns of the holy order of saint BENEDICT, by whose pious labors
and endeauours His obedience to the Roman sea.
the Monasteries built by saint BONIFACE were governed in the profession of
monastical discipline, the Benedictine Order much advanced in that Country,
and many thousands reduced to the Christian faith. In the mean time Pope
Gregory the second being dead, an other Gregory succeeded, unto whom saint
BONIFACE sent messengers out of hand, to testify his duty and observance
toward him and the Roman sea, to signify withal how and in what manner he
had labored in Germany, and to desire his counsel in many difficulties that
did arise. To all which the Pope not only gave particular answer by letters,
but allsoe (an honor which he desired not) made saint BONIFACE Archbishop of
Germany, and sent him the Palle due unto that dignity.

IX. Then this blessed man, having built two Monasteries, one in the honor of
the Prince of Apostles saint PETER, and an other to saint MICHAEL the
Archangell, and filled them with Monks to sing the praises of Almighty God,
he traveled into Bauaria, then governed by a Duke called Hubert, where with
his sacred preachings, and the excommunication of a wilful sck Ermwolfe,
(whose poisonous doctrine infected many) he greatly promoted the Christian
faith. And not long after, saint BONIFACE went His third journey to Rome.
again to Rome, where he was honorably entertained by the whole court and
chiefly by the Pope, who sent him back into Germany laden with many sacred
gifts, and with commendatorie letters to men of all orders and conditions as
well Ecclesiastical as secular throughout the Country. Being returned, Vtilo
Duke of He reformeth the Churches of Bauaria.
Bauaria sent for him to set in order the Churches of that Province, where
there were many that impudently assumed unto them selves the sacred functions
of Priests and Bishops without any authority but their own, and corrupted
the poeple with diverse errors. These the holy man banished out of that
country, and with great care and prudencie, provided against the like deceipts
in future: The Province it self he divided into ^ower Diocesses, which before
was governed by the sole Bishop of Pata^^a, unto which saint BONIFACE added the
Episcopal seas of Saltzburg, Frisengen, and R(...)bone: and this his
proceeding was ratified by the letters of Pope Gregory, who with his hands
lifted up toward heaven fignified the infinite thanks he gave to almighty
God, for the Evangelical seed so happily sown by Boniface in Germany, where
he had gained a hundred thousand souls to Christ out of the slavery and
bondage of the Devil.

X. But death having deprived the pious Prince Carolus Martell^^ Carolomannus
King of France.
of the use and cares of the world, Carolomannus together with his brother
Pipin ioinctly succeeded their father in the crown of France. To Carolomannus
therefore, who was the elder, S. Boniface went, whom when he had carefully
exhorted to imitate his fathers piety toward the Churches of God, for the
advancement of the Christian says, he found nothing degenerate from his father
in that matter. Therefore saint BONIFACE^ beseethed* his authority and consent
for the assembling of a Synod, whereby the Ecclesiastical A Synod held in
Germany.
discipline (greatly impaired both in the Clergy and poeple) might be reduced
to the exact observance of the Canons and de(...)s of the Church. For no^ Synod
had (...) held there for the space of fowe^score years before. The dec(...) of
the Canons were neglected; the ordinations of Bishops were dispatched by those
that had no authoriti^* men of wicked lives were without distrinction raised to
priesto^d and other Ecclesiastical functions. Therefore in this Synod (in
which by the authority of Zachary Bishop of R(...) saint BONIFACE presided)
many things very profitable to the Church were decreed: and amongst others,
that noe bishops or* Priests* contrary to the state of their dignity and
office, should follow ^eats of arms, those only excepted who ser^^ed the (...)
with the sacrifice of Mass and the sacramenes. Many allsoe that were feared
with the marks of wicked life, and teaching of (...) s^ doctrine, were
deprived of their degrees: and amongst others two notable masters of dam^able
opinions, Clement, and A^elbe^^, (...) ^ast out of the Church; as allsoe
G^^uilio Bishop He is made Archbis hop of Me^^s.
of Ment^ (who had cunningly slain the murderer of his father) was degraded,
(...) whose place the two Princely brothers (...), and B^p^^ substituted our
Boniface. And for the greater ornament of him and ^his sea, they not only
exempted it from the jurisdiction of the Church to which it was subject before,
but also made it the prime metropolitan Sea of all the Churches of Germany*
and by Lega^s sent to Rome obtained to have their decrees established by the
honorable suffrage of the Pope. His labors con*firmed by the Pope.


XI* BUT our holy BONIFACE being strengthened and adorned with this
Archiepiscopall authority, endeavored daily as his honors en^re^sed to
increase also his former labou^ and diligence of preaching* ^eaching* and
baptising* making many hard iourneies* over the country to that end, founding
new Churches and Monasteries, and ond^yni^g new bishops and Pastors to govern
them, especially at Ei^h^tat, Wirzburg, and Erphesfort, who were all confirmed
by the authority of Pope Zachary, who writ many letters to saint BONIFACE
him self, and to the bishops and Princes of Germany in his behalf: And saint
BONIFACE likewise, ^o take counsel touching diverse Ecclesiastical affairs,
sen^ many epistles to Pope Zachary, which the purpose of our brevity will
not permit to rehearse at large. But the fore^amed Hereticques Adelbert, and
Clement were condemned in a Synod at Rome, not T^^o Me^ericks condemned, for
wicked opinions.
as bishops and Pastors of the flock, but as de^ourers of their sheep, and
Apostatas against the Catholic Church. Adelbert like unto an other Simon Magu^
assumed a new deity to him*self yet alive, and refusing to dedicate Churches
to the holy Apostles and Martirs, did consecrate, or rather pollute a Temple to
his own name and honor; and gave his hair and nails for holy relics to
that deceived poeple. And when they came humbly to him to make a confession of
their sinne^* In vain (said he) ye seek to reveal those things to me, all
which I perfectly know allreadie, and from which I absolve ye all* therefore
with a secure and quiet conscience return home. But Cl^ment (who was a Scott
by nation) being possessed with See the insolent pride of here^ie.
a spirit^ of wonderful great pride, preferred him self not only before all
the learned and pious bishops and others of that age, but also before all the
ancient Fathers and holy Doctors of the Church: and besides other monstrous
opinions, tickling the ears and minds of that foolish poeple with the
flattering language of his preaching, he promised a certainty of salvation to
all, even Idolaters, whom together with the rest, he said Christ had redeemed,
by descending into Hell. But let us return to saint BONIFACE.

XII. WHO allthough he were encompassed with so many and so great cares and
labors in Germany, yet did he not depose all thought and care of his England;
where when he understood that many things were done amiss both by the bishops
and Kings, he piously admonished them of their duty by letters. Whereof one
written to Ethel^ald King of the Mercia^s to reclaim him from his wicked life,
because it is a lively patter^^ of the zeal and affection of this holy man, we
will here set down for the profitt of these times, and of posterity. Thus
therefore he writes.

To Ethelbald his most dear Lord, and to be preferred in the His Epistle to
King Ethelbald.
love of Christ before other Kings of the English, BONIFACE Archbishop, German
Leg^t of the Roman* Church sends perperuall health of Charity in CHRIST.
We confess before God that we rejoice when we hear of your prosperity,
^ayth, and good works. F^^ we have* understood that attending to almesdeeds
thou for (...) (...)beries and ^^pes* and love peace, and thou (...) de^^ndes
of widows* and the poo^e, and thence we give God thanks: but in that tho^
despisest lawful matri^onie, if thou did do it for love of chastity, it
were laudable; but because thou wall ^^est in lust and (...) eue^ with sacred
Virgins, it is to be (...) and damnable* For it confounds the same of thy
glory before God and men, and ranks thee amongst idolaters, because thou (...)
violated the temple of God. Wherefore, most dear son, do penance, and
remember how foul a thing it is, that thou who by the gift of God, art Lord
of many poeple, to the injury of him, becomest a slave to Lust. Moreover, we
have heard that almost all the Nobles of the Mercia^s, by thy example forsak^
their lawful wives and committ adultery with others. Which how far it is
from honesty, let the institution of other nations teach us. For in ancient
Saxony, where there is noe knowledge of CHRIST, if a Virgin in her fathers A
strainge punishment of Adult^ry.
house, or a married woman under the duty of a Husband committ adultery, they
burn her being strangled with her own hands, and hang up* the adulterer* on
her grave: or else being naked to the gyrdle, some chaste matrones do scourge
her, and punish her with knives from town to town, where she is ever me^t by
new tormentors, until she be (...) to death. A^ Widen also, which is a most
faithful generation of men, they have this custom, that a woman when her
husband is dead, do throw her self hedlong into his funeral ^ier to burn
together. If then the Gentiles ignorant of God have so great zeal for
chastity, what becomes thee, most dear son who art a Christian, and a
King^* Have compassion therefore on thy own soul, and on the multitude of
poeple perishing by thy example, for whose souls also thou must render an
account. Again, if the English nation (as it is reproached against us in
(...)e From unlawful, lust a bad generation.
and ^^a^^, yea and by the Paga^^ them (...)) said along law full marriage fall
wholly to fi^thy (...)s, that (...) generation it will breed a slugg i^ poeple,
that (...) God, and with their wicked manners overthrow the whole country, as
it has be^al^^ to the (...)ans, Pro^^s(...), and S(...)ds, whom the S(...)
have (...) years vex^^ fort(...) sin(...).

Furthermore, it is (...) us that (...) the Churches and Monasteries of
(...)ges, thou do(...) by (...)uoke thy Nobles to (...) the like: But call to
(...) I(...) thee The divine punishment of Church ^obbers.
what a terrible revenge (...)e God has ex(...) against other Kings thy
pre(...) that were gu(...) of the (...) we now ^eprehend in thee. For (...) thy
(...)ing a (...) of sacred Virgins, and a breaker of (...)ges, was suddenly, as
he fate (...)ully ba(...)g with his Nobles, (...)sed upon by a wicked Spirit,
that (...)tly robbed him of, his soul, without either confession (...)
Via(...) but talking with the de(...) and ^etesting the law of God. (...) (...)
King of the (...) and B(...) being gu(...) of the (...), be (...) madd; that by
a contemptible death he was deprived both (...) his Kingdom and youthful age.
All so Charles a Prince of the ^rench being a destroyer of ma^^ Monasteries,
and one that turned Church-goods to his own vles, was co^^med with the long
torment of a fearful death. Wherefore, most dear son, with f(...) and
earnest prayers we besee^h she^ not to despise the counsel of thy Fathers, who
for the love of God endeavor to call upon thy Highness to remember thy duty;
for nothing is more wholesome for a good King, then if such faults be willingly
amended, when they are reprehended; because Solomon says; Who ^oneth (...),
^oueth wisdom. Therefore, most ^eare son, making (...) our counsel; we
Prou. 12. v. 1.
be(...)h and con^^re thee by the ^uing God, and by his dear son (...), and
by the holy Ghost, to remember how flee^ing this present life is, and how short
and momentarl^ are the delights of the (...)thy flesh, and how ig^omi^^^ous a
thing it is, that a man but of a short life, should leave a p^^per^^^
remembrance of bad examples to his poste^^e. Begin then to or (...) thy life
with (...) manners, and to correct the former (...) of thy youth, that here
thou ^^iest purchase pray^^ before men, and ioies, of eternal glory in future.
Who wish thy Highness to enjoy health, and profit daily in good (...).

XIII. The should saint (...)CALL (...); King Ethe(...), wherein (...) did (...)
wholly loose his labor, (...) the King being Etherbald reformed by ^aint
Boniface.
terrified with this sha(...) and pio^s remem(...), in ma^le things reformed
his (...), and restored di(...) so the (...)ri^s; of so^ great (...) was the
(...) and (...) of the holy man^^ (...)kes of (...) mean time, saint (...)
((...) btayned (...) Prince K(...)man a pe^ce of land in the desert of (...)
(...) into the ^iuer F^ld^) began to lay the foundation of the famous
Benedictine Monastery which (...)heth to this day, and is called the A^bey The
building of the Benedictine Abbey of Fulda.
of Fulda, famous for religion and (...) The first Abbot thereof was called
(...), a man of V^^^rible con^^sation, to whom and (...) holy (...) of Morikes,
the land where the (...)nasterie now stands, was by the royal charter (...)
(...) confirmed and granted for ever. Which done, this ver(...) Prince growing
daily more and more perfect in the love of God, and finding that in the world
he could not see purely and perfectly (...)ine to the height thereof, (...)
with Magdalen of the (...) Caroloman beco meth a Benedictine Monk.
shall never be taken from him. For lea^ning the ample Kingdom of his terrene
dominions to the government of his brother. P^pi^, he departed to Mount-Ca(...)
in It(...), the place (...), holy Father saint BENEDICT laid the foundation of
his ver(...) Order, and in which was yet observed a most strict discipline, of
(...)sticall life; And now in that place this noble Prince cha^nged his ^oyall
robes of majesty, to the simple weeds of a self-punishing humility, and made
profession of a Monk under the MASTER-(...) OF DISCRETION, the holy Rule of
the great Patrianke of Monks saint BENEDICT. Then King (...) having ^^rayn^^
the whole i^heritance to him self, imitating the pl(...) of his brother, (...)
all ways to love, honor, and promote all the pi(...) (...)rs, of saint
BONIFACE, unto whom by his own letters, he confirmed his Br^thers donation of
the monastery of Fulda.

XIV. BUT now saint BONIFACES time dr^^ (...) wherein he should receive from
CHRIST the reward of his great hours, and taste the most ample fruit of the soed
of his Enangelicall preaching which he had (...) worthily (...) in the hearts
of the G(...) poeple. Therefore foreseeing the diss(...) of his own body S
^onitace retor neth into Frisia.
to be near at h(...) by the suggestion of the holy Ghost he returned into
F(...), there to finish his humane (...) where he took his beginning, there he
might all s^e make an end of his e(...)licall preaching, and his mortal life
together. Thy(...) then he went, not without a presage of what should befall
unto him. For being (...) take his journey be appointed his saythfull disciple
and companion L(...)us to succeed him in the Metropolitan Sea of M(...)z,
diligently recommending unto him, carefully to sert forward the building of the
Monastery of Fulda, and together with some books, to send him a shroud to
mind his body in after death; and cause it to be translated to Fulda. These
words (...) blessed (...) to perform with tears the holy man's commands.

XV. BEING arrived into Friseland, by his preaching he converted a The sacra
meant of Confirma tion.
great multitude to CHRIST, and washed them in the sacred Font of baptism,
unto whom departing away he appointed a day to return, in which by the
imposition of hands and anneyling with sacred chris(...) they ^igh(...) the
sacrament of Confirmation. When in the mean time those Neophites had by a
wicked persidiousnes suffered a relapse from the Faith into their old errors;
and now being chainged from lambs to wolves they came not in peace to (...)
the holy Ghost by the imposition of hands, but armed with fearful weapons, and
countenances more terrible then their weapons, and broke into the tents of the
Saints, to lay violent hands on the spiritual father of their souls, and to
take away his life, for whose ^afetie they ought to have spent their own. Then
some of Saint Bonifaces company prepared to defend them selves S. Bonifaces
desire of Martirdom.
by resistance, meaning to venture their own blood to save the shedding of his:
but they were strictly by him forbidden that enterprise, (...) that desire of
revenge did not become true Christians, and that they ought not to loose so
fair an occasion of (...), and (...) them selves the purchase of so great
glory, He seals the patent of his Apostles hip with his blood.
as now one minutes patience would bring. Therefore that surious multitude of
P(...) set upon the holy Bishop, and with their (...) weapons mad^ so many
wounds in his sacred body, that through those bleeding sluses his blessed soul
took a most happy flight to the immortal crown of martirdom in heaven. And
thus this Apostolical man, having to his death performed true Apostolical
labors, at length (after the manner of the Apostles) left his Apostle ship
signed with his own blood, that Germany noe less then ot^^r Churches erected
by Apostolical men, might glory with the everlasting memory and high glory
of so great an Apostle and Martyr, from whom it received the Gospel
testified with his blood, sealed with his death, confirmed with many miracles,
and lastly (that nothing might be wanting) ^ortified with store of writings.

XVI. THIS glorious bishop suffered martirdom the fi^t day of June, The
companions of his martirdom.
the sixtith year of his age, and fortith after his coming out of England: in
the year of grace 755. At the same time together with saint BONIFACE, E^banus
(whom he had newly made bishop in Frisia) and fi^tie persons more, some Priests
some deacons and other sacred ministers, of whom many were English Monks,
walked the same paths of death, to receive the euer-florishing crown of
Martirdom. But the wicked actours of this tragical scene escaped not the
divine punishment of heaven; for as they returned The just punishment of the
murderers.
from the slaughter, a controu^rsie arose amongst them touching the division of
the spoils which they had taken, which when they could not decide by words,
they fell to blows, and slew one an other with the same weapons which so
lately had been embrewed in the blood of these glorious Martirs: And as many
of them as escaped out of this mutual slaughter, were soon after slain by
the Christians, and so paid a just tribute to death for their former
sacrilege. The sacred body of saint BONIFACE was first buried at Vtre^ctht,
afterward translated to Mentz, and lastly to the Benedictine His sacred
burial.
Abbey of Fulda, according as he had desired in his life time. And at all these
three places his holy Tomb was adorned with many wonderful miracles, as so
many irresistable witnesses of his holy life and meritts.

The life of this glorious Saint was written by S. Willibald an English
Benedictine first bishop of Eistat in Germany, and by Othlonus Priest and
monk of the Benedictine Abbey of Fulda, out of whom we have gathered the
foresaid History. The Roman Martirologe makes glorious mention of him the
fifth day of June, and all Historiographers do largely speak his praises.

The life of Saint GVDWALL Bishop and Confessor.
JUNE 6 Extracted out of an ancient Author
GVDVVALL borne in great Britain of the noble blood of Britans, seemed to be
sent to that troubled country as the son of peace. For at his birth the
seucritie of the divine justice was chainged into clemency and meeknes, and
the three common scourges of Kingdoms, plague, famine, and war (which long had
afflicted that nation) ceased. Being baptized, together with his years the
grace of the holy Ghost increased in his soul, and the understanding and
knowledge of divine learning. When he came to man's age (all men presaging that
he would one day prove a worthy pillar of the Catholic Church) he was adorned
with the sacred dignity of Priesthood. Then he began to lay open the hidden
treasures His learning, and scholars.
of his wisdom and learning gotten in his tender years, and to instruct
others with the vndrayneable fountain of his divine science. Whereby many
were so rarely enkindled with the beams of the true Sun, that they became
fit to lighten and inflame others with the virtue and learning which they had
sucked from his breast. At length the fame of saint GVDVVALL was of so He is
made Bishop.
great estimation in the world that he was advanced to the height of
Ecclesiastical dignity, and made Bishop: when by how much he was exalted
higher to honors amongst the poeple of Gods Church, so the more abundantly he
spread abroad the sweet odours of his holy life and conversation, to the great
consolation and joy of the whole country. He was borne to a very large and
ample patrimony, but despising all the riches and wealth of the vain mortal
world, he gave all that he had to the Church of CHRIST his immortal King. And
perceauing allsoe that his pastoral He leaves his Bishopric.
chargetied his mind with the chains of care to worldly affairs more then he
desired, he found means to discharge him self thereof; and having substituted
an other in his place, retired him self to a Monastery within his Diocese,
where he entered into a contemplative life, serving our Lord in watching,
fasting, and prayer, and all other austeritie and discipline of a perfect
monastical life.

II. BUT desiring within a short time after to enter into a more He leads an
Heremiticall life.
secret solitarines, wholly to apply his mind to the contemplation of divine
things, he departed with one only companion and went to a great rock that stood
like a little Island within the Sea, where having cut him self a little cave in
the hard stone, he led a most retired and solitary life, according to the
example of the ancient Hermites. Till the brethren of the monastery which he
had left being not able to endure the hard burden of the absence of GVDVVALL
who had endowed them with the learning of heavenly discipline, made a pious
search over all the country to find him. And being found, they joyfully ranged
them selves in the institution of his virtuous school, carefully studying to
imitate his holy simplicity and lively mortification. But being pressed with
the narrownes of the place, they hewed many little habitations in that hard
rock to defend them selves from the violence of the weather. Therefore the rock
which before bred a solitary horror to the behoulders, The number of his
disciples.
being now turned into a house of prayer, was made an habitation of Monks,
where solemn watches were observed, and the Echoes of Gods divine praises
resounded amidst the roaring of those swelling waves. When the fame of the holy
man increasing daily, the number of his disciples likewise increased, so that
one hundred fourscore and eight monks are reported to have lived under the
government of his pious institution, in so much that the quantity of that
place being not able to contain so great a number, at a low water saint
GVDVVALL went down upon the The seas obey his command.
sands, and with an assured and strong confidence in the divine goodness, making
the sign of the cross in the sand, commanded those unruly waves in the name
of JESUS CHRIST noe more to flow beyond the limitts which he had there
prescribed. When to the great admiration and comfort of Gods servants, that
untamed element contained the accustomed pride of its swelling fury, and
obeying the holy man's command, never more dared to trangresse the bounds by
him prefixed. Hence it appears that the miracles of the old law have been
revived in the Christian Church; for Moses divided, and our GVDVVALL bridled
the waves of the untamed He(...) prayers.
seas. And not only in this, but in an other act allsoe this holy man was
replenished with the spirit of the Prophet Moses, when in the same place being
in want of fresh water, by his prayers he obtained a fountain of clear
streams to spring out of that hard rock.

III. WONDERFVLL surely was the life that this holy man led in this horrid
place. He daily celebrated the dreadful sacrifice of Mass, Angels appear at
h^^ mass.
and that with so great purity of mind and such devour preparations
thereunto, that sometimes the Angels descending visibly from heaven assisted
at that venerable mystery, and together with him sung the divine praises of
almighty God, to the great astouishment of his amazed brethren. And other
whiles, when the holy man began to recite his canonical hours, and pronounced
those words; Deus in aduitoriu^ meu^ intend, the same celestial spirits
distinctly answered; Domine ad adiuuandum me festina, joining their heavenly
harmony to the sacred devotion of S. GVDVVALL. But now this glorious Confessor
having wholly abandoned and forsaken the world, and crucified him self with
CHRIST, in so much that for his sake he hated his own soul according to the
words of the Gospel, yet was he not satisfied herewith, but endeavored daily
to better him self in perfection; He departs to an other part of the country.
whereupon after a consultation had with his brethren, he resolved to leave
this habitation, and seek a convenient place to build a monastery elsewhere.
Therefore they sailed into an other Province, where having obtained of a great
man a piece of land fit for his purpose he laid the fou^datio^ of a
monastery, in which together with his brethren he led a most heavenly and
angelical life on earth, totally applying him self to the contemplation of
heaven and heavenly things amidst the continual exercises and mortification of
a most devout monastical life.

IV. IN THE mean time, many miracles were wrought by the divine He cures a
dumb child.
power of almighty God at the intercession of this holy man, among which one
was, that he gave speech to a child ten years old that was borne dumb, and
others which for breuities sake are here omitted. And many heavenly favors he
received at the hands of the divine goodness, whereof one and not the lest was,
that ten days before his death performing the sacred mysteries of our
redemption at the altar, the holy Archangell S. MICHAEL together with the two
He has an apparition, and a revelation of his death.
princes of the Apostolic company PETER and PAVL appeared visibly unto him,
and amongst other divine consolations revealed the happy minute of his death,
exhorting him withal to prepare him self thereunto with watching, fasting, and
prayer, to gain a greater crown of glory in heaven. Therefore the next day,
having assembled his brethren together, he made known the manner of this
revelation, exhorting them to the contempt of the world, and a constant
perseverance in the service of almighty God. Then a welcome His la^^ sickness.
sickness taking hold of his holy body, made him more feelingly understand
that his time drew near, when being armed with the sacraments of the Church,
amidst the devout prayers and recommendations of his weeping Brethren, he
joyfully yielded up his blessed soul into the hands of his dear redeemer,
which in the form of a white dove was seen to take her flight toward the
heavenly dwellings. He died the sixth day of June, and over his sacred relics
shined a glorious splendor all the night following.

V. AMONGST others that were present at his death were his mother A
controversy miraculously decided.
and Sisters, who very earnestly desired to have his body transported into his
own native country to be honorably buried in the Church where he had been
bishop. But his Brethren a^ first absolutely resisted their petitions, till the
controversy was decided by miracle. For putting the sacred body in a wagon
the beasts that drew it were permitted to take their own ways: when contrary
to the desire of both parties, they went directly to be Island called Plet,
which was the place (if I be not deceived) where the holy man led a solitary
life in a rock of the Sea, as is above said. And there his sacred body lay
buried for the space of many years, famous for miracles all the country
over. Till that Province of the Britans being invaded by barbarous enemies, the
Monks of S. GVDVVALLS transported his body into France, and Arnulphus marquis
of Flanders caused The tran^ lation of his body.
it to be very honorably translated to the famous Benedictine Abbey of saint
PETER and PAVL a^ Gaunt, together with the holy relics of saint BERTVLPHE.
This translation happened in the reign of Clotarins over the Kingdom of
France, and it is yearly celebrated in the said Monastery of Gaunt the third
day of December.

His life is written by an ancient Author recited by Laurence Surius tom. 6.
and by Ioannes Anglicus recited by John Capgraue, both whom we have followed.
Very honorable mention is made of his great virtue, Sainctitie, and Miracles
in the life of Saint Bertulphe in the second tome of Surius, February the
fifth, and by Vsuard, Molanus, and others.

The life of saint ROBERT Confessor and Abbot under the holy Rule of saint
BENEDICT.
JUNE 7. Written by an ancient Author recited by Surius.
THE Venerable Abbot ROBERT borne in Yorkshire, shunning from his very
infancy the vain sports and pastimes of other Children his equals, so
worthyly profitted in the study of good learning, that he was afterward
promoted to the government of a Church in that country. But discharging him
self within a while of that office and all care and cure of souls, he went to
the Benedictine Abbey of Whiteby, where he putt on the habit and profession of
a monk of saint BENEDICTS Order. At that time one Richard Priour of our Ladies
of York had received a piece of land at a place called Fountains, where by
the means of Thrustine Archbishop of York he had built a Monastery, in which
together with twelve other monks, over whom he was Abbott, he led a
Monastical life according to the constitutions of the Congregation of
Cisterce, under the holy Rule of saint BENEDICT. Noe man there did eat his
bread in idleness, nor gave his body to rest, but when it was ouerwearied with
labor. They all went hungry to the table, and weary to bed. Their diet only
supplied necessity, not their appetite; and yet without either sadness or
murmuring they gave God thanks with alacrity. Therefore our saint ROBERT,
having He becomes a Cistercia^ Monk.
first obtained leave of his Abbot, joined him self to this holy company, and
chainged his black habit for a white; that is, from a Benedictine, became a
Cistercian, still observing the Rule of our holy father saint BENEDICT. And now
it was rare to behold how strongly this holy man performed the accustomed
labors of the monastery, how fervent he was in holy reading and
contemplation, and how devoutly he followed his prayers, and other monastical
exercises: being venerable in his behavior, provident in giving of counsel,
and elegant in his speech.

II. IN THE mean time, having spent five years in this place, in He is made
Abbot.
the year of grace a thousand one hundred thirty seven, a noble man of
Northumberland gave an ample possession of land to the Church, on which saint
ROBERT built a new Monastery, and being chosen Abbot thereof, he took with
him eleven other devout monks, wherewith he furnished the same. These he
governed in the rigor of a monastical life, making him self so perfect a
pattern His wonderful abstinence
of a abstinence, that he never rose from the table with a full stomach, and in
Lent for the most part his greatest dainties were bread and water. Whence it
came to pass, that at an Easter time, his appetite and gust of meat was so
utterly mortified, and overthrown, that he could not eat the meat which was
set before him. And when the monk that waited upon him demanded why he did
not eat? If I had some oaten bread (replied he) moistened with butter, I
think I should be able to eat it. Therefore the Monk So holy David refused
to drink the water which he had desi^red.
his servant brought some such bread: when the holy man reflecting with him
self that he had given a little favorable scope to his appetite, conceived so
great fear thereat, that becoming a rigid and severe revenge to himself, he
refused to taste it at all, but remained fasting. And that meat so provided he
commanded to be given to the poor that waited at the Monastery gate, where
they found a fair young man of a very beautiful countenance, who took the
meat with the dish, and vanished, Which as they related to the holy Abbot,
behold the same dish fell upon the table before him. Whereby they understood
that an Angel sent from heaven had received that alms from the holy man.

III. OVER and above the accustomed task of his divine office and His prayers
and the effects thereof.
prayers, he daily recited the whole Psalter of David containing an hundred and
fifty Psalms. But as once more earnestly he made his prayers unto almighty
God, and with the tears of his devotion abundantly trickling down his
cheeks, he powered forth his soul before the court of heaven, desiring that as
well his own as the service of his brethren might be acceptable to the divine
majesty, and that they might be found worthy to have their names written in
the book of life, he heard these comfortable words come from above: Take
courage, my Son, for thy prayers are written in heaven. Only two of them,
(whose hearts have been allwaies fixed to the love of terrene things) are
inscribed in the dust of the world. And not long after two Conuerses (commonly
called Laybrothers) casting off their habits made a miserable end of their
lives in the world, whereby the divine revelation of the holy man was verified.

IV. PASSING on a time by New Castle, he happened into a great He hinde^^^^ the
wicked endeauours of the devil
multitude of young men, where he saw one with a wonderful curiosity run up
and down amongst them, fawning upon them with an insolent countenance, and as
it were exhort and stir them up to the execution of some great matter. When
perceauing that he played not the part of a Man, but rather the deceiptfull
games of some wicked devil, by the powerful force of his divine words he
commanded him to depart: Ho thou gallant (said he) these men do not want thy
work, quickly therefore be gone, and follow me. Presently ^e, as if he had
been tied to their horse tails, went af^^t holy Abbot through the durtie
streets, to the great astonishment of those that were present. When they were
gone out of the town, and come into the turnings of the highway: Who art thou
(said the holy man) and what was thy business there? Thou art not ignorant who I
am (replied he) and thou know well my endeauours. There is a pompous
celebration of a rich man's wedding Note the ma^ice of the deu^^l
in that town, and I was earnestly laboring to have the groom slain in the
buanquet by his riualls, that the guests being incensed with anger thereat,
might endeavor to revenge his death, and so blinded with wrath and dronkennes
their mutual wounds might cause a sedition in the city, that by the cutting
down of many bodies I might reap an harvest of souls into my possession.
And now I was persuaded by the purchase of this victory to have returned in
joyful triumph to my Prince, when my whole plott and counsel being
overthrown by thee, I am constrained to go home without any gain at all. At
these words the holy Abbot detesting the wickedness of that insernall monster,
commanded him to depart to the determined place of his torments, and never
more hereafter to attempt to deceive minkind. Whereat the wicked spirit
vanished, taking his farewell with so great horror, that their horses growing
furious with neighing, snoring, and tearing the ground with their feet, could
hardly be held under the possession of their riders.

V. AN OTHER time the monks being at mattins, the holy man saw the Devil
standing in the habit of a country fellow at the quire He sees the devil
inquiring into the faults of his Monks.
door, and oftentimes endeavoring, but in vain, to enter into it. Then
falling heartily to his prayers, and stirring up the hearts of his brethren to
devotion, that infernal spy perceauing after a long expectance that he
profitted nothing, vanished away with anger and confusion. The same holy Abbot
celebrating once the dreadful sacrifice of Mass, saw in a vision a mighty
storm at sea, wherein a ship was sorely tossed up and down in those swelling
waves, till the stern being broken, she ran violently on her own ruin, and
beating her self against a cruel rock, dissolved her joints and ribs into
pieces, and left all the men her rulers to shift for them selves in the
merciless billows of the Ocean. The holy man being greatly moved to
compassion with this vision, having finished his mass, sent his Monks to the
sea side to take up the bodies of those drowned persons. They went, and the
fourth day after, in the very place designed by saint ROBERT, the sea cast up
the dead bodies, which by their hands were honored with Christian burial.

VI. A HOLY matrone (who by the pious persuasions of S. ROBERT S. Robert freed
from a fa^se Suspicion by S. Bernard
had contemned the gorgeous pride and vanity of the world, and betaken her
self to a retired and devout life) was oftentimes visited by the same holy man,
to be by his godly instructions daily advanced in the way of virtue. Which
thing was a cause of many bad suspicions in the jealous minds of some of his
brethren; who judged that current of familiarity to proceed from an impure
spring. And now they had infected the ears of many with their misdeeming
opinion, till their complaints arrived to the knowledge of the great Patron of
his Order saint BERNARD Abbot of Clareuall in France. To whom saint ROBERT went
in person: and he having had a revelation of his great same and merits, took
him secretly aside, and said: Brother ROBERT, those things are most false which
the sinister suspicion of many has bruted abroad against thy innocence: And
in testimony of his love, he gave him a gyrdle, which afterward by the merits
of them both, gave the benefitt of health to many sick persons.

VII. THIS holy Confessor was wont oftentimes to visitt the blessed Hermit
GODRICK, between whom past many pious discourses of the diseases of vices and
the remedies of virtues, as allsoe of the heavenly secrets, angelical
visitations, and the Patronage of the Saints, spending whole nights and days
in the delightful mixture of such divine speeches. But here I must admonish my
good reader An error in the History of his life. corrected.
that there is a mistake slipped into the life of saint ROBERT set forth by
Surius, when it is said that saint GODRICK heard the confessions of saint
ROBERT: for saint GODRICK (as we have said in his life the 21. May) was a man
wholly without learning, and never made Priest Perchance Surius correcting the
style of the Author, destroyed the sense; for in Ioannes Anglicus recited by
Capgrane We find contrariwise that saint ROBERT (who used oftentimes to visitt
saint GODRICK) was his Physician in matter of confession and conscience.
Therefore let not this error in Surius deceive my reader, as allreadie it has
done many others who are unacquainted with our English histories.

VIII. BUT this holy Abbot saint ROBERT when he had gloriously finished the
spiritual conflict of a monastical life which he had undertaken in this
mortal world, yielded up his blessed soul to receive the immortal prize and
reward of his labors in heaven. And S. Godrick has a vision of his glory
at the same instant, the forenamed saint GODRICK (being then in his cell in
the Hermitage of Finckley) saw his soul in the form of a fiery globe, carried
up in great glory to the heavenly Kingdoms, by the ministry and assistance of
angelical hands. He died the seventh day of June, in the year of our
salvation 1159. He was buried in his own Monastery called New Abbey, where
his tomb was famous for many miracles; there the blind received their sight,
the dumb their speech, the lame the use of their limbs, and many others the
benefitt of their desired health. The memory of Saint ROBERT was famous in
times past at Knaresborow in Yorkshire, where by some he is reported to have
led an Heremiticall life. But whether that saint ROBERT be the same of whom now
we treat, I dare not certainly affirm, especially because the Authors of his
life do make noe mention that ever he was an Hermit.

The history of his life we have taken out of the Author thereof recited by
Surius tom. 3. the same it set down by John Capgraue out of Ioannes Anglicus.
The Roman Martirologe, Molanus in his additions to Vsuard, Matthew Paris anno
1238. Matthew Westminster in the same year do make worthy mention of him.

The life of Saint WILLIAM Archbishop of York, and Confessor.
JUNE 8. Gathered out of diverse Authors.
SAINT WILLIAM borne of noble Parents, Count Herbert, and Emma Sister to King
Stephen of England, excelled the splendor of his parentage, with the bright
luster of his virtues, and the heavenly graces and gifts wherewith he was
adorned by the divine goodness of almighty God. When his tender years began
to be more soundly governed with the raynes of discretion, he also endeavored
carefully to rule his life with all the pious discipline of good manners. Till
by the daily increase of his virtues and holy conversation he purchased unto
him self advancement to Ecclesiastical dignity, and was chosen treasurer of
the Church of York He is made Treasurer of the Church of York.
under. Thurstin Archbishop of the same Sea. When WILLIAM judging no treasure
to be more precious then that which succoureth those that suffer want, made his
riches serve to enrich the poor and needy, At length, Thurstin the Archbishop
having paid the tribut of nature unto death, our WILLIAM, being found to be a
man in whom the virtues of meeknes, piety, and charity did a bound, was by
the common consent of the Chanons chosen to succeed in He is falsely accused.
the government of that sea. But by the factious and turbulent resistance of
Osbert Archdeaco^ of the same Church, and by the many false complaints and
crimes which he and his adherents preferred to the court of Rome against this
election, the matter was held in suspense and controversy for five years
space, allbeit the acclamations of the Clergy, and the general applause of
the people not only testified the innocence of S. WILLIAM, but allsoe
proclaimed him to be a worthy lover of justice and good life.

II. AT length Eugenius a Cistercian Monk succeeding in the Roman Primacie,
pronounced his sentence for Henry Mordach a pious Monk of the same profession
(who was sustained by Osbert the Archdeacon) not that he judged WILLIAM unfit
for the dignity, but because he was more inclined to the other, being a man of
his own order. Therefore the same of saint WILLIAM being thus unjustly His
great patience.
torn with the venomous detractions of his adversaries, he made use of noe
other weapons for his own defense in all these broiles but the bucklar of a
contented patience, with which and the unshaken constancy of a virtuous mind
he conquered all his troubles. He retired himself to Henry Bishop of
Winchester, of whom (being his Uncle) he was so courteously entertained, that
he made his whole family to be obseruant and dutiful unto him. But the
holyman abhorring the pomp of the world, affecting more the solitarines of a
retired life, contented him self His pious life, and exercises,
with a little corner of the Bishops house, where he piously spent his time in
watching, fasting, and prayer, and the contemplation of divine and heavenly
things. He rejoiced to have found the leisure of this good occasion to bewail
the faults of his life past, and to drown the reuengefull flames of the pains
due thereunto, with the sorrowful streams of his devout tears. He lived in
great silence and tranquillity, suffering noe vain word or idle speech to
hinder his mind from the continual contemplation of the divine goodness. In a
word, he led so holy a life, full of virtue and goods works that those that
beheld him, seemed to see in him an angelical creature in a humane shape.

III. BUT after the course of seven years in one and the same day Pope
Engenius and Henry Archbishop of York chainged this life for a better, whose
death was by a divine revelation made known to He is made Archbishop of York.
saint WILLIAM. Then the Chanons of York again made choice of him to succeed
in that Sea. Who going to Rome, had his election confirmed by Pope Anastasius,
was by him consecrated Bishop, and adorned with the honor of the
Archiepiscopall Palle. Which done, he returned into England, and at Canturbury,
he was for honors sake courteously visited by Roger Archdeacon of the same
city, of whom (he being departed) saint WILLIAM thus foretold to his own
company: This is the He foretells his successor.
man (said he) that after my death, shall succeed in my place. Which prophecy
the event proved true: so admirable were the divine gifts and favors
wherewith almighty God ennobled this holy man beyond the common lot of other
mortals. Amongst which this heavenly benefitt following is worthy of eternal
memory.

IV. FOR WHEN almost an infinite multitude of people of all ages, sexes, and
conditions came to meet him and congratulate his return toward York, as they
pasled in violent throngs over a wodden bridge after the holyman, the same
bridge broke suddenly under them, and let a great company fall headlong Note a
wonderful miracle.
into the river. Which the Bishop (who was newly past over) perceauing, being
stricken in mind with the vehemency of a sudden sorrow to see so many
innocent people in the imminent danger of their lives; and full of
compassionate tears, with his hands and eyes lifted up toward heaven, he
implored the divine mercy for the health of those perishing creatures, and
blessed them with the sign of life: when so miraculously he enjoyed his holy
purpose and desire, that to the wonderful amazement of all, and the great
glory of God and his Saint, they were all saved from the danger of drowning,
allbeit (for the greater renown of the miracle) a great part of them were
children wholly unable to shift for them selves. To S Williams death.
whom as by his prayers he gave life, so the thirtith day after his entrance
into the city of York, he deposed his own mortal life, to be clothed with
the heavenly and immortal, laden with all manner of virtues, merits, and good
works, that belonged to the function of a most holy Prelate. And the
innumerable benefitts bestowed upon many miserable and afflicted persons
Miracles at his tomb.
at his tomb, were so many powerful witnesses, that beyond all exception
proved of how great grace and glory he was, in the sight of almighty God.
Nay which is more, a wonderful oil, most sovereign against all diseases
flowed out of his sacred body, which was carefully received, and used by devout
poeple. He died the eight day of June, about the year of our redemption 1154.
But an hundred thirty one years after his death, his sacred bones were taken
out of the ground, and placed in an eminent place in the Church of York, in a
very precious and rich shrine, where thy were reserved with great reverence and
veneration till the fatal destruction of all Churches and religion in the
unhappy reign of Henry the eight.

His life we have gathered out of William of Newbery lib. 1. cap. 17. and 27.
Nicholas Harpsfield saec. 12. cap. 41. Ioannes Anglicus recited by John
Capgraue, and Polidore Virgill lib. 12 who allsoe speaks of his Canonization.
Vsuard and Molanus in their Martirologes make mention of S. William.

The life of saint COLVMBA Abbot and Confessor.
JUNE 9. Written by Adamnanus Abbot, who flourished in the year 690,
THE glorious Abbot and venerable father and Founder of many Monasteries
Saint COLVMBA, borne in Jreland of noble parents, was from his very infancy
much inclined to embrace all true Christian virtues, to follow the studies of
wisdom, and to keep him self chaste, pure, and entier in body and soul from
the infectious venom and vanities of the world. He was of an angelical
contenance, nea^e in his speech, holy in his works, sound in his judgment,
provident in giving counsel, and excellent in wit. He suffered no one hour
to pass, wherein he did noe apply him self to prayer, reading, writing, or
some other good work. He was so unwearied in the labors of fasting, and
watching, and His continual labor.
s^e strongly exercised him self therein night and day without intermission,
that the weight and greatness of those employments seemed to exceed the
possibility of humane nature. And amidst all bearing allwaies a joyful
countenance he became most grateful and dear unto all men. To the age of
thirty four years he lived in Ireland, in the continual exercise of a most
holy life. But in the year of our Lord five hundred sixty five he came into
the Island of great Britain to announce the faith of CHRIST to the northern
Picts, whom by his zealous preaching, virtuous example, and miraculous works
he converted to the Christian Faith; so that by a just title he is termed
their Apostle. In one of the Orkney Islands on the north side of Scotland he
built a famous Monastery, and furnished it with a great Convent of Monks, whom
he governed as He builds the Monastery of Hoy.
Abbot in all holiness of life and conversation, to the age of threescore and
seauenteen years, when laden with many meritts and good works he ended this
mortal life to enter into the immortal which never ends. He was first buried
in the same Monastery, which from him was called Columbkill, or Columbs-Cell,
but afterward his holy relics were translated to Dune in Jreland, and laid
in the same tomb with great saint PATRICK and saint BRIGITT; according to this
Epitaphe, Jn Burgo Duno tumulo tumulantur in vno,
Brigida, Patricius, atque Columba pius.


During his life he founded many other Monasteries both in Jreland He foundeth
many Monasteries.
and elsewhere, in which he gained many thousands of souls to God out of the
dangerous paths of this world. But if we should go about to set down in
particular the miraculous works, excellent virtues, prophetical revelations,
angelical apparitions, and all the heavenly and divine gifts and graces which
almighty God largely bestowed upon this holy man, it would require a whole
volume apart. And after all our best endeauours employed therein, we should
come so far short of worthyly declaring his worthy deeds that I have chosen
rather to pass them over in silence, then with a rude pen rudely to decipher
them to the world. He died the ninth of June, on which day his memory has
heretofore been celebrated with great solemnity, especially in Ireland, as his
proper Office in a Breuiary of that counrrey does testify.

His life is very largely written by Adamnanus Abbot of the Monastery of Hoy.
The Roman Martirologe, Venerable Bede de gest. Angl. lib. 3. cap. 4. and lib.
5. cap. 10. Notkerus Balbulus in his martirologe, Henry Huntington lib. 3.
hist. Ang. fol. 330. Cardinal Baronius in his Annotations on the Roman
Martirologe, and many other grave Authors do make honorable mention of him.

The life of Saint MARGARET Queen of Scotland.
JUNE 10 Written by Aluredus Abbot of Rhieuall.
AFTER the death of Edmund King of England, who from the great strength of body
was surnamed Iron-side, Canutus King of Denmark and conqueror of England)
being him self ashamed to putt to death his two sons Edmund and Edward by
reason of the league made with their father) sent them to the King of Sueuia to
be murdered: who moved with compassion, presented them Parents of S Margaret.
to Solomon King of Hungary to be preserved. But Edmund dying without
children, Edward his younger brother married Agatha daughter to the Emperor,
which marriage was blessed with a daughter called MARGARET, afterward Queen
of Scotland, who according to her name appeared indeed as a precious Margarite
before God and man. For in the prime of her flourishing age (when others of such
royal birth are wont to decline to the vain pleasures of the world) she
began to order her life according to the rules of continency, to love God
above all things, to apply her self to the reading of divine learning, and
with a delight to exercise and follow the rules and precepts of her reading.
Afterward (compelled by the importunity of her friends more She marries
Malcoline King of Scotland.
then her own desires) she was given in marriage to Malcoline King of
Scotland; when allbeit necessity constrained her to deal in worldly affairs,
yet she never so tied her mind thereto, as to forgett or omit her spiritual
exercise: for she was more delighted with doing good works, then in the royal
possession of her wealth and riches. By her prudent counsel, discretion, and
industry, the laws of the realm were maintained, and the Catholic religion
increased. Then her, nothing was more firm in faith, more constant in
patience, grauer in counsel, iuster in giving judgment, and pleasanter in
discourse.

II. MOREOVER, she was wonderfully liberal to adorn Churches, Her liberality
to the Churches.
enriching them with gould and silver vessels and very precious ornaments: in
the place where her royal wedding was celebrated she built a fair Church in
honor of the holy Trinity, and beautified it with great store of riches, and
amongst others with a fair Crucifix garnished with gould and many precious
stones. She governed her family in the love and fear of God, and especially
her The government of her children and family.
children, whom she would her self iustruct oftentimes in Christian doctrine;
using so sweet a severity, and so severe a sweetness toward those under her
charge, that they all loved her with fear, and feared her with love; in so
much that noe man in her presence durst presume to speak an unseemly word. Nay
besides the often admonitions, and continual instructions of her children,
this pious Mother (who may rightly be termed the Margurite of mothers) would
daily power out her devout prayers and tears for them, that having attained to
the knowledge of almighty God, they might truly serve him, and by serving him
come to his love, and by his divine love purchase eternal happiness with his
Saints. Many times all so she would putt the She moves the King to good
works.
King her husband in mind to exercise the works of justice, mercy,
almsdeeds, and all other acts of Christian virtues, whom by the inward
working of almighty God in his soul, she made to be most obedient to all
good things. In sum, she omitted nothing that belonged either to the
maintenance of Christian religion and piety, or the prudent government of the
Kingdom.

III. WHEN the king went in progress over the realm with his court and a
great train of attendants, this holy Queen kept his followers in so good
order, that noe man durst attempt to steal any thign by the way, nor wrong or
oppress the poor A rare virtue in so great a dame.
country poeple in the lest. And as in all things she was careful to correct
faults in others, so was she most patient and willing to have her own
reprehended by others. And to this end she would her self oftentimes desire her
Confessor to give her notice of whatsoever in her words or deeds was worthy
reprehension, desiring that for an increase of virtue which others are wont to
take as a calumny: According to the counsel of the royal Psalmist; Let the
just man correct me in mercy, and rebuke m^^ but Psalm. 140.
let not the oil (that is the flattery) of a Sinner fatten my head.

IV. SHE was careful allsoe to correct many errors and bad She corrects an
erronr in keeping the Lent.
customs which had crept into the Scottish Kingdom, against the universal
practice of the Catholic Church. First she reformed an abuse touching the
observance of Lent. For the Scots began not their Lent till the monday after
Ashwensday, endeavoring to cover their error with the authority of the
Scripture, which relating the fast of Christ, proposes but forty days to be
observed. But she on the other side, in an assembly before the King, made it
plainly appear, that taking away the six Sundaies (on which the Church is not
wont to fast) there would remain but thirty six days, and therefore the
four days of the precedent week ought to be reckoned in the number of
fasting-daies, to make up the just sum of forty days, and that for this
cause they ought to begin the Lent upon Ashwensday. Moreover, (when many
And an other touching communion at Easter. 1. Cor. 11.
refused to receive the Sacrament of the Eucharist at Easter, alleging their
own unworthiness and these words of the Apostle, He that eats and drinks it
unworthily, eats and drinks his own judgment,) she showed them that to
compare the worth of that dreadful Sacrament with our unworthiness, is noe
comparison, for he that is most worthy, is in some kind, unworthy considering
the infinite worth of that excellent Sacrament: nevertheless allthough we be
all indeed Sinners, yet we may have recourse to the sacrament of Peanance,
which is instituted to reconcile sinners to our Lord, who says; Unless ye
eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood, ye shall have noe
life in you. And this is it that the Apostle admonishes I^an. 6. 53.
sinners to do, when he cries Probet autem scips^m ho^^^, and sic de pa^^ illo
edat, and de calice bibat. Let every one examine and discuss his own
conscience, and by confessing his sins and doing peanance, Who receaues the
sacrament worthily.
come with fear and reverence to to the sacred mysteries, and then he shall
not eat his own judgment, as those do who presume to receive that venerable
banquet with their souls laden with the filth of sin. Allsoe she reformed
many other abuses, touching the due observance of the Sunday, the celebration
of Mass, and the sacrament of marriage within the degrees of consanguinitie
prohibited by the Church, and others.

V. DISCOVRSING at times with her Ghostly father touching the health of her
own soul, and the sweetness of everlasting life, her words seemed to (...)
replenished with a certain divine grace, and her self was touch^^ with so
great compunction of heart, that she seemed wholly to resolve into tears.
During the divine service in the Church she showed so great devotion and
attention, that she would never speak word to anieman touching any worldly or
secular business, but atte^ded wholly to her prayers, which were oftentimes
accompanied with d^uout tears, I (...) her singular charity Her charity to
the poor.
toward the poor, whom she would oftentimes relieve with her greatest
jewels, becoming her selfmore poor them they: for they being in want de^ired
to have riches, and she dispersed all she had. I say nothing of her great care
and piety showed to sick persons, orphans, and widows, to whom she was
allwaies a most indulgent and pious Mothe^. I pass over in silence the
affection and reverence she bore to Hermites and true religious m^n, whom
sometimes she visited, and daily furnished with sufficiency. Every morning she
The rare pretty of the King and Queen.
nourished nine orphan-children, and gave them victuals with her own hands.
Besides these her custom was to receive three hundred poor poeple into the
palace, and having (...) the doors, she ranged them into order, when the king
on the on side, and the Queen on the other, served CHRIST in his poor, and
gave them meat with their own hands, pecul^rly provided for that purpose. O
the wonderful piety of these royal persons! This done, she went to the
Church, where during the time of the holy sacrifice of Mass, she sacrificed
her self to almighty God, with the long continuance of many prayers, sighs,
and tears. And before the high Mass began, she heard five or six private
Masses every day.

VI. THEN she returned to dinner, rather to maintain life, then Her spare diet.
to satisfy the delights of her appetite; for in her diet she was so sober
and sparing, that her meals rather sharpened then extinguished her (...), and
she seemed rather to ^ast then to ^are her meat. Throughout the whole Lent,
and forty days before Christmas, she mortified her body with an incredible
abstinence; in so much that out of the austeritie of her fasting, she endured
most sharp pains and gripings in her stomach all the days of her life: but
the weakness of her body could nothing weaken the strength of her unconquered
virtue. At length falling into a grievous ficknes, she sent for her Confessor
(...) the second Prior of the Benedictine Monastery of Durham, of w^om (having
first declared the manner of her life, and at each word of the consolation
which he gave her, powered out whole floods of devout tears) she took her last
farewell: for (said she) I shall not long remain in She desires Masses and
prayers after death.
this mortal life, and thou will shortly follow me. Two things therefore I
desire of thee, the first, that during thy life thou be allwaies mindful of me
in thy mass and other prayers; the second, that thou take care of my children,
and keep them allwaies in the fear of God, lest the prosperity of the world,
when they attain to the height of terrene dignity, make them loose the
happiness of eternal life. VII. AFTERWARD the vehemency of her disease
increasing, she was no^able to rise but seldom out of her bed. But the fourth
day The slaughter of King Malcoline
before her happy departure (the king being then abroad in a warlick
expedition) she grew on the sudden more sad then her wonted custom, saying to
the assistants; I fear more misfortune has happened this day to the Kingdom
of Scotland, then in many years before. And soon after they understood that
the King and his son Edward had that very day lost their lives in the wars.
The fourth day after the kings death, her sickness giving some truce to the
former vehemency of her pain, she rose and went into her chapel, and armed
her approaching end with the last Sacrament, and the Viaticum of our Lords most
precious body. Then the cruelty of her griefs laying her again prostrate on
her deathbed, she understood, by the new arrival of her son Edgar from the
ar^ie, of the late overthrow received by their enemies: when lifting up her
hands and eyes toward heaven, she gave infinite thanks unto almighty God,
who at the hour of her departure out of this A worthy example of patience.
world, had sent her an occasion of so great anguish for a trial of her
patience, by the suffrance of which she hoped to be cleansed from some of her
former sins. In the mean time, feeling the secret messengers of death to
summon her departure, she began devoutly to recite this prayer; Domine Jesus
Christ, qui ex voluntate Patris cooperante She dio^^ happily.
spiritu Sancto, per mortem tuam mundum vi^ificasti, libera me; and and at that
word, her soul being delivered out of the chains of the body, quietly passed
to the Author of all true liberty CHRIST-IESVS, whom so dearly she had
loved in her life time, being made participant of the happiness of those
glorious spirits, whose virtuous examples she had been all ways careful to
follow. And her face, which during her sickness was so wane and pale, returned
after death to so fair a mixture of a red and white complexion, that to the
astonished behoulders, it seemed to set forth the countenance of a sleeping or
living body, rather then of one that was dead. She died the tenth day of June,
in the year 1097. and was buried in the Church of the Blessed Trinity, which
she had built in her life time.

The life of this glorious Queen has been written by S. Alured Abbot of
Rhieuall recited by Surius tom. 3. and by Turgot second Prior of Durham, whom
we have followed. Also Deidonatus lib. 12. hist. Scotorum makes ample mention
of her, as allsoe the Roman Martir^loge, Vsuard Molanus and others.

The life of Saint EADBVRG Virgin and Nun of the holy Order of Saint
BENEDICT.
JUNE 15. Out of William Malmesbury, and others.
EABVRG daughter to Edward the Elder, King of England, and Queen Elsgiue his
wife, Her parents.
at the age of three years gave a notable proof of her future Sainctitie. For
her father being desirous to try whether the little infant would be inclined to
God or the world, laid the ornaments of diverse professions in his chamber
before her, on the one side a chalice and the Gospel, and jewels, rings, and
bracelets on the other. Thither the little gyrle being brought in the arms of
her dandling nurse, she was seated on her fathers lap, who said. Choose my
EADBVRG which of these things do most delight thee. She with a countenance, as
it were, despising the rest, greedily laid hold on the chalice and book,
embracing them with Note her choice of a religiouslife.
a childish innocence. The whole company of assistants cried out, that it was
an evident presage of future sainctitie in the gyrle, and the father most
tenderly kissing and clipping his child; Go thy ways (said he) whither God
calls thee, follow happily the divine spouse whom thou have chosen, and happy
indeed may thy mother and I esteem our selves, being in religion overcome by a
daughter. Therefore when riper years allowed her the perfect use of
discrecretion, she went to the Benedictine Monastery which her father had She
takes the habit of a Nun.
built at Winchester, and putt on the habit and profession of a Nun under the
holy Rule of saint BENEDICT; when so rarely she conformed her life to the
laws of her profession, that by the diligence of her dutiful service she
greatly invited all the rest of her sisters and fellow-Nunnes highly to love
and honor her. Nether did the greatness of her blood and royal birth make her
more nice or backward to undergo the austeritie of her profession, because she
judged it a thing most glorious to be humbled under the sweet yoke of the
service of CHRIST-IESVS. Her sainctirie increased with her age, and her
humility flourished with her youthful years; in so A rare example of
humility.
much that by night she would play the part of a pious thief and steal the
sockes of all the other nuns, and having carefully washed and anointed them,
she restored them again to their bed sides. Wherefore, allbeit almighty God
has ennobled her alive with many famous miracles, yet this one example is
before all most worthy of praise, that charity began, and humility
finished all the works of her whole life. At length passing happily out of
this world, Her happy death.
her pure and innocent soul was carried on the wings of these two virtues to
be perfectly united with her everlasting spouse in heaven, the fifteenth day of
June, about the year of our Lord 920. Her body was first buried in the same
Monastery, but some of her bones were afterward translated to the Benedictine
Abbey of Pershore in the Diocese of Worcester, where they were reserved with
great reverence and devotion at both which places the holiness and integrity of
her life was witnessed with many famous miracles, as the governors of the
same Churches could affirm, in the time of my Author.

The life of S. Eadburg (says John Pits) is written by one Osbertus Clarentius
a Benedictin Monk of Winchester about the year of Christ 1136. which I have
not seen. But thus much of her I have taken out of William Malmesbury de reg.
lib. 2. cap. 13. and de Episcop. lib. 4. de monasterijs diocesis Vigorn. and
Nicholas Harpsfield saec. 10. cap. 8. Mention is made of her by Roger Houedon
priori part. Annal. an. 899. Polidore Virgill lib. 6. Molanus in his additions
to Vsuard; Peter de natalibus in his catalogue lib. 11. cap. 69. and others.
And in an ancient manuscript breniary of S. Benedicts order with belonged to
the Monastery of Burton upon Trent, I find her feast celebrated this fisteenth
of June, with three lessons and a proper Collect.

The life of Saint BOTVLPHE Abbot and Confessor, of the holy order of Saint
BENEDICT.
JUNE 17 Written by Folchard a Monk of Thorney.
BOTVLPHE, and ADOLPHE brothers borne of noble parents, were both as near of
kin in virtue as in birth, and both equally ennobled the nobility of their
blood with the resplendent excellency of their holy life. Who (because in
England then but newly converted, the Catholic religion, and discipline of a
monastical life was not yet established in that perfection as their minds
aspired unto) went on pilgrimage over into France or Belgia. Where, because
virtue is no where a stranger, but is every where honored even amongst
strangers, ADOLPHE was at length advanced to the sacred dignity of Bishop; and
BOTVLPHE having been a long time He professes a religious life.
exercised in the stricter discipline of a monastical life together with his
brother, and putt on the habit and profession of a Monk under the holy rule of
S. BENEDICT, resolved to return into his own country, being courteously
recommended to ETHELMVND king of the South Saxons, by his two Sisters, who at
that time led a religious life in France. Therefore S. BOTVLPHE having passed
the seas was kindly entertained by king Ethelmund, who having understood the
desire of his sisters, gave him a piece of land in Lincolne^hire not far from
the city of Lincoln. The name of the place was Icanhoe, a forsaken uninhabited
desert, where nothing but devils and goblins were thought to dwell. But S.
BOTVLPHE with the virtue and sign of the holy Cross freed it from the
possession of those hellish He builds a Monastery
inhabitants, and by the means and help of Ethelmund, built a monastery
therein, which he filled with a Convent of religious monks under the rule of
our holy father S. BENEDICT.

II. THESE he governed both by word, work, and example, according to the
stricter discipline of a monastical life which he had learned in foreign
countreies, drawing them by the mildnes of his daily pious admonitions to
embrace the sweet austeritie of a virtuous and holy life; in so much that he
was highly esteemed and His piety in sickness.
beloved of all, and by a special favor of almighty God, ennobled with the
gift of prophecy and working of many miracles. Being oppressed with sickness
of body, he imitated the patience of holy Job, and gave infinite thanks unto
the divine goodness for that visitation, all ways discoursing of the souls
departure out of the body, and of the joys of everlasting happiness which
followed. With these and such like pious exercises he spent his whole time till
he attained to the happiness to be by old age overtaken in the divine service.
When the end of his life drawing near, and the vehemency of his sickness
increasing, he ceased not to exhort his devout children carefully to observe
the rules of monsticall life which he had planted amongst them, and to
maintain peace and charity in the Monastery: Till adorned with the long
studies of all virtues, this untired H^s happy death.
champion of CHRIT, being oppressed with the cruelty of a teadious disease of
body, yielded up his blessed soul out of her mortal habitation to the
immortal reward of her labors, the seventeenth day of June, about the year
of our Lord 680. He was buried in the same Monastery, where his memory was
yearly celebrated, being famous for miracles both in his life and after his
death. But that place being afterward destroyed by the Danes, the worthy
restorer of the Benedictine discipline S. ETHELWOLD bishop of Winchester caused
his sacred relics to be taken up and translated to the Translation of his
body
two Benedictine Abbeies Ely and Thorney. And it has been found written in the
book of S. BOTVLPHES Church near Alderg^^e in London, that part of his holy
body was, by King Edward, given to the Abbey of Winchester. The memory of this
glorious Saint has in former times been very famous in our Island of great
Britain, and in Lincolneshire there remains yet a renowned town which from
his name was called Botulphs-Towne, but now by corruption of the word is named
B^ston, situate on the banks of the river Witham.

His life has been written by Folchard a monk of Thorney, and by Ioannes
Anglicus recited by John Capgraue in his legend of English Saints. S. Bid in
his history of England, Florentius Wigorniensis an 654. Matthew Westminster in
the same year, Nicholas Harpsfied saec. 7. cap. 24. William Camden in
descriptione comitatus Lincol^i^, Molanus in his additions to Vsuard, and many
others make worthy i^e^tion of him. And in an anncient Bre^iary of S. Benedicts
Order which belonged to the Monastery of Burton upon Trent, I find his death
celebrated with an office of three Lessons.

decorative device
depiction of the martyrdom of St. Alban S. ALBANVS PROTOMARTIR IN ANGLIA.
Iunij 22 (...)

The life of Saint ALBAN the first Martyr of Great Britain.
JUNE 22 Out of Venerable Bede, and an ancient manuscript of S. Albans.
WHEN the bloody persecution which the two cruel Emperors Diocletian, and
Maximian raised against the Catholic Church raged over the world, the fury
thereof was so cruelly outrageous that it could not be contained within the
bounds of the Ocean, but powered it self out in cruelty even into the remotest
Islands of the Christian world, and amongst others into our famous Island of
Great Britain. Where saint ALBAN was the captain and leader of that sacred
warrefare; who being a citizen of the ancient City of Verulam (which The
place of his birth.
at that time was a Colonie under the Roman Emperors) and borne of a famous
stock, received first the Christian faith by the precepts and instructions of
the most holy martyr Amphibaluss of whom allsoe we must in this history make
often and honorable mention. For after that by preaching he had purchased
other countreies to CHRIST, being enkindled with an ardent zeal of gayning
more and more souls to Gods Church, he came to Verulam, where first with
courteous hospitality he was entertained by our ALBAN as yet a Heathen. But
understanding that his new guest Amphibalus was He defireth to know the points
of faith.
not only a professor but a teacher all so of the Christian name, he was
desirous to hear him discourse of the assertion of his faith, and Amphibalus
was as eager to give his Host an account thereof, hoping to win him to the
same profession. Therefore he showed him how almighty God consisting of one
essence and three persons so dearly loved the world, that he sent the second
person in Trinity his only Son from heaven, as a witness and messenger of his
love, for the reconciliation and redemption of mankind. Who when he was true
God of God, yet so far he humbled him self for our healths sake, that he
voutchsafed to take humane flesh upon him, and be borne of a Virgin, allbeit
he were the maker and creator of the same flesh and of his mother the Virgin.
And these (said he) are the principles of our Faith, these by the instruction
of the holy Ghost were many ages ago known and foretold by many of the
Jews, and since confirmed by the wonderful works of CHRIST him self, and
received by the common consent of almost all nations: and in embracing of
these points consists the height of all felicity, and perpetual misery
follows all that deny them.

II. BUT at first ALBAN seemed to laugh at these things and contemn them, and
to hold the teacher of them him self not only to He laugheth at the mysteries
of Faith.
be vain in his doctrine but allsoe scarce sound in his wits, in auoching
such, paradoxes so abhorring (as he thought) from all sense and reason. For
who can be brought to believe (said he) that (said he) that God had a Son,
and the same soon to be made man, and borne of a Virgin without a father, and
she to remain both a Virgin and a Mother? In sum, that days discourse was
broken off, and ALBAN being displeased with Amphibalus and his doctrine, went
to please his troubled mind in his bed: whilst his holy teacher Amphibalus,
sorrowful that his words had taken noe deeper root in the mind of his kind
Host, and still remaining careful for his souls health, betook him self to
his prayers in steed of sleep: nether was his petition to almighty God in
vain. For ALBAN being oppressed under the heavy wings of sleep, seemed to
behold His vision being asleep.
the whole tragedy of our Lords sacred passion so perfectly acted before him,
that to his imagination it appeared not so much to be in a dream, as in very
deed represented to his corporal sight. Terrified therefore out of his sleep
with the strangenes of this vision, he went forthwith to Amphibalus, and
desired him (if those things which he preached of CHRIST were true) to expound
allsoe the meaning and interpretation of his dream. Who (having first given
thanks unto almighty God for so wonderful a vocation of his beloved Host)
drew out a Crucifix Amphibalus expounds his dream.
which he allwaies carried about him, and showed in that sign how he might
plainly understand what his nightly vision did portend. And following on with a
declaration of CHRIST'S Gospel and passion, conformeable to what he had seen
in his sleep, he so solidly discovered the mystery of CHRIST crucified, that
there was noe place for any doubt left in the mind of ALBAN, so powerfully
the holy Ghost had planted the truth of faith in his soul. By whose sacred
unction ALBAN Note the strange and sudden eonuersio^ of S. Alban.
being wholly replenished with unusual sweetness and contentment of mind,
desired now nether teacher nor arguments to instruct him, but of his own
accord detesteth his false Gods, abiureth his Idols, professes to acknowledge
no other God, to believe no other in his heart, to confess no other with his
mouth, but God the father, and his son CHRIST-IESVS, and him crucified. He
admireth the greatness of the divine piety and goodness in the redemption of
mankind; and begins wholly to be inflamed with his love, who voutchsafed
first so to love humane frailty, that he undertook not only our nature, but
allsoe all the miseries adherent thereunto, as also a most shameful death it
self, to redeem man from the tirannie of eternal death, to the glory of Gods
elect poeple. Nay falling He worshippeth the Crucifix.
prostrate before the Cross, as if he had seen CHRIST him self really hanging
thereon, he embraces and kisseth his wounds, gives him infinite thanks for
calling him to the knowledge of his faith, being wholly carried beyond him self
to think how to appear worthily grateful for the benefitt of so undeserved
a vocation. Therefore he bad adieu to all worldly pleasures, and embraced
tears and sighs for his greatest delights, all other things he contemned, that
he might gain CHRIST alone for all; in him he placed all his hope, and love;
to him he so perfectly vowed him self and all he had, that he would rather a
thousand times endure to be robbed of this life, then to be separated from the
faith and charity of his dear redeemer.

III. IN the confession of these and such like things Amphibalus admitted ALBAN
to the purifying grace of Baptism, and at his He is baptized.
earnest entreatie remained there some days, more amply to instruct him in all
things that belonged to the profession of his received religion. But in the
mean time the renowned name of ALBAN, and the fame of this fact (allbeit
secretly performed) made, that it came to the ears and knowledge of the
enemies of the Christian cause, who envying the advancement thereof, made
complaint unto the judge of the city. And he forth with commanded both the
master and the disciple to be cited to appear before him; which cruell-minded
decree was soon made known to saint ALBAN. Who desiring by all means to
prevent the deceipts of the prince, exhorted Amphibalus to Amphibalus flies
into Wales.
depart secretly out of town, giving him a rich garment of his own (which at
that time was of great dignity and reverence with all men) thereby to pass
with more security through his enemies. But he him self retained his Masters
poor habit for his own use, knowing for certain that the very sight thereof
would more vehemently incense the fury of his and CHRIST'S cruel enemies
against him. Therefore the sun had scarce cleared the day following, but
Amphibalus took leave of his dear scholar, when the tears shed on each
side, witnessed the greatness of their mutual love. Amphibalus hastened into
Wales, there to preach the faith of CHRIST, and find out a place of Martirdom:
and ALBAN clothed in his masters weeds, expected the same glory at Ver^da^,
which afterward he most gloriously obtained.

IV. FOR the same day the furious officers brake violently into his S. Alban is
ap^rehended.
lodging, searched narrowly in every corner thereof, and filled the whole house
with noise and tumult. Till coming to the little cottage (where he and his
Master had piously spent their time the days before) they found S. ALBAN in a
strange habit, barefcot, humbly praying before the sign of CHRIST'S holy
Cross. Then rushing furiously in troops upon him, they apprehended him,
bound him, and violently haled him, some by the garments some by the hair, to
the presence of the Judge, who at that time in a great assembly of poeple was
bysily employed in offering sacrifice to his diabolical Idols. But seeing
ALBAN led in that manner, his heart boiled with rage and fury against him,
because of his own accord he perceived him bent to hazard his life for
Amphibalus whom he had entertained: Therefore he commanded him to be drawn
before the Idols, threatening to make him suffer all the torments due unto his
sacrilegious guest (so his wicked tongue termed holy Amphibalus) because as a
contemner of the Gods, he had presumed to conceal him from the officers, and
now seemed him self to be departed from the profession of his ancient
religion. But S. ALBAN He contemns the threats of the Judge
(who had willingly betrayed him self to the persecutours of the Christian
faith) without any sign of fear, let pass the storm of the Princes threats
and fury; and armed with the shield of the spiritual warrefare, bouldly and
plainly affirmed that he would not obey his command. Then the Judge demanded
of what family and race he was? It appertains not to thee (answered ALBAN) to
know my lineage, but if thou desire to understand the truth of my religion,
know that I am a Christian, and one that embraces all Christian duties. My
Parents called me ALBAN, and I adore and worship the true living God the maker
and creator of all things. Then the Judge swelling with wrath and fury; If
thou desire (said he) to enjoy the happiness of life, offer forthwith sacrifice
to our great Gods. These sacrifices (replied saint ALBAN) which by you are
offered to devils, can nether help the supplicant sacrificers, nor accomplish
the end of their desires, but reward them in the end with the everlasting
torments of Hell.

V. AT THESE words the Judge could no longer contain his fury, but commanded
the holy Confessor of CHRIST to be cruelly beaten He is cruelly beaten.
and tormented, hoping with stripes to overthrow the resolution of his
constancy, which with words he could not move. Therefore the Lictours
executed their office of cruelty upon his holy body in most rude manner,
when amidst the noise of their pitiless whippes, he joyfully called upon the
name of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, making a willing oblation and sacrifice of him
self to his divine goodness: Till the tormentours being wearied with their vain
punishing, and he nothing wearied with constant suffering, the poeple obtained
to have him imprisoned for the space of six He is committed to prison.
months, hoping that time would wear out the purpose of his resolution. In
the mean while the heavens witnessed the injury done to the holy Martyr; for
from the first day of his apprehension to the day of his martirdom, such an
intolerable drought by the extremity of the suns heat raged in that
Province, that the fruicts of the earth were quite burnt up and destroyed.
Which the Heathens (whose hearts nevertheless were frozen up against the holy
flames of true charity) judged to be done by the art magic of the imprisoned
Christian. Therefore the wisest of the country being assembled together to
discuss this point, saint ALBAN was called out of the horror of the prison to
answer for him self at the bar He is released.
of their examination. And being found, Not guilty, they all griened at the
injury, and suffered in his sufferings; in so much that a sedition being
risen amongst the citizens and his friends, all stood up in his defense, and
freed him out of his beloved chains (by which they thought him injured, having
all ways had the name and fame of a man of good life) that he might render an
account of his deeds before the Judge. But saint ALBAN taking this kind of
mercy as an act of the greatest cruelty, greatly feared lest his martirdom
should be deferred. He exclay meth a against Idols.


VI. THEREFORE standing in the midst of the whole assembly, he made a new
inuectiue declamation against the weakness of their profane Gods, and their
blind folly in worshipping those blind Idols: whereby they were all incensed
afresh against him and with one voice pronounced him guilty of death. Then
arose a great contention amongst them in defining with what kind of death to
punish him, some as a disciple of the Crucifix judged him to be crucified,
others would have him buried alive, as enemy to their Gods, the rest thought
fit to have his eyes dug out and sent so to seek out his Master
Amphibalus. In fine, the judge and all the poeple agreed, He is condemned to
death.
and condemned him to loose his head. Therefore being again bound in chains,
he was rudely dragged to the designed place of his Martirdo^ called Holmhurst,
on the top of a fair plain hill, whose pleasantnes seemed worthy to be
consecrated with the blood of our glorious Martyr. But the thronging multitudes
of poeple that hastened to see this strange spectacle were so great, that
coming to a large river over which they must pass to the hill, the bridge
being not able to receive them, many that for have endeavored to wade or
swim over, were by the fury of those wild streams carried down to an
untimely death. Mean while S. ALBAN much grieved in mind to see the ruin of
those perishing souls, and perceauing his journey to the desired place of
martirdom to be hindered by that huge concourse of poeple, fell down on his
knees, and humbly made his prayer to him whose side flowed water and blood for
the redemption of the world, to give a safe passage to that poeple so desirous
to be present at his death. Then by the almighty power A notable miracle.
of him that divided the red sea for the Israelites, the fury of that great
river was stopped, and the channel made dry for the holy Martyr to pass: the
flowing of his prayers and tears before almighty God took from the river
the power of flowing, and laid open a fair passage for him self and the poeple
through the waters.

VII. BUT the virtue of this wonderful miracle gave grace to the Officer that
was appointed to be ALBANS executioner, to cast off all The executioner
converted
thought of such like woluish cruelty, and become a meek lamb of CHRIST'S
flock. For throwing away his sword that should have done that blouddie deed, he
fell prostrate at the holy Martirs feet, confessed his error, and humbly
demanded pardon; crying alowd that there was noe other true God but the God of
the Christians, and earnestly desiring to die in steed of him whom he was
commanded to putt to death. But his belief moved the rest of those ministers
of mischief to greater rage and fury, and falling upon that new Confessor
of CHRIST, they beat out his teeth, tore his mouth that had given testimony
to the truth, and so bruised all his limbs with cruel blows, that in his
whole body scarce any one part was left unhurt, yet in heart he remained
firm and sound in the confession of his faith. But leaving this wretched
creature in that miserable plight, they arrived at length Is cruelly beaten.
to the top of the hill, where an infinite number of poeple were expecting to
behold the action of this tragical scene. Who being generally tormented with
an extremity of heat and drought, He obtayneth a fountain by his prayers.
S. ALBAN by his prayers obtained to have a clear fountain spring out of that
dried earth, by which the multitude quenched their thirst, yet allwaies
thirsted for the effusion of his blood by whose meritts they had received that
benefitt: so great was the ungrateful cruelty, and cruel ingratitude of
their blinded minds, which ascribed all these most se^sible miracles to the
power of their own se^slesse Gods.

VIII. THEREFORE whetting still the edge of their own fury on the unshaken
rock of the holy Martirs constancy and virtue, they He is beheadded.
were more and more incensed to the shedding of his innocent blood. A new
executioner was chosen, to give the deadly blow for them all, who at once made
a cruel separation of his head from the body, that his blessed soul might
take a happy flight to the crown of everlasting life, which our Lord has
promised to those that suffer for his sake. But the cruel executioner was not
permitted to triumph in his wicked fact; for his eyes (ashamed as it were to
The punishment of his executioner.
behold their Masters cruelty) fell miraculously out of his head, at the very
instant that he gave the Martyr his death: so that loosing the guides that had
directed him to do what he did, he lost allsoe the power to see what he had
done. Which miracle caused many of the Gentiles there present to confess, that
he was justly punished. Mean while the poor soldier, whom they had left
half dead below, had cralled to the top of the hill, and coming to the holy
body of saint ALBAN, he was presently restored again to the perfect use of all
his limbs. But that happiness was soon after seconded with a far greater,
for making profession of the faith of A soldier martired.
CHRIST, he was forthwith beheadded, and by being baptized in his own blood,
was made worthy to follow his leader saint ALBAN into the everlasting joys of
CHRIST-IESVS, the eternal crown and glory of his Martirs. S. ALBAN was
martired about the year of our salvation three hundred and three, and his
body was buried in the same place of his martirdom.

IX. BUT about the year of our Lord four hundred forty six and an hundred
forty three years after the passion of S. ALBAN, the Pelagian Heresy, as
over the rest of the world, so chiefly it raygned in great Britain, in which
it is reported to have first begun. To suppress this infection saint GERMAN
Bishop of Au^er The Pelagian ^eresie suppressed.
and Lupus Bishop of Troy came out of France into our Island, by the force of
whose arguments and miracles the impudent mouths of the Pelagians were stopped.
And at that very time many great miracles and cures of diseased persons being
wrought at the sacred tomb of S. ALBAN, thither the holy Bishops went for
devotion sake, to give thanks unto almighty God for their success; and S.
GERMAN having opened the holy monument, laid therein many relics of the
Apostles and other Martirs, that the same place might contain the bones of
them whose souls enjoyed one and the same glory in heaven. Which done, he
took thence some part of the earth which had received the holy Martirs blood,
and which yet blushed therewith, to be by him reserved as a most precious
treasure, The ancient Britans over come by the Saxons.
and a worthy reward of his labor. Afterward the English and Saxons that were
Pagans, like unto a furious tempest invaded the Island of great Britain, and by
force of arms drove the ancient inhabitants thereof to the mountains and
farthest parts of the country, now called Wales, persecuting not only the men
but the Christian faith which they professed. Then amongst others the ancient
city of Verulam being destroyed, and all sacred monuments and Churches
demolisht, the memory of the glorious Martyr Saint ALBAN was extinguished for
the space of three hundred forty four years, and to the raygne of the most
famous King of the Mercians, Ossa, who (following a divine revelation that
commanded him to search out those holy relics, and place them in a more
worthy monument) assembled the poeple and Clergy together, and armed with
fasting and prayer they ascended the mountain where the holy Martyr suffered.
In the mean time the divine goodness, that would not have that treasure lie hid
any longer, sent forth a heavenly splendor which glittered over his
sepulcher, and lighted them to find out those desired relics. For having
dug in the same place, they found his sacred body in a The invention of S.
Albans body.
wodden chest, together with the relics of the Apostles and Martirs which
Saint GERMAN had placed therein. Therefore the King and whole assembly being
replenished with inestimable joy, translated that sacred treasure with great
veneration and solemnity, singing of himnes and praises to almighty, into an
ancient Church near Verulam, built in times past to the name and honor of
saint ALBAN, where in a very rich shrine made of gould and silver and adorned
with precious gemmes, they reposed those sacred spoils. Whereby it is made
manifest, that as in times past to Lucian Priest the body of the Protomartir
of Jury saint STEPHEN, and to King Dagobert the relics of saint DENIS the
first Martyr of France, so to our noble Offa almighty God miraculously
revealed the body of the prime Martyr of great Britain S. ALBAN. But this
invention and translation of S. ALBAN happened in the year 794. the first day
of August.

X. IN the mean time king Offa built and founded a most magnificent King O^^a
foundeth a Benedictine Abbey to S. Albau.
Church and a Monastery for the Benedictine Monks, to the honor of S. ALBAN
in the very same place where the holy Martyr had shed his blood for the
Christian faith. This Monastery he not only adorned with great wealth and
revenues, but went him self to Rome, and obtained for it large and ample
privileges of Pope Adrian, whereby it was exempted from all Episeopall power
and jurisdiction, and by the royal charter of Offa, the exercise of all civil
authority within the territorre thereof, was delivered into the hands of the
Abbott. And lastly Pope Adrian defined, in his Privilege granted thereunto,
that as S. ALBAN (whom at the earnest desire of King Offa, and the whole
country he had enrolled into the number of canonized Saint) was known to be
the first Martyr of Britain, so the Abbot of his Monastery should allwaies
have the precedence before all the other Abbots of that Country, and that
Abbey be accounted the principal and head of the rest. The Abbots of this S.
Albans the head ab^ey of England.
Monastery in times past were Barons of the realm, and Parliament men, and
from the Abbey the town built there abou^s is to this present called by the
name of Sainct-Albans.

XI. BUT a far greater and more excellent honor came to this Monastery by
the wonderful miracles which almighty God wrought there by the merits of
this glorious Martyr S. ALBAN, then by all the other glory of privileges,
wealth, and riches added thereunto. Nay more; the whole country received
infinite benefitts of cures of all manner of diseases, as we may understand out
of Venerable BEDE, an Author beyond all exception (who avouches miracles
wrought there even unto his time) and by the ancient annalls of the same
Monastery, wherein the wonders which yearly happened are diligently and
faithfully set down. Let us hear the Authors them selves make an Affidauit
of their own sincerity. Whatsoever we go about to relate (say they) of the
holy Martyr, let noe man esteem as feigned or frivolous, for we take God to
witness that they are such, as either we have seen with our own eyes, or heard
reported by men of approved creditt. Out of which it shall Miracles wrought at
his Tomb.
suffice us for the glory of our Protomartir briefly to rehearse some few. 1.
His relics being opposed to a furious fire oftentimes extinguished it. 2. In
extremity of drought his holy body being carried in procession with the
usual Litanies and supplications of the Church, obtained rain; and in time of
immoderate rain purchased fair weather. 3. Those that by an injurious
violence presumed to rob him of land or riches dedicated to his honor, were
oftentimes punished with a miserable end. 4. One A notable punishment.
Hugh, who with an impious mouth uttered reproachful speeches against the
blessed Martyr and his sacred solemnity, cast forth the excrements of his
body at his blasphemous mouth, all his life after, being justly punished in
that part which had offended. 5. A woman sick of a cruel palsy, who for many
years was not able to go her self, being admonished from heaven, entered into
the holy Martirs Church, where having made her prayer unto God and his Saint,
at the very time when the Priest at Mass offered the sacred Body of our Lord
to his father, she felt her self strongly recovered, and presently walked home
in perfect health of all her limbs. 6. The water which had washed his holy
shrine was oftentimes proved sovereign against many deseases. 7. And the
dust gathered out of the place where he was buried, and putt into drink,
wrought the like miraculous effects. But we shall never come to an end if we
go about to load this paper with all the miraculous cures done at his tomb;
blind, lame deaf, broken, and contracted persons received the wished benefitt
of their health by the meritts of this thrice glorious Martyr. Scarce any
disease could be named that was not here cured. Yea and many dead persons were
recalled again to life, by the The dead raised to life. Beda Hist Eccl. Angl.
lib. 1. cap. 18. And others, as Constant. in vita S. Germ. Baronius tom. 5. an.
429. Camden in descrip. Herford. com. Harpsfield sex. primis sae culis cap. 9.
Westminster. an. 794. malm. de gest. reg. l. 1. c. Surius ^ Tom. 6. Iun. 22.
intercession, and patronage of this glorious Martyr saint ALBAN.

XII. HERE it shall not be amiss to admonish my good reader, if perchance he
light on the writtings of some foreign Authors unskilled in our English
histories, that affirm the body of our saint ALBAN, to have been by the
sorenamed saint GERMAN translated to Rome, and thence afterward again
transported by the means of Theophana the Empress to the Benedictine Abbey of
saint PANTALEON at Cullen, that he suffer not him self to be easily deceived:
for all our English writters maintain the contrary. First saint BID
(following the ancient Annalls of saint ALBANS) avouches that saint GERMAN
took only with him some of the dust, where his body was laid, and not only
left the body it self behind, but (as we have said) placed many other
relics of other Martirs which he had thither brought, in the tomb of saint
ALBAN, as so many sacred witnesses and pledges of his devotion to the holy
Saint; which relics (to the manifest confutation of the contrary opinion)
were found there together with the body of S. ALBAN three hundred forty and
odd years after S. GERMANS coming into England as Matthew Westminster, William
of Malmesbury, and other English, writers do testify. Therefore his body
could not be carried out of England by saint GERMAN. Moreover in Surius (whom I
take to be the chief Author of the adverse opinion) I cannot but admire one
thing, as a sign of great partiality in him; for having gathered the whole
life of Saint ALBAN out of Venerable BEDE, he willingly passes over in silence
that act of Saint GERMANS putting the relics into Saint ALBANS tomb, and
carrying away of the earth embrewed with his blood. And why does he so? I
leave the reason to the judgment of the judicious reader, being loath to touch
the authority of so great a man. It may be because he was him self of Cullen,
he had rather for the honor of his town, report it to be enriched with the
whole body of saint ALBAN, then only with some of the dust of his tomb: using
a figurative speech of Rhetoricians, and putting the Whole for a Part. Or else
the identitie Authors that affirm his body to be a S. Alba^s.
of the names of saint ALBAN martyr of Mentz, and our saint ALBAN of England
drew him to report that of ours, which he should have said of the other.
Howsoever he was deceived, this much we can say on our own behalf (ommitting
to make an argument of the vnliklihood of the contrary assertion) that Matthew
Paris in the year 1179. Matthew Westminster in the year 1259. Walsingham in
the year 1313. Henry Huntington in the ninth book of his history, Thomas
Rudburne in his greater Chronicle, and others English writters of great creditt
and authority, and far more conversant in our histories then any stranger
can be, do constantly affirm that the sacred relics of saint ALBAN remained
allwaies in his own monastery in England; and this the ancient records of the
same place (which I have in my hands) do largely testify, by the
vndiscontinued relation of the yearly miracles wrought at his tomb to the
raygne of He^^y the second. And in the year of grace 1257. Certain workmen
that were busied in repayring the Church of saint ALBANS, digging somewhat
deep into the ground, happened upon the marble tomb in which his body had
been laid presently after his martirdom; at which time a heavenly splendor
shined over his grave, and the rauishing notes of Angelical harmony warbled
fourth, the praises of the holy martyr. But the garment of Amphibalus saint
ALBANS His garment found spotted with fresh blood.
Master in which saint ALBAN suffered martirdom, was afterward carried to the
Benedicti^e monastery of Ely, and there in a certain tomb reserved: which
King Edward the second caused to be opened in his own presence, when it was
found uncorrupted and stained with fresh spotts of the blood which he had s^ed
for CHRIST, who be for ever glorified in his Saints. Amen.

All Ecclesiastical writers make very honorable mention of S. ALBAN. of whom
amongst others Fortunatus sings this verse. Albanum egregium faecunda
Britanniaprofert.


And Hiericus a Frenchman, who flourished seven hundred years ago, has these
verses of him in the life of saint GERMAN; in which he mentions the
executioners loss of his eyes. Milliapaenarum Christi pro nomine passus.
Quem tandem rapuit capitis sententia caesi.
Sed non Lictoricessit res tuta superbo,
Vtque caput Sancto ceciderunt lumina soeuo.


His life we have gathered out of Venerable Bede in his history of England, and
an other old Author ancienter then Bid, which we have in written hand. And
besides the writers above named, Gyldas Sapiens epist. de excidio Britanniae,
Geffrey of Monmouth hist. Brit. lib. 5. cap. 5. the Roman Martirologe, Vsuard,
Molanus, and others do largely speak his praises. In the Sarum Breuiary he
has an office of nine lessons, and in an ancient Manuscript breuiary of S.
Benedicts Order which belonged to Burton upon Trent, he is served with twelve
lessons, whereof eight are proper, and which make large mention of his life and
miracles.

An Appendix to the life of Saint ALBAN containing The Passion of Saint
AMPHIBALVS, and other Martirs at the same time.
JUNE 22 Out of an ancient manuscript cited before.
THE famous miracles which went before and followed the death of our glorious
Protomartir saint ALBAN, moved The miracles of S. Alban conuerteth many.
many of the astonished assistants to be far better affected to the
Christian faith then they were; in so much that had they had but a teacher, it
seemed they might easyly be brought not only to approve, but to embrace it for
truth, being of their own accord allreadie well inclined thereunto. Nether was
the divine goodness wanting to their good will in this point, by whose instinct
one boulder then the rest stood up and in this manner spoke unto them. If only
with words (O fellow-citizens) ALBAN had maintained the truth of A citizens
speech to his fellows.
his faith, it were not to be admired if all men had rejected it as vain and
unprofitable doctrine, condemned by public laws, and contrary not only to
the institutions of our ancestors, but even to reason the guide of all things.
But now since he has confirmed his words and faith with such admirable works,
whosoever shall presume to deny it, will seem in resisting ALBAN to resist
God him self, by affirming that these wonderful signs proceeded from any
other author but God; or that that faith is not grounded in truth, which is
authorized by the testimonies of such divine works. For when I pray you did
our Gods ever perform the like? When was the like heard off in our religion?
Moreover the singular integrity, The praise of S. Alban.
meekenes, patience constancy, piety and other virtues of of this divine man
do set him forth amongst his other wonderful works for the greatest wonder:
Being vexed with so many taunts and reproaches, he reviled noe man; being
afflicted with so many injuries, he was so far from making the lest show
of any indignation of mind, that he seemed more tobewayle our case then his
own. Nay he went with so joyful and clear a countenance to his last deadly
punishment, that one would have judged him going to a banquet of mirth, and not
to the scaffold of death. Who does not see in this man a divine power greater
then humane frailty? If then these gifts do proceed only from God, surely he
is not wont to bestow them on wicked impious, and sacrilegious persons, but on
those that piously and holyly serve and worship him. Nether is it to be doubted
but that he will adorn us and our common wealth with these and far greater
gifts then these, if we show our selves plyant and dutiful to his divine
calling. Let us therefore follow ALBAN our Captain, and courragiously embrace
his faith and piety, which God grant to be fortunate and happy to us, our
children, and our common wealth.

II. THESE and such like words being spoken in a great assembly of the Citizens
of Verulam, all publicly proclaimed that then the religion of CHRIST nothing
was more divine, nothing more holy, nothing more true. Therefore they resolved
to search the whole country over to find out AMPHIBALVS, A^BANS guest, who was
a teacher of the Christian discipline. But he was gone into Wales, where with
so happy success he had cast abroad the divine seed of the Gospel, that he
had filled all the country thereabouts with fruits of the Evangelical
harvest, and the sweet odor of his own fame and name: whereupon the
citizens of Verulam to the number of about a thousand left their house and
home, and following the sent of his holy deeds and virtues, came at length to
AMPHIBALVS: who having understood of the martirdo^ of his dear Host ALBAN,
They are baptized.
and the cause of their coming thither, received them all to the sacrament of
the Christian faith, which they desired. And they joyfully embracing those
divine institutions, were incensed daily with so ardent a desire to profitt
and perfect them selves in their new-receaued faith, that the multitude of
faithful Christians grew every day greater in number, and more famous and
renowned in Sainctitie.

III. BUT the ancient and common enemy of mankind perceauing the Evangelical
kingdom to be amplified daily with such joyful increases, and his possessions
to be greatly diminished by these purchases; judged it high time to oppose him
self against those proceedings, and to that end he incensed the citizens
against their fellow-Cittizens, those remaining at Verulam against the others
whom AMPHIBALVS had now made Citizens of the kingdom of heaven. Against whom
the Burgesses of the earth (being incensed with the fury of the Prince of
darkness) determined to raise a cruel war, grounding their quarrel on noe
other theme, the^ that their fellow Citizens had forsaken the desire, and
love of the world, and were by the means of AMPHIBALVS ra^ged into the
warrefare of CHRIST'S A thousand Christians cruelly murdered.
holy Gospel. Marching therefore against them, when they perceived them to be
so resolute in the opinion of their new-receaued faith, that with courragious
minds they were ready to expose their necks to the furious swords of their
persecutours; setting aside all thought either of the name of fellow-Cittize^s,
or affinity of blood, or dignity of their innocence, they made a furious
assault upon them being unarmed, and in most cruel manner bathed their swords
in the blood of their own fellows and countrymen, they in the mean time
joyfully and willingly offering their bodies to the deadly blows of CHRIST'S
enemies, whereby his triumphant Church was adorned with the fresh roses of new
troops of holy Martyrs.

IV. BUT apprehending the Captain of this holy war AMPHIBALVS Amphibalus
reserved for greater pains.
in the midst of those murdered bodies, they brought him back to Verulam, to be
there reserved for greater and more exquisite torments. Whither when the news
of his coming arrived, all the town flocked out to meet him, though not in
courtesy, but to revenge on him the loss of their fellow-cittizens and kindred,
of whose slaughter they judged him to be the sole and principal author.
Therefore falling violently upon him, with so great inhumanitie they
tormented and beat the body of the holy man, that they left noe place thereof
without the cruel marks of many hurts and wounds. All which he is reported
to have endured with so great fortitude of mind, that no sign of anger or
trouble appeared in his countenance. When all men held it for a miracle (as
indeed it was) that his aged body was able to endure so many and so great
torments with such an unmoved constancy; and that they could not force his
soul out of that weak lodging with such pains, the lest whereof seemed more
then sufficient to martire the strongest champion in the world.

V ALL being astonished and many much grieved at this spectacle, Many
converted to Christ.
made (as the manner is) diverse interpretations and constructio^s of the
matter; some imputing it to witchcraft, others to a divine power; in so much
that there wa^ted not those that affirmed it to be a most unworthy act to
exercise so many torments on an innocent man, which without note of great
cruelty could not be inflicted on the wickedest malefactor that ever was: for
what offense is it (said they) to draw men from the horrible rites of profane
sacrifices, and from a savage manner of life, to an holy and pious way of
serving God? Therefore because AMPHIBALVS teaches these things we ought rather
to honor his virtue with all due reverence, and with benefitts to requite him
laboring for the common good, then so ungratefully and cruelly to persecute
his innocence. And this proceeding seemed to them to besoe unwarrantable, that
they feafeared not to affirm the patient to be most grateful to God in
suffering such cruelties for virtues sake, and the doers them selves to They
are martyred with S. Amphibalus.
be of God most hated, for so outrageously persecuting a poor innocent. On
these then speaking in this manner, and recommending them selves to CHRIST and
the prayers of AMPHIBALVS, the barbarous multitude exercised their madding
cruelty, and together with AMPHIBALVS their captain, with swords, knives,
and stones battered their souls out of their mortal lodgings, to take an
happy flight to the immortal.

VI THIS holy man was martired at the village of Rudburne, three miles distant
from Verulam, where Thomas Rudburne reports that two great knives which had
been instruments of this cruelty, were reserved to his time. And for the space
of almost seven hundred years the relics of this blessed Martyr lay buried
in obscurity, The invention of his body.
till about the year of our Lord 1178. they were miraculously found out, and
brought honorably in procession to the Benedictine Abbey of S ALBAN* when the
monks of the same place went solemnly to meet that treasure, carrying with
them S. ALBANS shrine. The town of Verulam never beheld a more comfortable and
joyful day. One martyr met an other, the disciple his Master, the Host his
guest, a heavenly citizen his fellow-citizen of heaven: His dear guest, whom
S. ALBAN in times past had secretly dismissed lest he should fall into the
hands of his enemies, he now receaueth with public honor and triumph at his
return. And whom then his weak lodging could not keep secure from harm, he
now introduces into a most magnificent Church. And this happened in the The
wonderful miracles wrought at his to^be
year above said, and the five and twentieth day of June. At what time that
country was burnt up with intolerable heat and drought, but at the holy
Martyrs return there fell a great abundance of rain, and they received a
common medecin of almost all diseases. But the many heavenly benefitts and
miracles which were then wrought in the sight of the whole country that
flocked thither drawn with the novelty of the thing, and the diseases that
were cured after these sacred relics were brought into the Church we omit to
recite here in particular, being contented only to say thus much, that nether
Gallen nor Hipocrates, nor any other of the skillfullest physicians that were,
could ever cure so many and such desperate diseases, as this holy Martyr,
being piously called upon did, without either potions or plasters, by his
only intercession to almighty God; whereby some dead persons were recalled to
life, a thing which noe human physic was ever known to perform.

Thus much of this blessed martyr we have gathered out of the annalls of S
Albans Monastery. Matthew Paris anno 1179. and 1217. Matthew Westminster anno
1178. Ioannes Anglicus in his goulden legend, and many ^^^er writers
especially of the Britans do make very honorable mention of S. Amphibalus,
and speak all agreeable to that which we have said of him.

decorative device
S. ETHELDREDA REGINA, VIRGO ET ABBATISSA Ordin^^ S.(...) in Anglia. Junij. 23.
M. ba^^

The life of saint ETHELDRED, or AVDRY, Queen, Virgin, and Abbess, of the
holy Order of saint BENEDICT.
JUNE 23 Out of the ancient records of Ely.
LEt the fabulous Greeks talk noe more of their chaste Penelope, who in the
twenty years absence of her husband Ulysses lived continently in despite of
the tempting importunity of many noble woers; and let the proud Romans cease
to brag of their fair Lucretia, that chose rather to become the bloody
instrument of her own death, then to live after the violent rauishment of her
honor, and let all the world turn their minds to admire and their tongues
and pens to sound the praises of the Christian virtues and chastity of our
blessed ETHELDRED, who being joined in wedlock to two kings one after an other,
preserved her self most pure in chastity to be spiritually united to her
heavenly spouse the king of Kings CHRIST-IESVS. Let all the married admire, and
the vnwarried in their degree, endeavor to imitate this example of wonderful
continency, the like whereof very few are to be found in the Ecclesiastical
histories. Hear her life.

I The glorious Virgin ETHELDRED being daughter to Anna king Her parents.
of the East Angles and his wife Hereswith, adorned the royalty of her blood
with the glory of her virtue and sainctitie. For from her very infancy she
studied to order all her actions to the service of almighty God, by avoiding
the toying company of other maids The virtue of her youth.
her equals, and wholly betaking her self to embrace chastity, modesty,
humility and all other virtues as the only ornaments of a devout soul: And
that they might be the better planted and rooted therein, she nourished them
with the food of her continual prayers, and watered them with the streams of
her devout tears; making it her chiefest exercise to be present at the divine
service, to visitt and frequent Churches, wherein she was more delighted then in
the splendor of her fathers royal palace. In a word, she led so holy a life
in this her tender age, that to her may be truly applied that saying of
wisdom; Aetas Senectutis, vitaimmaculata. A pure and immaculate life adorned
with many virtues begetts more veneration then many years of old age; for he
lives long that lives well.

II. At length when this holy virgin had in this virtuous manner She is desired
in marriage.
passed over her younger years and was come to an age in which she appeared
mariageable, her virtue of mind, wherein she excelled, and beauty of body
wherein she paralled almost all young virgins of that time, being by flying
fame made celebrious all over the country, many Princes and nobles that
frequented her fathers court were much taken therewith, and judged it a wordly
bliss which they greatly aimed at, to be wedded to such excellent parts seated
in so fair a throne of beauty. But she contemning all wordly pleasures
aspired only and wholly to the bedchamber of her eternal spouse CHRIST-IESVS,
for whose love she desired allwaies to preserve her chastity untouched,
singing continually spiritual himnes and canticles to his honor and praise,
and daily sacrificing her self unto almighty God. In the mean time, the
divine wisdom so disposing it, and that her unshaken resolution of chastity
might in this world be made more famous, and deserving a greater crown of
victory and triumph in the next, she was earnestly She marries against her
will.
desired in marriage by one Tunbert a Prince of the South part of the I Will of
Ely; who having obtained her fathers consent, judged him self sure of his
desire; till the flat refusal of the holy Virgin made him perceive that more
then one word was requisite to a bargain. Then her father interposing his
royal authority, his virtuous daughter ETHELDRED obeyed, using violence to
her own desires to make them subject to her fathers will. Therefore being
married in royal manner to the forenamed Prince (behold that which amazeth
the fond world and worldlings) she was found worthy to imitate the Blessed
Virgin MARIE, and to lead a chaste life together with her husband, if he may be
called an husband who never rob A chaste marriage.
bed his spouse of her virginity. But allbeit they were not as two in one
flesh, yet were they both of one mind in devotion, passing over their days in
prayer, alms deeds, and other good works (for both parties were consenting
to the observance of chastity) till an happy death made a separation of that
pious union, and called Tunbert into an other world to receive the everlasting
reward of his continent and chaste life, when he had lived in the bands of an
unexperienced wedlock the space of almost three years.

III. THEN allthough our holy Virgin ETHELDRED piously lamented She retireth to
Ely.
the death of her husband, yet in heart she rather rejoiced that now she was
freed from the yoke of matrimony, hoping by that means more easily to escape
the vain allurements of the world. Therefore in her own house at Ely, she
began to lead a most retired and devout life, hoping in that place (which was
an Island encompassed with store of shadie woods) more securely to avoid the
vain honors of the world. There her devotion increased daily, and her pious
desire was more and more enkindled with the fire of the holy Ghost But now her
former labor being overcome, she is to be drawn out and ranged into a greater
conflict, that the palm and glory of her virginity might more excellently be
made manifest to the world. For Egsrid King of the Northumbers made very
earnest suit to have her for his wife. To which his petition, allthough Her
second ma^^^ge to King ^gfrid
to her it seemed rather odious then glorious, yet being overcome by the
importunity of her friends, she unwillingly yielded and for the gayning of a
greater triumph over those vain pleasures, again she putt her virginity to
the hazard of marriage. But with King Egfrid (who was a young man that boiled in
the flower and ardour of youthly years, she endured a far greater combat,
allwaies remaining unconquered: In whom the love of heaven was so powerful,
that it still preserved her holy purpose free from all carnal desires. A
strai^ge reso^ut^o^ of c^asttie.
And in her kings palace, where other ladies are wo^t to be inflamed with
those unchaste fires, she burned with the flames of His heavenly love, whom the
Angels desire to behold and gaze on. In a word, for the space of twelve
years our pious Virgin ETHELDRED lived in an holy marriage with her husband
king Egfrid, without suffering any the lest blemish to her virginity. A thing
so worthy of admiration, that it is hard to say, whether the constancy of
her, or the patience of him that boiled with love, is more to be praised and
admired. Sure I am, that among many thousands you shall scarce find one, able
so to bridle the unbridled desires of the rebellious flesh.

IV. IN the mean time, King Egfrid, who was desirous to have King Egfrids
desire to overthrow her chastity.
heirs to succeed him in the kingdom, labored by all means (setting violence
aside) to get his wife to consent unto his desires, and yield unto him that
only desired the right of matrimony. ETHELDRED on the other side, who had
dedicated her virginity to the king of heaven, could not be removed nether by
the allurements of his pleasant words, nor with the terror of his rude
threats, to betray the resolution of her holy purpose. Therefore the King who
by nature was of a courteous and pleasing inclination of mind, allthough by how
much the more constantly his wife denied his request, by so much the more
eagerly his love burned in the pursuit thereof (for things denied are more
greedily desired) yet he allwaies withheld his hands from violence: and to the
end he might leave no way unbeaten that might lead to the mark of his
affection, he committed the matter to S. WILFRID Archbishop of York, hoping
that his authority would be powerful enough to beat down the fortress of
her resolution, and the rather because he knew how great confidence the holy
queen reposed in the man. But S. WILFRID quickly found all his labor in
persuading to be employed in vain, so unconquered the holy virgin remained,
in her foretaken purpose of chastity.

V. Nay she not only refused to condescend to the point of the Etheldred
labors to have her husband consent to a divorce.
kings desire, but allsoe ceased not with her daily prayers to solicit him
that with his leave and license she might be freed from the bond of matrimony,
and betake her self to embrace a single and private manner of life, which at
length by much importunity she obtained. For Egfrid, who was a prudent prince
could not chose but love and honor the purpose of chastity in his wife,
knowing that she had dedicated it to CHRIST JESUS. Therefore ETHELDRED being
now mistress of her desired liberty, retired her self to a Monastery She
takes the habit of a Nun
of Benedictine Nuns at a place called Coldingham, in the confines of
Scotland, where blessed EBBA aunt unto King Egfrid, was Abbess of a holy
Convent of Virgins. Amongst these, our holy ETHELDRED made her royal robes
give place to the humble weeds of a Nun, and instead of her princely diadem
of Sovereignty, she adorned her head with the poor veil of humility, making
her self from a commandresse a subject, from a princess a handmayd, from a
queen a servant. Yea now it was that this holy woman judged her self truly to
reign, when being freed from her terrene kingdom, she was ranged into the
service of CHRIST, and undertaking for his love the rule of monastical
discipline, she subjected her self to the rodd of holy obedience, and found by
her own daily experience, that the yoke of our Lord is sweet, Her holy
conversation.
and his burden light. In this place she attained to so great a height of holy
conversation, and showed so perfect an example of humility, that her life
appeared to the rest of her sisters as a true pattern and mirror of all
monastical perfection.

VI BUT King Egfrid impatiently bearing the departure of his beloved queen,
began at length to be much contrislated thereat, and by instinct and
instigation of his Nobles, he endeavored with violent A strainge miracle.
means to take her out of the Monastery. Which his intention being understood
by the holy Virgin, she recomended her virginity to almighty God, and with
two other of her fellows fled for safeguard into a hill near adjoining, where,
by the divine power of him that gouernes and commands the winds and seas, she
was miraculously preserved out of his hands. For the sea ouerflowing its usual
limitts, encompassed that hill about in such sort, that the king admiring the
accident durst attempt noe further, but returned sorrowful, Thomas Monach. in
Hist. Eliensi.
that he had gone so far. And the author hereof does testify that while
she lived with her company on the top of this hill, she obtained by her
prayers to have a fountain of clear water to spring out of the earth, to
comfort them in their extremity of thirst. And allsoe that the impression of
her footsteps ascending and descending the same hill remained visibly in the
rock unto the same Authors time. All which does most evidently prove of how
great meritt her holy life and untainted chastity was in the sight of her
dear spouse CHRIST-IESVS, the fountain and head of all purity. But because
we are fallen into such times that a great part of the world houldeth vows of
chastity to be unnecessary, and the virtue of chastity it self impossible,
especially between married folks, therefore it shall not be amiss here to
set down the testimonies of Venerable BEDE and saint WILFRID for an
irresistable proof of our holy ETHELDREDS virginity. When the matter was by
some called in question (says S. BID) WILFRID Bishop of blessed De gest. An.
lib. 4. cap. 6. A notable testimony of her virginity.
memory affirmed to me that demanded it, that he him self was a most certain
witness of her virginity, in so much that King Egfrid promised him a reward of
many lands and treasures if he could but persuade the Queen to yield to the
use of marriage, because he knew she loved ^oe man better then him. Nether ought
we to mistrust, that also in our age that was possible to be done, which our
faithful histories relate to have been done in former times, by the gift of
one and the same Lord, who promises to remain with us to the end of the
world. For the divine miracle, whereby the flesh of the same woman buried could
not be corrupted, is a sign, that she remained incorrupted from the touch of
man. Thus saint BID. Whereby is made manifest the undefiled integrity of
this holy Virgin. Who allbeit she shed not her blood by martirdom, yet she may
be justly entitled Etheldred a Martyr.
with the name of a martyr, when fighting gloriously against the vices and
concupiscences of this world, she daily carried our Lords cross in her body.
And if she had happened in the bloody times of Nero or Diocletian, without
doubt (like unto other holy virgins and Martirs of Gods Church) she would of
her own accord have endured the torture, fought with the wild beasts, gone
through the fires, and not have feared to have had her body torn in pieces
with the instruments of studied cruelty which the ironhearts of those times
made use off. But let us go on with her life.

VII. A YEAR after she had received the veil of religion in the monastery
above named, she returned to her own possession in the I Will of Ely, which was
her dowry given by her first husband Tonbert, and the place destined for the
perpetual habitation of her, and her successors. But traveling this long
journey on foot accompanied only with two other sisters, being all more then
usually wearied with the labor and heat of the way, they sat down under the
protection of a shadie grove, a while to refresh their tired bodies with a
desired rest. Where after a short sleep, they arose, and (as it is A strainge
miracle.
constantly reported by the Authors of her life) they found the holy Virgins
staff, which she had stuck in the ground at her head, to be miraculously
grown into a fair green tree, which afterward came to be a mighty Ash
bigger then any of the same kind in all that country, and the place was ever
after called by the name of Etheldredstowe, where a Church was built in honor
of the holy Virgin, and in memory of this miraculous accident.

VIII. AT the I Will of Ely therefore she at length arrived, where in Ely first
built by S. Augustine.
times past (as many Authors affirm) saint AUGUSTINE our Apostle had built
a monastery at the charge of Ethelbert King of Kent, and dedicated it to the
Blessed Virgin MARIE, and placed therein a Convent of Benedictine Monks, about
the year of our Lord six hundred. But afterward, when Penda, that tirannous
King of the Mercians, had laid to wast all the country of the East Angles,
that Monastery was allsoe made to fall into the confusion of an untimely
ruin: which now our holy ETHELDRED not only reedified again but allsoe
restored to a far greater state of glory. When many other Virgins, drawn
thither with the fame of her holy life and virtues, ranged them selves into the
discipline of a regular life under her government, (for by the authority of S.
WILFRID she was made Abbess of the same place) so that within a short time
she Etheldred made Abbess of Ely.
had gathered a worthy Convent of holy Benedictine Nuns, that night and day
sung the praises of almighty God, and led a most strict and holy life. Then
by the means of the same Saint WILFRID, and the instance of our holy Virgin,
this new Monastery of Ely was established with many privileges and liberties
by the authority of the Pope, and exempted from the jurisdiction and power of
Bishops.

IX BUT with how great sainctitie, virtue, and pious example of With how great
virtue she governed.
life our holy ETHELDRED governed the same Monastery, with how great
continency she lived, and with what heavenly gifts and graces she was adorned
by almighty GOD, it far exceeds, the weakness of this pen to rehearse.
From her first entrance into the monastery she never used any other clothing
but of woollen, which she wore also next unto her skin: She seldom made use
of warm bathes (a thing much practiced in those days) but against the
greatest solemnities of the year, as Easter, whitsuntide, and the like; nether
then would she take them, but after all the rest of her Sisters, when she had
first played the part of a diligent servant in helping them in that act. In her
diet she was so sparing, that she allwaies contented her self with on small
meal a day, unless either the solemnity of some great feast, her own
infirmity of body, or some other greater cause compelled her to enlarge her
ordinary allowance. In divine prayer and contemplation she was so untired that
after the performance of the mid-nights office in the quire, she always
continued her devotion in the Church till the next morning. Herevppon the
divine goodness, that is never wanting to his servants, adorned his virtuous
Spouse with the grace of doing many miraculous cures on the bodies of
possessed and diseased persons; and also endowed her with the gift of
prophecy, by virtue whereof she foretold the coming of an inevitable sickness
to the monastery, which to her and many of her sisters should be the
messenger of death; specifying withal the certain number of those that should
come under the cruel arrest of that fearful seargeant.

X. AT length, the time drawing near, in which the Spouse of all She falls
sick.
pure souls CHRIST-IESVS had determined to take this his beloved spouse out of
the frail bark of this mortal state, to the heavenly dwellings of his
glorious Kingdom, she was attached with a sickness which brought with it such a
cruel swelling and impostume in her neck and throat, that her body growing
daily to lower and lower degrees of weakness, she was compelled to entertain
both those incommodities in her bed. When, allbeit the swelling gave her most
sharp feelings of her pain; she nevertheless being attentive to her
accustomed devotions, ceased not to render thanks unto almighty God, who
uses the scourge of a pious chastisement to correct those he truly loves.
Then, nothing but weeping and lamenting was to be seen or heard in the house:
her family and the poeple adjoining grieved to loose so good a Mistress, and
her holy and chaste quire of virgins sorowed more then can be expressed, with
fear to be divided from so good a mother. Only she her self, for who^ was
made all this lamentation, seemed in heart and countenance most joyful; whose
confidence in the divine goodness was such, and so great, that she was nothing
terrified with the apprehension and fear of death. And when the pain of her
impostume gave her the sharpest remembrance, she seemed much delighted
therewith, and endured it as the delights and ornaments of her glory; using
these words to the bystanders: Most certainly I know that I deservedly suffer
this swelling in my neck, about which in my youth I was wont to wear many
vain bracelets, and goulden ornaments of pride, Therefore I give hearty
thanks unto the divine goodness, that thence my grief springs, where I was wo^t
to make show of a delightful vanity. And I believe, and trust that my pious
Redeemer by afflicting me with this pain, will mercifully absolve me from the
punishment due unto my former leuitie. A rare example of virtue! Harpsfield
saec. 7. c. 24.
Our English women are wont to wear about their necks a certain chain made
of fine small silk, which we call Etheldreds chain, it may be in memory of
what we have here said. And would to God this monument would stir up our
minds (as indeed it ought) to imitate the virtues and holy life of S.
ETHELDRED, which surely is the end for which it was first instituted and used.
And the same I wish unto those Peers and noble men both of England and other
nations, who carry a chain about their necks called, A Collar of S. S. which
letters signify the name of Saint Simplicius, who borne of the blood of Roman
Senators, generously suffered death for the love of CHRIST. Truly then, these
chains would become of no less ornament both to men and women, then in times
past that chain was to Titus Manlius the Roman, which, being provoked to
battle, he had taken from his conquered enemy, whereupon he afterward was
surnamed Torquatus, from Torques, which in Latin signifies a chain. But let
us return to Saint ETHELDRED.

XI. THEREFORE whilst this holy Virgin lying amidst the torments of a most
cruel sickness, gave thanks unto her Creator for so pious a visitation,
boiling with a desire to be dissolved to live with CHRIST, some of the
assistants, in whom yet remained a small hope of her recovery, caused a
skillfull chirurgean to lance the swelled place, and make way for that
corrupted matter to issue forth, as being stuff to base and loathsome to be
imprisonned in so pure a body. Which done, the holy Virgin seemed for two
days space to be greatly eased of her pain, and to wax better in health, so
She seems to recover.
that many conceived a new hope that she might escape this danger, which was
cause of great joy unto her friends and Sisters. But all this was but as a
glimpse of lightuing before death, for the third day, (when all wounds and
incisions are most panifull) she her self perceauing that the happy minute of
her wished departure was at hand, caused the whole Convent of Nuns to be
gathered together about her; unto whom, (having first signified that her hour
of death was come) she imparted (as well as the violence of her pain would
suffer her) the dying words of her last farewell, so full of the sweetness of
divine documents and devotion, that she wonderfully moved the minds and hearts
of them all to the love of heaven and heavenly things. Then, having
strengthened her journey with the Viaticum of our Lords holy body, she rendered
up her pure soul into the pure hands of her Creator, and ending this mortal
Her happy death.
life, entered into that which never ends, leaving the whole Convent of her
devout Sisters so ouercharged with sorrow, that not being able to contain so
hard a burden within doors, their co^passionate eyes let forth lively signs
thereof, to ease the heaviness of their pious hearts. This glorious Virgin died
the 23. day of June, in the year of our Lord six hundred seauentie nine, when
she had been Abbess seven years, Aldulph her Brother then raygning over the
East Angles.

XII. BUT when her sacred body had layne buried in the earth the space of
sixteen years, her holy sister SEXBVRG (who had succeeded in the gonernment of
the same Monastery) moved with the many miracles daily wrought at her tomb,
was desirous to take up those sacred spoils, and honor them with a more
eminent place in the Church. Therefore a day being appointed for the more
solemn execution of this translation, a great multitude of devout poeple
flocked thither to be present at that act; amongst whom also was S. WILFRID
Archbishop of York, and Kinefrid the Chirurgean that two days before her
departure, had made the incision in her neck, which we spoke of before. But
before they opened her sepulcher, the holy Abbess SEXBVRG sent some of the
Monks to provide A tomb^stone miraculously found for her body.
a stone to be the tomb of those sacred relics. Who (because the I Will of Ely
it self, being a place encompassed round with waters and Marshes was void of
all manner of stones of such greatness) went to a little town not far from
thence, called Grandacester, where near unto the walls of the same town,
they straight found a fair tomb curiously cut in white marble, with a cover
of the same matter most justly fitted thereunto. All much amazed at this good
fortune (especially because the neighboring poeple affirmed that they had
never before seen any such stone in that place) they understood that our
Lord, the wonder-working spouse of the glorious Virgin ETHELDRED, had
miraculously prospered their journey, and provided a shrine for her holy body.
Therefore singing himnes of praise and thanks unto his divine goodness, they
brought the newfound tombe-stone to the Monastery; which was a great comfort
and encouragement to the virtuous Abbess, to hearten her to proceed in the
execution of her intended purpose. Her body found uncorrupted after sixteen
years


XIII. THEREFORE all things being worthyly ordered and prepared, the whole
Convent came in procession and stood singing about the sepulcher, which was
covered and hidden under a pauillion. Then the Abbess with some others entered
into it, to take up the holy body, which being discovered, they found to be as
whole, fair, fresh, and uncorrupted as the same day it was laid, in the earth,
and appeared unto the amazed beholders more like unto one asleep, then dead.
Nay which is most wonderful, the incision in her neck, which at her burial
was a wide and open wound, was now so perfectly cured, that there remained
only to be seen a small and slender skarre, as a token of what it had been
before. So that the earth, which is wont to corrupt and consume the dead
bodies of other mortal men, served here as a sovereign baulme not only to
preserve her virginal flesh uncorrupted, but even to cure and heal the wounds
made therein. Then the body being elevated to the public view of the whole
multitude of assistants, with astonished eyes they all beheld the wonder of
almighty God, who works his own will and pleasure both in heaven and
earth, and here to show the integrity of this holy Virgins chastity during
her life, had preserved her body allsoe from all spott of corruption for the
space of sixteen years after her death. And of this were witnesses, besides
many others, great S. WILFRID, and Kinfrid the Chirurgean who being a
faithful recorder of this accident, was De gest lib. 4. c. 9.
wont to relate the same, as it is here written, unto Venerable BEDE, and
others, as BEDE him self does testify: affirming also that not only the
body, but the linen clothes in which it was wrapped were found also to be
as entier and new, as the first day they were employed to enclose that chaste
body.

XIV. THEN having washed the sacred body, and shrouded it in fresh clothes
fit to contain so worthy a treasure, they placed it with great reverence in
the new and miraculous tomb of white marble, (which they found to be so fit
in length and bigness to contain that sacred relic, that the cunningest
workman by line and measure could not have made one fitter) and brought it with
Miracles at her tomb.
great joy and solemnity into the Church of the B. Virgin MARY, which she had
founded in her life time. This translation or elevation of her holy body was
performed on the seventeenth day of October, and sixtee^ years after her
death. Many great miracles were afterward wrought there at her to^be, and the
only touching of the clothes that her body had been wrapped in, drove devils
out of the bodies of possessed persons, and cured many diseases, by the power
of Him that is all ways wonderful in his Saints. And the wodde^ chest, in
which her body had been first buried, healed many of sore eyes, by only laying
their heads close unto it, and in their prayers calling on the help of
almighty God, and the intercession of his glorious Virgin S. ETHELDRED. Also
out of the place where she was first buried, sprung forth a fountain of clear
water, which was proved to be most sovereign for many diseases even until
the time of our Author, who had seen the experience thereof himself. Diverse
other miracles are faithfully related by this Author, Thomas of Ely, to have
been wrought in the same Monastery, by the meritts In the manus cript history
of Ely.
of this glorious Virgin. There the blind recovered their sight, the dumb
their speech, the lame the use of their legs, the dease their hearing, and
almost all kind of diseased persons were restored to perfect health, as may be
seen at large in the history of Ely.

XV BUT as this holy Virgin was piously gracious to all that devoutly The
divine punishme^nt against one that wronged her Tomb.
implored her assistance in their necessities, so was she many times no less
terrible in punishing those that maliciously endeavored to wrong her Tomb,
Church, or any thing belonging thereunto. For proof whereof it shall suffice
to relate one example only. In that outrageous spoil which the barbarous Danes
mad throughout the kingdom of England during the troublesome raignee of the two
kings Etheldred and Elfred; when all Churches, Monastes ries, and religious
houses together with their inhabitants were committed to fire and sword; the
Monastery of Ely was also made a prey to their untamed cruelty. When one of
those Pagans, more prone to wickedness then the rest, attempted to break open
the holy shrine of saint ETHELDRED, hoping to find it furnished with store of
golden treasure, which his covetous mind greatly thirsted after. And having
with much labor made a hole through the marble chest (which remained in the
same until our Authors time) the divine punishment was so sudden against
him, that his unworthiness was not suffered to behold the treasure contained
therein. For at the very same instant, his eyes fell out of his head, and he
him self falling down to the earth, vomitted out his miserable soul to carry
news to the next world how severely God punishes those that wrong the
relics of his Saints. And his wretched end taught his fellows not to
presume to touch that sacred tomb, allbeit they committed the Church and
Monastery to the insatiable flames of fire. But after a long desolation, in
the time of the peaceable reign Kind Edgar repayreth, the Church of Ely.
of the most noble King Edgar, the same Monastery was magnificently restored
to its former and a far greater glory, by the royal munificence of the same
King, and the secular Clerks, that had crept into it in the mean time, were
for their incontinencie and bad life cast out by the means of that worthly
Pillar of the English Church and the Benedictine family, saint ETHELWOLD, and
by the special command of King Edgar; and the Benedictine Monks placed in
their steed, and one Brithnode made Abbot, unto who^ in success of time nine
other Abbotts succeeded in order. After whom in the year of our Lord 1108.
during the reign of King Henry the first, the Abbey it self was turned to an
Episcopal sea, and the Convent of Monks governed by a Priour, who had the
title of a Cathedral Priour, unto whom and his Chapter of Monks, belonged the
election of the Bishop.

XVI. BUT our glorious saint ETHELDRED was allwaies held and Etheldred the
Patroness of Ely.
reverenced for the special and principal Patroness of this place, and such
she showed her self to be both by the continual working of many miracles and
cures at her tomb, as allsoe by diverse apparitions after her death, for the
peculiar good thereof. One whereof we cannot omit. In the sixteenth year of
the reign of King Henry the first, there lived in the Province of Ely, a man
called Bricstan, who being from his very infancy entangled with the crosses
and adversities of the world gave himself amongst other vices to deal in the
damnable trade of usury, by which only he was maintained in the world: Till
having drawn his line of life to a great length in such wickedness, he fell
into a sickness so vehement, that it made him apprehend death to be nigh. When
the extremity of his disease forced him to enter into consideration of the
miserable state he had lived in: and being inspired with a heavenly glimpse of
divine grace, he made a faithful promise to deliver him self to the service of
almighty God, under the habitt of a Benedictine Monk, in the Monastery of
saint ETHELDRED at Ely. And without any further delay, having gathered all
his goods together, he went to the Monastery, Bricsta^ resolves to be a
Monk.
and made liuerie and season of them, and him self, unto the Monks, humbly
craving mercy for his former life. But the common enemy of mankind, by whose
envy Ada^ fell out of Paradise, stirred up an instrument of his, and a servant
of the Kings called Robert Malartes, who in behalf of the King hindered poor
Brickstans taking the habitt He is maliciously hindered.
of Religion, and having laid theft and other great offenses to his charge,
affirmed that not to save his soul, but to cloak the hay nousnes of his
wicked life he sought now to enter into religion. In fine, Brickstan having noe
other weapon but his own innocence, stood stiffely upon his denial, as
indeed he had reason being guiltless of the crimes he was accused off. But the
authority of his adversary so prevailed against the justice of his cause,
that he was clapped under guard, and led fettered and bound to London, where he
became an v^willing guest to the Iaylour in a dark and loathsome prison: and
laden with bolts and iron chains, in great misery he a long time fed upon
the two common dishes of the poor prisoners ordinary, cold, and Hunger.

XVII. IN the mean time, allbeit he found in him self no former meritts,
whereby he might deserve much before the face of almighty In prison he
calls upon S. Benedict and S. Etheldred.
God, yet he ceased not to call to his divine goodness for help, with a
sorrowful heart and voice desiring the intercession of the glorious Patriarch
of Monks saint BENEDICT, (to whose order he had vowed him self) and of S.
ETHELDRED (in whose Monastery he purposed to have embraced the same order.)
And this was his daily and nightly exercise whilst he lived in this wretched
state of imprisonment, which dured five months. What more? One night when the
bells in the city rung to the mid-nights office of Mattins, and our Prisoner
(having fasted three days before) lay, as he thought, at such a point of
extremity, that he expected nothing but death to be the period of his misery,
(yet still calling either in mouth or heart on the names of those glorious
saints) the divine goodness showed him a heavenly token and sign of his
mercy. For S. BENEDICT, and saint ETHELDRED with her sister saint SEXBVRG
appeared visibly unto him in the prison, with such a glorious luster to He has
an apparition.
that dark place, and such a lightning of comfort to his weak soul darkened
with sorrow, that betwixt joy and amazement he was almost tra^sported beyond
him self, not knowing what to say, or what to think. Till those heavenly
citizens having made them selves known unto him, demanded if he would be
delivered out of that captivity? At which words awaking, as it were, out of a
deep sleep he answered, that he would most willingly, enjoy liberty, if he
thought he could any longer live, but because the forces of his body were
quite spent, he had now no further hope to escape. Then S. BENEDICT drawing
near unto him, very gently pulled off his He is relea^ed by S. Benedict
shackles, and threw them with such vehemency against a beam in the same
room, that they broke in pieces, and the noise awaked the keepers, who fearing
lest their priso^ners might have made some escape, came hastily with lights
into the same room, where to their great astonishment, they understood first
by an other of the prisoners, and next of Brickstan him self, what strainge
guests had been there, and how he had been miraculously loosed out of his
fetters, by the heavenly visitation of S. BENEDICT and S. ETHELDRED. Therefore
the next morning, they made relation hereof to the virtuous Queen Mawde, who
happened to be in London at the same time: and she presently sent one Raphe, a
chaplain of the Court, to be more certainly informed of the truth of this
accident. He, having found how Brickstan was released out of his fetters, and
seeing the irons so straingely burst in pieces; brought him to the Queens
Great joy for his releasement.
presence at court. Then the noise of this miraculous accident being blown all
over the city of London, made the citizens with their mouths full of the
praises of almighty God, come flocking to the Court. And the Queen being
replenished with an extreme joy at the novelty of the miracle, caused all the
bells in the town to make the air resou^d with peales of joy for the
straingenes thereof, and all Conuents of Ecclesiastical persons to sing forth
praises of thanksgiving unto the almighty worker of wonders, for so great a
remonstrance of his goodness. And Brickstan him self going in pilgrimage to
visitt many Churches throughout the city to give thanks for this heavenly
favor, was followed with whole troops of poeple that desired to look upon
him, as upon a wonder, and at the Benedictine Abbey of Westminster he was
received by Gilebert the Abbot, and the whole Convent of Monks, that came in
procession to meet him In fine, by command of the Queen, he was honorably
conveyed out of all his troubles, to the beloved haven of his desires, the
Monastery of Ely, carrying with him, as the trophies of his victory over the
world, the chains and fetters, which had bound him in prison, and out of which
he was so miraculously released. At Ely he was very honorable received, where
he brought Briestan becomes a Monk at Ely.
his former purpose to perfection, and putt on the habitt and profession of a
Benedictine moke. And his fetters were hung up in the same Church before the
high altar, for a perpetual spectacle and monument of the miracle. This
happened in the time of Herueus first bishop of the same place.

XVIII. THOMAS Walsingha^ in his history of England, in Richard the second in
the year 1389. relates how during the same kings raygne, the holy Virgin
ETHELDRED appeared at two several times to distinct persons, and foretold
strainge accidents and punishments that should happen unto the Country, if
they were not auerted by the prayers and sacrifices of good men. Other
particularities thereof we omit, fearing to be over teadious, having showed
sufficiently how great a care this glorious Saint had of her country. Let us
make intercession unto her, that by her meritte and prayers, she would obtain
us grace of almighty God, to be freed from the yoke and oppression of
Heresy, which in these our days bears so great a head over onr miserable
country. Her life we have gathered out of the Chronicles of Ely which we have
in an ancient manuscript, written by Thomas of Ely a Monk of the same place;
a^ also out of Venerable Bede de gestis Ang. lib. 4. cap. 19. Nicholas
Harpsfield sec. 7. cap. 24. and Ionnes Anglicus recited by John Capgraue in his
legend of English Saints. Mention is made of her in the Roman Martirologe, and
in that of Bid, Ado, Vsuard, and Wion. Also William Malmesbury lib. 2. de
gest. reg. cap. 13. Matthew Westminster anno 679. Polidore Virgill lib. 4.
Wigorniensis annis 672. 673. and 679. Trithemius in his third book of the
famous men of saint Benedicts Order chap. 122. and many other writers do
worthyly sound forth her praises, and in ancient times her feast was
celebrated in England with great solemnity.

The life of saint BARTHOLOMEW Priest and Monk of the holy Order of saint
BENEDICT.
JUNE 24 Written by Ioannes Anglicus.
SAINT BARTHOLOMEW borne in Yorkshire in the Province of Whiteby, in times
past called Streanshall, was by his parents first named Tostius, but when he
left the world and entered into a monastical life, he left also that name,
and was called BARTHOLOMEW. In his very infancy he gave many rare signs of
future sainctitie, and received from heaven many special favors to confirm
the His divine visions.
same; being diverse times visited by our Lord JESUS CHRIST him self in person,
and by his glorious Mother the Blessed Virgin MARY, and the holy Apostles S.
PETER, and saint JOHN. In his youth he traveled into many foreign
countries, and in Norway he was adorned with the sacred dignity of Priestood.
But returning into England, he received the habitt of a Monk in the
Benedictine monastery Note a miracle.
of Durham, where entering into the Church, and making reverence to the
Crucifix, the sacred Image of Christ hanging on the Cross, seemed with an
humble bowing of the head, to resalute him again. In this monastery he led a
very regular and strict life, profitting daily more and more in humility,
obedience, and all other virtues belonging to a Monastical life. Till at
length aspiring to a more solitary manner of living segregated from all humane
company, the great Patron of that Order, and monastery, S. CVTHBERT appeared
to him in a vision, and invited him to live in the Island of Farne, which was
the place that he him self in his life time had honored with his holy
conversation. BARTHOLOMEW being glad of so heavenly an offer so suting with
his desires, promised to spend the remnant of his life in that Island, and to
that end, with much difficulty and importunity he obtained leave of his
Priour, who fearing lest so strict a life might be too hard for him to
undertake, having yet lived but a year in the observance of the Monastery, was
the more unwilling to consent to his purpose.

II. TO the Hermitage of Farne then he went, where he led a most His strict
life in the the Ermitage.
strict and rigid manner of life. He wore a hair shirt next his skin for
many years, until his Priour commanded the contrary. His bed was no other
then the hard ground; his diet, bread and herbs; he never tasted any flesh,
and after some years he abstayned from fish also: his drink was fair water,
and seven years before his death he is reported not to have drunk at all.
His clothing was a woollen stamin, a cowle, and a black cloak lined with
skins. His stockins were also of leather which he never putt of until they
were quite consumed with age. For he was wont to say to his brethren, that our
bodies were to be used to all manner of hardness and filth, if we desired to
bring our souls to the perfection of beauty and purity But in all this
rigorous manner of life, he allwaies carried so pleasant and merry a
countenance, and had his face so well tempered with its natural colors, that
all that beheld it would have judged him rather a great lover of bodily
delights and dainties, then so severe a chastiser and tamer of his own flesh.
In prayer, so unwearied, that besides his ordinary office, he recited over
David's Psalter sometimes twice, sometimes thrice every day. In the mean He
ouercometh the temptations of the devil.
time he was grievously vexed, and assaulted by many hellish temptations of
the devil all which with a firm confidence in almighty God, and by the
figne of the holy cross and the virtue of holy water, he utterly vanquished
and overthrew.

III. HE is reported also to have wrought many miracles in his life time, and
to have been comforted with diverse heanenly visions during the time of his
strict life in this Hermitage: amongst which, he beheld the soul of Thomas
Priour of Durham (who having left the rege^cie of the Monastery, had lived a
retired life together with him, and died in the same Island) carried up into
heaven by the ministry of angelical hands. And at length saint BARTHOLOMEW
him self (when he had lived forty years and six months in this hermitage, in
all sainctitie and holiness of life, having a long time before had a revelation
of the hour and time of his death) was called out of the thraldom of this
world to receive the everlasting rewards of his labors in heaven, on the very
feast of saint JOHN the Baptist the four and twentieth day of June. He was
buried in his Oratorie in the same place, at whose tomb many miraculous cures
were wrought by the all mighty power of him, who is for ever glorious in his
saints. What year he died is not specified by the Authors of his life, but
he must needs have flourished since the year 1100. about which time the
Benedictine Monks were first introduced into the Cathedral Church of Durham,
in the reign of William Rufus.

The life of S. Bartholomew we have gathered out of Ioannes Anglicus recited by
John Capgraue in his legend of English Saints; with whom let the truth of this
history stand, for J have not yet found any other Author that makes mention
of him.

The life of saint ADALBERT Deacon, Confessor and Monk of the holy Order of
saint BENEDICT
JUNE 25. Out of an ancient manuscript recited by Surius to. 3.
THIS holy man was one of those twelve Benedictine Monks which S. EGBERT sent,
as so many elect Apostles, to preach the faith of Christ in Germany; of
which mission you may read more in the life of saint Swibert March the first,
and in that of saint EGBERT April the twenty fourth. He was son to Edilbald
king of the Deiri, and nephew to saint OSWALD king of the Northumbers. But
esteeming the gain of the kingdom of heaven before all worldly greatness, he
despised the royal wealth, dignities, and honors of his birth, and embraced
first a Monastical life in England, afterward he became a disciple to saint
EGBERT in Ireland, in a more rigid and strict observance of the Benedictine
rule and profession; and lastly being made Deacon, he was joined to eleauen
other Priests and Benedictine Monks to make up the number of twelve
Apostolical men which (as we have said) saint EGBERT sent to announce the He
converted many in Germany.
Christian faith to the barbarous Pagans of Germany. ADALBERT therefore for
the love of CHRIST and the advancement of his holy Gospel, went courageously
with the rest, and at Egmond in Holland he employed his best labors for the
conversion of souls to CHRIST and his Church. Where after he had reaped a most
happy and fruitful harvest in the vineyard of our Lord, and reduced great
multitudes of Heathens out of the blind night of Idolatry to the comfortable
light of Christ's Gospel, famous for his holy life, and miracles, which it
pleased allmighiie God to work by his meritts for the better confirming of
what he preached, he ended his toilesome days in this world, and departed to
the eternal reward of his labors in heaven; the five and twentieth day of
June, about the year of our Lord 705. He was buried at Egmond in Holland,
where his tomb flourished wonderfully with many great miracles wrought
thereat.

II Afterward in the time of Theodoricke the first, Duke of Holland his holy
body was taken out of the earth, where under his coffin there appeared a
fountain of most pure water springing out of the ground: and the palle in
which that sacred treasure was wrapped they found to be as entier and
uncorrupted as it was at the first. And The elevation of his body.
the same Theodoricke built a chapel in a place called Hallen, in which the
holy body was placed with great reverence and solemnity. But his son
Theodoricke the Younger being a most fervent follower of his fathers devotion
founded there a goodly Monastery of S. B^nedicts order, in honor of S.
ADALBERT, by whose meritts his son Egbert A monastery dedicated to his name.
afterward Archbishop of Treuirs, was cured of a teadious and cruel fever,
which had given the foil to all the skill of human physic. This Monastery of
Egmond is held for antiquity and dignity the noblest in all Holland, in which
lie buried the bodies of many Princes, expecting the deadfull summons of the
last trumpett, who in their lives endowed it with many rich gifts and
possessions. Many other miracles were wrought at the same place by the merits
of this glorious Saint, which are contained in the history of his life written
by the Monks of Medeloc, and recited by Surius in his third tome, out of which
we have gathered thus much of him. The Roman Martirologe makes mention of him,
as also that of Ado, and Wion. Also Molanus in his Index of the Saints of
Belgia, Trithemius in his third book of the famous men of S. Benedicts order
chap. 294. Baronius tom. 8. anno Christi 697. Marcellinus in the life of S.
Swibert, and others.

The end of June, and the first Tome.
TO THE READER.
VOutchsafe (good Reader) courteously to receive this first tome of our Saints
lives, which allthough it come alone to thy view, and s^e bear an imperfect
face, yet I doubt not it will give thee some consolation in the reading. The
second part is going to the press, and shall by Gods holy assistance come with
as much speed, as is possible, to thy hands. In the mean time, let thy kind
acceptance of this add wings of courage and have, to the accomplishment of the
other. Farewell.

AN ALPHABETICALL TABLE OF THE SAINTS CONTAINED IN THIS FIRST TOME.
A.
A DELBERT Deacon. 612. Adrian Abbott. 42. Alban Martyr. 574. Aldelme Bishop.
487. Alfwold Bishop. 325. Alured Abbot. 56. Amphibalus Martyr. 587. Anselme
Archbishop. 380. Asaph Bishop. 412. Augustine Archbishop. 496. Aydo Abbott.
200.
B.
Bartholomew Priest. 610. Bathilde Queen. 104 Bid Priest. 523. Bennet Biscop
Abbott. 46. Birstan Bishop. 114. Boniface Martyr. 535. Bosa Bishop. 245.
Botulphe Abbott. 571. Brigitt Virgin. 118. Brithune Abbot. 432. Brithwald
Bishop. 45.
C.
Cadock Martyr. 102. Cedde Bishop. 35. Cedmon Monk. 153. Ceolulphe King. 70.
Chad Bishop. 224. Columba Abbott. 562. Cuthbert Bishop.
D.
David Bishop. 218. Deicola Abbot. 82. Dimpna Martyr. 426. Dunstan Archbishop.
434.
E.
Eadburg Virgin. 569. Eadbert Bishop. 413. Edilwald Priest. 324. Edward King
Confessor. 1. Edward King Martyr. 292. Egbert Priest. 402. Elfled Virgin. 14^.
Elphegus Bishop Martyr. 361. Elstan Bishop 340. Erkenwald Bishop. 407.
Ermenburg Queen. 100. Ermenild Abbess. 157. Ethelbert King Confessor. 179.
Ethelbert King Martyr. 466. Etheldred Queen Abbess. 593.
F.
Felix bishop 244 Fremund King. 424. Furseus Abbot. 72
G.
Gilbert Confessor. 135 Gregory Pope. 246 Godrick Hermit 472 Gudwall Bishop.
505 Guthlake Confessor. 343 Gyldas Abbot. 112 Gysla and Rictrude. 341
H.
Henry Hermit. 78 Herebert Priest. 322
I.
Inas King. 142 John of Beuerley. 415
K.
Kentigerne bishop. 61 Kyneburg Abbess and Kineswide virgin. 237
L.
Laurence Archbishop. 126
M.
Margaret Queen 564. Melli^us Bishop. 399. Milburg Abbess. 173. Milgith
Virgin. 187.
O.
Oswald Bishop* 188. Owen Confessor. 235.
P.
Paternus Bishop. 356. Patrick Bishop. 270. Peter Abbot. 69. Pyran Bishop. 236.
R.
Richard Bishop. 327. Robert Abbot. 554.
S.
Sexulphe Bishop. 111. Stephen Abbot. 357. Swibert Bishop. 202.
T.
Thelian Bishop. 149. Theorithgid Virgin. 101. Translation of S. Edward King
and Martyr. 159. Trumwine Bishop. 152.
V.
Vlrick Confeffour. 162.
W.
Walburg Virgin. 183. Wereburg Abbess. 131. Wilgis Confessor. 116. Willeick
Priest. 229. William Archbishop. 559. Winwaloke Abbott. 231. Wolstan Bishop.
84. Wulsine Bishop. 39. Wyre Bishop. 421.

