THE LIFE OF ALFRED, OR, ALVRED: The first Institutor of subordinate government
in this Kingdom, and Refounder of the University of OXFORD.

Together with a Parallel of our Sovereign Lord, K. CHARLES until this
year, 1634.

By ROBERT POVVELL of Wels, one of the Society of New-Inne.

Printed by Richard Badger for Thomas Alchorn, and are to be sold at the sign
of the green-Dragon in Paul's Churchyard. 1634.

REVERENDISSIMO IN CHRISTO PATRI, AC DOMIno Gualtero permissione divina Winton.
Episcopo, Sacrae Periscelidis Praesuli, Domino suo honoratissimo.
Reverendissime Antistes:
INter publicas, and privatas rerum anxietates, per suffuratas ansam arripui
horas, opusculum de antiquis legibus and subdelegatis in hoc regno regendi
formulis, ab Alvredo olim praeillustri Angliae principe institutis, and ad
Mosaicam moderno tempori deductis imitationem, elucubrandi: non citius opus
istud peregissem, and honoratissimo juris perito examine suo trutinandu^
devovissem, cum magnum me incessit desiderium, in illius celeberrimi regis and
vitam, virtutes, and gesta penitius inscrutandi, quae omnia quidem accuratius
perpendenti, tantum mihi in delitiis erant, ut variis sparsim Chronographis
reperta, in unum colligere fasciculum non pertaesum fuerit, in illius
adimplendi conatu sic unda supervenit undae, mirae (torrentis instar) in animum
meum de serenissimo nostro Carolo rege, and ipsius cum Saxonico illo
antecessore suo, aequiparabili fere in omnibus assimilatione, meditationes
inciderunt; and eo magis mirae, quod tunc temporis insignissimus ille Aetoniae
praepositus multas earundem (licet long concinniori and disertiori idiomatis
contextu) in plausibus and votis suis ad Regem e Scotia reducem dilucide
pertextuisset: aetate hac calamorum and typorum prurigine laboranti cum non
deerint (haud dicam histriomastiges) insolentes, and insensati Regis, legis,
ecclesiae Episcoporum, and totius ditionis hujus gubernationis, mastiges licet
ipsissimis ipsi flagellis pereant; non iniquum mihi (cum nos non nobis solum
natos esse meminerim) hoc minutulum meum in rei-publicae gazophylacium, Regis,
and legis ergo immittere visum est: Ad opellam istam de legibus, quod attinet,
quantum naturalem subditorum erga sacram Regis Majestatem, obedientiam, quantum
innatam Coronae regalis praeeminentiam, nec non veterum consuetudinum, and
novissimorum decretorum scientiam explicatura, quantum denique emolumenti, ad
rerum gerendarum subordinatione^ allatura videatur, consultissimos appellare
judices fas sit: interim ad nobile par Principum sacrorum redeam; quis de
talibus talia, qualia perraro ulla produxit aetas, silendo praeter ire queat?
Etenim (ut alibi in Alfredum dicitur) quae delectatio major, quam clarorum
virorum studia, res gestas, mores, vitas, ortus and obitus (tanquam tabulas
been pictas) quotidie intueri? Quis fructus uberior quam qui ex istiusmodi
rerum lectione percipiatur? Non alium hoc aggrediendo mihi finem destinavera^,
qua^m ut incomparabilia omnium in ij^^ praesertim in Alf. nostro superstite)
bonorum insignia, quasi totidem exemplaria imitationis commode singulis
accommodentur: qualis haec micula mea, prae grandioribus, apud vulgus hominum
estimanda videatur, non multum interest; modo dominationis vestrae (cui omnia
quicquid me penes, immo meipsum debeo) patrocinio, cum omni humilitate dicari
digneris. Intimis igitur a te praesul Reverende votis contendo, ut hujus
officii pignoris dedicationem acceptare non pigeat, quo ingenti favore fretus,
alterum istud de legibus, reipublicae utilitati devotum (quorum intererit prius
consultis) alacrius exhibiturus sum. Deus optimus and maximus dignitatem
vestram in ecclesiae, et regni ornamentum et adjumentum, diu incolumem
praestet, et annorum plenitudine transacta aeterna beatitudine in altissimis
coronet.

Dominationi vestrae omni observantiae officio, studio, and fide devinctissimus
Servulus ROB* POVELLUS*

The Preface.
HISTORY is the Herald of Antiquity, and the life of time, and well deserves
Cicero his appellation, Magistram vitae: it preserves and presents unto our
understanding, and knowledge in the book of nature (as it were in a Synoptick
glass) the life and light of the boundless and beautiful theater of the
whole world, the heavens, the elements, the glorious lights, the nature of al
herbs and plants, and all creatures whatsoever both of sea, and land; yea, even
subterraneous things, treasured up in the bosom and bowels of the earth; the
variety of all precious gems, and all mineral bodies and materials whatsoever;
and not only the life and light of this great universe, but of all persons and
actions memorable and worthy to be recorded, either for imitation of good, or
eschewing of evil, ever since the world it self had its first created light:
it presents our first Parents in their innocence and naked purity, and after
their fall, in their sinful Genesis 9 21
robes of figleaves. Noah in the Arc (the type of the Church militant) and
afterward uncovered in his Tent.

It brings to our memories, the gracious and godly government of David,
Iehosaphat, Ezechias, and many other blessed Kings; and on the contrary, the
tyrannical and cruel oppressions of Pharaoh, Astyages, and Herod, and many
others, with their woeful and exemplary punishments, the lives of good and bad
subjects; an undermining Ziba, and a faithful Mephibosheth, a proud Haman, and
a loyal Mordecai, an incorrupted Naaman, and a bribing Gehazi; in a word, a
Pharisaicall Thraso and a penitent Publican: it presents unto us from the mouth
of God, by the hand of Moses the Law of God, or the deca. logue proceeding from
the eternal wisdom and rule of justice in God; by which, as by a Rule or
Level, all the counsels and consultations, all the actions and enterprises of
men are to be directed and squared.

This great Mistress has two eyes, and by them she surveyes the whole world,
Topographie, and Chronology, and exact knowledge of places, and of times, which
like the Cynosura are able to guide and conduct every studious reader in the
vast Ocean of the affairs of the world unto the haven of true knowledge.

History is either universal, describing the whole fabric of the world, or
general containing a national or provincial description, Quae mores hominum
cognovit and urbes, or special, comprehending the lives and actions of
particular Princes or persons; this last I shall walk in.

To be versed in the knowledge of foreign Countries, and affairs, and to be
a stranger at home, were great folly, and a way to forget the legiance and
obedience which we owe to our Sovereign and his Laws.

Under the service of that great Commandresse, that yields subjection to none
but eternity it self, I shall humbly presume, to present unto the world for
the glory of our English Nation such a Prince, as Constantine the great
Emperor of Rome, (who rescued the Christians of his time from the
persecution,) would have owned and honored for a Compeere, if he had lived in
his time; Alfred, or, as some name him Aelfred, or Alvred, the 23. King of the
West Saxons, and the first Monarch of England; who not only rescued and
defended his Christian Subjects from Pagan persecutions, but was the Author of
reconciling and adopting a Danish King, and many Nobles and others to the
Christian faith.

To the Christian and Courteous READER.
THere are, who will expect from me some reasons, why I, inter minores
minimus, should adventure the labors of my shallow and slender judgment,
upon a Subject so Princely and Paramount; Let such accept some few for many.

In that degree of profession, and employment in the Common laws of this
kingdom which I now enjoy, and have done these twenty five years. I had ever
a desire to improve my knowledge not, only by traditionall and ordinary rules
of practice, but by a more exact inquiry, Petere fontes potius quam rivulos,
to look into the antiquities and original grounds of those laws wherewith I
was to deal.

My first encouragement therein I received by versing in a learned work
compiled and published Anno, 1609. by Master John Skeny a great Senator and
privy Counselor in Scotland, to our late blessed Sovereign of famous memory
KING James, entitled Regiam Majestatem, etc. with his marginall annotations
touching the Concordance of the divine law, the laws of this land, and the
latter Parliamentary laws of Scotland, which ministered an occasion unto me to
bestow some stolen hours (amidst many distracting businesses) in the study of
our British, Saxon, and English histories, wherein I observe, notwithstanding
the many and often permutations of State and government in the time of the
heptarchie, as also before, and after, a constant observation of the
fundamental rules of our National laws in Tanto, though not in Toto, and I
took no mean felicity therein, heartily wishing, that they were not so much
neglected and undervalued, as they are by many, who are more conversant in
Turkish and other foreign histories, than in our own, in sua republica
hospites, in aliena Gives Aliens at home and Citizens abroad.

From the study of those laws I learned that the body of the common weal
subsisteth by an ancient monarchical government, and that the KING is Vicarius
Dei and Caput reipublicae, GODS Vicegerent and the head of the Commonwealth.
The members which make up the structure of our Republike are the LORDS
spiritual and temporal, and the commons: the commonwealth has an interest
in every man's actions, In praemium or paenam, either to reward the good or to
punish the bad actions of men, crimes of omission, or commission; Interest
rei-publicae ne quis re sua male utatur, It has such a power over the actions
and estates of men, that no man must abuse or misimploy the talent of his
mind, body, or means: And by the rules of contraries, Every man must well and
rightly, order, and employ them for the aid, and defense of the head, and of
that great body. Master Crompton in the dedication of his learned Irenarcha,
rendereth this motive; for the publication of that book. For that (says he)
the body of the Commonwealth does consist of diverse parts, and every member
ought to endeavor himself according to his calling, for the maintenance
thereof; I have studied how I might put my poor talent into the treasury; for
the more safe conservation of that body. The same reason raised up some courage
in me to enterprise that work which is mentioned in the precedent nuncupation.

I had no sooner finished and devoted that to the view and examination of an
honorable person eminently learned in the laws, but my meditations fell
amain upon the lives, laws and memorable actions of our Royal pair of
peerless Princes, and especially of our British Alfred, and afterward
perusing that most accurate and learned work of Sir Henry Wootton Provost of
Eaton College for the gratulation of his Majesty's happy return from
Scotland. It bred a wonder in me, that two Subjects, the one noble, the other
plebeian should at one and the same time, as near as may be conjectured,
concord for most things in their meditations, upon the noble acts and deeds of
their most glorious Sovereign.

It seems to me a strong argument to prevent the sinister conceits and
critic opinions of those who will be too censorious upon my publishing of
this work: and amongst them some of my own calling, who never had their
breeding in any Innes of Court or Chauncery, such I must pass by with the Poet,

Carpere nostra voles? potes hinc jam lector abire
Quo libet --
I hear some already censure me, for writing some part of the life of our
renowned Monarch in his life time; two presidents instar multorum shall serve
to vindicate me therein. Asser who wrote the life of Alfred whilst he lived;
And our ever honored Cambden who wrote part of the life of blessed Queen
Elizabeth before her death.

I shall add a reason, that sithhence by nature we are apt to imitate the
worst things;

-- dociles imitandis
Turpibus and pravis omnes sumus --
It is most expedient that the lives of good and gracious Princes, being gods
on earth, should be set forth unto their people as specula, a super-eminent
Watchtower whom their subjects every where might behold afar off, and learn
to obey their supreme power; and as speculum, a mirror wherein they might gaze
on, and strive to imitate their Sovereign in virtue and goodness.

Two points in my Parallel, I hear, are already quarrelled with.

One concerning genuflexion at the saving name of JESUS; the Canonical
discipline of our Church ratified by regal authority injoynes it, and I will
obey it; and if there were no such injunction, my conscience would warrant me
to do it, with freedom from Idolatry.

The other, concerning recreations on the Lords day after the end of Evening
prayer, for which I refer the Reader to the late translated work of the
reverend Divine Dr. Prideux. In either of these I have not presumed to use any
arguments; neither needed I, for then I should have walked ultra crepidam: and
needless it is, to argue or dispute for that which authority has commanded,
and most insufferable insolence to speak or write against it: know, good
Reader, that I have learned the fifth Commandment, which teaches us, that
subjection must attend on superiority; and commands not only a natural
obedience from children to parents, but a civil obedience from subjects to
their Prince who is Pater Patriae, and to all subordinate Ministers and
Magistrates under him. How can any man think himself religious, who will
contemptuously violate that Commandment, not only in not obeying the
Ordinances and Edicts of their Christian King, but in oppugning them, and
perverting others from yielding obedience to them. Let this suffice for matter
of apology; I shall conclude with a thankful remembrance of some living
Authors, to whom this Treatise of Alfred must especially ascribe a part of its
being; Mr. Bryan Twyne sometimes Fellow of Corpus Christi College in Oxford,
for his learned and laborious work, touching the Antiquity of Oxford; out of
which I excerpted many things conducible to my purpose; and to Mr. Noel Sparks
Fellow, and Greek Lecturer of the same house, for his faithful and careful
collections out of Asser. These and many more I consulted with, before I
brought it to that contexture and form, wherein it now presents it self to
public view. And so beseeching the Almighty to direct all our actions for his
glory and the common good, and to bless us with true piety toward him,
unfeigned loyalty to our Sovereign, and Christian charity one toward another,
I rest,

Yours howsoever you censure me, ROBERT POWELL.

THE LIFE OF ALFRED, OR, ALVRED.
THE light of the Laws of this virtuous and magnanimous Prince, drawn from
the first and best pattern of all Laws, did not only minister the occasion
of compiling a Treatise to be hereto annexed, but a just encouragement with my
unworthy and unpolish't Pensil to limb out the life of him, who (though he
died seven hundred thirty three years since) does by the modern practice and
imitation of his Laws and Government still live: To speak sufficiently (as one
says) of so noble a Prince Holinsh.
as Alfred was, might require eloquence, learning, and a large Volume.

I must truly say, that tota vita luctamen, all his life was a perpetual
warfare against the enemies either of outward, or inward peace, men, or vices.
And in this short breviary of his life, I intend not any long discourse of the
various and troublesome affairs of his twenty eight years reign: but what
concerns his valor, virtue, and religion, his pious and memorable deeds, his
orderly (in the times of war and disorder) course and method of a well disposed
government.

This good King who is styled by one the Mirror of Princes, by another, Moses
his imitator, was the Grandchilde of Egbert, who first gave this Kingdom the
name of England, and the fourth and youngest son of Aethelwolphe by the Lady
Ogburgh. In his childhood he was a careful observer, and celebrator of
peculiar hours in prayers, and service of God, and so dexterously studious,
that he had many Psalms and Prayers by heart, which afterward being gathered
into a book, he did continually night and day carry about with him in his
bosom, as his inseparable companion, and as a supply or provision for the
worship of God, amidst the manifold changes of those times: he was a sedulous
frequenter, and visitor of holy places, Etiam ab infantia, Asser.
orandi and eleemosynam dandi gratia, diu in oratione tacita prostratus (says
mine Author) wherein he followed his Fathers steps, who by reason of his
monasticke education under Swithun a Monk (whom he afterward made Bishop of
Winton,) was a man zealously and piously addicted. And of all his sons,
Alfred was most heir apparent to his fathers devotion and virtues, though not
to his Crown and Kingdom. When he was not above five years old, yet senior
virtutibus quam annis Aethelwolphe Twine Apol. p. 194.
his father being warned thereto in a dream by the voice of an Angel, Adulphe
Rex dilecte Dei quid moraris? mitte filium postgenitum, etc. did upon this
vision (if it may receive any credit) by an honorable Convoy of Swithun
Bishop of Winton, and other Nobles, send this blessed youngling to the Bishop
of Rome, to be anointed King of England: certain it is, he was there, and was
humbly presented by Swithun to Pope Leo the fourth, who (as if divining and
presaging his future fortune and succession to his fathers Crown) did in the
year of Christ eight hundred fifty five, anoint him a King in the presence of
his Father (says Rossus,) and it was about the time that Lewis the second
succeeded Lotharius Chytrae^
in the Empire of Rome.

Aethelwolphe not many years after his return from Rome died, and his three
elder sons Ethelbald, Ethelbert, and Etheldred successively reigned, and
dying left the Kingdom distracted by continual conflicts with the Danes; and
Alfred having faithfully served his brothers, as Viceroy, in each of their
sev^ral reigns survived, and in the twenty second year of his age, and the
nineteenth year of the Emperor succeeded in ^ewis.
his Kingdom, in a year wherein eight several battles had been given to the
Danes by the Saxons; and Hellinshead.
himself within one month after his Coronation, forced into the field by the
Pagan Danes at Wilton, where the end of the fight was more successful than
the beginning, and procured the first truce between the Danes and Saxons; yet
so implacable were those Heathens against this pious Prince; that like wild
and savage Boares after many overthrowes they would continually whet their
tuskes to give new onsets. After this truce about the year, eight hundred
seventy five, Halden the Danish King having* the fresh supply and aid of
Guthrun, and other Danish Leaders, (Viceroyes at least) did both by Sea and
Land continually exercise this gracious Prince in a defensive warfare; but not
without some perilous imbroylements, he did enforce them to the treaty of a
second Hollinsh.
peace; and then (more than ever they did before to any) they took a solemn^
Oath to depart the Country; but eft-soones perfidiously violated the same, and
for further preparation of war, marched with an Army toward Exeter; Alfred
approached them in such wise, and so fiercely encountered them, as that they
were enforced to deliver pledges for performance of their former agreement of
departure: for no oaths would serve to bind the consciences of those lawless
Miscreants. Hence they departed and drew into Mercia; and having usurped the
government of the Kingdom from the River of Thames forward; no terms, nor
ties of truce could contain them from continual incursions, and invasions
upon this noble Prince: under the conduct of Guthrun (called by some Gurmund.)
The remnant of those disbanded Atheists mustered up themselves, and about the
first year of his reign invaded the Country of West-saxia, and pitched their
Tents about Chipnam in Wiltshire, where they infested the whole Country* and
so overlaid King Alfred Speed.
with their united forces; that by extremity he was necessitated to make his
recesse into obscure places almost inaccessible for fennes and marshes, having
nothing of his great Monarchy left unto him but that part of the Kingdom,
since known and distinguished by the Counties of Hampton, Wilts and Somerset.

In this distress, one of his greatest Courts for residence, was an Island now
known by the name of Athelney, in the County of Cambden F(...).
Somerset, anciently in the Saxon called Aethelingarg* (that is,) Nobilium
insula, so termed, by reason of the Kings abode, and the concourse of his
Nobles unto him: this place is as famous to us for the shelter of Alfred from
the Danish pursuit, as the Minturnian fens were to the Romans for Marius his
covert from the persecution of Sylla: In this place he lived poorly disguised
in a Cowheards house, (some would have it in the service of Denwulphus a
Hogheard;) Being excellent in music and songs, he oftentimes in the habit
and posture of a common minstrill, did insinuate himself in the Danish Camp,
where his plausible carriage and skill, gained a freedom of access and
passage in the company of their Princes at Banquets and other meetings; and
thereby he discovered their conditions, and all their martial counsels and
designs.

By this prudent and politic course, being now furnished and prepared not
only to prevent, but to surprise his enemies; ( Dolus an virtus, quis in host
requirat?) He returns to hi^ comfortless company, and unmasking himself, and
the Danish designs, does with comfort cheer them up; and with a refreshed
power and strength, he suddenly issued forth, and gave a fierce assault upon
the secure and careless company of the Danes who were then frollicking in
their Tents, and Somno vinoque sepulti; he put such a great number of them to
the sword, that the poor remainder of them were utterly disbanded and
discomfited, and enforced to a shameful flight for the safeguard of their
lives. This victorious surprizall gave a sure overture and hope to King Alfred
of regaining his imbroyled Monarchy; and so weakened and dishe^^tned the Pagan
Rebels, that ^hey could never recollect sufficient courage, or company to
renew any fresh encounter against the SAXON forces, who had gathered greater
strength unto them.

In this Isle (whether before or after his victory it much matters not) King
Alfred had built a kind of Castle or Fortress to receive him and his Nobles
upon return from their sallies and encounters during his wars in those parts.

About a year after that memorable overthrow, viz. Anno eight hundred seventy
nine, in a battle at Kinwich in Devon, Halden, Speed.
and some of the chief Leaders of the Danes, received their deaths-wound, and
ended their lives; hereupon the daunted and dispersed Danes humbly present
their terms of peace to King Alfred, with pledges and hostages, that they
would either depart the Land, or become Christians, which was accepted by him;
for in him Justice and Mercy met together.

Guthrun their new King upon the death of their other Leaders, with thirty
Noble men and almost all his people, received baptism in the new built Castle
of Athelney, where King Alfred was Godfather to him, and gave him the name of
Athelstane; and upon a confederation between them, Alfred did assign unto him
the Provinces of the Eastang'es and Northumberland, Cambden
vt eas, sub fidelitate Regis jure hereditatio foveret, quas pervaserat latr
cinio: that he might enjoy that by right, which before he usurped by rapine;
and unto the new baptized Nobles, he gave many large and rich gifts: This
truce or league, must be in time, about the eight or ninth year of his reign,
and thus begins: Foedus, quod Aluredus Lamb. Archaie^ fo. 49.
and Gythrunus reges ex sapientum Anglorum at que eorum omnium, qui orientalem
incolebant Angliam consulto ferierunt, in quod praeterea, singuli non solum de
seipsis, verum etiam de natis suis, ac nondum in lucem editis (quotquot saltem
misericordiae divinae aut regie velint esse participes) jurarunt: That is, They
did by a solemn Oath ratify this league, as well for themselves, as for those
that were then borne and unborne, that would be partakers of divine mercy.

In the Charter, or muniment of this truce; that his Kingdom might be free
from the Danish encroachments, he thus bounded his Kingdom. Primo ditionis
nostrae fines ad Thamesin fluvium evehuntor, etc. Let the bounds of our
Dominion reach unto the River of Thames, and thence forward unto the River of
Lee, and Lermouth (this passes through Ware, Waltham, and Stratford;) then let
them reach straight to Bedford; and last of all being extended through the
River Isis, let them end in Watling-street.

Afterward, certain Comitiall Laws and Ordinances ( Alfred no doubt was the
prime mover of Lamb. fo. 52.
them) were solemnly made between them, enlarged and amplified by their wise
men: before all things they proposed and preferred the strict and holy
worshipping of Almighty God, and abandoning all barbarous Idolatry; next, they
took care for the enacting, registring, and inrolling of moral Laws, for
containing of Subjects in their several duties and due obedience unto
Ecclesiastical discipline; and therefore they first decreed, That the peace of
the Church within her walls (as it was then delivered by the hand of King
Alfred) should be piously and inviolably observed; they proceeded to the
promotion and propagation of the Christian faith, and the abolition of all
Paganism and heathenish Rites; for coertion of Clerks, and men in holy Orders,
if they committed any perjury, fornication, or other offenses, or were
inconformable in the celebration of Festival days, times of abstinence, or
other Orders and injunctions of the Church; prohibiting mercature, and secular
negotiations upon the Lords day. In all which, the imposition of penalties and
punishments upon an Englishman, and upon a Dane were differenced one from the
other: they also provided for the exilement of Witches, Wizards, common
strumpets, and other lewd and wicked creatures; with other good Laws for
avoiding of homicides, and for preservation of peace and government, and
maintenance of each man's right of property in this their national commixture.

This adjured league quieted the civil discords of the Danes and Saxons for
the space of four years, until the twelfth year of Alfreds reign. And
afterward the continual inrode of the straggling unbaptized Danes, issuing out
of France and other places (who like Egyptian Locusts vexed that Eastern part
of the Land) gave this good King little time of intermission from a vigilant
provision for defensive wars; until not without a holy testamentary
preparation, he surrendered both life and Crown, in the eight and twenty year
of his happy reign.

And yet I must not so soon bring him to his grave; I said at first he lived,
and still does live, the Characters of that life which are his virtues, and
never-dying well-done deeds: It is my willingness, more than my ableness to
express; I will rather hazard my inabilities for such an enterprise to the
censorious opinion of this age, than leave his exemplary goodness unpublished
to the world.

In the flower of his youth (a time most subject to entertain pleasure and
delights) before he married his wife (who was Aelswida daughter of Etheldred
Earl of Mercia;) he was so chary of a chaste and continent course of life, and
so studious Asser.
to resist and suppress all ebullitions of sinful suggestions, that most
days, early at the summons of the mornings Herald, he would privately betake
himself from his rest unto sacred Oratories, and places of Divine Service, and
there in a prostrate humbleness, with no little expense of time, most devoutly
offer up the incense of his prayers to the Throne of Heaven; which course he
constantly observed in the silent hours of night, and at all seasons; as well
in the times of prosperity and victorious success, as also in all adverse, and
doubtful variations of war or State* or afflictions of sickness, and
infirmity of body; in all which he had his vicissitude of participation.

He was the first lettered Prince in this Kingdom, since it had its nomination
of England, and had the happiness to be disciplined under the care of
Plegmundus, ^. Godw. ca^. ^o. 17
a man of excellent learning, and eminent parts, who was borne in Mercia; and
from the solitary life of an Eremite* in the Island of Chester, called to be a
Tutor to this noble Prince; who at that time found the number of Learned men to
be so scarce and few, by reason of the continual devastations of wars
(which are always incompatible with laws and literature) as that with
incessant sighs and groans he would not Asser.
daily cease to bemone the want of such men, and with assiduity of earnest
prayers to implore a supply from that Omnipotent with soon gave a gracious
issue to his desires; for not many months after his inauguration to the
Kingdom, he obtained the comfortable service and attendance of Withfrithus,
called by some Werefridus (who was consecrated Bishop of Worcester on
Whitsunday, 872.) And for his singular learning was had in high estimation by
King Alfred, and by his command translated the dialogues of S. Gregory out of
the Latin into the Saxon or English dialect; he wanted not all the helps,
advise and instructions of Plegmundus his Tutor, who was afterward, Anno 889.
consecrated Archbishop of Canterbury. Those he consulted with, night and day,
taking sweet comfort as well in their discourses, as in their lectures and
rehearsals of many learned books and works, and never thought himself happy
longer than he had the fruition of their or such like pleasing companies; by
means whereof he attained the knowledge of most books, and ability to
understand them by himself without any of their interpretacions: his regal
desire of Arts and learning, rested not at home, but extended it self by
messages and Embassages beyond the Seas, for men of the most exquisit learning
that could be heard of; out of France he obtained Grimbald and Asser.
Scotus, men famous in their times for their great and singular learning: out
of the remotest parts of Wales he sent for Asser who wrote his life, and diverse
others of like parts* he drew from other places.

Asser (as himself affirms) abode with the King in his Court by the space of
eight months before his return to Wales; in which time he constantly read
diverse books unto him: for (says he) it was his custom both night and day,
amidst all other impediments both of mind and body to be ever versed in
reading books himself, or hearing them read by others; and took a great
felicity to translate books, especially meetre, into the vulgar (then Saxon)
tongue, and commanded others to do the like, whereby he acquired such perfection
therein, as that the Art of Poesy was much honored, by ascribing to him the
title of Poet.

This religious Monarch out of his immoderate thirst of the Arts and liberal
Sciences, modestly conceiving the want thereof in himself, to be more than it
was, did apply the greater care for the education of his children: In which
charge, Asser being recalled from Wales had the principal employment, and was
vouchsafed the name of Schoolmaster to his children, being two sons and
three daughters by his one, and only Queen. No less tender was he in the
trayning up and tutoring of the children of his Nobility under the same
masters, and in the same method of discipline.

For the perpetual propagation of learning, he revived and repaired the old,
and erected, and endowed new Schools and Colleges, as so many seed plots, and
nurseries of Religion and virtue. Some write that he did first institute the
University of Oxford: the institution of that famous Achademie was doubtless
long before: but if vivification and redemption from oblivion and ruin, be
proportionable to a work of creation; it is not a grain in the balance, who
should deserve the greatest honor of that renowned Seminary, either the first
founder, or Alfred the refounder.

For amidst the many mournful demolitions of stately monuments by the Danish
and Saxon wars, Oxford had her deplorable part and sufferance, in the exile
of her Muses in her houses and structures; All, by wars, laid wast, and even
with the dust, little or nothing left to demonstrate what her former beauty had
been, save only the Monastery of S. Frideswide.

For repairing the wastes and spoils of that sacred place, Alfred bestirres
himself; and there for the studies of Divinity, Philosophy and other Arts,
did raise up the fabric of three magnificent Colleges then called by the name
of his schools, one for divinity, another for Philosophy, and a third for
Grammar; one of which three is now known by the name of University College.

In this revived Seminary he designed and appointed several Readers and
Professors, to whom he allotted large and liberal stipends. The first
divinity Twine Apo.
reader was Neote (the second son of his father by his Queen Judith daughter
Mr. Lytes Geneal.
of Charles the bald Emperor and King of France, whom he married upon his
second return from Rome) a man of admired learning; to whose forwardnes and
direction in the reedification of this ancient Nursery, that place did owe a
special part of her being.

Asser as propense and Asser.
zealous to his power, in advising and furthering the perfection of that work,
was the Grammar and Rhetoric reader: hither he sent Aethelward his second
son, and first, and last child, who was borne about An. 880. And thereby gave
example to all the greatest Nobles of his Kingdom, to send their sons thither,
and to honor their education with the company of the young Prince.

This work of restitution Twine Apol.
was begun (says one) An. Dom. 874. And doubtless it could not be presently
finished, and furnished; the government thereof began to flourish between the
years 882. and 883* about which time Grimbald was made in the presence of that
victorious Prince, the first Chancellor of that University; to make this work
more absolute, he obtained the grant of many* privileges unto the scholars of
this place from Martin the Twine Apol. fo. 168.
second Pope of Rome, which he confirmed with his own grant of many honorable
infranchisements and immunities. From the same Pope he obtained a relaxation of
all tribute to the Saxon school at Rome.

As he was every way royal and magnificent in this ever blessed act of
restoration; so he was studious in the preservation thereof in peace and
concord: a great dissension and perilous, about the year 886, arose amongst
the scholars: the parties in this faction were Grimbald, and such learned men
as he brought thither with him, and the old scholars, who had their abode
there at the time of Grimbalds coming and refused to subscribe to, or obey the
laws, rules, and form of discipline instituted and prescribed by him: for the
space of three years the controversy was not visibly great, but a lurking and
intestine hatred, which now taking vent, made its way with the greater fury and
fierceness, Iamque faces and Saxa volant, furor arma ministrat; it grew so
great and dangerous, that none could appease it, but a Regal Arbiter, who
being certified of it, upon the complaint of Grambald, hastens thither to
accord the controversy, and (says the Author) summos Twine Apo.
labores hausit, etc. he took very great pains with unheard of patience,
exactly to hear the differences of each party. The sum of the controversy
was touching the orders and constitutions of that place, long before Grimbalds
coming established by Saint Gildas and others; and afterward allowed by Saint
German, who made six months abode there, as he took his journey to preach
against the Pelagian heresy; which being deliberately debated on both sides,
the good Prince accorded the discord, and with pious and sweet monitions,
incessantly exhorted them to join together in peace and unity: what can be
more said of his boundless munificence and blessing upon that glorious Garden
of Arts and Learning, than the suffrage of the place it self does ascribe unto
him.

Oxonii flores Alured fert iste priores. That schools of learning might not be
unfurnished of studious Colleagues, he made a law or decree, whereby he
straightly charged all the free men of the Kingdom, who were owners of two
hides of Land at the least, (being such a portion of land as Cambden Brit.
might be yearly manured by two ploughs.) That they should keep and train up
their children to learning, until they were fifteen years old; and that in the
mean time they should diligently instruct them in the knowledge of GOD, that
they might thereby acquire wisdom and goodness.

For the better promotion Asser. Godwin.
of piety, he built a stately Monastery at Winchester; and upon the occasion
before mentioned of his enforced retire into the Isle of Athelney, he there
out of a Twine fo. 196.
local gratitude erected an other like religious house, and a third for a
Nonnery at Shaftisbury in the County of Dorset; the prefecture whereof he
assigned to Ethelgeda his second daughter, the first Abbess there, all which
he enriched with large revenewes.

These and other his edifices by his own former kind of structure were most
spacious, sumptuous, and glorious, beyond all the platformes and presidents of
his ancestors.

And because, To every thing (says Solomon) there is a season, and a time to
every purpose under the heaven; and, jactura temporis preciosissima, it was the
glory of his first invention, to proportion out a certitude of time, in all his
best and choicest actions. The use of Clocks and Watches being not then
invented; he cast the natural day, consisting of twenty four hours, into
three parts; and having solemnly devoted the best and choicest part of his
time to the service of God; he apportioned the spaces of the day, by a great
wax light or Tapor which was placed in his Chapel or Oratory, divided into
three equal distances, and measured his time by the burning thereof, whereof
he had notice by his wax-keeper or officer appointed for that purpose;
according to this threefold proportion of time, he allotted eight hours for
prayer, study, and writing, eight in the service of his body, for his sleep
and sustenance, and eight in the affairs of his estate, which as far as
humane judgment could discern, his infirm body, and casualties of that
mutable time permit, he most accuratly studied to perform; and for the better
admeasurement of time for his subjects and common people, six wax candles were
appointed for every twenty four hours, and the use of Lanthornes first
invented by him, to preserve their due time of burning.

The prime motive of that invention was upon this ground: the Churches then
were of so poor and Asser.
mean a structure, that the Candles being set before the Relics were
oftentimes blown out by the wind, which got in not only, per ostium
ecclesiarum, but also, per frequentes parietum rimulas; insomuch, that the
ingenious Prince, was put to the practice of his dexterity: and upon that
occasion, by an apt composture of thin horns in wood, he taught us the mystery
of making a Lantern: he Lamb. fo. 54. ca. 6.
also made a Law for contribution of money toward the maintenance of candles.

And in the league between Idem. fo. ^^ ca. 54
him and Gythrun: there were strict and severe Laws made against those who
paid not tithes to the Clergy. He was as zealous in enlarging the immunities
and privileges of his Churches, as appears by his sanction de immunitate
Lamb. so
28
Templi, ca. 2. and by another de sacrarum aedium immunitate, 29
cap. 5. By the first, any person being guilty of any crime (if it did not
concern villam Regis, or any honorable family) he had the privilege of refuge
to the Temple, and of abode there three nights, without any disturbance or
expulsion.

By the latter; if a man pursued by his enemy did fly to the Temple, no man
might take him away, ( a nemine abstrahitor) by the space of seven days, if
he were able to live for hunger, and viam vinon apperuerit; other, and great
immunities the King there grants to the Church; but with this caution
unicuique templo religiose ab Episcopo consecrato hanc pacem concedimus, etc.
Every Church must be first haliowed by the Bishop before it could be capable of
such a freedom; whence a grave and learned Civilian D. Ridley his view. fo.
193.
observes upon that Law ca. 5. that the Patron or Founder might bring the
stones, and the workman put the materials together, and make it a house, but
the Bishop made it a Church; till then, nothing was but the breathless body of
a Temple, the soul being yet to come from the diviner influence of the
Diocesan.

As this Princely piety did enlarge it self, in maintenance of the rites and
ceremonies of the Church, the necessary and divine dues and duties to the
Altar, (Tithes) being the just alimony of the painful ministry; as also in
the immunitis of Gods houses, so was it munificently extended, to the needful
supportations of those consecrated bodies, the material temples themselves. It
was not long ere he cured, and closed up those parietum rimulas, the crannies
and chinks of those cracked and crazed houses, with the expense of his own
estate.

About Anno 892. Not without long seizing, and many doubtful skirmishes, he
recovered the City of London out of the hands of the Danes; restored it to its
former liberties, repaired the ruins, and committed the custody thereof to
Ethelred Duke of Mercia, who married the Lady Elfed his eldest daughter. And
doubtless the Churches in London, and elsewhere, had a principal interest in
his pious and prudent provision for restoration, and reparation. And if the
first fabric of the Temple of St. Paul (which was about 210. years after his
reign, Episcu. Land. Conc. 16^0.
consumed with fire, with no small part of the City) could speak for it
self, it would not be silent of his magnificent bounty.

The revenewes of his Kingdom, he was as studious to husband, as his time;
which, that he might the better ascertaine, and know his own, and (which is the
best part of thrift) confine his expenses, unto the provent of his estate: he
enjoined a general ^^niel (...).
survey of the kingdom to be made and certified unto him, and that with the
particulars of his whole estate, to be deduced into a book, which he committed
to safe custody within his treasury at Winchester.

The one half of his wealth, he faithfully and devoutly resolved to bestow in
the service of him whom he ever served: but to avoid the guilt of violating
that caution of sacred Scripture, Si recte offeras, recte autem Asser.
non dividas, peccas. He studied discreely to divide what he did religiously
devote. Therefore by a holy and divine direction, of all the income of his
annual revenew, he caused a twofold division to be made; whereof, one part for
divine, the other part for secular affairs.

1 That part for Gods service; he commands a quadruple subdivision, to be
exactly and carefully made? The first part whereof was to be distributed to
the poor of each nation, wherein his hand was ever open to cast his bread upon
the waters: his bounty and almesdeeds were not circumscribed at home, but
liberally dispersed abroad, and not only to those of his own and neighboring
nations; but to others of foreign and remote parts, as if he should have
therein said,

Tros Tiriusque mihi nullo discrimine habetur. In the year 888: he ^. Godwin.
fo. 164.
sent by Athelmus Bishop of Winton, much treasure of his own; together with a
large collection of his well disposed subjects, unto Marianus then Pope of Rome
consigning a portion thereof to be conveyed to Jerusalem. ^lem. fo. 269.
Another time by Sigelmus Bishop of Sherborne a large Alms, or offering of his
own into India: there was scarce any Country, where the poor had not a
portion of his bounty.

2 The second part was allotted to his Monasteries, for the support and
maintenance of them.

3 The third part was sequestered, and appropriated for the benefit, and
indowment of his great School, or Academie at Oxford which he had stored with
many Students.

4 The fourth he laid aside as a portion for all the bordering Monasteries, in
Asser.
Saxony, and Mercia, and (in some years) to releeve, and repair several
Churches by turns in Britain, France, Ireland, and other places.

The other moytie of his estate, he did wholly addict to the service of the
secular affairs which he carefully commanded to be tripartited.

1 Whereof the first part was yearly conferred on those of his military
employment, whom he highly esteemed; as also upon his meniall officers, and
Ministers, who guarded his person, and guided his Court; and being lifted into a
trinall Company, each of them waited a month by turns, and then had two
months recession for their ease and dis^^^ch of their own affair^^*

2 T^^ second part on the Masters and Workmen of his Fabrickes, whom he had in
great numbers procured, selected, and sent for out of many nations.

The third portion he reserved, for relief of strangers, whom, the deserved
fame of his virtue, goodness, and bounty, drew out of all parts to admire
him, and (whether they sought and asked it, or not) to be partakers of his
liberal largess, which to every one according to their dignity and desert,
he did abundantly dispose.

In all this (if virtue and piety were hereditary) he might justly challenge a
descent thereof from Aethelwolphe his father a Prince more affected to devotion,
than Action, who being a Subdeacon, was by the dispensation of Pope Leo,
afterward made King, and gave the tenth of his kingdoms tribute (with
exemption of regal service) to maintain the ministry of God, and his Church.
And in his last journey to Rome, did confirm Speed.
the pay of peeterpence to Leo IIIIth. then Pope of Rome, and his successors
to the end that no Englishman should do penance Asser.
in bonds.

Add unto Alfreds then unmatchable piety, his royal gratitude, which
(ingratitude being the worst of vices,) is the best of virtues; Asser makes
ample relation of his munificence, to him after his eight months abode in his
Court, yet with his excuse, Non ideo se dedisse parva illa, quod sequenti
tempore nollet dare majora, which promise he made good shortly after, in
bestowing the Bishopric of Sherborne upon him in the year 873.

His old Host of Athelnry Godwin* fo. 163.
he afterward well requited, by advancing him to the Bishopric of
Winchester, Anno Christi. 879.

He was not so careful in apportioning his estate and time, as he was in
disposing the local government of his now settled Monarchy (the league between
him and Guthrun being so firmly established,) and before he could not do it:
he did all things stato and statuto tempore, a president for all Princes, yea,
and for all persons, in imitation of Iethro his council to Moses. He was the
first, that reduced this confused Kingdom into an orderly rule of subordinate
Lam. explic. rerum, etc.
government.

And observing the old rule of Divide and impera, did divide this land into
Shires, hundreds, and tythings; respectively appointing the prepositure of them
to several Officers and Ministers, now called Sherifs, Constables, and
Tythingmen.

But no government could be without Laws; and herein Moses is still his
ensample, who having first selected his wisemen, and placed such to be rulers
over thousands, hundreds, fifties, and tens: then and not before, Iura dabat
populo, he gave laws to the people from Lamb. fo. 19
the mouth of eternity it self.

Alfred, with a religious majesty begins his Laws, Loquutus est Dominus ad
Mosem hos sermones, etc; and cites all the decalogue, and then proceeds with
the Laws comprised in the 21, 22 and part of the 23 Chapters of Exodus: all
which, and the confirmation of these, with the Laws of King Inus and other his
Ancestors, I have Lam. explic. rerum and verbo.
elsewhere at large expressed.

He caused a book containing Decreta judiciorum, collected by King Ethelbert,
to be written in the Saxon characters, which the injury of times has utterly
suppressed.

Laws without execution are but Vmbratiles, clouds without reign, shadows
without substance; he was therefore prepared jus sacere, as well as jus
dicere. He was not sparing to administer justice, and to dispose of affairs of
most weight in his own person; Taediosus, or, Asser.
districtus examinandae in judiciis veritatis arbiter existebat, and hoc maxim
propter pauperum curam, qui in toto regno praeter illum solum nullos aut
paucissimos habebant jutores; he was a most solicitous umpire, in examining the
equity and verity of judicatory proceedings, and that principally for the cause
of the poor, who besides him alone, had none or very few advocates or
assistants: he was the Patron and protector of Widows and Orphans.

As curious he was in reviewing almost all the judgments, decrees and
sentences, rendered in his absence throughout his whole kingdom, where he found
any ignorant, malevolent, or corrupt deviation from the line of Justice: he was
discreetly quick in his reprehensions, with a nimium admiror vestram hanc
insolentiam, etc.

He was a most ready composer of differences which commonly arose between his
subjects, both noble and plebeian at their comitiall centuriate, and other
assemblies in his several Counties.

And because there is so near a conjunction and coherence between the body
and the mind, Langueat illius, fessus ut iste malis: and the best cure and
comfort of either, is the alternate intermixture of some delights either in
objects, or actions.

Amidst the tempests of Asser.
war, the infestations of Pagans, the continual crazinesse of his infirm
body, his watchful providence in government, the ponderous depressure of his
state affairs; he disposed some intervalum of retired time for the needful
solace, and refection of his tired and toiled spirits: and therefore applied
himself to royal recreations, all kinds of hunting, and hawking, wherein his
skill and dexterity were so incomparable, that he was able to direct and
instruct all his Huntsmen, Fawkners, and all other Officers of his game: the
interpositions of these and other recreations added vigor and valor both to
his mind and body to support the burden of his state.

And thus he measured the paces of his earthly pilgrimage, w^h in the twenty
eight year of his reign he cheerfully resigned, leaving behind him Elswich
his sorrowful Queen, who survived him four years; Edward senior heir
apparent to his Fathers valor and virtues, as well as to his Crown: Ethelward,
his second son (but youngest child) to whom by his Will he devised great
revenewes in the County of South-hampton, Somerset, and Devon; a good part
whereof the Cathedral Church of Wels, built, or begun by his Ancestor K. Ine
does now enjoy. He also left behind him three daughters Elfleda, Ethelgeda* and
Elfrtde: he was buried in Saint Peter's Church at Winchester, but removed
thence, and buried by the new Kings direction in the Monastery there being one
of his own edefices.

His arms are to be seen Twine Apol. 20^
in the public Hall of University College in Oxford, and are thus blazoned. A
yellow Cross patence, in a field Azure, (the ancient arms of the West Saxon
Kings) And (added by him) at each end or point of the cross, a Saint Martins
bird, called a Martinet, or Martlet; the reason of which addition, whether
(because he was a fourth brother) according to the rule of Herauldry, or for
what other cause, it is not certainly historied. A fit emblem may be drawn
from the nature of these birds, who about the month of November, before the
Feast of S. Martin, for avoiding the coldness of the air, do in the Winter
time for shelter betake themselves unto secret and covert corners, Latebras
quaerunt ubi delitescant; they fly much, because they want the use of feet,
and thence are called Apodes.

It was the case of Alfred, who in the winter of the Danish pursuit and
persecution, was forced latebras quaerere, ubi delitesceret, and was kept in
such continual agitation, the former part of his reign, that he could not
make use for any settled station or abode.

His Epitaphe is the Epitome of his life, which the happiness of thankful
times have dedicated to him as a monument of his eternal fame, and here
follows out of the works of a modern Chronographer.

Nobilitas inimica tibi probitatis honorem
(Armi potens Alfred) dedit, probitasque laborem,
Perpetuumque labor nomen: immixta dolori
Gaudia semper erant, spes semper mixta timori*
Si modo, victor eras, ad crastina bella pavebas,
Si modo victus eras, in crastina bella parabas,
Cui vestes sudore jugi, cui sicca cruore,
Tincta jugi, quantum sit onus regnare, probarunt;
Non fuit immensi quisquam per climata mundi,
Cui tot in adversis vel respirare liceret,
Nec tamen aut ferro contritus ponere ferrum,
Aut gladio potuit vitae finisse labores.
Iam post transactos regni vitaeque labores,
Christus ei fit vera quies, sceptrumque perenne.
Englished by Mr. Flemming.
Nobility by birth to thee (O Alfred) strong in arms.
Of goodness has thy honor given, Holinsh.
and honor toilsome harms,
And toilsom harms, an endless name whose joys were always mixed
With sorrow, and whose hope with fear, was evermore perplexed:
If this day thou were conqueror, the next days war thou dredst,
If this day thou were conquered, to next days war thou spred'st,
Whose clothing wet with daily swet, whose blade with bloody stain,
Do prove how great a burden it is, in royallty to reign.
There has not been in any part, of all the world so wide.
One that was able breath to take, and troubles such abide,
And yet with weapons weary, would not weapons lay aside,
Or with the sword the toilsomnesse of life by death divide.
Now after labors past of Realm, and life (which he did spend)
Christ is to him true quietness, and scepter void of end.
That famous Academie Twine Apo. 202
of Oxford, retained so grateful a memory of this blessed Prince, that the
superstition of that age, ordained a solemn prayer to be celebrated in the
Schools yearly, upon the vigils of S. Martin, for the souls of all their
Benefactors, and especially, for the soul of King Alfred; which the happy
reformation of religion, has reduced to an anniversary commemoratio^ by way of
thanksgiving, and so continues, and ever may, til the worlds end.

The Preface.
SOme write the lives of dead Princes, to eclipse the glory of the living; in
such, a lawless humor discontented with the present State, over. swayes the
legiance of a loyal heart. This Treatise aims at no such end, nor other; but
only an impartial Parallel of two such Princes, the one dead, yet living in
the other, and the living, raised as it were, out of the ashes of the dead, as
many ages have not known the like. You have observed in the past discourse,
the life of the dead; and now survey the fullness of his virtues surviving in
him that lives, CHARLES, our great and dread Sovereign, the Constantine, and
Carolus magnus of our age: and if the style of Magnus may seem to be borrowed
from CHARLES the great, Emperor of Rome, yet I must add Primus, and I should
write but truth, if Primus ante omnes: and none who will observe that sacred
rule, In cogitatione tua Regi ne detrahas, will harbor so disloyal a thought
of his Sovereign, as to think I flatter: adulation, like a false Glass,
makes things seem to be what they are not, and exalts virtue from its proper
Sphere; in this subject of Soveraignety there is no need of such imposture, all
men's eyes and co sciences may see and know, that the radiant splendour of his
gracious goodness does exceed the expression of any tongue or pen.

A Parallel of our gracious Sovereign Lord King CHARLES with King ALFRED.
AS Alfred was, so is he the younger son of a Royal King; and though not
anointed King in his younger years, yet then by eternal providence designed
to his kingdoms His education, and studious desire of learning, his matchless
piety even in his tender age inferior to none; his frequent access to our
great provincial Councels, his sedulous observations there, and in the greatest
Courts of Justice, did promise of him what now he is: after the death of his
most dear brother of famous memory, when the burden of our so great
expectation, as his hopeful succession lay wholly on him, though before he
seemed not so agill and valid as his brother, yet his care of our welfare
(which breathed by the breath of him) did raise up such vigor and spirit in
him, that his ability and dexterity in body, and his admirable skill and
facility, in equestriall and other corporal exercises, did grow up and
increase together.

He journied not to Rome, to Spain he did, whence (to say no more his thrice
happy return, entertained with such wonderful acclamations, and ineffable
expressions of joy and gladness (as this kingdom never knew the like before)
did quicken and reviue the life and spirit of many sad distressed souls.

Not long after, when by our Solomon his resignation in fullness of time, of
both life and Crown Sol occubuit, by his gracious succession nox nulla sequuta
est; for (as a great Primate observed) Epise. Menev. modo Archiae. Conc. 1625.
by Gods grace, and his royal fathers prudent education, he was confirmata and
aptata columna, a Pillar every way fitted to the State he bears, fitted to the
difficulties of the times, fitted to the State, and fitted to the Church,
before his Crown was scarce settled on his Royal head; and, ere he was anointed
by the hand of the Priest, he was not without his cares, Coronam cura se
quitur; the epidemicall sins of our Nation, drew from heaven, one of the
greatest instruments of Gods vengeance, the noisome pestilence, which miserably
infested not only our great Jerusalem, but many other famous Cities, and
almost all the skirts and corners of our kingdom; shortly after seconded with
its second, the dread and horror of the sword in the times of An 1025
both which, first, in the time of contagion, turn back your eyes upon his
strict and careful edict of a general fast and humiliation, by a prescribed
form of prayer throughout all his Kingdom: himself, like another Phinees,
stood up and prayed and the plague ceased, and in a wonderful manner, that
Gods great mercies far surpassed the extent of our hopes; his royal
thankfulness, expressed An. 1625
in an uniformity of common prayer, in like manner publicly edicted followed,
nay, (as if both in one divine conception) issued forth with this great
deliverance.

He was not, as Alfred, forced into the field in the very infancy of his
reign; nor into any such angustious and distressed recessions: yet for
perlustration of his Armies, and the well ordering his military affairs, he
forced himself, not in a progress of ease, but by an expeditious toilesome
journey, to the remotest and most navigable harbor of his Western Region,
exposing himself thereby unto no mean dangers.

By the space of those few years wherein his preparations of defensive war,
were against two of the most potent and mightiest Christian Princes of Europe;
he put not his confidence in his Princes, nor in his men of war either by Sea
or Land, nor in the child of man; he put not his trust in his bow, neither was
it his sword that should help him nor did he trust in his Chariots, nor his
Horse, nor in his great Navies of Ships, nor in any Engines of war, nor his
warlike provision (of all which his copious supply and store exceeded former
times) but in God his strength, and his Redeemer. After the sudden and
miraculous deliverance from the Pestilence, look upon no less and in as
little distance of time, his form of prayer prescribed, in the year 1626,
necessary to be An. 1626
used in those dangerous times, for the safety and preservation of his Majesty
and his Realm: the like not long after with a general fast for the
preservation of his Majesty, his Realms and all reformed Churches: God heard
him, the Lord of Hosts was with us; the God of Jacob was our refuge, he made
wars to cease, he broke the bow and knapped the spear in sunder.

He blessed our Alf. and those two great neighbor Princes with a gracious
issue of truce and peace: at unity they are, and their Kingdoms in public
negotiations, commerce, and affairs of State, and God grant they long may be:
and (might they stand with divine providence) in the union of our Church,
as well as our Common wealth.

By this you see, that upon all occasions, God is his refuge and strength, a
very present help in trouble: the best armor of a Christian Prince is prayer
and humiliation; the strength and sinnewes whereof, do consist in the
uniformity of religion and conformity of the ministry; upon both these the
peace and quiet of the Church, (the Spouse of Christ) do principally depend.

Our royal Sovereign Peace of the Church.
had no sooner by the incense of his prayers drawn from heaven a remission of
that great contagion upon this land, but instantly he betakes himself to a
regal course for establishing the peace of his Church; and therein agrees with
Alfred, who in his sanction of the Lamb. A^hai^. fo 5^.
league between him and Guthrun did decree, ut ecclesiae pax and tranquillitas
pie inviolateque serventur. And Uniformity.
for avoiding all offenses, and innovations in religion, our now Alf. with the
advice of his reverend Bishops, Pro^l. 14. Iunij. 1620.
did by his edict declare and publish his utter dislike of all those, who did
or should adventure to stir or move any new opinions, contrary and differing
from the sound and orthodoxall grounds of the true religion here professed and
established: and did thereby charge all his subjects, especially Churchmen,
that they should not by writing, preaching, printing, conferences, or
otherwise, raise any doubts, or publish or maintain any new inventions or
opinions concerning religion, other than such as are warranted by the doctrine
and discipline of the Church of England.

And that all excuse of ignorance Articles of religion reprinted,
might be taken away; his illustrious goodness for avoiding diversities of
opinions, and for the stablishing of consent touching true religion; has
caused and commanded the Articles agreed upon by the Archbishops and Bishops
of both Provinces, in the Convocation holden at London, Anno 1562: to be
reprinted with his royal declaration prefixed thereunto for ratification
thereof: what zeal and care he has had to suppress and recall any books or
writings, though published by some of great Edict 17 Ia. 4. Rs.
learning, that might breed the least doubt and disquiet in points of religion
is well known.

For the conformity of the Conformity.
Ministry, I find an old Law ratified by King Alf. de formula Lamb fo. 1. ca. 1.
vivendi ministrorum Dei; it goes with an inprimis praecipimus, Dei ut ministri
constitutam vivendi formulam curent and observent; That the Ministers of God
should observe a regular form of living: and certainly it was meant by that
Law, as well in their habit and vestiture, as in their condition and gesture;
does not the parallel hold in our times? witness the prudent care of the
several Bishops within their Diocesses, by his Highness gracious and
provident directions, that the Ministers in their lives and conversations might
be lights and examples to others; and by their Clericall and conformable
habites, they might with respect to their callings be distinguished from
others. God has Godsday.
his proper day and time for the more especial and peculiar advancement of his
worship. And albeit his Highness Ecclesiastical laws are armed with competent
power, to redress the transgressing of either; yet he has given a liberty
for unsheathing the sword of his secular justice to propugne and maintain that
selected day and time.

There were good Laws Lamb fo. 54 ca.
made before the Conquest, one by King Alf. De ijs qui die dominico sua negotia
agunt, for repressing under a great mulcte all servile and profane works upon
the Lords day; no special law of that subject were ever since made, but in the
time of our Alf. in whose first Parliament, the first Law enacted, was for
punishing abuses committed on that day: and in the second and last Parliament,
the first Law made, was for further reformation of the breaches and
profanations of that day by Carriers and others. And Liberty of ^^^r^a^^on.
whereas his Highness pursuing the example of his dear Father, directed by
the primitive practice of former times, for the ease and comfort of his well
deserving people, has by his Princely declaration vouchsafed a liberty to his
subjects, concerning lawful sports to be used that day, without impediment or
neglect of Divine Service, prohibiting the same to all wilful and negligent
Recusants, that shall not resort to their own Parish Churches to hear Divine
Service before their going to the said recreations: this gracious indulgence
has of late disquieted the spirits of some unquiet humorists: But let the
consequence be discreetly weighed, and all men will perceive a double benefit
arise thereby for the propagation of Gods service: 1. In encouraging the
younger sort of people (who are most subject to desire of recreations) with
more alacrity to frequent their Church, that they might enjoy their harmless
pastime: 2. In retaining the Parishioners to the discipline of their own
Pastors from straggling abroad to other men's Cures, a thing too frequent and
most perilous to conformity.

As the service of God Gods time.
has its principal dependence on devout prayer, so the devotion of prayer is
quickened and much improved by fasting and abstinence Fasting.
at times prefixed by the Laws, which may be termed Gods time.

Alfred made a Law de Lamb. fo. 55.
jejunijs; Liber si indictum jejunium cibo sumpto dissolverit, and mulcta, and
ipsa legis violatae paena plectitor, etc. A Freeman for the violation of a
Fast was to pay a penalty (some say five marks) a servant to be beaten or to
redeem it with money.

His Majesty ever since his reign has had a most watchful eye, by orders and
Proclamations yearly, published to revive and command the due execution of his
Laws, made against eating and selling of flesh in Lent, and other times
prohibited* and finding that diverse Officers and Ministers were remiss in the
punishing and prevention of such abuses, did by a strict edict command all 27.
Iam. 7. Rs.
his people that his Laws should be duly executed upon all that should
offend, either in eating or venting of flesh at times inhibited, or not fasting
upon the days by his Laws appointed.

God has also a name Gods name.
which must not be taken in vain: our Sovereign, for his pious observation
of that, may be proposed for imitation to all the Princes and people of the
world, no rash oaths, nor temerous execrations breathe out of his sacred
mouth; and that saving Name, by which God ownes our redemption, is had in high
esteem with him. It is said (...)erius M^n.
of K. Alfred, that God sometimes permit^ed his adversaries an insultation over
him, ut sciret (says mine Author) unum esse omnium Dominum, cui curvatur omne
genu, that he might know that there was one JESUS CHRIST to whom all knees
should bow: It is Gods precept or rather protestation, Isay 45. ver. 23. In
memet ipso juravi, I have sworn by my self, the word is gone out of my mouth
in righteousness and shall not return, Unto me every knee shall bow: it is
the practice of our Church, Canon.
and still may it continue, Ad nomen Jesus curvetur omne genu, Let every knee
bow at the name of Jesus.

As God has his days and times, so his Places, Gods places.
Churches, and sacred Oratories for his adoration and invocation of his great
Name: the wisdom and munificent piety of ancient times, has within this
Island erected such stately and magnificent Churches, as do far surpass all
other places in the Christian world: were it not then great pity that such
famous fabrics should by the injury of times be suffered to moulder away, and
be demolished for want of timely reparations? And here let me pause a while,
and admire his Highness tender zeal for supporting the Houses and Temples of
GOD; and his beginning with that goodly and glorious structure, which was first
begun in our Kingdom, and dedicated to St. Paul, the great threshingfloore
of th^s Dominion, purchased and erected by the pious David's of former Ages and
consecrated for a Temple to the GOD of Jacob; and herein his Majesty does
inherit his Fathers Royal intentions.

It is said of London; That it is Camera Regis, Cor reipublicae, and tanquam
Epitome totius regni. The Kings chamber, the heart of the Commonwealth, and as
it were Saint Paul's.
a Summary of the whole kingdom. What shall I then term this holy place,
which is the very center of that imperial chamber, but Sanctum Sanctornm, the
Mother Church of the whole land, where all public benedictions are first
rendered, all apprecations for blessings, and all deprecations of public
calamities are resounded and ecchoed out unto the ears of Heaven. Twice has
his Highness vouchsafed his presence at several Auditories in that place:
Once as a glorious Star that follows the Sun, He attended his Royal Father
about thirteen Mart. 26 1620.
years since, to hear a holy and a powerful embassage on the behalf of that
Ancient Temple, delivered by the mouth and meditations of a learned Prelate
upon a foundation laid, a Text chosen out of a Kingly Prophet.

Psalm 102. VER. 13. Thou shall arise and have mercy upon Syon, for the time
to favor her, yea the set time is come.

VER. 14. For thy servants take pleasure in her stones, and favor the dust
thereof.

And in such an assembly was it, that to use his own words, He never spoke
in such an Auditorie, never should again. What would he have said (if he had
been living) upon his Majesty's second coming 2 Time*
to the blessing of that place, when the birth of his and our hope the most
illustrious Prince Charles ushered into the world by a light from Heaven,
Stella oriens in orient manifested in the Meridian of the day was not without
a solemn thankesgiving, in such a confluence, and throng of all sorts of
Subjects, as no eye ever saw the like in this land; And as it was said of the
first, so may it be of this last, worthy to add a Rubric more to our
Almanacke, and make a new holy day amongst us, for such a Prince borne to the
union of so many Kingdoms was here never known, non sic contigit ulli.

The precious ointment Other Churches.
of his Majesty's zeal does not only fall upon and drench the beard of this
aged Hermon, but descends and runs down upon all the skirts of Sion, all other
Churches within his Majesty's Realm of England, whereof he has given an
Edict. (...)* Rs.
evident remonstrance, as well by his proclamation edicted in the first year of
his reign, for preventing the decays of Churches and Chapels for the time to
come, and prescribing and commanding thereby a speedy reformation in all such
cases: as also by his Highness late letters and directions to his Bishops
within their several Diocesses; that either by themselves in person, or by
their officials or other persons of worth and trust, they take view and survey
of the Churches and Chapels in their several jurisdictions; and where they
find ought amiss to cause a speedy redress thereof.

Our Saxon Alfred was Their gratitude
never more grateful, nor more studious to prefer his Plegmund, Grimbald,
Asser, Scotus, and others his learned Chaplains, than our British Alfred has
been, and is, to advance and privilege his sacred Hierarchy of Bishops, and
others of the Tribe of Levi. Who was ever more tender and indulgent unto them?
Who more sedulous and speedy in the donation of Ecclesiastical dignities?
scarce do any fall, but presently he fits a person for the place, no
Episcopal Sees have (as in former times) seen any triennial vacancies. His
Princely gratitude has not only honored some of them in their lives, but
survived after their death. That late dead Bishop of Winton, a man of most
ample and eminent learning shall witness instar omnium: his accurate works
published by the reviewing of two his reverend Colleagues by his Majesty's
special command, have raised up an eternal monument of his goodness, and not
for his glory only, but (as in the B. Andrews misc.
dedication) utilitati simul and honori tum Ecclesiae tum Reipublicae futura;
and what is there further said of him I cannot conceal, Non habuit Regia
majestas servum fidelem magis, non habuit Ecclesia antistitem magis eruditum.
It is to be wished that his Highness honorable gratefulness to him might
incite others to deserve the like. His Majesty's frequent Piety*
and fervent exercise of piety in his own person is not inferior to that of
Alfred. The often and serious frequenting his Chapels, his reverend attention
in hearing his unfeigned devotion in praying, and his religious comportment
every way conformable, may be deservedly proposed to our little world; an
optative rule, that in this as in other things,

Regis ad exemplum totus componeret orbis. Let my meditations of Works of
justice
his unmatchable goodness in and to his Church, pass unto his works of
Justice in the Common wealth: behold him in the chair of Moses sitting amidst
his people; nay, his selected ones, e sacris and arcanis consiliis, Iethro his
Counselors men of courage, timentes Deum and amantes veritatem; and there you
shall observe his meekness and patience in hearing, his acuteness in
discerning, and his maturity in deciding whatsoever comes before him. The
Ecclesiastical and Secular justice.
two edged sword of justice Ecclesiastical and Saecular, one side whereof was
heretofore (scarce an age since elapsed) rebated by papal accroachment, is
full and absolute in his hands, and vailes power to none but the supreme head
of all. Look upon his unspeakable wisdom in the sincere and upright swaying
of that sword; his royal care to fence and conserve his Ecclesiastical and
municipall laws, from collisions and contestations, and to bind and bound
them up in judgment and justice, prohibiting in cases for reparation of Gods
houses and such like the too much profuseness of prohibitions.

The concurrence of both these Laws is necessarily required, in the
supportation of his regal government. And therefore his excellency as a regal
pillar, does his office in ballancing and upholding their jurisdictions as in a
just and impartial equilibre: he fits his Judges for the places of his
Judicature: where he finds virtue and goodness, he is not sparing of his
honorable guerdons; where he finds any aberration, out of the way of
righteousness, his discerning judgment has been and is as ready to reprove,
even the greatest of them, with as heroicke increpations, as ever Alfred did
his Judges, with his quapropter aut terrenarum potestatum Asser.
ministeria, quae habetis illico dimittatis, aut sapientiae studiis multo ut
devotius studeatis, impero.

His grave and learned Directions to the Judges.
Judges for preventing the causes of such rebukes want not sufficient
premonitions either from his own sacred mouth, or from his honorable Lord
Keeper by his directions, of cautionary dictates, and remembrances for the due
execution of his Laws as well in their semestriall circuits as at other
Iudicatory times; and at this time I dare boldly say that his Majesty's solium
or tribunal justiciae, and his Cathedra, and chorus Ecclesiae can more glory of
their learned, able, and incorrupt possessors than in former ages. But
Ministers and Magistrates are mortal, statutum est omnibus semel mori, and
therefore a continual succession must be supplied from Schools, and
Seminaries of Arts and learning, whereof the two most famous seed-plots are
Oxford Oxford and Cambridge.
and Cambridge.

His soveraignety has had a most special regard, not only to preserve the
respective privileges, order, and government of these renowned Sisters, but
their peace and unity each with the other; in the laborious Antigraphies for
their eldership, he has owned no side, vetustas virtute honaratur, virtue
crowns antiquity with honor: Grimbald, Twy^^i Apo. pro Oxo.
a great Divine (but a stranger) was the first Chancellor of Oxford created by
Alfred. A greater than he, and of our own Nation, and of her education was
the first Chancellor there, and the first Metropolitan of Canterbury that was
invested by King CHARLES since his reign. Alfred and Grimbald were not more
zealous in appeasing the civil broils of that honorable Academie, Anno 886.
886.
than our now living Alfred, and his most reverend and honorable Chancellor in
the year 1631.

Amidst his Highness Exacted fees.
many acts of preventing justice, I shall only insist on two, and but
perfunctorily.

The first a Proclamation 12 Octo. 1627.
in pursuance of his Fathers wise and just directions, for protecting his
people from exactions and oppressions in any his Courts of justice, either
Ecclesiastical or temporal, and his royal intention concerning his
Commission then lately granted to enquire of new Offices erected, and new fees
exacted in his Courts; His Majesty has not only intended, but acted a course
of reformation, and it was high time; the common appellation of such crimes is
extortion or expilation, and is one of those Cardinal sins that cry aloud to
God for vengeance, vox oppressorum; this sin of extortion, is no other than
robbery, but more odious, because that is apparent, and in possibility to be
avoided: And this is done color officij, under the mask or visage of a legal
verity, and pretext of a due demand; and the poor subject must either yield to
such exaction, or redeem it in some cases, with a more expensive waiting.

The second; his Majesty's Procla. 28. Sep. 8 Rs. cum Articulis
watchful eye of providence by his orders and publik edict, for preventing the
dearth of corn and victual, and his just and speedy proceedings in his high
Court of Star Chamber against Fore-stallers and Ingrossers, the common
Catterpillers of our Kingdom, termed by our ancient laws depressores pauperum
and totius communitatis and patriae publici inimici, who if a seasonable and
timely occurrence of Justice had not suppressed them, would like the Egyptian
Locusts have covered the face of the whole earth, and have bred a dearth
without a scarcity.

His impartialitie in Justice: Impartialitie. Injustice.
where he meets with the scarlet sins of Murder, or with the crimes of open
rebellion, unnatural abominations, or such like; no interpellations of favor
or greatness, dare implore any hope of pardon from him: His regal
inflexibility in the case of a mutinous (which always implies a malicious)
homicide, by the only Champion of his highness Noble and faithful Convoy in
his Spanish voyage would admit of no mediation for redeeming of prolonging of
life. In another case (I cite but two) of a dishonorable and ignominious
capital crime, he spared not one of the greatest and Antientest Cedars of his
Nobility. Let a word suffice; He does not in the distribution of Justice in
capital, or criminal causes, accept the persons of men; And yet, He is not
without his multitude of mercy: Mercy and Mercy.
Truth preserve the King, and his Throne is upholden by mercy: where the crime
is any way dispensable with hope to reclaim the offender for a future good to
public, or private services, and without any injurious example to his
government. Est piger ad paenas; No Prince more prone to a merciful
relaxation, of legal rigor; here you might recount numbers of condemned
Malefactors delivered out of several Prisons, not to their demerited
execution, but for some Martial and other serviceable expeditions: but let
such offenders beware of relapse (which is most dangerous as well in civil as
natural diseases.) They never then escape with impunitie.

I must not sever Mercy, and Truth, In verbo veritas. Truth.
To use our English adage, His royal word is a Law, His promises and
performances are twynnes, conceived together, though produced in birth one
after the other. He is constans verbi custos, either in foreign
entercourses, or domesticke pollicitations; his immobility in the one is
sufficiently attested to other Princes and States, and in the other, to his
own servants and subjects.

His Eleemosynarie largess Almesdeeds.
either at home, or abroad is not behind Alfreds, though not to Rome,
Jerusalem, nor India, yet nearer and more needful, for the relief of the
Palatinate, the distressed Clergy of the reformed Churches. For whose supply
and succor, His highness by his own example drew a general benevolence from
his subjects.

Add unto this, his great Embassage.
and chargable disbursments and diminution of his treasure, in the expensive
emissions and addresses of honorable embassages, to pacify the fury of almost
all the Christian Continent, was it not most expedient? what danger might not we
justly dread, Cum proximus ardet ucalegon, when neighbor Nations are all in
combustion, and religion the pretext?

The magnificent decoration Buildings.
of his structures and edifices in all symmetricall proportions, with his
prescript form of building strictly enjoined, do far surpass all former
times: they are such and so pattern'd by the most glorious Architectures of all
Europe, that a man would think Italiam, in Ilium, Italy translated into
England.

Though his Majesty did Care of subord.
not divide the Kingdom into centuries and decuries, nor was the first Author
of that subordinate kind of government in this famous Monarchy, yet his
restless vigilancie has ever been, to preserve and propagate the true and
ancient uses of that division. For which 5 Ianu. 1630.
purpose his highness in his commission directed to the then Lord Archbishop,
and others of his honorable Counsel, amongst many gracious directions is
pleased (...) direct.
to descend to the Stewards of Leets and to charge them, what they shall give
in charge in their turns and halfe-yearely viewes of Franckpledge touching
Forestallers, Regrators, and other the most obvious and enormous offenses of
the Country.

It is said of Alfred, that ad Warlike preparation.
crastina bella victor pavebat, victus parabat; If unjust peace is to be
preferred before just war, we having the happy fruition of a just and
honorable peace with all the Christian world, and having no need in the times
of conquest, to dread adverse approaches, or of defeatures to prepare for fresh
onsets, may glory in his Majesty's assiduous and vigilant supervising of his
military munition and provision both by Sea and Land, remonstrated by his
frequent visiting his greatest Storehouse of his Ordnance, and other martial
supply, as also his goodly number of Ships in several harbors.

Amidst the coacervations Recreations.
of his many and multifarious cares, He has like Alfred his statuta reficiendi
tempora, his convenient times of royal recreations, and no less skill and
promptness in the use and exercise of them: What insensate subject can envy
so gracious a Sovereign that liberty, which his clemency indulgeth to the
least of us? Must Princes only, be like heathen Idols? must they have eyes,
and not see the objects of lawful oblectations? ears, and not hear the sweet
harmony of vocal and isntrumental music? Of such murmuring miscreants I will
only say, Dij regno tales nostro divertite pestes.

Time in somethings does difference the parallel; Alfred lived in the infancy
of the English Church, when the fire at the Altar was but newly kindled; and
his zeal was by sending to foreign parts for learned men, and by other
means to raise up the fabric of Religion: We live in the height in, the
Meridian of the Church her Glory; And because, altitudo semper declinationi
proxima, his now Majesty's principal aim is for the work of preservation, to
keep the fire upon our Altar burning, which is magnum opus: It was high time
for his goodness to put to his own helping hand, or else by the fanatical
schisms and aversions of non-conformists, Religion, and her houses would both
have melted together, and Parlors and Groves been exalted and preferred before
the beautiful Temples, and sacraries of the God of Israel.

I have now presented to your favorable view, a pair of Peerless Princes,
who for their religion, piety, devotion, institution and renovation of good
laws, government, justice, mercy, truth, meekness, temperance, patience,
abstinence, conjugall castimony, and all other virtues, may be presidents of
imitation to all Princes and people. And what a reverend Archbishop in his
Preface upon the life of Alfred commends unto the Reader for him, I must say
for both, Ista quidem historia non mediocrem Archbishop Parker in preaes.
Asseri.
menti tuae voluptatem infundet, neque minorem adferet cum voluptate utilitatem
si in praeclarissimarum rerum contemplatione defixus, te ad eorum imitationem,
and quasi imaginem, totum effinxeris; and to proceed for both, as he does for
him, Etenim cum vide as regem summo splendore, and tanta, quantum illa praeraro
vidit aetas, dignitate regentem, etc. Quo te Lector animo esse oportebit, etc.
In brief, where* there are such glorious Sovereigns, would it not well become
their people to be gracious subjects? As I began, I shall close up my Parallel
and not unfitly with the time.

CaroLVs ALVreDo, Charo 1634.
ALVreDVs In CaroLo re VIVIsCIt. You have seen the twenty eight years reign
of the one, beyond that you can hear no more; and but nine years of the
other, of him we shall with incessant prayers to heaven expect much more;
numbers of days and numbers of deeds, a numerous issue by a most ennobled
illustrious Queen, equal in blood, and equal in good: that as one of Alfreds,
many of their royal Offspring, may with their princely education honor both
our Universities: and let all true hearted subjects humbly and thankefully
consider GODS ineffable mercy toward us in his Majesty's happy birth, his
virtuous education, the Almighties provident designing, and fitting him to our
our state and government; his royal match, his sweet Olive-branches, and their
and our hope of many more; his peaceable reign with his exemplary goodness
and virtue, which we all see and know, and have just cause humbly and heartily
to supplicate and implore the omnipotent Author of this so great happiness for
the long life of his Highness and his most dear consort: And that whilst the
Sun and Moon do endure, there never may one be wanting of their thrice
Royal Line to sway the Scepter of great Britain, Amen.

FINIS.
Perlegi hunc Librum, cui Titulus, ( The life of Alfred) in quo nihil reperio,
quo minus, cum utilitate publica, imprimatur.

THO. WEEKS, R. P. D. Episc. Land. Cap. Domest.


