WANT OF CHARITY Justly charged, ON ALL SVCH ROMAnists, as dare (without truth
or modesty) affirm, that Protestancie destroys Salvation.

In Answer to a late Popish Pamphlet entitled Charity Mistaken etc.

By Christopher Potter D. D. Chaplain to his Maty in Ordinary, and Provost of
Queens College in Oxford.

OXFORD, Printed by the Printers to the University. 1633.

TO OUR MOST GRACIOUS AND MOST Religious Sovereign, King Charles, etc.
Dread Sovereign,
AMongst the many excellent Virtues which have made your Maties Person so dear
to God, and so precious in the eyes of all your good People, the most eminent
is your Piety; which gloriously shines in the innocence of your Life, in the
constancy of your Devotions, in the justice and mildness of Your blessed
Government, and especially in your tender cares and thoughts for the
conservation of true Religion, and of the Peace of the Church, in this crazy
and quarelling Age. This Piety in your Maty gives me the boldness, humbly to
lay at your Foot this unworthy Piece; and the boldness also to hope, that
your Maty will graciously accept it. Both because it was undertaken in
obedience to your Maties particular Commandment: and because in it I plead (as
well as my Weaknesses will permit,) for the Faith and Charity of our Church,
against the Faction of Rome, who very falsely pretending to Truth and Unity,
are indeed the true Authors and Continuers of the miserable Schisms of
Christendom. If here in I have done any acceptable service to God and his
Church, and to your Maty, I have my desire. The Father of Mercies crown Your
Maty with all the comforts and Benedictions of Heaven and Earth; and continue
long the happiness of these Your Fortunate Islands, in the holiness and health
of their Gracious Sovereign.

Your Majesty's humble Servant and Chaplain Chapter Potter.

Reader,
THis Answer had been public some Months ago, if it had not been delayed,
partly by sickness, and the indisposition of my Body, (and of my Mind also,
which was ever averse from Contentions in Divinity, and now rather desirous to
spend in Devotion the few and evil days of my life that remain:) and partly
out of the hope I had to see a second Edition of the Mistakers Work, which the
strong report of that Part promised, or rather threatened. But that hope
failing, and being loath to seem to fail in my Observance, I now commend it
(such as it is,) to the blessing of God, and to the use and judgment of the
Church. My Answers, without further affectation, are true and modest: I speak
to the Cause not to the Person. Whosoever the Mistaker be, he has my pity
and my prayers. He thinks unworthily of Truth, that believes it to have need
of our Passions. My desire is, all Personal Defects may be charged on my
Self, none on the Cause. I have not followed the Mistaker in all his
wanderings. But let Him not take that for a pretext of clamor. For, if He will
be ingenuous, He must confess, that I have not omitted without Answer, any one
thing of moment in all his Discourse. Or, if He will not, Our Readers will
confess it, I have only neglected his repetitions, declamatory and injurious
speeches, and the like impertinencies: which being set apart, the true Summary
of the rest, is this that follows.

Charity mistaken.
Chapt. 1. and 2.
ROman Catholics judge, that Protestancie unrepented of destroys Salvation.
For this judgment, the Protestants charge them with want of Charity. This
charge (says the Mistaker) is 1. improbable, 2. untrue.

1. Improbable. For the Catholic Church expresses and diffuses her Charity
for the temporal and spiritual good of men in all imaginable sorts. She is
charitable to their bodies in her Monasteries, Hospitals, redeeming of
Captives, providing for Orphans, etc. and to their souls, by converting of
Heretics and Infidels, by teaching the ignorant, by directing the scrupulous
with books of Cases of Conscience, etc. Charitable to very Protestants: their
heresies are only condemned; and it is not said that they sin against the Holy
Ghost, because they may be converted to the faith, reconciled to the Church,
and so may be saved.

Answer, Sect. 1.
SOme Roman Catholics judge charitably of the Reformed. Iesuiters furious and
destructive in their censures, against all that are not of their faction. That
Faction (infamous for their cruelties) charged with want of Charity, not the
Catholic Church. The Catholic Church and the Roman ignorantly or cunningly
confounded. The Catholic truly and really charitable, and so the English: but
not so the Roman, not to her own Children, especially not to Protestants. Of
whom the Mistaker, and Others speak and think no better then of Infidels.
Though we entirely profess and embrace the Catholic Faith in all the parts
of it.

Charity mistaken. Cap. 3. and 4.
2. Untrue. The former judgment proceeds not from want of Charity, but from
truth. Which may appear by these grounds of truth which follow.

1. Almighty God has founded but one Church, and ordained but one Religion
wherein he will be served; and out of the communion of this one Church there is
no salvation. This Unity of the Church is proved by many testimonies of
Scripture, and by the consent of the Fathers of the East and West. And it is
likewise proved by the same authorities, that out of the Communion of this One
Church salvation cannot be obtained. Wherefore all Heretics, and
Schismatiques being out of this Church and Communion must needs eternally
perish.

Answer, Sect. 2.
OF the Unity of the Church. Wherein it consists. How it is violated. Each
discord in Opinion dissolves not the Unity of Faith. The Communion of the
Church in what sense, and how far necessary.

Charity mistaken. Chap. 6.
2. THis Unity is directly broken between Roman Catholics and Protestants,
who are not both Professors of this One Religion, or members of this One
Church. For they differ in prime and maine points of Faith: in which the
Reformers have departed from the Church. Besides, the Protestants are not at
Unity among themselves, and therefore much less with Roman Catholics. Their
bitter contentions and speeches one against another, declare them to be of
different Churches and Religions. Whence it follows that Roman Catholics and
Protestants are not both saveable in their contrary ways.

Anwer, Sect. 3.
THe true difference between the Roman and Reformed Parts of the Church.
Protestants have rejected nothing but Popery, that is, corrupt superadditions
to the Faith, confessed by learned Romanists to be doubtful and unnecessary
novelties. Errors and Abuses of Rome reformed by us, without Schism. Those
errors damnable; how, and to whom! Of the dissentions of Protestants among
themselves. They differ not in any point fundamental.

Charity mistaken. Cap. 6.
FVrthermore, the Protestants are properly Heretics at least, if not
Infidells. Heretics, because they reject and disobey the judgment of the
Catholic Church. For it is not the matter or quality of the doctrine, but the
pride of the man (who prefers his own opinions before the decrees of the
Church,) that properly makes the Heretic. The Heretics, recounted by S.
Augustine, Epiphanius and Philastrius in their Catalogues, were condemned, not
so much for their errors, (which were many ofthem not very material,) as for
their contempt of the Church. S. Cyprian and the Donatists differed not in the
matter of their error; but the obstinacy of the Donatists, and their
disobedience to the Church made them to be condemned for Heretics, when S.
Cyprian was absolved, because the Church in his time had not declared her
self. And in the like manner the Novatians were condemned, on the same grounds.

Answer, Sect. 4.
OF the nature of Heresy. The Church may declare and convince an Heresy, but
cannot properly make any Doctrine Heretical, unless it be such in the matter
of it. The words Heresy, and Heretic very ambiguous. How commonly used by
the Ancients. Of their Catalogues of Heretics. S. Cyprian (though erring in
the point of Rebaptization,) justly absolved from Schism and Heresy. The
Donatists guilty of both. And the Novatians of Schism.

Charity mistaken. Chap. 6.
Again, the only right ground and true infallible motive of faith (by which
it is produced, and on which it relyes) is the revelation of God, and the
proposition of his Church. He therefore who believes not every particular
Article of Catholic Doctrine, which is revealed and propounded by Almighty
God and his Church, (which Church is absolutely infallible in all her
proposalls,) does not assent to any one (even of those which he believes) by
divine faith; because he assents not upon the only true and infallible motive.
An assent not grounded on this, is no supernatural divine faith, but only an
humane suspicion, or opinion, or persuasion. And such is the faith of Turks,
Jews, Moors, and all Heretics, and particularly of the Protestants.

Answer Sect. 5.
DIvine revelation, the principal motive and last object into which faith
supernatural is resolved. The testimony and ministry of the Church is of
great use for the begetting of faith. But the Church has not an authority
unlimited and absolutely infallible in all her doctrines, as Some Romanists
pretend. Others of them reasonably and fairly limit the Churches infallibility.
The Church Universal infallible in fundamental doctrines. Not so in points of
lesser moment. The Mistaker cannot say what he means by the Church, whereof he
says so much. Of the Church represented in General Counsels, of which We
speak and think more honorably then do our Adversaries. Yet we think them
not absolutely infallible. Of the Pope whom they call the Church virtuall. How
his Flatterers speak of his authority. No Roman Catholic can be assured of
his infallibility, which is (at the most and best) but problematicall, by their
own principles.

Charity mistaken. Chap. 7.
PRotestants object, that Roman Catholics are not at unity among themselves,
as appears by many questions wherein their Writers are at variance. Answer.
Catholic Doctors differ only in matters of Opinion, not decided by the
Church, not in any point of Faith. And besides, their differences are all
fairly carried, without any breach of Charity. If it be again objected, that
learned Catholics believe more then the unlearned. Answer. This hinders not
their Unity. It suffices the Vulgar to believe implicitly what the Church
teaches. And by virtue of such implicit faith a Cardinal Bellarmine, and a
Catholic Collier are of the same belief.

Answer, Sect. 6.
DIssentions in the Church of Rome of greater importance then any among the
Reformed. They differ not only in Opinion, but in matters of their Faith. As
about the Popes authority: and the Popes themselves about their vulgar Latin
Bibles. Discords among Them uncharitably pursued. Some patterns of their
mutual bitterness and revilings, Implicit faith, in some points, and in some
persons admitted. What it is which we dislike here in the doctrine of some
Romanists.

Charity mistaken. Chap. 8. 9.
THe Protestants pretend to be at unity with the Ancient Church, with the
Lutherans, and even with Roman Catholics in fundamental points. That
distinction (so ordinary with them) between fundamental points and not
fundamental, is vain, and without ground. No Protestant Writer, none of their
Universities, Colleges or Societies of learned men amongst them, can or dare
define, what doctrines are fundamental, or give us in a List or Catalogue of
Fundamentalls. Some say they are contained in the Creed. But those men may be
ashamed of that opinion; seeing in the Creed there is no mention of the Canon
of Scripture; or of the number or nature of the Sacraments; of justification,
whether it be by faith alone, or by works; or of that doctrine of devils,
forbidding marriage and meats (which was the doctrine of the Manichees, and not
of Roman Catholics, as Protestants perversely affirm:) and finally since
there is such great differences between them and us about the understanding of
the Articles of Christ's Descent into Hell, of the holy Catholic Church, and
the Communion of Saints. Others say, the Book of the 39 Articles of the Church
of England, declares all the fundamental points of faith. But that also is
most absurdly affirmed. That Book declares only (and that in an extremely
confused manner,) what the Church of England believes in most things. And in
many Controversies between them and us, it speaks obscurely, not touching the
maine difficulty of the questions. As in the points of the Visibility and
infallibility of the Church, of Freewill, and of the Canon of Scripture.

Answer, Sect. 7.
THe distinction between doctrines fundamental and not fundamental avowed as
most necessary. It has ground in reason, and in Scripture. The Creed of the
Apostles (as it is explained in the later Creeds of the Catholic Church,)
esteemed a sufficient Summary or Catalogue of Fundamentals, by the best learned
Romanists, and by Antiquity. The Mistakers exceptions to the contrary answered.
As also his exceptions against the Confession of the Church of England. The
Conclusion.

ANSWER TO Charity mistaken.
Charity mistaken. Chap. 1. and 2.
Roman Catholics judge, that Protestancy unrepented of destroies salvation.
For this judgment the Protestants charge them with want of Charity. This
charge (says the Mistaker) is 1. improbable, 2. untrue.

1. Improbable. For the Catholic Church expresses and diffuses her Charity
for the temporal and spiritual good of men, in all imaginable sorts. She is
charitable to their bodies in her Monasteries, Hospitals, redeeming of
Captives, providing for Orphans, etc. and to their souls, by converting of
heretics and infidels, by teaching the ignorant, by directing the scrupulous
with books of Cases of Conscience, etc. Charitable to very Protestants: their
heresies only are condemned; and it is not said that they sinn^ against the
holy Ghost, because they may be converted to the faith, reconciled to the
Church, an^ so may be saved.

Answer, Sect. 1.
SOme Roman Catholics judge charitably of the Reformed. Iesuiter^ furious
and destructive in their censures, against all that are not of their faction.
That faction (infamous for their cruelties) charged with want of Charity, not
the Catholic Church. The Catholic Church and the Roman ignorantly or
cunningly confounded. The Catholic truly and really charitable, and so the
English: but not so the Roman, not to her own children, especially not to
Protestants. Of whom the Mistaker and others speak and think no better then
of Infidells. Though we entirely profess and embrace the Catholic faith in
all the parts of it.

Roman Catholics affirm that Protestants cannot be saved. It matters not
much what Roman Catholics affirm. They can affirm much more then they can
prove, many dreams and fancies are at this day affirmed to be Catholic
verities; and affirmed with great confidence. For want of truth is usually
attended with want of modesty. None so forward to affirm as they that have
least reason for their affirmations. But strong affirmations are but weak
proofs. In the mean while, the boldness of these Dogmatists in affirming so
many things in Religion upon so feeble grounds, has miserably distracted
Christendom, and lost us the peace of the Church.

But do all Roman Catholics affirm this? So the Mistaker seems to implie
by his indefinite assertion. But sure the man is much mistaken. It is indeed an
old tradition in the Popes Court, and one of the (...) or Maxims of the
Jesuitical Cabale, subesse Romano Pontifici est de necessitate salutis, that
none but perfect Papalins can be saved. But all Papists are not Courtiers, nor
as yet, I hope, fully Iesuited; without doubt, many learned and moderate men
living in the outward Communion of that Church (among the French, Venetians,
and elsewhere) do believe, that it is possible enough for Protestants to be
saved, since they believe in Jesus Christ, though they believe not in the Pope.
Many of the^ have said so much in effect, and many more would happily say more,
if they might speak freely. But though their thoughts are free, their tongues
are not. Yet the Mistaker believes his masters the Jesuits, who have told him,
that God will exclude out of heaven all sorts and sects of men, that are not
(as themselves) fully and furiously Romanized.

No Protestant can be saved! Here is a quick purging Index for the Book of
Life. Woe were it with mankind, if the Fathers of the Society had the keeping
of that Book. Their sponge would quickly make it a blotted Catalogue. Out,
into hell, must all, but themselves, and their disciples: so many as will not
worship the I doll at Rome. But our comfort is, these men shall not be our
Judges at the last day. Thanks be to God and our Lord Jesus Christ, we shall
stand or fall to our own Master, in whom we believe, whom we desire to obey,
and whose we are: who will bless us the rather for their unjust maledictions
and censures. These Fathers may do well (and so may their children and
clients) who are so fierce in passing such capital sentences against us, to
look well to their own final great accounts. What will become of them God
only knows, (...): and to his judgment we leave them. Only this we know
that he shall have judgment Iam. 2. 13.
without mercy, that has showed no mercy. And sure, it will go hard with them
if that be true which the prudent Cardinal d'Ossat (lieger for K. Henry IV. in
the Epist. 8. ^ Villeroy.
Court of Rome) collected from their wicked doctrines and practices, that
(notwithstanding their great pretensions of zeal, yet indeed) they believe
neither in Jesus Christ nor the Pope. For whatsoever he be, Tros Tyriusue,
Catholic or Heretic, if their General have him in a jealousy, he must
be cut of from Earth and Heaven. Witness Henry the Great of France, who,
after his conversion to the Pope, was struck first in the mouth by one of
their Disciples, and at last in the heart by another. And in that See Anticoton.
black Powder plot (the eternal shame of Popery) for the advancement of the
Catholic cause, Papists and Protestants both together, (since they could not
be severed,) pell mell must all be blown up. And that by the warrant and
advise of these conscientious Casuists, the Fathers. But happily, though they
meant to kill their friends in that massacre, yet they meant afterward to put
them in the Calendar; intending first to martyr, then to worship them, which
had been honor and recompense sufficient for their slaughter. But for all
Protestants, dying there or elsewhere, they are sent packing to Hell: for their
doom is, no Protestant can be saved.

But why may not a Protestant be saved? There is no good Protestant, but (for
matter of practice) he Nehem. 1 11.
desires to fear Gods name, Hab. 6. 1.
repents for sins past, and for the time to come has a sincere Act. 11. 23.
purpose of heart to cleau unto the Lord, Heb. 1^ 18.
willing in all things to keep a good conscience and to live honestly, obeying
God in all his Commandments, so far as humane frailty will permit: and (for
matter of faith) he believes entirely the Scriptures, the Catholic Creeds,
and whatsoever the Catholic Church in all ages has believed as necessary to
salvation. All Papists in the world shall never be able to prove the contrary:
Either that we walk not according to these rules, or that so walking mercy and
peace shall not be upon us, as upon the Israel of God. Nay, since we are no
further departed from the present Roman Church (as our late most learned
Sovereign K. James professed) then she her self is departed from Scripture,
from Antiquity, and from her self in her best times: she is most
uncharitable in condemning us to Hell, because we refuse to yield a blind
obedience to her new dictates. And the same damnatorie sentence which she
darts against us, involues equally and alike all truly Catholic Christians
in the world, with whom in substance we fully consent. Surely in this furious
rashness and rigor, there is nothing of that sweet virtue of Charity, which 1.
Cor. 13, 4. 5. 6.
S. Paul describes by other properties, quite contrary to these. But this is
the wont of factious Zelotes, to hate and damn all that approve not their
fantasies: and this angry unmerciful passion they call Zeal to the holy
cause, and that which is mere malice must pass for pure Charity.

So it fares with the Mistaker and his fellows the Iesuiters. They take it ill
that we charge them with want of Charity; when in their hopes and desires (for,
blessed be God, they can do it no otherwise) they bar us out of Heaven. It
seems, they would have us patiently to receive their bloody sentence of
damnation, and though they pronounce it against us without authority and
without reason, yet we must believe it is not without Charity. But he much
mistakes Charity and the Jesuits, who can believe the^ to be Charitable. Nay
he must be a stranger in Europe and in the world, who can believe it. Their
own Catholics in France believe it not, where the Voiez ^e Mercure Jesuit.
1. part.
University of Paris (in the name of all the others in that kingdom) has not
long since challenged above 30 Jesuits, to have published execrable doctrines,
(touching the killing of Kings, and absoluing subjects from their allegiance)
tending to the ruin of mankind and confusion of all government: and many of
their books of this argument, by public arrest of the Parliament of Paris,
have been condemned to the fire. And for this reason the whole Hist. Interd.
lib. 3.
Senate of Venice, (not one man of that great Body dissenting) did by decree
chase these men out of their Dominions into perpetual banishment, because, the
Jesuits have been the Authors and Instruments of all tumults, seditions,
confusions, and miseries happening in these times, in all Kingdoms and States of
the world. And for us Protestants, the innumerable massacres of our Brethren in
France, the Netherlands, and elsewhere, the barbarous treasons plotted against
our late Sovereigns and this state of England, are demonstrations sufficient
of their burning Charity toward us. But all their other cruelties are but
mild in comparison of this doctrine, which pursues our souls after death into
the neathermost pit.

Yet the Mistaker thinks this may be affirmed with Charity. For it is
improbable the Catholic Church should want Charity: Most true; not improbable
only but merely impossible, the Catholic Church should be without Charity.
Far be it from us to lay this unjust and unworthy charge upon our dear Mother,
the Catholic Church. Charity is the ligament which connects both that whole
mystical Body unto Christ her glorious Head, and each several member one to
another. The good spirit of truth and love ever assists and animates that great
Body. This Mother of all Christians we honor as her dutiful Children, and are
well assured of her blessing. We accuse not Her for want of Charity (she gives
no cause:) but that proud and cursed Dame of Rome, who takes upon her to revell
in the House of God, to let in and cast out at her pleasure, pretending that
she alone is the Mother and Mistress in that House, usurping and confining all
the privileges of the Catholic Church to her self alone. A pretension void
of color, and against the principles of reason, which forbids to confound a
part with the ^hole. Though she have many ways said the Harlot, and in that
regard de^erved a bill of divorce from Christ, and ^he detestation of
Christians; yet for those Catholic verities which she re^aines, we yield her
a member of the Catholic, though one of the most unsound and corrupt members.
In this sense the Romanists may be called Catholics. But that the Roman
Church and the Catholic are all one, is a very vain and absurd imagination,
unknown That the Roman Church was anciently esteemed a Topicall or particular
Church distinct from others, and in and under the Universal, may appear by
Ignatius in tit. epist. ad Romans Eccles. (...). Ambros. Epist. 83. ad med. Post
Aegyptorum supputationes and Alexandrinae Ecclesiae definitionem, Episcopi
quoque Romanae Ecclesiae meam adhuc expectant sententiam, quid existimem de die
Paschae. Innoc. ad Victricium Epis. Rothomag. ^initio. Quia Romanae Ecclesiae
normam magnopere postulasti, advertant Ecclesiarum regionis vestrae populi,
qualis servetur in vrbis Romae Ecclesijs disciplina. Caelestinus Episc. Romans
Epist ad Joan. Antioc. ap. Binn. in Council. Ephesians. Gr. lat* par. 1. 20 page
143. Asserat se (Nestorius) fidem tenere, quam secundum Apostolicam doctrinam
Romana* and Alexandrina, and Catholica Vniversalis Ecclesia tenet. Nicolaus PP.
1. Epist. 8. ad Michael. August. ad fin. Imperatores (Nero, Diocletia^us)
persequuti sunt Ecclesiam Dei and maxim Ecclesiam Romanam. Idem. Epist, 70 ad
Hincmarum, and caeteros Galliae Episcopos. Conantur Graeci tam nostram
specialiter (Romanam,) quam omnem, quae lingua latina vtitur, Ecclesiam
reprehendere, quod jejunamus in Sabbatis, etc. Et paulo post. Opprobria haec
universally Ecclesiae, in ea duntaxat part, quae latina vti dignoscitur lingua
ingeruntur. Innocent. 3. lib. 2. Epist. 200. ad Joan. Patriarch.
Constantinopol. Dicitur Vniversalis Ecclesia, quae de vniversis constat
Ecclesiis, quae Graeco vocabulo Catholica nominatur, -- Ecclesia Romana sic non
est Vniversalis Eccles^^^ sed part Vniversalis Ecclesiae.
to Antiquity, still loosly and miserably begged by the Mistaker and his
fellows, without offer of proof. Catholique-Roman is in true interpretation
vniversallparticular: which are terms repugnant, that cannot be equalled. The
latter restraines and cuts off from the former: and therefore to conclude the
Catholic Church within that of Rome, is to alter the name and nature of it,
and he that will be only a Roman must cease to be a Catholic.

It is not then the Catholic Church that we charge, or that charges us, but
the Roman. And therefore all the discourse of our Mistaker touching the great
charities of the Catholic Church to her children, is very roving and
impertinent, wind and words without substance. All confess, that she diffuses
her self in all acts of charity after all imaginable sorts. So do her
several members, the particular Churches. They of the Reformation, and
especially this of England, as amply and bountifully as any in the World; and
much more effectually and to better purpose then that of Rome. It has been
publicly avowed by some, and cannot be denied by a modest Adversary, that
hard^y any age in former times may compare with this of ours, (since this
Church was happily purged from Popery,) for public expressions of charity. In
so few years, hardly ever so many Churches or Chappells built and beautified
for Gods service, so many Colleges, Schools, Libraries, Hospitals, erected
and endowed for the honor of learning, and relief of the necessitous. And for
the other part of charity, which is spiritual, regarding the worship of God
and the conduct of souls to their eternal happiness; never did any Church
afford more plentifully the means of grace, nor more abound with all helps
and advantages of piety, then this of ours. The word of God is diligently
preached amongst us, the Sacraments of Christ reverently administered, abuses in
both are removed, the two extremes of Religion, Superstition and Profaneness
are avoided. The ignorant are instructed, the disorderly admonished, comforts
are applied to the afflicted, terrors to the impenitent, censures and
punishments to the obstinate. In our Leiturgy, policy and ceremonies, in the
government of our Prelates, in the dil^gence of inferior Pastors, in the who^^
face of our doctrine and discipline, we^ have a most near and fair
resemblan^^ of reverend Antiquity: all tending to the gaining of souls to
Christ, and to guid^ them in the way of peace.

In the Church of Rome appears bu^ little of this true Charity, even toward
her own Children. Indeed, she bring^ forth children unto God by her baptism,
but then poisons them in their breeding. When they ask for bread she gives
them a stone, and serpents in stead o^ fishes. To the word of God she adde^
and equals her own traditions, she reads unto them that word, but in an
unknown tongue: teaches them to pray, but in latin, which they understand
not: directs them to call upon God, but withal upon Saints and Angels: to
worship God, but also dumb blocks and Images. She sends them to Legends and
pictures for much of their instruction: and for direction of their conscience
to such Casuists, as their Aurel. Sorbonicus in vindicijs contra Loemelij
Spong. nuper editis page 516. 517. Omnium maximeintolerandi suntilli Theologiae
moralis, Institutionum moralium, moralium Praeceptorum, --. -- compilatores,
pene omnes Iesuitae inter quos Th. S. edidit densum opus de Matrimonio, opus
non gloriandum sed pudendum; tam immani curiositate, tam invisa in rebus
spurissimis, and infandis, and monstrosis, and diabo^icis perscrutandis
sagacitate horrendum, vt mirum sit pudoris alicujus hominem ea sine rubore
scripsisse, quae quivis mode stioris ingenij vix sine rubore legate. Portenta
ista sunt, non Scripta^ animorum insidiae, non mentium subsidia; incentiva
libidinum, schola flagitiorum, non honestae disciplinae, non scientiae
Christianae instrumenta. insoelix scientia quae omnes perdere, paucos juvare
nata est. Quae circ^ sordes and sterquilinia volvenda and revolvenda volutatur.
own men say to have dishonored Christian Religion with their abominable
lessons. She feeds them with a dry communion, and bids them obey Jesus Christ
and the Pope if they will be saved. She has also her Bishops, Priests,
Masses, Monks, Monasteries, etc. but such as have nothing almost common with
those of the Primitive times, save only their names. In brief, with all
possible artifices, she labors to keep her poor Laity hoodwink't in
ignorance: for blind men are more tractable and obedient unto their leaders.
She tells them, it is Creed enough for them to believe only in the Catholic
Church, that is, to resign up to her self their understanding. But if any of
them be farther curious to know more, especially if they will be prying into
that dangerous book, the Bible; she sends them into the Inquisition to be
there better catechized. Thus she deals with her own. But for all us that are
(in her opinion) Heretics, if her power were answerable to the malignity of
her desires, no remedy, we should all pass through the Inquisition into Hell.

Here is the image of the Roman charity so much magnified by the Mistaker.
Though we deny not, Romanists may be really charitable in some kind: But does
not that Charity (such as it is) both begin and end at home? Contrary to the
nature of true Charity which begins at home, and then enlarges it self to
others even to enemies. The Mistaker talks highly of their redeeming of
Captives, endowing of Hospitalls. -- But in conscience, what thinks he? would
not a needy Jew be sooner relieved in any Roman Hospital (as they are in the
City of Rome) then a poor Protestant? And a captive Turk as soon ransomed as
a Calvinist? Nay, we are so little beholding to them for any charitable
affection toward us, that the civility of fair language is thought too good
for us. Our writers are denied the honor of their Ind. Hispanicus Bern. de
Sandoual. edit. Genev. p. 167 a Conrado Gesnero. add Auctore damnato ib. per
Iacobum Frisium. add Auctorem damnatum p. 168. vnum integerrimum simistri
judicij, dele, virum integerrimum ib. doctissimus Simlerus doctissime exposuit.
dele, doctissimus and doctissime. ib. doctissimi diligentissimique viri. dele.
doctissimi diligentissimique ib. clarissimus medicus. dele, olarissimus.
learning or moral parts; and if any modest man among them do but Poss. Bibl.
select. page 130. de Bodino. vniversa hac tractatione haeresin sapit, quod
Lutherum, Calvinum, Melancthonem, caeterosque honorifice nominet.
fairly mention any of our names, he is said to savor of heresy. Briefly,
their people are taught by their principal Staplet. Orat. de Haeresi and
Magia. ad fin. sicut cum Magis ac Maleficis commerci a habere, pacem inire,
matrimonia facere, omnia, Christianus abhorret; non secus cum Haereticis eadem
commercia repudianda sunt. Sicut Magos publica authoritate arcemus, civitate
pellimus, poenis atroeibus afficimus, eodem studio ac vigore in Haereticos vti
oportet. Sicut Magici libri apud Christianos nusquam tolerantur, ferro and
flamma excinduntur: idem de Haereticis statuendum est.
Doctors to esteem us no better then Dogs, Infidells, and Magitians that have
professedly to do with the Devil: to abhor all commerce, truce, and
treaties with us, to burn our Books, and pursue our persons with fire and
sword, and far and wide to chase us out of their coasts. Thus are we hated,
reviled, persecuted, cursed, even into eternal fire by the Roman Charity. If
this be Charity, there is no such thing, as malice, in the world. The mercies
of the wicked are cruel. Prove. 12. 10.

But, it seems, the Mistaker thinks it favor and Charity enough to us, to
grant that though our Protestancy be a damnable sin, yet it is not the sin
against the Holy Ghost. For that sin excludes repentance; but Protestants may
repent, and be converted and reconciled to the Roman Church, and so may be
saved. And therefore we are not utterly conclamati, past all hope of life or
recovery. This yet is more favor then we could expect from that Pope Cause.
25. qu. I. can. Violatores.
who makes every wilful offender against the Canons, a blasphemer against the
Holy Ghost. And yet the Mistaker herein is no more favorable to us, then he
is to Jews or Mahumetans. I presume he thinks no Infidells to sin against
the Holy Ghost: upon their repentance and conversion he will grant they may
be faued. Just so he thinks and speaks of us. We have a great obligation to
him for his charity.

Well, if we will be saved, we must renounce our errors, be converted to the
faith and reconciled to the Roman Church. Our faith is the same which the
Apostles (or the Apostolic Church) delivered in their Creed; the same which
the Catholic Church, in the Creed of Athanasius, calls the Catholic faith:
into this faith we have been baptized, in this we live and hope to dye. To
renounce this faith were to abjure our Christendom. I hope the Mistaker would
not wish us converted from our Creed. Though some of his Ghostly Fathers seem
very meanly to esteem it. As appears by that Censura Symboli Apostolici -- ad
instar Censurae Pari siensis.
Censure which lately they published upon it, or rather against it: wherein
they say many Articles of it seem to be ambiguous, dangerous, false,
scandalous, heretical, etc. They say, it is in jest, to show the Sorbonists
the iniquity of their censures. As if Jesuitical Libells and Pamphlets were to
be paralleled with the Apostles Creed: or this as justly censurablea as the
other. God in justice may give over these men to Atheism in earnest, who dare
so profanely dally with the Capital Principles of our faith.

By the profession of this faith and by the bond of love, we are linked in
communion with the Catholic Church and all her true members in the world; and
doubt not of Gods mercy in Christ, if to our holy faith, we add an holy
conversation. For the Church of Rome, in those Catholic truths which she
maintains, we are not at odds with her, nor need any reconciling: for that
mass of errors and abuses, in judgment and practice which is proper to her
and wherein she differs from us, we judge a reconciliation impossible, and to
us (who are convicted in conscience of her corruptions) damnable.

Hitherto the Mistaker has declamed for the Charity of his party: He will now
declare the truth of his assertion, that no Protestant can be saved. Upon
examination, we shall find as little truth in the substance of his discourse,
as there is in the design of it, little judgment, or conscience, or modesty.

Charity mistaken. Cap. 3. 4. 5.
2 Untrue. The former judgment proceeds not from lack of Charity, but from
truth. Which may appear by these grounds* of truth which follow.

1 Almighty God has founded but one Church, and ordained but one religion
wherein he will be served; and out of the communion of this one Church there is
no salvation. This unity of the Church is proved by many testimonies of
Scripture, and by the consent of the Fathers of the East and West. And it is
likewise proved by the same authorities, that out of the communion of this one
Church salvation cannot be obtained. wherefore all Heretics and
Schismatiques being out of this Church and Communion must needs eternally
perish.

Answer Sect. 2.
OF the Unity of the Church. Wherein it consists. How it is violated. Each
discord in opinion dissolues not the unity of Faith. The communion of the
Church in what sense and how far necessary.

TO the first ground. No Protestant denies the Catholic Church to be one;
They all deny the present Roman to be that one Catholic. If the Mistaker
could prove this, his pains were to some purpose. But his labor is lost in
proving the unity of the Catholic Church; where of there is no doubt or
Countrouersie. Wherefore we might pass over this impertinent discourse; but
that some things are here and there intermingled, which merit our consideration.

That place of Deuteronomy. 17. 8, 9.
Deuteronomy. 17. alleged by the Mistaker, makes little for the unity of the Church,
and much less for the Popes pretense of sovereign power. All Controversies
civil or ceremonial are there referred, (not to the high Priest alone, as the
Mistaker thinks, but) to the great Tribunal, called the Sanhedrim, mixed of
Priests and Judges; in which all harder causes Ecclesiastical and Civil
should be determined, without further appeal. And therefore in respect of the
two kinds of causes, there were ordained two sorts of men to hear them,
Ecclesiastical and Civil; the Civil meant by the Judge, and the
Ecclesiastical by the Priest. And though sometimes amongst the Jews, both the
offices did meet in one person, as in Eli; yet this was very rare and
extraordinary. Ordinarily they were distinct; and in the place which we have in
hand, many learned Oleaster, Lyra. Cajeta. apud Bonfrer. in loc. Sigon. de Rep.
Heb. libr. 6. cap. 7. The Dowists in their Marginall note on 2 Chronicles. 19. verse.
11. (...)
Romanists affirm, that by the Judge is meant the civil Magistrate; who is
directly distinguished and severed from the Priest, both in the (...)
original Hebrew, and in the (...).
Septuagint. And by the Priest, not the high Priest alone, but (as may appear
by this Deuteronomy. 17. 9.
Text, and another Deuteronomy. 2. 1. 5.
parallel to it) the Priests the sons of Leui. It is true, amongst those
Priests there was one Chief, in this matter of highest judgment, in doubtful
causes: So also was there one principal among the Judges, in 2 Chronicles. 19. 11.
matters of the King, that is in civil causes. And therefore if the Mistaker
imagine, that Christians must have one sovereign Bishop over all, because the
Jews had one chief Priest; it may be inferred by as good consequence, that
Christians must have one Sovereign Prince over all, because the Jews had one
chief Judge. And as all harder causes of religion must be referred to the
Pope, so all civil matters must be referred to the Emperor. And as amongst
the Jews, the Priest and Judge were resident in the place which the Lord had
chosen; so the Pope and the Emperor must both abide in Rome. These Inferences
are all of equal validity, that is, of no validity at all.

The Mistaker will here have it further well considered, that the whole people
was to submit to the determination of the high Priest, (or of the Judge as the
Verse. 12.
Text has it) upon no less then the pain of death. True: and there was
reason for it. For 1. the sentences of them that are in authority, and judge
soueraignely without appeal, should be obeyed or submitted unto, though they
be unjust. A lawful power, though unlawfully abused, must be obeyed. A man
fined or censured in the Star Chamber, high Commission, or other Courts of
Justice, may not pretend for his contempt the error or misinformation of the
Judges. But though Inferiors be always bound to obey the sentences of their
Governors; yet they are not bound to believe them always to be just. Those
Priests and Judges had a rule to govern their judgments by: they were to give
sentence Verse. 11. and Eze. 44. 24.
according to the Law. If they erred from this rule, (as sometimes Es. 28. 7.
Ier. 2. 26. 27 Ezekiel. 22. 26. Mal. 2. 7, 8. Act. 23. 3. Vide Tirin. in loc.
Deuteronomy. 17.
they did) the error might be observed, though the authority might not be
disobeyed. 2. The high Priest in cases of moment had a certain Privilege from
error, if he co^sulted the Exodus 28. 30. Numb. 27. 21.
divine oracle by the judgment of Vrim, (or by the breast plate of judgment,
wherein were Vrim and Thummim) whereby he had an absolutely infallible
direction. If any such promise from God to assist the Pope could be produced,
his decisions might then justly pass for oracles, without examination; till
then, his words with us weigh so much as his reasons, no more.

The sin of Numb. 16.
Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, was a rebellion, yea treason against Moses the
civil Magistrate, as well as a schism from Aaron the Priest. That they with
all their company descended alive into the pit of hell, is rashly and
uncharitably said. God is merciful; and who knows, whether some of them did
not repent in the last moment? All that this example teaches is, that men
ought not to rend themselves from the Church of God, or join in the despising
of government, with them that seek their own glory, and not the glory of God.

It is a certain truth, that Matthew. 28. 20.
all things ought to be observed which Christ has commanded: and that Mark. 16.
whosoever believes not in Christ, shall be condemned. But here is no warrant
for the Church of Rome, to force upon the world her own commandments and
Creeds, in stead of Christ's.

That in S. Matthew, Matt. 18. 17.
If thy Brother offend thee tell the Church, is nothing to the point in hand.
Our Lord speaks of a brother wronging his brother, and after private
admonition refusing to obey the Church: which may be understood of an assembly
as well Civil as Ecclesiastical. Howsoever, it cannot be meant of the Church
Catholic, (which cannot be told of private injuries,) but of particular
Congregations; or as Chrysostom. hom. 61. in Matthew. vide etiam Tirinum in locum.
S. Chrysostom expounds it, of their Pastors. And if any disorderly or
obstinato persons will not be reformed by their good counsels, they are to be
esteemed as profane Publicanes and sinners, or to be punished with spiritual
censures. Yet in these censures any Church may err, through misinformation or
ignorance, and may sometimes strike the innocent; as is confessed by Pope
Decretal. lib. 5. tit. 39. c. 28. A nobis.
Innocent the third, and Mag. lib. 4. did. 18. lit. F.
Lombard. Whether in points of discipline or doctrine, so long as any Church
holds to the rule of truth, and gouernes her self by the word of God, she
erres not. We are to hear the Church our mother; true, that is, not rashly to
oppose her; especially if she be careful to hear God our Father, and Christ
her Spouse, of whom it was said, Matt. 17. 5.
Hear him. The Mistaker therefore vainly inferres from this place, that the
judgment of the Church in all Controversies is Sovereign and Infallible, and
that absolute obedience is due unto Her, no appeal being allowed, no not to
Scripture, though expounded in a Catholic sense, and consonantly to the
judgment of the most ancient and famous members of the Church. The Text
evidently speaks of particular Churches, to which I suppose he will not easily
yield these goodly privileges. After his wont, still when he talks of the
Church, he means his own; and ever mistakes the Roman for the Catholic.
The Church Catholic or universal is confessed in some sense to be unerring,
(as shall appear hereafter) and he is little better then a Pagan that
despises her judgment. For she follows her guides the Prophets and
Apostles, and is not very free and forward in her definitions. All this is as
false of the Roman Church, as it is true of the Catholic.

The Treatise of S. Cyprian, of the unity of the Catholic Church, (for that
title Epist. 51.
himself gives it) is directed against the schism and error of the Nouatians;
who peeuishly severed themselves from the Communion of Catholics, because
they gave the peace of the Church to such as repented after their fall, in
times of persecution. There is nothing in that Treatise which the Protestants
dislike, save only the corrupting of S. Cyprians text by some Romish zelote:
Cap. 3. secund. Pam. these words added to the Text. [Primatus Petro datur -- ]
and [super Cathedram Petri fundata est Ecclesia-) and super [illum] vnum
aedificat Ecclesiam Christus --
who has added and fourred in two or three false glosses of his own, in favor
of S. Peter's Primacy: Contrary to the faith of written copies, and of the elder
editions, which were before Manutius and Pamelius; contrary to the constant
doctrine of that holy Martyr, in other parts of his works, and even in that
very place which is corrupted; and contrary to the reading of their own
Gratian, Cause. 24. q. 1. can. Loquitur Dominus ad Petrum.
corrected by Pope Gregory 13. And in this unworthy fashion they have handled
many other records and Vide Rog Withring. Apol. Bell. number. 450.
momuments of Antiquity; adding, altering, razing them at their pleasure.
Sixtus Senensis highly commends Pope Pius the fifth, for the care which he had
Epist. dedic. ad Pium 5. P. M. Expurgari and emaculari curasti omnia
Catholicorum scriptorum, ac praecipue veterum Patrum scripta --
to extinguish all dangerous books; and to purge the writings of all
Catholic Authors, especially of the ancient Fathers from the filth and poison
of heresy. At Rome they call it heresy, not to speak the language of the
Court; or to say any thing in behalf of Protestants. A few years since, when
the learned Jesuit Andreas Schottus of Antuerpe, published 600 Greek Epistles
of Isidorus Ielusiotes, out of the Vatican Library, never before printed;
Beyerlinck the Censor of Books there, was content to pass them to the press,
In approbatione libri editi Antuerp. Graece 1623.
because they contained nothing contrary to the Catholic Roman religion. It
seems they had not passed, but upon that condition. Though since on better
consideration, that unwary clause is left out in the Approbation of the last
edition of those Epistles in Greek and Latin, at Francfort. This by the way.
Anno 1629.


S. Augustine, in his Epistle of the unity of the Church, largely debates that
maine controversy between the Catholics and the Donatists, concerning the
Church. Those Schismatiques pretended, that the Catholic Church was perished
in all other parts of the world; and that it remained only in their factious
Conventicles, in some corners of Rome and Africa, or (as they loved to speak)
in the part of Donatus. Against this fancy, (which is the opinion in effect of
our Roman Catholics at this day,) the learned Father proves, that the
Catholic Church may not be confined to any corners, or Countries: but that
it is universally diffused thorough all the world. And he constantly fetches
all his proofs from the holy Scriptures: often protesting that he will not
fight with any other weapons. Aug. de unit. Eccl. cap. 6. Dicitis in nullis
terris heredem permanere Christum, nisi vbi cohaeredem habere potuerit Donatum.
Legite nobis hoc de Lege, de P^opheus, de Psalmis, de ipso Evangelio, de
Apostolicis Literis. Legite and credimus.
You say o Donatists that Christ has no inheritance, but in the part of
Donatus, (as now it is said of the Popes party;) Read and prove this to us, out
of the law, the Prophets, or the Psalms, out of the Gospel, or the Apostles
Letters; Read it thence, and we will believe you. Ibid. cap. 3. Non audiamus,
haec d^co, haec dicis, sed audiamus, haec dicit Dominus. Auferantur illa de
medio, quae adversus no^ invicem, non ex divinis Canonicis libris sed aliunde
recitamus.
Let us hear no more, Thus I say, or Thus thou say; but let us hear, Thus
says the Lord. Away with those arguments on both sides, which are not taken
out of the Divine and Canonical Scriptures. Ibid. cap. 2. Inter nos quaestio
eist, vbi sit Corpus Christi, id est, vbi sit Ecclesia; Quid ergo facturi
sumus? in verbis nostris eam quaesituri, an in verbis Capitis sui Domini nostri
Jesus Christi? Puto quod in illius verbis potius eam quaerere debemus, qui
veritas est, and optime novit Corpus suum.
It is questioned between us, where the body of Christ is, that is, where his
Church is: what then must be done? shall we seek it in our own words, or in
the words of Christ the head of the Church? I trow rather in his word, who is
Truth, and best knows his one body. Ibid. cap. 4. Ipsum Caput de quo
consentimus, ostendat nobis corpus suum de quo dissentimus; vt per ejus verba
jam dissentire desinamus.
Let this head, of which we agree, show us his Body, of which we disagree; that
our dissentions may by his word be ended. Cap. 19. vid. etiam cap. 7. and 18.
and passim.
That we are in the true Church of Christ, and that this Church is universally
scattered over the earth, we prove not by our Doctors, or Counsels, or
Miracles, but by the divine Scriptures. The Scriptures are the only documents,
and foundations of our cause. Hither is his refuge and appeal from all other
sentences. The Mistaker was ill advised to send us to this Treatise; which both
in the general aim, and in the quality of the arguments and proofs, is so
contrary to his pretensions. If the present Roman Church could with S. Austine
(and all Antiquity) submit to this Judge (or rather Rule) of controversies;
both this, in hand, of the Church, and all the rest of our contestations might
be quickly ended. Before I leave this piece of S. Austine, I will leave this
passage out of it, to the Mistaker to ruminate upon. Ibid. cap. 4.
Whosoever believe aright in Christ the Head, but yet do so dissent from his
Body the Church, that their communion is not with the whole wheresoever
diffused, but with themselves severally in some part; it is manifest that such
are not in the Catholic Church. The Protestants communicate with the
Catholic Church, in what part or place of the world soever. They of Rome say,
the Church is no where to be found but in their faction, none can be saved but
Romanists. What will follow from hence, He has so much Logic that he cannot
mistake.

The Herefies recounted by Epiphanius, Philastrius, and S. Austin in their
Catalogues, were many of them wild wandering conceits of heads crazed in the
Principles of understanding; rather frenzies and dotages against reason, then
false opinions in faith, tending to break the unity of the Church. And justly
said S. Austine, No Christian Catholic (he might have said, no rational
creature) believes them. It is true, diverse of those Heretics (as the
Arrians, Photinians, Macedonians, Nestorians, Eutychians, etc,) did disturb
that unity, by maintaining obstinately their errors against the common rule of
faith. But they were convicted, not by their disobedience to the Church, as the
Mistaker believes; but principally by the evidence and authority of Scripture:
and then after that, by the attestation of the Catholic Church (which is the
faithful keeper of all Scripture and divine verities:) as appears clearly in
those Counsels, and Fathers, which have opposed those Heretics. Epiphanius
alone (of the three above named) disputes the matter with the Heretics; and
profesfes to fetch his arguments from Scripture. Haeresi 65. Pauli Samosateni.
number. 6. edit Petau. (...). Vide cund. Haer. 76. page 989. and Haer. 78. page
1047.
The divine goodness (says he) has forewarned, and fore-armed us against
Heresies by his Truth. For God foreseeing the madness, impiety, and fraud of
the Samosatenians, Arrians, Manichees, and the other Heretics, has secured
us by his divine word, against all their subtleties. And elsewhere to the same
purpose. Where by the way, the Mistaker must needs observe, (as he says) that
the Protestants hold diverse ancient heresies, and particularly that of denying
Prayers for the dead: He is very much mistaken in his observation. The
commemoration of the deceased in the ancient Church, which Ap. Epiphan. Haer.
75.
Aerius without reason disallowed; was a thing much differing from those
Prayers for the dead, which are now in use in the Church of Rome. Our Roman
Catholics believe, (at least they say so,) that some souls of the faithful,
after their departure hence, are detained in a certain fire bordering upon
Hell, till they be thoroughly purged: and their prayers for them are, that they
may be released or eased of those torments. On the contrary, the general
opinion of the ancient Doctors, Greek and Latin down almost till these last
ages was, (and is the opinion of the Graeci in Council. Flor. ante Sess. 1. in
Quaest. de Igne purgat. apud Bin. Tom. 4. part. 1. page 421. edit. vlt.
Greek Churches at this day,) that all the spirits of the righteous deceased
are in Abraham's bosom, or some outer Courts of heaven; where though they live
in a blessed condition of peace, and joy, and refreshing, being secured of
glory and the beatificall vision; yet they expect the full perfection, and
consummation of their happiness, till the last day. Some of their Testimonies
to this purpose, are collected by Spalat. de Rep. Eccl. lib. 5. cap. 8. number.
98. Sixtus Senens. Bibl. S. lib. 6. annot. 345.
Antonius de Dominis, and Sixtus of Siena, whereunto many more might easily be
added. This opinion seems directly to overthrowe two new doctrines of Popery;
Purgatory, and invocation of Saints: (Such Invocation I mean as is intended to
the Saints as a worship due unto them, and when they are invocated as
Commissioners under God, to whom he has delegated the power of conferring
sundry benefits deposited in their hands, and to be bestowed at their
pleasure: which is properly new and Popish Invocation.) Which De Beatitud.
Sanct. lib. 1. cap. 4. and 5.
Bellarmine well perceiving, passionately labors to overthrowe it, and to
prove that the Ancients were not of this mind. But his proofs are feeble, and
fall short of the thing in question; and, being a man of so great reading, it
may be thought he spoke against his knowledge, and conscience. Now conformably
to this opinion, the Ancient (...). Liturg. Basil. and Chrysostom. vide Clem.
Constable. lib. 8. cap. 12. Chrysostom. Liturg. Gr. Epiphan. Her. 75. Cyril. Hier.
Catech. 5. Mystag. Miss. Muzarab. in Bibl. P P. Colon. Tom. 15. p. 787. Di^nys.
Eccl. Hier. cap. 7.
Church in her Liturgies, remembered all those that slept in hope of the
Resurrection of everlasting life; and particularly the Patriarchs, Prophets,
Apostles. Martyrs, Confessors, Bishops, Fathers, such as led a solitary life,
and all Saints: beseeching God to give unto them rest, and to bring them (at
the Resurrection) to the place where the light of his countenance should shine
upon them for evermore. Signifying by this Memorial their faith (as Vbi supra.
St Epiphanius has it,) that the departed are alive and subsisting with the
Lord; and their hope of them, as of those that be from home in another
country; and that at length they shall attain the state which is more perfect.
Some particular Doctors had in these matters particular opinions, which must be
severed from the general sentiment and customs of the Church; which to this
day are conserved in the Greek Vide Marci Ephesii Episc. Epist. encyclicam.
Churches, notwithstanding the pretended Union (in this and other points) at
the late Council of Florence. This ancient observation of the Church we
condemn not. We say prayers are to be made for all that are departed in the
true faith of Christ; that is, first Thanksgiving, that they are delivered from
the body of death, and miseries of this sinful world: Secondly Requests of
Gods mercy, that they may have their perfect consummation in body and soul, in
the kingdom of God at the last judgment. The Roman writers utterly condemn
the former doctrine, and practice of Antiquity. Azor. Instit. moral. tom. 1. c.
20. lib. 8. See of this matter, the learned Primate of Armagh in his defense
against the Iespite.
One of them fears not to censure it, as absurd and impious. By this the
Mistaker may feel his error, and see that it is not the Protestants but his
own Doctors that agree with the old Heretic Aerius.

The unity of the Church is nothing hindered by diversity of opinions in
doubtful matters. It is a great vanity to hope or expect, that all learned
men, in this life, should absolutely consent in all the pieces and particles of
divine truth. The light, whereby we see in this state of mortality, is very
feeble, and very different; in regard of the good spirits illumination, the
capacities of men, and their diligences in study, prayer, and other means of
knowledge. So long as the Iud. 3.
faith once delivered to the Saints is earnestly contended for, and kept
entire; that is, the Tit. 1. 4.
common faith of Christians, containing all Catholic and necessary verities;
so long as men Phil. 3. 15. 16.
walk according to this rule charitably, though in other things they be
otherwise minded; the Church is but one, her unity no way violated. For this
unity consists in the unity of faith, not of opinions; and in an union of men's
hearts and affections, by true Charity; which will easily compound or tolerate
all unnecessary differences. Factious and fiery Spirits kindle and fly asunder
on small occasions; but among wise men each discord in Religion dissolues not
the unity of faith or Charity. Points of Religion are well distinguished by
Aqu. 22. q. 2. art. 56 and q. 29. art. 3. ad 2.
Thomas, and Staplet. dupl. lib. 1. c. 12. n. 3. and Rel. c. 1. qu. 3. art. 6.
notab. 1. and 2. Licet and vtile est de rebus difficilibus in Ecclesia aliter
atque aliter disputare; nec hoc vnitatem violat, sed veritatem illustrat.
Stapleton. Some, say they, are primitive Articles, of the substance of
Religion, essential in the object of faith; dissension in these is pernicious,
and destroys unity. Others are secondary, probable, accidental or obscure
points, wherein the oppositions and disputations of learned men proceeding
modestly are tolerable, and sometime profitable for finding out the truth.
Unity in these matters is very contingent and variable in the Church; now
greater, now lesser, never absolute in all particles of truth. And therefore
those ancient Worthies, the Fathers of the Church, as they were most zealous to
defend, even with their blood, to the least jot or title, the rule of faith,
(as they called it) or the Creed of Christians; or (as the Scripture calls it)
the 2. Tim. 1, 13.
form of wholesome words, the Heb. 6. 1. and 5. 12.
Principles of the oracles of God, or of the doctrine of Christ: so again,
they were most charitable to allow in other things (beside or without the
faith,) a great latitude and liberty. As in a musical consort, a discord now
and then (so it be in the descant, and depart no tfrom the ground,) sweetens
the harmony: So the variety of opinions, or of Firmilianus ap Cypr. epist 7 5.
number. 5. August ep. 86, Socrat. Hist. lib. 5. cap. 21.
rites in parts of the Church, does rather commend then prejudice the unity of
the whole. Indeed in the multitude of opinions, there is but one truth: but
among sundry truths, there is but one necessary to salvation; that wherein the
holy Scriptures (as the Apostle says) are able to make us wise by 2 Timothy 3. 15.
the faith in Christ Jesus. The keeper of this truth, and of the Scriptures in
which it is treasured is the Church; not of one City, but the Catholic
Church; that is, the fellowship of Saints dispersed through the whole World.
And it is not in deep or difficult questions, but in this necessary faith or
truth, wherein the Fathers (alleged by the Mistaker) justly require an exact
and perfect unity among Catholic Christians. To be ignorant of this faith, or
to err in it, though unwarily, is dangerous: but to corrupt or contradict any
part of it, though but in a word or syllable of moment, is damnable. The
difference between the Arrians and the Catholics was but in one letter, the
least in the Alphabet; yet never was the Church troubled with a more pernicious
heresy. And many times the addition or alteration of one word or two in the
confession of faith, had reconciled the Eunomians, Photinians, Sabellians,
Macedonians, etc. with the Catholics. But in this case, for the Catholics
to yield in a word or syllable, had been to yield their cause, and to betray
the truth. Therefore worthily and truly said Basil. (...). apud Theodoret.
Hist. l. 4. c. 17.
S. Basil to the officer of Valens the Arrian Emperor, not a syllable of
divine doctrine must be betrayed. For though Faith be sound in other respects,
yet one word (says Naz. Tract. de fide.
S. Greg. Nazianzen as truly) like a drop of poison, may taint and corrupt it:
and (as Hier. Apol. 3. adv. Ruff. cap. 7.
S. Hierome) for such a word contrary to this faith are Heretics justly cast
out of the Church. But though faith be kept entire, yet if Charity be wanting,
the unity of the Church is disturbed, her union dissolved. Schism is no less
damnable then Heresy. The old Vide Optat. and August. passim.
Donatists did not only unjustly separate from the Catholic Church diffused
through the World, but most un reasonably and arrogantly esteemed their own
faction to be the only Christians; hated and censured all of the Catholic
Communion, as no better then Pagans; and appropriated to themselves alone all
the benefits of Christ, and all the privileges of his Church. And accordingly
in effect they renounced the society of all other Christians, vanting that life
and salvation was no where to be had but in their assemblies. And are not the
Iesuiters of our times formally guilty of this Donatisme? Do not the Zelotes
of Rome thus speak and think, of themselves and of all other Christians?
Witness our Mistaker, and his Pamphlet; wherein his design is to show that Rome
compasses and contains all Christendom, and that Christ has no servants,
the Church no members, but only those that live under the Popes obedience.

Briefly the Unity of the Church Catholic is not hindered by any diversity of
opinions, or observations in her several members; so long as the substance of
faith, and the bond of Charity is conserved among them.

The Mistaker goes on.

Out of this one true Church no salvation Chapter Mist. ^. 5.
can be had. Every term is ambiguous; and therefore the whole proposition true
or false, as it may be limited. Salvation may be had either by the ordinary
means, or extraordinarily. The Church notes either the Catholic, or
Particulars. He may be in the one, who is outed by the others: and an
interior Communion may be without the external. A Church may teach many
truths, and so far be true: yet by the addition of many errors and abuses
become in regard of them a false Church. And it may be one in the faith, which
is not at one (either with it self or other particulars) in opinions. Lastly a
man may be out of a particular Church, either actiuely, by a voluntary
separation (which is just or unjust according to the grounds;) or passiuely, by
exclusion or ejection being cas^ out by the Church: And that may be done
either unjustly, by ignorance, malice, faction etc. or justly; and this either
by suspension for a time from the society of the faithful, or by utter and
final abdication from the body of Christ. This may better appear in
particular instances.

Infidels are without the Church. They have no distinct knowledge of Christ, or
explicit faith in him. Yet some Justin M. in Apol. vtraque Clem. Alex. Strom.
lib. 5. 6. 7. Chrysostom hom. 37. in Matthew. etc.
ancient Doctors, and many late Ludov. Vives in Aug. de C. D. l. 18. c. 47.
Andrad. Orthod. Explic. lib. 3. ad axiom. 6. Genes. a Sepulveda. lib. 7. Epist.
1. ad Petr. 1. ad Petr. Serramum. Franc. a victoria Relect. 13. Aquinas, Lyra,
Abulensis, Bruno, Dionysius Carth. Arboreus, Durandus, etc. apud Casal. de
quadr. iustit. lib. 1. cap. 12. Cornelius Mus, Claudius Seysellus, Ambrosius
Catharinus, Joan. Viguerius. Bened. Pererius, Dom. Soto. Alph. Salmeron. aoud
Franc. Collium de Animabus Paganoium lib. 1. cap. 24. vide eum lib. 5. cap. 7.
8. 22. Sotus, Canus, Vega, Thom. Richardus apud Greg. Val. T. 3. disp. 1. qu.
2. punct. 4. secunda vero.
Roman writers are of opinion, (concerning Pagans before and since Christ;)
that if their life be morally honest, by Gods extraordinary mercy, and the
merit of Christ, they may be saved. For (say they) though God in his wisdom
has tied us to the ordinary means, he has not tied himself. Let the
Mistaker here compare their Charity with his. They hope well of honest Pagans:
He rashly damnes the ^est part of Christians.

Again, a believer may be in no visible Church, and yet in a state of
salvation. For first, the ancient Church, whilst she wanted the assistance of
the Civil word, used a very severe discipline, to contain her children in
obedience, and to prevent scandals. Lapsed sinners were not restored to her
peace, nor admitted into the communion of the faithful, but with great
difficulty, and after the sharp penance of many years. But if any were guilty
of crimes, such as Tertullian calls non delicta sed monstra, monstrous
impieties, as Apostasy, Idolatry, Fornication, Murder and the like; Vide
Canones Concilis Eliberitani and Arelatensis. 1. and Albaspin. Obser. lib. 2.
she utterly refused to absolve such persons, even at the last hour of their
life, notwithstanding their repentance. Yet for their comfort, though they
might not have her mercy, she doubted not but that they were capable of Council.
Valent. 1. Canone 3.
Gods; and upon their true contrition might by him be pardoned and saved.
Secondly, the Council. Nicen. Can. 5.
Churches of those happy times so fairly corresponded in their amity and
justice, that whosoever was excommunicated by one, was not received or absolved
by any other. And hence it follows that Potest quis esse in Ecclesia animo
and desiderio, quod sufficit illi ad salutem; non tamen esse corpore sieve
externa communicatione, quae proprie facit hominem esse de Ecclesia visibili
que est in terris. Bell. lib. 3. de Eccl. milit. cap. 6. Respondeo. and cap. 3.
Denique.
external communion even with the truest and noblest Churches is not of
absolute necessity to salvation When one (and so all) visible Churches denied
their peace in that age to some Sinners, yet they denied them not Gods pardon.

Besides that a man may be Saepe sinit diuina prouidentia per nimiu^
turbulentas carnalium hominum seditiones, expelli de congregatione Christiana
etiam bono^ viros. August. de ver. relig. cap. 6. In foro contentioso and
exterion multi sunt Excommunicati quoad Deum, qui non sunt quoad Ecclesiam: and
e contra multi Excommunicats quoad Ecclesiam, qui non sunt quoad Deum, quia
Ecclesia non judicat de occultis. Cosm. Philiarch. de offic. Sacerd. Tom. 1.
lib. 3. c. 4. p. 89. Frequenter fit n qui per Ecclesiam militantem for as
emittitur, intus habetur in Ecclefia triumphante; and contra. Gloss. in Extra.
Joan. 22. Tit. 14. cap. 5. solutum in ^^^li^.
a true visible member of the holy Catholic Church, who is not actually
(otherwise then in vow,) a member of any true visible Church, appears by
these instances. The poor man in the Gospel adhered the more closely to
Christ, when he was cast out of the Synagogue; which was then the only true
Church, the Heathens being excluded, and the Christian Church being not yet
founded. And with whom (of his own rank) could Athanasius communicate in that
general Apostasy of Christendom? when that noble Champion stood single in
defense of divine truth, Vid^ Baron. An. 357. Number. 44.
all his Brethren the other Patriarchs (not He of Rome excepted) having
subscribed to Arrianisme, and cast him out of their communion.

Voluntary and ungrounded separation from the Catholic communion is without
doubt a damnable Schism, yet may it be much mollified or malignified by
circumstances. Tertullian was a man passionately zealous, even to superstition.
It appears in part by his Treatise de Corona militis: where he justifies the
vanity and peevishness of a common soldier, who made scruple to wear on his
head a Crown of Laurel, as if the Christian religion had forbidden it. And
accordingly when the Church thought fit to remit a little of her ancient rigor
in the manner and time of her fasts, in the receiving of penitents after
public satisfaction, in allowing second marriages, and the like: Tertullian
ill expounding this just relaxation to be a mere dissolution of good
discipline, hence took occasion, (being also provoked by some claumnies and
contumelies of the Roman Clergy) to fall off from the Catholics, to the
party of Montanus, great pretenders to mortification; and in that separation
(as it is likely) he died. Yet why may we not hope that God pardoned the
errors of his honest zeal, Nicol. Rigaltius in prefat. Obseruat. ad 9. libros
Tertulliani. Quae Tertulliani dicuntur haereses, eae vix aliud praecipiebat
quam martyria fortiora, jejunia sicciora, castimoniam sanctiorem, nuptias
scilicet vnas aut nullas. In quibus quicquid peccauit, id omne virtutis amore
vehementiore peccasse videatur. Id. mox ibid. Verosimile est Montani dogma
quale extitit primordio quidem sui Christianis austerioribus probabili,
Tertullianum tenuisse: non quale postea, quum sequacium quorundam imposturis
and fraudibus acu Phrygia interpolatum, ab Ecclesiis passim Catholicis despui
caepit.
his greatest fault being an excess of indiscreet piety? And if separation,
such as has been said, from all visible Churches, do not exclude from heaven:
much less does a separation from the Church of Rome work such an exclusion.
Whilst the Church of Rome stood in her purity, her amity and communion was
very much esteemed (and deservedly) by other Churches: yet never esteemed by
any to be of absolute necessity for salvation. Nor did Antiquity believe that a
separation from the Roman communion in some regards, (whether active or
passive,) did induce or implie a disunion with the Catholic Church, or a
rejection from Gods favor and Kingdom. Many proofs here of might be alleged:
but these few which follow may suffice.

When Pope Victor withdrew his communion from the Churches of Asia for their
Easter day, and Pope Stephen from those of Africa, Cappadocia, etc. for
rebaptizing; their censures were much slighted, and their pride and Schism, in
troubling the peace of the Church, much condemned, by Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 23.
z. p. Sec. Lation. Cyprian. Epist. 74. 75.
men of the greatest note for learning and piety in those ages. S. Austin
himself, and with him 217. Bishops of Africa, and their Successors for a
hundred years together, (if their own Bonif. 2. Epist. ad Eulal. Alexandi.
Lindan. Panopl. Eu. lib. 4. cap. 89. in fine. Salmeron. Tom. 12. Tract. 68. Ad
Canon. Sander. de visib. Mon. lib. 7. number. 411.
records be true) were all severed from the Roman communion, for maintaining
the liberties of their Churches, against the pretensions and forgeries of the
Sea of Rome, in the matter of appeals. Yet during that separation, many holy
Souls were sent up unto God by Martyrdom, under the persecution of the
Vandales.

The fifth general Council condemned three Chapters, casually omitted in the
Council of Chalcedon: the Bishop of Rome at length consenting. Many Bishops of
Liguria and Istria mistaking the Councels meaning, imagined the Council of
Chalcedon to be thereby dishonored. Sigon. de Occid. Imper. lib. 20.
Therefore in a full Synod of their own, they renounce the communion of their
own Patriarch of Rome, and erect a new Patriarch at Aquileia; which was; after
translated to Venice, and there (in name at least) continues till this day. And
the Bishops of Ireland on the same occasion (as Baron. Tom. 7. an. 566. number. 21.
Baronius reports,) when they perceived that the Church of Rome did both
receive the condemnation of the three Chapters, and strengthen the fifth Synod
with her consent, they did all jointly depart from that Church, and cleave to
the Bishops of Italy and Africa in that cause. Whereby it appears that they
did not take all the resolutions of the Church of Rome for undoubted oracles;
but when they thought that they had better reason on their sides, they
preferred the judgment and communion of other Churches before it. The most
ancient British and Irish Bishops did so stiffly adhere to the Churches of
Asia in their celebration of Easter, that the Baron. ad an. 604. number. 65. D.
Usher. Treat. of the Relig. of the ancient Irish. Chapter 9. and 10.
Pope did therefore cut them off from his communion: yet they persisted and
neglected his anger, as vain and without danger.

Like Instances might be numberless. By all which it is clear, that, of old,
a total Communion with the Church of Rome (even in her good days) was not
accounted so precious and necessary, as is now pretended. On the contrary, men
generally believed, that Christians might live and dye in the peace of God,
though they were at war with the Pope; and keep the unity of the Church
Catholic, though they fell off or were cut off from that of Rome.

The degrees of communion with particular Churches may be many and different.
The ancient Catechumeni and Penitents by degrees attained the spiritual
favors of the Church, being in some respects within her communion, without it
in others. So in the punishment of sinners, the Church was wont to temper her
censures according to the quality of offenses. Her censure for the most part
was only medicinal, for the sinners benefit to reclaim him from evil; by
suspending him from her society, the comfort of her public prayers and
Sacrament; not denying him her inwar^ communion and Charity. Sometime was a
mortal censure, by Anathema, against malicious and incorrigible wicked nesse.
In the former she intended to purge the sinner, by depriving him (...) while
of her society; in the latter to purge her self, by cutting him off from the
body of Christ. And this Tertullia^ truly calls Apologet. cap. 39.
maximum futuri judic^ praeiudicium, a Sentence which will be verified in the
last judgment, according to that of our Lord: Matt. 18. 18.
Whatsoever yo^ shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven. Whosoever is
thus cursed justly by the Church, shall never have the benediction of God;
unless he make his peace by true and timely repentance.

Particular Churches owe each to other the mutual offices of love and
communion (so far as may be:) but they owe only to the Catholic Mother of
all Christians the duty of obedience. If then any Particular will deny to her
Equals, the acts and union of Charity, because they deny (what they owe not to
her) their subjection and service: this is an insufferable and schismatic
arrogance, whereof the Church of Rome has now for many ages been deeply
guilty. Many other things are said against us: but surely the most capital
Valent. in Th. 2. 2. Tom. 3. disp. 1. qu. 1. punct. 7. in explic. quaest.
Quibus amnibus Omnino vere and Orthodoxe docetur ad Summum Pontificem pertinere
explicationem and editionem Symboli fidei, id est, eorum quae a fid elibus
credi debent. Quae veritas vsque adeo continet summam and caput totius
Christianae Religionis, vt nemo Catholicus esse possit, qui illam non
amplectatur; neque vllus sit Haereticus, qui illam non neget. Id. ibid. punct.
7.. 40. Postremo idipsum. Ab exordio Ecclesiae constat, controuersias omnes de
religione motas, ex D. Petri Cathedra fuisse judicatas: eosquo tandem and solos
communi Ecclesiae judicio, Haereticos esse habitos, qui repugnarint definitioni
ejus Cathedrae.
Heresy and Schism of Greeks, Protestants etc. is, that they refuse to be
commanded and governed by him who will needs be perpetual Dictator at Rome,
and from thence give laws to all the world.

Communion with the Catholic Church may be distinguished and measured
according to those different degrees of union which men may have with Christ;
for upon this union that communion is founded. Christ may be considered either
as a King or Ruler in regard of the whole visible militant Church: or as a
Savior and Head in regard of his mystical body or his true spiritual
members. Among the Kings liege people, that live in outward obedience to his
Laws; some carry in secret, evil and disloyal affections to him others love
and obey him with the heart. So it is with our Lord. All tha^ live within the
pale of the Church, profess to honor him as their Prince and Governor, even
though they deny the power of godliness, by hypocrisy o^ dissolution; others
constantly and unfeignedly serve him in all the duties of holiness. He rules
them all as King, and they are his Subjects: but he is a Savior only to these
latter, who live and dye in hi^ true faith and fear; who are therefore living
members of his mystical body, to whom he communicates, by his Spirit
effectual graces, spiritual motion, and eternal life. This blessed Company
is said in Scripture Col. 2. 19.
to hold the head, and is called Heb. 12. 23.
the Church of the first born who are written in heaven, and Gal. 4. 20.
the Mother of us all. When some of the Ancients speak of the Catholic
Church, Clem. Alexandr. Strom. lib. 7. page 514. edit. Heinsianae. (...). and
iterum in fin. libr. (...). Origin. contr. Cells. lib. 6. p. 318. Geaec.
Haeschel. (...). Isidor. Pelus. lib. 2. Epist. 246. (...). Aug. de Bapt. cont.
Donat. lib. 5. cap. 27. Ecclesiam veram intelligere non audeo nisi in sanctis
and justis. Et sic passim.
many times they understand it in a strict notion; only for this fellowship of
the Saints, as it contains all and only them that have spiritual union and
communion with Christ as their Savior. When Saint Cyprian compares the Church
to Noah's Arc, the paraleil runs most fully and properly on the Church in
this sense. For of the Arc and this Church it is true, whosoever is without is
saved, whosoever is without perishes; neither of which perhaps is truly said
of any visible Church. And thus 1 Pet. 3. 21.
S. Peter seems to apply that similitude, and says the Arc was a type or
representation of the inward Baptism or the Lauer of regeneration, wherein the
sprinkling of Christ's blood purges the conscience and saues the soul.
Communion then with this Church is no less necessary to Salvation, then union
with Christ: nor can he have God for his Father, who has not this Church for
his Mother. Which Sentence S. Cyprian the Author Epist. ad Pompeium.
uses, not of the Church of Rome (as the Mistaker seems to believe,) but where
he vehemently disputes against it. Whosoever either wilfully opposes any
Catholic verity maintained by this Church, (or the Catholic visible
Church) as do Heretics; or peruersly diuides himself from the Catholic
communion, as do Schismatiques: the condition of both these is damnable. The
Scriptures and Fathers cited here by the Mistaker, prove this and no more: and
therefore prove nothing against Protestants, who never denied it.

We deny, that What this imports, see the next. page 58.
Popery is any part of the Catholic Church, or maintains any one Catholic
verity. We deny also, that Protestants are in any degree dislinked from the
Catholic Church, or from the Church of Rome it self, or from any Church or
Christian on earth; so far as they communicate with the Catholic. The
contrary is easily and usually affirmed, but not so easily proved by firm and
conuincing Arguments.

Charity Mistaken. Cap: 6.
2. THis unity is directly broken between Roman Catholics and Protestants,
who are not both professors of this one Religion, or members of this one
Church. For they differ in prince and maine points of faith: in which the
Reformers have departed from the Church. The Protestants are not at unity
among themselves, and therefore much less with Roman Catholics. Their bitter
contentions and speeches one against another, declare them to be of different
Churches and Religions. And hence it follows that R. Catholics and
Protestants are not both saueable in their contrary ways.

Answer, Sect. 3.
THe true difference between the Roman and Reformed Parts of the church.
Protestants have rejected nothing but Popery, that is, corrupt superadditions
to the faith, confessed by learned Romanists to be doubtful and unnecessary
novelties. Errors and Abuses of Rome reformed by us, without Schism. Those
errors damnable; how, and to whom! Of the dissentions of Protestants among
themselves. They differ not in any point fundamental.

The Sea D. Abbot. True ancient Roman Catholic. Chapter 2. p. 81. and Chapter 3.. 3.
p. 111. and p. 113. 114.
Protestants never intended to erect a new Church, but to purge the old; the
Reformation did not change the substance of Religion, but only cleansed it
from corrupt and impure qualities. We preach no new faith, but the same
Catholic faith that ever has been preached. Whatsoever is good and true in
the Roman profession, we approve. We have abandoned nothing but Popery; which
is no branch of Religion, but the shame and stain of it; nor any part of the
Church, but a contagion or plague in it; which dangerously affected the whole
body, though by Gods great mercy, the vital parts kept out the poison. Naaman
was still the same man, before and after he was cured of his ieprosie: but a
man before distempered, after sound and healthy. In the prime grounds or
principles of Christian Religion we have not forsaken the Church of Rome: we
leave her only in her intolerable errors and abuses. She has mingled with
Gods Bread her own sour leaven, and with good milk some drammes of poison.
We have cast out only this poison and leaven; and feed Gods people with the
true bread of life, and the sincere milk of his word. Where the late Popes
wander in bypath, we leave them; that we may more safely walk with the old
good Bishops of Rome, in the old and good way. And in the issue, that which
distinguishes a true Papist from a true Protestant, is no more but this: the
former will needs be a Roman and the latter only a Catholic. The difference
at this day between the Reformed part of the Western Church and the Roman,
consists in certain points which they of Rome hold for important and necessary
articles of the Christian faith; which the Protestants cannot believe or
receive for such. Whereas contrarily, the things which the Protestants believe
on their part, and wherein they Voiez Vray usage des Peers, par Iean Daille Chapter
1.
judge the life and substance of Religion to be comprised, are most, if not all
of them so evidently and indisputably true, that their Adversaries themselves
do avow and receive them as well as they. For they are verities clearly
founded upon Scripture, expressly acknowledged by all Ancient Counsels, and
Doctors of the Catholic Church, summarily delivered in their Symboles or
Creeds, and unanimously received by the most part of Christians that have ever
been in the world. Such are the verities which make up the faith of
Protestants: and which are Semper, vbique, ab omnibus credita. Lirin.
properly Catholic, having carried the consent of all ages and Parts of the
Church universal. And if all other Christians could be content to keep within
these general bounds, Erasm. Epist. ded. ad Arch. Warhamum. Praefat. 2. Tomo
Epift. S. Hieron. speaking of the Apostles Creed, faith, Nunquam suit sincer or
castiorque Christiana fides; quam cum vnoillo eoque breuissiino Symbolo
contentus esset Orbis. Vide eundem in Praefat. ad Hilar. and in Paracles: ad
Lector. ante Edit. N. T. an. 1519. Bafil.
the woeful Schisms and ruptures of Christendom (worthy to be lamented with
tears of blood,) might the more easily be healed: and all the Disciples of
the Prince of peace, blessedly united in an holy link of Faith and Charity, of
Love and Communion.

The piety and wisdom of Antiquity did think fittest to walk in this
latitude, and clearly rested satisfied with the simplicity of such a
Catholic confession. But no bounds of reason could ever limit the unbounded
extravagancies and excesses of the Court of Rome. That body of faith, which the
Ancients thought complete enough, to them seems defective. Therefore they have
adjoined to that old Body many new Articles. And to those twelve, which the
Apostles in their Creed esteemed a sufficient summary of wholesome doctrine,
they have added many more in their new Roman Creed. Such are, for instance,
their Apocryphal Scriptures and unwritten dogmaticall Traditions, their
Transubstantiation and dry Communion, their Purgatory, Invocation of Saints,
Worship of Images, Latin Service, traffic of Indulgences; and shortly all
the other new Doctrines and Decrees canonized in their late Synod of Trent.
These (and the like) very vain imaginations our Mistaker calls the prime and
maine points of Christian Religion. Let him but change Christian Religion (as
his faction has done) into the Roman faith; and he says true, he is not
mistaken. Upon these and the like new Articles is all the contestation between
the Romanists and Protestants: while they are obtruded on the one side as
undoubted verities; and on the other side rejected as humane inventions,
cunningly devised to advance ambition and avarice, without any solid ground or
countenance of Scripture, Reason, or Antiquity.

The most necessary and fundamental truths, which constitute a Church are on
both sides unquestioned: and for that reason Iunius lib. de Eccl. cap. 17.
Falluntur qui Ecclesiam negant, quia Papatus in ea est. D. Rain. These. 5. negat
tantum esse. Catholicam, vel sanum ejus membrum. See the judgment of many other
of our writers, in the Advertisement annexed to the Old Religion, by the
Reverend Bishop of Exeter. The very Anabaptists grant it. Fr. Johnson in his
Christian plea page 123.
learned Protestants yield them the name and substance of a Christian Church,
though extremely August. de Donatistis. Nonideo se putent sanos, quia dicimus
eos habere aliquid sanum. De Bapt. contra Donat. lib. 1. cap. 8.
defiled with horrible errors and corruptions. And if they had fairly
propounded their new opinions to be discussed by the learned, with reservation
of liberty in judgment and conscience, to themselves and others; they had
erred much more tolerably, and much less disturbed the peace of the Church.
But they are far from this modesty and moderation. With insufferable tyranny
the prevailing faction amongst them presses them upon all Christians; as
matters of faith, not only of opinion; not as disputable problemes, but as
necessary truths: having both canonized them in their Council of Trent, with a
curse against all gaine-sayers; and put them in their Creed by Pope Pius the
fourth, who has obliged the whole Clergy of Rome to affirm that Creed by
their subscription and solemn oath; obliging also all Christians to believe it
under pain of damnation.

In the latter ages before the Reformation, though the Court of Rome by cunning
and violence had subdued many noble parts of Christendom under her yoke: yet
the servitude of the Church and her misery was somewhat more supportable;
because these base and pernicious adjections were not yet the public
decisions or tenets of any Church, but only the private conceits of the
domineering faction. Yet still the best learned and Notissimae sunt querelae
Bernardi, Occhami, Marsilis, Clemangis, Alvari, Gersonis, etc. de corrupto
Ecclesiae statu. vide Espenc. in Tit. 1. Digress. ^.
conscientious of Europe called (as loud as they could or durst) for a
Reformation. Rome heard their complaints, and Adrian. 6. PP. Instruct. pro
Franc Cheregato, in Fascic. ror. exper. page 173. Sci^nus in hac sancta sede,
aliquot jam annis, multa abominanda fuisse, abusus in spiritualibus, excessus
in mandatis, and omnia denique in perversum mutata. Nec mi^um si aegritudo a
capite in membra, a summis Pontificibus in alios iuferiores Praelatos
descenderit. Omnes nos, id est, Praelati Ecclesiastici declinavimus vnusquisque
in vias suns, nec fuit iam diu qui faceret-bonum, non fuit vsque ad vnum --
Subiecimus colla summae dignitati ad deformatam eius sponsam Ecclesiam
Catholicam reformandam, etc. Staplet. Relect. Contr. 1. q. 5. Art. 3. Vix vllum
peccatum cogitati potest (sola Haeresi excepta) quo illa Seeds (Romana)
turp^ter maculata non fuerit, maxim ab anno 800. He need not except Haeresy,
into which Biel (In Can. Mass. Lect. 23.) grants it possible the Bishops of
that Sea may fall. And Stella (in Luc. cap. 22.) and Almain (L. 3. D. 24. q.
1.) and Gabr. a Porta, a Jesuit now professor at Bordeaux (in 2. 2. q. 1. a.
10. dub. 1.) cited by Aurelius the Sorhonist, (In octo causas Spongiae
praeambulas -- page 560,) grants if freely that some of them did fall.
confessed them to be just, but resolved to neglect the^. This forced Luther
and his associats to cry out more vehemently; not against the Church but her
corruptions. Yet calmely, and without any thought or design of separation at
the first. When lo the Leo. 10.
Pope answers all their just complaints with unjust and violent censures.
Because Luther and his favorers tell him modestly of his faults, wishing him
to correct foul disorders; He therefore in a rage beats them out of doors,
excommunicates and chases them all out of his Romanc communion. And his
Successors take care to continue the Schism. For yearly each Maundy Thursday
in the Bull called Caenoe Domini, all Heretics are with great solemnity
cursed into hell. By Heretics, they mean all them that are not of the Roman
obedience; and such as cannot believe the vices of Rome to be good manners; or
her new inventions to be Catholic, and (as our Mistaker will say)
fundamental doctrines. Cum carpuntur vitia, and inde scandalum oritur; ipse
sibi scandali causa est; qui fecit quod argui debet, non ille qui arguit. Bern.
ad Hugon. de S. Vict. Ep. 78.
Here is the true cause of this miserable Schism in Christendom, and the
just grievance of all Christians in the world besides their own zelotes.

Rome cast us out before we left her, Non. fugimus sed fugamur. Rex. Iac. in
Epist. Is. Casaubon. ad Perrhon. Cardin. Anathematibus and diris nos
expulerunt; Quod satis superque nos absolvit. Calv. Inst. l. 4. c. 2. 6.
as our late most learned Sovereign truly observed. It is true when the first
Reformers were driven out, they were not unwilling to be gone. And when they
saw the Church of Rome in love with her diseases, so as she would not be
cured: Though Israel transgress, yet let not Judah sin. Hos. 4. 15. vide in
cum loc. S. Hieron.
other Churches (who owed her amity but not obedience) used their just power
and liberty, and reformed themselves: Gerson de Council. generali vnius
obedientiae part. 1. page 222. vlt. edit. Paris. Nolo dicere quin in multis
partibus possit Ecclesia per suas parts reformari, imo hoc necesse esset; and
ad hoc agendum sufficerent concilia provincialia -- But the good man
complains: this was neglected. Heu desolatione desolata est omnis terra! quia
nemo est qui recogitet cord, and omnes quaerunt quae sua sunt. Council. Tolet.
4. can. 3. Si causa fidei est, aut quaelibet alia Ecclesiae communis, generalis
totius Hispaniae and Galliciae Synodus convocetur, Alb. M. in 1. D. 11. A. 9.
vnicuique etiam particulari Ecclesiae licet id quod Catholicum est promulgare.
Rome her self added Filioque to the Creed of a General Council, not only
without the consent of the Greek Church but they vehemently opposing it.
in provincial or National Synods, confirmed by public Authority. Yet with
such a temperament of wisdom and Charity, (especially in the Church of
England, whereof I especially speak) that they left the Church of Rome in
nothing which makes her a Church; in nothing which she holds of Christ, or of
Apostolic tradition; Not in any part of the Catholic faith, or Gods service
such as is acceptable to him; not in a charitable affection to their erring and
seduced brethren of that Church. For whilst they hate and curse us, we love
and pity and pray for them. We return not curses again: our Luc. 6. 28.
Lord has taught us otherwise. All damnatory and capital Censures we leave
to him, Iam. 4. 12
who alone is able to save and destroy.

Only we cannot, we dare not communicate with Rome; either in her public
Leiturgy, which is manifestly polluted with gross superstition; as themselves
in effect confess by their several pretended reformations of it: or in those
corrupt and ungrounded opinions which she has added to the faith of
Catholics. These abuses and errors deface the beauty, and taint the purity of
divine truth: they make up the Popery of Rome, not the Church. In them our
Communion is dissolved: but we have still a true and real Union with that and
all other members of the Church Universal, in Faith and Charity.

The state of the Church under the Roman obedience, and that part which is
Reformed, is very fitly Mr Bedel* ag. Wadsw. cap. 4.
resembled to a field overgrowne all with weeds, thistles, tares, cockle: Some
part whereof is weeded and cleansed, some part remains as it was before; which
makes such a difference to the eye, as if it were not the same corn. But being
better considered it will be found all the difference is from the weeds, which
remain there, and here are taken away. Yet neither here perfectly, nor every
where alike; but according to the industry of our weeders, or convenience of
the work, with care of the safety of the good corn. Those worthy Husbandmen
that in these last 600 years have taken pains in plucking up those pernicious
weeds out of the Lords field, and severing the chafe from his grain, cannot
be rightly said in doing this, either to have brought in another field, or to
have changed the ancient grain. The field is the same, but weeded now,
vnweeded then: the grain the same, but winnowed now, vnwinnowed then. Such
tares are all those Roman additions, which we have rejected: which the best
learned of their own confess in effect, to be 1. doubtful and perplexed
opinions, 2 doctrines unnecessary and foreign to the faith, and 3. novelties
unknown to Antiquity.

1 Doubtful. The Roman Doctors do not fully and absolutely agree in any one
point among themselves, but only in such points wherein they agree with us: In
the other disputed between us, they differ one from another as much almost as
they differ from us. In each Controversy there is not only variety but
contrariety of judgments amongst them; and in conclusion nothing but
perplexity and uncertainty. I appeal for proof of this to the famous Tomes of
Card. Bellarmine; where in the front and stateing of every question, he has
with great diligence noted the contentions and contradictions of his Fellows.

2. They are confessedly Unnecessary and Superfluous. For they confess, that
setting aside all matters controverted, the maine positive truths wherein all
agree, are abundantly sufficient to salvation; and give direction sufficient to
every good Christian both for his knowledge and for his practice; teaching him
what to believe, and how to live so as he may be saved. For Knowledge first, it
is confessed a very small measure of explicit knowledge is of absolute
necessity. Some Apud Greg. de Val. Tom. 3. in Aqu. disp. 1. qu. 2. punct. 4. v.
10. Bergomens. Concordant. Contrad. dub. 419
Schoolmen think it needful to believe only so much of the Creed concerning
Christ, as the Church solemnizeth in her Holidaies, his Incarnation, Passion,
Resurrection, etc. Some require an explicit belief of the whole Apostles
Creed. And some (which go highest) add to that the Nicen, and Athanasian, to
make a complete belieuer. The Jesuit Vbi supr^.
Valentia mislikes this last imposition as too rigorous, and seems most to
incline to the first most moderate opinion. And De verb. Dei. lib. 4. cap. 11.
initio.
Bellarmine is confident, that the Apostles never used to preach openly to the
people other things then the Articles of the Apostles Creed, the ten
commandments and some of the Sacraments: because (says he) these are simply
necessary and profitable for all men: the rest besides, such as that a man may
be saved without them. Thus for matter of belief. Now secondly for matter of
practice, they cannot except against any part of the public service of God in
our Leiturgy. They will grant, I suppose, that God may be worshipped without an
image, nay that the interior and spiritual worship is most acceptable to him:
that a Christian may comfortably and with success call upon God alone, by the
only mediation of Christ, seeing the Sancti caeperunt coli in Ecclesia
Universally, non tam lege aliqua quam consuetudine. Bellarm. de SS. Beat. lib.
1. cap. 8.. vlt.
worship and invocation of Saints was brought into the Church rather by custom
then any precept: that inward repentance and confession of sins to God is of
absolute necessity, not so their auricular Secret confession, abstracting from
the abuses of it, our Church allows and inioynes, in some cases, as very
convenient for the comfort of afflicted consciences.
confession, and penal works of satisfaction: that it is necessary to be
really united to Christ by his spirit and our faith, and very comfortable to
receive both parts of the Eucharist; but no way necessary to eat the flesh of
Christ carnally in the Sacrament, or to want the Sacrament of his blood: that
those prayers must needs be most fruitful and effectual which are done with
understanding and in a known language: that when a man has constantly
endeavored with all his forces to obey God in all the duties of Piety and
Charity, yet it is not amiss for him after all this to confess himself Gods
unprofitable servant; and his Bellar. de Iustif. lib. 5. c. 7.. sit 3.
Propositio-Tutissimum est fiduciam totam in sold Dei misericordia and
benignitate reponere.
safest course not to trust to his own merits, but wholly and solely to cast
himself on the mercy of God in Jesus Christ. So then by the precepts and
conduct of our Religion, a Christian is fully instructed in all necessary
points of faith and manners, and directed how to live religiously, how to die
comfortably: and all this, without any addition of Popery; and all this by the
confession of Papists. Hence it follows, that by their own Confession the
doctrines debated are unnecessary.

3. They are also confessed Novelties. Themselves yield, that for above a
thousand years after Christ, Bellar. de Romans Pont. lib. 4. cap 2.. Secunda
opinio.
the Popes judgment was not esteemed infallible: nor his authority Bellarm. de
Conc. lib. 2. cap. 13.
above that of a general Council; the contrary being decreed in the late
Councels of Constance and Basil, constantly defended by the ancient Sorbon, and
at this day by the Reuision du Concile de Trent. liur. 4.
best learned in the Gailicane Church. Bellar. de Indulg. lib. 2. cap. 17.
That Eugenius the 3. (who began his Papacy 1145.) was the first that granted
Indulgences: and Bellar. de Sanctorum Beat. lib. 1. cap. 8.. Dices plur.
Leo the 3. (who lived 800. years after Christ) the first that ever canonized
any Saint: That not any Greg. de Valent. in Thom. Tom. 4. disp. 6. p 2.. Tertio
prob.
one ancient writer reckons precisely seven Sacraments; the first Bellar. de
Sacarm. lib. 2. cap. 25.
Author that mentions that number being Peter Lombard, and the first Council
that of Florence. That transubstantiation Scotus apud Bellarm. lib. 3. de
Euchar. cap. 23.
was neither named, nor made an Article of faith before the Council of
Laterane. That Antiquity, even till these Lombard. Sent. lib. 4. c. 12. and
Aqu. 3. p. qu 83. art. 1. in corp.
latter times believed the sacrifice in the Eucharist to be no other, but the
image or commemoration of our Saviors sacrifice on the Cross. That in Lindan,
Panopl. lib. 4. cap. 25. Albaspin. Obseru. lib 1. cap. 4.
former ages for 1300. years, the holy Cup was administered to the Lairy. And
divine service celebrated Nic. de Lyra. in 1. ad Cor. cap. 14. and Cassand. in
Liturgicis cap. 28.
for many ages, in a known and vulgar Language, understood by the people. That
Polyd. Virgil. de Invent. lib. 6. cap. 13.
the Fathers generally condemned the worship of Images, for fear of Idolatry;
and Azor. Moral. lib. 8. cap. 26. part. 1.. Respondeo.
allowed, yea exhorted the People with diligence to read the Scriptures. Many
more confessions of this kind might be produced.

If now the Mistaker will suppose his Roman Church and Religion purged from
these and the like confessed excesses and novelties: he shall find in that
which remains little difference of importance, between us.

But by this discourse the Mistaker happily may believe his cause to be
aduantaged, and may reply. If Rome want nothing essential to Religion or to a
Church, how then can the Reformers justify their separation from that Church,
or free themselves from damnable Schism? For surely to separate from the
communion of the Church, without just and necessary cause, is a Schism very
damnable.

All this in effect is formerly answered. Yet to satisfy our Mistaker, (if it
may be) we will here further say somewhat to the point, more plainly and
distinctly.

There neither was, nor can be any just cause to depart from the Church of
Christ; no more then from Christ himself. But to depart from a Particular
Church, and namely from the Church of Rome, in some doctrines and practices,
there might be just and necessary cause; though the Church of Rome wanted
nothing necessary to salvation. I said signanter, in some doctrines and
practices. For there is great difference between a Schism from them, and a
Reformation of our selves: And it is one thing to leave the communion of the
Church of Rome, another to leave communicating with her in her errors.

Whosoever professes himself to forsake the communion of any one member of the
body of Christ, must confess himself consequently to forsake the whole. And
therefore her communion we forsake not, no more then the Body of Christ,
whereof we acknowledge the Church of Rome a member, though corrupted. And this
cleares us from the imputation of Schism, whose property it is, (witness the
August. de Unit. Ecc les. cap. 13. Periisse dicunt de caetero mundo Ecclesiam,
and in part Donati in sola Aphrica^ remansisse. See more of them below.
Donatists and Hieron. aduers. Luciferian. initio Dialogi. Afferebant
Luciferiani vniuersum mundum esse diaboli, and vt jam familiare est eis dicere,
factum de Ecclesia lupanar. Et mox. Vestra Ecclesia (Catholicos alloquens)
Anti-Christi magis Synagoga quam Christi Ecclesia debet nuncupari.
Luciferians,) to cut off from the Body of Christ, and the hope of Salvation,
the Church from which it separates. And if any zelotes amongst us have
proceeded to heavier censures, their zeal may be excused, but their Charity
and wisdom cannot be justified. Unless happily they intended not the Church
but the Court of Rome: which two if any Roman Catholic cannot well
distinguish, let him read the French Doctor Peter Charron, in his third
Verity, Charr. Verit. troisiesme. Chapter 14.. Mais les Schismatiques. Il faut
prudemment distinguer enter l' Eglise Roman and la Court Roman -- Ceste
Court demeure, se couure, and se nourrit dedans ceste Eglise, ainsi que le ver
dedans la pomme, comme aussi est elle nee de sa gresse and de son abondance.
C'est contre la Court Roman, que Saint Bernard en tant de lieux, and autres
Anciens ont cry and escrit.
where he likens the Court of Rome in that Church to a worm in an apple, and
confesses all the maladies and miseries in the one to flow from the other.

But to forsake the errors of that Church, and not to join with her in those
practices which we account erroneous, we are enforced by necessity. Aug. de
^apt. contr. Donat. lib. 1. cap. 4. and 5. Alia causa est little qui in istos
Haereticos imprudenter incurrunt, ipsam esse Christi Ecclesiam existimantes;
alia little qui nouerunt non esse Catholicam.
For though in themselves they be not damnable, to them which believe as they
profess: yet for us to profess (and to auow by oath, as the Church of Rome
injoynes) what we believe not, were without question damnable. And they with
their errors by the grace of God might go to heaven; when we for our hypocrisy
and dissimulation, without repentance, should certainly be condemned to hell.
It is the doctrine of the Roman School, that venial sins to him that
commits them, not of subreption or a sudden motion, but of presumption that
the matter is not of moment, change their kind and become mortal. The like
may be said of their errors. To him who in simplicity of heart believes and
practices them, and withal fears God and works righteousness, to him they
shall prove venial. Such an one shall, by the mercy of God, either be
delivered from them, or saved with them. But he that against faith and
conscience, shall go along with the stream to profess and practice them,
because they are but little ones; his case is dangerous and without repentance
desperate.

We hope and think very well of all those holy and devout souls, which in
former ages lived and died in the Church of Rome. For though they died in many
sinful errors; yet because they did it ignorantly through unbeleefe, Cypr.
Epist. 63. Pam. number. 13. Si quis de antecessoribus nostris, vel ignoranter vel
simpliciter non hoc obseruauit and tenuit, quod nos Dominus facere exemplo and
magisterio suo docuit, potest simplicitau ejus de indulgentia Domini venia
concedi: nobis vero non poterit ignosci, qui nunc a Domino admoniti and
instructi sumus.
not knowing them to be either errors or sins; and repenting in general for
all their unknown trespasses; we doubt not but they obtained pardon of all
their ignorances. For it were an unreasonable incongruity to imagine, that the
God of mercy should not be as ready to pardon errors of understanding, as
wilful impieties. Nay our Charity reaches further, to all those at this day,
who in simplicity of heart believe the Roman Religion and profess it. But we
understand only those, who either have not sufficient means to find the
truth; or else such as after the use of the best means they can have, all
things considered, find not sufficient motives to convince their conscience
that they are in error, But they that have understanding and means to
discover their error, and neglect to use them; we dare not flatter them with
so easy a censure. And much less them, that dare profess the Religion of the
Church of Rome, when they do not believe it, or only believe it, because some
carnal or worldly respect does blind or misleade their understanding.

Wherefore, to that demand of our Romanists, If we believe their Religion to be
a safe way to heaven, why do we not follow it? We answer, we believe it safe,
that is, by Gods great mercy not damnable to some, such as believe what they
profess: but we believe it not safe, but very dangerous if not certainly
damnable to such as profess it when they believe, (or, if their hearts were
upright and not peruersly obstinate might believe) the contrary. The Iesuires
and Dominicans hold different opinions touching predetermination, and the
immaculate conception of the blessed Virgin: Yet so, that the Jesuit holds the
Dominicans way safe, that is his error not damnable, and the Dominicans hold
the same of the Jesuits. Yet neither of them with good consequence can press
the other to believe his opinion, because by his own confession it is no
damnable error. For as the Dominicans might urge the Jesuits after this
manner, so the Jesuits might return it upon the Dominicans: and so the
Argument being common to both, either it must conclude for both, (and so both
parts of a contradiction must be true;) or else, (which is most certain and
evident,) it concludes for neither. And if for neither of them against the
other, then by the like reason it is vain for Papists to use it against
Protestants. All false opinions are not damnable errors, to them that believe
them: yet may they be so manifestly false, that there can be no wisdom in
believing them. If one should believe, that twice two were not four, all would
confess he held no damnable error: But if the same man should think all men
bound in conscience to be of his opinion, and urge them (as the Romanists do
us) that, by their own confession there were no danger in his way, and
therefore in wisdom they were to follow it; who would not laugh at his
ridiculous folly? So if they have no better ground of their belief, then their
Adversaries charitable judgment of their errors, they will be so far from
conuincing their Adversaries of lack of wisdom, that themselves cannot
escape the imputation of folly.

By all this it is evident, that although we confess the Church of Rome to be
(in some sense) a true Church, and her errors to some men not damnable: yet
for us who are convinced in conscience, that she erres in many things; a
necessity lies upon us, even under pain of damnation, to forsake her in those
errors. Which is not so much a forsaking of her, as a purging of our selves.
To cleanse some part of the Church from vile abuses, is not to go out of the
Church. If a Monastery should reform it self, and reduce into practice
ancient good discipline, when others would not; in this case, could it with
reason be charged with Schism from others, or with Apostasy from its rule and
order. Or as in a Society of men universally infected with some disease, they
that should free themselves from the common disease, could not be therefore
said to separate from the Society: So neither can the Reformed Churches
(especially ours of England) be truly accused for making a Schism from the
Church, seeing all they did, was to reform themselves; yet with resolution, to
continue in communion (as much as in them lay,) even with those parts of the
Church, that would not do so. Indeed if they of Rome could first make it
appear by any sound proof, either that the Church was pure and needed no
Reformation; or that it is all one to leave the communion of the Church, and to
cease communicating with some Churches in their errors; or lastly, that it is
all one to forsake the Church of Rome and to forsake the obedience to that
Church as it is now required; then the crime of Schism might with some color
be laid to our charge. But all these are groundless assumptions, talked of
very freely and commonly, but such as never will be proved by any one Argument
of validity.

In sum, we can never be joined with Rome, in such corruptions as make her
Popish: But we were never disjoined from her in those maine essential
truths, which give her the name and effence of a Church. Whereof if the
Mistaker doubt, he may be better informed by some late Roman Catholic
writers, of milder judgment and temper: One of Examen pacifique de la doctrine
des Huguenots. a Caen. 1590.
France, who has purposely in a large Treatise proved (as He believes,) the
Hugonots and Catholics of that Kingdom to be all of the same Church and
Religion, because of the truths agreed upon by both. And another of our own
Syllabus aliquot Synodorum, Colloquiorum, Doctorum pro pace Ecclesie. Aureliae.
1628.
Country, (as it is said,) who has lately published a large Catalogue of
learned Authors, both Papists and Protestants, who are all of the same mind.

But he is persuaded, it seems, that Protestants among themselves are not of
the same Church and Religion. For he says, their differences are many and
material: and Luther with his followers, Schlusselburgius, Grawerus, Hunnius,
and their like, do rigorously curse and condemn the Zuinglians and
Caluinists. And some of their harsh censures to this purpose he transcribes out
of Brierly; who, with a curious, and (I doubt) a malicious diligence, has
raked up their intemperate speeches.

For answer: first, the Protestants, especially we of the Church of England,
acknowledge not any factious names of Lutherans, Zuinglians, or Caluinists;
with which we are injuriously nicknamed by our Adversaries, as of old good
Orthodox Christians were called Phot. cod. 280. in Excerptis Eulogi^ ad fin.
libri.
Cornelians, and Act. Conciliab. Ephesians. in Epist. legate. Schismat. ad suos in
Epheso. page 287. edit. Bin. 1618.
Cyrillians, by the seditious followers of Nouatus, and Nestorius. With
Pacianus we profess, Christian is our name, and Catholic our Surname. We
esteem of Luther, Zuinglius, and Calvin, as worthy men: but we esteem them
not worthy to be Lords or Authors of our Faith, or to lead our understandings
captive. Both themselves were far from affecting such divine honor; and we
far from bestowing it. We remember who said of Christ, Hear Him, not hear
them: and therefore though these men's reasons may gain our assent, their
Testimony is at the best but probable. We believe not what they say, but what
they prove. Much less can we endure, being once baptized into the name of
Christ, to be marked with the name of any man, as with a note of our servitude.
Gregory Nyssen* contr. Apollinar. (...).
Nyssen makes a sore complaint of his times; The great and venerable name of
CHRISTIAN (says he) is neglected; men profanely divide themselves into humane
appellations. And he laments the miserable ambition of many Sectaries, who
surname themselves from their grand Seducers. His Brother Basil. in Ps. 48.
S. Basil gives instance in the Marcionites and Valentinians, Optar. lib. 3.
Optatus in the Donatists. So might we in them that call themselves
Franciscanes, Dominicanes, Thomists, Scotists, Jesuits, etc. To all these we
say with Epiphan. haer. 70. in fin. (...).
Epiphanius, The holy Spouse of Christ bears only her Husbands name. And for
us, as the same Idem. haer. 42.
Epiphanius and Nazianz. orat. 31. in fin.
Nazianzene speak, Though we reverence S. Peter and S. Paul, yet we are
neither Petrians nor Paulians, but Christians. Our reason is that which we read
in Lact. lib. 4. cap. 30. Christiani esse desierunt, qui Christi nomine omisso,
humana and externa vocabula induerunt.
Lactantius; They are no Christians, who seek after foreign titles. And
therefore we disclaim the name of Caluinists: we owe no service, we have no
dependence upon Calvin or any other man, as Doctor or Master of our Faith. We
owe him, and the rest of the first Reformers many thanks for their painful
labors, which shall remain of honorable account in all posterity. We cannot
bless God sufficiently for such Instruments of his glory. Yet we do not
idolize their Persons, or adore their dictates and opinions, as if they were
divine Oracles, as the Romish zelotes do with their Pope. This were not to
shake of our old servitude, but to exchange it; and for one infallible Pope to
set up many. Thanks be to God, among the many Idols which we have cast off,
this Idol of humane authority is one; which has robbed God of much glory.
That Doctor, who has the command of our conscience, has his chair in heaven.
We take up no opinions upon the credit of any of our Teachers, whom we censure
as well as follow, and freely dissent from their judgment or approve it, when
we have weighed it with reason. We love and honor them as our Friends; yet
so, that we honor Truth, and love it above all Arist. Eth. 1. (...).
Friendship.

Wherefore the jarres and divisions between the Lutherans and Caluinists do
little concern the Church of England, which follows none but Christ. Yet to
speak somewhat in favor of them and of the truth: See D. Field of the Chapter l.
3. cap. 42. the Append. page 819. and seqq. vlt. edit.
their dissensions are neither many nor so material, as to shake or touch the
foundation; easily reconcilable, if men of any moderation had them in
handling. The bitter speeches of Luther none can excuse: and much less the
virulent Pamphlets and Proscriptions of some of his Disciples, who in a
preposterous imitation of his zeal are little less then furious. But the
consequence of opinions must not be measured by the passions or outrages of
opinionate men. Two Brothers in their choler may renounce each other, and
disclaim their amity; yet that heat cannot dissolve their inward and
essential relation. There are some doubts and questions (says August. de
pecc. Orig. contr. Pelag. and Caelest. cap. 23. Sunt quaestiones, in quibus
salua fide qua Christiani sumus etc. Vide eum contr. Julian. Pelag. lib. 1.
cap. 2. and Enchirid. cap. 59.
S. Austine) wherein, without any damage to that Faith whereby we are
Christians, a man may be ignorant, or suspend his opinion, or conjecture
amiss, through humane frailty. In such, what wonder if learned men vary in
their judgments; especially seeing the best of men are here below but men at
the best, obnoxious to numberless passions and infirmities; and (as the same
Aug. de Ciu. D. lib. 15. cap. 5. Proficientes, nondumque Perfecti inter se
pugnare possent.
S. Austine says) Not perfect, but proficient If Charity might still moderate
in disputations of this nature, if truth were ever aimed at more then victory,
if men contended for their opinions in a fair and manly fashion, that is, (as
Orat. 3. de Pace. p. 220. edit. Paris (...)
S. Gregory Nazianzen advises) with reasons without revilings; then might they
be an exercise of great use and fruit for the discovery of truth. But this
temper of wisdom and charity is rarely to be found: it has been the
miserable calamity of the Church in all ages, that the pride and confidence of
Some, either too to learned in their own opinion, or too to ignorant in other
men's, has caused these debates to degenerate into unworthy and scandalous
contentions.

The contentions of Catholics in the ancient Church, upon very trifling
occasions, were so very bitter and intemperate; that they were with scorn
objected by Cells. apud. Orig. lib. 3. Eusebius. de vit. Constable. lib. 2. cap. 60.
Chrysostom. in 1. ad Gal.
Pagans, and derided in their open Theaters; much Cypr. Epist. 8. Basil. Ascet.
lib. de Iudic. Dei. Nazianz. Orat. 1. 14. Pelus. l. 4. ep. 55. Vide Baron. an.
400. n. 51.
lamented by men of modesty; though excused Pelus. ib. and Themist. apud Socr.
l. 4. c. 27.
by some as well as they could. Many times the ground of a violent quarrel was
not real but imaginary, upon a mere mistake of one another meaning.
Chrysostom and Epiphanius agreed against the errors of Origin: but so
passionately contended about the condemnation of his writings, Sozom. Lib. 8.
c. 15. Phot. cod. 96.
that they proceeded to mutual imprecations one against the other: and God
heard the rash desires of them both, the former dying out of his Bishopric,
and the other out of his Country. In like manner, Cyrill of Alexandria
anathematized Theodoret, as favoring the Nestorian Heresy: yet quickly after
Council. Caleed. act. ^.
in the Council of Cbalcedon, upon examination of the cause, Theodoret was
absolved and declared Orthodox. Nazianz. orat. 21. in laud. Athan. Hieron.
epist. ad Damas. numero 57. Tom. 3.
The Churches of the East and West on a vain suspicion charged each other with
Heresy; and had been schismatically divided, if Athanasius had not cleared the
seeming difficulty. The Orientalls professing to believe three Hypostases in
the glorious Trinity, would not admit three Persons, and were therefore thought
to be Arrians: On the contrary the Western believing three Persons, could not
be induced to confess three Hypostases, and therevpo^ were taken to be
Sabellians. Here was a great jealousy, grounded upon a great error; which
Athanasius easily discovered, and restored again their good amity, and
intelligence: showing, that they differed not in judgment, all meaning the
same thing, and that Hypostasis on the one side, was the very same in effect
with Person on the other.

This last example much resembles the divisions of the Lutherans and
Calvinists, as they are called: who (especially, the moderate of either side,)
differ rather informs and phrases of speech, See D. Field Append. to the 5.
book page 819. and 869.
then in substance of doctrine. The first and maine Controversy between them
is that about Consubstantiation, which after occasioned that other of Vbiquity.
(I omit the questions of Predestination, being no less debated in the Roman
Schools then in the Reformed.) In both these Controversies, the maine truth on
both sides is out of Controversy; that Christ is really and truly exhibited to
each faithful communicant, and that in his whole Person, he is every where.
The doubt is only in the manner, how he is in the Symboles and how in heaven
and earth. Which being no part of faith, but a curious nicity inscrutable to
the wit of man; we should all here believe, where we cannot understand, and
not fall a quarrelling about that which we cannot conceive. Just. M. in Expos.
Fid. (...).
How or why are sawey questions in divine mysteries.

Their other differences in ceremony or discipline, are diversities without
discord. Vide Tertul. de Virg. vel. cap. 1. Firmil. apud Cypr. epist. 75.
August. Epist. 86. Socrat. hist. lib. 5. cap. 21. etc.
All wise men in the world have ever thought, that in such things each several
Church is left to her own judgment and liberty; so as she keep her self to
the general Apostolic rules of Order and Edification, and to the general
judgment and practice of the Church universal. Though the body of Religion in
diverse Churches and Countries be clothed in diverse suits and fashions, yet
for substance it may be one in all.

In all these Contestations, (as it commonly falls out, blessed be God!) they
that are for truth, have ever been for Charity and mutual toleration: as
appears by their Vide Iunij and Parei scripta Irenica.
published writings, all tending to pacification. Luther himself, though of a
rough and vehement spirit, yet before his death, being tempered by mild
Melancthon, (that honor of Germany) did Admon. Neustad. de libro Concord. cap.
6. page 236.
much relent and remit of his rigor against Zuinglius, and began to approve the
good counsels of peace. And among the Lutherans, all are not of the same
intractable disposition. As they in Polonia for instance; Vide Corpus Confess.
and ibi Poloniae Consensum.
where the followers of Luther and Calvin have long lived together, in a fair
and brotherly concord and communion; notwithstanding their several opinions,
which they still retain.

Since then our discords are of no higher degree, we say as Prudent. (...).
vlt. -- concordia laesa est, Sed defensa fide: quin and concordia sospes
Germanam comitata Fidem, sua vulnera ridet.
Prudentius, a Christian Poet, of the unity of his times. It has been a
little violated, but is defended by Faith her sister: in whose company being
safely come off, she laugheth at her wounds, as being easily curable.

Charity mistaken. Cap. 6.
FVrthermore, the Protestants are properly Heretics at least, if not
Insidells. Heretics, because they reject and disobey the indgement of the
Catholic Church. For it is not the matter or quality of the doctrine. But the
pride of the man (who prefers his own opinions before the decrees of the
Church,) that properly makes the Horetique. The Heretics, recounted by St
Austine, Epiphanius and Philastrius in their Catalogues, were condemned, not so
much for their errors, (which were many of them not very material,) as for
their contempt of the Church. S. Cyprian and the Donatists differed not in the
matter of their error; but the obstinary of the Donatists, and their
disobediencs to the Church made them to be condemned for Heretics, when St
Cyprian was absolved, because the Church in his time had not declared her
self. And in like manner the Novatians were condemned on the same grounds.

Answer Sect. 4.
OF the nature of Heresy. The Church may declare and convince an Heresy, but
cannot make any Doctrine Heretical properly, unless it be such in the matter
of it. The words Heresy, and Heretic very ambiguous. How commonly used by the
Ancients. Of their Catalogues of Heretics. St Cyptian (though erring in the
point of Rebaptization,) justly absolved from Sohisme and Heresy. The Donatists
guilty of both. And the Novatians of Schism.

But though we do agree in the substance of Religion with all true Christian
Catholics in the world; yet all this cannot win us the Charitable opinion
of our Mistaker. For notwithstanding all this, he believes us to be not only
Heretics, but no better in effect then Infidells. And he gives his reason,
which he says, strikes at the root and unanswerably convinces. His custom is
to give us only words: it is well that he offers us reason, which we shall be
ever willing to hear and consider of. His reason then. First we are
Heretics, because in many opinions we disobey the Church; and Heresy
properly consists not in the matter or quality of the false doctrine believed,
but in the pride of him that maintains it in contempt of the Church. Our faith
then is defective, because we believe not all that is commanded by the
Church. But 2. which is worse, we have no true faith at all; no, not of those
things which we truly believe. For though we firmly assent to many truths, yet
we do not believe them upon the only true and infallible motive, or upon the
right ground, which is the revelation of God, and the proposition of his
Catholic Church. The faith which relies not on this ground is not any true
faith, but only an humane opinion or persuasion.

Answ. If we did not dissent in some opinions from the present Roman Church,
we could not agree with the Church truly Catholic. But the Mistaker after
his fashion, is ever begging what will never be granted or proved, that his
Roman Church is all one with the Catholic. What Optatus said of the Donatists
(who arrogated to themselves alone Optat. lib. 3.
the name and privileges of the Church, exclusiuely to all others,) the same
say we of the Popes part; Vestra pars quasi Ecclesia est, sed Catholica non
est; Their Church is truly so called in some sort, being a corrupt member of
the Catholic, but the Catholic Church it is not.

The Catholic Church is careful to ground all her declarations in matters of
faith upon the divine authority of Gods written word. And therefore whosoever
wilfully opposes a judgment so well grounded, is justly esteemed an
Heretic: not properly, because he disobeyes the Church; but because he
yields not to Scripture sufficiently 'propounded or cleared unto him. So says
August. de Genesis ad. lit. lib. 7. cap. 9. Omnes. Haeretici Scripturas Catholicas
legunt, nec ob aliud sunt Haeretioi, nisi quod eas non recte intelligentes,
suas falsas opiniones contra earum veritatem pervicaciter asserunt. Ide^ habet
Epist. 222.
St Austin, and Hier. in Galat. cap. 5. Haereticus est quicunque aliter
Scripturam intelligit, qua^ sensus Spiritus S flagitat, licet de Ecclesia non
recesserit.
St Hierome expressly. The best Divinae Scripturae integra and firma regula
verita it is. Did. 37. c. Relatum. Bellarm. de verb. Dei lib. 1. c. 2. Sacra
Scriptura regula credendi certissima tutissim^que est. Gers. de exam. doctrine.
par. 2. consid. 1. Oper. part. 1. page 541. Scriptura nobis tradita est tanquam
regula sufficiens and infallibilis pro regimine totius Ecclesiastici corporis
-- vsque in finem. -- cui se non conformans alia doctrina vel abjicienda est vt
haereticalis, vel vt suspecta and impertinens ad religionem prorsus est habenda.
learned in the Church of Rome confess, that the Scripture was given as a
sufficient and infallible rule for the government of the whole Church, so as
any doctrine not conformable thereunto must either be rejected as heretical,
or suspected as impertinent to religion. It is confessed also that the Church
Almain. in 3. D. 25. q. 1. Resolutio Occham est, quod nec tota Ecclesia, nec
concilium generale, nec summus Pontifex potest facere Articulum quod non fuit
Articulus. Sed in dubijs propositionibus potest Ecclesia determinare an sint
Catholicae -- -Tamen sic determinando, non facit quod sint Catholicae quum
prius essent ante Ecclesiae determinationem. Sic etiam Turrecremata, Adrianus
apud Can. lib. 12. cap. 8. S^tus in 1. D. 11. q. 1. in fine. In nova Haeresi
veritas prius erat de side, etsi non ita declarata. Bonavent. in 1. D. 11. A.
r. q. 1. ad fin. Haere^^^ multa, quae erant implicita fidej nostrae,
compulerunt explicare.
has no power to make any Article of faith, or to add any thing to the
doctrine of faith. Her duty is only to B^larm. lib. 2. de Council. cap. 12.
Concilia quum definiunt, non faciunti liquid esse in fallibilis veritatis, sed
declarant. Gers. de err. circ. praec^^ Non occides. part. oper. 1. page 406.
vlt. edit. Papa vel generale Comlium determinando de fide, nihil faciunt aliud
nisi declarare talia esse fide. Canus lib. 2. cap. 7. Ingenue fatemur non esse
nunc novas rev^^tiones expectandas, five a summo Pontifice, five a Concilio,
five a Ecclesia tota. Vide Th. 2. 2. q. 1. A. 10. ad 1.
explain and declare the truth according to Scripture, and from thence to draw
all her conclusions. Aquin. 2. 2. q. 1. A. ^. in corp.
For the Articles of the faith cannot increase in substance, b^^ only in
explication. Hence it follows, that all necessary or fundamental truth is
contained in Scripture, which is the rule according to which the Church is to
judge of (...). Arist. lib. 1 de Anim.
truth and error. Her declaration is only to fetch out that truth which is in
the Scripture: her exposition of the Text must not be an addition to it. It is
a faulty and erroneous declaration, which in stead of declaring gives another
See the learned Answer to Fishers Relation of his 3. Confer. page 9.
and a contrary sense. Neither is any doctrine necessary or true, because the
Church declares it such, but because it is such in it self by warrant of
Scripture. If the Church walk not by this rule, Mag. 1. D. 11. lit. C. Qui
pretergreditur fidei regulam, non incedit in via, sed recedit a via. Quod
volumus Sanctum est. Ticonius Donatista apud S. Aug. cont. Epist. Parmen. lib.
2. c. 13.
she is out of her way. And in this byway never any Church has wandered so
far, as the Church of Rome, which has defined or declared very many things
to be fundamental Truths or Heresies, which are nothing less: following
herein no other rule but her own fantasy.

As in Truth, so in Heresy, the Church may declare what is Heresy, she may
convince and censure it: but still according to her Rule, the Scripture.
Neither is any doctrine Heretical, because it opposes the definition of the
Alph. a Castro. lib. 1. adv. Haeres, cap. 8. Ecclesia s^^ definitione non facit
talem assertionem esse Haeresim, cum e^amsi ipsa non definivisset, esset
Haeresis: Sed id efficit Ecclesia, vt nobis per suam Censuram pate at illud
esse Haeresim -- ibid. Ideo dicitur veritas aliqua Catholica, quia a Deo in
Scripturis revelata est, and e contra.
Church, but because it opposes that Scripture, on which the Church grounds her
definition. The doctrines of Arrius, Macedo^ius, Nestorius, Eutyches were in
themselves Heretical even before they were solemnly condemned in the 4
general Counsels.

But, says the Mistaker, the Heresier mentioned by Philastrius, Epiphanius and
S. Austin in their Catalogues, were many of them errors in themselves of no
great moment or importance: yet they were al^ esteemed Heresies, because they
were hel^ in disobedience to the Church. So likewise the error of
rebaptization was for the matter of it the very same in S. Cyprian, and in the
Donatists: yet the Donatists were accounted Heretics for despising the
judgment of the Catholic Church, and S. Cyprian not so, because he
conserved himself within the amity and communion of the Church. Therefore
properly and formally he is an Heretic that contradicts the definitions of
the Church.

Answ. In all ages, almost, the imputation of Heresy has been too too
frequent and familiar among Christians; and in this age above all, wherein
Christendom is so miserably broken into numberless fragments and pieces. It
is a thing purely impossible for the learned man in the World, exactly to
recount all the several Sects and subdivisions of Christians, or such as
pretend to Christianity. And every Sect has some Zelotes, so passionately in
love with their own Opinions, that they condemn all others, differing from
them, to be Heretical. So there lives not a Christian on earth, who in the
judgment of many others is not an Heretic. I speak not this in favor of
any Heretic or Heresy justly so called, ancient or new. But surely as this
imputation is a grievous crime where it is true: so it is no less grievous a
calumny if it be ungrounded. And it is good counsel, which Cont. Haeres. lib.
3. and lib. 1. cap. 7. Qui tam leviter de Haeresi pronunciant, saepe fit vt sua
ipsorum feriantur sagitta, incidantque in eam foveam, quam alijs parabant.
Alphonsus a Castro gives, let them consider who pronounce so easily of Heresy,
how easy it is for themselves to err. Very good advise, though Alphensus
himself makes very little use of it, and forgets it too often.

As all Truth is not of equal moment or necessity, so al errors are not, of
the same malignity and danger. Every Heresy is an error; but Aug. de Haeres. in
praef. Non omnis error Haeresis est, quamvis omnis Haeresis errore aliquo, etc.
Jd. alibi Errare postium Haereticus esse nolo. Bellar. lib. 3. de Euchar. cap
8.. Ac primum. Haeresis est, cuius contraria est veritas fidei a Deo revelata.
each error is not Heresy. What Heresy is properly, or what it is that makes an
Heretic, is a thing either merely impossible, or extremely difficult to
define, in the opinion of Quid faciat Haereticum, regulari quadam definitione
comprehendi, sicut ego existimo, aut omnino non potest, aut difficilime potest.
Id. vbi supra.
S^ Austine: who promised and In fine libri ad Quodvultdeum.
intended a treatise purposely of this matter, bu^ his death or other thoughts
prevented him. But it is most evident, that those Bellar. de Script, in
Philastrio. Observandum est multa a Philastrio inter Haereses numerari, quae
vere Haereses non sunt. Dion. Pctau. Animad. in Epiphan. initio, de Inscript.
operis. Haeresis nomen latissime ab Epiphanio vsurpatur, nec ad Theologorum
normam vocabuli istius vsus exigend^^ est.
ancient writers in their Catalogues (and elsewhere) do not use the words
Heresy or Heretic, in their exact o^ proper notion, but in a very large an^
general signification, not distinguishing between Heresy and error.
Whatsoever opinion they conceived to be contrary to the common or approved
opinion of Christians, that they called as Heresy; because it differed from the
received opinion, not because it opposed any formal definition of the Church.
This may appear by many circumstances.

1 St Austin was desired by his Frien^ Quodvultdeus, to set down all Praefat.
lib. de Haer. ad Quodv. Petis exponi, omnia omnin^ quibus a veritate
dissentiunt.
opinions of Heretics differing from truth. Every false opinion is not
properly a^ Heresy, or condemned by a definition of the Church.

2 The same Author says of Haer. 80. Alias ipse commemorat, quae mihi
appelland ae Haereses non videntur.
Philastrius, that he ranked many things in his Catalogue of Heresies, which
in his judgment were not truly so named. Therefore either Philastrius set
down many Heresies, not defined to be such by the Church, or else S. Austin
should be an Heretic, who denied them to be Heresies after the Church had
defined them.

Lastly, he notes that Philastrius and Epiphanius differ in the number of their
Heretics, because they differed in their judgment of Heresy; August. ibid.
proculdubio in ea quaestione vbi disputatur, quid sit Haeresis, non idem
videbatur ambobus, etc.
that seeming an Heresy to the One, which seemed not so to the Other. Himself
differs from them both; professing the reason to be, because it is hard to
agree upon the true nature and definition of Heresy. He was not then of our
Mistakers opinion, that the definition of the Church is that which makes an
Heresy.

The like difference may be observed in the Writers of the Roman Church.
Alph. in Praefat. and lib. 1. cap. 9. Pater. misere errasse Bern. de Lucemburgo
Hereticorum, Catalogum describentem.
Alphonsus a Castro often taxes the miserable errors, as he calls them, of
Guido Perpinianus, Bernardus de Lucemburgo and others in their Catalogues of
Heretics, and in their judgment of Heresy, wherein he thinks them many
times mistaken. And will the Mistaker say, that all the Heresies recounted by
Alphonsus himself, Prateolus, and the like were errors publicly condemned
by the definition of the Church?

It is true, when the Church has declared her self in any matter of Opinions
or of Rites, her Declaration obliges all her Children to peace and external
obedience. Nor is it fit or lawful for any private man to oppose his judgment
to the public. He may offer his contrary opinion to be considered of, so he
do it with evidence (or great probability) of Scripture or reason, and very
modestly, still containing himself within the dutiful respect which he owes.
But if he will factiously advance his own conceits, and despise the Church so
far as to cast off her communion: he may be justly branded and condemned for
a Schismatique, yea and an Heretic also in some degree, and in foro
exteriori; though his opinion were true, and much more if it be false. And
this was it that made one great difference between Saint Cyprian and the
Donatists, though they agreed in the er^or of Rebaptization. For the Donatists
had other errors more gross and dangerous, and even amounting to Heresy in
the matter of them, where of Sr Cyprian was no way guilty as shall appear.

St Cyprian was of opinion that all Heretics returning to the Catholic
Church ought to be rebaptized. Steven at the same time Bishop of Rome held the
direct contrary, that no Heretics should be rebaptized. Both of them erred,
and both said true, in some sense. The ambiguity of the word Heretic deceived
them. For the Catholic Church, afterward in the Council of Nice declaring
her self in that Controversy, distinguished of Heretics, and decreed that
Council. Nic. Can. 8. Cathari.
Some should not be rebaptized, but received with a simple benediction; and
that Paulianistae s^u Samosateniani ibid. Can. 19. and Council. 6. in Trull.
Can. 95.
Others should be. But the disposition and carriage of Steven and Cyprian in
this business was very different, and very remarkable.

Steven in a violent heat Eusch. Hist. lib. 7. cap. 4.
excommunicates all the Bishops of Cilicia, Cappadocia, Galatia, etc. because
they were not of his mind. When they sent some Bishops of their Company to him
fairly to treat of the matter, He Vide Firmiliani Epist. inter Epist.
Cypriani 75. ad fin.
forbids them to be received into any house or harbor. He uses Cyprian with
terms of reproach, calls him Ibid.
false Christ, false Apostle, deceitful Worker. With Steven agreed his Italian
Bishops.

On the other side, notwithstanding this Declaration of the Bishop and Church
of Rome in this Controversy, S. Cyprian Bellar. lib. 2. de Council. cap. 5.
Constat Cornelium Papam cum nationali Concilio omnium Episcoporum Italiae
statuisse non debere Haereticos rebaptizari, and eandem sententiam postea
approbasse ^^am Stephanum Papam, and jussisse vt Haeretici non rebaptizarentur.
Et simu constat Cyprianum contrarium sensisse and mordicus defendisse; id quod
etiam ipse fatetur in Epist. ad Pompeium, vbi arguit Stephanum Pa^am erroris.
Et tamen Cyprianus semper est habitus in numero Catholicorum.
persisted in his opinion; and with him 80. Bishops of Africa, Synodically
assembled at Carthage, besides those other of the East. For in that age men did
not believe, that the Roman Church was infallible, or that it was Heresy to
dissent from her judgment, or not to submit to her authority. But the
behavior of Cyprian was full of sweetness and modesty. He delivers his own
firm opinion; but withal Cypr. Epist. 72. ad Stephan. Qua in re, nos vim
nemini facimus, nec legom damus; cum habeat in Ecclesiae administratione
voluntatis suae arbitrium liberum vnusquisque Praepositus. Id. Epist. 73. ad
Iubaianum in fine. Haec breuiter pro nostra mediocritate rescripsimus, nemini
praescribentes aut praeiudicantes, quo minus quisque Episcoporum, quod putet,
faciat, habens arbitrij sui liberam potestatem. Nos, quantum in nobis est, cum
Collegis and Coepiscopis nostris non contendimus, cum quibus diuinam concordiam
and Dominicam pacem tenemus. Et mox. Seruatur a nobis patienter ac firmiter
Charitas animi, Collegii honor, vinculum fidei, and concordia Sacerdotij. Id.
in Praefat. Council. Carthag. Superest vt de hac re Singuli, quid sentiamus,
proferamus: Neminem judicantes aut a jure communio nis aliquem, si diuersum
senserit, amouentes. Neque enim quisquam nostrum tyrannico terrore ad
obsequendi necessitatem Collegas suos adigit.
professes, that he meant not to prescribe or give laws to any, that every
Bishop might freely follow his own judgment, that he would not contend with
any of his Colleagues about this matter, so far as to break divine concord
and the peace of our Lord; that he was far from judging or censuring any of
his Brethren, or cutting off from his communion any that were of a different
mind: that in such cases none ought to constrain his Colleagues by tyrannical
terror (therein glancing at the procedures of Steven,) to a necessity of
believing or following what he thinks meet. This modesty and Charity is very
often and very deservedly commended by Aug. de Bapt. cont. Donat. lib. 1. cap.
18. and lib. 2. cap. 1. and 2. and 3. and 4. and 10. lib. 3. cap. 1. and 3.
lib. 4. cap. 10. lib. 5. cap. 17. lib. 6. cap. 6. and Epist. 48. and passim.
S. Austin: who upon this ground frees that holy Martyr from Schism, (and much
more from that Heresy) whereof the Donatists after him were deeply guilty.

For the Donatists pursued and maintained their error with extreme pride,
faction, and fury. They dissented without reason not only from the Roman or
African Particular Churches, but from the great and grave Council of Nice,
representing the whole Catholic Church. They separated from the Communion of
all other Christians, Aug. Epist. 172. So^etis nobis objicere, non solum in
nostris crimina non probata, sed potius in vestris probata. Id. lib. 2. de
Bapt. cont. Donatist. c. 6. vestros fuisse Traditores monifestissima reru^
gesta testantur. Optatus l. 1. Omnia quae in Traditores and Schisinaticos dici
potuerunt, Parmeniane, ^^stra sunt. Vide Gesta purgationis Faelicis.
charging them with false crimes whereof themselves were guilty. They vanted
that Optat. lib. 2. Ecclesia vna est. Eam tu, frater Parmeniane, apud vos solos
esse dixisti. Et post. Nitimini suadere hominibus apud vos solos esse
Ecclesiam. Vide Aug. Epist. 50. and 161.
Christ had no Church on earth but in the part of Donatus, and that Salvation
could not be found but in their Assemblies. They esteemed Catholics to be no
better then Optat. lib. 3. Verbaseductionis vestrae sunt, Attendite post vos,
Redimite animas vestras. Vestrum est dicere hominibus Fidelibus and Clericis,
Estote Christiani. Et vnicuique dicere, Cai Sei, aut Caia Seia, adhuc Paganus
es aut Pagana. Idem lib. 4. Vester sermo est, quem ad pacis filios habetis, dum
dicitis, per^istis; attendite pos^^vos, periit anima vestra. Aug. Enarr. in Ps.
32. conc. 2. ad fin. Isti qui dicunt, non estis Fratres nostri, Paganos nos
dicunt. Id. de Bapt. cont. Donat. l. 2. c. 7. Consule animae tuae, ^iunt, esto
Christianus. O improbam rabiem, quum Christiano dicitur, esto Christianus!
Pagans, Optat. lib. 4. Vos odio nos habetis, Fratres vtique vestros. Auditorum
animis infunditis odia, inimicitias docendo suadetis docentes ne Aue dicant
cuiquam nostrum; tollunt commune inter homines salutationis officium.
hated them, disdained to salute them, Optat. lib. 6. Rasistis Altaria,
fregistis Calices, lauistis Pallas, parietes and inclusa spatia salsa aqua
spargi praecepistis. Ad Aggaeum Prophetam video vos velle confugere, vbi
scriptum est, Quae tetigerit pollutus, polluta sunt.
washed their Church-wals and their vestiments, broke their Chalices, scraped
their Altars, pretending that all were polluted by the very touch of
Catholics. (Is not much of this Donatisme to be found at this day, in some
that pretend themselves to be the only Catholics? They may do well to look
to it.)

For this unworthy contempt of the Catholic Church, those wretches were
worthily accounted Schismatiques in the highest degree: And Heretics also for
denying the Church to be Catholic, by their restraining of it to a corner of
Africa. But because the most of them erred out of a well meant zeal, being
seduced by their Guides, and so Haeretic is credentes rather then Haeretici,
(according to S. Austins distinction. De vtilitat. Cred. cap. 1.) and rather
Optat. lib. 7. Vos jamdudum in communionem nostram voluimus recipere, quia vos
illo tempore non peccastis, sed Principes vestri.
continuing in the Schism, then Authors of it; and because the worst of them
in the midst of their Schism and Heresy retained the Optat. l. 5. Et apud
vos and apud nos vna est Ecclesiastica conuersatio, communes lectiones, eadem
fides, ipsa fidei Sacramenta, eadem mysteria. Et lib. 1. Ideo post vos non
emendamus, quia and apud nos and apud vos, vnum est Sacramentum Aug. Epist.
164. Sacramenta, quae non mutantur, approbantur a nobis. Et Id. Epist. 48. In
multis estis nobiscum, in Baptismo, in Symbolo, in caeteris Dominicis
Sacramentis. Id. contr. Epist. Parmen. lib. 2. cap. 13. Sicut Baptismus in eis,
sic ordinatio mansit integra, quia in praecisione fuit vitium, non in
Sacramentis, quae, vbicunque sunt, sancta sunt.
substance (for the most important parts,) and Sacraments of our Religion:
Therefore the Catholics much more mildly judged of them then of the followers
of Arrius, Eunomius, or the like, expressly Optat. lib. 1. Been clausisti hortum
Haereticis frater Parmeniane, been subduxisti anulum ijs; vobis vero
Schismaticis, quamuis in Catholica non sitis, haec negari non possunt, quia
nobiscum vera and communia Sacramenta traxisits. Et mox. Quid tibi visum est
haec and vobis voluisse negare, quos Schismaticos esse manife stum est. Et
statim. Volebam vt soli damnarentur Haeretici: quantum in te est and jam vos
ipsos cum eis vna sententia ferire voluisti. August. Epist. 164. Non objicimus
vobis nisi Schismatis crimen, quod etiam haeresin male perseuerando fecistis.
seuering them from such capital Heretics as erred in the prime and most
fundamental Verities, concerning the Deity, the Incarnation of Christ, etc.
They requited all their hatred with good will, acknowledged them to be their
Aug. in Psalm. 32. Conc. 2. ad fin. Velint, nolint, fratres nostn sunt. Vide eum
etiam contr. Donatist. post Collat. cap. vlt. Optat. lib. 1. Quamuis Donatist.
nos odio habent and execrentur, and nolint se fratres nostros dici; tamen nos
recedere a timore Domini non possumus. Sun sine dubio Fratres nostri, quamuis
non boni. Quare nemo miretur, eonos appellare fratres, qui non possunt non esse
fratres. Et mox. Non sint Collegae si nolint; tamen, vt supra diximus, fratres
sunt. Frater igitur meus Parmenianus, and sic passim. Id. lib. 4. initio. Si tu
non vis esse frater, ego esse incipio impius, si de nomine isto tacuero. Estis
enim fratres nostri, and nos vestri. Et statim. Vos nobiscum, id est, cum
fratribus vestris, pacem habere non vultis. Non enim potestis non esse fratres,
quos ijsdem Sacramentorum visceribus vna matter Ecclesia genuit, quos eodem modo
adoptiuos filios Deus pater excepit.
Brethren, Aug. Epist. 166. Concordate nobiscum fratres, diligimus vos; hoc
vobis volumus quod and nobis. Id. Epist. 68. Nos cum magna dilectione seruamus
vestros illaesos: legimus illis loca, quibus ipse error conuincitur, qui
fratres a fratribus separat. Optat. lib. 4. Oramus pro vobis quia volumus: and
vos pro nobis and cum non vultis. Vides, frater Parmeniane, sancta germanitatis
vincula inter nos and vos in totum rumpi non posse.
loved and pitied and prayed for them. Though the peevish Schismatiques did
much abuse this Charity of good Catholics toward them. For hence they took
occasion to argue in favor of their Schism and Heresy: as if their
Adversaries by their own confession did justify it and them: reasoning thus.
Aug. Cont. lit. Petil. lib. 2. cap. 108. Petilianus dixit: Venite ad Ecclesiam
populi, and aufugite Traditores, si perire non vultis. Nam vt facile
cognoscatis, quod cum ipsi sint rei, de fide nostra optime judicant; Egoillorum
infectos baptizo, illi meos recipient baptizatos. Quod omnino non facerent, si
in Baptismo nostro culpas aliquas agnouissent. Videte ergo, quod damus, quam
sit sanctum, quod destruere metuit sacrilegus inimicus. Id. contr. Crescon.
Gram. lib. 1. cap. 21. Intentio tua est, in part Donati hominem potius
baptizari oportere: hanc intentionem hins probare conatus es, quod etiam Nos
esse illic Baptismum non negamus. Id. ibid. lib. 4. cap. 4. Quaeris a me, a quo
to baptizari conueniat, vtrum ab eo potius quem and ego Baptismum habere
confirmo, an ab co quem tuus hoc non habere contendit. Vide eundem, de Bapt.
contr. Donatist. lib. 1. cap. 10. and 11.
Your selves (said they to the Catholics) confess our Baptism and
Sacraments and Faith (for the most part) to be good and available; We deny
yours to be so, and say there is no Church, no Salvation amongst you. Therefore
it is safest for all to join with us. Do not the Romanists at this day in the
very same manner abuse the Charity of Protestants? And is not this directly
that Charm, wherewith they work so powerfully upon the Spirits of simple
people? Our answer is the same which S. Austin opposed to the Ancient Donatists
in the places cited.

By the way: from that favorable judgment and opinion which good Catholics
in that age had of the Donatists, esteeming them to be their Brethren,
notwithstanding their Schism and Heresy, these Corollaries may be probably
deduced.

1. It seems that an Heretical Church (where in some Heresy is publicly
maintained by the Guides and Pastors of it,) is in some kind the Spouse of
Christ, and brings forth August. ^le Bapt. con. Don. l. 1. c. 10. Ecclesia
Catholica etiam in communionibus diuersorum ab vnitate separatis, per hoc quod
suum in cis habet ipsa vtique generat Filios Christo per Baptismum.
Children to God, and Brethren to the Orthodox believers. Especially, if She
baptize her Children in the name of the Trinity; as did the Donatists.

2. It seems, that even in an Heretical Church Salvation may be had; as a
child may be borne in a plaguey house, and may live, though he has a running
botch on his body. In such Churches the very ignorance and simplicity of the
Vulgar is a preservative to them against the poison; more hopes of them then of
the Learned.

3. It seems to some Mr. Hooker lib. 3.. 1. The Morton of the Church. cap.
1.. 4. and cap. 7.. 10.
men of great learning and judgment (but herein I had rather leave the Reader
to his judgment, then interpose mine own,) that all who profess to love and
honor Jesus Christ, (though it be in much weakness and with many errors,
yet) are in the visible Christian Church, and by Catholics to be reputed
Brethren. Or to the same purpose; wheresoever (say they) a company of men do
jointly and publicly profess the substance of Christian Religion, which is,
Faith in Jesus Christ, the Son of God and Savior of the world, with
submission to his doctrine, and obedience to his Commandments: there is a
Church wherein Salvation may be had, notwithstanding any corruption of
judgment or practice; yea although it be of that nature that it may seem to
fight with the very foundation, and so heinous as that in respect thereof the
people stained with this corruption are worthy to be abhorred of all men, and
unworthy to be called the Church of God.

For further illustration and proof of this opinion, these things are said.

That to believe in Jesus Christ the Son of God and Savior of the world with
submission to him, is sufficient to constitute a Church, wherein Salvation may
be had, is warranted, as they think:

1. By Scriptures. 1 Ioh. 4. 15.
Whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son of God, dwells in him, and
he in God. Again, ibid. v. 2. Vide in h. loc. Tirinum.
Every Spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of
God. The like passages are 1 Ioh. 5. 1. and. 5.
elsewhere, S. Peter's Faith was the same Matt. 16. 16, 17.
with this; and the Faith of Ioh. 11. 27.
Martha, and of the Act. 8. 37.
Eunuch. And the Faith of all these is approved in Scripture.

2. Heretics themselves must be acknowledged, though a maimed part, yet a
part of the visible Church. Hooker vbi supr. Magaltanus idem probat contra
Bellar. in Tit. 3. verse. 11. Ann. 2.
For if an Infidel should pursue to death an Heretic professing
Christianity, only for Christian prosessions sake, could we deny unto him the
honor of Martyrdom? Yet this honor all men know to be proper unto the
Church. Heretics therefore are not utterly cut off from the visible Church of
Christ. If the Fathers do any where, as oftentimes they do, make the true
visible Church of Christ, and Heretical Companies opposite, they are to be
construed as separating Heretics, not altogether from the Company of
Believers, but from the fellowship of sound Believers. For where professed
unbelief is, there there can be no visible Church of Christ: there may be,
where sound belief wants. Infidels, being clean without the Church, deny
directly and utterly reject the very Principles of Christianity: which
Heretics embrace, and err only by misconstruction. Whereupon their
opinions, although repugnant indeed to the Principles of Christian Faith, are
notwithstanding held otherwise, and maintained as most consonan^ thereunto. To
which purpose the words of Salu. de Gubern. l. 5. Eis traditio Magistrorum
suorum and doctrina inueterata quasi Lex est, qui hoc sciunt quod docentur.
Haeretici ergo sunt, sed non scientes. Denique apud nos sint Haeretici, apud se
non sunt. Nam in tantum se Catholicos judicant, vt nos ipsos titulo Haereticae
appellationis infament. Quod ergo illi nobis sunt, and hoc nos illis. Nos eos
injuriam diuinae generationi facere certi sumus, quod minorem Patre ^lium
dicunt: Illi nos injuriosos Patri existimant, quia aequales (...) credamus.
Veritas apud nos est, sed illi apud se esse praesumunt. Ho^^^ Dei apud nos est,
sed illi hoc arbitrantur honorem diuinitatis esse quod credunt. Inofficiosi
sunt, sed illis hoc est summum Religionis officum Impij sunt, sed hoc putant
veram esse pretatem. Errant ergo, sed bo^^ animo errant, non odio sed affectu
Dei, honorare se Dominum atq^^ a^are credentes. Quanmuis non habeant rectam
fidem, illi tamen (...) perfectam aestimant Dei Charitatem. Qualiter pro hoc
ipso falsae opnionis errore in die judicij puniendi sunt; nullus potest scire
nisi Index
Saluian an ancient Bishop of Marseilles are very remarkable, concerning some
Arrian Heretics, of whom he speaks thus: The tradition of their Teachers,
and the doctrine which they have learned, is to them as it were a Law* they
believe as they have been instructed. They are Heretics then, but not
wittingly. Briefly, they are Heretics in our judgment, but not in their
own. For they esteem themselves so good Catholics* that they defame us with
the title of Heresy. Such therefore as They are to us, such are We to them.
We know assuredly that they are injurious to the Divine Generation of the Son
of God, because they say He is inferior to his Father: They contrarily think
us injurious to the Father, because we believe the Son to be equal to Him.
The truth is on our side, but they presume it is on theirs. Our opinion truly
honors God, but they suppose their opinion to be more honorable to Him. They
are indeed undutiful to God, but this they esteem a great duty of Religion.
They are impious, but this they think to be true piety. They err then, but
they err with a good mind: not out of any hatred to God, but with affection
to him, thinking to honor hereby and love the Lord. Although they have not the
right Faith, yet they imagine their opinion to be perfect Charity toward God.
How they shall be punished in the last day of judgment for this error of
their false opinion; the Judge alone knows.

3. In the Society of such Professors there is (at least there may be) true
Baptism administered, and rightly for the substance of it. And where true
Baptism may be rightly administered, there is the Covenant of Salvation in
Christ settled and established, because the Seal of the Covenant is there
allowed. And every Society, in which is the Covenant of Grace, is a Church of
Christ. Again, where true Baptism is, there, by the Confession of the
Romanists, every one by Virtue of that Baptism, if himself do not ponere
obieem, is made a member of the Church and of Christ, and an Heir of heaven.
And hence it follows, that Children baptized in that Church are regenerated,
because they do not ponere obicem. And hence again, that that Society is a
Church of Christ, and his Spouse, which brings forth Children unto God.

4. The people of the ten Tribes, after their defection, notwithstanding their
gross corruptions and Idolatry, yet because they professed (by Circumcision
and otherwise,) to honor the true Jehovah, they remained still a true Church,
(though a very imperfect and impure Church:) and were therefore called the Romans
9. 25, 26. 1 King. 16. 2.
people of God, the beloved of God, the Children of the living God, and God was
called the 1 Kin. 18. 36. etc. 20. 28.
God of Israel, and said to be among them, being also ever ready to direct and
counsel them by his true 2 Kin. 5. 8. 1. 16. 1 Kin. 22. 5, 7.
Prophets: and lastly, the Kings of Israel are often said to do evil in the
eyes of God, that is, (as it may be probably expounded) in that place,
whereupon God did as yet look with the eyes of his mercy, as upon his Church.
Though in regard of their halting between God and Baal, they were said to be
without 2 Chronicles* 15. 3.
the true God, without Priests and Law, that is, without that pure and
comfortable worship of God, which his Priests according to his Law ought to
have performed. And it seems by S. Paul, that a Christian serving the true God
after a false and devised manner, may be at once both 1 Cor. 5. 11.
a Brother and an Idolater.

And forignorances (yea or errors) of the understanding, though very gross,
and (perhaps, by some thought to be) fundamental, it seems true Faith may be
lodged in the same mind together with them. The Faith of Rahab in Heb. 11. 31.
commended, who surely had no great knowledge of the Messiah to commend her.
After our Lord had long conuersed with his Disciples and instructed them, yet
did they not believe Matthew. 20. 21. Act. 1. 6.
his Kingdom to be spiritual, nor Matthew. 16. 22.
S. Peter the necessity of his Passion, though immediately before he had made
that goodly Confession, on which the Church is founded. The Christians of
Ephesus knew not Act. 19. 2.
whether then were an Holy Ghost or no: and many thousand Christian Jews, Act.
21. 20.
did both believe the Gospel, and yet were zealous for the old legal
Ceremonies, which were by Christ fulfilled and abolished. A learned Synesius
apud Phot. Myriobibl. cod. 26.
man anciently was made a Bishop of the Catholic Church though he did
professedly doubt of the last Resurrection of our Bodies.

The Authors of this opinion are o^ age and ability enough to speak for it
and themselves. The Reader may be pleased to approve or reject it, as he shall
find cause.

No doubt, the errors of Popery, and those other of Vbiquitie,
Consubstantiation and the like, are errors gross and palpable: yet not such
as presently and absolutely cut off all, that profess and believe them, from
the Catholic Church and all hope of Salvation; especially if withal they
profess resolutely and heartily to believe in Jesus Christ, and to obey him
according to his word so far as they can understand it, or can be taught it.
For howsoever some skillful Disputant by Logical deduction may from those
opinions infer some consequences damnable and destructive to the Faith: yet
the erring persons many times do not see or believe that any such consequences
follow clearly from their opinions; nay they do (happily) so far abhor
them and are so well disposed toward truth, that rather then admit any such
dangerous consequents, they would readily renounce and rectify their opinions.

But I find my self digressing; I return and proceed.

By all this it is manifest that S. Cyprian agreed with the Donatists only in
a part of their error: but not wholly, nor in their chiefest errors, nor in
their faction and obstinacy, which made them guilty of Schism and Heresy.

S. Cyprian was a peaceable and modest man; dissented from others in his
judgment but without any breach of Charity; condemned no man (much less any
Church) for the contrary Opinion. He believed his own Opinion to be true, but
believed not that it was necessary, and therefore did not proceed rashly and
peremptorily to censure others, but left them to their liberty: and finally,
he had a teachable and tractable mind, willing to alter his Opinion if he had
seen reason, and to yield to Truth if it had been cleared unto him, or if he
had lived to hear the judgment of the Nicene Fathers. And this good
disposition kept him from falling further into such errors, as the pride and
obstinacy of the Donatists plunged them.

For contrarily the Donatists, whilst they suriously contended for one false
Opinion, fell by degrees into many more and worse. Such as were these doctrines
of theirs, That Aug. Ep. 167. De Bap. tismo dicere solent, tunc esse verum
Baptismum Christi cum ab homine justo datur -- vide evnd. de unit. Ecclesiae
cap. 21.
the efficacy of Sacraments depends on the dignity of the Minister, that being
no true Baptism which is not given by a just man: That Aug. cont. Epist.
Parmen. lib. 3. and Passim.
the Church ought not to tolerate evil persons in her communion; That
communion with such persons pollutes and prophanes the Church, and makes it no
Church: That therefore Aug. de Haer. ad Quodvultd. cap. 69. Donatistae --
pertinaci dissensione in Haeresin Schisma verterunt: tanquam Ecclesia Christi
propter crimina Caeciliani, seu vera, seu, quod magis judicibus apparuit,
falsa, de toto terrarum orb penerit, vbi futura promissa est, atque in Africa
Donati part remanserit, in aliis rerrarum partibus quasi contagione
communionis extincta.
all the Churches of the World were perished, because they communicated with
Caecilianus Bishop of Carthage, whom they accused ( Vide Gesta purgationis
Faelicis, and Opt. lib. 1.
falsely too) to have been ordained by such as were Traditors, or had given up
the Bible to be burned in times of persecution: Consequently, Aug. de unit.
Eccl. cap. 13. perijsse dicunt de caetero mundo Ecclesiam, and in part Donati
in sola Africa remansisse. and ibi mox, totus mundus, inquiunt, apostatavit,
nos autem -- in Ecclesia remansimus. and iterum -- suam paucitatem commendare
conantur, and in sanctis Ecclesiae multitudinem toto orb diffusam blasphemare
non cessant.
that the Church remained only with them in the part of Donatus, and that
themselves were the only Christians.

Now to omit the rest, this last error was in the matter and nature of it
properly Heretical, against that Article of the Creed, wherein we profess to
believe the holy Catholic Church. For by limiting the Church only to such as
were of their own communion (in Africa, Rome, or elsewhere) excluding all
others, they denied the Church to be Catholic. And when they were pressed
with this absurdity by the Catholics; for a shift they divised a new and
vain interpretation of the Word Catholic, saying, that the Church was called
Catholic, Aug. Ep. 48. ad Vincentium. Acutum aliquid videris dicere, cum
Catholicae nomen, non ex totius orbis communione interpretaris, sed ex
observatione omnium praeceptorum divinorum and omnium Sacramentorum. Brevic.
Collat. cum Donatistis die. 3. cap. 2. Donatistae responderunt, non Catholicum
nomen ex Vniversitate gentium sed ex plenitudine Sacramentorum institutum. Et
Gaudentius Donatista Coll. 3. cap. 102. Hoc est Catholicum nomen quod
Sacramentis plenum est, quod perfectum, quod immaculatum.
not because it is spread over the whole World or to import the Universality of
Nations, but because their Church retained all the Sacraments and observed all
Gods Commandments, and was perfect and unspotted.

This perverse confining of the Catholic Church was the principal Heresy of
the Donatists, which the Catholic Writers, Optatus, St Austin, and others did
most of all detest and oppose in them. And in their disputations of this point,
they convince their Adversaries, not by any authority or definitions of the
Church (as our Mistaker pretends,) but by testimonies of Scripture as has
been observed before, Aug. Collat. Carth 3. cap. 187. Sola divina testimonia
ad Ecclesiam demonstrandam sufficient, and mox. Sola divina loquatue
authoritas, sola Dei Scriptura, cui vtrique subdimur, in medium proferatur. Et
ib. cap. 155. volumus and optamus, negotium Ecclesiae, non nisi divinis
eloquijs terminare. Id. de unit. Eccl. cap. 3. Non audiamus, haec dico, haec,
dicis, sed audiamus, Haec dicit Dominus -- sunt libri Dominici -- ibi quaeramus
Ecclesiam, ibi discutiamus causam nostram. Auferantur illa de medio, quae
adversus nos invicem, non ex divinis Canonicis Libris sed aliunde recitamus. --
and fic passim.
and every where summon them to the judgment of Scripture alone. St Austin
purposely debates this matter with them in his Treatise de unitate Ecclesiae:
and therein professes almost in each page, that he will wave all other reasons
or arguments, and confute them only by Scriptures. And that not by Scriptures
Aug. de unit. Eccl. cap. 5. Illa interim sunt seponenda, quae (in Scripturis)
obscure sunt posita, and figurarum velaminibus involuta and secundum nos and
secundum illos possunt interpretari -- and anted iam praedico and propono vt
quaecunque aperta and manifesta eligamus. and mox. Prorsus quae alicuius
interpretationis indigent -- seponamus. vide c. 24.
dark or doubtful, but so Aug. ib. c. 19. Aliquid proferte, quod non contra
vos verius interpretetur, quod interpret omnino non egeat. Sicut non eget
interpret, in semine tuo benedicentur omnes. Sicut non eget interpret, terra
tua orbis terrarum. Sicut non eget -- and cap. 20. Nullo interpret indigent
Canonicarum Scripturarum testimonia, quae commendant Ecclesiam in totius orbis
communione. Et cap. 25. Ostendant Donatistae aliqua manifesta de Canonicis
libris testimonia. and cap. 4. notissimis and apertissimis testimonijs
contradicunt, and cap. 15. Manifestissimis testimonijs asservimus Ecclesiam
toto orb diffusam.
clear that they need not to be expounded, so full and express that they
cannot be avoided or eluded. Briefly such as the Donatists could not resist
without wilful Aug. vbi supra cap. 1. De Scripturis sanctisita sunt omnia
prolata and probata, vt ea negare non possit, nisi qui illarum Scripturarum
inimicum se esse profitetur. ib cap. 7. Quis tam surdus, tam demens, tam mente
caecus, vt his tam evidentibus testimonijs obloquatur? Sed ad manifestiora
veniamus. ib. cap. 11. Istae divinae voces de vniversa Ecclesia ita manifestae
sunt, vt contra eas nisi Haeretice animosa perversitate, and caeco furore
latrare non possint.
malice and blindness. Now the point which he proves by so many clear and
full Scriptures, is this; that the Catholic Church is spread and diffused
over the Earth among all Nations, and may not be enclosed within any one or
other society or communion of men whatsoever. (Wherein he does as clearly
oppose our Romanists, who enclose all Catholics and Christians within the
Popes communion, as he did the ancient Donatists.)

It is not then resisting the voice or definitue sentence of the Church which
makes an Heretic; but an obstinate standing out against evident Scripture
sufficiently cleared unto him. And the Scripture may then be said to be
sufficiently cleared, when it is so opened that a good and teachable mind
(loving and seeking truth) cannot gainsay it: For some froward and obstinate
persons will not be convicted by any evidence of truth whatsoever. And if the
authority of a Council, or of some Church do interpose in this conviction,
the obstinacy of Gainsayers is the greater, because there is the greater reason
to persuade them. And if any Church do upon such conviction excommunicate or
condemn any refractary Gainsayer, he stands guilty of obstinacy (and so of
Heresy) in foro exteriori, and for such is to be reputed by the members of the
same Church. But it is possible such a sentence may be erroneous, either
because the opinion condemned is no Heresy, or error against the Faith, in it
self considered; or because the party so condemned is not sufficiently
convinced in his understanding (not clouded with prejudice, ambition,
vaineglory or the like passion) that it is an error.

As these Donatists, so the Novatians also were Schismatiques, for disobeying
the public determination of the Catholic Church, in the same General
Council of Nice. In the first Ages, before that Council, the Church was very
rigorous in her Discipline. She utterly refused (as we have before observed)
to admit unto her Peace and communion Vide Canones Council. Eliberini. Tertull.
de pudic. Cypr. Epist. ad Antonian. and passim.
some kinds of sinnners, (as Idolaters, Apostates, Murderers, Adulrers and
the like,) though they had done many years penance, and though they were in
their last extremity: thinking fit to leave them to the mercy of God alone, and
to make their peace with him by inward repentance. Afterward She saw it
convenient to be more mild and merciful in her censures: and accordingly
declared her self in the Great Nic. Council. Can. 11. 12. 13. 14.
Council, allowing to all sinners the hope and comfort of her absolution, when
they had made her satisfaction by their humility and penance according to her
Canons. The Albaspin. Sacr. Observe. lib. 2. cap. 21.
Novatians stubbornely opposed this public resolution, pretending that the
judgment and practice of former Agesought not to be altered, that this
releasing of severe Discipline would open a gap to vice and licentiousness,
that the Church had no power to reconcile or receive into her society such
enormious Sinners though penitent, that if she did, she was polluted by their
communion. And upon these pretenses, they break out into a formal Schism and
separation.

Before the Nicene Council, many good Catholic Bishops were of the same
opinion with the Donatists, that the Baptism of Heretics was ineffectuall;
and with the Novatians, that the Church ought not to absolve some grievous
Sinners. These errors therefore (if they had gone no farther) were not in
themselves Heretical, especially in the proper and most heavy or bitter sense
of that word; neither was it in the Churches intention (or in her power) to
make them such by her Declaration. Her intention was to silence all disputes
and to settle peace and unity in her government: to which all wise and
peaceable men submitted, whatsoever their opinion was. And those factious
people, for their unreasonable and uncharitable opposition, were very justly
branded for Schismatiques.

Now for us, the Mistaker (nor his Masters) will never prove, that we oppose
either any Declaration of the Catholic Church, or any fundamental, or other,
truth of Scripture; and therefore he does unjustly charge us either with
Schism or Heresy.

Charity mistaken. Chap. 6.
Again, the only right ground and true infallible motive of faith (by which
it is produced, and on which it relyes) is the revelation of God, and the
proposition of his Church. He therefore who believes not every particular
Article of Catholic doctrine, which is revealed and propounded by Almighty
God and his Church; (which Church is absolutely infallible in all her
proposalls,) does not assent to any one (even of those which he believes) by
true faith; because he assents not upon the only true and infallible motive.
An assent not grounded on this, is no supernatural divine faith, but an humane
persuasion, or suspicion, or opinion. And such is the belief or faith of
Turks, Jews, Moors, and all Heretics, and particularly of the Protestants.

Answer Sect. 5.
DIvine revelation, the principal motive and last object into which faith
supernatural is resolved. The testimony and ministry of the Church is of
great use for the begetting of faith. But the Church has not an authority
unlimited and absolutely infallible in all her doctrines, as some Romanists
pretend. Others of them reasonably and fairly limit the Churches
infallibility. The Church Universal infallible in fundamental doctrines. Not
so in points of lesser moment. The Mistaker cannot say what he means by the
Church, where of he says so much. Of the Church represented in general
Counsels, of which we speak and think more honorably then do our
Adversaries. Yet we think them not absolutely infallible. Of the Pope whom
they call the Church virtuall. How his flatterers speak of his authority. No
Roman Catholic can be assured of his infallibility, which is (at the most
and best) but problematicall by their own principles.

Answer.

FAith is said to be divine, and supernatural, I in regard of the author or
efficient cause of the habit and act of divine infused faith, which is the
special grace of God preparing, inabling and assisting the soul to believe;
For 1 Cor. 12. 3. 4.
faith is the gift of God alone. 2. In regard of the object or things believed,
which are Phil. 1. 29. etc.
above the reach and comprehension of mere nature or reason. 3. In regard of
the formal reason, or principal ground on which faith chiefly relies, and
into which it is finally resolved; which is divine revelation, or the authority
of God, who is the first truth. If it fail in any of these, it is no divine or
supernatural faith.

Of the two first respects there is no controversy. For the 3d that the
formal object or reason of faith, the chief motive, the first and farthest
principle into which it resolves is only divine revelation, is a truth (denied
by some of the Scotus, Durand. Gabriel apud Can. loc. lib. 2. cap. 8.
School indeed, and some other Vide passim apud Eckium, Pighium; Hosium,
Turrianum, Costerum nequiter and contumeliose dicta in S. Scripturas.
unwise and unwary writers against Luther, but yet) confessed by the most and
best learned of the Th. 1. p. q. 1. art. 8. ad. 2. Innititur fides nostra
revelationi Prophetis and Apostolis factae. Can. loc. Theol. lib. 2. c. 8. Nec
si nobis aditum praebet Ecclesia -- protinus ibi acquiescendum est; sed ultra
oportet progredi and solida Dei veritate niti. Staplet. princs doctr. lib. 8.
cap. 20. Apostolorum and prophetarum immediate revelata sides in solum
revelatorem Deum ultimo resolvebatur; eum solum pro formali objecto habuit; in
eum solum tanquam supremam atque ultimam credendi causam desinebat and
sistebat. Ergo and reliquae totius Ecdesiae fides idem formale objectum habet.
Becanus Sum. 3. p. cap. 8. quaest. 8. Conclus. 3. Assensus fidei formaliter
resolvitur in primam veritatem revelantem. -- Atque hic sistitur. Aegid. de
Coninck. de Actib. supernat. disp. 9. dub. 5. concl. 4. Id in quod nostra fides
tanquam objectum formale ultimo resolvitur, five objectum formale propter quod
credimus non solum articulos fidei esse veros, sed etiam eos esse a Deo
revelatos, est testimonium primae veritatis.
Roman Doctors. And that this revelation, for all necessary points, is Basil.
M. de judicio Det, five proaem. in Ethic. (...). Athanas. Orat. contr. Gentes,
initio. (...). Cyrill. Hierosol. Catech. 4. (...). Theodoret. Dial. 1. (...).
Hilar. lib. 2. ad Constant. August. laudat Imp. fidem tantum secundum ea quae
scripta sunt desiderantem. Vinc. Lirin. cap. 2. perfectus Scripturarum canon ad
omnia satis superque sufficit. Et iterum Commonit. 2. cap. 1. Th. 2. 2. qu. 1.
A. 10. ad 1. In doctrina Christi and Apostolorum veritas fidei est sufficienter
explicata. Idem disp. de fide art. 10. ad 11. Successoribus Apostolorum non
credimus, nisi in quantum nobis annuntiant ea, quae illi in Scripturis
reliquerunt. Durand. Praefat. in Sent. S. Scriptura mensuram fidei exprimit.
Scot. in Prol. Sent. qu. 3. Theologia nostra non est nisi de his quae
continentur in Scriptura, and de his quae possunt elici ex ipsis. Gers. de
examine. doctr. p. 2. con. 1. nihil audendum diecre de divinis, nisi quae nobis
a Scriptura Sacra tradita sunt.
sufficiently and Basil. Regul. brevior. cap. 267. (...). Aug. de doctr. Chr.
lib. 2. cap. 9. In his quae aperte posita sunt in Scriptura, inveniuntur illa
omnia quae continent fidem mor esque vivendi. Bellar. lib. 4. de verb. non
Script. cap. 11.. His notatis, Dico illa omnia scripta esse ab Apostolis, quae
sunt omnibus necessaria. Et Iterum.. vltimo. Loquitur Augustinus (loco
praedicto) de illis dogmatibus quae sunt necessaria omnibus simpliciter.
clearly made in the Scriptures, either in express terms, or by manifest
deduction, is the constant Doctrine of Antiquity, even till the latter times.
If the whole object of faith be thus contained in Scripture, then surely no new
doctrines or revelations without, or beside Scripture may be admitted: neither
is the proposition of any Church, or any person, in matters of faith, to be
believed, further then it may be maintained or warranted by Scripture. Our
faith then is safe enough, which builds on this firm ground, and relyes on
this solid Iren. lib. 3. cap. 1. Scriptura fundamentum est, and columna fidei
nostrae. Ephesians. 2. 20.
foundation.

Now for the Church, she that is the mother of all Christians has two dugs,
says Aug. in Ep. Johan. tract. 3 init. Est matter Ecclesia, and ubera ejus duo
Testamenta Scripturarum divinarum.
S. Austine, which are the Old and New Testament; out of these she feeds and
gives milk to all her children. That Church (or any particular) which delivers
only what she has received, and propounds not her own traditions in stead of
Gods Commandments, we are ready in all things to hear, and reverently to
submit our selves to Gods truth delivered by it.

We do not deprive the Church of that prerogative and office which Christ has
given it; Romans 10. 17.
Faith comes by hearing the word of God: and the ministry of the Church is
necessary (in ordinary course) for the begetting of faith. But the force and
validity of that ministry is different; according as the Church may be taken,
either for the Prime Church, or for the Present.

The Prime Church I call that which included Christ and his Apostles, who had
immediate revelation from heaven. The voice and testimony of this Church is
simply divine and infallible, and the word of God from them is of like
validity, written or delivered.

The testimony of the present Church, though it be not the last resolution of
our faith, yet it is the first external motive to it. It is the Hooker. lib.
2.. 7.
key, or Gretser. Defens. de verb. lib. 4. c. 4. col. 1581. prima janua. See
the learned Answ. to Fishers Relat. of his 3. Confer. page 24.
door which lets men in to the knowledge of divine mysteries. It works very
powerfully and probably (as the highest humane testimony) 1. Upon infidels, to
win them unto a reverent opinion of that faith, and those Scriptures, which
they see so many wise, learned and devout men in the Church constantly to
esteem as the very truth and word of God. 2. Upon Novices, weaklings, and
doubters in the faith, to instruct and confirm them, till they may acquaint
themselves with, and understand the Scriptures, which the Church delivers as
the word of God. 3. Upon all within the Church to prepare, induce, and persuade
the mind, as an outward means, to embrace the faith, to read and believe the
Scriptures. But the faith of a Christian finds not in all this any sure ground
whereon finally to rest or settle it self; till it arise to greater assurance
then the present Church alone can give. Humane authority, consent and proof
may produce an humane or acquired faith, and infallibly (in some sort) assure
the mind of the truth of that which is so witnessed: but the assent of divine
faith is absolutely divine, which requires an object and motive so infallibly
true, as that it neither has, nor Cui non potest subesse falsum.
can possibly admit of any mixture of error or falsehood. And infallible in
this sense is only that testimony which is absolutely divine.

Now our Adversaries yield that the testimony of the present Church is not
absolutely divine. It is not simply but in a manner divine, says Staplet
Relect. contr. 4. qu. 3. A. 1. Vox Ecclesiae est suo modo divina.
one: not merely divine, nor merely humane, but as it were in the middle, says
Becan. 3. p. Sum. cap. 8. qu. 8.. 8. nec pure divina, nec pure humana, sed
quasi media.
another: In truth and to speak properly an humane testimony, says a Aegid.
de Conick. disp. 9. dub. 5 Conc. 2. Quantumvis Ecclesia dirigatur infallibili
Sp. S. assistentia, atque ita ejus testimoniu^ nitatur, suo modo, authoritate
divina, atque ab ea firmitatem accipiat: tamen non est vere and proprie
testimonium sive verbum and revelatio Dei, sed proprie est testimonium humanum.
Ergo illud nequit esse objectum formale fidei Theologieae, and consequenter
haec nequit in illud, tanquam in suum objectum, ultimo resolvi.
third: who thereupon well inferres that therefore the voice of the Church
cannot be the formal object of divine faith, or that where-into it is lastly
resolved.

The Church then is only the first inducer to believe; and the watchman, that
holds out the light in open view, and presents the shining beams thereof to
all that have eyes to discern it: but the principal motive and last object of
belief is the divine authority of Scripture it self. And, that Scripture is
of divine authority, the believer sees by that glorious beam of divine light
which shines in Bellarmin. de verbo Dei. li. 1. c. 2. Certissimas and divinas
esse Scripturas, quae Propheticis and Apostolicis literis continentur, nec
humana inventa, sed divina oracula continere, testis est ipsa Scriptura -- O.
rig. de Princip. l. 4. c. 1. Quod ipsae divinae Scripturae sint divinitus
inspiratae, ex ipsis divinis Scriptuis is ostendemus. Salv. Massil. l. 3. de
Gubern. mox a^ initio. Alia omnia, id est, humana dicta, argumentis ac testibus
egent: Dei autem sermo ipse sibi testis est; quia necesse est quicquio
incorrupta veritas loquitur, incorruptum sit testimonium veritatis.
Scripture; and by many internal arguments found in the letter it self;
though found by the help and direction of the Church without, and of grace
within. Herein the Church leads, but the Scripture resolves. The Ministry of
the Church, as a Candlestick, presents and holds out the light: but, this
supposed, there is in the Scripture it self 2 Pet. 1. 19.
light sufficient, which (though blind and 1 Cor. 2. 14
sensual minds see not, yet) the eye of reason cleared by grace, and assisted
by the many motives, which the Church uses for enforcing of her instructions;
may discover to be divine, descended from the father and fountain of light. To
this light the Church adds nothing at all; but only points at it, directs us
to it, disposes and prepares us for it, introduces it as the dawning of the
morning does the clear Sunshine. So far as any Church walks in this light,
and carries it with her, we may safely follow her: if she bring a divine word
for her warrant, she must be believed. But if her propositions, or doctrines be
merely voluntary, her own, and not according to that word, there Es. 8. 20.
is no light in them; neither can her authority make such doctrines proper
objects of divine faith.

An Object, how sensible soever it be in it self, yet it does not actually
move the Sense, unless it be conveyed and applied to it by some Mean. So
here: God has appointed an ordinary outward means to present and propound
divine verities to our faith, and this ordinary means we grant is the Church:
to which we willingly attribute these two excellent uses in that employment,
1. of a witness, testifying the authority and sense of the Scriptures unto us:
2. of Gods instrument, by whose ministry in preaching and expounding the
Scriptures, the Holy Ghost begets a divine faith in us. But in that assent
which we yield unto the mysteries propounded and delivered by the Church,
though the Church be one cause, to wit, inductiue or preparatiue, Gretser.
Append. 2. ad lib. 3. Bellar. de verb. D. Col. 1514. principaliter Scripturis
fidem habemus propter divina^ revelationem: at ob Ecclesiae authoritatem non
aliter qua^ ut ob conditionem sine qua non. Et infra. Sacris litetis assensum
prae bemus primario ob divinam revelationem, secundario ob Ecclesiae
testimonium.
without which men ordinarily do not believe; yet it is not the principal or
final, upon which we lastly depend. The chief principle or ground on which
faith rests, and for which it firmly assents unto those truths which the Church
propounds, is divine revelation made in the Scripture. Nothing less then this,
nothing but this can erect or qualify an act of Becan. Sum. tract de fide ca.
1. q. 2.. 9. Assensus qui nititur authoritate Ecclesiae non est assensus fidei
Theologicae sen divinae, sed alterius inferioris ordinis.
super natural faith which must be absolutely undoubted and certain; and
without this, faith is but opinion or persuasion, or at the most, an acquired
humane belief.

This power in the Church, to instruct her children in the faith according to
Scripture, (which is her ground and rule, from which she may not depart) we
willingly admit. But we cannot yield that the present Church has an absolute
or unlimited authority to propound what she pleases, or an infallible
assistance in all her propositions; which is our Mistakers meaning, and the new
doctrine of some of his Masters.

Who teach, 1. that the authority of the Church is absolute, not depending on
Scripture, but on which the Scripture it self (and so our whole faith)
depends. The words of Bellar. de effect. Sacram. lib. 2. cap. 25.. tertium
testimonium.
Bellarmine are remarkable: If (says he) we take away the authority of the
present Church of Rome and of the Trent Council; the decrees of all other
ancient Councels, and the whole Christian faith may be questioned as doubtful.
For the strength of all doctrines and of all Councels depends upon the
authority of the present Church. And elsewhere again, to the same purpose:
(lest the former words might seem to have fallen from his pen unawares)
Bellar. de Eccl. mil. lib. 3. cap. 10.. Adhaec necesse est.
The Scriptures, Traditions, and all doctrines whatsoever depend on the
testimony of the Church, (he means that of Rome) without which all are wholly
uncertain. Here Is a plain principle of Atheism. For if this be true, all the
faith we have of God, of our Redeemer, of the Scripture, of any thing in
Religion, is all but an ungrounded and uncertain opinion, unless the Church
confirm it. And as the Idols of old Rome could not be consecrated or deified
but by consent of the Senate, who took upon the^ (...) (as S. Chrysostom. in 2. ad
Cor. hom. 26 in Moral. Et Tertul. Apolog. cap. 5. Nisi homini Deus placuerit,
Deus non erit.
Chrysostom merrily speaks) to make gods by most voices: So here, it seems,
our true God, and Scriptures, and Religion, must all stand at the courtesy and
suffrage of the Roman Conclaue.

2 They teach that much of the object or matter of faith is not contained in
Scripture any way; that the Church has an unlimited power to supply the
defects of Scripture; and that she may propound any doctrines as necessary to
salvation, which have no other ground but her own authority, which is equal
to that of Scripture. There are many things, says Mel. Canus Loc. lib. 3. c.
3. fund. 3.
Canus, belonging to the faith of Christians, which are neither manifestly nor
obscurely contained in the sacred Scriptures. And Doctor Princip. Doctrine. li.
12 c. 5. initio.
Stapleton: Very many things necessary to salvation, and necessarily to be
believed are not comprehended in the Scriptures, but are commended to us only
by the authority of the Church. And again: Id. Relect. Contr. 4. qu. 1. art.
3. ad arg. 12. Etiamsi nullo Scripturaru^ aut evidenti, aut probabili
testimonio confirmetur.
The Church may propound and define matters of faith, without any evident, nay
without any probable testimony of Scripture. Do not these words of Stapleton
imply, that the Church of Rome propounds many things to the belief of
Christians, without any probability from Scripture? With what ingenuity then,
or conscience do they pretend Scripture in each Controversy against us, since
by their own confession many of their assertions are mere unwritten
Traditions, leaning only on the authority of their Church? On the contrary,
for the fulness and sufficiency of Scripture in all necessary points, we have
the full consent of Antiquity, and of many learned Writers of their own; even
of Bellarmine himself, whose plain words to this purpose have been already
noted. And the same Cardinal (though herein, as not seldom, contradicting
both himself and his fellows) Bellar. lib. 3. de verb. D. interpret. cap. 10.
ad arg. 15. Sciendum est propositionem fidei concludita li Syllogismo: Quicquid
Deus revelavit in Scripturis est verum, hoc Deus revelavit in Scripturis, ergo
hoc est verum. Ex propositionibus hujus Syllogismi prima certa est apud omnes,
secunda apud Catholicos est etiam firmissimas nititur enim testimonio
Ecclesiae, Concilii, vel Pontificis.
grants that a proposition is not de fide, unless it be concluded in this
Syllogism: whatsoever G^^ has revealed in Scripture is true, but the or that
God has revealed in Scripture, erg^ it is true. If matters of faith must be
revealed in Scripture, as this reason supposes: then the proposal of the
Church cannot make any unwritten verity to become matter of faith. Yet to
salve the sovereign power of His Church, he makes all the strength and truth
of the minor in this Syllogism to depend on the testimony of the Church; and
by consequence the truth of the conclusion, which ever resembles the weak:
Premisse. So as, if this be true, there is no truth in the Scriptures, or in
our Religion, without the attestation of the Church.

3. They teach that the Church is infallibly assisted in her proposalls and
doctrines, so as she cannot err. And this dream has made Rome senseless of
her errors and careless to seek any remedy, nay utterly incapable of remedy.
For, to minds really possessed with this fond persuasion and prejudice, the
most convincing reasons, the most plain Scriptures, the most pregnant
authorities of Fathers, which prove the Church of Rome may err, or has erred,
are all lost and made ineffectuall: and seem not strong arguments of the
truth, but strong temptations against it. And this imagination of their
Churches infallibility, is to them at once both a sufficient reason of what is
most unreasonable, and a sufficient answer for what is most unanswerable.

That the Church is infallible we do not absolutely deny: we only deny the
Church to be absolutely infallible. Some of the most able Writers of the Roman
party do so fairly limit this privilege, that in their sense we do without
difficulty admit it. Their limitation is double, regarding 1. the subject of
this infallibility, 2. the object of it. First, for the subject, they plant
this infallibility only in the Church Universal, or the Catholic body of
Christ on earth, comprehending all his members; not in any particular Church,
or any representation of the Church in Councils, (General or particular) much
less in any one member of the Church; no not in him who pretends to be the
Head. So Walden. lib. 2. Doct. fid. art. 2. cap. 19.. 1. Ecclesia Universalis
fide^ habet indefectibilem, non quidem in Generali Synodo congregata, quam
aliquoties errasse percepimus -- Sylv. Sum. verb. Ecclesia cap. 1.. 4.
Ecclesia, quae non potest errare, dicitur, no^ Papa sed congregatio fideliu^.
Et vide gloss. in cap. 24. qu. 1. call. A recta.
Waldensis, Sylvester and others.

2. For the object or extent of this infallibility, they grant it reaches not
to all points or questions in Religion that may arise, but only to such
Articles as belong to the substance of faith, such as are matters essential
and fundamental, simply necessary for the Church to know and belleue. To omit
Maldon. in Johan. 14. 26. Dubium est, an illud docebit omnia, referendum sit ad
illud -- quaecunque dixi vobis -- quasi non aliud docturum Spiritum sanctum
dicat, quam quod ipse antea docuiffer. Non repugnabo si quis ita velit
interpretari. Charron. vetite 3. chap. 5.. lc second poinct. L infallibilite de
l'Eglise, ne s'entend que des chooses qui concernent la substance de la foy,
laquelle ne recoit point de contrariete, divet site, changement, and pource
nulle correction, reformation, ou amendment, estant vne tousiours immuable and
non reformable, dit Tertullien de virg. Veland. Et ibid. saepe.
others, Dr Staplet. Princip. Doctrine. lib. 8. controv. 4. cap. 15.
Stapleton is full and punctual to this purpose. He distinguishes
controversies of Religion into two sorts. Some (says he) are about those
doctrines of faith, which necessarily pertain to the public faith of the
Church. Others, about such matters as do not necessarily belong to the faith,
but may be variously held and disputed without hurt or prejudice to faith. To
the first sort he restrains the infallibility of the Church. But in the second
he yields, that the Church may sometimes err, either in her discourses, or in
her conclusions; and that without any violation of Christ's promise made to the
Church for infallibility. And of this assertion He gives diverse good reasons.
The first and chiefest taken from the end, for which infallibility was given to
the Church: It was given (says He) for the common salvation of the faithful,
and not for the satisfaction of unprofitable curiosities, or for the search of
unnecessary subtleties. For as nature, so God is neither defective in
necessaries, nor lavish in superfluities. A second reason He adds, taken from
the office of the Church after the Apostles, which is not to make new Articles
of faith, but only to consigne and deliver those which she has received. Thus
Dr Stapleton.

Briefly, their meaning is, (and ours is the same) that the whole Militant
Church (that is, all the members of it,) cannot possibly err, either in the
whole faith, or any necessary article of it. For such an error must needs
dis-unite all the members from Christ the Head; and so dissolve the Body, and
leave him no Church, which is impossible. Christ ever has had, and ever shall
have a true Church on earth: now a true Church is all one with a Church not
erring in the foundation.

By these reasonable restrictions of this infallibility, they give us a fair
and certain interpretation of all those promises, which our Lord has made
unto his Church, for his assistance: Such promises are intended, not to any
particular Persons or Churches, but only, to the Church Catholic: and they
are to be extended not to every parcel or particularity of truth, but only to
points of faith or fundamental. Thus we are to understand those passages;

Joh. 16. 13. John 14. 16. See the judicious Author of the Answ. to Fishers
Relation of his 3. Confer. p. 49.
The spirit shall lead you into all truth and shall abide with you for ever.
Though that promise was directly and primarily made to the Apostles, (who had
the Spirits guidance in a more high and absolute manner, then any since them,
yet it was made to them for the be hoof of the Church, and is verified i^ the
Church Universal. But all truth (...) not simply all, but all of some kind.
T^ be led into all truths, is to know and believe them. And who is so simple as
to be ignorant, that there are many millions of truths (in Nature, History,
Divinity, --) whereof the Church is simply ignorant? How many truths lie
unrevealed in the infinite treasury of Gods wisdom, where with the Deuteronomy. 29.
29. 1 Cor. 13. 12.
Church is not acquainted? How many obscure texts of Scripture which she
understands not? How many School questions which she has not, and happily
cannot determine? And for matters of fact, it is apparent and Bellar. l. 2. de
Conc. cap 8.. Respondeo. Quidam.
granted that the Church may err. So then, the truth it self enforces us to
understand by all truths not simply all, not all which God can possibly
reveal; but all appertaining to the substance of faith, all truth absolutely
necessary to salvation.

That other promise of Christ's being with his Mat. 28 20.
unto the end of the world, is properly meant (as some Auth. de vocat. Gent.
lib. 2. cap. 2. Ecce ego vobiscum. i. e. nolite de vestra infirmitate
trepidare, sed de mea potestate confidere, qui vos usque ad consummationem
saeculi in omni hoc opere non derelinquam: -- praestiturus ut nulla sevientium
crudelitate superemini. In mea enim potestate praedicabitis, and per me fiet,
ut inter contradicentes, interfurentes. Abrahae filii de lapidibus suscitentur.
Ancients truly give the sense) of his comfortable aid and assistance,
supporting the weakness of his Apostles and their Successors in their
ministry, or in their preaching of Christ. But it may well be also applied (as
it is by Leo Sermon. 10. de Nativ. cap. 5. Idem Salvator noster est super
coelorum altitudines victor mortis ascendens, and usque ad consummationem
soeculi univer sam Ecclesiam no^ relinquens.
others) to the Church Universal: which is ever in such manner assisted by the
good Spirit, that it never totally fails or falls off from Christ.

For it is so firmly Math. 16. 18.
founded on the Rock (that is on Christ 1 Cor. 3. 11.
the only foundation) that the gates of hell (whether by temptation or
persecution) shall not prevail against it. Not prevail so far as to sever it
from the foundation, or clearly to undermine, or Bernard. Sermon. 79. in Cant.
Non deficit genus Christianum, nec fides de terra, nec charitas de Eccles.-que
fundata est super petram. Petra a. est Christus. Bellarmin, de Eccles. lib. 3.
cap. 13. Quod Ecclesia non possit deficere ostenditur primum ex Scripturis,
Math. 16. Super hanc petram aedificabo Ecclesiam.
overthrow it. The Church may err, and dangerously too; but every error
destroys not the Church. The whole Church cannot so err as to be destroyed.
For then our Lords promise here of her stable edification should be of no value.

Lastly, that prayer of our Savior for S. Peter, Luke 22. 32.
that his faith might not fail, in the native sense of the place, regarded
only S. Peter's person, for whom our Lord prayed, and obtained perseverance in
the grace of God, against the strong temptation which was to winnow him above
the rest: Yet is it very well referred by Aqu. 2. 2. q. 2. A. 6. ad 3.
Ecclesiae Universalis sides non potest deficere, Domino dicente Luc. 22. Ego
pro te rogavi, Petre, ut non deficiat fides tua.
Aquinas to the whole Church; which is never so far forsaken by Christ that it
should utterly forsake and fall off from him. But the faith of the Church
cannot be totally corrupted in the Essentialls of it, or abolished; yet may it
be foulely infected with many vile and unworthy additions, though not with
direct repugnancies.

In these promises then there is no foundation to support that very vain and
vaste pretension of the Church of Rome: who challenges to her self an absolute
and universal infallibility in all her proposalls. For neither do these
promises principally respect the Church of Rome, and more then the Church of
Corinth, Ephesus, or the like, any further or longer then such parts do cleave
and consent to the whole body and Spouse of Christ: nor has the Church
Universal the like assurance from Christ that she shall not err in
unnecessary additions, as she has for her not erring in taking away from the
faith what is fundamental and necessary. Its comfort enough for the Church,
that the Lord in mercy will secure her from all capital dangers, and conserve
her on earth against all enemies: but she may not hope to triumph over all
sin and error, till she be in heaven. Hay and stubble and such unprofitable
stuff, laid on the roof, destroys not the house, whilst the maine pillars
are standing on the foundation. The Giant in Gath, 2. Sam. 21. 20. was a true
man, though much deformed with superfluous fingers and toes; but if one loose
any vital part, he is a man no longer. There is not so much danger in adding
superfluities, as in detracting what is essential and necessary. That the
Church shall never be robbed of any truth, necessary to the being of the
Church, the promises of Christ assure us: But that to necessary truths, she
shall add no unnecessarie opinions; for that we have no warrant, either from
the Scripture, or any promise of God. And were it otherwise, the Doctors above
mentioned had betrayed the Churches cause, in stead of maintaining it. For if
in all her doctrines and definitions she be infallible, why should they
restrain her infallibility in defining unto matters necessary? They should
have professed her roundly and plainly infallible in all her determinations.
For to limit her infallibility in defining, only to things necessary; and then
to say that all defined by her, is eo ipso necessary because defined, is to
delude the world, and seemingly to yield something when nothing is yielded.

The Roman cause at this day (as it appears by the vulgar Writers of the
Popes quarter, and, among others, by our Mistaker,) wholly depends on this
pretended absolute infallibility. All Controversies in the issue are reduced to
this, and decided by it. And with great reason, if there were any reason in it,
or for it. For if Rome cannot err or be deceived, then without doubt all they
err and are deceived, who dissent from her. And therefore, me thinks, learned
men of that party, might do very well to ease themselves and the world of much
trouble and pains, in the scanning of other questions; if with all their
strength and wit they can but settle on the Pope or his adherents such an
infallibility, by any one convicting argument; this will instantly and
evidently conclude all our other differences. No wise man will any way
contradict them, who cannot any way err.

But surely this doctrine, that the Church is infallible in all her
definitions, is so far from being certain and divine, that it is at the best
but doubtful and problematicall; and that even by, and from their own
principles.

The Roman Drs deliver us these Maxims concerning the Churches authority. 1.
Staplet. lib. 9. Princip. doctr. and passim contr. Whitak.
That the truth of Scripture it self and of all contained in it relyes, in
respect of us, upon the testimony of the Church; so as nothing is credible to
us, but by the Churches attestation. 2. Valent. Tom. 3. disp 1. qu. 1. pun. 1..
6. col. 29.
That the proposition of the Church is so necessary to the act of divine faith,
that nothing can be believed without it. 3. That Bellarm. lib. 4. de Pont. R.
cap. 14.. Respondeo. Inprimis.
until a doctrine be declared or defined by the Church, so long it may be
either doubted of, or denied without danger. These propositions are their own.
Hence we assume: But this doctrine [that the Church is infallible in all her
decrees and definitions] was never yet declared, decreed or defined by the
Church, no not by any Council, or by any Pope. And hence we infer; Therefore
it is a doctrine which may be doubted of, or denied without danger; a doctrine
which no man can believe by divine faith; a doctrine (whatsoever it be in it
self) to Christians not credible. If any man will deny the assumption, he will
oblige himself to disprove it by a contrary instance: Let it be showed where,
and when, and in what terms the Church has published any such declaration.
And suppose (which will not be granted) that such a declaration had been made,
it may be demanded with reason, upon what warrant the Church can assume to her
self a power so divine and boundless, as to authorize all her decrees in so
high a form, that they must be accounted divine and infallible? If the promise
of God in Scripture be pleaded for this power, we have already showed how the
learned among themselves have voyded this plea, and so restrained those
promises that they are by much too narrow to support so wide a privilege. If
it be said that this authority of the Church is a principle admitted by all
Christians without any doubt or proof, this is a saying voluntary and and
groundless. For 1. they will confess every principle in Religion to be
founded either in nature, or in Scripture, or in tradition, or in Church
definition; and in none of these will they find any footing for this. 2. All
Christians in the world confess the authority of Scripture, to be a principle
indemonstrable; yet are we by them perpetually urged to prove that authority,
and that by Scripture. 3. Dr Princ. Doctrine. l. ^. c. 21.
Stapleton thinks it not only fitting, but necessary, in respect of us, that
the Church should give testimony to her self: especially the^, in this point of
so great importance and consequence, concerning her infallible authority,
wherein all Religion is so much concerned. 4. Lastly, it is a great error and
vanity to believe, that this absolute infallibility of the Church is believed
by all Christians: especially in the sense of our Adversaries, who ever by the
Church intend that unsound piece, which they call the Roman Catholic. The
Protestants and Greeks, expressly accuse this Church (and have convicted her
too, as they think,) of many gross and dangerous errors. The Sea Mr.
Brierwoods Enquiries.
Armenians, Syrians, Indians, Iacobites, Maronites, Abassines, with other
innumerable assemblies of Christians, have many doctrines and customs directly
repugnant to those of Rome: which were an unreasonable presumption and
absurdity, if they esteemed the Church of Rome so wholly infallible. Nay,
within the Roman Church it self, many Authors of great learning and judgment,
by name Horum omnium testimonia legere est apud Rob. Baronium de objecto fidei.
Tract. 5. cap. 19.
Occam, Cameracensis, Waldensis, Panormitanus, Antoninus Archbishop of
Florence, Cardinal Cusan, Nicholas Clemangis -- have declared their opinion,
that any particular Churches, and particularly the Roman, any Councels though
General, any Popes may err, even to heresy: and I doubt not but the best
learned Romanists at this day are of the same opinion.

Before we proceed, it will not be from our purpose, to note one thing more in
passing. The Church of Rome pretends, that it is an office belonging only to
Her, to deliver the entire rule of faith to all Christian people. And she
pretends further that this divine and infalliable rule is made up of three
integrall parts; to wit, Scriptures, Traditions, and Church definitions. If
this be true, she does but loosely discharge her office, and very ill satisfy
the obligation which she has unto the Christian world. For 1. Why has she not
yet defined that her definitions are of divine authority? The late Fathers of
Trent have canonized unwritten traditions, and equaled them to Scriptures; but
why did they omit to canonize the decrees of all Popes, and Counsels? Why did
they not add to Traditions, their Church definitions, and command them both,
and them all to be received with no less devotion then the holy Scriptures. 2.
The same Fathers have given us an exact catalogue of all the books of
Scripture: but why did they not give us the like list of divine and infallible
Traditions? Is it because they are numberles and cannot be recounted? Or
because it may be a thing full of danger to confine them to any certain
number, least some be omitted? Or because they are not yet agreed which are
divine Traditions? Or is it (as Dr. Defens. author. Eccles. l. 1 cap. 2.. 5.
Stapleton excuses his Church on the like occasion) because that Church has
not yet thoroughly weighed all her Traditions, either for want of opportunity,
or by reason of other thoughts and distractions which have not permitted her
seriously to consider of this business? But there cannot be a business of greater
moment in Religion, or more worthy of the Churches care, then to deliver the
rule of truth clearly and precisely, by which all doctrines in the Church are
to be squared and examined. And therefore the Church of Rome herein so
careless, cannot be excused from supine negligence.

Now to return from this short digression. So far as truth and reason will
permit, we have yielded an infallibility to the Church: That is, infallibility
in the Essentialls of faith, to the Church Universal. And this confession
satisfies the best of our Adversaries, who demand no more.

But when our Mistaker talks so often of the infallibility and supreme
judgment of the Church, He means somewhat else by the Church. Though, surely, he
knows not well what he means; or at least will not be forward to let us know
his meaning; whether he means the Church representative, which is a General
Council, or the Church virtuall, which is the Pope; in whether of the two he
plants this infallibility, as in the Proper Subject, it will perplex him to
say; and whatsoever he say he shall touch a sore, and find strong opposition
within his own party.

First, for General Counsels, we give them all the respect which is due unto
them, and much more then do the most of our Adversaries. We say, that such
General Counsels, as are lawfully called and proceed orderly, are great and
awful representations of the Church Catholic; that they are the highest
external Tribunal which the Church has on earth; that their authority is
immediately derived and delegated from Christ; that no Christian is exempted
from their censures or jurisdiction; that their decrees bind all persons to
external obedience, and may not be questioned but upon evident reason, nor
reversed but by an equal authority; that if they be careful and diligent in
the use of all good means for finding out the truth, it is very probable the
good Spirit will so direct them, that they shall not err, at least not
fundamentally. But they are not absolutely freed from all error. Such a
Council is but an assembly of men, and those sometimes not of the most able
and sufficient. The Church Universal may have many more able members, out of
the Council, then she has in it. For though that represe^ting body, have all
the legal power or binding strength of the whole, yet it has not all the
natural power or wisdom which is in the whole. The Catholic Church cannot
possibly communicate her strength or power in that kind to any Council. Yet
suppose the best of men to be in that meeting; even they are but men when all
is done, neither all of them equal in the endowments of nature or grace, nor
any of them perfect, being every one subject to all the infirmities and
passions which attend our nature. Their meeting then cannot make them
infallible in all things; though the act that is hammered out by so many heads,
must needs in reason be perfecter, then that which is the issue of one man's
sufficiency.

But happily they are infallibly assisted! No doubt, the holy infallible Spirit
assists at all such holy meetings; but how Math. 18. 20.
far, or in what manner, is all the doubt. The good Spirit ever assists the
endeavors of the devout and diligent, so far as is necessary: and is ready to
guide them that are desirous to be guided by him. But his guidance is not a
violent rapture, or a wild Enthusiasme; but in searches of truth He ever
directs us to the infallible rule of truth, the Scripture. And it is possible
that a General Council may misapply, or misunderstand, or neglect that rule,
weakly or wilfully; and so err, notwithstanding the Spirits assistance. A
lawful Council may in some things proceed not lawfully, and so err, says
Bellar. lib. 2. de Council. cap. 7.. Respondeo. Concilium.
Bellarmine; nay says he, Id. ibid. c. 8. Alii dicunt.
it may chance to be most manifestly convicted of an intolerable error. His
meaning is, they may be deceived where they follow not the instructions of the
Pope: as Id. ibid. c. 11. in titulo.
elsewhere he expresses himself. We say, and with more reason, no Council is
further privileged then it follows the instructions of Jesus Christ, and of
his Scriptures, whose warrant all unerring Counsels have had for their
decrees, and all Counsels must have that will not err.

Besides, Bellar. de Council l. 2. c. 12. Dicuntur igitur. Co^cilia per
ratiocinationem deducunt conclusiones. and iterum ibidem. Alteru^ discrimen.
Patres in Concil^is debent rem ipsam quaerere, id est; conclusiones investigate
disputando, legendo, cogitando.
the Fathers in a Council are discursive in their deliberations: they use the
weights and moments of reason for the drawing out of conclusions from their
principles. Wherein Staplet Relect. Cont. 4. qu. 2. notab. 2. Ecclesia in
singulis mediis non habet infallibilem Sp. S. directionem, sed potest in illis
adhibendis probabili interdum, non semper necessaria collectione uti*
it is confessed they may mistake by ignorance or negligence; being not herein
infallibly directed, and making collections sometime but probable. Now fal^ible
principles can never produce an infallible conclusion.

Yet Relect. contr. 4. qu. 2. Notab. 4.
Stapleton here has a new pret^y device, that the Church though she be
fallible and discursive in the Means, is yet prophetical, and depends upon
immediate revelation (and so infallible) in delivering the conclusion. Which is
a fancy ^epugnant to reason and and to it self. for to infer a conclusion by
argument or discourse, and yet to expect the same conclusion from immediate
revelation, his is to argue and not to argue; to in^er it, yet not by
inference. A conclusi^n follows the disposition of the Means and results from
them. A proposition immediately inspired without discourse may be a divine
prophecy, or an oracle, but it is not a conclusion. And what use can there be
of diligence or discourse in Counsels, if all their conclusions come by divine
inspiration? Propheticke infallibility is a mere 1. Cor. 12. 10.
gift of God, which cannot be acquired or increased by study: neither can a
Prophet be discursive in that which he delivers from God as an infallible
truth. And if the Canons of Counsels be divinely inspired, then they must be
admitted into the Code of holy Scriptures, as of equal authority with them;
which though Vide Can. loco. lib. 5. c. 5. qu. 3.
some grosser Papists admit, yet the Bell. de Council. lib. 2. c. 12.
wisest dislike and deny. Upon these or the like grounds, Bellarmin leaves his
companion Stapleton to walk alone in this dangerous path; and avowes to the
contrary, Ibid.. Dicuntur igitur.
that Counsels neither have, nor write immediate revelations.

Yet may some decrees of Counsels, in regard of their matter and consonancy to
Scripture, be of divine and infallible truth; as those of the first Counsels
against Arrius, Macedonius and the rest. If in other things of lesser moment,
or in any thing they err or mistake, the Universal Church has means of
remedy; either by antiquating those errors with a general and tacit consent,
or by representing her self again in an other General Council, which may
review and correct the defects of the former; as the great Council of
Chalcedon, did with the second of Ephesus. So says De Baptis. contr. Donat.
lib. 2. cap. 3.
S. Augustine, Provincial Counsels may be corrected by plenarie; and plenarie
Counsels the former by the latter; But still all examined by Scripture and
submitted to it, as the same Father Aug. ad Donat. post Collat. ca. 15. Item.
l. 3. contr. Maxim. and de unit. Eccl. cap. 18. and 19.
constantly teaches.

But if our Mistaker will be ingenuous and speak out, he will confess that he
means by his infallible Church only the Church virtuall, that is, only the
Pope. In whom alone all the virtue and power of the Church is eminently
contained; by whom all Counsels must be judged and all Controversies
determined; on whom the whole frame of the Roman Catholic faith depends, and
into whom it is lastly resolved. For this is the new Catholic doctrine of his
new Masters, especially of the Fathers of hi^ society: who teach with great
consent* that Bell. lib. 4. de Romans P. c. 3.. Secundo, probatur. Quilibet
Successor Petri est petra and fundamentum Ecclesiae.
every Successor of S. Peter is the rock and foundation of the Church; tha^
Skulkenius Apol. pro Bell. cap. 6 page 255. Pontificia potestas est velut
cardo, fundamentum, and (ut uno verbo omnia complectar) summa fidei
Christianae. Vide Bell. Praef. in lib. de R. P.
the Popes authority is the hinge, foundation, and (in brief) the sum of
Christian faith: that Gretser. Defens. cap. 10. lib. 3. (...) verb. Dei. page
1450, and 1451. per Ecclesiam intelligimus Pont. Romanu^ Et, per Ecclesiam
Papam interpretantur, Non abnuo. Franc. Albe^^ Corollar. Theolog. Tom 1. Corol.
4. punc. 7. number. 35. 36. Dico primo quod praeter veritatem primam revelantem,
est in universo aliqu^ regula infallibilis, animata, rationalis, qualis est
Ecclesia. Quo^ autem haec regula animata, rationalis, sit summus Pont. Romanus,
n^^ est hic locus proprius probandi, sed inter recentiores videndus Valent. 22.
q. 1. and Card. Bell. and Medina-Dico secundo, stante hac regula ration^^^
infallibili, omnes Articuli fidei ultimate resolvuntur in ipsam, tanqu^^ in
rationem formalem, qua, in proponendo --
by the Church is understood the Pope, in Greg. de Valenti^ Anal. fid. lib. 8.
cap. 7.. Porro. Authoritas quae in uno Pontifice re^det, authoritas dicitur
Ecclesiae and Conciliorum.
whom alone resides all the authority of the Church and o^ Counsels: that
Bell. l. 4 de Ro^ P. cap. 3.. At contra. Apparet totam firmitatem Conciliorum
esse^ Pontifice, non partim a Pontifice, partim a Concilio. vide Long. a Cori^
in Sum. Council. praelud. 6.
the strength of all Counsels depends upon him alone: that Gretser. defens.
cap. 1. lib. 1. de ver^ Dei p. 16. Id solum pro verbo Dei veneramur ac
suscipimus, quod no^^^ Pontifex ex Cathedra Petri, tanquam supremus
Christianorum Mag^ster, ac omnium Controversiarum Judex definiendo proponit.
he i^ the supreme Master of Christians, and judge of all Controversies; and
whatsoever ^e propounds out of his chair (and that ^nely,) must be received as
the word of God: that his judgment is so absolutely infal^ible, Valent. Anal.
fid. lib. 8. cap. 3. ad 6. object. sive Pontifex in definiendo studium adhibeat
sive non adhibeat, modo tamen controversiam definiat, infallibiliter certe
definiet.
that whether he be careful or negligent in his definitions it matters not,
let him but define, and without doubt he defines infallibly: that Jesuitae in
Regulis Patavii inter schedas relictis An. 1606. quum illinc ob interdictum
discederent: reg. 13. Apud. Paulum Soarpium Theologum Venerum in Histor.
Interd. lib. 2.
if he (who is the Hier^rchicall Church) define that to be white which the eye
judges to be black, it must be so admitted: that Bell. de R. P. lib. 4. cap.
5.. Quod autem. Si Papa erraret precipiendo vitia vel prohibedo virtutes,
teneretur Ecclesia credere vitia esse bona and virtutes malas, nisi vellet
contra conscientiam peccare.
if he should err, and command the practice of vice, or forbid the exercise of
virtue, the Church were bound in conscience, to believe vices to be good and
virtues to be bad. This is plain dealing. Scriptures are obscure, unless the
Pope interpret them. All Fathers and Counsels may err, unless the Pope
confirm them. The Church without him, is a body without an head, an house
without a foundation. Controversies cannot be decided, but only by his
definition; and in that there can be no error, nor any appeal from it. But
this being so, these men deal not plainly with us, when they pretend often in
their dispu^ations against us, Scriptures, and Fathers, and Counsels, and the
Church: since in the issue their final and infallible argument for their faith
is only the Popes authority.

But infallibly there is nothing in Scripture which favors this infallibility:
unless the Pope may be admitted to expound it, which he will do infallibly for
his own advantage. And as little in reason, or in Antiquity. The Ancient
Church was very careful to conserve the purity of the faith against heresies.
Some Tertullian. Vinc Lirin.
Fathers have written purposely of the plea's or prescriptions which the Church
has against them, and how Catholic doctrine may be discerned and maintained;
to wit, by authority of Scripture, and tradition of the Catholic Church. If
they had believed the Bishop of Rome to be the infallible Judge, surely
(without more a do) they had appealed all Heretics to his Tribunal. And
what needed the Christian Emperors anciently (and sometime at the request of
the Bishops of Rome themselves,) to have gathered together so many Bishops,
from so distant parts of the world, to celebrate General Counsels; if this
had been then known or imagined, that Counsels can conclude nothing to
purpose without the Pope; and that his sentence alone must clear all
controversies, and silence all Heresies? Nay, his judgment has been formally
opposed and rejected anciently, by particular Doctors, (men of eminency and
esteem in the Catholic Church,) by Counsels Provincial and General; by
the Churches of the East for above 800 years now past; and the only cause of
that Schism is by the Greeks cast upon the vast ambition, and pretensions of
the Bishop of Rome; Nilus Thessalon. de causes dissidii inter Graecos and
Latinos. (...).
Who refuses to have the grounds of that dissension fairly heard and discussed
in a General Council; but, in a Masterly fashion, will needs be judge
himself in his own cause, and have all men besides stand by, and obey him as
his Scholars. And here in the West, it is not long since the Counsels of
Constance and Basil, deposed some Popes, and decreed against all, that as
inferiors they may be sentenced by Counsels. And their judgment herein has
been ever constantly avowed, and maintained by the best learned Vide Vigor. in
Comment. ad Resp. Synod. Basil. Em. Richer. de Ecclesiastica and Polit.
potestate. Iac. Leschass. de liberate Eccl. Gallicanae ap. Laur. Bochell.
Decret. Eccles. Gall. l. 4. tit. 21. Revision du Concile de Trente liu. 4. etc.
Roman Catholics of France, as a branch of the liberties of the Gallican
Church; and by the Sorbon it self, till of late Du Val and Similes.
some of that body have been corrupted, by the practices of the Jesuits, to
flatter the Pope contrary to their own ancient Maxims, and (as I verily
think) contrary to their own judgment. For however the Authors of this
imagination can be content to abuse simple people, persuading them that the
Pope is infallible; yet I am persuaded Franc. a Victor. Relect. 4 de Potest.
Pa. and Council. prop. 12. ad fin. Da mihi Clementes, Linos, Sylvestros, and
omnia permittam arbitrio eorum. Sed, ut nihil gravius dicatur in recentiores
Pontifices, certe multis partibus sunt priscis illis inferiores.
they are so far from beleiving it themselves, that they secretly deride all
those that believe it, well knowing it to be but one of their holy frauds
devised for the advancement of their Catholic cause.

If this then be the infallible ground and motive of our Mistakers faith,
without doubt all his faith (in this point, and so in all the rest which depend
on this) is but a fancy, and comes far short of a probable opinion. Especially
considering that in all this conceit of the Popes authority and infallibility,
there is no certain ground for a divine faith to build upon: nay, there is
nothing but uncertainties and probabilities. Divine faith must have a firm and
divine foundation that cannot fail or deceive: it cannot rely on conjectures,
on which only this pretended infallibility relies. As may shortly appear by
this that follows.

S. Peter sat many years Bishop of Rome, and there he died. Well, grant this;
though it seems it can hardly be proved. For Bellarmines first reason for it
is so weak, that himself says only Bell. lib. 2. de Romans Pont. cap. 4..
Restant.
suadere videtur, it seems to persuade; it does not convince but persuade, and
but seem to do so. There God commanded him to fix his Chair, and to leave his
full power to his heirs and Successors, the Popes. But what certainty of this?
Indeed says Bell. lib. 2. de Romans P. cap. 12.. Observandum est tertio.
Bellarmine, it is no where expressed in Scripture that the Pope succeeds S.
Peter, and therefore happily it is not of divine right that he succeeds him;
Bell. ibid.. Et quoniam. and lib. 4. de R. P. cap. 4.. Accedit.
yet it is not improbable that God commanded him to fasten his seat at Rome,
and it may be devoutly so believed. Happily it is thus, and happily otherwise.
This is not improbable, nor that. This may be believed, and may not be. Here Is
some little feeble ground for opinion, none at all for faith: a conjecturall
certainty here may be, no certainty of faith at all.

Yet further: if S. Peter left this privilege of infallibility to his Chair,
surely he left it only to his lawful Successors; such as were lawfully
elected and ordained Bishops of Rome, not to intruders. But here again we have
nothing but mere uncertainties.

For first, Onuphrius, and other Roman Writers have noted six and twenty
several Schisms in the Sea of Rome; wherein two Antipopes, and sometime
three, have each one pretended to the Chair, and pretended also their claim
to be just and reasonable, disabling their concurrents as unjust and
unreasonable. The last of these Schisms continued above 40 years; from Urban.
6. until the Council of Constance: during which time all these Western parts
were distracted, and perplexed, Plat. in Vrb. 6. Adeo perplexum fuit Schisma ut
etiam doctissimi viri and conscientiosi non valerent discutere, cui esset magis
adhaerendum.
as Platina says, the most learned and devout men being not able to judge
which of the pretenders was the true Pope. If the faith of Christians did then
depend on the infallible Pope, then infallibly all that while Christians had no
means to setle their faith in any thing that should be questioned.

Again, by the Popes own Leo PP. apud Gratian. Cons. 1. qu. 1. Can. Gratia.
Gratia si non gratis datur vel accipitur, gratia non est. Simoniaci autem non
gratis accipiunt; igitur gratiam, quae maxim in Ecclesiasticis ordinibus
operatur, non accipiunt. Si aute^ non accipiunt, non habent, nec gratis, nec
non gratis, cuiqua^ dare possunt. Quid ergo dant? profecto quod habent. Quid
autem habent? Spiritum utique mendacii. Bull. Iul. 2. Si contingat Simoniace
quenquam ad Pontificatum promoveri, electio ipsius, seu assumptio ad
Pontificatum, co ipso nulla existat; nec ullam electo seu assumpto
administrandi facultatem vel in spiritualibus, vel in temporalibus tribuat, and
a nemine pro Pontifice Romano habeatur. -- Imo liceat omnibus Electum talem, ut
Magum, Ethnicum, Publicanum and Haeresiarcham evitare.
Canons, all ordinations of men promoted symoniacally, or for money, are mere
nullities, of no validity. Now it is clear, out of their own Baronius ad an.
Chr. 912.. 8. Romae tunc dominabantu^ potentissimae ae que ac sordidissimae
meretrices, quarum arbitrio mutabantur seeds, dabantur Episcopi, and (quod
auditu horrendum atque infandum est) in Sedem Petri earum amasii
Pseudo-Pontifices intrudebantur. Nusquam cleri eligentis, vel consentientis
post a populi aliqua mentio: Canones omnes pressi silentio, decreta Pontificum
suffocata, proscriptae antiquae traditiones, veteresque in eligendo summo
Pontifice consuetudines, sacrique ritus ac pristini usus prorsus extincti.
Genebrard. Chronol. ad an. 901. Per annos fere centum quinquaginta, a Johanne
scilicet. 8. ad Leonem 9. usque, Pontifices circiter quinquaginta a virtute
majorum prorsus defecerunt: Apotactici, Apostaticive potius quam Apostolici;
quando non per ostium sed per posticum ingrediebantur.
Historians, that very many Popes have been simonically advanced to the
chair. And who can be infallibly assured that Leo 10th, or Paul 5th, or Urban
8th, or any Pope whosoever has been fairly and freely elected without any
corruption of rewards or promises? A Roman Catholic may wish or hope well,
that his Holiness has entered Canonically: (though, if the Mant. lib. 3. de
Calam. Tem. -- Romae Templa, Sacerdotes, altaria, sacra, coronae Ignis, thura,
Preces, Coelum est venale Deusque.
Monk Mantuan said true, his hope must needs be mixed with very much fear;)
but he cannot be Puteanus in 2. 2. qu. 1. A. 6. Dub. ult. Papam existe^tem
(verbi gratia Paulum. 5.) esse verum vicarium Christi and successorem Petri,
non est absolute de fide Catholica. 1. Quia supponit haec duas istas alias
propositiones, Paulus 5. est baptizatus, and Paulus 5. est canonice electus in
To. Pontificem; at neutra ex istis duabus est de fide Catholica absolute. --
sure. And if he be not sure that any of them is Pope, he is not sure of his
infallibility.

But besides all this, it is a thing most certain that no Roman Catholic in
the world can be certain of any Pope, that he is either a Bishop, or a Priest,
or even a Christian. For this is one point of their Catholic doctrine Decret.
Eugenii post Council. Florent.
that the force and virtue of all Sacraments depends on the intention of all
the Minister, who, if he have not an intention to do as the Church does, all
he does is nothing, he confers no Sacrament. And accordingly Andr Veg. lib. 9.
de Iustific. cap. 17. Nemini potest per fidem constare se recepisse vel minimum
Sacramentum. Estque hoc ita certum ex fide, ac clarum est nos vivere. Nulla
siquidem est via, qua citra revelationem, nosse possumus intentionem
ministrantis, vel evidenter, vel certo ex fide. Bellarm. lib. 3. de Iustif.
cap. 8.. Dicent. Non potest quis esse certus certitudine fidei, se percipere
verum Sacramentum; cum Sacramentum sine intention Ministri non conficiatur,
and intentionem alterius nemo videre potest.
they grant, that no man can possibly know (otherwise then by bare conjecture)
whether himself, or any other, have received either Baptism, or Orders, or
any Sacrament: being impossible for him to know the intention of the Minister.
None is capable of holy orders, unless he be baptized. Pope Urban 8. then
cannot be either Bishop or Priest, unless he were made a true member of the
Church by true baptism. And he was not truly baptized, or ordained, if the
Bishop ordaining him, or the Priest baptizing him, (or any other who formerly
baptized or ordained them) failed in their intention. And whether they did so
fail, neither Urban himself nor any man else can be assured, no not by an
humane certainty, much less by a divine faith. How then, is our Mistaker sure
that his Pope is the infallible Head of the Church, when he cannot be sure that
he is a member of it?

Lastly, admit the Pope infallible in his definitions, yet how can any Papist
in Europe (excepting only those few that stand by and hear his Holiness when
he gives out his Oracles,) be infallibly sure what it is which he has defined?
Their assurance hereof is only so much faith as they can give to the reports
of their Priests and Jesuits: which at the best can produce in them but a
strong opinion, unless they can believe their Priests and Jesuits also to be
infallible in their relations.

It much concerns our Mistaker, and all Roman Catholics to consider, how
feeble and wavering that faith must be which is concluded from these slippery
principles. Every lawful Bishop of Rome is infallible, but Urban the 8th is
lawful Bishop of Rome, therefore he is infallible. And then again. Whatsoever
Urban the 8th. defines is infallibly true, but this or that Urban has defined,
therefore it is infallibly true. In these Syllogisines imagine the Propositions
to be certain and true, (as they are most certainly false,) yet the assumptions
to a very Roman Catholic, at the most can be but probable, he cannot be
certain of either. Not certain that Urban was lawfully ordained, and elected
into the chair; nor certain that out of his chair he has published this or
that definition. An opinion or a conjecture of these things he may have; but he
cannot have certainty, and much less divine faith. Wherefore, since the
conclusion cannot be stronger then the weaker of the Premises, his faith is
not divine nor certain, but only a conjecture, or an opinion. Unless happily
he can comfort himself with that witty invention of Cardinal Bell. l. 1. de
Purg. cap. 4.. Respondeo, non.
Bellarmine, who thinks a firm conclusion may follow out of feeble premises
by the rules of prudence, though not by the rules of Logic.

We may now conclude this point, and return our Mistakers words upon himself.
If his faith be grounded on so fallible a motive as the Popes infallibility,
it is clear that he has no true divine or supernatural faith at all, but
only opinion, or persuasion, or humane belief.

Charity mistaken. Chap. 7.
PRotestants object that Roman Catholics are not at unity among themselves,
as appears by many question^ wherein their Writers are at variance. Answer
Catholic Doctors differ only in matters of opinion not decided by the
Church, not in any points of faith. And besides their differences are all
fairly carried, without any breach of charity. If it be again objected, that
learned Catholics believe more then the unlearned. Answ. This hinders not
their unity. It suffices the vulgar to believe implicitly what the Church
teaches. And by virtue of such implicit faith a Cardinal Bellarmin, and a
Catholic Collier are of the same belief.

Answer Sect. 6.
DIssentions in the Church of Rome of greater importance then any among the
Reformed. They differ not only in opinion, but in matters of their faith. As
about the Popes authority; and the Popes themselves about their vulgar Latin
Bibles. Discords among them uncharitably pursued. Some patterns of their
mutual bitterness and revilings. Implicit faith, in some points, and in some
men, admitted. What it is which we here dislike in the doctrine of some
Romanists.

THe Mistaker has formerly upbraided us with our discords in Religion: Now, he
pretends there is great Unity in doctrine among his Roman Catholics. With
little reason, and with as little ingenuitie. For certainly if in this point we
be not innocent, they are much more guilty. The truth is, that old complaint of
Optatus fits our times better then his, Lib. 5.
Omnes contentiosi homines sumus, there is but too much quarrelling on all
sides, which exposes our holy faith to the scorn of Infidells, and ill
beseemes them that pretend (as we do all,) to serve and follow the Prince of
peace. But sure the Romanists are not in case to fasten this reproach on us,
since it will reflect more strongly on themselves, who have many more, and more
weighty Controversies among their own Doctors, then those of ours.

For our dissensions I have already said enough (if not to justify, yet) to
excuse them. To which I now add, by way of just recrimination, that they are
both for their number, and in their nature, of far less importance, then the
dissensions in his Roman Church.

But our Mistaker answers in the behalf of his jarring Doctors, two things. 1.
that they differ only in some schoole-questions of opinion, not in matters of
faith. 2. that they dissent in judgment only, without breach of charity. But
in both the parts of this answer, I shall briefly let him see that he is
Mistaken.

His first plea is a very true and reasonable Apology for our Reformed
Churches, but not so for his Roman. Our controversies are none of them, in the
substance of faith, but only in disputable opinions, not clearly defined in
Scripture; wherein learned and charitable men do each one abound in his ow^
sense, still keeping the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. The sum of
our faith is the same which we have received from the Apostles. We have no^
added any new Articles to the Creed nor do we differ about any of the old ones.
But they of Bulla Pii. 4. post Council. Trident.
Rome have enlarged the Creed of Christians one moity; and will needs have the
world to believe many things as points of faith, which at the best are but
doubtful opinions; among all which there is hardly one wherein themselves do
fully agree. The The new title of Cardinals by the decre of Pope Urban. Jun.
10. 1630. See it in the French Merc. Tome 16. page 592.
most eminent Cardinal Bellarmine, in his Controversies against us, has
fairly confessed (as has been formerly noted,) that each opinion almost is
controverted amongst themselves. A Contradictiones DD. Romans Eccl. ex Rob.
Bellarmino. Autore Joan. Pappo Argentorati. Ann. 1597. Vide etiam Matthiam
(...) (...) Sectis and controversiis religionis Papisticae Basil. 1565.
German Doctor has collected out of Him their contradictions, and set them
down in his own words, to the number of 237. and withal a Catalogue of such
Roman Writers as Bellarmine himself has contradicted and confuted, which
contains the most part of Writers in his own Church, famous for learning in
later ages.

Ioannes de Radae has filled two gross volumes with the contentions of the
Thomists and Scotists. And the Dominicans and Jesuits have filled libraries
with their quarrels in the matter of Grace and Freewill: wherein either side
pretends the definition of the Trent Council for their contrary opinions. It
seems that Council (like the Devil in the old Oracles,) has deluded them
both with ambiguous sentences: Or, if the definition be clear, one of the
Factions does obstinately contradict it. Why does not his Holiness all this
while interpose, and give out his infallible judgment in the questions? If he
will not, he wants charity toward his own children; if he cannot, how is he
the infallible Judge? Or is it rather his wary wisdom, not hastily to decide
Controversies, wherein witty and learned men on both sides are engaged: As
Widdrington and his followers have done. See Widdringtons Purgation against the
Popes Decree, wherein he was condemned for an Heretic and no child of the
Church.
lest in stead of changing their opinions, they should fall to challenge not
only the infallibility (but which were more dangerous) the authority of their
Judge; and in stead of reforming their own judgment, despise his.

The most capital point of all others in their new Creed is that of the Popes
authority, and that obedience which he challenges in spiritual and temporal
matters: yet of all others they are most at discord among themselves about this
point, The old doubts are not yet resolved, whether he be under or above a
General Council, and whether he may err in his definitive sentence, some
advance him with privileges above the condition of men. Others think more
soberly of his power, and are bold to resist him, when they see him abuse it.
In the Trent Council the Spanish Bishops stood stoutly for the independency of
Episcopal authority, and strongly maintained residence to be de jure divino;
being overborne only with most voices by the Italian faction. The Divines of
Venice in the late quarrels of pope Paul the 5. against that State, neglected
the Popes Interdict; so that he was fain, with shame enough, to revoke his
Censures. Voiez la Declaration de l' Assemblee Generale du Clerge de France.
An. 1625.
Very lately the Bishops of France have brought the Regulars of that Kingdom
under their jurisdiction, notwithstanding their exemptions by the Pope. And
whereas his Flatterers tell him, that he has either directly, (as Carerius,
Bosius etc.
some say) or indirectly, (as Bell. etc.
others, to the same purpose) a Tempor all Monarchy over all the earth; that
all Princes are his vassals, and may be deposed when he thinks fit; that he
may dispense with subjects for their oath of Allegiance, and license them to
take arms against their Sovereigns: Many good Catholics detest these
damnable doctrines, and have Barclay. Withrington. The Divines of Venice.
confuted them, as tending to bring ruin and confusion on all states; and in
France the seditious books of Mariana, Bellarmine, Becanus, Suarez,
Santarellus, and such like, containing these horrible Maxims of the Society,
have been cast into the fire by the hand of the public Hangman.

But among their discords there is none more memorable, or of greater
consequence, then that of the two Popes Sixtus 5. and Clement 8. about their
vulgar See Dr James his Bellum Papale, and Cortuptions of the Fathers part. 3.
Latin Bibles. When the Council of Trent declared that Translation only to be
authentical, there were abroad in the World above 60. several Editions of it,
each differing from other. Which Sixtus taking into consideration with great
diligence and advise of many Cardinals, he compared the Copies, and out of them
all published one, which he straightly commanded to be received as the only true
Vulgar; by a solemn Bull abolishing all others which did not exactly, ad
verbum, and ad literam agree with that; and was so curious as with his own
hand to correct many errors escaped in the Press, because he would have it
more complete. This Bible was published with the Popes Declaration before it,
the year 1590. a Copy whereof is extant (though they have consumed as many as
they could) in the public Library of Oxford. Clement 8. shortly after,
observing many defects and corruptions in that Edition, published another, with
the very like Declaration, wherein he authorizes only his own Bible, revoking
all others. These two Bibles infinitely differ, not only in words, phrases,
and entire verses, but in very many absolute and direct contradictions: yet are
they both equally justified, and equally enjoined, under the penalty of a curse
to them that obey not. So as hereby all Roman Catholics are involved in a
miserable necessity, either to use no Bible at all, or to undergo the curse of
Pope Sixtus if they use that of Clement, or of Pope Clement if they use the
other of Sixtus. Nothing can be said with truth or reason to salve this
contradiction. Now I suppose our Mistaker will yield, that the authentical
Edition of the Bible, and the Popes Authority are not matters of opinion only.
Their differences therefore are not only in matters of opinion.

The second part of his Answer for his Doctors is, that their differences are
all fairly and peaceably carried without any breach of charity. Happy were the
poor Church of Christ, if all Controversies in Religion might be so handled:
but it has been and is her misery, that it is far otherwise. And here again
the Roman Part is as guilty (at least,) as the Reformed. I love not to be
raking in dunghills: Yet to show the Mistaker, that Lutherans alone are not
troubled with passions of the Spleen, I will give him some few examples of
Papists railing as unmercifully at their own Brethren, as they are wont to do
at us.

Alex. Carerius is so zealous for the Popes direct temporal Monarchy, that
all who deny it are, in his language, Carerius in tit. libri sui, and lib. 2.
cap. 12. Quorum.
impious politicians, and heretics, and their reasons all false heretical
dotages. Now it is denied by the Cardinals Bell. lib. 5. de R. Pont. cap. 1..
Tertia.
Bellarmin, Turrecremata, Cajetan, and a great number of other learned
Romanists.

In that bitter contention between the Seculars and Jesuits of this Kingdom
in the year 1600, and after, about the authority of Blackwell the Archpriest;
the two Factions are notably deciphered each by other. The Seculars by the
Parsons his Apol. for Subord. chapter 4. 8. etc. and the Table prefixed.
Jesuits to be mad heads, seditious libellers, notorious calumniators,
factious, turbulent, obstinate brawlers, tumultuous, of scandalous life,
writing evident egregious malicious untruths, impudent fictions, and wicked
slanders; rebels, betrayers of the Catholic cause, etc. On the other side the
Jesuits by the Watsons Quodlibet. page 61. 151. and passim.
Seculars to be Schismatiques, Donatists, Anabaptists, Arrians, Vipers, men
that run such a desperate course, as if Religion were but a mere political
and Atheall devise; living by the principles of Machiavell, taught by their
Arch-rabbies how to maintain (with equivocations,) dissimulation, detraction,
ambition, sedition; surfeiting sorer then ever did Heliogabalus; busied in
setting division, breeding of jealousy, and making of hostile strife, by
opposition of King against King, State against State, Priest against Priest,
Peer against Peer, Parents against Children, raising of rebellions,
murdering of Princes, making uprores every where. Men unworthy to be called
Religious, or Catholics, or Christians: For howsoever they boast of their
perfections, holiness, meditations, and exercises, yet their plots are
heathenish, tyrannical, satanicall, and able to set Aretine, Lucian,
Machiavell, yea and Don Lucifer, to school. Wicked Jesuits, who would have
all Catholics to depend on the Archpriest, when as the Archpriest depended
upon father Garnet, Garnet on Parsons, and Parsons upon the Devil, etc. These
are our Mistakers friends whom he commends so much for unity and charity. But
sure, if this be charity, it is, such as he calls in the title of his book,
Charity mistaken.

This very contention is now again of late revived amongst them, on the like
occasion, and pursued with the like intemperate bitterness, both in See the
Treatise of Paul Harris Priest against the Excommunication published against
him and D. Caddell, by the Archbishop of Dublin. Th. Flemming alias Barnewell,
a Franciscane Friar. Printed Anno 1632.
Ireland, and especially in this Kingdom. The present Pope Urban has given to
one Richard Smith the title of Bishop of Chalcedon, and has sent him (not to
reside upon his See, for that had been to punish him and send him a begging,
but) hither into England, appointing unto him for his Diocese the two
Kingdoms of England and Scotland; and investing him with the power and
jurisdiction of Ordinary over all his Catholics in these Kingdoms, without
any exception of Laity or Clergy, Secular or Regular. The Jesuits cannot
brook any subordination, but where some of their own command in chief.
Therefore being questioned by this Bishop for their Faculties, they straightway
question him for his Authority; and publish to the world in diverse Discussio
assertionum D. Kellisoni. Autore Nichol. Smithaeo. Apologia pro processione
sedis Apostolicae. Autore Daniele a Jesu. Declatatio Catholicoru^ Laicorum
Angliae.
Declarations that his power is merely usurped and pretended; that there is no
necessity either of particular Bishops for the government of particular
Churches, or of the Sacrament of Confirmation, especially in times and places
of persecution, (for so these men speak of the most mild government of our
most religious Sovereign:) that the Regulars, as such, are proper and
principal members of the Ecclesiastical Hierachie; that their state is a
state of greater perfection then that of Bishops or Presbyters; that their
exemption from the power of Bishops is essentially annexed to their condition;
that their privileges cannot be revoked, no not by the Pope, etc.

These Maxims, and the like pass for Catholic doctrine among the Jesuited
party. But on the other side they are condemned and censured (not only by
their own secular Clergy here, but) in France, by the Archbishop of Paris; by
34 of their other Bishops in a full assembly; and by the Sorbon to be Censura
quarundam propositionum per Facult. Parisiensem. Parisiis. 1631.
propositions rash, presumptuous, false, absurd, scandalous, profane, injurious
to Episcopal dignity, destructive to the Church, and heretical.

This Censure was quickly well washed with the bitter Sponge of John Floyd a
Jesuit, Aurelius in vindiciis page 385.
lurking under the name of Hermannus Loemelius, who charges the Sorbonists with
malice, ignorance, stupidity, schism and heresy; and with great scorn
insults upon them. But against him, the Censure and Censors are defended by two
Doctors of that Society, Hallier, and Aurelius, in two several Volumes. By
them the Author of the Sponge is accused of Idem Aurelius in libri sui titulo.
Hallier in Admon. ad Lect. p 8. 9. 16. 24.
lying, ignorance, and heresy, of profane scurrilitie; of blasphemy and
impiety; of furious, filthy and devilish railing; of unsufferable arrogance,
etc.

It were easy to note The like may be seen in Bzovius, and Cavellus, and their
Abbetters, about Scotus and Thomas. See also Harwartus Chanceler of Bavaria his
book against Bzovius, in defense of Lewis of Bavaria, against the base lying
slanders and aspersions cast upon that Emp. by Bzovius.
more such examples of this Roman Charity, if it were worth the while to look
after them. The Protestants may well comfort themselves when they suffer under
these sharp tongues, which so cruelly lash one another.

Now further that the Unity of Faith is not impeached, nor any discord in
Religion induced between learned men and the ignorant vulgar people, although
they differ much in the measure of their knowledge, and in the manner of their
assent to divine verities, it will be easily yielded to the Mistaker. And I do
not think, any learned Protestant will deny the great use of that
distinction, (which has ground in reason and nature,) between explicit and
implicit faith, for which he contends; if it be rightly interpreted, and all
faith, of what kind soever, directed upon the proper Object, which is holy
Scripture, and not the Church. The best advised of his own Catholic Bannes
in 2. 2. q. 2. art. 8.. Ultima sententia. Tolet. Instruct. Sacerd. lib. 4. c.
2. n. 9. and ibi Victorellus annot. ult. Aquin. 2. 2. q. 2. Art. 5. in Corp.
Divines yield that there are some points necessary to be known of all sorts,
necessitate medii, in which points implicit faith does not suffice; but
express particular knowledge is to be joined to the assent of faith in all
them that will be saved. This granted, we will yield that in other espencaeus
in 2. Tim. c. 3. dig. 17. p. 119. edit. Paris. 1564. Alia certe credibilia
implicit, and in animi praeparatione credant populares, quatenus parati sunt
credere quicquid Scriptura continet, explicit credituri, quum quid eis
constiterit in fidei doctrina tradi and contineri: in secundariis inquam
credendis, sive in iis quae fidei objecta per accidens vocantur. -- In
subtilibus item considerationibus. In istis fides simplicium velata atque
implicita valeat sufficiatque. In iis autem quae fidei per se sunt objecta, per
quae nimirum homines justi beatique fiunt, quales sunt superbenedictae
Trinitatis, incarnation isque Dominicae articuli, definita opus est adultis and
explicita fide: nec sufficeret decantata hodie per Catholicos carbonarii fides.
--
matters of great difficulty, and not of such absolute necessity, a general,
infolded, or virtuall belief may suffice to some persons, who either want
capacity or means of better instruction: so as they diligently and conscionaby
endeavor to increase their knowledge, not affecting ignorance; and withal
carry an humble preparation of mind to believe distinctly and particularly any
truth when it is cleared unto them out of the word of God. In this case, that
of S. Augustine Contra Epist. Fundam. cap. 4.
is most true: not the vivacity or quickness of understanding, but the
simplicity of beleiving does make the common sort of people most safe.

In some sense, the faith of the best learned Clerks in the world, may truly
be said to be an implicit faith. For though the assent of faith be more
certain (if it be possible) then that of sense, or science, or demonstration,
because it rests on divine Authority, which cannot possibly deceive: yet is it
also an assent inevident and obscure, both in regard of the object, which are
things Heb. 11. 1.
that do not appear; and in respect of the subject, the eye of faith in this
state of mortality being dim, and apprehending heavenly things as through 1.
Cor. 13. 12.
a glass, darkly. Our faith is not yet 2. Cor. 5. 7. 1. Pet. 1. 8.
sight, or vision, till we be in our heavenly Country. And therefore though any
faithful man may apprehend the (...) or the revelation of God in Scripture,
that the Mysteries of our Religion (the Trinity, the Hypostaticall union, and
the like) are divine and true: yet no faithful man can fully comprehend the
(...), the reason or manner how these Mysteries are true. Here Orig. (...).
lib. 1. proaem. Sancti Apostoli fidem Christi praedicantes -- quae cunque
necessaria omnibus credentibus crediderunt, manifestissime tradiderunt,
rationem assertionum relinquentes inquitendam. De aliis dixerunt quidem, quia
sint, quomodo autem aut unde sint siluerunt. Cyrill. Hieros. Catech. 11. (...).
Theodoret. de provid. lib. 10. sub. fin. (...).
faith for bears all curious and bold inquisitions, and requires not any
distinct knowledge, but sits down involved in an humble and devout ignorance,
leaving these secrets only to God.

The things which we dislike in the doctrine of implicit faith, as it is
delivered by some Roman D Drs, are specially two.

1. They teach that implicit faith alone, and of it self may suffice to
salvation without any distinct knowledge, or explicit faith, of any Article in
the Creed. This is the doctrine of many Parisiensis, Altisiodorensis. Summa
Rosella: fi fides adhibenda fit Banni^ in 2. 2. qu. 2. A. 8.. Secunda
sententia. Richardus Mediavill. Soto, Vega, apud Lorin. in Act. 10. 2.
learned Writers in the Church of Rome (if others do them no wrong,) who hold,
that it is not necessary to believe any Article of the faith expressly, no not
in this time of grace after the clear publication of the Gospel, but that it
is enough to believe all which the Church believes. So as if a man be demanded
whether Christ were borne of a virgin, or whether God be one, and three in
Persons, he may answer, I cannot tell, but I believe all that the Church
beleives: and this faith may justify and save him. The model of this faith is
that confession of the Catholic Collier, so much memorated and applauded by
Hofius, Pighius, Staphylus. and his Translator Stapleton.
them, as a very good faith, and the safest way of beleiveing, yea more safe
then the meditation and exercise of the Scripture.

2. They make this implicit faith to rest it self, not on the Scripture, the
only foundation and rule of faith, but on the Church: still meaning by the
Church (not the Church Catholic, or any sound member of it, but) only the
Church of Rome, that is, the Pope assisted with some few of his Cardinals and
Prelates. Wherein, the Church of Rome manifestly aims to erect her own absolute
sovereignty over the consciences and faith of Christian people. Whatsoever
these Masterly Doctors shall define or prescribe in matters of faith, that,
they say, must be received without Greg. de Valentia. Anal. fid. lib. 8. cap.
6.. Quod vero. Sine contradictione ulla obedire iussi homines sunt Sacerctoti
judicanti-Quod ipsum persuadere nobis de summo Ecclesiae Pastore and nunc
jubemur.
contradiction, yea without Bellarm. de verbi Dei interpret. lib. 3. c. 10..
Septimu^ arg. Christiani tenentur doctrinam Ecclesiae recipere, and non
dubitare an h^c ita se habeant. Et ib.. Addo. Debet Christianus sine examine
recipere doctrinam Eccles. Et ib. ad arg. 16. Doctor non proponit sententiam
suam ut necessario sequendam, sed solum quatenus ratio suadet: at Judex
proponit ut sequendam necessario. Patres sunt Doctores, Concilia vero and
Pontifices sunt Judices.
examination, yea though it be Tannerus in Colloq. Ratisbon. Sess. 9. Si
Praepositi Eccles. in aliquo dubio definiendo errarent, populus Christianus vi
talis regiminis errare posset, imo deberet,
false and erroneous. This indeed is a sure means to keep the Court of Rome in
quiet possession of her tyranny and errors, if men may be persuaded to resign
unto her their judgment and reason, and yield her a blind and brutish
obedience in all things. The color is, that in all doctrines she is assisted
with an infallible Spirit, and therefore being all divine truths and
inspirations they may not be inquired into. The ordinary pretense of
Deceivers; of Dictum Apellis apud Eusebius. Hist. Eccleslib. 5. cap. 13. (...).
Apelles the old heretic in Eusebius, of Mahomet the great impostor, and of
some Others (besides the Romanists) in this age. But, as a learned man has
well observed, Ludov. Vives de verit. fidei Christ. li. 4. page 478. contra
errores Mahumetis. Tutissimum mentiendi genus est, nolle rationem eorum quae
dicas reddere, and veritatem dictorum ad Deum refer authorem, quem nemo de
veritate possit interrogare.
The safest way of lying, is for men to entitle God to their own dreams, and
for all reason to say they are heavenly verities which may not be examined.

It is very meet, that the ignorant people should obey Heb. 13. 17
their overseers in the Lord, and submit themselves to the Ministry and
direction of the Church, in many profound doctrines above their reach: But it
behooves them to have a distinct and comfortable knowledge of the essential
points of faith: and not securely to rest in a babish simplicity, but (so far
as God has enabled them) to Heb. 6. 1.
be led on to profection. To which purpose they are commanded to Joh. 5. 39
search the Scriptures, that they may 2 Pet. 3. 18.
grow, and Col. 1. 10.
increase in knowledge, that the Col. 3. 16.
word of Christ may dwell richly in them, and that they may be able both to
believe Romans 10. 10.
with the heart, and confess with their mouth, and render 1. Pet. 3. 15.
a reason of that hope, that is in them. The words of Lactantius lib. 2. cap.
8. Oportet in ea re maxim, in qua vitae ratio versatur, sibi quemque
confidere, suoque judicio ac proptiis sensibus niti ad investigandam and
perpendendam veritatem, quam credentem alienis erroribus decipi, tanqua^ ipsum
rationis expertem. Quare cum sapere, id est, veritatem quaerere, omnibus sit
innatu, sanientiamsibi adimunt, qui sine ullo judicio inventa majorum probant,
and ab aliis pecudum more ducuntur.
Lactantius to this purpose are observable: In those things which concern our
welfare and life, (especially that of our souls) it is fit for every man to
make use of his own discretion in the search and trial of truth, rather then
without reason to rely upon the credit of others that may abuse him. Every man
by nature desires to be wise, and to know the truth: And therefore they befoole
themselves, who without judgment follow the judgment of their leaders; which
is the property of sheep rather then of reasonable men. And by that of
Theodoret Graec. Affect. Curat. Sermon. 5. sub. fin. (...).
Theodoret we learn, what kind of knowledge the ancient Church required in
Christians. Every where, says he, you may see the points of our faith to be
known, not only by them who are Masters in the Church, and Teachers of the
people, but even of Cobblers, Smiths, and Weavers, and all kind of Artificers,
and of women also, which get their living with their hands, yea Maidservants
and Waitingwomen: Husbandmen also do very well know them, and Ditchers, and
Neate-herds, and Woodsetters. All these may ye find discoursing of the
Trinity, and the creation of things, and as skillful in the nature of man, as
Plato or Aristotle.

Charity mistaken. Chap. 8. 9.
THe Protestants pretend to be at unity with the Ancient Church, with the
Lutherans, and even with Roman Catholics in fundamental points. That
distinction (so ordinary with them) between fundamental points and not
fundamental, is vain, and without ground. No Protestant Writez, none of their
Universities, Colleges, or Societies of learned men amongst them, can or dare
define what doctrines are fundamental, or give us in a List or Catalogue of
fundamentalls. Some say they are contained in the Creed. But these men may be
^shamed of that opinion; seeing in the Creed there is no mention of the Canon
of Scripture; or of the number or nature of the Sacraments; of justification,
whether it be by faith alone, or by works; or of that doctrine of devils,
forbidding marriage and meats (which was the doctrine of the Manichees, and not
of Roman Catholics, as Protestants perversely affirm:) and finally since
there is such great differences between them and us about the understanding of
the Articles of Christ's Descent into Hell, of the holy Catholic Church, and
the Communion of Saints. Others say, the Book of the 39 Articles of the Church
of England, declares all the fundamental points of faith. But that also is
most absurdly affirmed. That Book declares only (and that in an extremely
confused manner,) what the Church of England believes in most things. And in
many Controversies between them and us, it speaks obscurely, not touching the
maine difficulty of the questions. As in the points of the visibility and
infallibility of the Church, of Freewill, and of the Canon of Scripture.

Answer Sect. 7.
THe distinction between doctrines fundamental and not fundamental avowed as
most necessary. It has ground in reason, and in Scripture. The Creed of the
Apostles (as it is explained in the latter Creeds of the Catholic Church)
esteemed a sufficient Summarie or Catalogue of fundamentalls, by the best
learned Romanists, and by Antiquity. The Mistakers exceptions to the contrary
answered. As also his expections against the confession of the Church of
England. The conclusion.

IN humane Sciences, the great Philosopher has taught us Analyt. Poster. lib.
1. c. 2.
to distinguish between (...) and (...), principles and conclusions. The first
principles are (...) and (...), Maxims so clear by their own light, that
they can not be proved, nor denied, or doubted of, by any man that understands
the Terms wherein they are propounded. In the bosom (as it were) of these
principles lurk innumerable conclusions, which must be deduced, and drawn out
by the help of Discourse; some of them issuing out immediately, and evidently,
others obscurely and by a long circuit of consequences; and are either
certain, or only probable, according as they approach nearer to the
principle, or are further off removed.

In like manner, that there be diverse degrees of truths and errors in
Religion, which necessarily must be distinguished, is a thing acknowledged by
all learned men, even in the Church of Rome, (expect our Mistaker will have
himself excepted.) 2. 2. qu. 2. art. 5. in Corp. Dicendum, quod fidei objectum
perse, est id per quod homo beatus efficitur: Per accidens aut secundario se
habent ad objectum fidei omnia quae in sacra Scriptura continentur; sicut quod
Abraham habuit. --
Aquinas, having divided the object of faith, into that which is so by it
self, and that which is by accident and secundarily, defines the First to be
that whereby a man is made blessed and saved; the Latter that which is
revealed, whatsoever it be; as that Abraham had two sons, and David was the
son of Iesse, etc. Dialog. part. 1. lib. 2. cap. 2.
Occham sets down three differences of verities to be believed. Some touching
God and Christ, whereon principally depends our Salvation; Non direct e sed
indirect e quodammodo ad salutem humani generis pertinere noscuntur.
as the doctrines of the Trinity, Incarnation, etc. Some whereon our salvation
depends not so principally or directly; as the Histories of Scripture: Of the
third sort, such as are not revealed; but either agree with that which is
revealed, or follow manifestly of it. Melchior Canus Locor. lib. 12. cap. 11.
init. Quaedam sunt Catholicae veritates, quae ita ad fidem pertinent, ut his
sublatis fides quoque ipsa tollatur. Quas nos, usu frequenti, non solum
Catholicas sed fidei veritates appellavimus. Aliae veritates sunt etiam ipsae
Catholicae and universales, nempe quas universa Ecclesia tenet; quibus licet
eversis fides quatitur, sed non evertitur tamen. Atque in hujusmodi veritatum
contrariis erroribus, dixi fidem obscurari non extingui, infirmari non perite.
Has ego nunquam sidei veritates censui vocandas, quamvis doctrinae Christianae
veritates sint. Canus iterum lib. 12. cap. 3. ad fin. Praeter articulos fidei,
omnia quae in sacris literis assumuntur -- tametsi non sunt fidei nec
Theologiae praecipua capita, sed his ex accidenti conjuncta, and quasi
principia secundaria; accipit tamen ea Theologus, non aliter ac Philosophus
principia per se nota, sine medio aut ratione -- Haec enim quasi naturalis
arque insira est in animis fidelium notio, ut quicquid ab Apostolis scriptum
traditumque est verum esse sentiant. Vide Staplet. Espenc. alios supracitatos.
Canus to the same purpose. There be some Catholic verities which do so
pertain to faith, that these being taken away, the faith it self must be
taken away also. And these, by common use, we call not only Catholic, but
Verities of Faith also. There are other verities, which be Catholic also and
universal, namely such as the whole Church holds, which yet being over
thrown, the faith is shaken indeed but not overturned. And in the errors
which are contrary to such truths as these, the faith is obscured, not
extinguished, weakened, not perished. These may be called verities of Christian
doctrine, but not of faith. Briefly, it is the common and constant doctrine of
Mag. 3. d. 25. Aquin. 2. 2. qu. 2. art. 5. and ibi DD.
Schoolmen and Tolet. Navarr. Sayr. Filiucius. Reginaldus -- caeteri.
Casuists, that have written of the nature of heresy, and the measure of
Catholic faith; that there is a certain measure and quantity of faith,
without which none can be saved, but every thing revealed belongs not to this
measure. It is enough to believe some things by a Virtuall faith, or by a
General, and as it were a Negative faith, whereby they are not denied or
contradicted: and in some things men may be ignorant or err in them, without
danger of their salvation.

All this evidently confirms that most necessary and most useful distinction
between fundamental and not fundamental doctrines: which our Mistaker here
with so great noise and so little reason cries down. By Fundamental doctrines
we mean such Catholic verities, as principally and essentially pertain to
the faith; such as properly constitute a Church; and are necessary (in ordinary
course) to be distinctly believed by every Christian that will be saved. Other
points of truth are called not-fundamentall, because they are not of such
absolute necessity, and do not primarily belong to the Unity of faith, or to
the Essence of a Church, or to the Salvation of a Christian: Such as, for their
subtilty and profoundnesse, are disputable in themselves, and happily by plain
Scripture indeterminable: Such finally as may admit an (...), or a non liquet;
both ignorance (if it be not affected,) and error, if it proceed not from
negligence or wilfullnes, without peril. It is true, whatsoever is revealed in
Scripture, or propounded by the Church out of Scripture, is in some sense
fundamental, in regard of the divine authority of God and his word, by which
it is recommended: that is, such as may not be denied or contradicted without
infidelity; such as every Christian is bound with humility and reverence to
believe, whenever the knowledge thereof is offered to him. But in regard of
the matter and moment of things revealed, and of their use to us; though all be
revealed alike, yet not all under the like penalty. We are told by Cardinal De
Eccles. lib. 3. cap. 14.. Quinto. Multa sunt de fide, quae non sunt absolute
necessaria ad salutem. Sane credere historias U. T. --
Bellarmine, that many things are de fide, to be believed, which are not
absolutely necessary to salvation. The knowledge or faith of Christ's passion is
necessary, not so that of his Genealogy. Fundamental therefore properly is,
that which Christians are obliged to believe by an express and actual faith.
In other points, that faith, which the Cardinal Replique. liur. 1. chap. 10.
Perron calls the faith of adherence or non-repugnance, may suffice: to wit, an
humble preparation of mind to believe all or any thing revealed in Scripture,
when it is sufficiently cleared. By which virtuall faith, an erring person may
believe the truth contrary to his own error: inasmuch as he yields his assent
implicitly to that Scripture, which contains the truth, and overthrowes his
error, though yet he understand it not.

This maine distinction of doctrines, whereof we speak, has express ground in
the Scriptures of the N. Testament. Therein the Church of Christ is often
called 1. Tim. 3. 15. 1. Pet. 2. 5. Heb. 3. 5. 6.
the Spiritual house of God. The foundation of this house is either real and
personal, or dogmaticall and doctrinall. The Real foundation is 1. Cor. 3.
11. Ephesians. 2. 20.
Christ; the Dogmaticall, are Matt. 16. 16. 18. Heb. 6. 1.
those grand and capital doctrines which make up our faith in Christ; that is,
that Tit. 1. 4.
common faith which is 2 Pet. 1. 1.
alike precious in all, being one and the same in the highest Apostle and the
meanest believer; which the Apostle Heb. 5. 12.
elsewhere calls the first principles of the oracles of God, and the 2. Tim. ^.
13.
form of sound words. These hold the place of the common foundation, in which
all Christians must be grounded. The materials laid upon this foundation,
whether they be sound or unsound, are named by S. Paul 1. Cor. 3. 12.
super structions; which are conclusions, either in truth or in appearance,
deducible from those principles. Concerning all which superstructures the
general rule is, that the more near they are to the foundation, of so much
greater importance be the truths, and so much more perilous be the errors: as
again the further they are removed off, the less necessary does the knowledge
of such verities prove to be, and the swarving from the truth less dangerous.

It is clear then, that some points are fundamental, others not so.

But here all Protestants are defied by the Mistaker, not only particulars,
but in corpse, their Colleges, Universities, all, or any of them, dared to give
him in a list or Catalogue of fundamental points. So high a Challenge, in a
subject of this nature, might better have beseemed his betters; some Cardinal
rather then a See Char. Mist. page 1.
Cavallier. It seems, the man thinks excellently of his own learning and
judgment; and that conceit fills him with this courage. But his strength is
not answerable, They that have tried it, say, (...). The prudent Ulysses in
Iliad. ss. (...). Et ad There Is. (...).
Homer gave good counsel to some busy persons, that were forward to meddle in
matters beyond their Spheere: the Mistaker stands in need of it, and may do
well to follow it.

By fundamental points of faith (for of them alone the Mistaker expressly
speaks in this discourse,) we understand (as has been noted) not the
necessary duties of Charity which are comprehended in the Decalogue, nor the
necessary acts of hope contained in the Lords prayer, there being the same
object both of our prayers and of our hope, though both these virtues of
Charity and Hope are fundamentally necessary to the salvation of Christians;
but we mean those Prime and Capital doctrines of our Religion, which make up
the holy Catholic and Apostolic faith, once (for all) delivered to the
Saints: which faith is the same which Jude. 3.
the Church received from the Apostles, the Apostles from Christ, Christ from
God, as Tertullian speaks: that faith which essentially constitutes a true
Church and a true Christian. These fundamentalls are all contained in the rule
of faith: which rule being clearly, but diffusedly, set down in the
Scriptures, has been afterward summed up and contracted into the Apostles
Creed; either by the Apostles themselves, or by the Church of their times from
them. This Creed taken in a Catholic sense, that is, as it was further opened
and explaned in some parts, (by occasion of emergent Heresies,) in the other
Catholic Creeds of Nice, Constantinople, Ephesus, Chalcedon, and Athanasius,
is said generally by the Schoolmen and Fathers to comprehend a perfect
Catalogue of fundamental truths, and to imply a full rejection of fundamental
heresies: and has been received by Orthodox Christians, of all ages and
places, as an absolute summary of the Christian faith. For proof whereof, we
will first argue ad hominem, and teach the Mistaker how to esteem of his Creed
out of his own Masters, whom he will not distrust or gainsay. Begin with the
Council. Trident. Sess. 3. Symbolum Apostolorum est principium illud, in quo
omnes, qui fidem Christi profitentur, necessario convenient, ac fundamentum
Ecclesiae firmum ac unicum.
Council of Trent. The Apostles Creed is that principle, wherein all that
profess the faith of Christ do necessarily agree, that being the firm and
only foundation of the Church. The Catec. Trident. page 13. ac 14. Apostoli
hanc Christianae fidei ac spei formulam composuerunt, -- veritatis summa ac
fundamentum, primo ac necessario omnibus credendum.
Catechism of Trent to the same pupose. The Apostles composed this profession
of Christian faith and hope, as a summary and foundation of that truth which is
necessarily to be believed of all. Azor. par. 1. lib. 8. cap. 5. Symbolum
Aposto^orum est brevis fidei complexio, ac summa omniu^ credendorum; and veluti
nota quaedam and signum, quo Christiani homines ab impiis and infidelibus, qui
vel nullam vel non rectam Christi fidem profitentur, discernendi ac
internoscendi sunt. Huic Symbolo add^ta sunt alia duo Nicaenum and
Athanasianum, ad uberiorem explicationem fidei.
Azorius. This Creed briefly comprehends the faith, and all things to be
believed; and is as it were a sign or cognizance, whereby Christian men are
differenced from the ungodly and misbeleivers, who have either no faith at all,
or hold not the right faith. To this, the other Creeds of Nice, and Athanasius
were added only for further explanation. Jacob. Gordon. Hunt. Controv. 2. cap.
10. number. 10. Regula fidei continetur express in Symbolo Apostolorum, in quo
continentur omnia prima fundamenta fidei. Neque enim adeo obliviosi fuerunt
Apostoli post acceptum Spiritum S. ut in Symbolo fidei quod omnibus credendum
tradiderunt, praetermittere^t primum and praecipuum fidei fundamentum.
Huntley a Scottish Jesuit: The rule of faith is expressly contained in the
Apostles Creed, wherein are contained all the prime foundations of faith. For
the Apostles were not so forgetful, as to omit any fundamental point in that
Creed which they delivered to be believed by all Christians. Greg. de Val. in
2. 2. disp. 1. qu. 2. punct. 4. in fin. Articuli fidei in Symbolo contenti sunt
veluti prima principia fidei Christianae -- in quibus continetur summa
Euangelicae doctrinae, quam omnes tenenrur explicit credere. -- Ita judicant
Sancti Patres, quum affirmant ab Apostolis compositum esse illud Symbolum
fidei, ur omnes haberent brevem summam little quae sunt credenda and sparsim
continentur in Scripturis.
Gregory of Valence. The Articles of the Creed are the first principles of
Christian doctrine, wherein the sum of the Gospel is comprised, which all
are bound expressly to believe. So say the Ancient Fathers, that this Creed
was framed by the Apostles, to the end that all Christians might have a short
abridgement of those things that must be believed. Vinc. Filiucius Moral.
Quaest. Tract. 22. c. 2. number. 34. Nulla brevior and accommodatior assignari
potest regula in Ecclesia, unde scire possunt fideles quaenam credenda sint
populo Christiano explicit, ea quae continetur in Symbolo -- cujus Articuli
sunt prima rudimenta fidei.
Vincentius Filiucius. There cannot be assigned a shorter and fitter rule of
faith in the Church, by which Christian people may be instructed in matters to
be explicitly believed, then that which is contained in the Apostles Creed;
the Articles whereof are the first rudiments of our faith. Puteanus. in 2. 2.
Qu. 2. Art. 3. Dub. ult. Concl. ult. Ideo Symbolum hoc fuit ab Apostolis
compositum, ut Christiani formam aliquam haberent, qua possent se Catholicos
profiteri. Ita D. Th. art. 5. qu. hujus.
Puteanus late professor at Toulouse. This Creed was made by the Apostles
purposely, that Christians might by this form of faith profess themselves to
be truly Catholics, as Aquinas here says. The great Cardinal of France
Instruction du Chrestien Lecon premiere. Le Symbol des Apostres, est le
sommaire and l'abbrege qu' ils ont faict de la foy necessaire au Chrestien. Ces
saints personnages ayant receu commandment de Jesus Christ de s' espandre par
tout le monde, pour y prescher l'Evangile, and y planterla foy de toutes parts,
estimerent qu'il estoit du tout necessaire de reduire en abbrege, ce que tout
Chrestien doit scavoir, a fin que separiez en diverses parties du monde i^^
preschassent vne mesme chose, and ce d'autant plus aise a retenir, qu' elle
seroit reduitte a peu. Pour cet effect ils appellerent cet abbrege Symbol, qui
signify marque and sign, parce qu' il leur servoit de marque, pour distinguer
les vrays Chrestiens qui l'embrassoient, des infidelles quila rejettoient.
Richelieu, in his Homelies published for the instruction of his Diocese. The
Apostles Creed is the abridgement of that faith which is necessary for a
Christian. For those holy persons being by the commandment of Jesus Christ to
disperse themselves over the world, and in all parts by preaching the Gospel
to plant the faith; esteemed it very necessary to reduce into a short sum,
all that which Christians ought to know and believe; to the end that being
separated in diverse quarters of the earth, they might all jointly preach one
and the same faith, in a form short and brief, that it might be the better
remembered. Therefore they called this abridgeme^t the Symbol, that is, a mark
or sign, which might serve to distinguish true Christians which embraced it
from Infidels and misbeleevers. It were easy to multiply testimonies to this
effect out of their late and ancient Schoole-Doctors, if it were not tedious.
All agree that the Creed briefly comprehends all fundamental principles or
rudiments of faith; that it is a distinctive note or Character severing
Orthodox believers from Infidels and Heretics; that it is a full, perfect and
sufficient summary of the Catholic faith.

And their judgment herein seems full of reason. For how can it be necessary
for any Christian to have more in his Creed, then the Apostles had, and the
Church of their times? May the Church of after ages, make the narrow way to
heaven narrower then our Savior left it? Shall it be a fault to streiten and
encomber the Kings high way with public nuisances; and is it lawful, by
adding new Articles to the faith, to retrench any thing from the latitude of
the King of Heavens high way to eternal happiness? The yoke of Christ, which
he said was easy, may it justly be made heavier, by the Governors of the
Church in after ages? The Apostles profess they revealed to the Church the
Act. 20. 27.
whole Counsel of God, keeping back nothing needful for our salvation: what
tyranny then to impose any new unnecessary matters on the faith of Christians,
especially (as the late Popes have done) under that high commanding form, Qui
non crediderit, damnabitur? If this may be done, why then did our Savior
reprehend the Pharisees so sharply, for Mat. 23. 4.
binding heavy burdens, and laying them upon men's shoulders? And why did he
teach them, that in Mat. 15. 30.
vain they worshipped God, teaching for doctrines men's traditions? And why did
the Apostles call it a Act. 15. 10.
tempting of God, to lay those things upon the necks of Christians, that were
not necessary? It is true, to guard the depositum committed to her charge, and
to defend it and every part of it from the incursion of heretics, and to
maintain the ancient sense of it against their new and adulterate glosses, the
Church has authority, and hereto shall not fail of assistance. But to add to
it is high presumption, almost as great as to detract from it.

All that can be replied to this discourse is this; that the whole faith of
those times is not contained in the Apostles Creed; which is all one, as if a
man should say, This is not the Apostles Creed, but a part of it. For the
Apostles and the Church of their times in giving it this name, do they not
plainly tell us, that the sum and substance of their Credenda is comprised in
it? For to call it Creed, and to leave out of it any necessary Article of
faith, what had it been but to deceive the world? The Ancient Church appointing
her Infants to be instructed (for matter of belief) De consecrdist. 4. can.
Ante viginti. and Symbolum and Baptizandos, and Nonliceat.
only in the Creed; and admitting her Catechumens, upon their profession of
the Creed, to baptism, and into the number of the faithful; and exacting of
strangers the same profession, before they could be received into the Communion
of Catholics: did she not by all this evidently declare her judgment, that
the profession of this Creed and these Articles alone was an absolute
profession of the Catholic faith? Nay, whereas the laudable custom of the
Catholic Church required, that each new Marcus Ephesius in Council. Florent.
Sess. 12. page 480. ex edit. Binn. ann. 1618. Colon. Gr. and Lat. Olim quilibet
Arcl ^episcopus and Patriarcha literas, quae Synodicae appellantur, inter se
dabant, nihil aliud continentes quam rectfidei suique sensus confessionem; quod
in Orientalibus Ecclesiis hodieque fit usque ad hoc tempus.
Patriarch, immediately after his assumption to a place of so great trust and
authority in the Church, should render an account of his faith by his
Synodicall or Circular letters, (called otherwise Optat. Milevit. lib. 2.
Siricius hodie (Episcopus Rom.) noster est Socius, cum quo nobis totus orbis,
commetcio Formatarum, in una communionis societate concordat.
literae formatae, and Aug. Epist. 162. Communicatorias literas jam olim
propter suam perversitatem, ab unitate Catholica quae toto orb diffusa est,
non accipiunt Donatistae. Et saepe de illis in ea Epistola.
communicatoria) directed to his Peers and Companions in that dignity; that by
the sight of his profession his faith might be judged, whether he were a sound
Catholic, or tainted with heresy; and so whether he were fit or unworthy to
be admitted into their Communion: If in those Letters he did profess entirely
to adhere to the Catholic Creeds, his profession and person was accepted as
sound and Orthodox. The Circular Epistles yet extant, of Extant Council. 6.
Gener. Act. 11.
Sophronius Patriarch of Jerusalem, of Conc. 7. (sive Syn. 2. Nic.) Act. 3.
Tarasius Patriarch of Constantinople, of Apud Baron. ad ann. 556. number. 33. --
Pelagius Patriarch of Rome, of Extat inter Epistolas Photii MSS. Graece, in
Bibl. Bodleiana.
Photius of Constantinople, and many others testify this. So truly said S.
Austin, Aug. Epist. 57. Regula fidei pusillis magnisque communis.
that the Creed is a rule of faith common to great and small. The meanest
Catechumen must believe so much, and the greatest Patriarch can believe no
more. In those old and golden times those Articles were thought abundantly
sufficient, and it was thought a great sacrilege to add any thing to them, or
diminish them. No Catholic in the world was then required to believe the
Popes Supermacie, or his Indulgences, or Purgatory, or Transubstantiation, or
any doctrine now debated between us and Rome. No such matter. These things
were brought in long after the beginning: the Church of Christ was long without
them, and was well without them; and happy had she been, whether we regard
truth or peace, if she had still so continued. Nor can it be reasonably said,
that all (or any of) these things, though not expressed in the Creed, are yet
contained eminently in the belief of the Catholic Church. For (to omit, that
these are no traditions or doctrines of the Catholic Church, but only the
partial and particular fancies of the Roman; unless happily the opinion of
Transsubstantiation may be excepted, wherein the later Vide Nicetae Thesau.
Orthod. Gr. Ms in Bib. Bodleiana. Euthym. in panoplia. tit. 21. and Hierem.
Patr. CP. in Resp. 1. ad Lutheranos. cap. 10. and Resp. 2. cap. 4. 3. Nichol.
Episc. Methon. and Samonam Arch. Gaz. (...): inter Liturgica Graece edita
Parisiis, 1560.
Greeks seem to agree with the Romanists:) 1. what reason can be imagined, why
amongst many things of equal necessity to be believed, the Apostles should so
punctually and distinctly set down some, and be altogether silent in others?
As well, nay better, they might have given us no Article but that, and sent us
to the Church for all the rest. For in setting down others besides that, and
not all, they make us believe we have all, when we have not all. 2. I suppose
no learned Romanist will say, that in the belief of the communion of Saints
all the new doctrines of the Roman Church are virtually contained. Yet the
learned Replique chapter 1.
Card. du Perron thinks it probable, that the Article of the Catholic Church
and the Communion of Saints is all one, this latter clause being only an
explication of the other. 3. Many of the Ancient Doctors have left us their
expositions on the Creed, Ruffinus, S. Augustine, Cyrill of Jerusalem,
Chrysologus, Maxim. Taurinensis, others. Where they speak of the Catholic
Church, all say we must believe the unity, universality, perpetuity, sanctity
of the Church; none at all say any thing of any sovereign and infallible power
in the Church, to prescribe or define what she pleases. 4. Lastly Azorius the
Jesuit gives a fair meaning to this Article of the Catholic Church, and
such as little favors the conceit of our Mistaker. Azor. pa^. 1. lib. 8 cap.
6.. Sed mibi probabilius. Substantia articuli, quo credimus unam, Sanctam and
Catholicam Ecclesiam, est, neminem posse salvum esse extra congregationem
hominum qui Christi fidem and religionem profitentur susceptam; and posse
salutem obtineri intra hanc ipsam congregationem hominum piorum and fidelium.
I believe the holy Catholic Church, that is, (says he) I believe that none
can be saved out of the Congregation of those men, who profess the faith and
religion of Christ; and that within that company of holy and faithful people
salvation may be obtained.

Now to the reasons alleged for the full and formal sufficiency of this rule
of faith, to which nothing essential can be added or may be detracted; we may
adjoine the full consent of the Ancient Doctors, Greek and Latin; who come in
with one voice (each one almost contributing his suffrage,) to testify for
this perfection of the Creed, and that in their days it was so acknowledged.
Iren. lib. 1. cap. 2. and 3. Ecclesia per universum orbem seminata ab Apostolis
and little discipulis, accepit eam fidem, quae est in Deum omnipotentem -- Hanc
fidem diligenter custodit Ecclesia, in Celtis, in Orient, Aegypto -- Cum enim
una and eadem fides sit; neque is, qui multum potest de ea dicere superfluit;
neque is qui parum, imminuit.
Irenaeus, having repeated the most important Articles of it, says, It is the
faith which the Church throughout the world has received from the Apostles;
being every where one and the same, admitting neither addition nor diminution.
Therefore it is called by Tertul. de vel. virg. cap. 1. Regula fidei una omnino
est, sola immobilis, irreformabilis. Hac lege fidei manente caetera admittunt
novitatem correctionis.
Tertullian, one only immovable, and unreformable rule, which remaining safe,
other matters (of discipline) may be altered or corrected, as occasion
requires. And the same Author again, Id. de Praescript. cap. 13. and 14. Haec
regula -- null as habet apud nos quaestiones, nisi quas herefes inferunt, and
quae haereticos faciunt. -- manente form aejus in suo ordine quantumlibet
quaeras and tractes -- Fides in regula posita est, cedat turiositas fidei.
Nihil ultra scire est omnia scire.
This rule ordained by Christ, is not questioned by any among us but by
heretics, (Valentinus, Marcion and the like:) All beyond, and beside this
rule is but curiosity and exercise of wit. The faith which saves, consists in
this rule. Let curiosity yield to faith -- to know no more is to know all. And
a little Ibid. cap. 8. Hoc primum credimus, nihil esse ultra quod credere
debeamus.
before. This first of all we believe, that no more ought to be believed, as
necessary to all. In Symb. initio and fine. (...).
Athanasius of his Creed (received by the Catholic Church;) This is the sound
Catholic faith. If this be the Catholic faith, then it is not only a piece
or parcel of it; then there is no part of the Catholic faith, besides or
beyond this, more or less then this. The Fathers of the Patres Concilii
Chalced. Act. 5. in fine. post recitata Symbola. (...).
Chalcedon Council; The Symbol is sufficient to the perfect knowledge and
confirmation of piety. Gregory the Nazianz. Orat. 52. init. (...).
Divine; It is a short breviary, or boundary, or rule of the faith and sense of
Christians. Cyril Hierosol. (...). Catech. 4. Symbolum est (...). Iterum Cat.
5. (...).
Cyrill of Jerusalem; It is the sum of all necessary doctrines. Again. That
no soul might be lost through ignorance, we have all the doctrine of faith
comprised within the little compass of the Creed: which we must carefully
conserve as the only provision for our journey toward heaven, regarding no
other (for point of belief.) For herein are collected out of all the
Scriptures, the most useful maine articles of our Religion: and as a small
grain of mustard seed contains within it self many branches; so does the
Creed in a few sentences all the substance of godly knowledge, revealed in the
old and new Testament. Cyril. Alexandr. in Ep. ad Joan. Antioch. citatus a
Marco Ephesio in Council. Florent. Sess. 5. statuit. (...).
The other Cyrill of Alexandria: It is utterly unlawful any way to alter (by
adding, detracting --) one word or Syllable in the holy Creed. Epiphan. in Exp.
fide^ Cath. number. 19. exedit. Petau. (...).
Epiphanus: This confession is the pillar or foundation of truth; our life, our
hope, and the assurance of our immortal happiness. Hill. ad Constan. Aug. post
confessam and juratam in baptismo fidem, no^ oportet quicqua^ aliud vel
ambigere vel innovare. Et mox. Tutissimum est primam ac solam Euangelica^
fidem, co^fessa^ in baptismate intellectamque retinere.
Hilary of Poictiers: After that faith which we all confessed and avowed in our
Baptism, it is not fit to add or innovate or doubt of any thing. It is the
safest course for all Christians, to retain constantly that first and sole
confession of Evangelicall doctrine. Hier. ad Pam. Ep. 61. c. 9. In Symbolo
fidei and spei nostrae, omue Christiani dogmatis Sacramentum concluditur. and
in Prove. c. 2. lit. 1. Fides dominica in Symbolo continetur, quam se die
baptismatis servaturum quisque promittit.
Hierome: All the holy doctrine of Christianity is concluded within the Creed,
which is the profession of our faith and hope, which we all promised to keep
at our Baptism. August. de Symb. ad Catech. lib. 3. c. 1. Noveritis hoc
Symbolum esse fidei Catholicae fundamentum, super quod aedificium surrexit
Ecclesiae, constructum manibus Apostolorum and Prophetarum. Idem August. de
Tem. Sermon 115. Symbolum comprehensio est fidei nostrae atque perfectio,
simplex, breve, plenum ut simplicitas consulat audientium rusticicati, brevitas
memoriae, plenitudo doctrinae -- totius Catholicae legis fides, Symboli
colligitur brevitate. Sermon. 119. Symbolum est breviter complex a regula fide:
ut mentem instruat, nec oneret memoriam. Sermon. 131. Doctrina Symbols virtus est
Sacramenti, illuminatio animae, plenitudo credentium; breve est verbis, sed
magnum est Sacramentis: parvum ostendens imminutione latitudinis, sed totum
continens compendio brevitatis; exiguum est ut memoriam non obruat, sed
diffusum ut intelligentiam supercedat; confirmans omnes perfectione credendi,
desiderio confitendi, fiducia resurgendi. Quicquid praefiguratum est in
Patriarchis, quicquid nunciatum est in Scripturis, quicquid praedictum est in
Prophetis -- totum hoc breviter Symbolum in se continet. Eadem verba repetit.
Sermon. 181. Sermon. 181. Sancti Apostoli certam regulam fidei tradiderunt quam
Symbolum vocaverunt, per quam credentes Catholicam tenerent unitatem, and per
quam haereticam convincerent pravitatem. Illi enim in diversa ituri, normam
prius sibi futurae praedication is in commune statuerunt, ne diversum vel
dissonum praedicarent his qui ad fidem Christi invitabantur -- arque hanc it a
credentibus dandam esse regulam instituerunt. Ambros. Sermon 38. de Iejun. and
quadrag. ad fin. Duodecim Apostolorum Symbolo fides sancta concepta est, qui
velut periti artifices in unum convenientes, clavem coelorum suo consilio
conflaverunt. Clavem enim quandam ipsum Symbolum ^ixerim; per quod reserantur
diaboli tenebrae, ut lux Christi adveniat. Ruffinus in praefat* ad expos. In
his verbis Symboli, Sp. S. nihil ambiguum, nihil obscurum, nihil a reliquis
dissonans providit poni. Apostoli enim discessuri breve istud futurae
praedicationis, unanimitatis, and fidei suae indicium, fidei normam,
munimentum, turrim in commune constituunt -- atque hanc credentibus dandam esse
regulam statuunt. Hoc indicium est seu tessera, per quam agnoscitur is qui
Christum vere secundum Apostolicas regulas praedicat. In Ecclesia urbis Romae,
mos servatur antiquus, eos qui gratiam baptismi suscepturi sunt, public, i. e.
fidelium populo audiente, Symbolum reddere: and utique adiectionem unius saltem
sermonis eoru qui precesserunt in fide, non ad mittit auditus. (...). Romans
Epist. 1. ex versione Ruffini ad med. Apostoli discedentes ab invicem Symbolum
condiderunt, ut hance regulam per omnes gentes praedicarent, summam totius
fidei Catholicae recensentes, in qua integritas credulitatis ostenditur.
Cunctis credentibus quae continentur in praefato Symbolo salus animarum and
vita perpetua bonis actibus praeparatur Leo. Ep. 13. ad fin. Symbolum brevis
est and perfecta confessio instruct a munitione coelesti, ut omnes haereticoru
opiniones solo ipsius possint gladio detruncari. Cujus Symboli plenitudine^ si
Eutyches puro and simplicivoluisset cord concipere, in nullo deviaret ib.
Singular est Sacramentum salutis humanae. and anted non portiuncula aliqua
fidei nostrae, sed quod Dominus noster in Ecclesia neminem voluit sexus
utriusque ignorare. Novatianus de Trin. cap. 1. and 9. Symbolum regula est
veritatis. and cap. 29. fidei auctoritas. Maximus Taurin. Homil. de tradit.
Symboli. Signaculum Symboli inter fideles perfidosque secernit. Petr. Chrysol.
Sermon. 59. Est placitum fidei, pactum gratiae, salutis Symbolum. Caelestin.
Episc. Romans in Epist. ad Nestorium, citante Ioanne Foroliviensi Episcopo in
Council. Florent. sess. 10. Quis unquam non dignus est anathemate judicatus, vel
adiiciens vel detrahens fidei in Symbolis contentae? Plene enim ac manifest
tradita nobis ab Apostolis, nec augmentum nec imminutionem requirunt. Bessarion
Nicaenus Council. Flor. sess. 8. page 464. edit. Bin. ult. Sacro Symbolo nihil
est addendum, quia in Ecclesia locum obtinet principii ac fundamenti fidei
nostrae. Marcus Ephesius ibid. sess. 3. page 431. Arbitramur nihil omissum esse
a Patribus in Symbolo fidei, neque omnino positum esse quicquam mano^m, quod
correctione aut additamento indigeat. Et haec est potissim^ schismatis (inter
Graecos Latinosque) causa: praecipientibus Patribus, aullum aliud Symbolum esse
unquam recipiendum, nec esse quicquam addendum vel detrahendum, quodilli omnia
satis complexi sunt. Andraeas Rhodi Archiepi scopus Latinus, ibid. sess. 7.
page 451. Ad illud quod aiebat Dominus Ephesius, Symbolum esse perfectum, and
perfecto nihil posse addi, respondemus, perfection, sumi dupliciter, vel quoad
fidem vel quoad explanationem. Et quidem quoad fidem Symbolum esse
perfectissimum, nec indigere additamento; quoad explanationem vero non suisse
satis, propter haereses quae erant emersurae.
Augustine to young novices: You must know that the Creed is the foundation of
the Catholic faith, and of the Church, laid by the hands of the Apostles and
Prophets. My margin will add some more to this cloud of Witnesses, and fully
make good my word; that the Fathers here come in with full consent.

And now our Mistaker has his Catalogue of fundamentalls, recommended to him
by such reason and authorities, as I presume will satisfy his longing, and
content him. If so, then he is satisfied both for the question, which be
fundamentalls! and for the state of our Church, that we agree in fundamentalls.
If this please him not, then it will be in his choice whether he will reject
the constant opinion of his own DDrs and the old Fathers, or show us some way
how they and he (dissenting herein from them) may be reconciled. If he reject
them and their opinion, we shall be content to be condemned by him together
with the Fathers and his own Brethren. If he approve the perfection of the
Creed (with them,) he may be pleased to make answer to his own objections:
which if he will calmely consider, he may happily find to be but weak and of
small moment.

His Objections are. In the Creed there is no mention. 1. of the Canon of
Scripture. 2. or of the number and nature of the Sacraments. 3. or of
Justification, whether it be by faith or by works. 4. That Doctrine of devils,
1. Tim. 4. 1. forbidding marriage and meats is not there condemned. 5. Lastly,
the sense of diverse Articles is questioned, as that of the Descent into hell,
and the other of the Catholic Church. Therefore the Creed is no perfect rule
of faith.

Answer.

To the first. The Creed is an abstract or abridgement of such necessary
doctrines as are delivered in Scripture, or collected out of it; and therefore
needs not express the authority of that which it supposes. These Articles are
principles which are proved by Scripture; the Scripture it self a principle,
which needs no proof amongst Christians. The Creed contains only the
material object of faith, or the things which must be believed expressly
according to Scripture: The Scripture is further the formal object of faith,
or the motive and ground whereupon faith is founded; being (as Philosophers say
of light in regard of the sight,) both the objectum quod, in respect of the
things therein revealed; and objectum quo, in respect of that divine verity and
authority which reveals them. Although the Nicene Fathers in their Creed
confessing that the holy Ghost spoke by the Prophets, do thereby sufficiently
avow the divine Authority of all Canonical Scripture.

To the 2. we say 1. That the Sacraments are to be reckoned rather among the
Agenda of the Church, then the Credenda: they are rather divine rites and
ceremonies, then doctrines. 2. For their numbers, the Mistaker, who has so
little moderation as to think his Seven fit matter for the Creed, shall be
answered in the words of a Examen pacifique Chapter 1. page 22. Prenantce mot de
Sacrement propreme^t, S. Aug. dit (de Doctr. Chr. li. 3. ca. 9.) qu'il ny en a
que deux, a scauoir, le Baptesme and l'Eucharistie. Dauantage c'est vne phrase
common parmy nous Catholics, de dire, que tous les Sacremens sont coulez du
cost de nostre Seigneur. Or ne coula de son cost que sang and eau. Ce que
representoit (selon l'interpretation de Chrysostom, Cyrill, and autres
anciens) les deux Sacrements de l'Eglise. a scauoir le Baptesme parl'eau, and
le calice de l'Eucharistie par le sang, Et nos Docteurs Catholics ne font
autre responce a ceci si non, que ces deux sacremens ont quelque dignite par
dessus les autres: qui n'est autre chose, si non dire qu'ily a deux Sacremens
principaux and plusieur sinferieurs. Ce qui est demesme que les Huguenots
disent, mais en diverse terms; eux disans qu'il ny en a que deux proprement,
nous qu'il ny en a que deux principalement: nous disons aussi qu'il y en a
plusieurs inferieurs; eux qu'il y en a aussi plusieurs, si nous parlons des
Sacremens ^^ la signification generale. Car Calvin dit, que l'ordre est un
Sacrement, and Melancthon ditle mesme, and y adjouste la penitence. Bref, ils
diron^ qu'il y en a sept, mais non pas seulement sept, and de fait, il ny a
aucun des Anciens Peers qui aye iamais trouue ce nombre de sept.
moderate Roman Catholic. Taking the word Sacrament properly, S. Augustine
says there are but two, to wit Baptism and the Lords Supper. And it is a
common saying among us Catholics, that all the Sacraments flowed from the
side of our Lord. Now there came from his side only blood and water; which
represented (according to the interpretation of Chrysostom, Cyrill and others
of the Ancients,) the two Sacraments of the Church; Baptism by water, and the
Chalice in the Eucharist by blood. To which our Catholic Doctors give no
other answer; but that these two Sacraments, by reason of their dignity, are
specially so called: which is all one to say, that there are only two
principal Sacraments, and many inferiors, which is the very thing which is
said by the Huguenots in other terms. They say there are but two properly, and
we say there are but two principally: Again we say there are many inferior
Sacraments, and they yield it if the name Sacrament be taken in a general
signification. For Calvin says that Order is a Sacrament; and Melancthon says
the same, and moreover adds Penance. Briefly they grant there are seven, but
not only seven: and in truth, none of the ancient Fathers have ever found this
number of seven 3. For the two principal Sacraments, Azor. par 1. l 10. 8.
cap. 5.. Praeterea dices. Cur inter Articulos fidei non recenserur venerabile
Eucharistiae Sacramentum, and Baptismi? Respondeo cum S. Thoma, 2. 2. q. 1. a.
8. a^ 6. and Richardo 3. d. 25. a. 1. qu. 1 ad 4. eos articulos contineri and
includi in articulo fidei quo credimus unam sanctam Ecclesiam, sanctorum
Communionem, remissionem pecca^orum: nam per Sacramenta peccata remittuntur a
Deo.
Azorius propounds his objection: Why is not the Sacrament of the Eucharist and
of Baptism reckoned among the Articles of our faith? and thus answers it, out
of Aquinas and others: The two Sacraments are implied in the articles, where we
profess to believe the holy Catholic Church, the communion of Saints, and
the remission of sins. The Creed of Nice expresses Baptism by name; I
confess one Baptism for the remission of sins. And the Eucharist, being a
seal of that holy Union which we have with Christ our Head, by his Spirit and
faith, and with the Saints his members by Charity; is evidently included in the
Communion of Saints.

To the 3. we grant good works to be necessary (in ordinary course) to
salvation; and that a reward is due unto them, not for any dignity in them or
us, but by divine dignation, and by Gods free and gracious promise. The faith
which justifies is ever fruitful of such good works; a living and a working
faith. But no wise man will put any confidence in the goodness of any works;
he will rather wholly cast himself on the mercies of God, who for Christ's sake
accepts of our weak obedience, pardons our sins, Manes. (...).
and crowns us with happiness. This is properly the justifying of a sinner,
and this we believe when we profess to believe the remission of sins;
wherein with the Scripture and all Antiquity we place our Justification.

To the 4. The Creed is a rule of positive truths, not a rejection of errors
but only by consequent or implication. He that beleives aright in the Lord
Almighty, beleives all his creatures in themselves to be good, and all his
institutions to be holy: and therefore cannot believe either any meats to be
in their nature polluted, or marriage in any persons to be profane. Many of the
old heretics who believed so, were men marveilously abused by the Father of
lies: especially the Manichees, who had in them much more of the Infidel then
of the Christian; if they were not rather madmen, (according to the name of
their Founder) then Infidels. Yet to do them, no wrong, it seems by Aug. de
Mcrib. Eccl. and Manich. lib. 2. c. 18. Hic non dubito vos esse clamaturos
invidiamque facturos, castitatem perfectam vos vehe menter co^mendare atque
laudare non tamen nuptias prohibere qua^doquidem Auditores vestri, quorum apud
vos secundus est gradus, ducere atque habere non prohibentur uxores. Id. Epist.
74. Auditores qui appellantur apud eos, and carnibus vescuntur, and agros
colunt, and fi voluerint, uxores habent; quorum nihil faciunt qui vocantut
Electi.
S. August. they did not forbid meats or marriage, as absolutely impure, or to
all: only their choice Elect ones must abstain: the other vulgar, their
Auditors, were left at their liberty. The Mistaker desires passionately to free
his Church from this Manicheisme, and if he can do it we desire not to find
her guilty. But if She be not, why is single life called Chastity, and
commended as an eminent degree of sanctimony? why is marriage said to be in
compatible with Innocentius Papa did. 82. can. Proposuisti. Neque eos fas sit
ad officia Sacra admitti, qui exercent vel cum uxore carnale consortium: quia
scriptum est, Sancti estote quoniam sanctus sum, dixit Dominus.
holiness, or with Id. ibid. Qui in carne sunt Deo placere non possunt.
Gods favor? nay counted a Pelagius Papa did. 61. can. Catinensis. Hominem
qui necuxorem habeat, nec liberos, nec aliquod crimen canonibus inimicumeligi
suadeas.
crime? nay a Bell. de Clericis cap. 19.. Jam vero. Non ^olum conjugium
sacerdotum, quod sacrilegium est non conjugium, sed etiam Sanctorum matrimonium
sine pollutione quadam and turpitudine non exercetur.
sacrilege? worse then Coster. Enchirid. cap. de Coelib. Sacerdos si
for^itetur, aut domi concubinam alat, tamet si gravi sacrilegio se obstringat,
gravius tamen peccat si contrahat matrimonium.
whoredom? And for meats, why is abstinence from flesh counted a perfect
Christian fast, yea holy and meritorious? and why is he that eats flesh in
Lent punished with a more grievous penance, then he that commonly blasphemes
the name of God, or defiles his neighbors bed, or abuses himself by
drunkenesse, or others by railing, slandering etc.

To the 5. The Church of England questions not the sense of those Articles:
She takes them in the old Catholic sense, and the words are so plain they
bear their meaning before them. Men abounding with wit and idleness may seek
knotts in a bull rush, and cast a mist over the most clear truths. It is by
the Roman Doctors that they are questioned, who can neither agree with us nor
with themselves. Contr. 5. q. 5. A. 1.
Stapleton affirms the Scripture is silent that Christ descended into hell,
and that there is a Catholic and an Apostolic Church. 4. de Christo. c. 6.
and 12. Scripturae passim hoc docent.
Bellarmine on the contrary is resolute, that the Article of the descent is
every where in Scripture; and 2. 2. q. 1. A. 9. ad 1.
Thomas grants as much for the whole Creed. Then for the sense of that Article,
Thom. p. 3. q. 52. A. 2. in Corp.
Some hold Christ descended really into hell; Durand. in 3. d. 22. q. 3.
Others virtually only and by effects. And by Hell, some understand the lowest
pilt, or the place of the damned, as 4. de Christo cap. 16.
Bellarmine at first: others the Limbus Patrum as Recogn. p. 11.
Bellarmine at last, following the common opinion of the In Th. p. 3. qu. 52.
A^z.
Schools. These jarres concern not the Church of England, which takes the
words as they are in the Creed, and beleives them without further dispute, and
in the sense of Aug. Epist. 99.
Ancients. As also She does in that other Article of the Catholic Church.

It remains then (notwithstanding all this feeble opposition) very probable,
according to the judgment of Antiquity and even of the Roman D Drs, that the
Creed is the perfect Summary of those fundamental truths, wherein consists the
Unity of Faith, and of the Catholic Church: the Articles whereof all
Christians ordinarily are bound expressly to believe, and distinctly to know,
for their salvation.

I say such explicit faith and actual knowledge is necessary to Christians
ordinarily; for I meedle not with the extraordinary dispensation of Gods
mercies, which is a secret reserved to the Lord himself. And I say men are
bound to it by necessity; that is, necessitate praecepti, but happily not so,
necessitate medij vel finis. For as the De explicit and necessario credendis;
vide quae scripserunt Sylv. in Sum. ver. Fides. Azor. Instit. moral. par. 1. l.
8. c. 6. Tolet. Instruct. Sacerd. lib 4. c. 2. Greg. de Val. in 2. 2. disp. 1.
q. 2. punc. 3. 4. 5. B^nnes in 2. 2. q. 2. a. 8 Beca^. in sum. pur. 3. c. 12.
Filiuo. de casib. tract. 2. 2. cap. 1. and 2. Putean. in 2. 2. q. 2. (...). ^.
3. dub. 4. Aegyd. Connick. disp. 14. dub. 9. and 10. and DD. communiter in 3.
d. 25. and in 2. 2. q. 1. a. 7.
Casi^ists and Schoolmen do well and truly observe, in this dispute of
necessary and fundamental truths, both Truths and Persons must be wisely
distinguished: That truth may be necessary in one sense, which is not so in
another; and fundamental in some persons, in certain respects, which is not
so to some others.

1. Every thing fundamental is not alike near to the foundation, nor of
equal primenes in the faith. Among the fundamentalls of the Creed, some are
radical and primary, others like branches issuing or descending from them, as
Paris Tract. de fide cap. 2. Communiter credendorum, quae usualiter Articuli
fidei vocantur, alia sunt ut radices primitivae and fundamenta primaria; alia
sunt ut rami descendentes and.
Parisiensis: or as Th. 2. 2. q. 1. a. 7. in Corp. Omnes Articuli implicit
co^tinentur in aliquibus primis credibilibus; sc. ut credatur Deus esse and
providentiam habere circa hominum salutem:
Aquinas, there are certain prime principles of faith, in the bosom whereof
all other Articles lie wrapped or folded up. Such is that of S. Paul. Heb. 11.
6.
He that comes to God must believe that God is, and that he is a rewarder of
them that seek him: but especially that most important and most Joh. 17. 3.
and 20. 31. Matthew. 16. 16. 17. Act. 4. 12. and 8. 37. and 16. 31. Romans 10. 9.
10. 1. Cor. 3. 11. and 12. 3. 1. Joh. 2. 22. and 4. 2. 15. and 5. 1. 5. 2. Pet.
2. 1.
fundamental of all Articles in the Church; that Jesus Christ the son of God
and the son of Mary is the only Savior of the world. These are so
absolutely necessary to all Christians, for attaining the end of our faith,
that is, the salvation of our souls; that a Christian may loose himself, not
only by a positive erring in them, or denying of them; but by a pure
ignorance, or nescience, or not knowing of them, Dom. Bannes in 2. 2. q. 2.
arr. 8. Illa quae sunt necessaria necessitate finis, si desint nobis etiam sine
culpa nostra, non excusabu^t nos ab aeterna morte, quamvis non fuerit in
potestate nostra illa assequi: quemadmodu^ etiam si non sit nisi unicum
remedium, ut ali quis fugiat mortem corporalem, and tale reremediu^ ignoretur
and ab infirmo et medico; sine dubio peribit homo ille.
The Roman DDrs themselves say, that Invincible ignorance cannot here excuse
from ever lasting death: even as if there were one only remedy whereby a sick
man could be recovered from corporal death; suppose the Patient and the
Physician both were ignorant of it, the man must perish, as well not knowing
it, as if being brought unto him he had refused it.

2. Again of Persons, some are invincibly disabled from faith and knowledge,
through want of capacity, Pet. de Allinco in quaest. vesperiarum. Sicut ad
legis Christi habituale^ fide^ omnis viator obligatur sine ulla exceptione; fic
ab ejus actuali fide nullus excusatur nisi sola incapacitate. Parvulos autem et
furiosos, caeterisque passionibus mente captos seu alia naturali
impossibilitate prohibitos incapaces voco, et si non simpliciter, tame^
secundu^ quid, ^^. dum his defectibus laborant.
as Infants, Naturalls, and distracted Persons; or through want of means of
instruction: which may be saved, but God only knows how. Others have capacity
and means but in very different degrees, and accordingly they differ in that
measure of faith and knowledge, that is necessarily required in them. More
knowledge is necessary in Aegid. de Conninck. disp. 14. dub 10. Hominum sunt
tres classes, majores, medii, infimi, qui hic distinguendi, Similiter Puteanus
in 2. 2, q. 2. art. 3. d. ult. and ^lii.
Bishops and Priests, to whom is committed the government of the Church and the
cure of souls, then in vulgar Laickes: amongst whom in them of the rudest and
meanest sort, (if there be a studious care of holiness and obedience in their
life, which is ever supposed as most necessary) the knowledge of those maine
Artiles concerning our Saviors Incarnation, Passion, Resurrection, etc. (which
are purposely to that end celebrated by the Church, in her Festivities) as many
Almain in 3. d. 26. Minores tenentur explicit credere Articulis por
festivitates solennes celebratis, ut Ecclesia celebrat Festu^ de Nativitatc-sic
Durand: Bonavent. Alii, in eum loc. Sylv. ver. Fides.. 6. Azor. lib. 8. ca. 6..
2o quaeritur Filiucius de Casib. tract. 22. c. 1.. Dices. Aliique piurimi. Le
Card. de Richelieu* Instruct. du Chrestien. Lecon premiere. Gen'est pas chose
necessaire que celuy qui ignorera quelques vns des Articles de foy, ne puisse
aucunes fois fair son salut; mais il est besoin qu'il ait vne cognoissance de
ces Articles, suffisante pour le diriger a sa derniere fin. Si quelque un
ignoroit la Communion des Saints, la descente de nostre Seigneur aux Limbs,
que sa passion ait este soubs Pilate, qu'il ait este au Sepulcher, le temps
auquel il est resuscite, scauoir est le troisiesme iour, le sens de ces mots,
il est assis a la dextre de son Pere, il ne scroit damn pour cela. Le simple
se peut sauuer auec moindre cognoissance que celuy qui ne peut estre tenu pour
tell. C'est assez au simple de voir, comme nous anons dit, vne cognoissance du
Symbol suffisante pour la diriger ^ sa derniere fin: Au lieu que le Cure and
le Prelat, qui ont charge d'instruite les autres, sontobligez, and descauoir
distinctement tous les Articles du Symbol, and qui plus est de le pouuoir
expliquer au peuple.
Learned judge, may suffice.

For conclusion of this discourse concerning Fundamentalls, I will propound to
the consideration and censure of the judicious, these thoughts following.

It seems fundamental to the faith, and for the salvation of every member of
the Church, that he acknowledge and believe all such points of faith, as whereof
he may be sufficiently convinced that they belong to the doctrine of Jesus
Christ. For he that being sufficiently convinced does oppose, is obstinate, an
Heretic, and finally such a one as excludes himself out of heaven, whereinto
no wilful sinner can enter.

Now that a man may be sufficiently convinced, there are three things required.
1. Clear revelation, 2. Sufficient proposition, 3. Capacity and understanding
to apprehend what is reveiled and propounded.

1 Revelation from God is required: for we are not bound to believe any thing
as Gods word, which God has not declared to be his word, and that in such
clear manner, as may convince a reasonable man that it is from God. For want
of this, not only the Church before Christ, but even Christ's own Disciples
are excused from being guilty of any damnable error, though they believed not
the death, resurrection, or ascension of our Lord: as it is plain they did
not. Marc. 16. 11. 13. Luke 24. 11. Ioh. 20. 9. Marc. 9. 10. But now that these
things are so clearly reveiled in Scripture, he were no Christian that should
deny them.

2. Sufficient proposition of reveiled truths is required, before a man can be
convinced. For if they be not propounded to me, in respect of me it is all one
as if they were not reveiled. This proposition includes 2 things. 1. that the
points be perspicuously laid open in themselves, for want of this Apollos
believed not some points of the faith, till he was further informed. Acts 18.
25. 2. that the said points be so fully and forcibly laid open, as may serve to
remove reasonable doubts to the contrary, and to satisfy a teachable mind
against the principles, in which he has been bred to the contrary. For want
of this, the Apostles believed not the resurrection, when yet they were
plainly told of it. See Luke 9. 44. 45. and Mar. 9. 10. compared with Marc. 8.
31. 32.

Note here (1). This proposition of reveiled truths is not, as the Mistaker
says, by the infallible determination of Pope or Church, but by whatsoever
means a man may be convinced in conscience of divine revelation. If a Preacher
do clear any point of faith to his Hearers, if a private Christian do make
it appear to his neighbor, that any conclusion or point of faith is delivered
by divine revelation of Gods word; if a man himself (without any other
teacher,) by reading the Scriptures, or hearing them read, be convinced of the
truth of any such conclusion: this is a sufficient proposition, to prove him
that gain says any such truth to be an Heretic, and obstinate opposer of
the faith. Such a one may be truly said to be (...), condemned by his own
conscience. v. g. He that should read in Scriptures, Now is Christ risen from
the dead -- 1. Cor. 15. 20. or, The word was made flesh. Ioh. 1. -- and yet
should deny Christ's Resurrection or Incarnation, he were an Heretic, without
any determination or sentence of the Church. And such Heretics there were
many in the Primitive Church fore any Council was celebrated, and long before
any Pope pretended to Infallibility.

(2) Note. A man may be truly thought thus convicted, not only when his
Conscience does expressly bear witness to the truth, but when virtually it
does so, and would expressly do it, if it were not choked or blinded by some
unruly and unmortified lust in the will. For if a man make himself a slave to
ambition, covetousness, vaineglory, prejudice, etc. these untamed passions
will not only draw the man to profess what he thinks not, but to think
what he would dis-avow, if in synceritie he sought the truth. And in this case
the difference is not great between him that is wilfully blind, 24. qu. 3..
28. Haereticus est.
and him that knowingly gainsayeth the truth.

(3) Note. A man may be sufficiently convinced either in foro exteriori, or in
foro interiori. In the former he is convinced, who by an orderly proceeding of
the Church is censured and condemned: and such a one ad omnem effectum juris,
and in the esteem of the said Church, is to be reputed an heretic, though
perhaps the Censure be erroneous. He that is convicted in the later kind, is
an Heretic before God, though no authority of the Church have detected or
proceeded against him. And this conviction only is necessary to prove one an
Heretic excluded from Heaven.

3. There is required capacity or ability of wit and reason to apprehend that
which is clearly revealed and sufficiently proposed. For want of this, not
only fools and mad men are excused, but those who are of weaker capacity or
less knowledge may be excused from beleiving of those things which they cannot
apprehend: as the Apostles are by Christ Ioh. 16. 12.

But where there is no such impediment, as has been said, and the revealed
will or word of God is sufficiently propounded; there he that opposes is
co^vinced of error, and he who is thus convinced is an Heretic, and Heresy
is a work of the flesh which excludes from heaven. Gal. 5. 20. 21. And hence
it follows, that it is fundamental to a Christians faith, and necessary for
his salvation, that he believe all reveiled truths of God, whereof he may be
convinced that they are from God.

The cavills of the Mistaker against the Church of England and her Articles (in
this matter) are easily answered.

When the Church of England had orderly reformed her self: she was loudly
accused (by the Roman faction) of Heresy and Schism; (as it has been, in
later ages, the cunning custom of Rome to blast and disgrace all them that
dared to oppose any of her corrupt opinions or usages.) Wherefore, to clear
her innocence, She published to the world a Declaration of her judgment in
matters of Religion, which we call her Confession. Wherein her aim was not, in
any curious method, to deliver a Systeme of Divinity: but plainly, without
fraud or artifice, to set down, first the positive principles of her faith, or
the fundamentalls of it, wherein she has sufficiently declared her self, both
in Aro. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. -- 8. --
most particulars, and in sum by Art. 8.
avowing the Catholic Creeds,) and then a rejection of such errors
(especially Popish) as She judged to be without ground of Scripture, reason or
Antiquity. Now Popery is not any univocall part or member in the body of
Divinity: it is only an Aposteme gathered of corrupt and heterogeneous matter.
All the Logic in the world cannot possibly range such a confused lump of
falsities into any certain or distinct method. And therefore if the
Declaration of our Church against these errors be extremely confused, as our
Mistaker pretends; the cause is in the errors themselves, wherein there is
nothing but extreme confusion. By the other part of his charge, that our Church
in diverse points speaks obscurely, and not home to the question, it is evident
that he does not well understand himself or those points, wherein he gives
instance.

That particular Churches (and particularly his) have erred, our Church
beleives and Art. 19.
professes; and we believe further, that if any particular Church presume She
cannot fall by error, She is fallen already by pride. That the Catholic
Church can err in the foundation, our Church beleives not and therefore 1.
Cor. 1. 2.
professes not. But by the infallible Church, I doubt not, the man means that
which they call the Roman Catholic; for it is the perpetual and palpable
paralogisme of the Faction to confound the Roman and the Catholic, and to
argue from this to that; as if all the privileges of the Catholic Church
belonged only to the Roman quarter.

Likewise, it is not denied that the true Catholic Church is always visible
and cannot be hid. And wheresoever there is a Congregation of men, that
profess and desire to honor the true God, Calling upon the name of Jesus
Christ our Lord, both theirs and ours, and beleiving the Scriptures of the old
and new Testament; there (as very Vide supra page 111.
Learned men are of opinion) is a true Christian Church, wherein salvation may
be had, and a visible member of the holy Catholic Church. Innumerable such
there ever have been since Christ, and ever shall be scattered over the face of
earth. For Joh. Serranus Appar. ad fid. Cathol. Paris. 1607. page 172. Quicquid
vel molitus est, vei moliturus mendacii Pater, non tamen vel effecit hactenus
vel effectures est posthac, ut doctrina Catholica, omnium Christianorum
consensu, semper and ubique rata, aboleatur: Quin potius, 'illa in densissima
maxim involutarum perturbationum caligine victrix extitit, and in animis and
in aperta confessione Christianorum omnium, in suis fundamentis nullo modo
labefactata. In illa quoque veritate una illa Ecclesia fuit conservata, in
mediis saevissimae hyemis tempeftatibus, vel densissimis tenebris suorum
interluniorum. Hanc successionis perpetuae vim esse and illius usum omnes
sobrii animadvertunt.
whatsoever the Father of lies either has attempted, or shall attempt, yet
neither has he hither to effected, nor shall ever bring it to pass hereafter,
that the true Catholic doctrine ratified by the Common consent of Christians
always and every where should be abolished, but that in the thickest mist
rather of the most perplexed troubles it still obtained Victory, both in the
minds and in the open confession of all Christians, no ways overturned in the
Foundations thereof. And in this verity that One Church of Christ was preserved
in the midst of the tempests of the most cruel winter, or in the thickest
darkness of her waynings. Which true succession of the Faith and Church all
sober men observe and acknowledge. And as a most learned Bp. Usher Sermon. of the
unity of faith.
Prelate has observed further, if at this day we should take a survey of the
several professions of Christianity that have any large spread in any part of
the world, and should put by the points wherein they differ one from another,
and gather into one body the rest of the Articles wherein they do all generally
agree; we should find, that in those Propositions which without all
Controversy are universally received in the whole Christian world, so much
Truth is contained, as, being joined with holy obedience, may be sufficient to
bring a man unto everlasting salvation. Neither have we cause to doubt, but
that as many as walk according Gal 6. 16.
to this rule, (neither overthrowing that which they have builded by
superinducing any damnable heresies thereupon, nor otherwise vitiating their
holy Faith with a lewd and wicked conversation,) peace shall be upon them, and
mercy, and upon the Israel of God.

In the point of Freewill, our Church professes (withal Catholic Antiquity,
Greek and Latin, before and after Pelagius,) that though the Will be
naturally and essentially free from all constraint and necessiity, yet it is
not spiritually free from sin, or to any good, until it be freed by inward
supernatural and undeserved Grace; which both prevets, prepares and excites
the Will to every good act that it may be helped, and then helps it when it is
prepared. That the Will of it self has no power to any good act, till it be
thus quickened, enabled and assisted by Grace, which in all good works and
desires is the principal agent, to which the Will is subordinate. But that
this grace corrects and perfects nature, does not abolish it. Wherefore the
Will being moved by grace as aforesaid, is not idle but freely moves it self
to consent, having still a natural and corrupt liberty to sin. So as all the
good we do (or have or hope for) must be ascribed to God and his free grace,
and all the sin we do, only and wholly to our own will and freedom. And by
this doctrine, we fully avoid and contradict the two contrary errors, of the
Manichees on the one side, who deny the natural liberty of the Will, and of
the Pelagians and their Relics on the other side, who give the will a
spiritual liberty of it self, and so deny the necessity of preventing grace.
If some Protestant Writers go farther Piscator, etc.
in this point, so far as to affirm that God determines and necessitates the
Wills of men to every act, good or bad, natural, moral or spiritual, so as
the motion of Providence or grace leaves no power or possibility in the Will
actually to dissent (in sensu composito:) Answ. 1. this is nothing to the
Church of England, which approves not this dangerous doctrine. 2. The Mistaker
cannot with reason or modesty upbraid them (much less others) with this
opinion or the ill consequents of it; since no Calvinist (as he calls them)
herein speaks more harshly or rigorously then his own Dominicans, Bannes,
Alvarez, Zumel, Ledesma, Herrera, Nugnus, Navarrete, and many others; for
proof whereof I refer him to a late Apell. pro Dom. Banne per Ariviere Doct.
Paris. Lugd. An. 1630. Vide etiam Andr. Rivet. sum. Controv. Tract. 4. quaest.
6.
Sorbonist who has published, by way of parallel, the exact argiement of
Dominicus Bannes, (and Others) with Calvin in this matter, quoting and
comparing their very words.

For the Canon of Scripture, it is true, our Church admits of no other Books
in the Old Testament, as divine and Canonical, but only those which Romans 3. 2.
were commended by God himself, to his own people the Church of the Jews.
Wherein we have the consent of the most ancient Clem. Romans Constable. lib. 2. ca.
57. Melito Sard. ap. Eusebius. Hist. lib. 4. cap. 27. Grae. Origin. ap. Eund. lib.
6. cap. 25 Sec. Graec. Athanas. in Synopsi. Nazianz. in Carm. Cyrill Hieros.
Catech. 4. (...). Epiphan. de Mensu: and Ponderibus number. 4. edit. Paris.
Council. Laodic. Can. ult. Ruffin. in Expos. Symb. Hieron. in Praefat. ad lib.
Regum. and ad libros Salom. and in Prol. Galeato. Damasc. de fid Orth. lib. 4.
cap. 18. Glossa. in did. 16. Canones. Lyra. Prolog. primo Rich. a S. victore.
Exceptionum lib. 2. c. 9. Caietan. in com. hist. v. Test. fine. Vide Canum. l.
2. c. 10. etc.
Christian Churches and Writers for the most part; who expressly exclude the
Apocryphal, and by name the Hicr. Praefat. in lib. Salom. Judith and Tobiae
and Machabaeorum libros legit quidem Ecclesia, sed cos inter Canonicas
Scripturas non recipit. August. lib. 2. Contr. Epist. Gaudent. cap. 23.
Scriptura Machabae orum recepta est ab Ecclesia non inutiliter, si sobrie
legatur and audiatur. Greg M. moral. li. 19. cap 17. Macch. vocat Libros non
Canonicos.
Machabees, whereof the Mistaker makes so great esteema. The Books of the New
Testament are fitly severed by Eusebius into three ranks. 1. Some were (...),
whose authority or Authors were never debated. 2. Others were (...), doubted of
(not by the Church so much, as) by Some in the Church, and rather for their
Authors then their authority, as the Epistles to the Hebrews, of S. James, the
latter of S. Peter, etc. 3. Others were (...), rejected by consent of all, as
the Pastor of Hermes, the pretended Gospells of S. Thomas. S. Bartholomew and
the like. The doubts of the Second rank are now long since cleared, and all
Eusebius. Hist. lib. 3. cap. 3.
those Scriptures generally received by all Christians (in their Western parts
at least,) and particularly by the Lutherans (at least, by the best learned
among them,) who admit the Epistle of S. James (and the rest) as Canonical;
which the Mistaker may learn (for it seems He knows it not) from their own
Writers, and by name from their learned Dr Exeges. Plen. Locor. Loc. 1. de
Scrip. S.. 279. 280. 281.
Gerhard.

The Mistaker ends his Discourse as He began it, with Rhetorique and Passion.
But this weapon wounds not, being commonly -- (...), the reasoning of them that
want better reasons.

I shall conclude with a part of my daily prayers; humbly beseeching the Father
of mercies, (who is the lover of souls, and has said that he delights in
mercy, and sworn that he takes no pleasure in the death of them that die,
being not willing that any should perish, but willing that all men should be
saved and come to the knowledge of his truth;) that he would be pleased to
look with the eyes of his compassion, upon all those miserable Nations that
sit in ignorance and infidelity, in darkness and in the shadow of death,
calling them out of darkness into his marveilous light, out of the power of
Sainto the Kingdom of his dear Son; that it would also please Him to take
away out of his Church all dissension and discord, all Heresies and Schisms,
all abuses and false doctrines, all idolatry, superstition and tyranny; and to
unite all Christians in one holy bond of truth and peace, faith and charity;
that so with one mind and one mouth, we may all join in his service, and for
ever glorify the holy name of the most glorious and holy Trinity.

Amen, Amen.
FINIS.

