THE SVBSTANCE OF CHRISTIAN RELIGION, SOVNDLY SET FORTH in two books, by
definitions and partitions, framed according to the rules of a natural method
by Amandus Polanus professor of Divinity.

The first book concerns faith. The second concerns good works. The
principal points whereof are contained in a short table hereunto annexed.
Translated out of Latin into English by E. W.

This is life eternal, that they know thee to be the only very God, and him
whom thou have sent Jesus Christ. Ioh. 17.3. Whatsoever I command you, take
heed that you do it. Thou shall put nothing thereto, nor take any thing
therfro^. Deu. 12.32. LABOR ET CONSTANTIA printer's device of John Oxenbridge

Imprinted at London by R. F. for John Oxenbridge dwelling in Paul's
churchyard, at the sign of the Parrot. 1595.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND HIS VERY GOOD LORD, THE LORD Edward Earl of
Bedford: and to the right honorable also and virtuous Lady, the Lady Lucie
his wife, E. W. wishes all growth of goodness in this life, and in the end
everlasting blessedness through Christ.
MAy it please your HH. to understand, that having by my fathers appointment
for exercise sake, according to my poor skill, translated out of Latin into
English, this worthy work following: and God having besides prepared a way
(when I did neither think nor know of it) to bring it to light and sight of
men, by putting it into Print, I bethought my self, as well as my want of
years and discretion would suffer me, of some worthy persons and patro^s to
whom I might dedicate these my simple labors. Amongst many none came more
often and more justly into my remembrance, tha^ your HH. whose affection in the
Lord to my father, and some measure of Christian care for me in the world, have
made me bold, and even as it were to presume, to dedicate these simple fruits
of my first travails unto you. What reasons I have besides those alleged to
lead me thereto, I shall not need largely to lay out. Your HH. zeal to
Religion: your favors to me, as also some declaration of all dutiful
thankfulness from my self toward you for the same have greatly provoked me.
In who^ though there be nothing as in regard of my self and pains taken
herein, that may commend it, yet as in respect of the work it self, sure I
am, not by mine own judgment I protest (for how weak and childish that is, I
very well know) but by the sentence of sundry very learned men, both for the
soundness and sufficiency of the things therein contained, as also for the
methodicall manner of handling the same, there will be found much that may well
beseem your HH. profession and place. And so earnestly praying the good
acceptance of that which is done, that under your HH. patronage it may be the
better received amongst men: and humbly beseeching the continuance of your HH.
favors, that so I may the better proceed in godliness and learning,
whereunto my parents, though not able indeed of themselves to maintain me
therein, have unfeignedly dedicated me, and I my self have willingly vowed my
self; and heartily craving pardon for my boldness and scapes this or any other
way committed, I humbly end.

At London the first of this January. 1595. Your HH. humble and dutiful as he
is much bound. Elijahu Wilcocks.

The titles of the common places handled in these Partitions.
1 Of the word of God page 1.179. 2 Of God. page 2. 3 Of the attributes of God.
page 2. 4 Of the persons of the Deity, or of the holy Trinity. page 12. 5 Of
the works of God. page 14. 6 Of the decree of God, where also of the decree of
Predestination. page 16.17. 7 Of Creation, where of the image of God. page
18.19. 8 Of good and evil Angels. page 20.21. 9 Of man, his state and free
will. page 21.22.23. 10 Of the providence of God. page 28. 11 Of good. page 28.
12 Of evil. page 29. 13 Of sin page 29. and those that follow. 14 Of the
action of God. page 36. 15 Of the instruments of God. page 36. 16 Of Gods
permission or sufferance. page 40. 17 Of the conservation of things. page 42.
18 Of Predestination. page 44. 19 Of the natural manifestation of God, where
concerning the law of nature. page 45. 20 Of afflictions and the cross. page
46. and those that follow. 21 Of Gods secret moving of the wills. page 49. 22
Of Gods governing of all humane actions. page 50. 23 Of the supernatural
manifestation of Gods will. page 51. 24 Of the law of God whereof the decalogue
or 10. Co^mandeme^ts. 52. and those that follow. 25 Of the ceremonial and
judicial law of God. page 63: 26 Of the Gospel. page 63. 27 Of Christ, of his
person, of his double state, incarnation, conception by the holy spirit, of his
personal union, of the majesty of the humane nature of Christ, of the
communicating of the Idioms, or properties of his birth, obedience, suffering,
death, burying, desce^sion to hell, exaltation, resurrection from the dead,
ascension into heaven, sitting at the right of God his father. page 64. and
following. 28 Of the office of Christ, or of the office of the Mediator. page
78. and following. 29 Of the foretelling of things to come. page 82. 30 Of Gods
promises. page 84. 31 Of Gods threatenings. page 86. 32 Of Gods calling. page
87. 33 Of the covenant of God. page 89. 34 Of the benefits purchased to us by
Christ. page 89 35 Of the communion or fellowship with Christ. page 91. 36 Of
justification, where of forgiveness of sins. page 93. 37 Of regeneration or
sanctification, where of repentance. page 94. 38 Of adoption. page 100. 39 Of
the liberty of the sons of God, where of Christian liberty, and of things
indifferent. page 102. and those that follow. 40 Of comfort under the cross,
and in death. page 105 and so forward. 41 Of divine signs, where of miracles
and the Sacraments. page 114. 115. and so forward. 42 Of Baptism. page 132. 43
Of the Supper of the Lord. page 136. etc. 44 Of the works of God after this
life, where of the general resurrection, and the last judgment, and
glorification of the elect. page 151. 152. and those that follow. 45 Of the
true Church, where of true Religion. page 155. etc. 46 Of the Ministers of the
Church. page 159. 60. 47 Of the Ecclesiastical power, where of the power of
order and jurisdiction, of the lawful calling of Ministers, of the power of
the keys, of the Ecclesiastical discipline, of excommunication. page 163.
164. and so forward. 48 Of Counsels. page 170. 49 Of the false Church, where of
false Religion, of the enemies of Christ and his kingdom, of the Jews, and of
their reiection and restitutio^, of the Mahumetistes, heretics, Anrichrist,
of the Church of Antichrist, and of false Prophets. page 172. 173. and
following.
The second book.
50 Of good works. page 179. 180. Of things adjoined thereto. page 180. 51 Of
things disagreeing with good works, where of the fear of God, of constancy,
prudence, zeal, fortitude, the glory of God. page 181. 182. and those that
follow. 52 Of the inward and outward worship of God, and the things that
disagree therefrom, where of lively faith. page 188. 189. etc. 53 Of
invocation, where of prayer, of the Lords prayer, of an oath. page 197 54 Of
thanksgiving, and the confession of truth. page 211. 212. 55 Of the rites or
ceremonies of the Church, where of a godly fast, vow, sacrifices of the old
Testament and feast. page 215. 216. and so forward. 56 Of virtue, where
concerning the desire of wisdom, of fortitude, temperance, chastity,
liberality, justice, and the whole company of virtues. page 196. and so
forward. 57 Of private justice, where of wedlock, and of divorce. page 243.
244 58 Of the public justice, where of Magistrate and laws, of peace and
war. page 273. and so forward.
THE FIRST BOOK OF THE PARTITIONS, AND DEFINITIONS OF Divinity, framed
according to the rules of a natural method, by Amandus Polanus of Polansdorf.
Of Faith.
THe word of God, is a doctrine written by the Prophets and Apostles, the holy
spirit being the inditour thereof, perfectly delivering the way how to obtain
eternal life. 2. Pet. 1.21. Ephesians. 2.20. John. 5.24.39. and 20.29.31. 1. Cor.
1.21. 2. Tim. 1.10. and 2.5. Tit. 1.1. 2. Romans 1.16. Psalm. 32.1. and 1.1. and
119.1. and so forward. Mat. 5.3. and so forward. Iam. 1.21.22.

Of the word of God there be two parts: the first concerning faith. Act.
24.14.15.16. Romans 1.16. Hab. 2.4. the other concerning good works. Iam. 2.20.
Phil. 1.27. Tit. 3.8. Mar. 1.15. 1. Tim. 1.18.19. Of faith.


The first part, namely concerning faith, does teach us, what we must believe
to salvation. And that concerns either God, or the Church.

God, is an eternal, infinite, omnipotent, Of God.
and most holy spirit. John 4.24. Psalm 9.2. and 92.8. and 102.13. Esa. 63.16.
Dan. 6.26. Heb. 1.12. Reu. 4.8. and 11.17. and 16.5. 1. Kin. 8.27. 2. Chro.
6.18. Job. 11.7.8. Iere. 23.23. Psalm. 139.7.10. Esa. 6.3. Genesis 17.1. and 35.11.
Exodus 6.3. Deuteronomy. 7.8. and 10.17. Number. 11.23. Esa. 40.12. Matt. 19.26. Luke
1.37. Reu. 1.8. Mat. 19.17. 2. Chr. 30.18.

Of the knowledge of God, or of faith concerning God, are two parts, the first
concerning the essence of God, the second concerning his works.

The essence of God, is the nature of God, whereby God is indeed, and does
subsist.

And that essence is but one: and therefore God is but only one also.

There are two parts of the knowledge of the essence of God, the first
concerning the attributes of God, the second concerning the distinction of the
persons.

The attributes of God, are those titles, which are attributed to God, to
declare his essence better unto us.

Of the attributes of God.
The attributes of God, are either simple, or compared.

The simple attributes of God are the esential properties of God, which do
agree to him without comparison.

Of these some have such a similitude of him, as is in the creatures by
creation: some have not.

Of the former kind are blessedness, immortality, understanding, praescience,
memory, will, goodness, holiness, justice, clemency, long sufferance,
patience, constacie, fortitude, truth, faithfulness, and the rest.

The goodness of God is that, by which he has been everlastingly contented
with him self, not having need of any other thing. 1. Tim. 1.11. and 6.15.

The understanding of God, is that by which he has a perfect understanding of
al things, and this is sometimes called the wisdom of God.

The immortality of God, is that by which he never dies. 1. Tim. 1.17. and
6.16.

The praescience of God, is a most perfect foreknowledge of all things to come.

The memory of God, is that by which he does most exactly remember all things.
Psalm. 25.6.7. Esa. 49.16.

Of the will of God.
The will of God, is that by which he wills all things. Rom 9.15.22. Ephesians.
1.5.9.11.

And that will is only one, and most simple if we respect God him self, but so
far as we respect me^, to who^ it is either revealed or hid, it is two fold:
manifest or secret. The schoolmen do call the former of these, the will of the
sign, the other the will of the good pleasure of God.

The secret will also in due time appointed by God, is made open and manifest.

The will of God is most free, whereupon also it is called the free will of God.

The free will of God, is that self same essence of God, understanding by it
self all things immediately and most perfectly, and that most freely, but yet
unchangeably and necessarily, willing that which is good only, and abhorring
that only which is evil, neither depending of another former beginning, but
of it self only. And this alone may properly be called of his own power.

The goodness of God is that by which he is the author of all good things.

And he does exercise this, either generally toward all creatures, or else
particularly toward his elect.

The former is called beneficence, the later is called mercy.

The beneficence of God, is that by which he gives his gifts to all his
creatures. Mat. 5.44.45. Act. 14.17.

The mercy of God is that by which God does good to his elect, although they
deserve nothing of him but evil. Esa. 49.10.13. Ephesians. 2.3.4. Psalm. 145.9.

The holiness of God is that by which he does altogether abhor all impuritie
and uncleanness Esa. 6.3. Reu. 4.8. Ierem. 3.12.

The justice of God, is that by which he deals justly in all things. Psalm.
116.11. Romans 3.4.

The clemency of God, is that by which he does repress his anger, which is
most just, that he might spare us. Exodus 34.5.

The long sufferance of God, is that whereby he does a long time defer his
anger, and punishment against sinners, that he might provoke them to
repentance. Exodus 34.5.

The patience of God is that by which he suffers a long time patiently the
sins of men, that he might lead the^ to repentance. Esa. 48.9

The constancy of God, is that by which he performs most certainly that
which he has spoken. Exodus 34.5.

The fortitude of God, is that by which he is able to perform all things that
he does will. 1 Samuel 2.2. 2 Samuel 23.13. Esaias. 28.2. and 49.26. Ier. 50.34.
Revel. 18.8.

The truth of God is that by which he speaks and does all things as they
are indeed, he himself being most free from all lying. Romans 3.4. Deuteronomy. 7.9.

The fayhfulnes of God is that by which he most faithfully performs to his
children that which he has promised. Esaias. 49.7. Exodus 34.6. Deuteronomy. 7.10.

Hitherto we have handled the simple attributes of God, which are of the first
sort: they of the latter sort follow.
The simple attributs of God, of the later sort are those which have not in
the^ such a similitude of him, as is in some creatures by creation.

Of which sort are these, Eternity, Infinitnes, vbiquity, omnipotency,
omniscience.

Eternity, is an essential property of God, by which he is said to be
without any beginning or ending. Esa. 43.13. Ps. 90.2. and 92.8.

Infiniteness, is an essential property of God, by which we understand that
the divine essence can in no wise be co^prehe^ded in any bounds. 1. Kin. 8.27.
2. Chro. 2.6. and 6.18.

It is also called his unmeasurableness.

Vbiquitie is an essential property of God, by which he is always present
every where in all things. Iere. 23.23.24. Psalm. 139.7.10. Esa. 6.3. and 66.1.

It is also called omnipresence.

Infiniteness is the cause of vbiquitie.

For that that is every where, is therefore every where, because it is infinite.
Neither is, neither can any thing be said to be every where, except it be
infinite.

And this is proper to the Deity alone, that it be whole every where and in
every particular place.

Omnipotency, is an essential property of God, by which he can bring to
pass all things, whatsoever he does will now he does will all those things,
which are agreeable to his nature and word. Luke 1.37. and 18.27.

Omniscience, is an essential property of God, by which he most perfectly
knows, even in one moment all things every where. Hebr. 4.13.

The meditation hereof has a double use, one for our exhortation, the other
for our comfort.

It serves us for exhortation, because it stirs us up to the sincere fear
of God, that in every place we may fly all filthiness, and sins, seeing all
things though never so secret are subject to the eyes of God, and nothing can
be hid from the^: seeing also God will bring forth into the open light all
secrets in due time.

It serves us for comfort, because it does stre^gthe^ our minds in all
miseries, seeing God knows them, and they cannot be hid from him.

Thus have the simple attributes of God been handled: The compared follow.
The compared attributs of God are those titles which do belong properly to
creatures, but are by a metaphore or similitude attributed to God. For the
Scripture oftentimes does speak of God, according to ma^s capacity.

Of them some are taken from man, some from other creatures.

Those which are taken from man, are said to be attributed to God, by a humane
passion. A humane passion is a metaphore, Of a humane passion in God.
whereby those things which perteine to man, are by a similitude attributed to
God.

Of this sort are these, the parts, members, senses, affections, and adioynts
of man.

The soul which is a part of man, is attributed to God Iere. 5.29. and 9.9.
Amos. 6.8.

Where by the soul is mea^t, the life of God, that is to say, the very essence
of God it self.

And by the members of the body, by the senses, affections and adioynts, which
are attributed to God, a power is meant to be in God, performing for us
certain actions by an inco^prehensible manner, whereof the works which men
perform by the means of their members, senses, affections and adioyntes be as
it were a certain resemblance.

These members of the body are attributed to God: the head, the face, the eye,
the apple of the eye, the mouth, the ear, the nose the nostrels, the hand, the
arm, the right hand, the finger, the heart, the womb, the feet.

By Gods head is meant God himself being such a one as to whose glory all
things are to be referred, which are subject to him in Christ 1. Cor. 11.3. God
is the head of Christ.

By face or countenance, is meant sometime presence, sometimes the favor and
kindness or God. Psalm. 114.7. and 27.8.9. and 31.17. Sometimes anger. Psalm.
34.17.

By the eyes is meant, either the good will and favor of God. Psalm. 34.16. Or
the providence of God: or else this, namely that God sees all things.

By the apple of the eye is meant, that which is most dear to God. Deuteronomy.
32.10. Psalm. 17.8. Zach. 2.8.

By the mouth is meant either the decree of Gods providence. Mat. 4.4. or else
the commandment or revealing of his word. Iere. 9.12.

By the ears is meant, either readiness, and facility in hearing our
prayers. Psalm. 31.3. and 34.16. Or this, that God hears all things.

By the nose is meant the fierce wrath of God. Ierem. 49.37.

By the nostrels to which smelling is attributed is meant, that acceptance by
which he takes sacrifices to be well pleasing, and acceptable unto him. Genes.
8.21.

By the hand is meant power, protection, liberality, workmanship, and those
things which are like these. Job. 10.8. Psalm. 31.6. and 8.7.

By the arm is meant power, strength and might. Genes. 49.24. Exodus 6.6.

By the right hand, is meant, the power, or rule of God. As in the Creed of
the Apostles.

By the finger is meant, power, mighty working. Exodus 8.19. or else
workmanship. Exodus 31.18.

By the heart is meant, either the living essence of God, for the heart is judged
to be the seat of life in a living creature. Genes. 6.6. or the decree of God,
because the holy Scripture does appoint the heart to be the seat of the sense,
whose part is to think, and to determine. Iere. 19.5. or the good pleasure of
God, as when David is said to be a man according to Gods own heart.

By the womb is meant generation. Psalm. 110.3.

By the feet is meant strength or power. Psalm. 110.1. or else the presence of
God.

Hitherto of the members attributed to God in the Scripture: now follow the
senses.
By the senses attributed to God there is understood the providence of God.
Mat. 14.2.

The senses which are attributed to God, are either inward or outward.

Inward, as memory or remembrance. Esa. 49.16. 1. Sam. 15.2.

To which is opposed forgetfulness. Esa. 49.14.

The outward senses attributed to God are sight. Genes. 1.4.

Hearing. Psalm. 5.2. and 6.8.9.

Smelling. Genes. 8.21.

And these are the senses, which are attributed to God: the affections follow.
Affections are attributed to God, as love, grace, or mercy, anger, fury,
hatred repe^ting.

The love of God, is that whereby he being moved does bestow his gifts on his
creatures. Mal. 1.2.3. John. 2. Tit. 3.4 Ephesians. 2.4.

Of the grace of God.
The grace or mercy of God, is the favor, good will, and clemency of God, by
which he gives freely to his elect without any desert of theirs, all good
things both for body and soul, especially eternal life. Romans 11.6.12.25.

The schoolmen do make two sorts of the grace of God: A grace making a man
freely accepted, and another grace given freely: The schoolmen for the most
part do understand by the grace which makes a man freely acceptable, the gifts
and qualities infused into the soul: but more rightly it is taken for the
favor, and mercy of God, which does not consist in us but in God himself.

Grace given freely, is every gift which does proceed from the love, and
liberality of God, and is bestowed upon us. Paul calls it the gift by
grace. Romans 5.15. Schoolmen call it an infused grace.

The good pleasure of God, is that by which he suffers all good things to
please him, Gene. 1. God saw all things that he had made, and behold they were
very good. So works done by faith please God.

The anger of God, are those punishments, by which he punishes sins. Romans
1.18.

And that is also called the reuengement of God. Esa. 47.3. Psalm. 2.5.

The fury of God, is the fierce and mighty wrath of God declared by most
grievous punishments. Psalm. 2.5.12.

The hatred which is in God, is an abhorring lothing and rejecting of evil.
Mala. 1.2.3. Romans 9.13.

Of the repenting of God.
The repenting of God, is not a changing of his divine counsel and decree,
which is immutable. 1. Sam. 15.29. but a changing of the works of God. Genes.
6.6. 1. Sam. 15.11. Ierem. 18.8

The causes thereof are either the sins or repentance of men.

Notwithstanding this kind of change is decreed by God from everlasting. For
God has decreed both of these, namely to perform some work, and to change it
again, for the sins, and repentance of men. That changing of the work is
called the repenting of God.

And these are the affections which are attributed to God: the adioynts follow.
The adioynts of man which are attributed to God are these, to sit in a throne
to see. Psalm. 2. to arise, to asce^d, to desce^d, apparel. Psalm. 104.2. he is
called also a husbandman. John. 15.1.

And these attributes are taken from man others follow, which are both common
and also taken from other creatures: Of this sort are these, place, time,
ascending, descending.

Wings are also attributed to God, by which is meant protection and defense.
Deuteronomy. 32.10. Psalm. 17.8. Psalm. 91.4.

Likewise a shadow is attributed to God. Psalm. 91.1 by which is meant
protection. For even as a shadow does protect us from the beams, and heat of
the sun: so God does protect us from dangers.

So God by a metaphore is called by diverse names.

He is called a tower. Psalm. 91.2. For even as in high and defenced towers, we
are safe from the enemy: so God does set us in safety.

He is called, a shield, a buckler. Psalm. 3.4.

He is called, a consuming fire. Deuteronomy. 4.24. and 9.3. Heb. 12.19.

He is called a rock. Psalm. 71.

He is called a strong dwelling place. Psalm. 71.3.

He is called a defense. Psalm. 71.3.

Hitherto we have spoken concerning the attributes of God: now we will speak
concerning the persons of the Deity.
A person of the Deity, is a subsistence in the Deity, Of the persons of the
Deity.
having such properties, as cannot be communicated from one to another.

There are three persons in the Deity, the Father, the Son, and the holy
ghost. Mat. 3.16. and 28.19. 1. John. 5.7. Ephesians. 2.18. Gene. 1.26. and 18.2.
Exodus 3.6. and 15.16. Psalm. 33.6. Esa. 6.3.

These are coeternall, and equal, of one, and the self same simple essence,
distinct one from another by an incommunicable propriety. And those are
distinguished one from another, not essentially, because the essence of them is
but one, yet notwithstanding really: they differ from the essence of God, not
in deed, but by respect or by relation only.

The Father, is the first in the Godhead, which has begot the Son from
everlasting. Psalm. 2.2. Cor. 13.

The Son, is the second in the Godhead, which is begotten of the Father, by
an eternal communicating of the whole essence. John. 1.14.18.34. and 3.16.
Mat. 3.17. 2. Cor. 1.19. Hose. 11.3. Luke. 1.31. Romans 1.4.

Of the divine generation.
The divine essence neither does beget, neither is begotten: because that which
does beget is in very deed, distinguished from that which is begotten: now the
divine essence, being but one, and most simple, it cannot be distinguished from
it self.

The Son, is beggotten of the essence of the Father: and has the whole
essence of the Father not by flowing from, neither by cutting out of the
Father, neither by propagation, (for the essence of the Son, does not flow
from the essence of the Father, neither is it propagated or cut out of it) but
by communicating. And the Son is not in deed the Son of himself, because
he is the Son of the Father: yet notwithstanding he is God of himself, that
is to say, that essence which is in the Son, is not of another, but of it
self, seeing the essence of the Father, and the Son, is one and self same.
The essence of the Father, is of it self, without all beginning: but the
essence of the Son, is the essence of the Father. For the Godhead, by which the
Son is God, is that same by which the Father is God: therefore the essence of
the Son is of it self and without beginning. Therefore Christ is God of
himself. For except he be God of himself, he certainly can not be God at all.
For that he be God, God has it of himself naturally. He cannot be God whose
essence is not of it self.

But it is one thing for the essence to be begotten, and another thing to be
begotten of the essence. The essence is not begotten of the essence, the
essence is without generation.

Therefore the Son also as he is God, is not begotten. But the Son is
begotten of the essence of the Father. Wherefore Christ as he is God is of
himself, as he is the Son, he is of the Father.

The holy Spirit is the third person in the Godhead, which proceeds from the
Father and the Son. John. 15.25.26. and 20.22. Romans 8.9. Esa. 6.8.9. Acts.
28.25.26. and 5.3.4. 1. Cor. 3.6. and 19.20 2. Cor. 6.16.

Therefore God is one in essence. Exodus 3.14. Deuteronomy. 4.35. and 6.4. and 7.9. and
10.17. and 32.39. 1. Cor. 12.6. Gal. 3.20. Ephesians. 4.6. 1. Tim. 2.5. But three
in persons, whereupon we worship the reverend Trinity, or Trinity in unity.
Genes. 1.26. and 18.2. 1. John. 5.7. Ephesians. 2.18. Romans 9 5. 1. Timot. 3.16.
Acts. 5.3.4.

Hitherto concerning the essence of God: now concerning his works.
Of the works of God.
The works of God, are those things which God does for his own glory. Psalm 8.1.
and 19. and 104.1. Proverb. 16.4. Esaias 48.9. Romans 1.20.21.

And by the consideration of Gods works, diverse names are given to God in the
Scripture.

Furthermore those are the undivided works of the Trinity, and yet we must
keep the personal propriety, the natural distinction, and order of the
persons in working. For as the Son is of the Father, and the holy Spirit of
the Father and the Son: so the Father works immediately by the Son: and
the Father and the Son, by the holy Spirit, in performing the same work.
For the Father is powerful, but by the Son and the holy Spirit. John. 5.19.

The Father works by the Son, not as by an instrument or helper of the
working.

The works of God, are either benefits, or judgments.

The benefits of God, are the works which God does perform for our good.

The benefits of God, are either spiritual, or bodily.

Spiritual benefits, are those which pertain to the soul or spiritual life.

Bodily benefits, are those which pettaine to a bodily life.

Hitherto generally concerning the benefits of God: now concerning his
judgments.
The judgments of God, are those works, by which he justly lays afflictions
upon men.

Again the works of God are either eternal, or limited in time.

The eternal works of God are those which were done from eternity, before the
foundations of the world were laid.

The works of a certain or set time, are those which are done in the time
appointed.

Hitherto concerning the adiunctes of the works of God, the sorts follow.
Of the decree of God.
The works of God are two: the decree of God, and the execution of Gods decree.

The decree of God, is the eternal and unchangeable work of God, whereby he
has decreed in himself, all things which he will do, and permit to be done,
and all the circumstances of all things. Act. 2.23. and 4.28. and 10.42. Ephesians.
1.1.5.11.

All things therefore are done by the decree of God. Ephesians. 1.11. Mat. 6.33.

And God has so decreed all things, that he has determined the time, place,
and the manner how they should be done: and also has appointed al things
particularly to their end: and has moreover ordained even the very means, by
which they shall come to that end.

Now the decree of God is unchangeable, and immovable, and such a one as God
can not repent him of it, and therefore it is necessary. Psalm. 33.11. Number.
23.19. 1. Sam. 15.29. Esa. 46.10. Mal. 3.6. Iam. 1.17. Esa. 14.24.27.

The decree of God, is either general, or special.

Gods general decree, is that which pertains generally to all and every
thing, great and small, yea, even to those things, which fall out every moment.

Gods special decree, is that which does specially concern men.

Of the decree of Predestination.
That pertaining properly to the eternal salvation, or destruction of men, is
called the decree of Predestination.

The decree of Predestination, is the decree of God, concerning the eternal
salvation, or destruction of men.

And that is two fold: the decree of election, or the decree of reprobation.

The decree of election, is that decree, by which God has purposed with
himself, to deliver (and also to ordain to eternal life, and that to the
praise of his glorious grace from that common destruction into which men would
willingly have thrust themselves headlong) all those who^ he would have mercy
upon. Ephesians. 1.5. Mat. 22.14. Romans 8.28. and 9.21. Act. 13.48. Luke. 10.20.
Phil. 4.3. Revel. 3.5. and 21.27.

The decree of election is by a metaphore called the book of life, in which
are written the names of those that shall be saved. Revel. 20.12.15.

The decree of reprobation, is that decree by which God has purposed with
himself to leave, and that for the declaration of his justice, those on whom
he will not take pity, in everlasting destruction, to which, for their sins,
they should be subject. Proverb. 16.4. Exodus 9.16. Romans 9.22. 2. Pet. 2.4. Job.
4.18. and 15.15. Jude. verse. 4. Revel. 13.8. and 17.8. and 20.15.

Hitherto concerning Gods decree: now concerning the execution of Gods decree.
Of the execution of the decree.
The execution of Gods decree, is a most free, and just work of God: by which
God does in the determined time perform all things, which have been decreed
from everlasting, and does so perform them, as they were decreed.

For the works of God are now in time so performed, that they do fully answer
to his decree, that is to say, that those things which are decreed should all
of them be done indeed, and as they were decreed, so they should be done.

The execution of Gods decree is two fold: either respecting this life or the
life to come.

The execution of Gods decree, respecting this life, is that by which those
works are done, which God has decreed to do in this life.

Those works are two fold. Creation and providence.

Of Creation.
Creation, is a work of God, by which he has brought forth all creatures of
nothing. Gene. 1.2.

A creature, is whatsoever has bin made by God of nothing.

Now all the creatures of God were created very good. Therefore all nature as it
is nature, is good, because it is the work of God.

Of these creatures some are created according to the Image of God: some are
not.

Of the image of God.
The Image of God, is that dignity, and excellency, in which the reasonable
creatures, being created like unto God, do excel other creatures.

Of this Image of God there are two parts, perfect reason, and perfect
blessedness.

Perfect reason, is a part of Gods Image, by which the reasonable creature,
does more expressly carry the Image of God his creator, whilst by a certain
divine force it knows plainly things, without error, as they are, and does
will and choose no other thing, then that which does please God.

And that perfect reason consists, both in the mind and in the will.

Perfect reason in the mind, is an excellent understanding, rightly knowing
all simple, particular, and general things, which a created nature can know,
and joining them together, or dividing them, or reasoning by compared things,
it having also by nature, some ingraffed and natural knowledge, such as are
the principles of arts, and rule of life, and a respective motion judging of
the proper acts thereof.

In the will there is both the conformity of the will with God, and also free
will.

The conformity of the will with God, is that obedience, which the will does
vprighly perform to God, so that all inclinations, desires, and actions do
agree with Gods will.

The free will of a reasonable creature, is the power of the will, choosing or
refusing freely and of it own proper motion, without compulsion, that which
understanding shows to be chosen or refused.

Thus far concerning perfect reason: now concerning perfect blessedness.
Perfect blessedness is that other part of the image of God, by which a
natural creature, through an excellent joy, taking pleasure in God alone, does
enjoy perfect felicity.

The creatures made according to the image of God, Of Angels.
are Angels, and men. Angels, are created, understanding, and invisible
spirits, neither sustained in any other (excepting in God alone) neither part
of another.

And Angels are either good or evil.

Good Angels, are Angels which have stood in their integrity in which they
were made.

Their free will, is to good things only, because they are already so
confirmed in goodness, that their mind cannot be deceived, nor err in
judging, that is to say, in approving, and misliking the object, neither can
the will desire any other thing, the^ that which the mind judges, but choose
that which it approves, refuse and reject that which it misliketh. Job. 4.18.
Mat. 22.30. 1. Tim. 5.21. Ephesians. 1.10. Col. 1.20.

The duty of good Angels is two fold: either toward God, or men.

Their duty toward God is of two sorts: the first to do Gods will. Psalm.
103.20.

The second to set forth God by continual praises. Psalm. 103.20. and 148.2.

The duty of Angels toward men, is also two fold.

The one, to be a defense to the elect against all dangers, and against the
subtleties and assaults of the enemies, and to carry the souls of the elect
being dead, into the place of the blessed. Or else to minister to those that
fear God in all their ways. Heb. 1.14. Psalm. 34.8. and 103.21. Mat. 18.10.
Psalm. 91.11. Dan. 10. and 12. Luke. 16.22.

Their other duty is, to punish the evil. For the good Angels, are not only
the disposers of the goodness of God, but also sometime executers of
punishment. 2. King. 29.35.

Hitherto concerning good Angels: now concerning evil Angels.
Evil Angels, are Angels who have fallen from God. John. 8.44. 2. Pet. 2.4.
Epistle of Jude. 5.6. Ephesians. 2.2.

The same are called devils.

And they are the first authors of all sins, and do endeavor to seduce men by
their temptations, and to stir them up to sin, as also by all means to turn
them away from God, and to thrust them headlong into destruction.

The temptations of the devil, are persuasions, sollicitings, and sturrings
up, by which he does endeavor to draw men into sin and destruction. After
this manner he tempted our first parents. Genes. 3.1. So the devil tempting
Christ, solicited him to distrust concerning Gods providence, as though God
could not sustain, and preserve him without bread. Mat. 4.3. he tempted him to
rashness, and unadvised boldness, that for the obtaining of glory, he might
expose himself to unnecessary dangers. verse. 6. he solicited him to
idolatry. verse. 8.

In evil Angels, we must consider both their office, and restraint.

If we respect their office, they are compelled to serve, and obey God in those
works, which it pleases God to perform by them.

Of this office there are two parts: For they are ordained both to afflict the
godly, that their constancy might be proved. Job. 1.12. and 2.6.7. 2. Corin.
22.7. as also to vex the wicked, as officers, and tormentours appointed by God.

The restraint of the evil Angels, is the bounding, and limiting of their
power and fury, that they are able to do no more, then God does suffer them to
do.

Their free will is to evil things only. For seeing they are cast away from
God for ever, and are hardened in evil, they can do nothing, nor hereafter
shall do any thing but sin, that is to say, only to approve with their mind,
and choose with their will, those things which are evil, and displease God, and
therefore they shall suffer everlasting punishment. John. 8.44. 1. John. 3.8.
Mat. 3.8. Mat. 25.41. Jude. verse. 6. Revel. 20.10.

Hitherto concerning Angels: now concerning man.
Of man.
Man is a creature of God, made according to his Image, consisting of a body,
and a reasonable soul.

We ought especially to consider, both his estate, and also his will.

Of the estate of man.
The estate of a man is to be considered two ways: one before the fall, another
after the fall.

The estate of man before the fall, was that happy estate of his first
integrity, in which man was made at the beginning. It is also called an upright
estate, or the estate of integrity or innocence.

The estate of man after the fall, is that estate into which all men fell
afterward.

And that estate is two fold: corrupted, or renewed.

The corrupt estate, is that unhappy estate, which all men descending by
carnal generation, have fallen into through sin.

The renewed estate, is that estate of man, in which man is renewed again
according to the Image of God.

And that renewed estate is two fold: the one begu^, the other perfected: the
former is in this life, the other the life to come.

Hitherto concerning the state of man: now concerning his will.
The will of man, is that power of his will, choosing, Of the will of man.
or refusing that, which the understanding shows to be chosen or refused.

And that was of one sort before the fall, and of another since the fall.

The will of man before the fall, was free in all things, because it could
incline to either part, that is to say, to good or evil, so that it might
choose either the one or the other, yea and that so far, that man by his own
strength was able to stand or to fall.

For although man were so made, that he was good, and could know God aright,
and perform to him right and perfect obedience, by the free motion of his own
will yet notwithstanding he was changeably good, that is to say, he was not so
confirmed in the knowledge and obedience of God, but that a show of some good
being set before him, he might be inclined to fall away, and indeed did fall
away of his own proper motion.

Thus much concerning the will of man before the fall.
The will of man after the fall, is to be considered two ways: first as it is
in this life, secondly as it shall be in the life to come.

In this life it is two fold: the one in the corrupted, or unregenerated men,
the other in the regenerated men.

In men corrupted or unregenerated, the will is both bound and free.

Their will is free only to evil, in all things, both in spiritual, and also
in civil and outward matters. But freedom of the will to goodness, is lost
through sin.

True it is indeed, that the will of the unregenerate, works freely, yet it
can do nothing but sin. And sin does always flow from this fountain of the
free will of man.

And although the unregenerated sometimes do perform some good works
morally, and such as of themselves are good, yet by accident they are become
sins: because they do them not, by the true knowledge of God, and by faith,
lastly because they err from the true end, whilst they do not regard this,
namely the honor of God. Heb. 11.6. Mat. 23.27.28. Romans 1.18. and 14.23.

Of the bondage of will.
But the will of the unregenerate is bound and captive as concerning good and
holy things, and specially concerning things belonging to salvation and
eternal life. For the unregenerate, cannot by their own strength turn
themselves to God, nor receive the grace that God offers them, nor undertake
or perform any work pleasing God. Genesis 6.5. and 8.21. Iere. 13.10 23. and
17.9. Psalm. 14.1.3. Romans 3.10.11.12. Mat. 7.18. and 12.34. Ioh. 3.3. and 6.44.
and 12.39. Romans 7.18. and 7.7. 2. Cor. 3.5.

Hitherto concerning the will of man being corrupted: now concerning the will
of the regenerated man.
Of the will of a regenerated man.
The will of the regenerated man, is free, partly to good, partly to evil.

The will of the regenerated man to good is free by the special blessing and
assistance of the holy spirit, who does begin, continue, and make perfect in
him his conversion to God and good works: and that so, that both the beginning,
proceeding, and finishing of this conversion is the free gift of God:
notwithstanding in the mean while the regenerated man is not idle, but
works, being sturred up by the holy spirit. Deuteronomy. 30.6. 1. Kin. 8.58. Iere.
31.33. Ezech. 11.19. and 30.26. Luke. 24.45. Ioh. 6.45. Acts. 16.14 Rom
6.18.2. Cor. 3.5. and 17. and 46. Phil. 1.6. and 2.13. Ephesians. 4.24. Col. 3.20.

Again the will of the regenerate man is free to evil first because the
regeneration, and renewing of nature, that is to say, of the mind, will, and
affections is only begun, and not perfected in this life, and always the
relics of flesh or sin do remain, which do somewhat both darke^ knowledge
in the mind, and also toss and turn the will, so that we cannot by and by
do those things which we would. Mar. 9.24. To. 7.18. and so following. 1. Cor.
13.12

Secondly, because the regenerate are not always powerfully ruled by the holy
spirit, but now and then for a time are as it were forsaken, and left to
themselves by God (who does not so manifest his power in the^ as before time)
that they falling into sin might be humbled. 2. Sam. 24.1. 1. King. 8.57. Psalm.
51.13. Esa. 62.17. Eze. 16.6. and 63. Romans 11.32. 2. Cor. 12.7.

Hitherto concerning the will of men in this life: now concerning their will in
the life to come.
In the life to come there shall be one will of those that are blessed, and
another of those that are damned.

The will of the blessed after this life, shall be free only to good, and not to
evil, so that they shall not only not sin, nor choose the evil, but they
shall not be able to sin, or to choose the evil, that is to say, that they
shall will nothing but that which is good.

And hereof there are two reasons.

1 Because their regeneration shall be perfect, and not begun only, as now it
is. Mat. 22.30. 1. Cor. 3.12.1. John. 3.2. 2 Because they shall never be
forsaken, but shall be governed continually, and ruled powerfully of God in all
their actions, that they should not err from a right course. 1. Cor. 15.28.
The will of the damned shall be only to evil for evermore: because they shall
always be without any repentance, and hope of pardon and deliverance, and
shall remain in the kingdom of Satan, and be thrust forward by him and their
own lusts, and shall fight against God. Mat. 25.46. Mar. 9.43.

Hitherto concerning creation: now concerning the providence of God.
Of the providence of God.
The providence of God, is a work of God, by which he governs all things
according to his own will, and does direct them to his own glory, and to the
salvation of the elect. Otherwise it is called the government, the rule also,
and kingdom of God. Psalm. 93.1. and 97.1. and 99.1. and 103.19.

And that is a perpetual testimony of Gods presence in all places.

Neither does any thing happen rashly, or by chance, but all things are done by
the providence of God, according to his fatherly counsel and will.

Neither yet is that done without Gods will, which is done contrary to his will.

Both good and evil is governed by the providence of God.

Good is that which God allows, Of good.
as for example, all the substances of things, and their quantities and
qualities, which they have by creation, their motions, and changes, their
actions and events as far forth as they are motions, and do agree with Gods
nature and will, as it is expressed in his word.

Whatsoever therefore is remaining either in devils or in men by creation, is
good.

Good is either natural, or moral.

Natural good, is every good thing which God has created in nature, to those
uses of men which please God, as the sun, moon, the earth, the water, meat,
drink and raiment.

Moral good, is an action agreeing with the eternal, and unchangeable
wisdom of God, manifested in Gods law, which both by creation is ingraffed in
the minds of men, and afterward published abroad by Gods voice. Or else
moral good, is every good action agreeing with the will of God revealed in his
word.

Thus much concerning good: now concerning evil.
Evil, Of evil.
is a destruction of the nature created by God.

And that is, either the evil of the offense, or of the punishment.

Both these evils are set down. Iere. 18.8. If this nation shall turn away
from their evil, concerning which I have spoken against them, it shall also
repent me of the evil which I purposed to have done unto it.

Evil of the offense* is sin.

Sin, Of sin.
is every thing contrary to the law of God.

Sin is either of devils or of men.

The sin of the devils is that, into which evil Angels have fallen.

And that is two fold, their fall, and the malice following their fall.

The fall of the devils, is their falling away from God, whereby they have left
their own standing, assigned them in heaven for ministration.

The malice following upon the fall of the devils, is that, whereby they are
for ever made the enemies of God, and of men, and are carried with an
unreconcilable hatred toward God, and men. 1. John. 3.8.9. 1. Pet. 5.8.
Ephesians. 6.12.

Thus far concerning the sins of devils: now concerning the sins of men.
The sin of men, is that sin into which men have fallen.

And that is of two sorts, either the sin of our first parents, or of their
posterity.

Of the fall of our first parents.
The sin of our first parents, is the sin of Adam and Heuah.

And that is two fold: both the fall, and the corruption following the fall.

The fall of our first parents, is the eating of the forbidden fruit, by the
persuasion and subtlety of the devil, through which eating they did break the
commandment of God, and have cast themselves and their posterity headlong into
eternal death.

Now our first parents fell, both willingly, and by Gods providence.

That they fell willingly, it appears hereby, because they were endued with a
will of their own, which was free, and could not be compelled.

Thereupon it came to pass, that a show of good, that is to say, of obtaining
a divine nature being set before them, they did fall, and sin, the mind
approving that which was set before it, and the will inclining it self to
embrace the same.

That they fell by Gods providence, it appears in the Prou. 16.4. Romans 11.32.
Gal. 3.

The corruption following the fall, is a darkening of the Image of God, by
which there cease to be in the mind the true, and perfect knowledge of God,
in the will the freedom of choice to goodness, and in the heart the true love
and fear of God and a purpose, and desire to obey God, and there succeeded in
the mind ignorance, and doubtfulnesse: in the will, and heart stubburnnesse
against God, and a froward disposition.

Thus much concerning the sin of our first parents.
The sin of the posterity, is that into which all the posterity of Adam, and
Heuah did fall. And that is two fold: original or actual sin.

Of original sin.
Original sin, is that sin, in which all of us are conceived, and borne, who do
descend by a carnal generation. Paul calls it the sin dwelling in us.
Romans 7.20. Psalm. 51.7. Ephesians. 2.3. Romans 5.12.

The parts thereof are two: Original guilt, and original naughtiness.

Original guilt, is a natural offense, and subjection to punishment, because
of the fall of our first parents. Romans 5.12. So death went over all men.

Original naughtiness, is a natural deprauing and corruption of man's whole
nature.

This naughtiness is not the very nature of man it self, but only sticks
to man's nature, from which it is always to be discerned, even after the
deprauing.

And that is both in the soul and in the body.

Naughtiness in the soul is two fold: the darkness of the mind, and the
loss of free will, or of free choice to good, and the disorder of the
affections of the heart, naughty disposition to vices.

Naughtiness of the body is also two fold: the disorder of the moveable
members, and diseases which come by nature.

Thus much concerning original sin: now concerning Actual sin.
Of actual sin.
Actual sin, is that sin, which we our selves commit.



Inward sin, is every evil thought, and doubting concerning God and his
will, incredulity and the rest.

Outward sin, is every word, deed, or gesture contrary to the law and will of
God.

Outward sin, is either hid or manifest.

An hid sin, is that which no man is privy of, besides he which did commit
it.

A manifest sin, is that sin, which other men also are privy unto, and are
offended, and made worse thereby. Therefore it is specially called an offense.

Of an offense.
An offense is a speech or deed whereby an other is made worse.

An offense, is either given, or taken.

An offense given, is an ungodly doctrine, or evil example of manners, which
does hurt others, either because they do imitate the same, or because by it
men are discouraged from the Gospel.

An offense taken, is when either by some right doctrine, or necessary deed,
hypocrites are offended, and conceive hatred of the Gospel, and godly men. And
that is also called a Pharisaicall offense.



A sin reigning, is that sin, which the sinner does not resist by the grace
of the holy spirit, regenerating him to eternal life, and therefore it makes
him subject to eternal death, except he repent, and obtain pardon by Christ.

A sin not reigning, is that sin which the sinner resists by the grace of
the holy spirit, regenerating him to eternal life, and therefore he is not
subject to eternal death, because he repents him, and does obtain pardon by
Christ.

Every sin in it own nature, is deadly, that is to say, it deserves
eternal death, but it is made venial, that is to say, it does deserve pardon
and forgiveness, so that it does not bring to the regenerate death eternal,
by grace through Christ.



Sin against conscience, is a sin when a man knowing the will of God, does
contrary to it of set purpose.

Sin which is not against conscience, is that sin, which is committed of him,
that knows not the will of God, or else the sin is acknowledged, and lamented
of the sinner, to be a sin, yet it cannot perfectly in this life be avoided: as
for example, original sin, and many other sins of ignorance and infirmity.



Pardonable sin, is that sin which is forgiven to him that repents, and to
him that asks remission through Christ.

Such are all sins, except the sin against the holy Ghost.

Unpardonable sin, is that sin which is not forgiven, neither in this
world, nor in the world to come. Mat. 12.31. Mar. 3.28. Luke 12.10. Heb.
6.4.5.6. 1. John. 5.16.

Of this sort, is the sin against the holy Ghost.

The sin against the holy Ghost, is that sin, where Gods truth is resisted,
or denied of set purpose, after that the mind is confirmed, and taught in the
truth, by the testimony of the holy spirit, whosoever commit this sin are
punished by God with blindness, so that they can never repent, and therefore
cannot obtain forgiveness.



An affected sin, is that sin which is committed of mere malice or
stubburnnesse.

An advised sin, is that sin which is committed of rashness or infirmity.



Sins by them selves, are all sins which are forbidden by the law of God.

Sins by accident, are the actions of the unregenerate, which indeed are
commanded by God, but yet they displease God, because of the defectes and vices
concurring in the wicked: or else indifferent actions which are done with
offense.

Thus far concerning the evil of the offense: now concerning the evil of
the punishment.
Of the evil of the punishment.
The evil of the punishment, is every destruction, or affliction, or forsaking
of the reasonable creature whereby God punishes sins.

Thus much concerning the subject of Gods providence: now concerning the parts
thereof.
The parts of the providence of God.
Of the providence of God there are two parts: Action, and permission.

Augustine in his book called Enchirideon to Laurentius. There is not any
thing done, but that which the almighty would have to be done, either suffering
it to be done, or he him self doing it (and now nothing could be done, if he
did not suffer it, neither does he suffer any thing to be done against his will
but willingly.) Nothing therefore is done but that which either God him self
does, or suffers to be done.

Of the action of God.
The action respects good things which God himself does, amongst which are
numbered the evil of the punishments (as men call them) because they tend to
that which is good morally.

The action of God is either by means or without means.

The action by means, is when God for the performing of certain works uses
the ministry of seco^dary causes as instruments.

Of Gods instruments.
And the instruments which God uses are either good or evil.

God does always use well both of them, that is to say, both the good, and the
evil instruments also.

God uses the evil, either to exercise and try the faith, patience, and
constancy of the elect, as it is manifest by the example of Job: or else to
chasten the elect: so doubtless Absalom was used by God to chasten David: or
to punish evil men, that the evil might be punished by the evil. Esaias. 21.2.

Now although he use evil instruments, yet he is not the author or partaker of
any sin at all: which appears even by this, that at the length he does most
severely punish those wicked instruments whose help he used. Esa. 14.5.6.29.

Although also evil men do nothing neither can do any thing, but that which
is decreed of God: yet they cannot be excused, neither can they have any
excuse, and then are worthily punished, because they do not regard the decree
and glory of God, neither that end which God has purposed with himself: but
their own evil purpose, that they might bring that to effect, that is to say,
that they may do those things which their natural malice does suggest unto
the^, they being filled, with anger, envy, harred, desire of revenge and set no
other end before them, but that they might satisfy their own desire,
covetousness, and ambition, that they might preserve or increase their own
estate, that they might overthrow the good, and that they might revenge
themselves. Hereof there is a notable example, Esa. 50.5.6. and so forward.
Esa. 14.5. and 5.7.6.

For the wicked do always set before them selves an evil end. Gene. 50.20.

Now though God move and stir up the evil, that he might do some good thing
by the^: they notwithstanding move themselves with a contrary motion, to do
wickedly, and that they might will that which is evil, and perform the same
also.

Yet in the mean while, God does direct those evil things which the ungodly
do, to a good end, namely to his own glory, and the salvation of the elect.

For God knew that it did rather pertain to his most omnipote^t goodness to
turn evil to good, the^ to suffer evil not to be at all.

Wherefore in that Satan, and the wicked sin, it is of themselves, that they in
sinning do this or that, it is by the power of God, that is to say, in that the
evil are moved and do work, it is by the power of God, but that they work
euilly, that is to say, are moved and work, with evil affections, evil
counsels, in evil manner, and with an evil end, that is of themselves: for
naughtiness is to be distinguished from the action it self, with which the
naughtiness is adjoined.

Every action, as it is an action, is of God: for in him we live, we move, and
have our being. Acts. 17.28. and he performs all things by the counsel of
his will. Ephesians. 1.11. but the naughtiness of the action, does arise from the
will of man, neither does it touch God, who can so use evil and wicked
instruments, that in the mean space, he is not so much as once touched with
any infection of evil.

What sin soever therefore is in the action, it does cleave unto the
instruments, by whom although those things are done, which God would have to be
done, yet they are not always done after that manner which pleases him: and
they set before themselves another end then that which God respects.

Both these kinds of instruments, to wit, both good and evil, are either
ordinary or extraordinary.

Ordinary instruments, are those instruments which God uses ordinarily to
execute his decree.

Extraordinary are those which are contrary to the former.

Again instruments, are either living or without life.

Living instruments, are either reasonable or void of reason.

Reasonable instruments, as for example Angels. 2. King. 6.17. Job. 2.7.

And men. Genesis. 45.4. 2. Sam. 16.10. Ierem. 25.9. Ezech. 21.21. John. 19.11.
Acts. 2.23. and 4.27.

Instruments void of reason: as for example, beasts. 2. Pet. 2.16. Ezech.
14.2. King. 2.24. Gene. 8.2. Exodus 8.2.

Instruments without life are these: brimstone, fire. Genesis. 19.24. Hayle.
Exodus 9.22. Manna. Exodus. 16.4. flesh. Exodus. 16.13. meat and drink. 1.
Kings. 14.4. also drought, famine, disease, pestilence, the sword, war,
death. Esaias. 13.4.17. For all these are the ministers of God.

Thus far concerning Gods action done by means: now concerning Gods action
without means. Of the action of God without means.

The actio^ of God done without means, is that whereby God does perform
without means or instruments, whatsoever he will. Gene. 20.3. Mat. 4.4. Deuteronomy.
8.3. So Gene. 2.5. When as yet the Lord had not rayned on the earth, neither
was there any man to till the ground, yet all things were green, and flourished
in the field, and there were fruits in the fields.

Hereby we learn that God can eue^ without means, perform and bring forth
all things.

Neither yet does it follow thereupon that the earth is not to be tilled,
because God without means can bring forth of the earth all things, that is to
say, although it rain not, although the earth be not tilled. Because God
afterward ordained means by which he would work. Now we must use these means
or else we should tempt God.

Yea God would have man to labor even in the state of his integrity, namely
that he might till and dress the garden Eden. Gene. 2.15.

Thus far concerning the action of God: now concerning his permission.
Of Gods permission. Beza in his questions and answers. God works not in the
evil ones, but delivers them up to Satan, and their own lusts.
Gods permission, is the work of Gods providence, whereby God according to his
eternal decree permits the evil of the offense, or sin to be done, whilst
he does withdraw his grace from sinners, and does not incline or bend their
will to obey Gods will. Esa. 2.6. Acts. 14.16. Romans 1.24.28. Psalm. 81.13.

Permission is a suffering of the evils of the offense, that is to say, of
sins which are not done by God himself, but he does suffer the^ to be done
according to his decree. Esa. 2.6. Acts. 14.16. Romans 1.24.

But God suffers the evil the offense, so that it cannot be done except he
be willing to it, and it ca^ no other wise be done the^ he suffers, nor no
further then he permits, that he also may direct it to a good end.

He suffers the Saints to fall into sin, that they being chastened for their
sin, he might bring them to the true knowledge of them selves, and to
humility, Psalm. 119.

It is good for me, o Lord, that thou have humbled me, that I might learn thy
statutes.

He suffers also the reprobate to fall into sin, that he might show the
glory of his justice in punishing them for their sin. Romans 9.17. Exodus 9.16.

For God would not being good, suffer any thing to be done euilly, except also
he being omnipotent, could turn evil to good.

He has not therefore by his eternal, immutable, most wise and most just
purpose at any time wrought or approved evil, but permitted only, that the
chief creatures should fall into sin.

Howbeit the devil and the wicked, yea all creatures are so in Gods power,
that without his will, they cannot only not do any thing, but they cannot so
much as once move them selves. Gene. 20.6. So the false Prophet Balaa^ could
not curse the people of Israel. Number. 22. Job. 1.12. Proverb. 21.1. Acts.
17.25.28.

Hereupon we may gather two doctrines.

The first pertains to our comfort, namely, that no evil can befall us from
the devil or from wicked men, without the will and permission of God.

The other pertains to our instruction, namely, that whatsoever adversity
comes to us, our mind must be turned away from our enemies, and the evil
men who hate us, and be lifted up to God, and we must bear all things
patiently. Job. 1. we must acknowledge the judgments of God to be just, and
reverence them. Psalm. 119. It is good for me, o Lord, that thou have humbled me
and so forth. And we must commit our injury to God, and so forth.

Hitherto concerning the parts of Gods providence: the sorts follow.
The providence of God is two fold: General or special.

Of the general providence of God.
The general providence of God, is that whereby the whole world is governed.
Genesis 7.1, 2.3.

And that is declared, and especially beheld in the preservation or destruction
of things.

The preservation of things, is that whereby God preserves all creatures, the
better to declare his love toward them. Psalm. 36.8.9. Psalm. 104. throughout.
105.106. Mat. 6.26.30.

Preservation is either universal or special.

The universal preservation, is that whereby he is present with all and every
creature, even with the evil, so that he may preserve them only as long as
pleases him. Psalm. 104. throughout. Mat. 6.26.30.

That is made manifest by their succeeding one another, or by their continuance.

By their succeeding one another, whereby one sort dying or perishing another
sort comes in their room: as for example, men after men, beasts, after
beasts, corn after corn: or one season after another season, as for example
the spring, after the winter, the summer, after the spring, the fall of the
leaf after summer, winter after the fall of the leaf.

By their continuance, as for example, of those things which are void of
these changes, as the continuance of the heavenly motions, of the sun, and
other stars, of the continual springing of rivers, etc.

Particular preservation, is that whereby he does take the care of every
particular thing severally. Mat. 6.30. and 10.29.30. Psalm. 56.9. God nu^breth
even the tears of his children.

The destruction of things, is that whereby God does destroy whatsoever he
will, that he might show evident examples, of his most just judgments. Psalm.
104.29. and Psalm. 105. and 10. Gene. 7.4. and 19.24. Number. 16.31.

The use of this doctrine of Gods providence is three fold.

1. That we should be patient in adversities. Romans 5.3. Iam. 1.3. Job. 1.21. 2
That we should be thankful in prosperity. Deuteronomy. 8.10. 1 Thessalonians. 3.^8. 3 That
we should have a most sure hope laid up for the time to come, in God our most
faithful father, certainly knowing that there is nothing that can draw us away
from his love. Rom 5.2.4.5.6. Romans 8.38.39.
Hitherto concerning the general providence of God: his special providence
follows.
Of Gods special providence.
The special providence of God, is that providence whereby God does
particularly govern men.

The works of Gods special providence, are either universal, or particular.

The universal works, are those which belong to all men generally.

And the universal works are these, predestination, the natural
manifestation, and affliction, the hid motion of the wills of men, and the
governing of all humane actions.

Of Predestination.
Predestination is an ordaining of men being fallen either to eternal life, or
to eternal death.

Predestination is two fold: Election or reprobation.

Election and reprobation are properly referred to mankind, already made and
fallen, and corrupted by sin: but by a metonymie or putting of the effect for
the cause, even the very decree of choosing and rejecting is called by that name
also.

Election is that predestination, whereby God of his free mercy does deliver
out of the common destruction, whomsoever it pleases him. Ephesians. 2.3.4.5.6.7.

God is pleased to declare his mercy on the elect: because when he might most
justly cast away all mankind for sin, into which they had fallen willingly,
for we all were the sons of wrath by nature, even as well as others: he of
his free mercy delivered some from that common destruction, that every mouth
might be stopped, and the whole glory of our salvation might be attributed to
God alone. Ephe. 2.3.4.5.6.7.

Reprobation, is that predestination by which God according to his justice,
does leave those, on whom he will not take mercy, in the destruction into which
they have willingly thrown themselves headlong.

Hitherto concerning predestination: now concerning the natural manifestation
of God.
The natural manifestation of God, Of the natural manifestation of God.
is that which is done by the help of nature, to this end, that the excuse of
the ignorance of God, and of sin, might be taken away from all men.

And that natural manifestation is either by the law of nature, or by the
works of nature.

The law of nature, is a natural knowledge ingraue^ in the hearts of men in the
first creation, teaching a difference between honest and dishonest things,
that we may seek after the first and eschew the latter. Romans 1.32. and 2.15.

The manifestation of God, by the works of nature, is that natural
manifestation, by which through the works of creation God does show forth his
eternal power and divinity. Romans 1.19.20.

Hitherto concerning the natural manifestation of God: now concerning
afflaction.
Of affliction.
Affliction, is a work of Gods special providence, whereby God according to
his eternal decree does afflict men.

Affliction, is either the punishment or the cross.

Of the punishment.
Punishment, is an affliction, which God lays on men for sin.

And that is either Gods chastisement, or his reuengement.

Chastisme^t is a punishment, whereby God chasteneth the elect for their
sins, that he might stir them up to repentance. Esaias. 2.17. Psalm. 119.71.

Gods reuengement is that punishment, whereby God does take vengeance on the
sins of the wicked, that he might destroy them.

Gods reuengement is two fold, spiritual or bodily.

Gods spiritual reuengement is that which does pertain to spiritual things
or to the soul.

And that is either the hardening of the^, or the withdrawing of Gods grace.

The hardening of them, is a spiritual reuengement, when God by his just
judgment does leave some in their natural blindness, and naughtiness

The withdrawing of Gods grace, is a spiritual reuengement, when God for the
sins of men does take away his grace, from them whom he had begun to enlighten.

The bodily reuengement, is a reuengeme^t which God lays on the wicked in
things pertaining to the body.

Again reuengement is either temporal or eternal.

The temporal reuengement is a punishment, which is laid on the wicked in
this life, that by it as by a preparation, they might be prepared, to the most
grievous punishment of hell, which at the length remains for them.

Eternal reuengement, is a punishment which the wicked shall endure in hell
for evermore without any end.

Hitherto concerning the punishment: now concerning the cross.
The cross is the affliction, Of the cross of the Church.
both of the whole Church, and specially of the particular and holy members
thereof, but not for their sin, but that the godly treading in the steps of the
cross of Christ, may be conformed to his Image. 1. Pet. 4.13.15. Phil. 3.10.
Romans 8.28. Coloss. 1.24. Heb. 12.2. 1. Pet. 2.21.

And this cross is two fold, temptation and martyrdom.

The divine temptation, is the cross of the godly, by which God tries the
faith which they have in his promises, by present or imminent affliction, and
sets the same before all men to be beheld and imitated.

And that is either inward or outward.

Inward temptation is two fold, either the trouble of the mind, or the
striving between the spirit and the flesh, as it appears in the example of
Abraham.

Outward temptation, as the affliction of the body, the loss of goods and
children, and so sorth, as it is manifest in the example of Job.

Of martyrdom.
Martyrdom, is the cross of the godly, which they for the truth of Christ
suffer of the world.

And martyrdom is either to death, or not to death.

Martyrdom to death, is a shedding of the blood and life, for a final
confirmation of the truth of God, as it were by an outward and undoubted
testimony. John. 21.18.

Martyrdom not to death, is an enduring of slanders, reproaches, prison, exile
and other dangers for the truths sake. 2. Cor. 4.8. and 6.4.8. and 12.10.1.
Pet. 4.14.

Thus far concerning affliction: now concerning the secret moving of the will.
The secret moving of the will, is a work of Gods special providence, Of the
secr^^ moving of the will.
when God boweth the wills of men hither and thither as pleases him. Prou.
23.1. Job. 12.20.24.

For all the actions even of evil men, which they in living do perform, are
done and governed, although by the secret, yet by the good and just will of
God. All the (...). I say even of the wicked, so far forth as they are
actions, or motions to the things set before them, or as they are punishments
or chastisements, or the executions of gods will, all all these, I say, God
does powerfully will and rule. Gene. 45.5.7.8. Exodus 7.3. and 10.1. Deuteronomy. 2.30.
Ios. 11.19.20. Judge. 3.1.12. 2. Sam 12.11.12.2. Sam. 16.10.11.2. Sam. 24.1.1.
King. 22.19.20.21.22.23. Job. 1.12.21. and 2.3.6. and 19.6. Psalm. 107.40. Esaias.
19.2.3. John. 13.27. That which thou do do quickly. Acts. 2.23. and 4.27.
and 7.43. Romans 1.24.28. Revel. 17.17.

The secret motion of the wills, is either the softening, or the hardening of
them.

The softening, is a secret motion, by which God boweth the wills of men, that
they willingly do that which is acceptable to God. So God commanded the widow,
that is to say, by the secret force of his providence hebowed her will, that
she should willingly nourish Elijah.

Of hardening.
The hardening is a secret motion, whereby God does bow men's will that they
should not have a will to do that which is acceptable to God. So God hardened
Pharaoh that he should be unwilling to let the people go, nor to make peace
with them. So God hardened Shemei that he should not cease from cursing 2. Sam.
16.22.

Thus far concerning the secret motion of the w^^^: now ^oncerning the
governing of all woe dly or humane actions.
Of the governing of all humane actions.
The governing of all humane actions is a work of Gods special providence,
whereby he does always so govern all the actions of men, as pleases him.

The parts thereof are the direction of the actions, and the restraint of the
wicked.

The direction of the actions is the work of Gods special providence, by
which God does so govern the actions of me^, that they should be able to do
nothing, but that which he has already decreed with himself, neither after
any other sort the^ that which he has decreed, that he might also direct it to
a good end. Romans 9.17. and. 11.11.1. Cor. 11.19. Phil. 1.12.2. These. 2.11.12.
Revel. 17.17.

The restraint of the wicked, is the work of Gods special providence, whereby
God does determine, and limit as it were the power of the wicked me^, that they
should be able to do no more then God suffers them.

Hitherto concerning the general works of Gods special providence: the
particular follow.
The particular works of Gods special providence, are those which do
pertain to part of mankind.

Such are the supernatural manifestation of Gods will, the working of
miracles, the calling, the heavenly covenant, and the heavenly sign.

Of the supernatural manifestation of Gods will.
The supernatural manifestation of Gods will, is the work of Gods special
providence, whereby after a special manner he manifests his will to men in
the Church. Psalm. 103.7. Heb. 1.1.2.

Of this there are two parts, the revelation of doctrine, or the foretelling of
things to come.

The revelation of doctrine, is either of the doctrine of the law, or of the
Gospel.

Of the law of God.
The law of God is a doctrine, which commands us what we must do, and what we
must leave undone, requiring perfect obedience, both inward and outward
toward God, and promising eternal life to those that obey it: but threatening
eternal punishments to those that break any part thereof. Mat.
19.16.17.18.19. Mat. 7.12. Leuit. 18.5. Ezech. 10.11. Romans 10.5. Gala. 3.10.
Deuteronomy. 27.26. Iam. 2.10.

The law of God, is either general or special.

The general law of God, is that whereby all men generally, are always bound,
except God himself, do specially command another thing: After this sort the
ten commandments are general.

For all general laws are to be understood with this condition: to wit,
Except God him self command another, as:

Thou shall not make to thy self any graue^ Image: namely except God does
especially command to make it, as when he commanded to make the Cherubins, and
brazen Serpent: and so forth.

Thou shall not steal, namely except God does specially command, as when he
commanded to spoil the Egyptians. Thou shall not kill, namely except God does
specially command, as when he commanded Abraham that he should sacrifice his
son Isaac. Honor thy parents, obey thy parents, namely except God command
another thing the^ our parents: For then we must not obey our parents but God.

The particular law of God, is that which he made specially to certain men, in
some certain case.

Therefore it does not overthrow the general law of God: because the particular
law, is not perpetual, but for a certain time, neither does it belong to all,
but only to those to whom it was made specially, neither is it of force in all
cases, but only in that which God himself has by name expressed.

Again the law of God, is either perpetual, or for a certain time.

The perpetual law of God, is that law which does always bind all reasonable
creatures to obedience: and that is called the moral law.

Of the moral law.
The moral law is that law which teaches how every one ought to behave
himself, in inward, and outward manners, that his whole life may be agreeable
to Gods will.

The sum of that is comprehended in the decaloge or ten commandments.

Of the ten commandments.
The decaloge or ten commandments is a brief sum of the moral law,
containing ten precepts.

And that is divided into two tables or parts.

The first table of the ten commandments.
The first table contains four commandments, concerning our duties toward
God, or concerning love toward God, or concerning his worship.

The explication of the first commandment.
The first commandment is this: thou shall no have strange Gods before me.

In this commandment God forbids to have strange Gods before him.

A strange God, is every thing, in which a man puts his confidence besides
the true God, or that which a man does fear or love more then God, or equally
with God, or to which he gives divine worship contrary to the express word of
God.

To have strange Gods, is to put his confidence in any thing, which is not the
true God, or to love, or fear that more then God, or as well as God, or to
give to it divine worship contrary to the express word of God.

Not to have strange Gods before God, is to eschew all idolatry, not only in
the sight of men, but even in the heart, because God sees all things.

The second commandment is this: The 2. commandment.
thou shall not make to thy self any graven image, neither shall thou
counterfeit any Image of those things, which are in heaven above, or in the
earth beneath, or in the waters under the earth, thou shall not bow down to
them, nor worship them. For I am the Lord thy God, strong, jealous, revenging
the sins of the fathers upon the children, and that unto the third and fourth
generation of those that hate me: and showing mercy unto thousands of them
that love me and keep my commandments.

In this commandment God forbids, both the framing of Images for Religions
sake, and also the worshipping of them.

And by Image is understood (by putting the part for the whole) even all the
worship of God devised by men.

Therefore Images are not to be borne withal in Churches, which might be in
steed of books to the ignorant people.

For neither does it become us to be more wise then God, who will have his
Church to be taught, not with dumb Images, but with the lively preaching of
his word. Iere. 10.8. Haba. 2.18.19. Luke. 16.29. Neither is God to be
otherwise worshipped the^ he has prescribed in his word.

Now there is a threatening and promise added to this commandment, that it
might drive us the more powerfully from Idolatry, as from an abominable sin.

In the threatening God names himself strong and jealous.

He calls himself indeed, strong, that we might fear the power which he
has to revenge.

He calls himself jealous, because he never without punishment suffers his
honor to be given to any other.

But in the threatening God does threaten punishments, both to the sinners
themselves, and also to their posterity.

God for two causes threateneth punishments to the posterity of sinners.

1. That he might show the greatness of sin, which draws punishments not
only upon them that commit them, but upon their posterity also, if God should
deal according to the straightness of his justice. 2. That at the least men
fearing the punishment that shall light on their posterity, they might abstain
from sin.
That the posterity be punished for the sins of the parents, it is not
against the justice of God: for such is the naughtiness of our nature, that
except God regard us in his singular mercy, we should all of us persevere in
the sins of our parents.

Thus far concerning the threatening.
In the promise joined to this commandment, God promises that he will bless
even the posterity of the godly.

There are two causes leading him to this.

1. That he might express the greatness of his mercy toward the godly,
whereby he does bless not only them, but their porterity also. 2. That
happiness being promised to our posterity, he might stir us up more
earnestly to godliness.
And he says, that he will bless to the thousandth generation, and punish at
the least to the fourth, that he might testify, that he is not delighted with
the destruction, but with the salvation of men: and that he does not punish,
but for the manifestation of his justice.

Hitherto concerning the second commandment: now concerning the third.
The third commandment is this: The 3. commandment.
thou shall not use the name, of the Lord thy God rashly. For the Lord thy God
will not let him go unpunished, who takes his name in vain.

In this commandment God forbids the vain use of his name, and
establishes that prohibition with a grievous punishment.

The vain using of Gods name, is when any false or reproachful thing is spoken
of God, or when a man by lightness or ungodliness does falsely or rashly
swear by God, or when one does bitterly curse others, by custom or desire of
reuengement.

The establishment of this commandment contains a threatening of punishment,
that God might show, that the profanation of his name is to be accounted
amongst most grievous sins.

The 4. commandment.
The fourth commandment is this: Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day.
Six days shall thou labor and do all that thou have to do. But the seventh
day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God, in it thou shall do no manner of
work, thou nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy manseruant, nor thy
maidseruant, the cattle nor the stranger that is within thy gates. For in six
days the Lord made heaven and earth, the sea and all that in them is, and
rested the seventh day, wherefore the Lord blessed the Sabbath day, and
hallowed it.

The sanctification of the Sabbath day is the appointing of an holy day to the
public worship of God: or else it is to bestow a day in holy works and
exercises.

There are four parts of the sanctification of the Sabbath* the handling of
Gods word, the using of the Sacraments public calling on God by prayer, and
the exercising of the works of mercy.

God for two causes would have a certain time appointed for the ministry of
the Church.

1. For our weakness, who otherwise do seldom wholly give our selves to the
meditation of heavenly things. 2. That rest from labor might be given to
those, who are under other men's authority.
Now we are not bound to the seventh day: for Christ by his coming has
abolished the ceremonies of Moses.

Hitherto concerning the first table of the ten commandments: The second
follows.
The second table of the ten commandments,
The second table of the ten commandments, consists of six commandments
concerning our duties or love toward our neighbors.

And those commandments are in order, the fifth, the sixth, the seventh, the
eight, the ninth, and the tenth.

The 5. commandment.
The fifth commandment is this: Honor thy father and thy mother, that thy days
may be prolonged in the land, which the Lord thy God shall give thee.

Of this commandment there are two parts: In the first part God commands
the performance of honor due to our parents.

By the name of parents are understood not only those who begat us, but even
all superiors who are over us, or who are set over us by God to govern us.

Now of the honor due to our superiors, there are five parts, reverence,
love, obedience in all things not forbidden by God, thankfulness, and
patience in bearing their infirmities, and slips.

In the second part of this commandment, God promises long life to those that
honor their parents, and that for two causes.

1. That he might show what account he makes of obedience to superiors. 2.
That he might allure us perform it.
The 6. commandment.
The sixth commandment is this: thou shall not kill.

In this commandment God forbids manslaughter.

By manslaughter is understood, not only the outward hurt of our own life,
or of our neighbors, but even every cause of hurt and slaughter, as are anger,
gestures expressing anger, injurious facts, reproach, hatred, desire of private
revenge, and so forth.

The 7. commandment.
The seventh commandment is this: thou shall not commit adultery.

Wherein God forbids all uncleanness of the mind or of the body, both in
marriage, and out of marriage.

The 8. commandment.
The eight commandment is this: thou shall not steal.

Wherein God forbids theft.

Theft is every unjust translating or turning of any other men's goods to
himself, whether it be done privily or openly, or else whether it be done by
violence, or deceit, and show of right. Or else theft, is every manner of
doing any thing forbidden by God.

Such as are these, pillage, taking away of other men's goods, an unjust weight,
an unjust elle, an unequal measure, deceiptfull ware, cou^terfeit coin,
usury, covetousness, the abusing of Gods gifts.

The 9. commandment.
The ninth commandment is this: Thou shall not bear false witness against thy
neighbor.

Wherein God forbids false witness, both in judgment, and also out of
judgment.

Therefore by false witness, is understood, even perjury, slander,
backebiting, reproach, cursing, evil suspicion, prating, flattering, lastly all
sorts of lies.

The 10. commandment.
The tenth commandment is this: Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, thou
shall not covet thy neighbors wife, nor his manseruant, nor his maidseruant,
nor his ox, nor his ass, nor any thing that is thy neighbors.

Wherein God forbids even the least desire and thought contrary to Gods law.

For in the sight of God not only the outward evil deed is sin, but even the
thought and consultation of committing an evil deed, although it be not
brought to pass.

Hitherto concerning the explication of the ten commandments: now concerning
the uses of the moral law.
Of the uses of the moral law.
The uses of the moral law are of two sorts: common or proper.

The common uses are those, which do equally belong to the elect, and
reprobate.

And they are three. 1. To preserve discipline, both in the regenerate, and
unregenerate, and that two ways First, because it binds all men, that they
should govern the moveable or outward members, to the intent that the outward
deeds may agree with Gods law. Secondly, because it establishes punishments
even bodily in this life, against those who commit outward offenses, which
punishments God does execute on the guilty, either by the Magistrate, or by
some other means.

2. To teach us to know, what a one God is.

3. To teach us to acknowledge our sins. Romans 3* that the whole world might
be guilty before God. By the law comes the knowledge of sin. Romans 7.7.

The proper uses of the law are those which do belong to the elect only, or to
the reprobate only.

The uses of the law pertaining particularly to the elect are these.

1. To stir up and increase repentance in the elect. 2. To kindle in the
elect desire to seek forgiveness of sins, and righteousness in Christ. 3.
To stir up, and thrust forward the elect to an endeavor to the perpetual
meditation, and calling upon the holy spirit for grace, whereby they may be
renewed daily, more and more, according to the image of God. 4. To stir up and
increase in them the desire of perfection, which we shall obtain in the life
to come. 5. To be to the elect a direction how to live, and a rule of good
works. For it teaches what works please God.
The uses of the law belonging only to the reprobate are three.

1. To make them without excuse. 2. The more to harden them. 3. To prepare them
to desperation.
Thus far concerning Gods perpetual law: now concerning the law of God for a
certain time.
The law of God for a certain time, is that which was only for a certain
time prescribed to the people of Israel, and is abrogated by the coming of
the Messiah.

And that law is either ceremonial or judicial.

Of the ceremonial law.
The ceremonial law, is that law which gave commandment concerning ceremonies
to be observed in the public worship of God, which did scrue to instruct the
people of Israel, of the manner of their eternal salvation, by Christ to come.

Of the judicial law.
The judicial law, is a law, which gives commandment, concerning the
politic government of the Jews, that is to say, of the order and offices of
Magistrates, judgments, punishments, contractes, of the distinguishing of
gouernements, made for this end, that justice, and public peace might be of
force among Citizens, and the laws of God might be delivered from contempt.

Hitherto concerning the law of God^ now concerning the Gospel.
Of the Gospel.
The Gospel is that wholesome doctrine, concerning Christ, already showed and
manifested.

Christ, is the only begotten son of God, made man for our salvation. John.
1.14. 1. John. 4.2. 1. Tim. 3.16.

Of Christ.
Of the knowledge of Christ, there be two parts, the first concerning his
person, the second concerning his office.

Of the person of Christ.
The person of Christ, is one, because Christ is one.

Of the knowledge of Christ's person, there be two parts: the first concerning
the natures in the person of Christ, the other concerning his state.

There are two natures in the person of Christ, the divine, and the humane
nature.

Therefore Jesus Christ is true God, and true man in one person. Romans 1.3.4.
and 9.5. 1. John. 4.2. 1. Timot. 3.16. Coloss. 2.9. Heb. 2.14.16. John. 1.1.

Thus far concerning the natures in the person of Christ: now concerning his
state.
The state of Christ's person is two fold: his humiliation, or exaltation.
Phil. 2.7.8.9. Luke. 24.26.

Of the humiliatio^ of Christ.
The humiliation of Christ is that state of his, in which he did abase himself
below all creatures. Phil. 2.7.

Of his humiliation there are two parts? his incarnation, and obedience.

Of the incarnation of Christ.
The incarnation of Christ, is part of the humiliation of the son of God, when
taking the humane nature, he was manifested in the flesh. John. 1.14. 1. Tim.
3.16.

The parts of the incarnation of Christ, are both his conception by the holy
spirit, and the personal union of his two natures, and also his birth.

The conception of Christ by the holy spirit, is the forming of the humane
nature of Christ, of the flesh and blood of the virgin Mary, by the miraculous
working of the holy spirit. Mat. 1.18.20. Luke. 1.31.35.

Of the personal union.
The personal union of the two natures in Christ, is such a coupling of them as
they might be one person. 1. Tim. 3.16. Coloss. 2.9. Gal. 4.4. Heb. 2.16.

In this personal union, both the distinction of the two natures is to be
considered, and also the effects of the union.

In the personal union, the natures remain distinct, and not confused,
whether we respect their essence, or the properties, or operations. Romans 1.3.4.
and 9.5. 1. Tim. 9.16. Heb. 9.14. 1. Pet. 3.18. and 4.1.

As therefore in that one person of Christ there be two natures: so there is a
double mind, or understanding a double will, working, wisdom, strength,
power, virtue, and so forth. The one heavenly and not created: the other
humane, and created. Luke. 2.52. Mar. 11.13. and 13.32. 1. John. 2.1.17. John.
2.25. and 6.64. and 5.20. Heb. 1.9. John. 1.33. and 4.6. Heb. 1.3. John. 2.19.
and 10.18.

And each of the natures retains and keeps his own essential properties,
neither does it communicate them, to the other nature, and that for two causes:
the first is, least the natures should be mingled and confounded: the other,
that there might forever remain a difference between the natures. Luke. 24.39.

For he that confounds the properties, D. Luther.
confounds the natures: and he that takes away the properties, takes away
the natures.

Thus far concerning the distinction of the natures in the personal union:
now concerning the effects of the union.
Of the majesty of the humane nature of Christ.
The effects of the union are two fold: the one, the exaltation of the nature,
assumed to the highest and unspeakable dignity, and the communicating of the
Idioms, or proprieties.

The exaltation of the assumed nature to the highest and unspeakable dignity,
is that honor, which the person of the son of God has communicated to the
nature assumed, so that he has exalted it above all Angels and men, whom he
surpasses, and excels by most far and unspeakable degrees. Heb. 14. Mat.
28.18. John. 17.2. Phil. 2.9. Ephesians. 1.20.22.

That exaltation consists chiefly in these three points.

1. In the personal union with the word: because the humane nature is assumed
into the unity of the person of Gods son: so that it is the proper flesh of
the eternal son of God, Heb. 2.16.

2. In the gifts, because it has the fullness of all the gifts of the holy
spirit, which can be in a creature, that is to say, it has not only some
gifts, as the rest of the Saints, who have them according to measure: but all
gifts, not only in number, but even in the most excellent degree. John. 3.34.

Those gifts given to the humanity of Christ, are created qualities: because
his humanity is crea^ed.

That truly is adorned with most excellent, and incomprehensible gifts, but
such as do not overthrow and destroy the same.

3. In the fellowship of the office, both of the mediator between God and the
believers, and also of the head of the Church, and of the Judge of the whole
world. Mat. 28.18. Phil. 2.9. Ephesians. 1.20.22, Psalm. 110.1.1. Timot. 2.5. 1.
John. 2.12. Heb. 7.25.26.27. and 8.1. and 9.24.

Hitherto concerning the exaltation of the nature assumed: now concerning the
communicating of the Idioms or properties.
Of the communicating of the Idioms, or properties.
The communicating of the Idioms or properties, is a Sinecdoche, whereby that is
spoken of Christ's person, which is proper to one of the natures in the person.
John. 3.13. Acts. 20.28. 1. Cor. 2.8. 1. John. 1.1. and 3.16.

For because of the personal union of the two natures, their properties are
common to the person.

And the communicating of the Idioms or properties, have a place in the
concreet, or primitive, but not in the Abstract or deriuatiue.

The concreet is the name of the person.
The Concreet, or primitive, is a name understood of the person of Christ, as
these, God, Man, Christ, Jesus, the son of God, the son of man, and so
forth.

The Abstract is the name of the nature.
The Abstract or deriuatiue, is a name understood of one of the natures only in
the person of Christ, as these, the Godhead, the manhood, flesh. John. 1.14.
The seed of Abraham. Heb. 2.16.

And if in steed of the Abstract, the Co^creet be sometime used, for the most
part there is added a note or particle of difference restraining it to one or
other of the natures: sometime also it is uttered absolutely, without any note
of difference expressed, yet understood.

The notes of difference are these, by, nigh to, as long as, or until, in,
through, as much as, and those that are like these. Romans 1.3.4. 1. Tim. 3.16.
Heb. 9.14. 1. Pet. 3.18. and 4 1. Romans 9.5. Acts. 2.30.

And by these notes of difference is signified the property of the one nature,
which ca^ not be spoken of the other nature.

As therefore it is most rightly said of Christ, God is borne of the virgin,
suffered under Pontius Pilate, crucified, dead and buried, and so forth.

So also it is most rightly said of the same Christ, he is a man eternal,
present every where, omnipotent, knowing all things.

Contrariwise, as this is a most wicked and blasphemous speech, to say, the
Godhead is borne of the virgin, suffered under Pontius Pilate, crucified,
dead, and buried: so this is a most wicked and blasphemous speech, to say, that
the humanity of Christ is eternal, present every where, omnipotent, knowing
all things.

Thus much concerning the personal union.
Of the nativity of Christ.
The nativity of Christ is that whereby he was borne of the virgin Mary at
Bethlehe^, that he might be our Savior. Luke. 2.4. Mat. 2.1.5.

Thus far concerning the incarnation of Christ: now concerning his obedience.
Of the obedience of Christ.
The obedience of Christ, is the other part of his humiliatio^, whilst he was
in all things obedient to his father. It is also called the righteousness of
Christ. Esaias. 53. Heb. 5.8. Although he were the son of God, yet he learned
obedience by those things which he suffered.

Of the obedience of Christ there are two parts: the fulfilling of the law, and
the paying of the punishment for our sins.

The fulfilling of the law, is the first part of Christ's obedience, whereby in
his whole life he performed for us perfect obedience to the law of God.

Otherwise it is called the active righteousness of Christ, and also the
obedience of the holy life of Christ.

The paying of the punishment for our sins, is the other part of Christ's
obedience, whilst he for us sustained the punishment which we had deserved,
that he might satisfy for us the most severe justice of God: so that we are no
more bound to suffer that punishment, seeing Christ has paid it for us.
Otherwise it is called the passive righteousness of Christ: or the obedience
of his Passion and death.

The parts of paying the punishment for our sins, are both his Passion, and
death, and also his burying and descending to hell.

Of the Passion of Christ.
The Passion of Christ, is that part of his obedience, when he in body and
soul sustained the wrath of God against sin. Heb. 9.26.28. and 10.11. Dan.
9.24. Esaias. 53.5.

The parts of the Passion of Christ, are, the suffering of manifold evils, even
presently from his birth, to the institution of the holy Supper: and that
solemn and most grievous Passion in the end of his life.

The manifold evils from his birth to the institution of the holy Supper, are
either of the body, or of the soul.

The evils of the body were both poverty and dangers of life: and also diverse
infirmities.

He sustained poverty, Mat. 8.20. and 21.1.2. and 27.55. Luke. 9.58. that he
might enrich us with heavenly gifts. 2. Cor. 8.9.

The manifold dangers of his life, were these, for which he was both led into
exile, Matthew. 2.14.15. and also he did often yield for a time to the furies of
the enemies. Mar. 3.6.7. John. 7.1. and 11.53.54.

The infirmities of the body, Heb. 5.2. were hunger, Mat. 4.2. and 21.18. and
thirst, Ioh. 4.8. weariness. John. 4.6. tears. John. 11.35.

The evils of the soul, were both ignorance, and temptations: as also
sadness, and ignominy.

For Christ knew not certain things, until he knew them by feeling. Mat.
11.13. he knew not the day and hour of judgment. Mar. 13.32.

Of the temptations of Christ.
His temptations, were the assaults of the devil and his ministers, by which
they did endeavor to seduce him to sin, Mat. 4.1. or else to confound him,
and lay him open to reproach, Matthew. 22.35. or to cast him into danger of life.
Mat. 22.15.16.

But he was therefore tempted, that he might help those that are tempted. Heb.
2.17.18. and 4.15. Also that he might teach us by his example, how we ought to
meet with, and resist the temptations of the devil and his instruments.

His sadness, was that whereby his soul was heavy and troubled. John. 12.27.

His ignominies were manifold, unjust accusations, and slanders. Mat. 12.24.
Mar. 11.19. reproaches, reuilings. John. 8.48.

His base account, and neglect. Mar. 6.3.4. reiection, contempt, and that
truly among his own.

Hitherto of the evils which Christ suffered from his birth, even to the last,
and solemn act of his Passion.
That last and solemn act of Christ's Passion, comprehends both his striving
in the garden, and his betraying, as also his judgment.

Of the striving of Christ in the garden.
The striving of Christ in the garden, was that whereby he did terribly strive
with the most vehement feeling of Gods horrible wrath against sin, and with
the horror of Gods curse. Mat. 26.37. and so forward. Out of which he at the
length scaping conqueror, he brought so to pass that death should no more be
fearful unto us.

The parts of his striving, are both the fear, and trouble of the soul.

The fear of Christ, was that he feared more and more, that horror hanging
over him. Heb. 5.7.

The trouble of his soul, was the sadness of his soul, whereby it was most
grievously touched with sorrow, anguish and grief Mat. 26.37.38.

The effects of his striving, were his affectionate and earnest prayer, and
his sweating of blood.

The affectionate and earnest prayer of Christ, was that whereby he asked of
his father, the taking away of that horror. Matthew. 26.39.42.44.

Christ's sweating of blood, was when sweat, as it were drops of blood, did
fall on the earth. Luke. 22.44.

Thus far concerning the striving of Christ: now concerning his betraying.
His betraying was this, whereby Judas Iscariot, that unfaithful disciple,
receiving thirty pieces of silver for an hire, delivered Christ to the Princes
of the Priests, and to the elders of the people of the Jews. Matthew. 26.47.
and so forward.

Thus much concerning the betraying of Christ.
Christ was drawn into two sorts of judgment, to the judgment of the Priest
and of the civil magistrate.

In the former, false witnesses being, produced in vain, he was at length by
Cayphas slandered, and condemned for blasphemy. Mat. 26.57. and so forward.

The civil judgment is two fold, the one before Pilate, the other before
Herod, by who^ Christ was sent back again to Pilate, who at the length
condemned him to be beaten with rods, and to be crucified. Now therefore Christ
was condemned, that he might redeem us from eternal condemnation. His beating
with rods is set down Mat. 27.26.

His crucifying is that whereby he was fastened on wood, or on a cross, that he
might take the curse of the law from us upon himself. As it is written, cursed
is every one who hangs on a tree. Mat. 27.38. Mar. 15.27. Luke. 23.33. 2.
Cor. 13.4. Heb. 13.12. John. 19.18.

Hitherto concerning the passion of Christ: now concerning his death, and those
things which followed his death, namely his burying, and descending into hell.
The death of Christ is part of his obedience, when commending his soul to his
father he gave up the ghost on the cross, to ratify his Testament, and to
loose the fear of death. Heb. 9.15.16.17. and 2.14.15.

Of the burying of Christ.
The burying of Christ, is that whereby his body was laid into the new tomb.
Mat. 27.59.60. Mar. 15.46. Acts. 13.29. 1. Cor. 15 4.

Christ was buried for four causes.

1. That it might appear that he was dead indeed. 2. That he might bury our
sins with himself. 3. That we might with him be buried to sin. Romans 6.4.
4. That he might sanctify our sepulchers.
Of Christ's descending into hell.
The descending of Christ to hell, is the very last degree of Christ's
humiliation, when he was kept down in the grave under the bonds of death
three days, and three nights, as though he had been utterly overcome. Acts.
2.24.27.29.30. Psalm. 16.10. Ephesians. 4.9. Mat. 12.40.

The end of this, is that he might abolish the sting of hell. 1. Cor. 15.55.

Hitherto concerning Christ's humiliation: now concerning his exaltation.
Conce Christ's exaltation.
Christ's exaltation, is his state in which he was carried up into the highest
and unspeakable glory. Luke. 24.26. Phil. 2.9.

That does comprehend both his resurrection, and manifestation of himself,
forty days upon the earth, and also his ascension into heaven, and his
sitting at the right hand of God his father.

Of Christ's resurrection.
Christ's resurrection, is that whereby he having overcome death, and the
dominion thereof, by his own divine power, he rose again the third day from
the dead, and lives with God for evermore. 2. Cor. 13.4.1. Pet. 3.18. Rom
6.8.10. and 14.9.

There are four ends and uses of the resurrection of Christ.
1. That he by his resurrection has overcome death, to the intent that he
might make us partakers of his righteousness, which by his death he has
purchased for us. Romans 4.25. 1. Pet. 1.1. These. 1.10.3.4.5.21. 1. Cor.
15.16.17.54.55. Or that he by his resurrection, has fully confirmed to us, the
redemption and righteousness purchased for us by his death.

2. That the devil and death being overcome, he might rule over the dead and
the living Romans 14.9.

3. That he by the power thereof might stir us up to a new life. Romans 6.4.
Coloss. 3. 1. Ephesians. 2.5.

4. That the resurrection of our head, is a pledge to us of our glorious
resurrection. 1. Cor. 15.12.13.14. Romans 8.11.

The conversation of Christ upon the earth forty days after his
resurrection, was done to that end, that he might most certainly confirm his
resurrection: so that no man might doubt of it. Acts. 1.3.

Of Christ's ascension into heaven.
The ascension of Christ into heaven, is that whereby in body, he was visibly
lifted from the earth, and was received up into heaven. Mar. 16.19. Acts. 1.9.
John. 14.2.

The heaven into which Christ ascended.
The heaven into which Christ ascended, and into which he will take us, Christ
himself teaching us it, Ioh. 14.2. is the house of his heavenly father, in
which there are many dwelling places, the throne of God, the place of joy: and
it is not every where, but in the highest heavens, it is a place as. 2. Chron.
6.21.

And therefore we believe that Christ's body, is not now on earth, much less
every where, but in heaven: Acts. 13.21. yet Christ shall be with us even to the
end of the world, by his Godhead, grace and spirit. Mat. 28.20.

There are three ends of Christ's ascension.

1. Because he does make intercession for us before his father in heaven Heb.
9.24. and 10. 19. 1. John. 2.1. Romans 8.34. 2. Because we have our flesh in
heaven that we by that, as by a certain pledge might be confirmed, that it
shall come to pass, that he which is our head may lift us his members to
himself. John. 14.2. and 20.17. Ephesians. 2.6. or else, that he might prepare a
place for us, that where he is, we might be also. 3. Because he does fill the
Church with his spirit, and unspeakable power, and beautify it, with diverse
gifts. John. 14.16. and 16.7. Ephesians. 4.10.11. Psalm. 68.19. or else, because he
sends us the holy spirit in steed of a mutual pledge.
Hitherto concerning Christ's ascension: now concerning his sitting at the
right hand of God the father.
Of Christ's sitting at the right hand of God.
The sitting of Christ at the right hand of God his father, is the highest
degree of Christ his glory, whilst he does possess all power, over all
creatures, in heaven and earth, that the father might both work and govern
all things immediately by him. Psalm. 110. Acts. 2.30. and 3.21. and 7.56. 1.
Cor. 15.27. Ephesians. 1.20. Phil. 2.9. Heb. 1.34. Mat. 28.18.

That is attributed to the person, that is to say: not to one nature of Christ
severally, but even to whole Christ God and man.

For when the kingly office of Christ is noted by it, it ought to be taken of
the whole person, or of both natures.

And Christ sits at the right hand of God his father, not every where, but
in heaven, as the Scripture plainly testifies. Heb. 8.1.4. Ephesians. 1.20 Col. 3.1.
Acts. 3.21. Heb. 1.3.

And that not till after his ascension. Mar. 16.19. 1. Pet. 3.22.

The difference between the ascesinon and sitting of Christ at the right hand
of the father.
And the ascension of Christ into heaven, is one thing, his sitting at the right
hand of God his father, is another thing. 1. Because his sitting is the end of
his ascension: for therefore Christ ascended to heaven, that he might sit at
the right hand of his father.

2. Because Christ does perpetually sit at the right hand of his father: but he
ascended but once in heaven.

3. Because we shall also ascend into heaven, but we shall not sit at the right
hand of God.

Hitherto concerning the person of Christ: now concerning his office.
Of the office of Christ.
The office of Christ, is to bestow on the elect all things which are required
to eternal salvation.

This office does jointly belong to both natures in the person of Christ. John.
6.3.53. Heb. 9.14. Acts. 20.28.

And as that duty belongs to both natures: so also the effects, that is to
say, Of the (...) of the ^^^^^tour.
the works of the office are attributed to Christ accorrding to both natures.
Heb. 3.2.3.4.5.6. and 9.14. Acts. 20.28.

But in the performing of every effect or work, some things do pertain to
the divine nature, other some to the humane nature. 1. Pet. 1.18. and 2.24. and
3.18.

For although every effect or work of the mediator be one, because the person
of the mediator is but one: yet to the effecting of this work there do
concur two operations, that is to say, two actions, one of the Godhead,
another of the manhood: the Godhead doing those things which belong to the
Godhead, and the ma^hood doing those things, which belong to manhood; as the
work of a man is but one, but in performing it, there does concur, the
action both of the soul and body, the soul doing those things which belong to
the soul, and the body doing those things, which belong to the body.

And as the natures, and properties of the same remain distinct: so also the
actions, and operations of the natures, so that either of them does severally
work that which is proper to it, namely the word working that which belongs
to the word: and the flesh acco^plishing that which belongs to the flesh.

The offices of Christ are three: his Prophecy, Priesthood, and Kingdom.
Psalm. 110. Heb. 7.2.3. and 13.20.

Of the prophecy of Christ.
The Prophecy of Christ, is perfectly to deliver the whole word of God to men.
Heb. 1.1. John. 1.16.17.18. Esaias. 61.1.

Therefore he is called, the chief Prophet, teacher, and Apostle of our
confession. Heb. 3.1.

Of his Prophecy there are two parts: namely the foreshewing of things to
come, and doctrine.

Of doctrine there are two parts: the laying open of the Gospel, and the true
interpretation of the law.

The laying open of the Gospel, is the first part of Christ's doctrine, when
he did lay open, the secret counsel, and all his fathers will concerning our
redemption. John. 1.18. and 15.15. Mat. 11.17.

The true interpretation of the law, is the other part of Christ's doctrine,
when he expounded the true meaning of Gods law. Mat. 5.20. and so forward.

Thus far concerning the Prophetical office of Christ: now concerning his
Priesthood.
Of Christ's Priesthood.
The Priesthood of Christ, is to perform the works of a Priest. Heb. 5.10.

Of Christ's Priesthood there are two parts: the expiation of sin, and
intercession to God.

Of the expiation of sin.
The expiation of sin, is the first part of Christ's Priesthood, when Christ
offering to God his father, the only sacrifice of his body, did pay the
punishment for the sins of the elect, to redeem them from all the power of
the devil. 1. Pet. 2.24. and 3.18. Esaias. 53.12. 1. John. 2.2. Romans 3.25. Heb.
10.12. Whereupon also it is called redemption. As also the satisfying for
sins.

And that is done two ways: by merit, and by a powerful working.

Of the merit of Christ.
The merit of Christ is a full satisfaction for our sins, sufficient for all
the men of the world, if all did receive the same by faith.

The powerful working of Christ, is that by which he does certainly bestow on
the believers, benefits purchased by his merit for them, as for example, the
forgiveness of sins, regeneration, the holy spirit, and eternal life, and
does preserve the same benefits in them, and endue them with perseverance that
they fall not from grace.

Thus much concerning the expiation of sin: now concerning intercession to
God.
Of intercession to God.
Intercession to God, is the other part of Christ's Priesthood, whilst that he
causes by the perpetual memory of his sacrifice, that his father should
receive us into grace.

Hitherto concerning Christ's Priesthood: now concerning the kingly office of
Christ.
Of the kingly office of Christ.
The kingly office of Christ, is this, that he as the head governs the Church.
Psalm. 2.6. Luke. 1.33. Mat. 28.18. John. 10.28.

And he exercises that two ways: one way, if we consider the Church by it
self; another way, if we consider the enemies of the Church.

If we consider the Church by it self, he exercises his kingdom two ways.

1. Because by his holy spirit he powers heavenly gifts upon us, which are
his members. Ephesians. 4.10.11.12. 2. Because he governs us by his word and
spirit.
If we consider the enemies of the Church of Christ, he exercises his kingly
office also two ways.

1. That he by his power does defend, preserve, and mightily deliver both us
and that salvation which he has purchased for us, against our enemies. Psalm.
2.9 and 110.1.2. John. 10.28.29.30. Ephesians. 4.8. 2. Because he does beat down
their enemies, until at the length he may fully and perfectly deliver us from
them.
The vanquishing of the enemies is two ways.

1. Because he does deprive our enemies of all power, although they be never so
strong and proud, as the devil, and all the wicked. 2. Because he does utterly
abolish other, as death. 1. Cor. 15.26.
Thus far concerning the revelation of doctrine: now concerning the
foretelling of things to come. Of the foretelling of things to come.

The foretelling of things to come is a laying open of Gods will, by which God
would foretell those things which shall be hereafter, as far as it might be
for our good to know them.

And that is either confirmed by an oath, or else it is without an oath.

The oath of God, is a confirming of the foreshewing of things to come, not
because that foreshewing is doubtful, but because God would so provide for our
infirmity, judging of God according to the manner of men, that if any be not
contented with the bare words of God, the oaths might suffice him.

Taulerus says thus: O blessed are they, for whose sake God swears: o
miserable are they, who believe not God, when he swears.

The bare foretelling, is that which has no oath adjoined to it, but yet it is
as certain as if God that had sworn, had done it. And therefore Philo said
elega^tly, all the words of God are oaths, in respect of their certainty,
neither do they need any co^firmatio^, as whose truth proves and defends it
by the effects, as the shining of the native light being sent forth.

Again the foretelling of things to come, is either absolute, or with a
condition.

The absolute foretelling is that which is without all condition, and that is
prophecy or foretelling.

A prophecy or foretelling, is a revealing of mysteries or secret things which
shall come to pass in their due time. Such were many foretellings of the
Prophets: of Christ concerning his own passion, death and resurrection,
concerning the overthrow of Jerusalem, concerning the end of the world, and
concerning false Prophets: of Agabus, concerning the pestilence to come, and of
Paul concerning the restoring of the Jews, and concerning Antichrist. etc.

Hitherto concerning the absolute foretelling of things to come.
The foretelling of things to come with condition, is that to which some
certain condition is annexed, which if it be present, the things foretold are
done.

And that is either promise or threatening.

Gods promise is a foreshewing of good things to come, which God will give us
if we also perform those things which he requires of us, or if we satisfy
the condition, which he lays upon us.

The promise of God is either spiritual, or bodily.

The spiritual promise, is that whereby God does show, that he will give us
spiritual good things.

The bodily promise, is that whereby God does show, that he will give us bodily
good things, as far as it may be expedient for our salvation.

Again the promise is either of the law, or of the Gospel.

The promise of the law, is a promise, which the law propounds, having a
condition of perfect obedience annexed unto it.

For the law precisely commands the condition to be fulfilled, neither
otherwise performs it the promises, then as the condition shall be thoroughly
performed.

Therefore the perfect fulfilling of the condition commanded by the law, should
have had a respect of merit, and should have been a cause of obtaining those
rewards, which the law promises.

But the perfect fulfilling of the condition of the law cannot be performed by
men corrupted with sin.

The promise of the law, although it has a condition adjoined impossible to be
performed by a corrupted nature: notwithstanding it is not unprofitable, or
idle: for the impossible condition is therefore adjoined, that men might be
admonished of their weakness, and they thoroughly understanding the same might
fly to Christ, by who^ they being received into grace, and already having
obtained justification, might obtain those same promises.

The promise of the Gospel, is a promise which the Gospel propounds, having
the condition of faith adjoined to it.

For the Gospel promises forgiveness of sins, and eternal life, yet to
the believers only.

The promise of the Gospel is universal but to the believers: for all which
believe in Christ do receive forgiveness of sins, and eternal life. Acts.
10.43. John. 3.16.

But it does not pertain to the unbelievers.

Thus much concerning the promise: now concerning the threatening.
Threatening, is a denouncing of evils to come, by which God will either chasten
his, or punish the wicked, except they repent.

Therefore the condition of repentance is adjoined.

Threatening also is either spiritual or bodily.

Spiritual threatening, is that whereby God does denounce, that he will send
spiritual evils upon us.

Bodily threatening, is that whereby God does denounce, that he will send bodily
evils upon us.

Hitherto concerning the supernatural manifestation of Gods will: now
concerning his calling of us.
Our calling, is a work of Gods special providence, whereby God does call men
to some certain end. Matthew. 22.9. 1. Cor. 1.9. 1. Tim. 2.4.29.

And that calling is either to Christ, or to some office.

The calling to Christ, is that calling, whereby God does inuit us to Christ,
that by him we might obtain eternal life.

And that calling is two fold, either inward or outward.

The outward calling, is a calling which is done by the Ministers of Gods word.

And that is two fold, effectual, or ineffectual. Mat. 22.2.

The effectual calling belongs to the elect, in whose hearts the word
preached does abide.

The ineffectual calling, belongs to the reprobate, in whose hearts the word
of God either finds no abode, or else vanishes away, so that it is become to
them the savor of death, and a matter of more grievous condemnation.

Thus much concerning the outward calling: now concerning the inward.
The calling that is inward, is a calling, which is wrought by the holy spirit,
by who^ the father draws us, and gives us to his son. John. 6.37.44. and
17.11.

Hitherto concerning our calling to Christ: now concerning our calling to some
office.
The calling to some office, is the separating of a fit person to some office.
Romans 1.1.

Thus far concerning our calling: now concerning Gods covenant.
Gods covenant is a bargain which God has made with me^, in which God
promises to men some good, and requires of them again, that they perform
those things which he commands.

And that covenant is either eternal or temporal.

The eternal covenant is a covenant in which God promises men eternal life.

And that is two fold, the covenant of works, or the covenant of grace.

The covenant of works, is a bargain of God made with men concerning eternal
life, to which is both a condition of perfect obedience adjoined, to be
performed by man, and also a threatening of eternal death if he shall not
perform perfect obedience. Gene. 2.17.

The covenant with Moses is the covenant of works.
The repetition of the covenant of works is made by God, Exodus 19.5. Deuteronomy. 5.2.
1. King. 8.21. Heb. 8.9. and that chiefly for four causes.

1. That God by all means might stir up men to perform obedience. 2. That
every mouth might be stopped, and all the world might be made subject to the
condemnation of God for not performing perfect obedience. Romans 3.19. 3. That he
might manifest man's sin, and naughtiness. Romans 3.19.20. and 7.7.8.9.10.11.
4. That he might thrust us forward to seek to be restored in the covenant of
grace. Gal. 3.22. and 5.23.
Thus much concerning the covenant of works: now concerning the covenant of
grace.
Of the covenant of grace.
The covenant of grace is the reconciling of the elect with God, by the death of
the only mediator. Romans 8.30. 2. Cor. 5.17.18.19.20.21. Heb. 9.15.

The mediator.
That only mediator is our Lord Jesus Christ, who only does reconcile us to
his father, by his satisfaction and merit. Gene. 3.15. and 11.35. Gal.
3.12.13.14. Gene. 15.18. and 17.2.10.11. Exodus 6.4. the Epistle to the Heb.
Chap. 7.8.9. and 10. The covenant made with Abraham, is the covenant of grace.
Acts. 3.25.

The covenant of grace is also called the Testament, because this
reconciliation, was made and ratified by the death of the testatour Christ
coming between. Heb. 9.16.17. Christ purchased reconciliation between his
heavenly father and us, by his death, and there withal left it unto us no
otherwise the^ parents dying do leave their goods to their children.

And that perpetually is one and the self same, if we consider the substance
thereof: as there is but one Church in all ages, one true faith and Religion of
Saints, one God, one mediator Christ, but one sacrifice for sins, but one
righteousness and rede^ptio^ of the world, one manner for all the ages of the
world to obtain salvation, namely by faith in Christ. Heb. 13.8. Revel. 13.8.
1. Tim. 2.5. Romans 12. and 4.3. Ephesians. 1.10. Romans 9.5. Col. 1.18. Ephe. 2.21.
Acts. 4.2. Mat. 11.27. John. 14.6. Luke. 10.24. John. 8 56. Gene. 3.15. and
22.18.

But by the circumstances, it is called the old or new Testament.

It is called the old Testament or covenant, because it was hid from the
faithful by diverse shadows and figures before Christ was manifested in the
flesh. Gene. 12.7. Heb. 9.4.18. Exodus 24.8.

It is called the new Testament or covenant, because it is clearly manifested
to the faithful, by Christ himself showed in the flesh. Heb. 8 6.

Therefore the faithful in the old Testament, had Christ as yet covered in a
type, or rather they looked for a true manifestation of him: but we have him
manifested indeed.

They had figures, we have the thing it self: they did rejoice in outward and
ceremonial things, we triumph in spiritual, and the things signified, without
types. Ierem. 31.31. Matthew. 26.28. 1. Cor. 11.25. Heb. 8.9.10. and Chap. 9. and
10.

Of the covenant of grace there be two parts: the promise of grace, and the
answering again of a good conscience. The former respects God, the later
respects the faithful. Heb. 8.10.11.12.

Of the promise of grace.
The promise of grace is the first part of the covenant of grace, by which God
promises freely his benefits purchased by Christ, unto all those who believe
in Christ.

The benefits purchased by Christ for us, and promised in the Gospel, are
these the giving of the holy spirit, the communion with Christ, and our
preservation in this communion, and the giving of eternal life.

Of the giving of the holy spirit.
The giving of the holy spirit, is a benefit of God; by which he gives us his
holy spirit, who makes us partakers of Christ, and of all his benefits.

Of the knowledge of the holy spirit, there be two parts, the first conc^rning
the person of the holy spirit; the second, concerning his office.

If we consider his person, he is true God, equal with the father, and the
son. Acts. 5.3.4. Gene. 1.2. Math. 28.19. Mar 16 15.

But the office of the holy spirit, is this, that by him the father, and the
son, do show forth their power, and execute the decrees of their will, in
creating, sustaining, and moving all things but chiefly in moving the hearts of
those that hear Gods word, and in sanctifying and quickening the elect with
eternal salvation.

Thus far concerning the giving of the holy spirit: now concerning our
communion with Christ.
Of our communion with Christ.
Our communion with Christ, is the benefit of God, whilst he gives to the
believers Christ himself, and his merits that he might powerfully work in
them eternal life. John. 3.16. Romans 8.32.

That is also called, our joining, union, knitting together with Christ, our
ingrafting into Christ, the eating of Christ's flesh, the drinking of Christ's
blood, the bringing of us under one head, joining into one body, under one
head, to wit, Christ, Ephesians. 1.10. our washing in the blood of Christ, the
quickening of us, the raising of us from the dead, the placing of us in heaven
together with Christ. Ephesians. 2.5.6.

Now the communion of all Saints with Christ, is one and the self same, that
is to say, only spiritual. There is not a bodily entrance, and remaining of
Christ within the bodies of the Saints: neither does Christ dwell spiritually
in some, and bodily in other some: but in all believers spiritually only. And
that is done by the holy spirit, who notwithstanding does truly join and knit
together, by faith, all the godly and faithful with the flesh of Christ,
although it be lifted up and remain in heaven. 1. Cor. 12.13. By one spirit
are all we baptized into one body, and all we drink one drink into one
spirit. For one and the self same spirit, works that in all Baptismes, in
all the holy Suppers, that we might be one with Christ, and joined spiritually
to him. Ephesians. 3.12. He dwells in our hearts by faith. Ephesians. 4. One body and
one spirit. 1. John. 4. By this we know that he dwells in us, and we in him,
because he gives us of his spirit. Romans 8. If the spirit of him, which raised
Jesus from the dead dwell in you, he that raised up Jesus from the dead, shall
also quicken your mortal bodies, by his spirit that dwells in you.

Irenaeus book 3. Chap. 19. As one lump and one loaf, cannot be made of dry
wheat, without moisture: so neither can we being many be made one in Christ
without the water which is from heaven.

And it belongs to all the elect and believers only, even from the beginning
to the end of the world. 1. John. 3.24. and 1. John. 4.13. John. 14.23. and
15.1.2.3.4.5.6.

The parts of our communion with Christ are these, Justification, and
Regeneration, Adoption, and the freedom of the sons of God.

Of justification.
Justification is a benefit of God, by which we being received by him into
favor are accounted just. Romans 5.19. Ephesians. 2.8.9. Romans 3. and 4. and 5.

The parts thereof are two: forgiveness of sins, and imputation of Christ's
righteousness.

Of remission of sins.
The forgiveness of sins, is a benefit of God, whereby he pardons us both
the offense, and eternal punishments due unto it for sin. 2. Cor. 5.19.21.
Iere. 31.34. Psalm. 103.3.10.12. Romans 7.24. and 8.1.2.3.

Of the forgiveness of sins there be two parts: the forgiveness of the
offense, and the forgiveness of eternal punishment.

Therefore by one forgiveness, both are remitted to wit, the offense, and the
eternal punishment. For the justice of God requires that, because Christ has
satisfied for both to wit, for the offense, and the punishment. Therefore God
should be unjust if he should only forgive us the offense, and not the
punishment also. Therefore the Papists err, who say, that the offense only is
remitted, and not the punishment, for which they will have men to satisfy,
when as they can by no means do it, but Christ has fully satisfied for it.

Of the imputing of Christ's righteousness.
The imputing of Christ's righteousness, is a benefit of God, whereby God
vouchsafes to account Christ's obedience, by which he sustained for us the
punishments of sin, to be ours, even as though we our selves had sustained
those punishments for sins. Esa. 53.3 4.5. Romans 4.3.5. Romans 5.11.18. Col. 1.22.
2. Cor. 5.19.21.

Thus far concerning justification: now concerning Regeneration.
Of regeneration.
Regeneration, is a benefit of God, by which our corrupted nature is renewed to
the image of God by the holy spirit. 2. Pet. 1.4. Tit. 3.5. Gal. 4.6. 2. Cor.
3.7.

That same is also called sanctification, and the gift of grace. Romans 5. Also
of schoolmen it is called an infused grace.

Regeneration is either begun, or perfected: the former belongs to this life,
the later to the life to come.

In regeneration are to be considered both the parts, and also the perpetual
adioynts.

Regeneration is both of the soul, and also of the body. 1 Thessalonians. 5.23.

Regeneration of the soul, is that whereby the powers of ye soul are renewed.
Tit. 3.5. Gal. 4.6.

Of the regeneration of the soul there are two parts: enlightening, and
repentance.

As there are two parts of the soul, understanding, and will: so also
regeneration is wrought in those same two parts. The enlightening belongs to
the understanding, and repentance belongs to the will. So Paul says, that
in regeneration the image of God is renewed to the acknowledgement of the
creator. Coloss. 3. and to true righteousness and holiness, Ephe. 4.23.

Of the enlightening or annoynting of the holy spirit.
Enlightening is the first part of the regeneration of the soul, whereby the
natural darkness being driven forth, our mind is enlightened with true
knowledge how to obtain eternal life. Psalm. 16.11. Col. 3. Romans 12 2.

That is also called the annoynting of the holy spirit.

Of enlightening there are two parts: spiritual wisdom, and prudence.
Spiritual wisdom, is the wholesome knowledge of faith and the mysteries of
salvation, joined with confidence in Christ. Ephesians. 1.17.18.

Spiritual prudence, is a wholesome knowledge of things commanded or
forbidden, by the law of God, with a desire of the former, and shunning of the
latter joined to it.

Thus much concerning enlightening: now concerning repentance.
Of repentance.
Repe^ta^ce, is the other part of the regeneration of the soul, whereby our
will is renewed, that it no longer wills evil, but that which is good only.
Romans 6.4.5.6. Ephe. 4.22.23.24. 2. Cor. 5.7. Phil. 2.13. It is also called
repentance and turning to God, by putting the part for the whole, it has the
former name truly of the first part: and the other of the latter part.

And that does not proceed from our own free will, which being lost by sin,
there is no more will to goodness after the fall, and especially to eternal
salvation, Genesis 6.5. But it is the gift of God.

There are two parts thereof, the mortification of the old man, and the
quickening of the new man.

Of the mortification of the old man.
The mortification of the old man, is the first part of repentance, whereby
sin (so far as it may be in this life) is abolished in us. Romans 6.4.5.6.
Coloss. 3.5.6.7.8.9.10. Romans 8.13. It is called also the denying of our selves.
Also the putting off of the old man. Coloss. 3.9.10.

The parts thereof, are both the acknowledgement and confession of sin, and
also the detestation, and hatred of sin: next a profitable sadness for sin.

The ackhowledgement of sin, is when we acknowledge that we have sinned.
Ierem. 3.2.13.

Of the confession of sin.
The confession of sin, is that whereby we openly testify that we have
sinned, and offended God. 1. King. 8.47. 2. Sam. 24.10. And that is either
public or private.

The private confession, is that which is done privately of every one, even
within his own private house. And that is either to God only, or to man. To
man either to the Minister of the word, or to some faithful friend.

Public confession, is that which is done publickely with the whole Church.

Public confession, is either of the whole Church, or of one, or many in the
face of the Church.

The detestation of sin, is when we accuse and condemn both the sins
committed by us, and our selves also for our sins sake. 1. Cor. 11.31. If we
would judge our selves, we should not be judged by the Lord.

The hatred of sin is a perpetual shunning of sin. For to hate sin, is
to turn away from it, and to shun it. Nehem. 9.35. Ierem. 36.3. Ezech. 14.6.

A profitable sadness, is true fear, and grief of conscience for sins
committed, by which we offend God, joined with the true hatred of sin. Esaias.
66.2. 2. Cor. 7.11. Joel. 2.12.13. Deuteronomy. 4.29. Jonas. 3.8. 2. King. 22.19.

Hitherto concerning the mortification of the old man: now concerning the
quickening of the new man.
The quickening of the new man, is the other part of repentance, Of the
quickening of the new man.
whereby a new spiritual life is raised up in us. Gal. 2.19. Romans 6.10.11.

And that same is called our resurrection with Christ.

Of this there be two parts: the comfort of the conscience, and spiritual
government.

The comfort of the conscience, is the true joy of a contrite conscience in
God, having received forgiveness of sins by faith, through Christ. Psalm
51.10.14. Romans 5.1. Esaias. 57.15.16.17.18. and 61.1. Esaias. 49 13.

The spiritual government, is the other part of quickening by which God
leads by his spirit the regenerate, in the right way of his commandments, so
that they live no longer to sin, but to God* and do lead a new life. Romans 6
throughout. Also 7. and 8. where he speaks largely of sanctification, or
regeneration. David very often prays to God for this spiritual government,
chiefly Psalm. 119.33.34.35. and every where throughout the whole Psalm. So
Psalm. 25.8.9.10.

Thus far concerning the regeneration of the soul: now concerning the
regeneration of the body.
Of the regeneration of the body.
The regeneration of the body, is that by which the body is made obedient to the
spirit, being regenerated. Romans 12.1.

Therefore there is both a mortification, and quickening of the body also. Romans
6.12. etc.

The parts of the regeneration of the body are two: the bridling of the
affections, and the ruling of the moveable members,

The bridling of the affections is the first part of the regeneration of the
body, by which the affections of the body are tamed, that they might obey
reason regenerated.

The ruling of the moveable members, is the other part of the regeneration of
the body, by which all the members of the body are ruled, lest being thrust
forward by the re^na^ts of corrupted lusts, they should do any thing contrary to
the consent of the mind and will regenerated.

The testimony of regeneration, is a holy, and just life.

O how many are there, who by their wicked life do openly show, that they are
not regenerated!

An upright man, and a corrupted man, a regenerated man, and an unregenerated
man differ by a rational respect, and not in subject and truth of being.

Hitherto concerning the parts of regeneration: the perpetual adioynts thereof
remain.
Of the spiritual warfare.
The spiritual warfare, or battle, and victory of the Saints, are things
continually accompanying regeneration.

The spiritual battle or warfare, is ye battle of a regenerated man, by which
he fights against the deceipts of the devil, the bad examples of the world,
the sollicitings of his own flesh, as the causes of sin, and resists them
stoutly. Romans 7.8* and so forward. Gal. 5.16.17.

The victory of the saints, is a victory, whereby the Saints do through Christ
overcome the snares of the devil, of the world, and their own flesh.

Hitherto concerning regeneration: now concerning adoption and the freedom of
the sons of God.
Of adoption.
Adoption, is a benefit of God, by which he receives us for Christ's sake, to
be his sons, and makes us heirs, of heaven, and eternal life with him.
Romans 8.15.16.17. Gal. 3.26. Ephesians. 1.5. John. 1.12.

Adoption is two fold: imperfect is that which we have in this life: of this it
is spoken to the Romans; For ye have not received the spirit of bondage again
to fear, but the spirit of the adoption of sons, by which we cry Abba
father. And they already have obtained this adoption, who have received Christ
by faith. John. 1.12. The other adoption is perfect, which in the resurrection
shall be given: of that it is spoken in the same Chapter to the Romans; Every
creature sigheth, and waits for the revealing of the sons of God. Moreover
even we also having the first fruits of the spirit, do sigh within our
selves, waiting for the adoption, and redemption of our bodies.

Thus far concerning adoption: now concerning the freedom of the sons of
God.
The freedom of the sons of God, is the delivering of us by Christ, from a
spiritual bondage. Gal. 5.1.

The freedom of the sons of God, is either inward, or outward.

The inward freedom* is that which belongs to the inward life. John. 8.31.36.

And that is two fold: freedom from eternal bondage, and freedom from the
bondage of sin.

Freedom from eternal bondage, is that by which we are freed from the power
and tyranny of the devil, and from condemnation, and eternal death. John.
8.36.

By this we are comforted in the conflict of conscience with the judgment of
God.

Freedom from the bondage of sin, is that by which we are delivered from the
dominion of sin, that sin may no longer reign over us, but that we being
justified, and endued with the holy spirit, might live to righteousness and
unto God. John. 8.34. 2. Cor. 3. where the spirit of the Lord is, there is
liberty. Romans 6.6. and so forward even to the end. 2. Pet. 2.19. Galat. 5.13.

Thus much concerning inward freedom: now concerning outward freedom.
Of Christian liberty.
The outward freedom, is that which pertains to the outward life. And it is
called Christian liberty, because it belongs to Christians only.

And that is two fold, freedom from the laws of Moses, and freedom in
indifferent things.

Of freedom from the laws of Moses.
Freedom from the laws of Moses, is that by which Christians are loosed from
the ceremonial, and Judicial laws of Moses, namely, so far forth as they
only pertain to the civil government under Moses. 1. Cor. 9.1.19. 2. Cor.
3.17. Heb. 9.10.

For such laws which belong to the law of nature, and by which all nations are
bound, are not abrogated.

Freedom in indifferent things, is that by which Christians are free, in the
use of indifferent, and mean things. 1. Cor. 9.1.

Of freedom in indifferent things.
Things indifferent or mean things, are those, which are neither commanded, nor
forbidden by God but are delivered, and instituted by men.

Of indifferent
Such are the ceremonies instituted by humane authority, for good orders sake.

These may be kept or omitted, by the power of Christian liberty.

They may indeed be observed in this respect; namely, for the preserving of
concord, and avoiding of the offense of the weak. Rom 14.15.16. 1. Cor. 8.1.9.
and 11.29. 2. Cor. 11.12. but so that always there be no false opinion,
namely, 1. of merit, as though the observing of them, might merit forgiveness
of sins.

2. Of worship, as though God would be worshipped with the^, contrary to his
express word; Mat. 15. In vain they worship me* according to the
commandments of men. Also. Ezech; 20. Walk in my commandments, and not in
the precepts of your fathers.

3. Of perfection as though the observing of them could make us perfect.

4. Of necessity, as though it were necessary that they should be observed for
conscience sake, and as though the conscience were hurt, unless they were
observed, when as yet notwithstanding no laws bind the consciences of men,
except the laws of God only.

They also may be omitted without sin, where no danger of offense is, and
without the show of denying the truth, and without the omitting of a necessary
confession.

But they do sin, whosoever neglecting these things, do break such
ceremonies, in reformed Churches.

Therefore indifferent things, according to the circumstances are either
lawful or unlawful Romans 14.20.21. 1. Cor. 8.13.

But here now where there is contention and contrariety of circumstances, those
which are less, must give place to those which are of greater importance, the
less number must give place to the more. Romans 14.21.

Notwithstanding we must take heed, lest those things be judged indifferent
which are not indifferent.

Such are those which are both superstitious, and wicked things.

Superstitious things, are those, the obserning whereof, is joined with a false
opinion of merit, worship, perfection and necessity.

Wicked things, are those which are flatly contrary to Gods commandments, of
which sort are many traditions of the Pope, as the abuse of the Lords Supper,
prayer to the dead, the worshipping of images, the law of single life, holy
days dedicated to Saints, images made for Religions sake, that is to say,
that they may serve to the use of Religion, or that they might be worshipped,
or that holy things might be represented by them. For God will not have images
serve to this end: but he will have all men to be taught by his word. And the
monuments, by which heavenly things are represented, are the Sacraments only,
not painted, or graven, but administered. For Christ does not say, paint this,
but do this, that is to say, break the bread, and so forth, in remembrance of
me.

The use of the doctrine concerning Christian liberty is two fold.

1. That we might learn in what things our righteousness does properly
consist. 2. That we might know what to judge of ceremonies, namely that
righteousness is not to be sought for in them, but that we freely by Christ
obtain righteousness, and forgiveness of sins, not for the observation of
any ceremonies, or traditions of men.
Hitherto concerning our communion with Christ: now concerning our preservation
in this communion.
The preservation of the elect in their communion with Christ, is a benefit of
God, whereby he does preserve the elect even to the end, that they should not
perish, but that they should remain in the fellowship of Christ. 1. Pet. 1.5.

The parts thereof are, consolation, the hearing of the electes prayers,
defense against their enemies, deliverance out of dangers, and the gift of
perseverance.

Consolation, is a benefit of God, whereby he does strengthen us, to the
suffering of adversities, with an unspeakable joy of heart joined thereunto.
Psalm. 94.19. and 119.76.77. 2. Cor. 1.3. 1. Cor. 10.13.

And that is either common in every affliction, or particular in death.

The common consolation in every affliction, is manifold.

1. Because affliction proceeds from the divine providence of our most
merciful and heavenly father. 2. Sam. 16.10. Ier. 14.22. 2. Because affliction
serves to the good and salvation of the elect. Romans 8.28. Psalm. 119.71. Revel.
3.10. 3. Because affliction brings forth patience Iam. 12.3. Romans 5.3. 4.
Because they who suffer affliction for godliness, and the truths sake are
blessed. Matthew. 5.10.11. Luke. 6.22. Iam, 1.12. 1. Pet. 3.14. and 4.14. 5.
Because affliction, bideth but for a while. 2. Cor. 4.17. 6. Because God
himself puts an end to affliction. 1. Cor. 10.13. 7. Because affliction
cannot separate us from Gods love. Romans 8.39. 8. Because affliction is not a
testimony of Gods wrath. 9. Because affliction is a testimony of Gods love.
Prou. 3.11.13. Heb. 12.6. 1. Pet. 2.19.20. 10. Because he that is proved by
affliction, shall receive the crown of life, which God has promised to those
that love him. Iam. 1.122. Tim. 2.11. Mat 5.12. Revel. 2.10. 11. Because it
cannot overthrow the elect. 2. Cor. 4.8. 12. Because the end of affliction
will be joyful Luke. 6.21 Mat. 5. verse. 4. 13. Because other Saints also have
been subject always to afflictio. Iam. 5.11. Mat. 5.12. 14. Because the
spirit of God rests on those that bear affliction. 1. Pet. 4.14. 15.
Because by affliction we must enter into the kingdom of God. Romans 14.22. 16.
Because by affliction we must be conformable to the image of the son of God.
Romans 8.28. 1. Pet. 4.13. 17. Because they that bear affliction shall not be
condemned with the world. 1. Cor. 11.32. 18. Because Christ himself has
sustained affliction. Heb. 12.2. 19. Because the eternal joy which we shall
reap in the kingdom of God, shall excel by many degrees the grief of
affliction in this life. 20. Because affliction shall not endure for ever. 21.
Because by affliction our heavenly father has appointed to make trial of his
elect. 22. Because by daily affliction, we being admonished of our weakness
and fraylty, might be humbled, and so being humbled, we do learn to call for
Gods assistance. 23. Because in affliction, we have experience of the loving
presence of God. 24. Because affliction is a token of obtaining eternal
inheritance. 25. Because our hope is stre^gthened by affliction. 26. Because by
affliction we learn due obedience to God. 27. Because affliction does get in
us contempt and lothing of this present life. 28. Because affliction
admonishes us of the vanity of this present life. 29. Because affliction does
inuit us to the meditation of the life to come. 30. Because at the length God
freeth us from all evil.
Hitherto concerning the common comfort in every affliction: now concerning the
particular comfort in death.
Out of the disputations of Doct. John James Grineus.
Comfort against death is likewise manifold.

1. Because we do not live or dye to our selves, but to God Romans 14.8. 2.
Because Christ is to us both in life and in death an advantage. 1. Phil. 12. 3.
Because Christ is our resurrection, and life: and they who believe in him
although they were dead, yet shall they live. Ioh. 11.25. 4. Because God
mitigateth and shortneth, to his servants the sorrows of death. 5. Because our
death turned into sleep, is a fulfilling of the mortification of our flesh:
and he who is dead is free from sin. Romans 6.7. 6. Because we know, that if the
tabernacle of this our earthly house we dissolved, we shall have a building of
God, namely a dwelling place not made with hands, but eternal in the heavens.
2. Cor. 5.1. 7. Because we dying godlily go to Christ, which is best of all for
us. Phil. 1.23. 8. Because this way of all flesh is sanctified by the death of
Christ. 9. Because if at any other time in suffering the griefs of this life,
yet especially in the agony of death, the power of comfort, which the spirit
of Christ ministers, does beyond all account overcome the sorrows of death.
10. Because the flesh indeed is weak, but the spirit is ready. Mat. 26.41.
Therefore the whole man does not fear death indeed, but his meaner part,
namely the flesh. 11. Because the desire that we have clearly to behold God,
and to be delivered from whole sin, does greatly diminish, and mitigate the
fear and sorrow of death. 12. Because our love toward the faithful, who
ouerco^ming death have gone before us, and with whom we greatly desire to be
joined in one country, ought to be no less, then it is toward them whom we
leave alive behind us in this miserable exile, and from whom we are loath to be
separated, who must yet notwithstanding by and by follow after us. 13. Because
we do so evidently, and so often perceive the mercy of God toward our
children being dead, therefore it becomes us, to be of a resolute mind,
especially since we know that we are sealed with the pledge of the holy spirit.
14. Because we must not make greater account of this natural life, then of the
spiritual: for so it is meet that the desire hereof might lessen the fear of
death. 15. Because we certainly know, that the soul indeed is immortal, and
is carried by Angels to the assembly and congregation of the first borne, who
are written in heaven. Luke. 16.22. Heb. 12.13. And we know that the body
rests in the earth: neither indeed has one unfitly called the grave the
haven of the body. 16. Because we believe the resurrection of the body and life
eternal. 17. Because as in the whole life, so in the agony of death, God does
not suffer his servants to be tempted above that which they are able to bear,
but does give, even the issue with the temptation. 1. Cor. 10.13. That in deed
is a wonderful thing, which Gregory says in his Morals; Some dye laughing.
But we had rather say, that death is overcome in undergoing it manfully. 18.
Because we must not think so carefully of a quiet death, as of an holy life.
For as Augustine said excellently: We must not think that death evil, before
which has gone a holy life. And as the same man says; He cannot dye euilly,
who has lived well: and he hardly dies well, who has lived euilly. 19.
Because death never is altogether untimely, whether we respect the good or
wicked. For the godly are called before the time, that they should no longer be
vexed of the evil: but the evil and wicked are taken away, that they should
no longer persecute the good. As the same Augustine says. 20. Because this life
is filled with so many and great miseries, that death compared with it is taken
to be a remedy, and not a punishment: as Ambrose judged. 21. Because he that
has an extreme fear to dye, does not hope to live a^^^r death: as says
Chrysostom. 22. Because it is better to offer that (I mean our spirit) for a
free will offering to God, which otherwise we are bound to restore, because it
is his due: as Chrysostom says. 23. Because as death is evil to the evil,
so it is good to the good, to whom all things work together for good. 24.
Because death is the way to life: as Ambrose wisely says. 25. Because this
death is the reparing of life: as the Church sings. 26. Because as Bernard
says: The death of the just is good, by reason of the rest it brings with
it: better because it renews us: best, because it puts us out of danger.
And as the same man says, the death of sinners, is bad, worser, worst of all:
but the death of the good, is good, better, best of all. 27. Because that death
is good, which takes not away life, but tra^slateth it into a better estate.
This a sentence of the same Bernard. 28. Because as the same man also
witnesses, death has freed us from death, life from error, grace from sin.
29. Because faithful men take death to be but a name only: as says
Chrysostom. 30. Because God rules death, that it cannot be a cause of any
evil.
Hitherto concerning comfort: now concerning the rest of the benefits.
The hearing of the elects prayers, is a benefit of God, whilst the elect
praying in Christ's name, God performs unto them all things which profit
their salvation. John. 9.31. Psalm. 145.18.19. John. 14.13.14. and 15.16.

Defense against enemies, is a benefit of God, whilst he so defends the
elect against their spiritual and bodily enemies, that by no mean, they can
hinder their salvation.

Deliverance out of dangers, is a benefit of God, whilst he does often beyond
all hope of man, deliver his elect being in distress, that so (trying his
presence in their perils) they might rejoice in him.

The gift of perseverance, is a benefit of God, whilst he does so seal in
the elect the grace of Jesus Christ by the holy spirit, that they continue in
it, even to the end, and can not fall from it. Romans 11.29. Matthew. 24.24.1.
John. 2.19.27. 2. Pet. 2.18. John. 10.28. Romans 8.35. Luke. 22.32.

Hitherto concerning our preservation in this communion with Christ: now
concerning the gift of eternal life.
The gift of eternal life, is a benefit of God, purchased for us by Christ,
when after this life God will give the elect, that they may live with him for
ever.

Hitherto concerning the promise of grace: now concerning the answering again
of a good conscience.
The answering again of a good conscience is the other part of the covenant of
grace, whereby the believers do again promise to God, that they will in true
says receive his benefits, and that they will serve him in true
righteousness and holiness, the better to declare their thankfulness
toward him.

Hitherto concerning the eternal covenant: now concerning the temporal
couenaur.
Of the temporal covenant.
The temporal covenant is a covenant, in which God promises men temporal good
things. Of this sort was the covenant which God made with mankind after the
flood, that he would not destroy the world any more with a flood. Gene. 9.8.
and so forward.

And that stands upon the eternal covenant, and is as it were belonging
thereunto.

Hitherto concerning Gods covenant: now concerning the divine sign.
Of sigues. August. in his 2. book of Christian doctrine. Chap. 1. Phil.
Melanct.
The divine sign, is that which of it self does cause some divine thing to
come into ma^s mind, besides that show which it offers unto the senses. Or
else, it is some thing offering it self unto the senses, which puts men in
mind of some other thing, which is joined with that sign.

A sign is either natural or given.

A natural sign is a sign which by nature has that self same thing in it
which it signifies. Of this sort is the rainebow, signifying either showers or
fair weather, if it be considered naturally.

A sign given, is a sign, which does not by nature signify that whereof it
is a sign, but it signifies by the appointment and will of God: as the
rainebow is a sign by the appointment of God, that the world shall not perish
with a flood.

The sign given, is either a miracle or a Sacrament.

Of miracles.
A miracle is a sign effected beyond the order of nature. Exodus 3.2. and
14.21.22.23. Dan. 34.9. and 6.22. Mat. 14.19.20.

Therefore if any thing be done according to the order and course of nature, it
is not miraculous, but natural.

There are two ends of miracles: the one, that God by them might manifestly
show forth his power. Exodus 19. and 20. Dan. 3.

The other, that by them as by seals, he might confirm true doctrine. Mat.
16.17.

It is true indeed that in miracles the order of nature by the ouerruling power
of God is interrupted, but never destroyed or overthrown, thrown, neither are
the essences of those things destroyed, although the form be sometime
changed. So when the Sun stood while Joshua fought, when it returned back
when Ezekiah was sick, the order of nature was interrupted, not overthrown:
for afterward the Sun kept the same course again, which was given to it in
the creation. Yet never thelesse the essence of the Sun remained. When the
sea was divided, the course of the sea was interrupted: but the work being
firnshed which God had decreed, it returned again to the former course, and
continued the same: yea the very essence of the sea remained. When Aarons rod
was made a Serpent, it was not the taking away of the substance, but a changing
of it. So the water in Cana of Galile, the substance was not taken away, but it
was turned into wine.

Now God works most freely in the effecting of miracles: for be himself has
most freely put that order into nature, therefore also when he will he can most
freely interrupt it. Furthermore because he is not bound to the order of
nature, he may interrupt it as it pleases him.

And although God can do all things, yet must not miracles be every where
alleged, especially where men cannot be well assured of Gods will, neither yet
where no necessity is: as for example, in the holy Supper men may not imagine
miracles, as though the body of Christ were supernaturally and miraculously in
the bread: because Christ has no where said that he would have it so. No
where, I say, has he said, that he would be in the bread. Furthermore it is
not of necessity: for Christ may become ours, although he desce^d not into the
bread, or with the bread to be thrust into our mouths.

Thus far concerning a miracle: now concerning a Sacrament.
Of Sacraments.
A Sacrament, is an outward sign, which God joins to his covenant, which he
has made with men.

And that is either of an eternal, or temporal covenant.

A Sacrament of an eternal covenant, is a Sacrament, whereby God does confirm
the promise of eternal life.

And that is either of the covenant of works, or of the covenant of grace.

The Sacrament of the covenant of works, is a Sacrament, which God gave our
first parents in the state of their first integrity.

And that was two fold, the tree of life, and the tree of the knowledge of good
and evil.

The tree of life was a Sacrament of the covenant of works, whereby that life
was signified, which man should have lived, if he had stood in the obedience of
God. Gene. 2.9.

The tree of the knowledge of good and evil, was a Sacrament by which was
signified to man, in how good estate he was whilst he performed obedience to
God his creator: and into how evil and miserable estate he should cast
himself if he obeyed not God. Genesis 2.17. and 3.7.8.9.10.11.

Hitherto concerning the sacrament of the covenant of works: now concerning
the Sacrament of the covenant of grace.
Of the Sacrament of the covenant of grace.
The Sacrament of the covenant of grace, is a seal of the righteousness of
faith. Romans 4.11.

Or else, the Sacrament of the covenant of grace is a Sacrament by which the
faithful are both admonished, and also are made sure that the covenant of
grace, and all the benefits of God which are promised in this covenant, do
not only belong to others, but severally to every one of them, who do use the
Sacrament according to Gods ordinance.

A mystery.
It is also called a Mystery, because it signifies secret things, and such as
are unknown to them who have not been taught out of the word of God
concerning the signification and use of them: because in a mystery one thing
is seen, and an other is meant.

The Vbiquitaries do think it therefore to be called a mystery, because the
manner of the bodily receiving of it is unsearchable: but this is a false
cause, because the bodily receiving has no foundation in the Scripture, but it
is the devise and imagination of men. Furthermore, this manner is manifested to
us, namely that it is spiritual, and that the receiving is done by faith.

Both the Word and Sacraments do lead our faith to Christ, as to the only
foundation of our salvation.

Therefore in the Sacraments is propeunded, offered, given and sealed, no other
thing then is promised and preached in the Gospel, but one and the self same
thing, namely, Christ with his benefits. In the Sacraments we receive no other
thing, then in the simple word, namely Christ with his benefits.

And the receiving of Christ, whether it be in the simple word, as in John. 6.
or in the Sacraments, is one and the self same, to wit, spiritual, that is to
say, which is wrought in us by the power of the holy spirit, and by the only
instrument of faith. The receiving of Christ in the word and Sacraments do
not differ indeed: for in both there is the same thing and the same substance,
to wit, Christ with his benefits. It does not differ in the manner, for it is
spiritual in them both. The difference is not in the instrument by which we
receive it, for in them both faith is the instrument to receive it by. What
then is the difference between the receiving of Christ in the simple word,
and in the Sacraments? The outward form only: to wit, because in the
Sacraments bodily signs are joined with the word of promise. In the simple
word God deals with us by preaching, and by our ears only: but in the
Sacraments he uses beside, such signs as offer themselves to the rest of the
senses also: whereby it comes to pass, that the communicating of Christ by
the Sacraments, is more forcible and plain, then by the simple word only.

There are two parts of the Sacrament of the covenant of grace: namely the
earthly matter, and the outward action, or the outward rite. Genes. 17.11.
Exodus 12.8. and so forward. Matthew. 3.11. and 28.9. Matthew. 26.26. and so
forward. 1. Cor. 11.23.24.25.

The earthly matter alone, is not a perfect and whole Sacrament, but there must
be adjoined to it the outward action or ceremony, or the use of the earthly
matter appointed by Christ.

For nothing has the force of a Sacrament, except there be adjoined to it the
use of it, according to Christ's institution.

Of the earthly matter.
The earthly matter in the Sacrament, is a sign or token, by which under a
certain promised similitude, a heavenly matter is signified and represented to
the faithful, that so they might be assured, that the heavenly matter is as
certain spiritually present, as they do certainly see the earthly matter, to
be bodily present before their eyes. Genesis 17.11. Rom 4 11. Eze. 36 25.

Christ himself by the holy spirit, does make the things promised present to
our faith: and faith receives them.

Faith works not that presence: but Christ himself works it.

The heavenly matter signified in the Sacrament by the earthly matter, is the
new Testament or covenant of grace, in the blood of Christ.

Therefore we must not respect the minister and earthly elements, but turn the
eyes of our faith to the things promised.

Of a Sacrame^tall metaphor.
Wherefore also the earthly matter by a manner of speaking, both usual in the
Scripture and Church, and also plain in it self, is also oft-times called by
the name of the heavenly matter: because the heavenly matter is signified and
meant by the earthly. Exodus 24.8. The blood of the sacrifices is called the
blood of the covenant. Genes. 17.10. Circumcision is called the covenant. Exodus
12.11. The Paschall Lamb is called the Passover. Titus 3.5. Baptism is
called the washing of regeneration.

Now how these speeches concerning the Sacraments ought to be understood and
expounded, the Scripture it self does declare, because the earthly matter is
a sign of the covenant. Genes. 17.11. Because it is a seal of the
righteousness of faith. Romans 4.11. Because it is a remembrance of Christ's
death.

And it is so called by a metaphor, in which the sign is either put for the
thing signified, or is called by the name of the thing signified.

Hitherto concerning the earthly matter: now concerning the outward action in
a Sacrament.
Of the outward action in the Sacrament.
The outward action in a Sacrament, that is to say, a rite or ceremony which we
must observe in ye Sacrament according to the institution Christ, is a sign of
the inward action. Deuteronomy. 30.6. Matthew. 3.11. Romans 6.3. 1. Cor. 6.11. Col. 2.11.
Act. 22.16.

This action is two fold: one of the minister administering the Sacrament, the
other of a faithful man using a Sacrament.

The action of the Minister administering the Sacrament is two fold: the
sanctification of the earthly matter: and the administering of the same earthly
matter?

The sanctifying of the earthly matter, is an action of the minister, in the
which by Gods commandment, he appoints the earthly matter to a holy use.

Therefore the rehearsing of the words of the institution of the Sacrament is
necessary, both that the manner of instituting the Sacrament may be laid
open, as also that by it the earthly matter may be sanctified and consecrated
to a holy use, because therein the commandment of God is contained. Therefore
Augustine says; The word comes to the element, and so there is a Sacrament.
1. Corinthians. 11.23.24.25.

The administering of the earthly matter, is the other action of the minister,
whereby is meant, that God does as certainly offer and give the benefits that
he has promised, as we do certainly see that the earthly matter is offered
and given us by the minister of the word. 1. Cor. 11.23.

The minister of the word distributeth and offers the earthly matter: but
Christ himself distributeth and offers the heavenly matter. Matthew. 3.11. I
baptize you with water, there is an other who baptizeth with the holy spirit.

Hitherto concerning the action of the minister that administreth the Sacrament.
The action of a faithful man using a Sacrament is also two fold: namely, the
receiving of the earthly matter, and thanksgiving.

The receiving of the earthly matter, is the action of a faithful man using
the Sacrament, whereby he receives the earthly matter, to signify that he
does so certainly receive spiritually the benefits that God has promised, as
he does certainly receive bodily the earthly matter. Romans 4.11. Matthew. 26.26.

We receive the word of the promise of grace, and the earthly matter from the
mouth and hand of the minister: but we receive the heavenly matters from the
hand of Christ himself.

The outward receiving is wrought in the body: the inward is only wrought by
faith and by the powerful working of the holy spirit in our hearts: for the
inward receiving comprehends justification and regeneration.

We receive the earthly matter by the body, that is to say, by the members,
actions, and senses of the body, by the eyes, ears, hands, mouth and
stomach, sight, hearing, touching, taste, and smell: but we receive the
heavenly matters by faith, and the powerful working of the holy spirit in our
hearts.

And therefore not only the faithful, but even infidels receive the earthly
matter: but the faithful only receive the heavenly matter.

Thanksgiving is the action of a faithful man using the Sacraments, whereby
he with his mouth and heart gives thanks to Christ, for the whole work and
benefit of his redemption. 1. Cor. 11.25.26.

These therefore are the parts of a Sacrament, which are required to the
perfecting of every Sacrament, by which the covenant of grace is sealed up:
with which if in the true use thereof, the heavenly matters and the inward
action be joined together, this conjunction is called a Sacramental union,
which is also the cause of the speeches proper to a Sacrament.

Of the Sacrame^tall union.
Therefore the Sacramental union, is a spiritual joining together of the
Sacrament, with those things whereof it is a Sacrament, or else it is a joining
together of the signs and things, that is to say, of the earthly matter with
the heavenly, and of the outward action with the inward action.

This union is not natural and local, but spiritual and belonging to
covenants, and having respect to others, which is in the divine disposing of
the sign to the thing it self: and in the spiritual offering and receiving
of things truly joined with the bodily offering and receiving of signs.

As therefore there are two parts of a Sacrament: so also of the sacramental
union.

The first part, is the uniting of the earthly matter with the heavenly.

It is not necessary, that this heavenly matter, be substantially and bodily in
the earthly matter, or in that place in which the earthly matter is, because
this union is merely spiritual.

Neither does it follow, if Christ be not bodily present on the earth in the
earthly matter, or in the place in which the earthly matter is, that therefore
he is not present, because that indeed is truly present which is present
spiritually.

The other part of the sacramental union, is the joining together of the
outward action with the inward action.

For in the right use of the Sacrament, the offering and receiving of the sign
and thing signified is joined together: the offering, and receiving of the sign
indeed is bodily, by the hand of the minister: but the offering and receiving
of the thing signified, is spiritual, through true faith by the hand of Christ
himself.

For a Sacrament, is not only an earthly, and bodily action, but a heavenly
and spiritual action also, in which not only the earthly matter, which is on
earth, but also those things which are in heaven, which are in God, and which
are in the hearts of the faithful, are present with us.

And the holy spirit joining us together with Christ, does couple us, even we
being most far asunder, as in regard of distance of place, much more nearly
and straightly, then either the soul is joined with the body, or the vine with
the branches.

Hitherto concerning the parts of the covenant of the Sacrament of Grace: the
ends follow.
Of the ends of the Sacrament of the covenant of Grace.
There are seven ends of the Sacrament of the covenant of Grace.

1 That it might be a remembrance of Gods benefits, both already offered, and
hereafter to be offered, that is to say, that it might put the faithful in
mind of Christ's benefits, either already bestowed, or hereafter to be
bestowed on them. So the Passover was a remembrance not only of the
deliverance out of Egypt already past, but also of the deliverance to come by
Christ. So the holy Supper is a remembrance, not only of our redemption made
upon the erosse: but also of that which is to be performed when he shall come
to judge the quick and the dead, and shall fully deliver his elect from sin,
and all their enemies. Luke 21.28.

2 That our faith might thereby be increased, exercised and strengthened.

3 That by it we might be stirred up to thanksgiving for the benefit of our
rede^ptio^.

4 That it might be a bond of mutual love and concord in the Church, that is
to say, that by the partaking thereof we might more and more be bound amongst
our selves in mutual love: for we that are many, are one bread and one body.

5 That it might be the bond of public meetings, and of the preserving of the
ecclesiastical ministry. Exodus 12.16. 1. Cor. 11.20.

6 That it might be a note of our profession, whereby as by a cognizance, the
Church is discerned from infidels. Exo. 12.45. So by circu^cisio^ the Jews were
discerned from the Gentiles.

As all unclean men were to be kept from eating the things offered to God,
this threatening being added, that whatsoever unclean man did eat of them, his
soul should be cut off from his people. Leu. 7.20. even so no unclean or
unbelieving man ought to use the Sacrament of the covenant of Grace.

7 That it might be a witness of our confession and society with the church.
The sixth end pertains to the whole Church: but the last end pertains to
every believer.

He that shall not be circumcised, his soul shall be cut off from the people
of God. Whosoever uses not the Sacraments when he may, he shows that he is
not a member of the Church, and the companion of our confession. For the
Sacrament is a witness, which testifies, that he who uses the Sacraments
does pertain to the company of the church, that he is a member of the Church,
and that he has fellowship with it. Whosoever in any congregation uses the
Sacrament, he by this use does testify, that he embraces the confession of
that company, and that he has fellowship with it.

Thus far concerning the ends of the covenant of grace.
Of the Sacraments of the covenant of grace in the old Testament.
The Sacrament of the covenant of Grace is two fold: of the old Testament, or of
the new.

The Sacrament of the old Testament, is that which before the coming of Christ
was instituted for the Church of the old Testament. Genesis 17. Exodus 12. and
16.15. and 17.6. 1. Cor. 10.1.2.3.4.

The Sacraments of the old Testament, were either ordinary, or extraordinary.

Ordinary Sacraments were those, which did ordinarily and always pertain to
the Church of the old Testament. Genes. 17. Exodus 12.

And they were two: Circumcision, and the Passover.

Of circumcision.
Circumcision was a Sacrament of the old Testament, by which all the males
amongst the people of Israel circumcised in the foreskin of their flesh, were
ingraffed into the covenant that God made with Abraham. Genesis 17.10.11. Ios.
5.2. Romans 4.11.

The parts thereof are two: the foreskin, and the outward action in the
Circumcision. Genes. 17.11.

The foreskin, was a sign that our nature is corrupted, that men are borne
guilty in this carnal generation: and therefore stand in need of the
regeneration and renewing which was to come by ^he blessed seed, who should
bruise the head of the serpent, and in whom all nations should be blessed.

The outward action in Circumcision was two fold: the one of the minister
administering Circumcision, the other of a faithful man receiving Circumcision.
Genesis 17.9.10. Romans 2.19. and 4.11.

The action of the minister administering Circumcision was two fold: the laying
open of the institution of Circumcision, and the Circumcision of the foreskin.

The Circumcision of the foreskin, was a sign of the Circumcision of the
heart, that is to say, of justification by faith, Romans 4.11. of forgiveness of
sins, and of regeneration, Deuteronomy. 30.6.

The action of a faithful man receiving Circumcision was two fold: the
receiving of circumcision, and thanksgiving.

The receiving of Circumcision, was that whereby a faithful man, through the
circumcision that was done by the hands of the minister, did put off the
foreskin of the flesh, to signify, that he put off from him, the sins of the
flesh. Col. 2.11. Romans 4.11.

Thanksgiving was done by the parents, and kinsfolks, in stead of the infants
being circumcised.

Thus far concerning circumcision: now concerning the Passover.
Of the Passover.
The Passover was a Sacrament of the old Testament, whereby the faithful
having eaten the Paschall Lamb, were put in mind of their deliverance out of
Egypt, whether it were bodily already past, or spir uall and was to come. Exodus
12.1.2.3.5. and 11.

The parts of the Passover were two: the Paschall Lamb, and the action
pertaining to the use thereof

The Paschall Lamb.
The Paschall Lamb by a spiritual signification, did note Christ the lamb of
God, taking away the sins of the world. 1. Cor. 5.7.8. and 10.3.

The action in the Passover, was either of the minister, or of the receiver.

The actio^ of the Minister is two fold: both the laying open of the
institution of the Sacrament of the Passover: and also the offering of it to
men. Exodus 12.3.4.5.21.

The laying open of the institution of he Sacrament of the Passover is
commanded. Exodus 12.26.27.

The offering of the Paschall Lamb to others, was made by the father of the
family, and did signify that God would give his son, that he might be
sacrificed for the sins of the world. 1. Cor. 5.7.

The action of the faithful receiver, was also two fold: the eating of the
Paschall Lamb and thanksgiving.

By the eating of the Paschall Lamb, was signified the participation of
Christ's passion. 1. Cor. 5.7.8.

In the thanksgiving was remembered to the praise of God, the benefit of
bringing forth the people of God from the bondage of Egypt, as also the
benefit of the deliverance that should be from the spiritual Egypt, that is
to say, from the bondage of sin, both which were to be wrought by the sacrifice
of the Messiah. Exodus 12.24.26. and 13.8.9.10.

Thus far concerning the ordinary Sacraments of the old Testament: now
concerning the extraordinary.
The extraordinary Sacraments, were those which were extrordinarily both before
the instituting of the two ordinary Sacraments: as also those which were added
to them afterward.

Before the ordinary Sacraments, were the sacrifices from Adam even to Abraham.
Genes. 4.4.

The extraordinary Sacraments which were added to the former two, were also
two. The Baptism of the cloud, and of the sea: and the supper of Manna, and of
the water flowing out of the rock.

The Baptism of the cloud and sea, was an extraordinary Sacrament in the old
Testament, whereby the Israelites being under that cloud, and passing through
the sea, were all baptized into Moses, in that cloud and in that sea. 1. Cor.
10.1.2.

The supper of Ma^na and of the water flowing out of the rock, was a Sacrament
of the old Testament, whereby the Israelites were nourished with meat sent from
heaven, to signify the spiritual nourishment of the flesh of Christ, and did
drink the water flowing out of the rock, to signify the spiritual drink of
the blood of Christ. 1. Cor. 10.3.4.

Hitherto concerning the Sacraments of the old Testament: now concerning the
Sacraments of the new Testament.
Of the Sacraments of the new Testament.
A Sacrament of the new Testament, is that which being by Christ himself
instituted for his own Church, came in the room of the Sacraments of the old
Testament. Matt. 26.26. and 28.19.

The Sacraments of the new Testament are two: Baptism, and the Lords supper.

Of Baptism.
Baptism is a Sacrament of the new Testament, whereby is signified and sealed up
to us, that we are as certainly washed in the blood of Christ from sins, as
our body is certainly washed through water in the name of the father, the
son, and the holy Ghost. Mat. 28 19. Acts. 2.38. Mat. 3.11. Mark. 16.16. Romans
6.3. Mar. 1.4. Luke 3.3.

Baptism comes in the place of Circumcision, and keeps the analogy and
proportion thereof: for both of them is a Sacrament of entrance into the
Church, and of regeneration.

And as the Israelites were but once circumcised: so we are but once baptized
only, because we are but once borne only: and as circumcision was the first
beginning of Iudaisme: so Baptism is the first beginning of Christianity.

Of Baptism there are two parts: the water of Baptism, and the outward action
in Baptism.

By the water of Baptism is signified, the blood of Christ shed on the cross.
Heb. 12.24. 1. Pet. 1.1. Zach. 13.1. Ezec. 36.25.

The outward action in Baptism is two fold: the one of the minister
administering Baptism: the other of a faithful man using Baptism. The action
of the minister is two fold: the sanctification of the water, and the outward
washing.

The sanctification of the water, is the appointing of it to this end, that it
might signify the blood of Christ.

The outward washing is a sign, seal, and very sure pledge of the inward
washing, whereby we with the blood of Christ are washed from sins. Reave. 1.5.
Romans 6.3. 1. Cor. 1.6.11. 1. Pet. 3.21. Ephesians. 5.26. 1. Ioh. 1.7.

For as the filthinesses of the body are purged with water: so our sins are
taken away by the blood of Christ. Reave. 1.5. and 7.14. 1. Cor. 6.11. Gal.
3.17. 1. Ioh. 1.7.3.

Therefore the outward Baptism is called the washing of regeneration. Tit.
3.5. The washing away of sins. Acts 22.16. not because the washing is
properly and by it self that by which we are regenerated: for we are properly
regenerated by the holy spirit: but because it is the sign and seal of the
inward washing, that is to say, of regeneration and adoption according to the
form of the covenant; I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed. The
minister washes outwardly with water: but Christ washes inwardly with his
blood. Mat. 3.11. Reave. 1.5.

Thus far concerning the action of the Minister administering Baptism: now
concerning the actions of a faithful man receiving Baptism.
The actions of a faithful man using Baptism is also two fold: the receiving
of Baptism and thanksgiving.

In the receiving of Baptism is signified, that the infant is by the blood of
Christ so certainly washed from sins, as his body is certainly sprinkled
and washed with water. Revel. 7.14. Ezech. 36.25.

To be washed with the blood of Christ, is is to be made partakers of the
benefits of the covenant of Grace, that is to say, to be reconciled,
justified, regenerated, adopted by God to be his sons, to be endued with the
freedom of the sons of God, and so forth.

The outward man feels the force of the water: but the inward man feels the
powerful working of the blood of Christ.

Even Infidels are washed with water: but believers only with the blood of
Christ.

Therefore all who are Baptized, are not regenerated, but only the believers.

Now not only those that are of years of discretion are to be Baptized: but
also infants.

1 Because they also do pertain to the covenant of the grace of God. 2 Because
to them also belongs the promise of forgiveness of sins through the blood
of Christ. 3 Because they belong to the Church of God. 4 Because they are
redeemed by the blood of Christ. 5 Because to them is promised the holy
Spirit. 6 Because they are to be discerned from the children of Infidels. 7
Because also in the old Testament infants were circumcised.
Thanksgiving is either presently done by the party Baptized, if he be of
years of discretion: or else it is performed by the the witnesses in his stead
if he bean infant: who yet when he comes to ripe years, ought afterward in
the whole course of his life to be thankful to God for this benefit.

Hitherto concerning Baptism: now concerning the Lords Supper.
Of the Lords Supper.
The Lords Supper is a sacrament of the new Testament, by which is signified and
sealed up unto us, that we are as certainly nourished to eternal life by the
body of Christ crucified, and by his blood shed, as we do certainly with the
mouth of our body eat the bread broken, and drink the wine out of the cup.
Mat. 26.26.27.28. Mark. 14.22.23.24. Luke 22.19.20. 1. Cor. 10.16.17. and.
11.23.24.25. and 12.13.

In the fame sense it is called the table of the Lord. 1. Cor. 10.21.

Therefore thou do come to the banquet of Christ, thou art his guest, as often
as thou do eat and drink of this supper.

The Lords supper comes in the room of the Paschall Lamb: therefore it does
also keep the analogy or proportion thereof. For both the one and the other
is a Sacrament of nourishment and spiritual bringing up.

And as the eating of the Paschall Lamb was often used: so also the using of
the Lords Supper is oftentimes performed.

For as the Passover was the nourishing of Iudaisme: so the Lords Supper is
the nourishing of Christianity, which nourishing often times stands in need
of meat and drink, that is to say, restoring and renewing, even as our life
does daily want refreshing, which is performed by meat and drink.

The parts of the Lords Supper, as of other sacraments, are two: the earthly
matter, and outward action in the Supper.

The earthly matter in the Supper is two fold: the bread and the wine. Because
we live not only by meat, but by drink also.

The bread in the holy Supper is a sign or image of Christ's body given to
death for us. Ioh. 6.35.48.50.51.55.56.

The wine in the holy Supper is a sign or image of Christ's blood, shed on the
cross for us.

Therefore the bread also is called the body it self, and the wine, or cup in
which the wine is, is called the blood it self.

Not that the body of Christ descends from the seat of his glory, out of
heaven, and does hide it self inuisibly in the bread, and his blood in the
wine, which opinion is most absurd: but therefore the bread is called the body
of Christ, because it is a sign, remembrance, token, figure, similitude, and
image of his body given for us. And the wine or cup is called the new Testament
or covenant, in the blood of Christ: because it is a sign of the new Testament
or covenant, that is to say, of reconciliation wrought with God, by the blood
of Christ shed upon the Cross for the forgiveness of sins. The bread by a
metaphor, is called the body of Christ delivered for us, because the bread
being broken, is a sign calling into our remembrance, or imprinting in us,
and as it were setting before our eyes, the breaking, that is to say, the
crucifying of the body of Christ. The wine by the same metaphor, is the blood
of Christ, because it is a sign calling into our remembrance, and imprinting
in us, the shedding of Christ's blood done on the cross, for the forgiveness
of our sins.

Yea the bread is not a sign of his glorious body, as it is now already
glorified, but of his body delivered unto death, of his body broken on the
cross, and slain for our sakes: as the Lord expressly says; This is my body
which is given for you.

And the wine is not a sign of his blood contained in the veins, but of his
blood shed on the Cross, or as it was shed: as the same Lord expressly
testifies.

And therefore the body of Christ is not now in the bread, because it is
already glorious, and shall not before the last day descend from heaven unto
this miserable earth, neither is his blood already in the wine: because he once
shed his blood, and died, now he sheddeth it no more, death shall no more
reign over him.

By the bread being broken is represented unto us, as by a similitude, and a
certain image, his body that suffered for us. For the whole action of the
Lords Supper is to be referred to this end, that we might preach the death of
the Lord until he come.

The metaphor seems to be more convenient in the laying open of these words,
because not the bread simply, but the bread broken, by a certain similitude,
does represent the body broken, as Paul says: that is to say, delivered unto
death. For the breaking of the bread, puts us in mind of the breaking of the
body of Christ, as it were by a certain picture set before our eyes. Christ
did not simply call the bread his body, but the bread which is broken. But to
what end? As I see with mine eyes that the bread is broken for me: so I am
certainly confirmed in my faith, that the body of Christ was given unto death
for me. Secondly, as certainly as the minister of the word does give me the
bread broken, so certainly does Christ give me his body delivered to death for
my sake.

That this is the natural meaning of the words of Christ, by this it appears.

For Christ commands to do all these things in remembrance of him, and
Paul expounds that saying, ye shall preach the death of the Lord until he
come.

Christ truly has not said, the bread is the sign of my body: but because he
ordained the Sacrament, he speaks of it as the Scripture is always wont to
speak concerning Sacraments, under a metaphor, calling the sign by the name
of the thing signified.

And therefore the faithful coming to the holy Supper, when they behold with
the eyes of the body the Sacramental bread, they are admonished, that withal,
by the eyes of faith they behold and embrace the body of Christ, broken or
crucified upon the cross for us. For therefore the bread has the name of the
body, not that the faithful should stand upon the bread only, or seek the
body of Christ in the earthly Element, but that they should by faith lift up
themselves into Heaven, whither he did ascend, and where he is, and by the eyes
of faith should behold, and eat the unspotted Lamb that was slain for them
on the heavenly Altar, the Church names it, saying; Lift up your hearts.

By the same metaphor the bread which we break, is by Paul called the
communion of the body of Christ, the cup of blessing which we bless is
called the communion of the blood of Christ. 1. Cor. 10.16. Because by this
bread and cup, as by a seal, the faithful are assured that they have
communion, that is to say, fellowship with Christ.

Both the matters, that is to say, the earthly and heavenly, are indeed
present in the holy Supper: the former indeed bodily and visibly, but the
other spiritually, and by the sight which faith affords us.

We with the eyes of the body see the bread and wine: but with the eyes of the
soul, that is to say, with faith, we see the body and blood of Christ.

Therefore as certainly as we see the bread and wine to be present: so
certainly do we believe that the body and blood of Christ is present to us:
yea we do not believe that it is the Lords supper, except his body and blood
be present to us.

Otherwise if they were absent, how could it be made the partaking of the body
and blood of Christ, for the partaking is not of things that are absent, but
present.

But the body and blood of Christ, are truly present to the faithful, that is
to say, to those who receive it by faith, and yet this is by a spiritual
presence, not by a local, or bodily presence or placing: by a Sacramental
presence, and such as belongs to a covenant not by a natural presence: the
body and blood of Christ are present, by such a kind of presence as faith
requires and would have, not as the bodily mouth: such a one as the spirit
requires and not the letter: such a one as the purpose of Christ calls for,
and not a Capernaiticall interpretation: and therefore rather we should by our
mind be carried up into heaven, then to have the blessed and glorious flesh of
our Lord Jesus Christ pulled out of heaven upon this miserable earth, and to
imagine his invisible descending into the bread, and again his ascending into
heaven, after the holy supper is celebrated.

Hitherto concerning the earthly matter in the holy Supper: now concerning the
outward action.
The outward action in the Lords supper, as in other Sacraments, is two fold:
one of the minister that administreth the Lords supper, and another of a
faithful man using the holy supper.

The action of the minister that administreth the holy supper is two fold: the
sanctifying of the bread and wine, and the administering of it.

Of the sanctifying of the bread.
The sanctifying of the bread and wine is an action of the minister, whereby
according to the commandment of Christ, he ordains the bread and wine to a
holy use.

The reciting of the words of the institution and promise, is done for the
blessing of the bread and wine, that is to say, that of the common bread and
wine they might be made holy signs of the body and blood of Christ. Which
consecrating, sanctifying and appointing of the bread and wine to a holy use,
was called of old writers, a change, that is to say, such a changing as
belongs to Sacraments.

Of the change belonging to Sacraments.
Which changing of the earthly matter, is not a change of the substance, as the
Papists erroniously affirm, but a change of the end: because the bread and
wine are no more common meat and drink, but serve to a holy end and use.

For the mystical signs, Theod, Dial. 2.
even after sanctifying do not loose their own nature: Paul after the
blessing, calls the bread still bread.

The administering of the earthly matter, is the other part of the ministers
actio^, whereby he administreth the earthly matter in the holy supper.

And that administering is two fold, partly of the bread, partly of the wine.

Of the administering of the bread there are two parts, the breaking and the
distributing.

Of the breaking of the bread.
The breaking of the bread is an action of the minister, whereby is signified
that the body of Christ was no less certainly offered and broken on the
cross for me, then I with my eyes see the bread of the Lord broken for me.

The distributing of the bread, is an action of the minister, whereby is
signified that the body of Christ is as certainly offered to me, as the bread
broken is certainly offered to me.

Of the administering of the wine there are also two parts: the pouring of the
wine into the cup, and the distributing of the cup.

The pouring out of the wine, is an action of the minister, whereby is
signified the shedding of the blood of Christ, done on the cross.

The distributing of the cup is an action of the minister, whereby is signified
that the blood of Christ is as certainly given us, as the cup is certainly
delivered unto us.

Thus far concerning the action of the minister: now concerning the outward
action of a faithful man using the holy Supper.
The outward action of a faithful man using the holy supper is two fold: the
receiving of the bread and wine, and thanksgiving.

The receiving of the bread and wine, is an action of a faithful man using the
holy supper, whereby he eats the bread and drinks the wine, to signify that
he does as certainly by faith eat the body of Christ and drink his blood, as
he does certainly with the mouth of the body eat the bread and drink the
wine out of the cup.

To eat the body of Christ, is to be made a partaker of the benefits of the
covenant of grace, that is to say, of reconciliation, justification, and
regeneration in Christ, of adoption, etc.

Abraham did eat the flesh of Christ, before that by his own substance he had
any being in his manhood. We eat the flesh of Christ, no otherwise then
Abraham did: neither are we made partakers of the flesh of Christ otherwise
then Abraham was. Ioh. 6.51. 1. Cor. 10.16. This eating is only spiritual,
because it is done by faith and the spirit. Whereby it appears, that the
believers only do eat the body and drink the blood of Christ: the reprobate
do not, because they have no faith.

Now the flesh of Christ in that respect only that it was slain and dead for
us, is eaten to quicken the godly: and the blood of Christ, only as it was
shed on the cross, is drunk for the forgiveness of our sins.

For although Christ being once dead, and raised from the dead, dies not any
more, and so is not now any more in the state of humiliation, but of glory, yet
the Sacraments lead our faith to the sacrifice of Christ, performed on the
cross, as Christ says: Do this in remembrance of me, and Paul says, As often
as you shall eat of this bread, and drink of this cup, ye shall preach the
death of the Lord until he come.

Hitherto concerning the receiving of the bread and wine: now concerning
thanksgiving.
Thanksgiving is an action of a faithful man using the holy supper, by which
through true faith he thinks and speaks of Christ's death to his praise. 1.
Cor. 11.26.

Thus far concerning the parts of the Lords Supper: now concerning the
preparation of a faithful man before the use thereof.
Of the preparation of a faithful man before the use of the holy supper.
The preparation to the use of the holy Supper is two fold: inward and outward.

The inward preparation is spiritual, which consists in a man's examining of
himself, or in trying his own worthiness or unworthiness.

The worthiness and unworthiness of those who come to the holy Supper, and
the effects of them both are two fold: either of the person or of the using.

The worthiness of the person is faith, or the righteousness of Christ imputed
by faith, which whosoever has, they are worthy guests, and receive this food
to eternal salvation.

Therefore the worthiness of the person consists in faith alone, and the effect
of it is the escaping of eternal punishment.

The unworthiness of a person is infidelity, wherewith whosoever are possessed,
they are unworthy of this table, and receive to themselves judgment and
eternal damnation.

The worthiness of the using is true reverence, inward and outward,
forgiveness, love, a serious bewayling of sins repentance, the meditation of
the benefits of Christ, the discerning of the body of the Lord, thanksgiving,
the avoiding of all offenses.

Now the worthiness has place in the faithful only.

The unworthiness of the using, is the vnreuerent or irreligious offering of the
Lords Supper.

The same indeed is always in persons which are unworthy, yet sometime even
in the worthy partakers.

And therefore it is two fold: one in the wicked, the other in the godly.

The unworthiness of the using in the wicked, is a want and absence of true
reverence, inward and outward, of forgiveness, of love, of a serious bewailing
of sins, and of repentance, of the meditation of the benefits of Christ, of
thanksgiving, of the discerning of the body of the Lord, and of the avoiding
of all offenses.

The unworthiness of the using in the godly, is a negligence and colder feeling
in the trying of himself.

For although the godly do indeed eat the bread of the Lord, and the bread
which is the Lord, and therefore eat eternal salvation, free from eternal
judgment, yet they coming irreverently to the Lords Table, that is to say,
trying themselves too negligently and coldly, do eat to themselves temporal
judgment, that is to say, they offend God, and are by diverse chastisements in
this life called back to the amending of these sins. So Paul does with a
threatening of temporal punishment terrify the Corinthians, coming
irreverently to the Lords Table, although some of them notwithstanding being
truly converted: and yet nevertheless he rayseth them up again with
consolation. 1. Cor. 11.30.31.32.

For even the faithful do oftentimes sin by this kind of negligence and
carelessenesse: and although their eternal salvation be not made frustrate,
yet they are hardly chastened in this life. The Apostle teaches this plainly,
when the Corinthians sinning in the irreligious using of the Lords Supper,
whether by affections or by ignorance, does yet call them brethren, and does
say that they are punished of the Lord with diseases, and temporal death for
this fault, that they might not be condemned with this world. 1. Cor.
11.30.31.32. as 1. Cor. 3.12. he says; Those which build hay and stubble on
that foundation, which is Christ, they shall indeed be saved, but yet as it
were by fire.

In all the faithful indeed there is some parcel of this unworthiness, but in
some more, in some less: and those who have care to avoid it, and keep a
good conscience, are pardoned for Christ's sake.

And therefore there is required a trial of both these sorts of worthiness:
that we may escape not only the eternal, but the temporary wrath and
punishment of God. 1. Cor. 11.28.

Concerning the trying of a man's self before the use of the Supper of the Lord.
The trying or examining of a man's self consists in two things: first
whether thou be in the faith, whether thou understand the articles of faith,
the promise of the Gospel, and doctrine of the Sacraments. In this case the
Creed of the Apostles, or doctrine of the Gospel is the touchstone. Here is
to be taken from the people that opinion wherewith many are possessed, who
(these three words being taken hold of, THIS IS MY BODY) suppose that it is not
necessary to search more diligently the nature of the Sacraments they will
believe simply: but this is not to believe, but to err, and indeed to err
obstinately, if thou have purposed that thou will not learn any thing. If thou will rightly believe, it behooves thee to have understanding: for faith is a
sure knowledge. For what fruit shall they receive by the use of the
Sacraments, who never have rightly learned the use of them?

The other part consists in examining ones life. In this case the ten
commandments is a touchstone, that is to say, we must try how we have led
our life, how far it is from the law of God, what it ought to be: whether
thou have performed those things which thou have promised to God in baptism:
whether thou love God above all things, and thy neighbor as thy self, that is
to say, whether thou do, and hereafter wilt do those things which God
commands: and whether thou eschewest and wilt eschew those things which
God forbids: whether thou have a settled purpose to amend thy life, and to
frame the same according to the word of God. If there be any who feel such an
inclination in themselves, they are to be exhorted to go to the holy Supper;
the rest, who neither understand the doctrine of the promise of the Gospel and
Sacraments: neither desire to amend their life, but have a mind to continue in
their faults, they are to be dissuaded, not to go to the hol^ Supper, least
they eat judgment to themselves.

Hitherto concerning the Sacrament of the eternal covenant: now concerning the
Sacrament of the temporal covenant.
The Sacrament of the temporal covenant, is a Sacrament whereby God confirms
the bodily promise: such as is the rainebow. Genesis 8.12.13. Such as was the
fleece of Gedeon. Iud. 6.36. even to the end. Also the going back, both of the
shadow in the dyall of Ahaz, as also of the Sun, when God promised to king
Hezekiah, the deliverance of the city from Senacherib, and the adding of
fifteen years to the space of his life. Esa. 38.5.6.7.8.

Thus far concerning the works of God which are done in this life: now
concerning those works which shall be done in the life to come.
The works of God which shall be done after this life, are both the general
raising up of the dead, and the last judgment: and also the manifesting of
Gods glory to all eternity.

The general raising up of the dead, is a work of God by which after the
number of the elect shall be fulfilled, he will call all men being dead to life
again. Act. 3.24. 1. Pet. 3.7. Revel. 6.11.

Of the last judgment.
The last judgment, is that whereby Christ will declare all without exception,
being judged by his word, some to be heirs of eternal life, some to be
partakers of eternal fire with the devil. Matthew. 25.31. Romans 14.10. 2. Cor.
5.10.

The godly have this comfort of the last judgment, that the father has
delivered all judgment to the son, that he might give peace to our
consciences, and might take away all fear of condemnation. Ioh. 5.

Of the last judgment there are two parts: the separation of the elect from
the reprobate, and the final sentence.

The separation of the elect from the reprobate, is that whereby all men being
gathered from all the corners of the world by the Angels, the elect shall be set
at the right hand, and the rebrobate at the left hand of Christ. Matthew. 25.33.

The final sentence is the other part of the last judgment, whereby Christ
shall minister justice to every one, and shall render to every one according to
his works. Matthew. 25.32.33. Romans 1.6.1. Corinth. 4.5. Revel. 20.12.15.

The final sentence shall be two fold: the one pronounced to the elect, and
the other denounced against the reprobate.

The final sentence pronounced to the elect, is this: Come ye blessed of my
father, and possess ye the kingdom prepared for you before the fou^dations of
the world were laid. Matthew. 25.34.

Of the final sentence pronounced to the elect there are two parts: the one
concerning the bringing of the elect of the possession of the eternal
inheritance and blessedness, the other concerning their glorification. Of the
glorification of the elect.


The glorification of the elect is a work of God, whereby he shall with
eternal glory adorn all the elect, after the general resurrection of the
dead.

This glorification pertains both to the body, and to the soul.

Of the glorification of the body.
The glorification pertaining to the body, is in that it shall be made
spiritual, that is to say, because it shall lead a spiritual life, free, and
delivered from all the spot of the flesh, such a one as the spirits themselves
do lead: furthermore incorruptible, immortal, lastly conformable to the
glorious body of Christ. For the bodies of the godly, shall not only be
immortal and incorruptible, but also strong, impassible, glorious, spiritual.
1. Corinthians. 15.

Augustine to Crescentius; As the natural body is not a soul but a body, so
we ought not to call the spiritual body, a spirit, but a body.

It is of Paul called the spiritual body: then not a spirit, for the spirit
has not a body, that is to say, flesh and bones. Therefore the spirit and the
spiritual body are not one. And Paul does not say that the substance of the
body shall be changed in the resurrection, but the qualities of the body and
substance: for so he writes to the Corinthians, that this body which is
subject to corruption, may put on an incorruptible nature, and the mortal may
put on immortality. But (say thou) it shall not have a matter subject to
perishing. Who denies it? Yet it shall not want a matter. Has not even the
heaven an impassible matter void of corruption? You except: but we shall be
like the Angels; then we shall not be Angels: for our flesh must rise again,
and we in the same (as Job says) shall see God our Savior. If our bodies
shall be changed into spirits: then man shall not rise again, because man
consists of body and soul, and the body cannot pass into the spirit, for
they do not agree in matter. By Paul a spiritual body is opposed to a natural
body, but understand by a natural body, a changeable and weak body: for our
body cease not to be a natural body, although it be made immortal and
impassible; for even the heaven is a natural body, which yet consists of a
nature not passible nor vanishing.

The glorification pertaining to the soul, shall be an enlightening of the
soul, with the full knowledge of the mysteries of God, and with an
unchangeable vprightnes of the will.

Thus far concerning the final sentence to be pronounced to the elect: now
concerning the final sentence to be denounced against the reprobate.
The sentence to be denounced against the rebrobate, is this: Go ye cursed
into the everlasting fire, which is prepared for the devil and his Angels.

Hitherto concerning the general raising up of the dead, and the last
judgment: now concerning the manifestation of the glory of God to all
eternity.
The manifestation of the glory of God to all eternity, shall the^ be after
that Christ shall deliver the kingdom to God his father, and Christ himself
shall also in respect of his humanity, subject himself to God his father,
that God the father may be all in all things. 1. Cor. 15.24.28. Ephesians. 2.7.

Hitherto we have laid open faith concerning God: now concerning the Church.
The Church is a company of men professing a certain religion.

Religion is a form of worshipping God. Religion


The Church is two fold, true or false.

Of the true Church.
The true Church, is a company of men professing the true religion.

The true religion, is that whereby the true God is rightly worshipped.

And that is only one.

And in that alone men shall be saved.

But the true Church is universal or particular; this latter is visible, the
other invisible.

Of the universal Church.
The universal Church is an invisible company of the elect only, to eternal
salvation. Matthew. 8.11. Ioh. 10.16. Gal. 4.26.

And that is also called the kingdom of Christ or of God in the Lords prayer,
And it is said to be invisible because the elect cannot be known by ma^s
judgment, but they are known only to God. 2. Tim. 2.19. The Lord knows them
that are his. Notwithstanding every man for his own part may by certain and
infallible signs be well assured that he is elected: concerning himself
indeed he may certainly know it, but concerning others he is to hope only.
in the Prophets it is called the kingdom of the Messiah. Also a Lot. Ephesians.
1.11. The lot or inheritance of the Lord, to which not only the Priests, but
also the unlearned pertain.

And that is called universal.

1 Because it is the general company of the elect. who altogether make one
mistical body 2 Because all that believe in God, and are to be saved, must be
in this company: for without the church there is no salvation. 3 Because it
comprehe^deth the whole body of the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles. 4
Because it is dispersed through the whole face of the earth. Esa. 2.2.3.
And it is only one. Ephesians. 2.14.15.16.17.

The head of the universal Church is Christ Jesus alone. 1. Cor. 12.27. Ephesians.
1.22. and 4.15. and 5.23. Col. 1.18. and 2.10.

And he has no need of a Vicar, nor of a ministerial head.

But the body of the universal Church is mystical. Romans 12.5. 1. Cor. 10.17.
and 12.27. Ephesians. 1.22.23. and 4.4.12.16. and 5.23. Col. 1.15.24.

The members thereof are only the elect. 1. Ioh. 2.19. Ioh. 10.14.27.28.

And these members are both of the Jews, and also of the Gentiles.

And both these members are either in heaven, or on earth. Ephesians. 1.10.

They are in heaven, who are already departed in the faith of Christ.

They are on earth, who believe in Christ and yet live.

Thus far concerning the universal Church, now concerning the particular. Of
the particular Church.

The particular Church, is a visible company of men in any place whatsoever,
who hear the sincere word of God, and rightly use the Sacraments, among whom
are many evil hypocrites, and unbelievers mingled, and so shall be to the last
day. Mat. 13.24.47.

Now that it is the true Church of Christ, the esse^tiall notes of the true
church do show.

The essential notes of the true Church, are properties by which it may be
infallibly known, which particular company being any where gathered together,
is the true Church of God.

And these notes are two: the sincere preaching of Gods word, and the right use
of the Sacraments.

The sincere preaching of Gods word, is that, when according to the form of
wholesome words, all things necessary to eternal salvation, are out of the
word of God only taught to the edifying of the Church. Ioh. 8.31.47. 2. Ioh.
1.9. Ioh. 10.27. and 14.23. Act. 2.42. 2. Pet. 1.19. Ephesians. 1.20. Gal. 1.8.9. 1.
Cor. 3.11. Mat. 28.20. Romans 10.8. Act. 17.11.

The right use of the Sacraments is that, when the Sacraments are administered,
and received according to the institution of Christ. Mar. 16.6. Act. 2.38. and
10.47. Luke 22.19. Act. 2.42.

The particular Church, is either of the old Testament, or of the new. Ephesians.
2.17.

The Church of the old Testament was that which was among the people of God,
before the coming of Christ. Ephesians. 2.11.12.

The Church of the new Testament is that, which began after the coming of
Christ. Ephesians. 2.13.14. There is a certain settled government of them both.

The Ecclesiastical government, is a well ordered state of the Church, or else
it is an order consisting of certain laws according to the word of God, and
the same tending to the preserving of the well ordered estate of the Church. 1.
Cor. 1.10. and 14.40. Col. 2.5.

And that government is either proper or common.

The proper government is that, which belongs to the office of several
persons, who are in the church. Mat. 18.17.18. Romans 12.6.7.8.

Those persons are either ministers or hearers.

Ministers are those, who having a lawful calling, are set over the Church.
Romans 12.6.7.8. 2. Cor. 2.6.

And they are either ordinary or extraordinary. 1. Cor. 12.28.29.31. The office
of the former is perpetual in the Church, the other but temporary.

Ordinary ministers are those, who do employ their ordinary labor on the
church, both by an ordinary manner, and also endued with ordinary gifts. Romans
12.6. 1. Cor. 12.4.

Extraordinary ministers are those, who are raised up besides order, either to
lay the foundations of Churches, or to restore them being broken down, or to
amend them that are decayed. 1. Cor. 12.28.29. Ephesians. 4.11.

Those that were called extraordinarily had this testimony, that they could not
err in doctrine, because God did testify concerning it. Yet in life and
manners, both they might sin, and sometime also have sinned. Gal. 2.14.

Ministers that were extraordinarily called, had extraordinary gifts, namely,
extraordinary prophecies, and the gifts of working miracles. 1. Cor. 12.9.10.

An extraordinary prophecy was that, by which through the singular gift of God,
they were enabled both to interpret and apply Scriptures: and also most surely
and clearly to foretell things to come. Ioh. 10.8.12.

The gift of working miracles was that, whereby they did seal up their
prophecy, and doctrine.

Of the ministers of the Church of the old Testament.
The ministry of the Church of the old Testament ordinarily called, were
Priests and Levites.

Priests were those, to whom oldinarily the administering of the true worship of
God in the church of the old Testament was committed. Exodus 28.41. and 29.1.

Levites were those, who were appointed to look to the tabernacle, and to all
things which appertained to it. Number. 1.50. and 3.6. Deuteronomy. 10.8.

The Prophets in the old Testament, were those who were sent by an
extraordinary calling, both to the restoring of the doctrine corrupted by the
Priests, and also to prophecy of the Messiah, and of other things to come, and
also to the governing of certain politic counsels. 1. Sam. 9.9. 2. Chron.
9.29. Esa. 1.1. Ier. 1.3. Ose. 1.1. Amo. 1.1. Aba. 1.1.

Hitherto concerning the Ministers of the church of the old Testament: now
concerning the Ministers of the Church of the new Testament.
Of the Ministers of the Church of the new Testament.
The Ministers of the Church of the new Testament, who were extraordinarily
called, were John Baptist, the Apostles, and Evangelists, and Prophets of the
new Testament. Ioh. 1.6. 7. Ephesians. 4.11. 1. Cor. 12.28.

Te office of these ministers was temporary, being instituted particularly for
that time, in which at the beginning, the Churches of the new Testament were to
be planted. Mat. 28.19.

John Baptist was the son of the Priest Zachariah, and Elizabeth, ordained by
God, to be the forerunner of the Messiah, and to prepare the way for him. Luke
2.

The Apostles were teachers immediately appointed by Christ himself, to preach
the Gospel every where throughout the whole world. Mat. 28.19.

The Eua^gelists were those, who were next the Apostles in office. And sometime
did supply their places.

And some of them were Apostles, as Matthew and John: for the same person might
undergo like offices: and certain of them were the companions and fellow
laborers of the Apostles, as Mark and Luke.

And because the Church of the new Testament was to be gathered out of al
nations, therefore chiefly the Apostles and Evangelists were endued with the
gift of tongues. Act. 2.4.

The Prophets of the new Testament were those, who being endued with some
singular revealing of the mysteries of God, foretold things to come, as for
example Agabus. Act. 11.27. and 21.10. and John in the Revelation. Paul also in
the Romans 11.25. speaking concerning the restoring of the Jews. and 2 Thessalonians.
2.3. concerning Antichrist.

Hitherto concerning the extraordinary Ministers of the Church of the new
Testament: now concerning the ordinary.
The ministers of the Church of the new Testament ordinarily called, are either
Bishops or their helpers. Ephesians. 4.11.

The office of these men is perpetual, that is to say, which is required in
the Church even to the end of the world.

Of Bishops.
Bishops are those, who are occupied about spiritual things, and such as
pertain unto God.

The office of a Bishop therefore, is an Ecclesiastical office, which is
occupied in heavenly things, and such as pertain to God. 1. Tim. 3.1.2.

Bishops are Pastors or Doctors. Ephesians. 4.11.

Pastors are those who are set over the church, according to the commandment
of Christ.

And they are also called Elders.

Of the office of the Pastor there are two parts: the ecclesiastical
ministry, and the ecclesiastical power.

Of the Ecclesiastical ministry.
The ecclesiastical ministry is the first part of the office of a Pastor,
consisting in teaching the word of God, and administering of the Sacraments, to
the undoubted profit of the church.

Of the ecclesiastical ministry there are two parts: the application of the
word to the uses of the church, and administration of the Sacraments.

The application of the word to the uses of the Church, is the first part of
the ecclesiastical ministry, which is exercised in teaching, comforting,
rooting out of false opinions, exhorting, correcting, and so forth. And that
both publicly in the congregation of the people: and also privately, specially
if any be pressed with diseases, or other calamity, or molested with the
temptations of Satan.

The administration of the Sacraments, is the other part of the ecclesiastical
ministry, when the Pastors according to the institution of Christ, administer
the Sacraments.

Thus far concerning the Ecclesiastical ministry: now concerning the
Ecclesiastical power.
Of the Ecclesiastical power.
The ecclesiastical power, is the other part of the Pastors office, whereby the
authority of the church is preserved,

The ecclesiastical power is two fold: of order and jurisdiction.

The power of order, is a power to set order in the ecclesiastical government.

And it is either in the lawful calling of ministers: or in making
ecclesiastical laws.

Of a lawful calling.
The lawful calling of ministers is that, when according to the word of God,
fit persons are chosen to the office of teaching, and admininstring the
Sacraments.

The parts thereof are two: examination, and ordination.

The examination is two fold: of doctrine and of life.

The examination of doctrine, is an examining whereby trial is made, whether
the person to be chosen be able to teach the Church: For bow shall he teach
others that, which he has not learned himself? 2. Tim. 2.2. Tit. 1.9.

The examination of life is an examining whereby trial is made whether the
person to be chosen, has honest and unblameable manners. Tit. 1.6.7.8.9.

Ordination is an appointing of the examined person to undergo some office.

The Ecclesiastical Laws, are rules according to which, the Ecclesiastical
government ought to be administered.

Hitherto concerning the power of order: now concerning the power of
Jurisdiction.
The power of Jurisdiction, is a power to exercise the ecclesiastical
judgments.

And it is either in the censure, or in the power of the keys.

The censure is that, whereby escapes, either in doctrine or manners, having
been observed in some, they are corrected, and that either by private
admonition, or by taking one or two witnesses, that so in all parts of his
office, he may do those things which are prescribed in the word of God. Mat.
18.11.16.

Of the power of the keys.
The power of the keys, is an Ecclesiastical power, whereby heaven is opened
to the believers, but shut to unbelievers. Ioh. 20.21.22.23. Mat. 16.19. and
18.18.

The parts thereof are two, loosing or binding.

The loosing is a part of the power of the keys, when to those that repent,
forgiveness of sins, and the grace of God is preached.

The binding is the other part of the power of the keys, when the wrath of God
is denounced to the impenitent.

This power of the keys is exercised, either by preaching the word, or by
ecclesiastical discipline.

The power of the keys by preaching of the word, is when the ministers of the
word do preach and testify to all every one that repe^teth, and takes hold of
Christ by faith* that God has pardoned all their sins by the merit of Christ.
But contrariwise they denou^ce to the impenitent, unbelievers and hypocrites,
that the wrath of God and eternal condemnation does hang over them, as long as
they continue in their sins: according to which testimony of the Gospel, God
shall judge in this life and in the life to come.

Of the Ecclesiastical discipline.
The Ecclesiastical discipline is a spiritual execution of the ecclesiastical
laws.

Of that there are two parts: the ecclesiastical punishment, and the absoluing
from the punishment.

The Ecclesiastical punishment is that, which in the Church is laid on them
that sin.

And that is lighter or greater.

The lighter punishment is a rebuking, when he is reproved who has sinned,
either by ignorance, or privately without the offense of others.

A greater Ecclesiastical punishment is that, which is laid on him who has
sinned more grievously, namely both of mere malice, and also with the offense
of others.

And that is two fold: suspension or excommunication.

Suspension is an ecclesiastical punishment, whereby the offender is not for a
certain time admitted, either to the use of the holy supper, or to the rest of
the holy things of the church.

Excommunication is an ecclesiastical punishment, Of excommunication.
whereby a lawful knowledge going before, he who has contemned the former
private or ecclesiastical admonitions, is declared to be excluded justly from
the company of the Church and kingdom of God, and to be delivered to Satan,
except he repent. Mat. 18.17. 1. Cor. 5.3. 1. Tim. 1.20.

And excommunication is done, either for dangerous errors about the foundations
of religion, which any man does obstinatly defend, and raises in the church
scismes, and heresies, and does stubburnly and seditiously trouble the peace of
the church* 1. Tim. 1.20. Tit. 3.10.

Or for manifest faults, which tend to the offense and slander of the Church.
1. Cor. 5.3.

The ends of excommunication are two.

The first is this, that by this remedy the flesh of the excommunicat might be
tamed, that he might learn to live to the spirit, that is to say, that the
excommunicate overcome with shamefastnes, might be stirred up to repentance,
and decline from evil. 1. Cor. 5.5.2. Cor. 2.7, 2 Thessalonians. 3.14. 1. Tim. 1.20.

The other, that contagion might not come to the rest, and infect them also. 1.
Cor. 5.6.7.

Thus far concerning the Ecclesiastical punishment: now concerning
absolution.
Absolution is a freeing from the punishment, after repentance is sufficiently
testified.

And that is either private or public.

Private is that, by which either those that were rebuked or suspended are
absolved. Mat. 18.15.

Public is that, by which the excommunicate after repentance sufficiently
testified publicly, are reconciled to the Church, and are received again into
the society thereof. 2. Cor. 2.6.10.

Hitherto concerning Pastors: now concerning Doctors.
Doctors are those who only give themselves to the interpretation of the
Scripture, either in turning it into other tongues, or in searching out the
true sense of it, that so sincere and wholesome doctrine may be retained among
the faithful.

Therefore the office of Doctors is occupied in a scholer-like and exquisite
interpretation of the word of God. Ro^. 12.5. 1. Co. 1.12.8.

Thus far concerning Bishops: now concerning their helpers.
The helpers of Bishops are those, who are adjoined to the Bishops for the
Ecclesiastical businesses.

And they are either governors or disposers of the Church goods.

The governors are grave and godly men chosen out of the people, who together
with the Bishops are set over the ce^sure of manners, and of exercising
discipline. Romans 12.7. 1. Cor. 12. These by a Sinecdoche, of the general for
the special, are called Elders.

Their company is called the eldership.

Hitherto concerning the governors: now concerning the disposers of the Church
goods.
The disposers of the church goods, Of Deacons.
are such helpers of Bishops as dispose bodily things.

And they are Deacons, or Deaconesses.

Deacons are those, who dispose the goods of the Church.

The goods of the Church are divided into four parts.

One part is distributed to them who are appointed for the ministry of the
Church. Mat. 10.10. 1. Cor 9.9. 1 Thessalonians. 3.8.

The other fourth part, is bestowed in the maintaining of the poor.

The third part is appointed for the upholding the building of churches.

The fourth part that remains, is appointed to the Bishop, to the end that he
may entertain poor strangers and help also the captive brethren when it is
needful. 1. Tim. 3.2. Tit. 1.8.

But yet now a days, those are also called Deacons, that are adjoined to the
Pastors to help them, in teaching in preaching, in administering the
Sacraments, in visiting the sick and captive, and in other things pertaining
to the holy ministry.

Thus far concerning Deacons: now concerning Deaconesses.
Deaconesses are widows, who serve to the uses of the poor and sick. Act.
6.11. Tim. 5.9.

Hitherto concerning the Ministers of the church: now concerning the hearers.
The hearers are all the rest of the saints in the Church besides the
ministers, whose duty is willingly to submit themselves to the ecclesiastical
discipline, and to further it according to their ability, with gifts, labor,
and by what means soever they can Heb. 13.17. 1. Tim. 5.17.18. Otherwise they
are called ley men, private men.

Thus far concerning the proper government of the church: now concerning the
common.
The common government of the Church, is that, which does pertain to all the
members of the whole body of the Church.

And that appears in the ecclesiastical counsels: for every one may and
ought to be heard in them, so that it be done duly and in order.

Of counsels.
The ecclesiastical counsel, is an assembly instituted for the causes of the
Church.

Otherwise it is called a Synod.

But the cause of calling together of counsels: is two fold.

One that the Church may defend the sincere doctrine comprehended in the word
of God against heretics, and approve it by open testimony. Act. 15.

In this regard the Church is called the pillar, or ground of truth, to wit,
whereof it is a faithful witness 1. Tim. 3.15.

The other, that it might appoint laws or rules of the ecclesiastical
government, according to the diverse respects, of times, places and persons.

The counsel is general or particular.

General is that, which is gathered in the name of the whole Church: as was
that of the Israelites. 1. King. 18.19. and of the Apostles. Act. 15.6.

The particular counsel is that, which is gathered in the name of some
certain church.

And that is called provincial or national, when the chosen ministers of the
church of one province or nation meet together.

The Synod of some choice of learned and godly men, is to be gathered together
by the authority of the magistrate.

We must not make any decree concerning the order and manner of conferring with
the adversaries, except the magistrate be present, or else men chosen by the
magistrate.

The order must be according to method. The positions must be definitions,
distributions, short axioms. The manner of disputing must be always by
syllogismes.

But all things that are done by writing, are to be subscribed with the very
hand of those who are to confer: or if they do rather choose to deal by
speech, the sayings of both parties are to be written by approved notaries of
good credit, and chosen by the consent of either party, which afterward both
parties may ouersee, and confirm it by adding the subscription. For this truly
is the just and sincere form of conference, that so falsehood may be prevented.

The positions of the conference which are propounded must be undoubted, and
very few also: let not liberty be given to wander from them: neither yet are
all the judgments and interpretations of private men to be defended, but every
part must clearly propound and defend his own judgment: for it is neither
needful nor necessary, that all the judgments and sayings of all men be
approved by us. For why should we defend the particular judgment and authority
of other men, if we our selves be of another mind.

The controversies after both parties heard are finally to be determined. From
which determination and deciding, the civil magistrates are not to be excluded,
but admitted to it. For both Zenas the Lawyer is highly commended by Paul, and
joined with Apollo as equal with him. Tit. 3.13.

Hitherto concerning the true church: now concerning the false Church.
The false Church is that which follows a false religion.

A false religion, is what religion soever is contrary to the word of God,
delivered in the holy Scripture.

Whosoever embrace this, are the enemies of Christ, and his kingdom, or true
Church.

The enemies are either open or dissembled.

The open enemies are those, who do manifestly show themselves enemies to the
name of Christians.

And they are both blasphemous Jews, and Gentiles.

The blasphemous Jews, are the open enemies of the christian religion who
though Jesus Christ the promised Messiah be already manifested, yet look for
an other and speak evil of the Lord Jesus and his members, neither will they
believe the Gospel concerning Jesus Christ.

In them especially we must consider both their reiection and also restoring.

The reiection of the Jews, is a most just punishment which by God is laid
upon the^, whilst he has blinded and hardened them being unthankful
toward Christ and his Gospel, and rejected them from his covenant, that he
might call and adopt the Gentiles in their stead. Act. 13.46. Romans 11. chap.
almost throughout.

And that is neither general nor perpetual. Romans 11.

Of therestoring of the Jews.
The restoring of the Jews is a benefit of God, when God after that the
fullness of the Gentiles is come in into the Church, shall convert the Jews,
that they being kindled with an emulation of the mercy showed to ye Gentiles,
might embrace that Gospel which concerns Christ, and be ingraffed again
into the covenant of Grace made with Abraham and their fathers, and might be
saved. Romans 11.23.24.25.26.27.28.29.30.31.32.

Hitherto concerning the Jews: now concerning the Gentiles.
The Gentiles are open enemies to the Christian religion, who worship false
and counterfeit Gods.

And they be either Mahumets or other Pagans.

Mahumets are open enemies to the Christian religion, who worship Mahumet, and
embrace the Alcoran delivered unto them by him. They are also called Turks.

Other Pagans are also besides the Mahumets, which worship fained gods.

And thus far concerning open enemies: now concerning dissembled enemies.
The dissembled enemies of Christ and the true Church, are those who under the
name of Christ do fight against him, and by many lying signs seduce men.

And they are either Antichrists, or false Christ's.

Antichrists are the dissembled enemies of Christ, who every manner of way are
against the doctrine of Christ, whose followers they profess themselves to be.
1. John. 2.18.22. and 4.3. and 2. Ioh. verse. 7.

And the same are also called false Prophets. Matthew. 7.15.

Antichrist is two fold: for either he is against one part or other only of
the Christian doctrine, or else almost against the whole body of it.

Of the first kind are all Heretics.

Of Heretics.
An Heretic is he who does err in the foundation of eternal salvation, that
is to say, who does fight against either the perfon or office of Christ, and
does stubbornely persevere in error.

Many such have been even from the times of the Apostles, and yet also there
are some, as Cerinthus, Valentinus, Marcion, Sabellius, Arrius, Nestorius,
Ertiches, Pelagius, and others.

Of Antichrist.
Of the latter kind is that notorious adversary of Christ, who by an excellency
and principally is called Antichrist. 2 Thessalonians. 2.7. and that false Prophet.
Revel. 16.13.

In this place especially two things are to be considered: first Antichrist
himself: secondly the Church of Antichrist.

Concerning Antichrist himself, the question is both what he is, and who he
should be.

That Antichrist is a man exercising a kingdom, the head of the universal
Apostasy, or falling away from the faith, and professing the name of a
Christian indeed, but yet setting himself both against Christ and the
doctrine of Christ: having a double and supreme power, to wit, a spiritual and
secular, boasting himself with deceaueable signs and miracles, an inchaunter
making a compact with the devil: an idolatrer, an hypocrite, a blasphemer,
ambitious and proud, lawless, leading a single life, and forbidding marriage,
and yet he himself a filthy fornicatour and adulterer, a Sodomite, and that
whore of Babylon: abstayning from certain kinds of meats, and yet given to
riotousnesse: covetous, cousening men of their money, wily, given to vanity,
alyer, cruel, a tyrant, a persecuter and murderer of the Saints, vaunting
himself as God, and lifting up himself against all powers and majesty's, both
in earth and also in heaven, arrogating to himself the divine power and
absolute dominion of Christ, by a double and fourth fall that is to say, by the
Roman Monarchy out of the rubbishes thereof by little and little, rising and
increasing by the power and forcible working of Satan, in the city compassed
with seven hills, that is to say, at Rome: and in the temple of God, that is to
say, in the Church, but he shall be discovered in the last times of the world,
and at the length by the glorious coming of Christ, shall utterly be
abolished. 2 Thessalonians. 2.3. Dan. 7.8. Revel. 17.1. and 18.3. and 13.11. and every
where throughout the Revelations.

Thus far is showed what Antichrist is: now who it is.
THAT ANTICHRISR IS THAT POPI OF ROME: even as both the Canon law, and also
the lives and acts of the Bishops of Rome do expressly show.

Thus far concerning Antichrist himself: now concerning the Church of
Antichrist.
The Church of Antichrist, is the Church of Rome, falsely called Apostolical
and Catholic, whereas it is indeed an Apostaricall Church, that beast, and
indeed disguising it self, and which does represent the lively image of the
Monarchy of the Romans, heretofore defaced of their government, power,
honor, and seat among all Nations Revel. 11.7.8. and 13.3. and so forward, and
every where in the Revelations: and experience also does watnesse the same.

Of this Church there be two parts: to wit, the head, and the members.

The head of this Church of Antichrist, is Antichrist himself, the Pope of
Rome, the son of perdition, and minister of the Dragon.

The members of it be either the Clergy, or the Lai^y.

The Clergy are those unclean spirits coming out of the mouth of the Dragon,
of that beast and false Prophet. Revel. 16.13.

Of them there be three orders: Cardinals, false. Bishops and the filthy heap
of Canonists, scholemen, and Monks.

Cardinals are those unclean spirits, coming forth of the mouth of the
Dragon, of that beast and false Prophet, who go to the Kings of the earth, and
of the whole world, honored by that Antichrist of Rome with a Cardinals hatte,
and sent out that even like frogs, by their clamorous and unpleasant craking
they might be importunate, which all men, to the intent they may gather them to
the battle against God. Revel. 16.13.14.

False Bishops are unclean spirits, coming out of the mouth of the Dragon of
that same beast and false Prophet, who for a great price do buy their cope at
Rome, and have special jurisdiction, both civil and ecclesiastical.

That heap of Canonists, Scholemen, and Monks, are unclean spirits coming
out of the mouth of the Dragon, of that same beast and false Prophet, every one
according to his place underpropping the sea of Rome by murders and lies.

But amongst the Monks, those new Monks now adays have the cheifty, who by
a false name are called Jesuits, whereas they are indeed Esauites or Iebusites.

So much concerning Antichrist: now concerning false Christ's.
False Christ's, are dissembled enemies of Christ, who vaunt themselves to be
Christ. Matthew. 24.26. Mar. 13.21. Luke 17.23.

Such were Simon Magus, Bencocab, David Gorgius, who was burnt at Basil.

The end of the first Book of the partitions of diuintie.
THE SECOND BOOK of the definitions and partitions of Divinity, framed
according to the rules of a natural Method, by Amandus Polanus of Polansdorfe.
Of good works.
THE second part of the word of God, is concerning good works, that is to say,
which prescribes and commands what works are to be done by the faithful,
that so men may perform thankefulnes due to God, for the deliverance from sin
and eternal death. Phil. 1.27. Iam. 2.20. Tit. 3.8.

Good works are works commanded by God, which are done of a true faith, to
the glory of God alone. Romans 14.13. Heb. 11.6.

And yet they are before God neither righteousness it self nor any part of
righteousness, neither have they any whit of merit in them. Esa. 64.6. Rom 3.28.
Ephesians 2.8.9. Luke 17.10.

Every singular good work has two sins set against it: the one as
disagreeing, the other as contrary.

Of hypocrisy.
The former of them is hypocrisy, that is to say, a fayning of godliness and
honesty, or if you will, a new found godliness, the works whereof do seem
to have some affinity and agreement with good works: and therefore they do
oftentimes delude men with a show and nearenesse of goodness: but in very
deed are diverse from them, either because they are not commanded by God, but
are feigned and commanded by men, under the opinion of vprightnes: or although
they are commanded by God, yet they are done of hypocrisy either to deceive
others, or for the show of godliness, after the manner of the Pharisees.
Although sometime there may be more differences or disagreeme^ts then one.

But the sin which is opposed to a good work as contrary thereto, is that
which is simply contrary to it.

And even as the sum of our faith is comprehended in the Creed of the
Apostles, so the law of God is the direction and rule of good works.

Both the adioints and also the kinds of good works are to be considered.

Of the adioynts of good works.
The adioynts of good works are two fold: some if we respect God, and some if we
respect men.

If we respect God they are two fold, that is, the childlike fear of God, and
subjection that we owe to God.

Of the childlike fear of God.
The childlike fear of God, is a fear of the anger and judgment of God
against sin, whereby we are stirred up reverently to obey God and fly sin.
Or else the childlike fear of God, is that whereby we fear, as the chiefest
evil of all, least we displease God through disobedience. Psalm. 5.8. Such a
fear is in the elect, and it consists in three things.

First, that we set before our eyes God always beholding all our works.

Secondly, that we acknowledge and reverence him as the witness and revenger
of all our thoughts, words, and works.

Thirdly, that there be nothing which we fear more then to offend God, being
so loving a father, and to stir up his anger and judgment against us.

Against this fear of God is opposed, both a causeless fear, and the servile
or slavish fear of God, and also security or carelesnes: the two former as
disperate or disagreeing, the other as contrary.

A causeles fear is to fear where no fear is. Psalm. 14. This is an
hypocritical fear, as is that also of the Papists, who fear the wrath of
God, when they break foolish traditions, as when they will not eat flesh on
days forbidden by the Bishop of Rome, and do not fear the anger of God, when
they do stiffely and stubburnly defend Idolatry, and do persecute godly men
and innocents with sword and fire.

The servile fear of God, is the fear of Gods wrath, and divine judgment
against sin, by which the ungodly are so smitten, that they flee from God, and
chafe against him. And that is in the wicked, as in Cain, Saul, and Judas
Iscariot, of which fear mention is made, 1. John. 4.18.

Security, is to live without care and without the fear of Gods anger, Of
security.
and of his divine judgment against sin. Pro. 28.14. Matt. 12.44.

Security is two fold: either in the ungodly, or in the godly.

Security in the ungodly, or if you will call it Epicureall and giant-like
contempt of God, is an amazednes or benummednes altogether neglecting the wrath
and judgment of God.

Security in the godly, is a cold and languishing fear of God, the^
especially appearing in them, when they be in prosperity.

So much concerning the fear of God: now concerning subjection unto God.
Subjection unto God, is that by which we submit our selves to God, as to our
Lord, to perform to him the obedience of the Law.

The obedience of the law, is a perfect conformity of al thoughts, motions,
and actions, inward and outward, to the law of God.

Hitherto concerning the adioynts of good works as they respect God.
The adioynts of good works in respect of men are two fold: either as
concerning our selves, or our neighbor.

In respect of our selves there are required chearefulnes, conscience,
co^stancy, and wisdom.

Cheerfulness is that, by which any man of his own accord freely and
willingly does with joy obey the law of God. Psalm. 40.9. and 110.3. Col. 3.23.

To it is opposed rashness and co^pulsion: the former as disagreeing, the other
as contrary.

Rashness is an inconsiderate forwardnes or wilfulnes of doing something, under
the pretext of obeying God, when as yet a man knows not whether that which he
does or will do, be commanded by God. And of this sort is that rage that is in
Idolaters, who are ready to exercise and commit Idolatry, and to do every thing
commanded by their sacrificing Priests.

Compulsion is that, whereby a man being compelled, does obey either for fear
of punishment, or for shame before others: therefore also such an obedience is
displeasing unto God.

Conscience is that spark of right reason, which remains in man as yet
undefaced, and is that bewrayer and judge of good and evil deeds. It is a
bridle before sin, sometime to stay the rage of it, and a scourage after sin
committed, to afflict the heart or mind.

Constancy is a perpetual will and study to obey Gods law, Of constancy*
or else it is a stable and perpetual abiding in the obedience of Gods law.
Ephesians. 4.14.15. Dan. 1.8.

Or else, Constancy is a perpetual will to do good works.

To this there is opposed stubburnnes and inconstancy: the one as disparat or
disagreeing, the other as contrary.

Stubburnnes is an abiding or perseuering in evil, as in ungodly opinions,
superstitions and wickedness contrary to conscience.

Inconstancy is a rash changing of the mind or will from good to evil. 2.
Chron. 24.21. Ierem. 26.8.16.

Wisdom, is that by which we observe comeliness in every action. Ephesians.
5.15.16.17. that is to say, by which we observe what we are to do, how, in
what place, at what time, before whom, that all things may be done in a
convenient place, time, and manner.

Of wisdom.
Of wisdom there are two parts, a perceiving or foresight, and uprightness of
choice.

A perceiving or foresight, is a careful and diligent considering, what is
comely in every action. It is otherwise called circumspection.

The vprightnes of choice, is that by which we do will and choose that which
we perceive to be meet. Psalm. 119.173.

Therefore by wisdom, counsels and deliberations are directed in the choice
of honest and profitable things, and al actions so carried, that conueniencie of
place, time, and persons, and of other circumstances is observed.

So Paul wills that our serving of God be according to reason. Romans 12.1. So
the same Paul does command us to observe opportunity in the exercise of
virtues. Romans 13.11.

Singular wisdom is required in the choice of evil things.

Of two evils the less evil is to be chosen. But this rule is to be
understood of the evil of the punishment which is contrary to profitable
goodness, and not of the evil of the offense, contrary to honest goodness.
For if God forbid both evils, neither of them is to be done.

Therefore in evils of offense or sin there must be no choice: that is to
say* the evils of offense and sin it self, must at no hand be chosen, but all
evils are to be shunned a like.

In evils of punishment there may be choice, as if one being taken in war, or
falling into the hands of a thief, might choose whether he will redeem
himself with money, or whether he will loose his life: it is better to loose
his money, then his life.

So 2. Sam. 24 12. To David, when he had sinned by numbering the people, the
Lord offers a choice of three fold punishment, of which he should choose one
which he would, namely, either seven years famine through the whole kingdom,
or war in which he should flee three months before his enemies pursuing
him, or three days pestilence Consider now (says the Prophet Gad) and look
what I shall answer to him that sent me. Therefore says David to God: I am
distressed above measure: but it is better to fall into the hand of the Lord
(because his mercies are many) then into the hands of men.

Of the evils whereof (even for the profession of true religion) choice is
offered to one that is altogether innocent, no choice ought to be made: but we
must wait what God will, and patiently bear what soever the tyrant has
decreed: least if thou choose willingly punishment and death, thou wrap thy
self in suspicion of having committed some wickedness, and do give occasion
to spread slanders of thy fame to the posterity; for otherwise thou would not
willingly have chosen punishment, if thou had not binguiltie to thyself of
some fault. There is an example of such a spiritual wisdom in the french
history, in the prince of Condie himself. Charles IX. sent for the Condie to
come to him, and propounded to him three conditions, of which he should choose
one: namely to go to Mass, or to death, or to perpetual imprisonment. The
Co^die answered him, that he would (God so assisting him) never so trespass as
to choose the first. Of the other two he left the one or the other of them to
the will and pleasure of the King, and yet doubted not, but God would govern
all that action by his providence.

To wisdom there is opposed wiliness, or deceit, and rashness: the former
as disparate or disagreeing, the other as contrary.

Wylines is an observation of our own profit in some thing, and that with the
hurt of another. For wisdom is in good things: but wiliness in evil things.

Rashness is a wilfulness or violence to do any thing without counsel and
reason. Pro. 15.22.

Spiritual wisdom, is specially seen in beating back and ouercomming the
temptations of Satan.

Hitherto we have spoken of the adioynts of good works as in respect of our
selves: now concerning the adioynts of good works, in respect of our neighbor.
The adioints of good works in respect of our neighbor, are zeal for the
glory of God, and care to shun offenses.

Of an holy zeal.
Zeal for the glory of God, is a vehement grief of mind, and indignation
against the things which are done contrary to Gods law, with an endeavor to
hinder those sins in time and place convenient. John. 2.14. Psalm. 68.10. 1.
King. 19.10. Act. 17.16. Number. 25.11. 2. Cor. 7.7. and 11. 2. Psalm. 119.139.

This zeal ought to be joined with knowledge, that is, with a sound knowledge
and spiritual wisdom of Gods will, and of the truth.

To it is opposed zeal without knowledge and benummednesse.

Zeal without knowledge is a blind wilfulnes and violence, or an inco^siderate
indignation against those things which are either right and good, or if they be
done contrary to the law of God, they are done of ignorance or infirmity. To.
10.2. Phil. 3.6. Act. 21.20. and 22.3. Gal. 1.14.

And it does arise either of the ignorance of the truth, or of the charity and
edification of our neighbor neglected.

Benummednesse is when any as it were a block is not touched at all, although
he does manifestly see many things to be done frowardly and stubburnely against
God.

Care to avoid offenses, is when whatsoever we do, we have always a respect
that we be not an offense to others, but that by our example we may rather
edify them.

So much concerning the adioynts of good works: their kinds follow.
Good works are two fold: that is either the works of Gods worship, or of
virtue. The former, that is, Gods worship, is commanded in the first table of
the ten commandments: the other in the second.

Of the worship of God.
The worship of God is an honor to be given to God alone according to his
commandment; If I be your father, where is my honor? I will not give my glory
to an other: that he that honors the son, might honor the father also:
that they may glorify your father in heaven. Pro. 3.9. Honor God with thy
riches.

Atheism, witchcraft, Idolatry, and superstition are contrary to the true and
sincere worship of God.

Atheism is when some beastly natures of me^, do deny that there is any God: or
at the least that there is any providence of God. Psalm. 14.

Witchcraft is a couena^ting with the devils ye enemies of God, that by their
help things not necessary may be known and effected either for the fulfilling
of evil lusts, or for ostentatio^* or to the commodity of life, or else that
they might receive by them those things which are to be asked and looked for
from God alone. Deuteronomy. 18.11.

Idolatry is a sin, when the worship that is due to God alone, is translated
to the creatures. Genesis 31.30.34. Exodus 12.12. Iere. 43.13. Exodus 32.1.2. etc.
Iud. 17.3.4.

The worshipping of bread, or of the God Maozim in the Papisticall mass, and
as also the worship of Images, are special kinds of Idolatry.

Superstition, is a sin, when the effects of Gods favor, or some natural
force, is attributed to a thing or gesture without Gods commandment, or
without natural causes. Col. 2.23. Genesis 32.32. Iud. 18.27. 1. Sam. 5.5. Act.
17.22.

There are infinite kinds of this superstition amongst the Papists: among which
the exorcisme, or as we may call it coniuration of creatures is notorious.

Exorcisme is a superstition, through which the sacrificing priest adiureth the
evil spirit by heavenly things, and does boldly enough, and by his authority,
command him, that he depart out of the infant that is to be baptized.

The worship of God, is either only inward, or else both inward and outward.
Deu. 6.5. and 10 12. Mat. 1.8.

The only inward worship of God, is that which does consist in the affection
of the mind only. Deuteronomy. 6.5.

And that is the true knowledge of God, love toward God, humility, confidence
in God, and patience.

The true knowledge of God, is the inward worship of God, when we know God so,
as he has manifested himself in his word.

To it is contrary the ignorance of God, which is not to know those things
concerning God, which every one ought to know. Furthermore false opinions
touching God, are contrary to it.

Love toward God, is the inward worship of God, when we do love God so
earnestly, that we do all his commandments with a certain ioyfulnesse. 1.
Ioh. 5.3. 1. Tim. 1. Deuteronomy* 6. Mat. 22.

To it is contrary the hatred of God, which is by reason of the turning away of
our nature from God, and from the justice of God, and through inclination to
sin, to flee from God, and to be angry with him, accusing and punishing
sin. Romans 8.7.

To it also is contrary, an inordinate love of himself or of any of the
creatures, which is to prefer a man's own lusts, will, life, or glory, before
Gods will and glory, and wickedly to neglect, and offend him rather then to
forgo those things we love. Mat. 10.37.

Of humility.
Humility is the inward worship of God, when we acknowledgeing our own misery,
cast away all confidence in our own strength, and do acknowledge that all good
things which are in us, and which are done by us, do not proceed of any
worthiness or ability of our own, but of the free goodness of God. 1. Cor.
4.7. Job. 1.21.

Poor in spirit that is to say, humble, may he be said to be, who does
acknowledge that he has no good thing of his own nature, or by himself, but
rather that he is naked and poor, and void of all good things, and receives
all such things freely from God.

To it is opposed, a fained humility and pride.

Fained humility belongs to hypocrites. Col. 2.23. as of the Pharisees. Mat.
6.6. Of the Anabaptists and Muncks, who will be humble without lowliness,
poor without want, rich without labor, as Bernard says.

Pride is a sin, when any one without the knowledge of his own infirmity,
does love, extol, and magnify himself for some gifts he has, and does
swell and trust in his own wisdom, holiness and strength, and attributes
to himself more then is in him, and despises others. Prou. 8.13. and 16.5.
Revel. 3.17.

Thus far concerning humility: now concerning confidence in God.
Of confidence in God.
Confidence in God, is the inward worship of God, when all human confidence
either in our selves, or in other creatures, being laid aside, we do rest in
God alone. Ier. 17.5. and so forward.

To it is opposed tempting of God, confidence in creatures, and distrust.

Tempting of God, is presumption, and confidence, imagining under a foolish
pretext of confidence in God, that we shall effect and perform some things
without the word and revealed will of God: as if any will not use means
ordained by God: to such a sin the Devil tempted Christ. Mat* 4.6.7.

Confidence in creatures, is a sin, when any does put his trust in riches, or
in the favor of Princes, and of other men. Ephesians. 5.5. Mat 6.24. Psalm. 146.3.
Iere. 17.5. and 48.

Distrust is a sin, when any does not rest in God, nor stay upon his help
alone, but gives place to fearfulness, trembling and anguish, and does seek
means and helps forbidden and not granted. 1. Sam. 28.5.6.7.8.

Confidence in God, is either a lively faith, or hope in God.

Of a lively faith.
A lively faith, is not only a knowledge and consent, whereby a man believes
that whatsoever the word of God has commanded to be believed, is true, but
also a firm and constant confidence, by which every one does for himself
obtain and get the benefits promised by God.

Or else, a justifying faith, is a confidence whereby every one certainly
believes for himself, that the merit of Christ is assuredly imputed and
given to him.

Faith does receive not only spiritual but even bodily benefits also. Mat.
9.22. Christ says to the woman that had an issue of blood; Thy faith has
saved thee.

Therefore a lively faith is either of spiritual or bodily good things.

The proper duties thereof are two.

The first, that by it every one is certainly persuaded for himself, that the
promises of God do also pertain to himself.

The other, that by that alone as by the only hand* we receive and lay hold on
the benefits offered by God.

Therefore also by that alone we are justified before God.

To be justified by faith only in Jesus Christ, Of righteousness by faith.
is by faith alone as by a hand and only instrument to take hold of, and to
apply to himself the righteousness of Christ, purchased by the obedience of
his death.

To a saving faith is opposed incredulity, doubting infolden or hidden faith,
and temporary faith.

Incredulity is that, which when a man has heard and known Gods word, does not
consent to the same, and specially to the promise of Grace.

Doubting is neither fi mely to consent to the word of God, and in that word to
the promise of Grace especially, neither altogether to resist the same, but to
flow: now into one part, and anon faintly to incline to the other part.

An infolden or hidden faith is to submit his sense obediently to the Church,
Of a hid faith.
and to believe things not understood, and to embrace for truth, whatsoever
the Church has prescribed, and to post over to the Church the labor of
enquiring and knowing the same, and not to be careful whether the Church
prescribe true things or not.

This devise of an infolden or hidden faith was invented by schoolmen, and
after them the Vbiquitaries have diversely commended it, under which name,
decking a most gross ignorance, they go about to delude the silly common
people to their great destruction.

Temporary faith, is to embrace the truth for a time, but without regeneration
and confidence of the promise of the grace of God, and therefore in time of
temptations and persecutions, to be overcome through hope of profit and honor,
and to cast away again the profession of the truth. Mat. 13.5.20.21. Luk
8.13. Act. 8.13. Heb. 6.4.

So much concerning faith: now concerning hope in God.
Of hope in God
Hope in God is confidence in God, by which we undoubtedly look for the
benefits of God to come, but especially eternal life to be given freely for
Christ his sake, and the mitigating of the present cross, or deliverance from
it, according to Gods counsel. 1. Pet. 1.13.

Faith does receive the present benefits of God, but hope does look for those
which are to come.

To hope is opposed the hope of Papists, doubting concerning the receiu^ng of
Gods benefits, and desperation.

Papisticall hope is a sin, when any for the Bulls and pardons of that
damnable Roman Antichrist and his indulgences, or else for some good work of
his own, especially not commanded by God, as peregrinations to the sepulchers
of Saints, buildings of Monasteries, gifts to Churches, or for taking a
Munckes Cowle, and so for that does falsely persuade himself that he shall
obtain eternal life.

Doubting concerning the receiving of Gods benefits is a sin, when any does
doubt of eternal life, and defense, and deliverance in temptation.

Desperation, is to esteem and judge his own sins greater then the merit
of the Son of God: and to refuse the mercy of God offered in the Son of
God, the mediator of God and man: and therefore not to look for the benefits
promised by God to the believers, but to be vexed with the horrible feeling of
Gods wrath, and with fear of subsequent casting away into eternal punishment,
and to abhor and hate God as cruel and a tyrant. Genesis 4.13. 1 Thessalonians. 4.13.

So much concerning confidence: now concerning patience.
Of patience.
Patience is the inward worship of God, when we submit our selves to God,
quietly to bear the cross laid upon us by him. Number. 16.46. Job. 1.20. and
2.10.

To it is opposed an hypocritical tollerating or bearing, and impatiency.

An hypocritical tollerating or bearing, is a suffering of torments, brought
upon them by their own accord: as in Heremites, in Munckes: in whippers, who
do beat themselves with rods.

Impatiency is a sin, when a man will not obey God in bearing the griefs
which God has laid upon him, but is angry and murmureth against God, and
chiefly against them that hurt him, as the Isaelites. Exodus 5.21. and 14.11.
and. 16.3. and 17.2.3.

Hitherto concerning that worship of God which is only inward: now concerning
that which is both inward and outward.
The worship of God both inward and outward, is that which comprehend the
obedience of the soul and body. Deuteronomy. 5.19. and 6.5. and 10.12. Romans 12.1.

And it has two objects, that is, calling upon God and thanksgiving* and also
the confession of the truth, and the observing of the Ecclesiastical rites or
orders.

Of calling upon God.
Calling upon God is the worship of God, by which we do religiously call upon
God. Psalm. 50.18. and 116.13.

To it is opposed an idolatrous invocation, and the omitting of invocation, or
sin.

An idolatrous invocation is a sin, when that is called upon which is not God.

And of this first, is the invocation or sin of the Gentiles, Turks, Jews,
and Papists.

The omitting of invocation is a sin, when invocation so straightly commanded
by God is omitted, as though God had no need of it.

Calling upon God is either prayer or an oath.

Of prayer.
Prayer is a calling upon God, by which we ask of God such good things as are
necessary for the soul and body, and contrariwise do pray, that evil things
may be removed Genesis 17.18. and 24.12. and 28. 2. and ^2.11. Exodus 8.12. 1. Sam.
17.19. 1. King. 8.15.

And that (...) either the absolute service of the deity, or prayer proper to
the mediator.

The absolute service of the deity, is that which is properly directed to the
deity: and with that also we worship Christ as he is God, and by which we
attribute unto him the honor of omnipotency, knowing all things, and being
every where present.

Of worshipping the mediator Christ.
Prayer proper to the mediator, is that worship which is given to Christ, both
in respect of his person and of his office, as to that mediator that is God and
man.

For as the acknowledgement of Christ consists in the acknowledgement of his
person and office: so in invocation we must think of Christ, after either
manner.

First, he is to be called upon as God, the giver of good things, with the
Father and the holy Spirit.

Secondly, we must think of him as of a mediator, and intercessour, for whose
sake we believe that we are received and heard.

That worship of the mediator is one, not in respect or degree, but in number.

And as our faith in the acknowledgment of Christ, does put a difference
between the natures: so also in the worshipping of him.

Therefore he the mediator is worshipped, not for his humanities sake, which
is created, but because of his eternal and omnipotent deity. For the deity the
Creator of all things, is the proper subject of religious worship: and not the
humanity, because it is a creature. Cyrillus writing to Theodosius the king
concerning the right faith, says; Shall we therefore worship Emmanuell, that
is God with us, as a man? Be it far from us: for this sin were a dotage,
deceit and error. For in this we should not differ from those, who do
worship the creature more then the creator and maker.

And as faith does attribute to him according to either nature, that which it
ought according to the Scriptures: so it does demand that in the work of
hearing, as in the perfection of his duty and obedience, he should work
according to either nature that which is his own to do.

According to the deity, that he might behold the hearts, hear the sighs of
his servants, give the holy Spirit, and other good things according to his
unmeasurable wisdom and power.

But according to the humanity, that he might of his own human will approve
the prayers and hearings of his people, and in that might do that which is
proper to him. So the Church prays. Revel. 22.20. Even come thou Lord Jesus:
in which prayer it does ask, not that made manifest in his Godhead, he might
come in the clouds, but manifested in his humanity: and so one and that self
same Lord Jesus might deliver and glorify the Church by his divine omnipotency
or almighty power.

Thus much concerning the distribution of prayer: now concerning the form of
prayer.
Of all other, the Lords prayer is the best form of prayer.

The Lords prayer, is that which our Lord Christ himself has taught us. The
expounding of the Lords prayer.
Mat. 6.9. Luke 11.20. Our Father which art in heaven, and so forth.

Of the Lords prayer are four parts: an entrance, petitions, a confirmation,
and a conclusion.

Of the entrance there are two parts: the first teaches us whom we ought to
call upon: namely our father.

Our father is God.

Now we call God father, for two causes.

1 Because he has begot the son to himself from eternity, to wit, Jesus
Christ. 2 Because he has adopted us to be his sons, for Christ his sake.
But in our prayers we call him father, for three causes.

1 That we being about to pray might find a distinction between our invocation
and the prayers of Infidels, turning our selves to this God, who has
manifested himself in his son Jesus Christ. 2 That a child-like fear and
reverence of God might be stirred up in us. 3 That we might pray with
confidence, certainly assuring our selves that we are heard of God, as of a
merciful father, because he has adopted us to be his sons, because we are
members of Christ, because we call upon him by Christ.
But we call him our Father for two causes.

1 That so we might think, that we are to pray not only for our selves, but
for other men also, especially for those who are members with us in the body of
Christ, and sons of the same father in heaven. 2 That we may pray the more
boldly, thinking this, that the whole Church, and even the mediator, as our
brother, does pray with us.
This is the first part of the entrance: the second follows.
The second part is this: which art in Heaven.

That God is in heaven, it means, that he only is omnipotent, and alone can
give us those things which we ask of him.

God truly is every where. Iere. 23.23.24. Esa. 66.1. But heaven is as it were
the ordinary Palace of God, in which is his throne, and the chiefest glory of
God does appear: because God does most magnifically manifest himself in heaven
to the Angels and blessed souls. Psalm. 115.16. Psalm. 19.

But these words, which art in heaven, are added for five causes.

1 That we might not imagine any earthly and carnal matter of the heavenly
majesty of God. 2 That we being about to pray, might lift up our minds from the
earth to heaven, Psalm. 25. and 121. 3 That we might expect from the omnipotency
and almighty power of God, what things soever are necessary for soul and body.
4 That we might be mindful of this, that our God has all government of heaven
and earth, that he is present every where, and that he hears and helps
those that call on him. 5 That we should not direct or tie the worship of God to
any place or thing besides his commandment.
So much concerning the entrance of the Lords prayer: the petitions follow.
The petitions of the Lords prayer are two fold: the three former pertain to
the glory of God, and the three later to our own necessity.

The first petition is this: I. Petition.
Hallowed be thy name.

In it we ask the hallowing of Gods name.

The hallowing of Gods name is the glorifying of God.

And that is done both by true faith, and also by good works.

Therefore the sense and meaning of the first petition is this; Grant that we
may glorify thee by true faith and good works.

We sanctify Gods name by true faith, when we rightly acknowledge God and his
works.

We sanctify Gods name by good works, both when we worship God aright, and
also when we desire and labor for virtue and well doing, and that to this end,
that the most holy name of God might not be slaundered through our means, but
rather that other seeing our good works, might glorify our heavenly Father.

The second petition is this: II. Petition.
Let thy kingdom come,

In it we ask the coming of the kingdom of God.

The coming of the kingdom of God, is the governing of the Church.

And this coming of Gods kingdom is two fold: either to the whole Church, or
to the several members of it.

The coming of gods kingdom to the whole Church, is when God defends the
Church.

And that two ways: both in preserving and increasing his own church, and in
destroying the church of the devil, or satha^s synagogue.

The coming of Gods kingdom to every member of the church, is when God does
so by his word and spirit govern every one, that he does subject them more
and more to himself and the obedience of his will.

The sense therefore of the second petition is this; Govern thy Church, and
the several members of the Church by thy spirit and word.

The third petition is this: III. Petition.
Thy will be done, as in heaven, so in earth also.

In it we ask that all of us might obey Gods will, and that all wicked lusts
being tamed, we might wholly and altogether serve God, and that so readily and
willingly as the holy Angels in heaven do.

Will does here signify that which is acceptable to God, and that also which
he therefore requires of us.

The three former petitions have been thus expounded: the three later follow.
The three later petitions pertain to our necessity, and that both as in
respect of the body, as the fourth petition: and also as in respect of the
soul, as the fifth and sixth.

The fourth petition is this: IIII. Petition
Give us this day our daily bread.

In it we ask the sustentation and nourishment of this temporal life.

Daily bread, is whatsoever is necessary for the upholding and preservation of
this present life.

God indeed has commanded us to get it with the labor of our hands, but yet
we ask it of God, because neither our labor, neither those thing which are
gotten by our labor, do or can profit us without Gods blessing, which it
self also is part of daily bread.

But if thou art rich and abounding, yet as if thou were needy, pray daily for
the blessed use of thy riches, think that full sellers, and full storehouses,
or chests, may be suddenly emptyed, except they be kept by the Lords hand: yea
except the Lord shall season with his blessing the meat and drink that we take
in, they that eat shall sterue for hunger, and they that drink shall wax dry
with thirst. Eze. 4.14. Ye shall eat and not be satisfied. Leuit. 26.26.

Now we name it our bread indeed, and yet we ask that God would give it us,
because that by the gift of God it is become ours: neither can any thing be
ours, or become ours except God give it.

We name it our bread, that so being content with that, we might not desire
another man's.

And we call it our bread and not mine, that so every one might know, that he
ought to ask bread necessary not for himself alone, but for his neighbor also.

Lastly, we ask daily bread, and pray that the same may be daily given us, for
four causes.

1 That a distrustful carfulness for to morrow might be taken out of our
minds. 2 That we might remember, that for daily bread we have need of daily
prayers. 3 That we might be daily admonished of the shortness of this our bodily
life, as though we should live to day only. 4 That we might not immoderately
and greedily desire or covet any thing besides that which God has prescribed.
The fifth petition is this: V. petition.
And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those that trespass against us.

In it we ask the forgiveness of sins, or justification.

And when God in his eternal covenant had willingly and freely promised us
forgiveness of sins, he has also bound us to himself by the answering
again of a good conscience to forgive our brethren.

So that he is not bound to keep his promise with us, except we also continue
in the obligation, covenant, or condition to be performed on our part.

Our forgiving therefore is not a cause of Gods forgiving: for God first has
freely promised us forgiveness, when as yet we were his enemies: and besides
he has bound us to himself to pardon our brethren also.

The cause can not be after his proper effect.

But our forgiving of them is after Gods forgiving of us.

Therefore our forgiving is not the cause of Gods forgiving.

The assumption is certain, for they only can pardon their brethren, to whom
God has forgiven their sins: and by this testimony we feel in our hearts
that our sins are pardoned us, if we be fully purposed with our selves from
our hearts to pardon all those who have offended us.

The sixth petition is this: VI. Petition.
And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.

In it we ask both that we our selves may be governed by the holy spirit and
word, least we should fall into sin. And this governing is part of our
regeneration or sanctification, and also deliverance from evils, that is to
say, from the snares of Satan, from the deceipts of the world, and from the
entisements of the flesh, as causes of sin.

Thus has the second part of the Lords prayer been handled: the third
follows.
The third part of the Lords prayer is a confirmation, which conteyneth three
arguments, by which our faith is confirmed, that God does certainly hear our
prayers. Two arguments are drawn from the adioynts of God, the third from the
end of hearing.

The first adioynt of God is this: because he is king having rule over all
things.

The second, because he is able, who can give us all things which we ask.

The argument from the end is, that he might be praised and glorified for
ever, because he is God, and a most bountiful and merciful father.

Hitherto we have handled the third part of the Lords prayer: the conclusion
remains.
The conclusion of the Lords prayer consists in one word. Amen, which is both
a wish that those things may be ratified, which we ask, and also a note of
confidence, whereby we show that we are persuaded, that God has certainly heard
our prayers.

Blessing is a peculiar kind of prayer, Blessing.
and that is, whereby we ask good things for other men at the hands of God.

And that is due to all, whether friends or enemies.

To it is opposed execration or cursing.

Against prayer to God is opposed, wicked prayer, idolatrous prayer, the
omitting of prayers, a vain babbling, and tediousness in praying.

A wicked prayer, is an asking of those things at Gods hand which are contrary
to Gods will and law.

An idolatrous prayer, is that which is directed and made either to the feigned
gods of the Gentiles, or to dead Saints: and of this sort are the prayers of
Ethnickes and Papists.

The omitting of prayers, is a sin when any does omit prayers, as though he did
not want the help and blessing of God.

A vain babbling is the reciting of long or many prayers, with the vain noise
of the lips without the true motion of the heart, and without faith: hither
pertain the bellowing of the Monks in the Churches.

Tediousness in prayer is a sin when any one having a desire of other
things, makes prayer with a wandering mind, and a heart that desires the
prayers were ended.

Hitherto concerning prayer: now concerning an oath.
Of an oath.
An oath is a calling upon God, by which we call him (as the only searcher of
the heart and raynes) for a witness of our speech, that so he may give
testimony to the truth, and aueng and punish the deceit, if we wittingly
deceive others thereby. Deuteronomy. 6.13. and 10.20. Romans 1.9. 2. Cor. 1.23. and
11.31. Phil. 1.8.

The parts of an oath are two: that is, taking God to witness, and cursing.

Taking God to witness, is that by which the swearer does cite God as a
witness of his asseueration. Romans 1.9. Deuteronomy. 6.13. and 10.29. Ios. 23.7. Esa.
65.16. Ier. 5.7. and 12.16.

Cursing is that by which the swearer does vow and tie himself to the
punishment of perjury, that he may be accursed before God, and God may punish
him, if he wittingly deceive. 1. King. 2.23.

An oath is two fold: to wit, offered, or a voluntary oath of a man's own
accord.

An offered oath, is that which is offered by the Magistrate or Judge, or the
adverse party: in Greek it is called swearing. Heb. 6.16.

A voluntary oath, or oath of a man's own accord, but yet taken, a man's calling
forcing him thereunto, is that which is done that we might defend either our
own or other men's good name and life: as Paul by calling God to witness,
affirms that he spoke the truth. Romans 9.1.

The refusing of a lawful oath, and a wicked oath, are contrary to the religion
of an oath.

The refusing of a lawful oath is a sin, when any does refuse to take an oath
which either the Magistrate does justly require, or otherwise necessity
demands, under this condition, that faith may be confirmed, and the truth
established: that so both the glory of God may be set forth, and other men's
safety provided for.

A wicked oath is a sin, when a man does swear against the law of God.

And it is either a rash oath, or an Idolatrous oath, or else perjury, or of an
unlawful thing.

A rash oath is when any swears rashly, and without cause, of a certain
lightness, and profane custom: as if any being angry, swears that he will
slay another.

An Idolatrous oath, is when a man swears by Saints, or other creatures.

Perjury is a sin, when any wittingly and willingly deceives by an oath,
whether it be in giving testimony, or in professing some thing of himself, or
in the promise of his own will. Exodus 20.7. Leuit. 19.12. Matthew. 5.33. Iam.
5.12.

An oath of an unlawful thing is when any swears that he will do that which
is contrary to Gods word. Such was that of Iephte and of Herod.

So much concerning calling upon God: now concerning thanksgiving.
Of thanksgiving.
Thanksgiving is the worship of God, when we render due praise to God for good
things given or promised Psalm. 50.15.

The parts of it are two: the approbation of Gods works and praising of God.

The approbation of Gods works, is a part of thanksgiving, when we allow all
things whatsoever God does because they are good, and therefore we do suffer
them to please and like us. So it becomes us also to allow of the judgments
of God, his providence and governing of tempests, of calmness, of rain, of
wars, of our health, of our household affairs and all other things. Mar. 7.37.
Psalm. 119.71.

The praising of God is a part of thanksgiving, when we praise God in all his
works.

To it is adjoined the admiration of Gods works, and the right estimation of
them.

The admiration of Gods works, is a part of the praising God, when we
marvel at his works, with the true motion of our heart. Psalm. 8.2. Mar. 7.37.
Matthew. 9.33.

The right estimation of Gods works, is a part of the praising God, when we
magnify and extol his works. Psalm. 8.2. and so forward, and 104 throughout.

To thanksgiving is opposed an hypocritical thankfulness, as is that of the
Pharisie. Luke 18.11. and ingratitude toward God, which is a sin when we
do not acknowledge that we have received of God whatsoever good thing we have.
Also when one uses Gods graces and gifts without thanksgiving. Also when any
finds fault with the works and judgments of God: or when any does little
esteem the works of God, and his judgments: or when any is not content with
that which God gives him, and prescribes God, what and how he ought to do.

And thus far concerning thanksgiving: now concerning the confession of the
truth.
Of the confession of the truth.
The confession of the truth is the worship of God, when we do openly without
fear profess the heavenly truth, as it is made known unto us out of the holy
scripture. Matthew. 10.32. 1. Pet. 3.15.

And that is done either with the mouth, or by martyrdom.

With the mouth, when we do without doubtfulnesse and darkness profess that
which we think with our heart. Romans 10.10.

By martyrdom, when we give testimony to the truth, by the cross: yea when
God shall see it so good, by death it self. 1. Pet. 2.20. and 3.14. and 4.12.
Phil. 1.29.

To the confession of the truth, is opposed heresy, the corrupting of
doctrine, blasphemy, and omitting of doctrine, the shunning of doctrine, the
tediousness of doctrine, an unseasonable confession, the dissembling of truth,
and denying of truth.

Heresy is a sin, when any erreth in the foundation of salvation, Of heresy.
and stiffely or stubburnly perseuerteh in his error.

Therefore that wicked stubburnnesse of frantic men in the punishments which
they suffer, either for sedition, as for example, of the Anabaptists, or for
errors which are openly blasphemous, as of Seruetus, who was burnt at Geneua in
the year 1552. is not the confession of truth.

For these are not the martyrs of Christ, because the cause makes a martyr not
the martyrdom, as Cyprian says, and Apollinaris; Where the truth of Christ is
not, there is not the truth of martyrdom.

The corrupting of doctrine, is when men spread abroad any false thing of God
or of his will.

Blasphemy is to speak of God, thing contrary to his nature and will. Leu. 24.

The omitting of doctrine, is a neglect of occasions and ability to teach
others, and to bring them to the knowledge of the truth, especially our
children or others, who are committed to our faithfulness and care.

The shunning of doctrine, is a sin, when any does shun conferences and
speeches concerning God and heavenly things.

Tediousnes of doctrine is a sin, when any is cloyed, as we say, with the
fullness of the word of God.

An unseasonable confession, is that which is made without the necessity of a
man's calling, or of doing some duty: and therefore neither the glory of God is
set forth by such a confession, neither the salvation of any is promoted, but
rather either the scorning or obloquie of the truth, or the fierceness of the
enemies is stirred thereby, specially against the godly.

The dissembling of the truth, is a sin, when any dissembleth the truth, where
the glory of God, and safety of his neighbor requires a true and full
confession.

The denying of the truth is a sin, when any does deny the truth after he has
certainly known it.

The denying of the truth is two fold: either proceeding of infirmity, or
willing.

The former is when any being upon the sudden, and with present and unlooked
for fear, overcome and compelled, does with his mouth indeed deny the truth,
and that to shun some danger, but nevertheless keeps it in his heart,
neither falls from it. Such a denying was that of Peter the Apostle who
denied Christ. Mat. 26.69. etc.

A willing denying of the truth is a sin, when any denies the truth certainly
known, being overcome and compelled with no sudden and unlooked for fear,
but willingly and of purpose, either to keep dignity, or life, or for hope to
obtain substance and riches.

And that is properly called Apostasy, that is to say, a wicked falling away
from the truth, Apostasy.
as was that of Julian the Apostata, and Francis Spira.

Hitherto concerning the confession of the truth: now concerning the observing
of the Ecclesiastical rites or ceremonies.
Of Ecclesiastical rites.
An Ecclesiastical rite or ceremony is the worship of God, in which we worship
God by outward means.

And it is either common to the old and new Testament, or proper to either of
them.

A rite common to the old and new Testament, is both the sanctifying of an holy
day, and also a godly fast and vow.

Of the sanctifying of an holy day.
The sanctifying or celebrating of an holy day, is an ecclesiastical rite, when
we resting from human and bodily labors, do come together into the public
assembly of the Church, for the exercise of Gods worship.

And that does comprehend both the meditation of Gods word, and solemn
prayers: and also the administration of the Sacraments, and the exercise of
the works of mercy.

The exercise of the works of mercy has three parts, both the giving of
alms, and also the visiting of those that need comfort, and also the helping
of those that need our help.

The giving of alms is to be done for the helping and releeuing of the poor,
of the sick, of the prisoners, of the captives, of those that suffer burnings,
or shipwracks, and others that need.

The visiting of those that need comfort, is that of the orphans and widows,
in their affliction. Iam. 1.27.

The helping of those that need our help and aid, is that of the sick, of
those that are besiedged, of captives, or those that are in other dangers of
life. Matt. 12.

Hitherto concerning the sanctification of an holy day: now concerning a godly
fast.
Of a godly or religious fast.
A godly fast, is the outward worship of God, when we for a time refrain from
all meat and drink, the more fervently to exercise godliness.

The ends thereof are:

1 That our unruly flesh may be (as it were) tamed with hunger. 1. Cor.
9.25.26.27. 2 That we might prepare our selves to conceive and make prayers
with the earnest affection of the heart. Luke 2.37. Act. 13. and 14.23. 1. Cor.
7.5. 3 That we might wholely cast down and humble our selves before God with
true grief of mind. 4 That even by outward testimonies, we might whet on both
our selves and others to repentance. Joel. 2.14.15. 1. Samu. 7.5.6.
A private fast, is that which any has privately set to himself, for private
causes and necessities. 2. Sam. 3.35. and 12.16. Nehem. 1.4. Est. 14.2. Dan.
9.3.

A public fast, is that which is generally appointed by the authority of the
Elders and a godly Magistrate, as often as any occasion of times, and imminent
calamity due for our sins do so require. Iud. 20.26. Joel. 2.12. Ion. 3.5.7.
1. Sam. 7.6. 2. Sam. 1.11.12. Est. 14.3. Act. 13.2.3. and 14.23.

So much concerning a fast: now concerning a vow.
Of a vow.
A vow, is asolemne promise made to God, concerning some lawful and holy thing,
which is in our power, and acceptable to God, to be performed in respect of the
thankfulness that is due to him.

And it is either conditional or absolute.

A conditional vow, is a vow to which the condition of time, or place, or some
other circumstance is adjoined, that so, that which is vowed may be performed
or not performed, according to the respect of the condition.

An absolute vow, is that which is without all condition. Psalm. 102.

And both these vows are either temporary, or perpetual.

A temporary vow, is that by which any binds himself to some thing, at the
least for a certain season.

A perpetual vow, is that whereby any binds himself to some thing all his
life long, as Psalm. 102.

Hitherto concerning a rite common to the old and new Testament: now concerning
that that is proper to either of them.
A rite proper to either of them, is either of the old or new Testament.

A rite proper to the old Testament, is either public or private.

A public rite was that which was done in the solemn assembly.

And it was either the Jewish sacrifice, or the observing of holy times.

The Jewish sacrifice was a rite instituted by God, Of sacrifices.
that it might be a putting of them in mind of the benefits to be bestowed
upon them by the Messiah.

And it was either expiatory, or of thanksgiving.

An expiatory sacrifice was a type of the oblation that was to come, which was
to be slain for the sins of mankind. In Greek it is called a cleansing:
otherwise it is called a satisfaction for sin.

And it was either propitiatory, or sacrifices of redemption.

A propitiatory sacrifice was that in which the whole oblation was burned, to
pacify and appease God: it is also called a whole burnt offering.

Sacrifices of redemption were such, as by which sins were redeemed.

And they were either a sacrifice for sin, or a sacrifice for offense.

A sacrifice for sin, was a sacrifice redeeming sins committed of error or
ignorance.

A Sacrifice for an offense, was a sacrifice redeeming offenses wantonly
committed, or as we say, more slight transgression.

Thanksgiving offerings, were those which on the behalf of thanks were
offered to God for benefits bestowed. Genesis 8.20.

Thanks offerings were meat offerings, peace offerings, and the sacrifice of
praise.

A meat offering, was a thanks offering, in which meat was offered.

The Priest did take part of these, the rest was burned with incense.

Peace offerings was a sacrifice, in which only the fat of the oblations was
burned, and they did receive the rest, whose oblations they were.

The sacrifice of praise, was a sacrifice in which cattle were slain, and
drink offerings were to be offered to celebrate and set out praises due to the
Lord.

Hitherto concerning-sacrifices: now concerning the observation of holy times.
Of the holy times in the old Testament.
Holy times in the old testament were either of some set days, or else of
years.

1 Of some set days, which were either daily, in which a continual sacrifice
was offered: and a continual sacrifice, was a sacrifice which was offered to
God daily, at Morning and Evening. Exodus 29.38.39.

2 Or, of every seventh day, in which the Sabbath was observed.

The Sabbath was a holy day, The Sabbath.
which was celebrated on every seventh day. Exodus 20.8.

3 Or of Calends, in which the new Moons were celebrated.

A new Moon, was a holy day, which was religiously observed the first day of
eueuery month. Number. 28.11.

Hitherto concerning the holy times of a day: now concerning the holy times of
a year.
Of the holiness in the old Testament.
The holy times of a year, are those wherein were celebrated either yearly
solemnities, or those which returned after many years.

Yearly solemnities were those which came every where.

And they were instituted either by God, or by the Jews.

Those that were instituted by God, were either great or lesser.

Great, as the Passover, Pentecost, and the feast of the Tabernacles.

The Passover was a great holy day, which was celebrated the fourteenth day of
the month Abib, for the continual remembrance of bringing the people of
Israel out of Egypt. Exodus 12.1.

Pentecost was a great holy day, observed in the fiftieth day after the holy
days of the Passover, in which every family did offer two loves of the first
of the corn, for remembrance of the publishing of the Law. Exodus 23.16. Leuit.
23.15.

The feasts of Tabernacles were holy days, which were celebrated the fifteenth
day of the seventh month, in remembrance of preserving of the people abiding
in tents whilst they were in the wilderness, and to put them in mind of
thanksgiving for the promised land delivered to them, and for the yearly
gathering of their corn. Deuteronomy. 16.

The lesser solemnities were those, which were celebrated with less
preparation.

And they were either the feast of trumpets or of expiation.

The feast of trumpets was celebrated in the first day of the seventh month:
of expiation in the tenth of the same month. Leuit. 23. ver. 24.27.

Hitherto have the solemnities instituted by God himself been handled.
The solemnities instituted by the Jews, were either the feast of Lots, or of
restoration or dedication of the Temple.

The feast of lots were set holy days of the Jews, and commanded and
instituted by Queen Hester and Mordecay, and they were celebrated in the
fourteenth and fifteenth days of the month Adar, in remembrance of the most
cruel counsel of Aman, for slaying the Jews every where, which was hindered
even by God himself. Est. 9.17.

The feasts of restoration, or dedication of the Temple, were set holy days
of the Jews, instituted by Judas Maccabaeus, and they were celebrated in the
fifth day of the ninth month in remembrance of the religion and the temple
restored, which before was profaned by the Gentiles. 1. Macch. 4.59.

Hitherto concerning the yearly solemnities.
The solemnities which returned after many years were two: either the sabbath
of the land, or the year of Jubilee.

The sabbath of the land, was a solemnity coming every seventh year, in
which they were to cease from tilling their fields and vineyards. Leuit. 25.

The year of Jubilee was a solemnity coming every fiftieth year, in which
all their possessions returned to their own masters, and the Hebrew servants
were set free. Leu. 25.

Hitherto concerning the public rites of the old Testament: now concerning
the private.
A private rite was that, which every one did privately observe.

And it consisted both in manifold purifications, and also in the observing of
the differences of meats.

Hitherto we have handled the rites proper to the old Testament: the rites
proper to the new Testament remain to be treated of.
A rite proper to the new Testament, is an observing of the holy days of the
new Testament.

A holy day of the new Testament, is either weekly or yearly.

Weekly is the Lords day.

The Lords day is the first day of the week, Of the Lords day.
wherein Christians do make solemn meetings to exercise the public worship
of God. Act. 20.7. 1. Cor. 16.2. Revel. 1.10.

But the Lords day is celebrated in stead of the sabbath for 3. causes, 1.
that it might continually call to remembrance the benefit of the Lords
resurrection. 2. That the believers might understand, that they are freed from
the yoke of the Law. 3. That it might be a difference between us that are
Christians, and the Jews, who as yet (but without cause) are addicted to the
observation of the time.

The yearly holy day of the new Testament, is either the feast of Christ, or
else of the coming of the holy Spirit.

The holy day or feast of Christ, is that which Christians by the repeating
and holy remembrance of special benefits which Christ has bestowed on the
Church is celebrated and kept for the honor of our Savior Christ himself.

And it is either the holy day of Christ his birth, or of Christ's circumcision,
or of his passion, or of his resurrection, or of his ascension into heaven.

Hitherto concerning the holy days of Christ.
The holy day of the holy Spirit, is the holy day of Pentecost, or Whitsontide
as we call it, in which the memory of sending the holy Spirit is remembered
and set before us.

And thus far concerning the worship of God: now concerning virtue.
Of Virtue.
Virtue is a serious purpose of the will to live honestly, continually and
constantly manifesting it self by outward ctaions. Or virtue is an enclining
of the will to honest actions. Psalm. 1.2. and 39.2.10. and 102.2.3. and so
forward. and
119.2.5.8.16.30.35.40.44.47.57.59.60.69.70.77.93.106.111.112.115.117.121.128.141.143.153.157.166.167.168.173.174. Dan. 1.8. Prou. 16.1. Job. 39.37.38. in which places the will or purpose of the will, is always distinguished from the actions themselves, proceeding from the purpose of the will. Tit. 3.8. 1 Thessalonians. 4.12. Romans 12.17.

For even as true faith is not idle, but working and powerful by love: so true
Virtue is not a bare affection of the mind, or a naked purpose of the will,
but declares it self by outward honest actions, and does shine in them: from
whence it is that all the praise of virtue does consist in action.

Therefore Virtue is the worker of honest actions: and therefore also the
honest actions, by a metonymie of the effect are every where almost called
Virtues.

To Virtue is opposed a counterfaite Virtue and vice: the former as disparat or
disagreeing, the other as contrary.

A counterfaite Virtue, is a false or fained show, a pretext or appearance of
Virtue.

Vice is a purpose of the will to live dishonestly. Vice.


Virtue is referred to our selves* or others.

When it is referred to us our selves, it is either the desire of wisdom, or
a zeal of goodness: and also fortitude, and temperance,

Of Chastity.
Chastity is an abstaining from straggling lusts and al impurity and
uncleanness, whether it be in marriage or out of marriage.

To it is contrary, the counterfaiting of chastity and filthiness of life.

Of filthiness there are many kinds, as these, fornication, adultery, whoredom,
incest, rapte, daintiness, sodomitry, beastliness.

Fornication is committing of filthiness with a single person, that has been
defiled, or with a harlot.

Adultery is filthiness with a married person.

Whordome is filthiness with a virgin.

Incest is filthiness with one of the blood, or that is of kin.

Rapte is filthiness with a maid violently stolen, or taken out of her fathers
house.

Daintiness is filthiness, when any is willingly polluted by himself.

Sodomitry is filthiness of man with man, or of woman with woman.

Beastlines is the filthiness of man with a beast.

Of shamefastnes.
Shamefastness is an abstaining not only from delights following lust, as
unchaste and immodest embracings, kisses, songs, and conferences, or speeches,
but also from thoughts, gestures, and signs of lust, as from immodest moving of
the eyes, etc.

To it is contrary, the counterfeiting of shamefastnes, and immodesty or
shamelesnes.

Hitherto concerning continency: now concerning thriftinesse.
Of thriftines.
Thriftines is a moderating of costs and expenses, that so they may become only
honest and necessary.

To it is contrary nigardlines and prodigality.

Nigardlines, is to use riches so sparingly, that neither due honor is given
to that kind of life wherein a man lives, neither can he almost spare any
thing out of his substance and riches, but trouble and hard labor.

Prodigality is a vice, when any does by little and little wast, and at the
length consume his riches, in unnecessary and immoderat costs and expe^ses

Thus far concerning Temperance: now concerning the care or desire of true
glory.
The care of true glory, is a virtue through which we by honest means, that is
to say, by true godliness and virtue, do endeavor to get our selves a good name
among others. Gal. 6.4. The Grecians express it by one word, which signifies
an honest care of glory.

The hunting after vain glory, whether it be by hypocrisy, or wickedness, or
vice, or sin, does differ from it. Mat. 6.2. Gal. 5, 26. and 6.3. and so does
the contempt of true glory, as that in the Epicures, who pass away their life
as beasts, which nature has made prone and obedient to the belly. And these
me^ are ashamed of a good name of godliness and virtue

Hitherto we have spoken of virtue which is referred to our selves: now
concerning virtue toward others.
Virtue toward others, is that which by outward actions does spread it self
abroad to the use of others, or of our neighbor, as we say

Our neighbor is every man, whether he be our friend or enemy, rich or poor*
either domestical or a stranger: and especially those which stand in need of
our help. Lu. 10.36.37.

Virtue toward other, is either humanity, ciuility, and brideling of the
inordinat motions of the mind: or else christian love and justice.

Humanity is a virtue, Humanity.
when any signifies his good will toward men by gestures and convenient words.

To it is contrary, lightness and inhumanity.

Ciuility, Ciuility.
is a moderating of outward manners and gestures, that so they may agree with
nature. By an other name it is called a special comeliness.

Ciuility pertains to Virtue toward other, for it cannot be exercised but
amongst others.

To it is joined graciousnesse.

Graciousnesse is a virtue, when any does so strive unto the elegancy and
nature of manners, and gentleness of speech, that he may be gracious to others
thereby.

To ciuility is contrary toyishnesse and clownishnesse.

Ciuility stands either in modesty and gravity, or else in elegancy of
manners, and cleanliness of attire.

Modesty is that, Modesty.
by which we in the motion of the whole body, do shun those things which do not
become us.

To it is contrary impudency.

Gravity is that, Gravity.
by which any shows a comeliness and a convenient dignity in the course of
his life.

And that is either in speech, apparel, or gesture.

Gravity in speech is either the right use of the tongue, or taciturnity and
stillness of speech.

The right use of the tongue.
The right use or moderating of the tongue, is a gravity when we so use the tongue,
as when need is* we speak fitly and in place such things only as belong to
the glory of God, and edification of our neighbor.

And it is either in serious, or merry spech.

Serious speech is when necessary things are spoken, and that so far forth
as pertains to the good of others.

Merry speech consists in pleasantness.

Pleasantness is a modest dexterity, or quickenesse in pleasant speeches, and
comely jesting: the Greeks call it pleasant table talk.

Scurrility is diverse from it: and lumpishnesse is contrary to it.

To the right use of the tongue is contrary the abuse of the tongue, when any
does with his tongue speak perverse things. Prou. 10.31. that is to say, when
any abuses his tongue to execrations, cursings, blasphemies, or to lie, to
spread abroad false opinions, to scurrility and filthy speeches; to slander, to
seduce, to give evil counsel, and so forth. To speak perverse things, is to
subvert the truth, justice, good manners, to deceive, blaspheme, backbite.

Taciturnity or silence, is a gravity, when we co^ceale things which might
incur the reprehension of such as are able to judge justly.

And it is either honest or necessary.

Honest taciturnity is a silence, when we abstain and hold our peace from
speaking, the^ especially, when it does not become us to speak.

Necessary taciturnity is a silence, whereby without the hurt of our
conscience, we co^ceale secrets, least they might be spread to hurt any.

Gravity in apparel or attire, is that by which we observe in our apparel or
clothing a convenient adorning of nature.

To it is contrary, lightness in apparel.

Gravity of gesture is that, by which we do so govern the outward gestures of
the whole body and several members thereof, that it may appear thereby that the
mind is well ordered. Gentleness in speech is that, Gentleness in speech.
by which we show our selves easy, affable, and tractable: otherwise it is
called popularity, affability, facility, etc.

That in our meetings and conversation, brings forth pleasantnes in our words
and works.

To gentleness in speech is contrary, overmuch care to please others, and
morosity or way wardnesse.

Elegancy of manners is that, by which we endeavor for excellent manners.
Elegancy of manners.


Excellent manners are those, which agree with the customs of the me^ with who^
we live

Those customs are either of our own country, or of strangers, in the use
whereof we must observe a comlines, namely, that they be there used where they
are of force. For they which bring strange customs into their own country
with them, and by them set out themselves, they are worthily ridiculous, and
indeed to be laughed at.

Cleanliness of attire.
Cleanlines of attire, is that, when we carry our selves cleanly in attire and
raiment.

Hitherto concerning ciuility: now concerning brideling the inordinat motions
of the mind.
Brideling of the inordinat motions of the mind, is either of pride, or of
anger, or of covetousness.

The brideling of pride consists in modesty, and submission, and also in
docility.

Modesty is a brideling of pride, Modesty.
by which we judge conveniently of our selves, and do not despise others. Romans
12.3.

To it is contrary, the couterfeiting of comeliness and immodesty.

The counterfeiting of comlines, is a faining of modesty, when any hunteth
after the praise of modesty, with the denial of those things which yet he in
his mind does either truly or falsely attribute to himself, and with the
refusing of those things which he desires, and does privily endeavor to
obtain.

Submission is a brideling of pride, Submission.
by which we carry our selves inferior to others, who are adorned with more
excellent gifts. Mat. 18.3.

To it is contrary arrogance.

Docility, Docility.
is a brideling of pride, by which we do so govern our mind, that we do not
through the admiration of our own wisdom contemn the judgments of other,
but that we hear others quietly, and yield being convicted with true arguments.

To it is contrary, stubburnnes in errors, and the abounding in a man's own
opinion, and rash presumption of knowledge, when any one does think, that he
knows that which he is yet ignorant of. It may also be called the opinion of
knowledge.

Concerning which, there are many notable sentences, as, glory offers
violence to the truth. And again, glory is the hinderance of promotion. The
rash presumption of knowing does forestall the way of learning. For will any man
suffer himself to be taught, that thinks himself to be learned? Many might
come to the highest degree of learning, but that they do falsely persuade
themselves, that they have already attained to it.

So much concerning the brideling of pride: now concerning the brideling of
anger.
The brideling of anger, is either a desire of concord and mildnes, or long
suffera^ce and quietness.

The desire of concord is a brideling of anger, by which we endeavor as much as
in us lies, to embrace and have peace with all men. To the same virtue it
belongs to turn away and remove the causes and occasions of offenses,
discords and hatreds, amongst us or others.

Also to part from a man's own right.

Also to restore or set concord between those that are at variance. Matt.
18.15.

Also not to revenge an injury offered or done. Matthew. 18.15.

To the desire of concord is contrary an unjust rejoicing or troublesomnesse,
giving or taking occasions of troubles and contentions with others.

Mildness, is a bridling of anger, Mildness.
by which we deal gently, and without disordered affections with others.

To it is contrary cockering and wrath.

Long sufferance.
Long sufferance, is a bridling of anger, by which we bridle the preposterous
desire of revenge. And to this is contrary, slownes and desire of revenge.

Quietness, is a bridling of anger, Quietness.
by which we are made easy to pardon injuries and mutual offenses. Matthew.
18.21.

To it is contrary lightness and implacabilitie, or a mind that can not be
pacified.

Hitherto concerning the brideling of anger: now concerning the brideling of
the desire, or covetousness.
The bridling of the desire, or covetousness, is either of riches or honor.

The brideling of the desire for riches, is called contentedness.

Contentedness, is that by which we are contented with present good things,
rightly gotten, so that also we quietly bear poverty.

To it is opposed covetousness, a counterfeit contempt of riches, an accusing
of fortune, and the loathing of our present estate, or things present.

The brideling of the desire of honors, is when we are so content with our
present state, that we do not affect honors that are not due to us.

To it is contrary an inconsiderate and rash affecting of honors, of a
kingdom, of lordship and principality, etc.

Hitherto concerning the brideling of the inordinate motions of the mind: now
concerning Christian love.
Christian love, is a virtue by which we declare our love toward other.
Christian love.
Romans 12.10.

And it stands both in liberality and friendship: and also in a fellowlike
feeling, and procuring of other men's good.

Liberality, Liberality.
is love toward our neighbor, by which we study and endeavor to profit him. Or
else, liberality, is that by which we succor an other man's necessity.

And it consists both in communicating either of counsels or riches, and also
in performing of duties.

Liberality, which consists in communicating of counsels, is when we do
readily and willingly bestow our gifts and learning for other men's profit.

Liberality, which consists in communicating of riches, is either alms, or
bou^tifulnes.

Alms is a liberality toward the needy, Alms.
by which we through compassion ministering unto them things necessary for their
sustentation, do relieve their wants and lackes. Esa. 58.7.8.9.10. Psalm. 41.2.

Bountifulness, Bountifulness.
is liberality in bestowing gifts or benefits.

And it is either mean or sumptuous.

A mean bountifulness, is that by which we bestow some thing on one of
poorer estate.

And that may be in every one according to the measure of his substance.

A sumptuous bountifulnes, is called magnificence.

Magnificence, is the sumptuous bountifulness only of great men.

Diverse from it is riotousnesse.

Magnificence is either public or private.

Public, when costs are bestowed on public uses. And they again are bestowed
either on holy things, as are the gifts, or things bequeathed to maintain the
ministers of the Church, the poor and stipendarie Scholars, and so forth: to
uphold buildings, or restore them being decayed, for the erecting of Temples,
Schools, Colleges, Hospitals for strangers, etc.

Or else they are given for civil uses: or to preserve, increase, and adorn
the common wealth: as the building of a Court, of storehouses, of armories, of
market places, of mils, of walls, of fortresses, also gifts to nourish by
yearly costs and expenses, the poor, or soldiers, or others which profit
the commonwealth.

Or for the honest recreating and refreshing of the people, as public
banquets, such as David made. 2. Sam. 6.19.

Such magnificence is commendable, if it be referred to the glory of God:
otherwise it shall be a monstrous and execrable pride, as that of King
Ahashuerosh. Est. 1.

Private magnificence, is that which is exercised privately toward some
persons.

So much concerning liberality in communicating of riches.
Liberality in performing of duties, may be called dutifulness.

Dutifulness, Dutifulness.
or a dutiful will, is that which does shine in the giving and performing of
duties.

The kinds of dutifulness are gratification and hospitality.

Gratification, or desire to gratify, is dutifulness, by which we help other
that need our labor, Gratification.
or desire our help, as when we do help any to obtain health. Mar. 7.32. Mat.
9.2. or other necessary things whatsoever.

Hospitality, Hospitality.
is dutifulness, by which we embrace with all duties of hospitality, pilgrims
and strangers, and especially those that are banished for the profession of the
truth.

Thus far concerning liberality: now concerning friendship.
Friendship, is to perform that true kindness toward others, which we would
have them perform toward us.

Friendship is either public or private.

Public friendship is peace.

Private friendship, is a mutual and true kindness amongst good men, stirred
up by the mutual knowledge of virtue, or by honest duties, performing all such
duties as are honest and possible. And such was that between Jonathan and
David.

That is also called Christian brotherhood: to which pertains the unity of
the spirit, or to think the same thing, to will and nill the same thing.

To this is contrary flattery, and heart burning or enimity.

Hitherto concerning friendship: now concerning a fellowlike feeling.
A fellowlike or mutual feeling, is love by which we are duly touched with the
state of other men.

And it is both toward the living and the dead.

A fellowlike feeling toward the living is two fold: pitifulness, or
congratulation.

Pitifulness, is that by which we are moved to lament with others for their
adversity or unhappy estate, otherwise it is called compassion, as Luke 19.
Christ with weeping did pity the miserable destruction of the Jews. So Paul
says, Weep with those that weep.

To this virtue also it belongs to visit the fatherless children and
widows in their calamities, and to comfort them.

To it is opposed, a rejoicing in evil, and want of feeling or affection.

Congratulation, is that by which we rejoice with others for their prosperity
or felicity: of which Paul says; Rejoice with them that rejoice.

Thus far concerning a fellowlike feeling toward the living: now toward the
dead.
A fellowlike feeling toward the dead, is both mourning, and also a care to
bury them. 1. Sam. 28.3.

Mourning, is that by which we bewail the death of those, who in their life
were dear to us. 1 Thessalonians. 4.13. Act. 8.2. 2. Sam. 3.31.32.33.

Care to bury them, is that by which we honorably commit the dead to their
burial. 1 Thessalonians. 4.14.

So much concerning a fellowlike feeling: now of the procuring of other men's
good.
The procuring of other men's good, is love toward our neighbor, by which as
much as we are able we further and promote his good. Prou. 3.29. Phil. 2.4. Or
else it is when we help and increase his commodities and profits as much as we
can.

And that does respect both the good name of our neighbor, and also other
commodity of this life. Exodus 23.1.

Hitherto concerning love: now concerning justice.
Of justice.
Justice, is a virtue giving to every one that which by duty or desert, is his
own.

And it is either universal or particular.

Universal justice, is that which we generally owe to all.

And it is exercised and occupied either in admonishing of others, or in
prayers for the^.

Particular justice, is that which we ought to perform to them to whom we are
specially and peculiarly bound.

And that is either private or public.

Private, which every one ought to perform privately.

And that either in his own proper calling, or in fellowship with others.

In his own proper calling it is both the lawful obtaining of an office, and
the care of that his own office: and also diligence and fidelity or
faithfulness therein.

The lawful obtaining of an office, is when a man obtayneth some office by
lawful ways and means: he does not buy it with money as the Popes buy the
Popedom.

The care of his own office, is when any deals with the matters of his own
calling, and does not thrust himself into an other man's vocation.

Diligence, is that by which we execute, as well as we can the labors of our
office and duty. 2 Thessalonians. 3.10. Romans 12.11. Prou. 12.4.5.

Or else when we do our works diligently and faithfully, that we may be the
better able to help the need of others also.

Fidelity, is that by which we in our office do sincerely perform that which
we have received or undertaken to do.

Hitherto concerning private justice in a man's own vocation.
Justice, which ought to be performed in fellowship, is either distributive (as
we call it) or commutatiue and interchangeable, as we may say.

Of a distributive justice.
Distributive justice, is that by which we perform to every one, things
agreeable to the condition, state, and dignity of every one. Romans 13.7. Honor
to whom honor, tribute to whom tribute. Romans 12.10.

And that is either appertayning to house and family, or else it is political
and civil.

Justice appertayning to the house, is that which ought to be exercised and
performed either in domestical fellowship, or in the accomplishment of
domestical or household duties.

This stands in the holiness of wedlock, and right guiding of household
affairs.

Of wedlock.
Wedlock, is a lawful joining together of one man and woman, for the bringing
forth of issue.

The holiness of wedlock does consist both in a lawful betroathing of man
and wife, and also in the duties of wedlock or marriage.

Of betrothings.
Betrothing, is a firm and certain promise of wedlock between two, before fit
witnesses appointed thereto: by another name it is called sponsals or spousals.

Fit witnesses, are those who can testify the things which are required in
betrothings.

And those things are either consent of the parties themselves, or else that the
persons be fit for betroathing.

Of consent in wedlock.
Consent is both of the bridegroom and of the bride: and also of the parents, or
those who are in steed of their parents, and supply their places.

The consent of the bridegroom and of the bride, must be expressed and plain,
because wedlockes are joined by mutual consent.

Consent is made and given, either with condition, or without condition.

If the consent be made with condition, they are termed betrothings of the time
to come, or delivered in the future tense, as we say.

In which, if the condition made in the beginning of the contract was honest
and pertaining to wedlock, and were not yet fulfilled, the contract is broken
or become void.

Such as are these conditions: to wit, if the parents shall gree: if a
convenient dowry shall be given thereto.

But when there follows companying, or lying together, they not expecting or
waiting for the performing of the condition, that conjunction is judged to be
wedlock* because the persons agreeing together, have departed from the
condition.

But if the condition be strange, that is to say nothing at all pertaining to
wedlock: or if it be filthy, or impossible, the^ it is to be rejected by the
judge, as though it had not bin added: neither is the contract to be dissolved
for it, although the condition be not fulfilled: as that so, crafty dealing
and wantonness may be forbidden in deceiving the poor and weak sex.

If the consent be made or given without condition, they are called
betrothings, in the present time or tense, in which the wedlock by a verb of
the present tense, or simply, is promised, and there is even then the true
beginning of present wedlock.

Now both error and compulsion must be far removed from the consent of the
bridegroom and bride.

Error in wedlock.
Error is either of the person, or of the condition.

Error of the person, is when there is deceit as in respect of the parties. As
Leah was delivered to Jacob for Rahel.

For this error of the person both the betrothings and wedlock may be dissolved
or broken.

Therefore Jacob might have refused or cast off Leah, but he used not the
strictness of his right.

The error of the condition, is when one person knows not the state of
another.

The error of condition is two fold, for either it pertains to the condition
of household affairs, or respects the state of the chastity of one of the
persons.

The error of condition, pertaining to the state of household affairs, is, if
a woman think the bridgroome to be rich, or noble, or to have no children.

For such an error of condition, the betrothings or wedlock, are not to be
broken or dissolved, because such an error does not at all pertain to the
essential things of wedlock.

The error of condition, pertaining to the state of the chastity of one of
the persons, is, if any being ignorant, does marry her that is deflowred, or
with child by another.

In such an error the judgment of Moses is one, and the judgment of the
common law is an other.

The judgment of Moses is put down, Deuteronomy. 22. chap. which commands her to
be stoned with stones that was defiled by another, which afterward (as though
she had bin a virgin) was married to another, if she were accused, and the man
asked a diuorcement.

The proceeding of the common law, is two fold: one before their lying
together, another after their lying together.

Before the lying together be committed, this proceeding is to be kept.

First reconciliation between them is to be assayed, that he who of error
married her that was defiled by another, may keep her, especially if she be
modest, and will afterward live chastely. And this course also would be observed,
because oftentimes great calamities follow diuorceme^ts, of which both the
judge and the actor, must have special regard.

But if the reconciliation does not proceed, the diuorcement must be made.

For it is better to follow the example of Moses law, then other reasons. For
although the judicial laws of Moses do not pertain to our states and
places, yet we see in them what God allows. Furthermore the example of Moses
law does more strengthen the consciences, then other arguments: because by the
testimony of Gods law, the Judges are sure that they do not contrary to the
will of God.

But after the lying together, it is to be determined, that ye bridegroom or
husband may retain her, which before was defiled by himself or some other,
whether he married her wittingly or ignorantly.

And that is established even in our new constitutions and orders, for three
special causes.

The first, that their lightness might not be strengthened who willingly upon
every and any pretext do forsake their wives, by what means soever their mind
be altered.

The second is, least through suspicions or some small offenses, the innocent
parties should come into danger.

The third is this, that secret faults may not be laid open, which is more
honest and profitable to be covered: according to the saying, Love covers all
faults.

And thus we have spoken concerning error, which ought to be far from the
consent of the bridegroom and the bride: now concerning compulsion.
Compulsion also ought to be far removed, for there is no consent or wedlock,
when the person is by force compelled to promise wedlock, and in this behalf
or respect many hurtful errors and offenses fall out.

The consent of the bridegroom and bride has bin handled: now concerning the
consent of others that have interest and right therein.
The consent of others that have right therein, is either of parents, or of
those who are in steed of parents.

Of the consent of parents.
The consent of parents is of necessity required: and the betrothings are to be
judged void, if the parents gainsay the same before the commixtion,
copulatio^, or lying together: because the authority of parents is not to be
violated or broken.

But it does belong to the office of the Judge to consider, when the parents
have a probable cause of gain saying, and when there is no probable cause.

But after the copulation or lying together the wedlock cannot be cut off or
broken by the authority of the parents: because the question is not now of the
wedlock to come: and there should injury be offered to the woman forsaken or
cast off.

The consent of those that are in steed of parents, as for example, of tutors,
is not required of necessity, but for honesty sake only.

So much concerning the consent which is required to wedlock: now follows
what persons be fit.
That the persons may be fit there are required two things: first, that they be
fit both in regad of age and also of gifts, necessary for house keeping or
government. 1. Cor. 7.36.40. Prou. 31.10.11.

A full age is required, as which cannot only give consent to the match, but is
also fit for governing of household affairs and matters.

The betrothing of boys and wenches.
Therefore, the betrothing of men-chidren under fourteen years old, and
wenches under twelve, yea though it be made by parents or tutors, is not the
beginning of true wedlock, and it may be dissolved when afterward the will of
the young folks does not like, or comes not thereto. Neither is that party
which is unwilling to be compelled, which has not bound him or her self
afterward when their age was fit for wedlock, and they might be able by their
own judgment to determine the matter.

The second thing is, that they may be joined together, having either power to
bring forth issue, or by the law of nature.

By reason of having power to bring forth issue, such may be joined together as
are not unmeet for the co^panying of wedlock: namely those that are not gelded
men, or in whom nature is not hurt, by bewitching or poisning.

Gelded men.
Gelded men are those, who are altogether unfit for accompanying of wedlock,
whether they be such by nature, or whether they be made unfit by art, as being
gelded.

Such persons are not to be joined in wedlock, therefore also the marriages
being celebrated, when after the space of three years, the coldness of a
gelded man is tried, or in three whole year, the healing of the nature being
maimed, is attempted in vain, the Judge may pronounce that those persons are
free. Neither yet then is diuorceme^t made because it was not wedlock: and to
the person which has the sound force of nature there may be granted another
lawful copulation, and the same more fruitful.

So much concerning those who may be joined together, as having power to bring
forth issue.
By the law of nature, they which are not of kindred in the flesh, may contract
matrimony, Leuit. 8.5. and so forward.

For these are always forbidden to be joined together, unless when they are
compelled by mere necessity, to wit, when there want persons which are not of
kindred in the flesh, as in the first and second beginning of people, the
former under Adam after creation, the other under Noah after the flood.

Kinsfolks in the flesh.
Kinsfolks in the flesh, are those who touch us in the flesh. Leuit. 18.6. and
25.49.

Propinquitie or aliance therefore is touching in flesh, or neerenesse in blood.

Kinsfolks in the flesh, are those who are near unto us, either by nature or
by marriage: from whence there is a double aliance in the flesh that is either
by nature, or by marriage.

Kinsfolks by nature.
Kinsfolks by nature, are kinsfolks of either of our parents, father or mother.
Leuit. 18 12. or else kinsfolks by nature, are those who descend and come of
the same stock.

Whereupon also they are called cousins in blood, Consanguins.
because they are joined more near unto un by the society of blood, and of
nature.

Aliance or consanguinitie.
Aliance by nature therefore, or consanguinity and cousinage by blood, is the
kindred of persons, which because they do arise of one stock, they are joined
nearer unto us by the society of blood and nature.

A stock.
A stock is a person from which others are derived.

And alyes by nature or blood, are discerned by line and degree.

The line of Alyes.
The line, is a descent of alyes by nature derived from one stock.

And that is either right or collateral.

The right line, is either of kinsfolks ascending or descending.

Kinsfolks ascending, are first the father and mother: secondly, the fathers
father, and mothers father: thirdly the great grandfather, and great
grandmother: fourthly the great grandfathers father, and great grandmothers
mother: and all other ancestors besides.

Kinsfolks descending, are first the son and the daughter: secondly the
nephew and the niece: thirdly the nephews son, and the neeces daughter:
fourthly, a son in the fourth degree, a daughter in the fourth degree: fifthly
a son in the fifth degree, a daughter in the fifth degree: and what other
children souer.

A collateral or cross line is two fold: equal or unequal.

Equal, is that by which alies by nature do equally differ from the common
stock.

Unequal, is that by which alies by nature unequally differ from the common
stock.

Alies by nature, in an unequal line, are either superiors or inferiors.

And both either from the fathers stock, or from the mothers.

Superiors, are first the uncle and the aunt by the fathers side, the uncle
and the aunt by the mothers side: secondly, the great uncle and great aunt by
the fathers side, the great uncle, and great aunt by the mothers side: thirdly,
my fathers uncle and aunt, my mothers uncle and aunt: fourthly, my fathers
great uncle and great aunt, my mothers great uncle and great aunt.

Inferiors, are the sons of those referred to the superiors.

So much concerning the line: now concerning the degree.
A degree is a difference or distance of persons from the stock, or of one
person from another.

And that either from the stock or among themselves under the stock.

But in every person we must number from the stock.

A genealogy.
Which numbering is called a genealogy. For a genealogy is a descent of the
generation, counted in order: and the same is so numbered, that so the stock
being set down, from which the accounting of the degrees is to be begun, above
that stock his ancestors must be placed, and beneath the same the sons and
nephews are set, and on the sides are added, the brothers and sisters. For
example.

Aram. Their. Abraham. Isaac. Jacob. Joseph.



Nachor.
The knowledge of a genealogy, is necessary for the understanding first of
the account of degrees, and secondly the forbidding of wedlock.

Of the reckoning of degrees
The reckoning of degrees is required, that we may know by how many degrees
persons differ, concerning whose consanguinitie there is question made.

And seeing the line is two fold, right or collateral, therefore the account
of degrees, according to the difference of the lines is two fold also, the one
in the right line, the other in the collateral line.

In the right line, look how many persons there are, so many degrees there
are, excepting the stock from whence the account must be begun: as Joseph does
differ in the third degree from Abraham, Jacob in the second, Isaac in the
first.

Therefore the son makes the first degree, the nephew the second, the
nephews son the third, the nephews sons son the fourth, and so forth.

In the collateral line, seeing it is two fold, that is, equal or unequal,
the manner of the reckoning is two fold also: the one in the equal line, the
other in the unequal.

In the equal line, by how many degrees the one person differs from the
common stock, by so many degrees the persons themselves differ one from another.

Therefore two brethren, or a brother and a sister, are by consanguinitie
joined to themselves, in the first degree, as Jacob is joined to Esau in the
first degree. So the same man is joined in the second degree to Rahel and Leah.

BATHVEL.
Rebecca Jacob. Laban Rahel and Leah.
IEPPHNNE.
Caleb. Axa. Cenas. Othniell.
Othniel therefore is joined in the second degree to Axa.

In the unequal line look by how many degrees he that is removed differs
from the stock, by so many degrees they differ one from another.

THEIR.
Abraham Aram Sarah.
Sarah differs two degrees from the stock: therefore she differs so many
degrees from Abraham, and is joined to him in the second degree.

THEIR.
Abraham Isaac Nachor Bathuel Rebecca.
Rebecca differs in the third degree from the stock: therefore also she
differs from Isaac in the third degree, in which she was also joined to him.

The account of the degrees has been handled, now follows the forbidding of
wedlock in respect of the degrees.
Of the ^o^^idding of ^^^l^^k
The forbidding of wedlock according to the double difference of the line, is
also two fold: one in the right line, the other in the collateral.

In the right line all kinsfolks, both ascending and descending are forbidden
from mutual marriages, and that as for the order of nature, so for the
reverence of blood. Leuit. 18.7.

Wherefore if Adam were at this day alive, he could not mary a wife.

In the collateral line, forbidding also is two fold* the one in the equal
line, the other in the unequal line.

In the equal line, although by Gods law wedlock was granted in the second
degree: and therefore it was lawful for the sons or daughters of brethren to
contract matrimony between themselves: yet now by man's law they are forbidden
within the fourth degree: that so Gods forbidding might be observed with
greater reverence.

Jacob married Rachell his cousin germane by the mothers side, to whom he was
joined in the second degree.

Othmell married Axa, to whom he was also joined in the second degree.

And the dispensations which do grant a commixion in the degrees forbidden in
the Text. Leuit. chap. 18. are not of force. For the laws in Leuiticus, which
forbid the commixion of certain persons, are the laws of nature and bind all
nations. For God or incestuous lusts punished even the Gentiles, who were
without the policy and government of Moses, and which also were before Moses.
As the text in Leu expressly says, that the Egyptians and Canaanites were
punished for incestuous lusts: so Paul punished the Corinthian who had touched
his stepmother, or had carnally known her.

In the unequal line, wedlockes are forbidden by Gods law, in the second
degree, because generally God would have more reverence to be given to the
superior degree then to the equal* because these in the unequal line occupy
the place of parents, and children. 1. Tim. 5.4.

Therefore the brother ought not to marry his sister, nor the nephew his aunt
by his fathers side, nor his aunt by his mothers side, neither the niece ought
to marry her uncle by her fathers side, or her uncle by her mothers side.

Hitherto we have spoken of alies by nature or by blood: now of allies by
marriage.
Of alyes by marriage and affinity.
Alies by marriage, are kinsefolks, of one of the married parties, by reason of
the marriage contracted betwixt him and the party near to him in blood. As
David is nothing a kin unto Jonathan, but because he married the sister of
Jonathan to wife, now he is become the kinsman of Jonathan.

Affinity therefore is a nearinesse of persons, which marriage makes between
one married party, and those that are near in blood to the other party married
also.

By how many degrees is my kinsman by blood, by so many degrees his wife is my
kinswoman by marriage: as two brethren are joined in the first degree of
consanguinity: therefore the wife of my brother is joined to me in the first
degree of affinity.

The forbidding of wedlock in the first degree of affinity belongs to the
law of nature. Therefore Herod when he married Herodias his brother Philips
wife, committed incest, because Herodias was joined to Herod in the first
degree of affinity.

HEROD.
Herod. Philip whose wife was Herodias.
So Ruben also sinned, because he defiled the bed of his father Jacob.

Jacob.

Ruben. his stepmother Bala.

Therefore Ruben touched or knew his stepmother in the first degree of affinity.

Of the bound of affinity.
Affininity is not extended very far, for my kinsmen in blood are not kin to
my wifes cousins in blood. I ought to abstain from my wifes kinsewoman by
blood, and my kinsefolkes by blood ought to abstain from my wife, but yet not
from my wifes kinsefolkes by blood. Wherefore two brethren may marry with two
sisters, for they are not hindered by affinity. The father and the son may
marry the mother and the daughter.

Thus far concerning the betroathings which ought to go before wedlock: now
concerning the duties of wedlock or marriage.
The duties of wedlock consist in the justice of marriage, and in the education
of children.

The common bond of these duties is a natural affection.

A natural affection.
A natural affection, is a natural love of the nearenesse of blood.

Justice of marriage, is either common to both the married parties, or proper to
the one.

The duty common to both married parties.
The common justice of both the married parties is, 1. that both keep their
marriage love perfect and undefiled.

2 That they may dwell together with familiar fellowship, and lovingly live
together, that their life be not passed away with sadness, or they be
compelled to seek comfort abroad, whereupon they may easily incur infamy or
slander.

3 That they mutually love one another without iealosie, least otherwise they
get themselves continual anguish of heart and do mutually give provocation and
allurement to break their faith.

Jealousy, Jealousy.
is the suspecting of adultery in the parties that are married.

If it fall out otherwise, the married parties learn and feel by experience
many discommodities: so that it is either a troublesome or sorrowful
matrimony, or diuorcement follows.

Of diuorceme^t.
Diuorcement is a lawful breaking off of wedlock.

The causes of diuorcement are only two: one adultery. Mat. 5.32 and 19.3.

The other is a forsaking, that is to say, a malicious departing of one of the
married parties, and that without any just causes, but either of lightness, or
unjust impatience, and suffering of the bridle of marriage, or for some other
unnecessary causes. 1. Cor. 7.15.

But in diuorcement there ought to be observed both the manner of proceeding,
and also the time after which a second wedlock or marriage may be granted to
the innocent person.

The proceeding in deuorceme^t for adultery.
The manner of proceeding comprehends both the lawful knowledge that the
Judges have, and also the trying of reconciliation, or the pronouncing of the
sentence

The manner therefore of proceeding in the case of adultery, ought so to be
framed, that the parties being heard, the accusation may sufficiently be
confirmed and proved, so that the guilty person may be convicted.

If the person which has offended be found guilty, and the innocent person
does require that a diuorceme^t be made, the Judge ought first to try them
both, and to exhort them, that they would return into savor and love one of
them with another.

If the reconciliation does not proceed, the innocent person may not be
compelled to receive the guilty.

But if the person accusing, has lived honestly, and does require the sentence
to be pronounced, it ought to be pronounced thus: Since the person which has
offended, has by his wickedness dissolved wedlock, the judge by the
authority of the Gospel does pronounce the innocent person to be free, and
does expressie grant him, that according to his conscience he may safely and
godlily marie another.

But the condemned person ought to be punished by the civil magistrate, to
whom it belongs to punish adultery, either by exile that the guilty person
might be driven out of those places, where the innocent person lives, to whom
the other, to wit, the condemned person, is to be esteemed as dead: or else by
some other punishment, which the magistrate shall judge convenient.

And thus the manner of proceeding in the case of adultery ought to be framed
and ordered: the manner of proceeding in the case of forsaking, now follows to
be handled.
The proceeding in diuorcement, for forsaking
The proceeding in the case of forsaking, ought so to be framed and ordered,
that the petition of the accuser being heard first, there should be lawful
trial made. That trial or knowledge consists in this, that it may be tried,
whether the person be rightly forsaken or no: whether the color of forsaking
be not used to cover lightness or unfaithfulness.

For he is not a forsaker, who is absent either because of some duty, as an
ambassador, or soldier, chosen by lawful authority to go a warfaring: or
else by the will of his wife, as if he be absent some where for merchandise, or
about some other honest business: or be held in captivity: or be carried away,
if namely the case into which the husband falls be such, as it does not
change the affection of the wife, that is to say, if there be no such
wickedness committed, whereby otherwise wedlock may be dissolved. Furthermore
after it is known that the person is indeed forsaken, the person forsaking is
to be called into judgment by lawful citing, done and affixed in the public
place, that so he may appear within a certain time, set and appointed
therefore.

If the person forsaking does not appear within the set time, the testimonies
concerning the integrity of the innocent person are to be heard, and that
party is to be pronounced free.

Hitherto we have spoken concerning the manner of proceeding in diuorcement: now
we must speak of the time after which another wedlock may be granted to the
innocent person. Of the time of granting wedlock, the diuorcement being made.

There is a two fold consideration of the time, after which another wedlock is
granted to the innocent person, one in the case of adultery, another in the
case of forsaking.

In the case of adultery the time is not prescribed to the innocent person,
after the thing is once judged.

In the case of forsaking, wedlock is to be granted, if it do certainly
appear, that the person forsaking either is dead, or has in some place by
committing adultery, violated marriage, or would not appear though he had
knowledge of the scitation.

Otherwise the person forsaken ought to expect: for it falls out that even
after nine years, the husband sometime returns, especially if any be taken
in war in Turkey, or other where he beholden by the enemies in captivity.

Hitherto concerning common justice of both the married parties: now of that
that is proper to one of them.
Justice proper to one of the married parties, does peculiarly appertain
either to the office and duty of the husband or of the wife.

The office of the husband, is first to defend his wife, Col. 3.19.

The duty of the husband.
2 Decently to use his wife in ornaments and other necessaries. For she is not
to be used or entreated as a handmaide or servant, but as a fellow, because she
was formed not out of the feet, but out of the side of man.

3 Gentlely, if need be to correct and admonish her, not angerly and sharply,
least she be provoked.

The duty of the wife.
The duty of the wife, is first to be subject to her husband. Ephesians. 5.22.
Coloss. 3.18. 1. Pet. 3.1.

2 To be chaste and shamefast, modest and silent, godly and discreet.

3 To keep her self at home, for the good government of her family, not to
stray abroad.

Hitherto concerning the justice of marriage: now concerning the education of
children.
The education or bringing up of children, comprehends both the duties of
parents and children.

The duty of parents.
The duty of parents, is first to sustain their children with food and raiment.
1. Tim. 5.8.

2 To bring up their children in learning, and discipline or instruction of the
Lord. Ephesians. 6.4. Colos. 3.21.

3 Moderately to use their fatherly power. that they do not grieve their
children, and provoke them to anger. Ephesians 6.4.

The duty of children.
The duty of children, is both to honor their parents. Ephesians. 6.1. Col. 3.20.
and also to agree among themselves. Psalm. 133.1. and mutually to love and help
one another.

Honor toward parents, comprehends reverence, obedience, and beneficence or
liberality toward their parents. Leuit. 19.3. Matthew. 15.1. Mar. 7.11.12.
Christ shows out of the fifth commandment, how children should do well to
their parents.

Joseph is a singular example of beneficence toward his parents and
kinsfolks, who brought into Egypt, and liberally nourished, not only his
father, but also his brethren (by whom he was sharply and ungently entreated
and sold) and their whole family being vexed with very sore famine.

Hitherto concerning the holiness of wedlock: now touching the disposing of
household affairs or matters.
The disposing of household affairs, consists in the duty both of masters,
and also of servants.

The duty of Masters.
The duty of masters is, first, moderately to use their authority over their
servants Ephesians. 6.9

And that is done two ways: first, if the masters do not grieve their
servants with oouermuch labor, and do always remember that they are not asses
but men: secondly, if they do quietly govern them, and also quietly chide
them, when they have neglected their duty, least they be provoked with over
hard words, and that they remember, that they also have a Lord in heaven, with
whom there is no respect of persons. Ephesians. 6.9.

2 Bountifully to reward the labor of their servants, least being compelled by
necessity they should steal.

The duty of servants.
The duty of servants is, first from their hearts to perform the labors that
their masters command them. Ephesians. 6.5.6.

2 To be faithful in things committed to them by their masters, that so they
may keep their goods.

3 To observe the uprightness of manners, that the wife, the sons and
daughters, or other fellow servants, be not corrupted by their bad counsels.

A justice as pertaining to a household or family has bin thus set forth:
civil justice does now follow.
A civil distributive justice, is that which ought to be performed in a
politic society.

And that is due either to every one, or to some few.

To every one is due, truth, sincerity faithfulness, gentleness, Truth.
and dutifulness.

Truth is that by which we do constantly love and embrace true opinions, we
speak true things, and both in our speech and gestures avoid deceitful
concealings and clokings of matters.

To it is contrary lying, and a deceitful concealing of the truth.

Sincerity, Sincerity.
is when the tongue and gesture agree with the heart.

To it is contrary counterfeiting and faining.

Faithfulness, Faithfulness.
is that by which we keep our promises and covenants.

To it is contrary deceit, and breaking of faithfulness or fidelity.

Gentleness, Gentleness.
is that by which we judging justly of others, do attribute those due praises
to them, which they deserve.

To the same virtue it belongs to take all things in good part, not to
backbite our neighbor, and not to give ear to backbiters.

To gentleness is contrary, quarelling, or backbiting, a foolish credulity
or belief, suspicion and distrustfulnesse.

Quarelling, Quarelling.
is a malicious taking of some thing in evil part.

Dutifulness, Dutifulness.
is that by which we with outward due honor, embrace and reverence those that
are our superiors, by age, state or gifts. Romans 12.

And that either in granting to them the pre-eminence of speech, seat, and
every action: or in gestures meet and fit according to the circumstances.

Hitherto concerning civil distributive justice, which ought to be exercised
toward every one: now follows that which is to be exercised toward some
few.
A civil distributive justice, which ought to be exercised toward some few is
two fold: thankfulness and submission.

Thankfulness, Thankefulne^.
is a virtue by which we declare that we are thankful toward our benefactors.

And that again is either of the mind, or of the deed.

The thankfulness of the mind is that by which we thank our benefactor for
benefits bestowed on us. Thankefulnes.


And that is declared both in giving thanks for benefits received, we holding
fast the memory of them, and commending the^ amongst others, and by godly
wishes praying heartily for the good success of those that deserve well of us:
and also in bearing a very ready mind to recompense the favors received.

Thankfulness of the deed, is when we in deed, that is to say, in gifts and
duties, requite the benefits that have been bestowed upon us.

To thankfulness is contrary unthankfulness, and an unjust and unlawful
gratifying for benefits received.

Thus far concerning thankfulness: now concerning submission.
Submission is a distributive justice, which is due to the politic magistrate
by the subjects that are under him.

And that consists in obedience toward laws and in the bearing of public
burdens. Romans 13.1. Mat. 17.27. and 22.21. 1. Pet. 2.13.

To it is contrary sedition, stubburnnesse, a faining of submission, and a
wicked bondage, especially in idolatrous and unjust matters.

Hitherto concerning distributive justice: now concerning commutatiue justice.
A co^mutatiue justice.
A commutatiue justice, is that by which we according to our covenant, keep an
equity in our bargains and contracts: or else, it is that by which we so
deal with our neighbor in contractes, as we would desire to be dealt with our
selves.

Hitherto concerning private justice: now concerning public justice.
Public iustic^
Public justice, is that which the public Magistrate ought to exercise to
preserve in safety the common state of the subjects. 1. Ti. 2.2.

A magistrate.
A Magistrate is a public person, lawfully bearing rule over subjects. Romans
13.1. Or he to whom it is granted to command by authority.

Public justice is either in peace or war.

Justice in peace.
Justice in peace, is that by which the commodities of the subjects are rightly
ordered and governed in the time of peace.

And it is seen in the publishing and execution of laws.

The publishing of laws.
The publishing of laws ought to respect the prosperity and good estate of the
subjects.

That prosperity and good estate does not only consist in businesses
pertaining to this life: but also or especially in this, that in the first
place the true worship of God should be of force, from which alone all true
felicity does proceed. Deuteronomy. 17.18. 2. Sam. 6.1. King. 2.27. and 11.11. Psalm.
75.11.

The execution of laws.
The execution of laws, is a bringing of the^ to effect, for the preservation
of the public discipline. Romans 13.3.

And it is two fold: the defense of subjects, and brideling of evil men.

Of the defense of subjects there are two parts, the procuring and conservation
of the good estate of the subjects, and the aiding of them, who have just cause
against the iniquity of others.

The brideling of evil men, is another part of the execution of laws, by which
punishments are inflicted on the guilty.

In the punishment is used either strictness or clemency.

Strictness, Strictness.
is that by which according to the strict law, or rigorous severity of laws,
and that without mitigation, the punishment for the sin pronounced after a
lawful manner, is inflicted on the sinful offender. Psalm. 102.1.5.8.

To strictneste is contrary impunitie, and tyranny or outragiousnesse, or
cruelty and over much rigor.

Clemency, Clemency.
is that by which for just and sufficient causes, the punishment is remitted or
mitigated to the guilty. In Greek it is called (...), that is, equity. Psalm.
102.1.

To clemency is contrary tenderness and softlinesse, which does not only
mitigate, but even dissolve the bonds of laws: and cruelty.

Without accepting of persons.
In the execution of laws there must be no partiality or respect of person,
which is, an vncorrupt execution of laws without accepting of persons. Psalm.
82.1.2. Chro. 19. Deuteronomy. 1.16. and 16.18. Prou. 24.23.

Accepting of persons.
To it is contrary, the accepting or respect of persons, which is to attribute
just things to unjust men, or rewards to them that deserve not the same.

Thus far concerning the justice of the magistrate in peace: now concerning
justice in war.
Justice in war
Justice in war, is the administering of war with equity. Luc. 3.14.

War, War.
is a necessary defense against public violence, or a just punishment for
heinous injuries, which is vndertake^ with force of arms by an ordinary
power. Iud. 8.19. and 20. throughout the whole chapter.

Of justice in war there are two parts: the undertaking of war only for a
just cause, and the preserving of martial discipline.

The end of the second book of the Definitions and partitions of Divinity.
To God alone be glory.

TO THE GENTLE reader health in Christ.
GEntle Reader, if any thing in these definitio^s and partitions of divinity
do not satisfy thee, know thou, that I have performed therein, as much as God
of his grace has given me at this time, and have ministered unto thee matter
also that thou with me might think upon and labor to find out. In the
mean while use these things as I do, to the sanctifying of Gods holy name. And
so farewell.


