THE BARONETS BVRIALL, OR A FUNERAL SERMON PREACHED at the solemnity of that
Honorable Baronet Sr EDWARD SEYMOVRS burial.

BY BARNABY POTTER Bachelor in Divinity, Fellow of Queens College in Oxford,
and Preacher to the Town of Tottnes in Devon.

PROVE. 10. 7. The memorial of the just shall be blessed, but the name of the
wicked shall rot. Printed at Oxford by Joseph Barnes. 1613.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL Sr EDWARD GILES, KNIGHT HIGH Sheriff of Devon; and to
his right virtuous and Religious Lady, the Lady MARY GILES: B. P. wishes
increase of all heavenly graces in this life, and in that other, eternal
happiness, both to them and all theirs.
RIGHT WORSHIPFUL,
I Know there are many that will wonder at me, and those most that know me
best, that after no less then ten years labor and toil in the Lords
harvest, I should hope to approve my pains, or improve my praise or profit
with these few scattered ears, in such a plentiful crop of all kind of
fruitful books that are daily brought into the Lords barn. To these I may
profess, and if need were protest, that it is neither my praise, nor profit
that I aim at; and whatsoever my toil has been for these ten years, yet
this little crop was both sown, and ripe, and reapt, and brought into the
barn, within less then the compass of half ten days, and therefore I
cannot look either for praise or profit for such small pains, Others perhaps
will pull me by the ears and put me in mind of that position, lately
maintained in that great assembly of the Act at Oxford 1613. doctior quisque
fuit in scribendo parcissimus. Handled the same Act.
learned, that the more learned are the moreloath to leave any thing in print
to the view of the world. To such I answer, that it is my love not my learning
that I would show, and therefore I hope the lawiers position will satisfy
such, amor excusat in delictis, those actions that proceed from the passion of
love are not liable to law, at least pardonable in reason. Unto both these
objections I say that I had rather the world should condemn me as unjust, and
the whole University as unlearned, then you should so much as think me
unthankful. For since you first fetched me from the bosom of my mother the
University, and ever since with extraordinary kindness have harbored me in
your house, that countenance you have continually given to my weak ministry,
that comfort I have taken from your continually frequenting the means of
salvation, the preaching of the word, and your willing conformity unto it,
that extraordinary respect which I have found, not from your selves only, but
for your sakes from the most and best of the country about you, whether I came
as a stranger^may justly challenge a greater return of thankfulness, then
these few indigested meditations; which as they were first preached, and now
published at your earnest entreatie (whose will should be worth a command to
me) so must I now entreat that they may pass under both your patronages, whose
very names, for the love you have of all sides from all sorts in your country,
will quickly procure them a quiet passage. If the curious or captious carpe at
them I care not, so the faithful Christian may receive some comfort by them.
If your remembrance, with this honorable Baronets (whose burial it is) may
live a little longer by these lines, if the day of your death, now after that
great pomp and height wherein you have passed the heat of your honorable
employment may be renewed, and in all these my thankfulness testified I have
my desire. Whatsoever these short meditations be, both ihey and their author
desire to be yours, who will not cease when he prays for himself, to beseech
God for the increase of his heavenly graces here, and eternal happiness
hereafter, both to your selves, and all such as are dear unto you.

From your house at Bowdon, Aug. 24. 1613. Your Worships to be commanded
BARNABY POTTER.

DEVT. 34, VERSE. 5. So Moses the servant of the Lord died there in the land of
Moab, according to the word of the Lord.
THere is a season, says Solomon, for Fecles. 3. 1.
all things under the sun; but of all other things a word in due season Prove.
25. 11.
is like apples of gold with pictures of silver, pleasant and profitable. If
any word, me thinks a word of comfort from the mouth of Gods messenger should
always meet with a good season; especially seeing it is a principal part of
their office, to appoint unto them that mourn in Sion, to give Isay. 61. 3.
unto them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, and the garment of
gladness for the spirit of heaviness. Yet in this case, I find the saying of
a sage Divine to be most true, that it is not so hard to give comfortable
counsel to the sorrowful, as to find a fit season when to give it. For while
the stream of sorrow runs fresh and full it is vain and to small purpose to
oppose counsel; passions must have leisure to digest; time does as much
moderate them as wisdom does. At the first the^ it is best to mourn with such
as mourn for the loss of friends, and when our tears and theirs are dry to
give counsel. And yet in this case I doubt what is best; for as before men
have digested grief, advise comes too early, so it is too late to advise when
they have digested it; as before it was unseasonable, so after it would be
superfluous; as before it cannot benefit, so after it may hurt by rubbing a
skinned sore afresh. This honorable, but heavy and sad solemnity then must
bear the blame, if now that sorrow seems to have wearied her self having
wept like David and his company, till she can weep no more, and with wearines
is fallen asleep, 1. Sam. 30. 4.
I awake (notwithout true grief) the remembrance of our great, our common
loss. When our Savior was to suffer, certain women well affected, followed
him weeping, to whom he said, weep not for me but weep Luke 23. 28.
for yourselues, and for your children. Let me with some inversion of our
Saviors words solicit you, which both in habit and heart bear the greatest
part of this sads^^^e, weep not for your selves, though you have lost an
honorable husband, a tender hearted father, a faithful friend, a kind master,
a merciful landlord, as most he has left behind; but put of these private
passions of sorrow, and put on the sorrow of compassion, and come and bewail
with us our common losle: The Church, the Church has lost a choice patron,
the Common wealth a chief pillar. But because this passion hinders our
attention, and takes up our heart before hand, and makes men unfit to hear, as
the people of Israel for anguish of spirit could not harken to Moses: therefore
Exodus 6. 9.
you shall give me leave a little, to cast a veil over our sorrow, till we
have heard what God has to say unto us by the mouth of me his unworthy
minister, from these words of Moses, Moses the servant of the Lord died, etc.

The providence of God, (which like a well drawn picture, eyes every
particular person in this great house of the whole world, and is as inward and
familiar to every action therein, as our spirit is to our raines) did most
plainly manifest itself, in the birth and life, in the death and burial of
this man of God. For to say nothing of his birth and life, wherein both the
wisdom and the power of God were deeply printed, these words you see call us
to a consideration of his death described in the fifth verse: wherein you may
see, we may observe, first the person, Moses, secondly his praise, The Division
the servant of the Lord, thirdly his period and end, he died, fourthly the
place, in the land of Moab, and lastly the cause, according to the word of the
Lord. Had it been but a private person, yet being so rarely qualified as he was
who could have commanded his passion so much as to bid sorrow be silent^ but
behold it is Moses a guide, a governor, a prince among the people: or had he
bin a governor that had proved either a traitor to his Prince, or a tyrant to
his people, both Prince and people might have been glad, but it is Moses the
servant of the Lord; or had he been but gone into the mount to talk with God,
we need not so have grieved, but he is dead; or had it been in his own
country the land of Canaan, (which God had given him and his people for
inheritance,) or at home in his own house; but it is there in Mount Nebo upon
the top of Pisgah in the land of Moab where he was withinken of that sweet
country. And yet that you may not be cast down with all these cross
accidents, or cry out upon badfortune, or condemn the fates, or father these
crosses upon some malign aspect of the planets and constellations; know that
nothing has come to pass in all this but by the wise guidance and direction
of Gods alseeing providence. Moses a great man, Moses a good man is dead and
that in a strange land but according to the word of the Lord. In the words the^
the person comes in the first place to be considered; and the consideration
thereof that Moses a governor a great man is dead affords us this doctrine;
that Doct. 1. A great govenour quick ly gone.
the most careful and conscionable Magistrates cannot look to live longer, yea
oftentimes diesooner then other me^. Wise Solomon, godly David, religious
Josiah, are all gathered to their fathers, and the most wise godly and
religious must follow them, as soon as those persecutors of his church and
children. Gods in calling but men in condition. I have said, ye are Gods and
you are all the children of the Psalm, 82. 6, 7.
most high; but you shall die like men, and you princes shall fall like others.
God denounces by his Prophet. The Lord God of Israel will take away from
Jerusalem and from Judah hthe stay and the strength, even all the stay of bread
and I say. etc.
all the strength of water, the strong man and the man of war, the judge, and
the Prophet, the prudent and the aged, the captain of fifty, and the
honorable, and the counselor; and I will appoint children to be their
princes, and babes to rule over them; the people shall be oppressed one of
another, and every one by his neighbor; the children shall presume against the
ancient, and the vile against the honorable. Josiah; because thine heart did
melt and thou have humbled thy self 2 King 22. 19. 20.
before the Lord, when thou hardest what I spoke against this place, and
against the inhabitants of the same, and have rent thy clothes and wept before
me: behold therefore, I will gather thee to thy fathers, and thoushalt be put
in thy grave in peace and thine eyes shall not see all the evil that I will
bring upon this place. Thus the righteous perish and no man considers that
they are taken away from the evil to I say. 57. 1.
come.

See then, beloved, what cause we have to pray for Use.
the life and perseruation of godly governors as the Apostle exhorts, to
prevent their death to our power: as 1. Tim. 2. 1.
the Israelites prayed David that he would not go forth 2. Sam. 21. 17.
to battle least he should quench the light of Israel; to be thankeful for
them when we have them, and to be sorrowful when we see them taken away. I
know not whether it be our coldness in praying or our carelessness in praising
God for such gracious governors as he has given us, or whether God be but
preparing some heavy judgment against this whole land, (his judgments are
secret, and I leave them to himself:) but sure we are senseless if we cannot
see how deeply the Lord has wounded us in the head, and heart, and whole body
of this land, the remembrance whereof is yet fresh and bleeding. He has
wounded the whole kingdom by the untimely death of a most worthy Prince, he
has wounded the court by the sudden cutting off of a most wise counselor,
and now he has wounded the country by depriving it of so honorable a
maintainer of peace by righteous justice. If then a king thought he had cause
enough to lament the sickness of a Prophet, and not only kindly to visit him
but compassionately to weep over him; then give me leave as a Prophet to
bewail the death of a great prince, a wise counselor, a worthy pillar of the
common wealth in the same words; O my father my father the 2. King. 13. 14.
chariots of Israel and the horsemen of the same; or as David lamented the
death of Saul: Ye daughters of Israel weep for Saul which clothed you in
scarlet, with pleasures 2. Sam. 1. 24.
and hanged ornaments of gold upon your apparel. In respect of themselves we
have more cause to joy and say as Hierome, of his sinful time; Foelix
Nepotianus qui haec non videt; Nepotian is a happy man that lives not to see
the wicked world: and as Saint Ambrose speaks of such a one, he was not so
much taken from us, as from dangers. But for our selves and sins which have
provoked God, we cannot sorrow enough. When God ships his Noah's, it is a sign
there is a flood not far behind; Genesis 7. 16. 17.
when God sends his Angels to fetch his Lots out of Sodom, it is a sign there
is punishment for that sinful Gen 19. 23. 24
city shortly to ensue.

From the party, I proceed to the second part his praise, [Moses the servant
of the Lord.] Behold here Moses funeral sermon sent after him and perserved
for posterity; And it teaches us that sanctity is the highest honor, and
greatest commendations, that can be given a Sanctity is the highest honor
and greatest commendation that can be given to a man Heb. 11. 24. Eccles. 12.
13.
man. He that refused to be called the son of Pharaohs daughter, reioiceth
here to be called the servant of the Lord. The end of all, says Solomon, is
this, fear God and keep his commandment for this is the whole duty of man.
There is nothing else that makes a man to be a man, without which we are below
the brute beasts. And amongst all titles of countries and kingdoms, David had
this as the highest honor afforded him, that he was a man after Gods own
heart. If the name of a servant 1. Sam. 13. 14.
seem to imply some meandness and misery, yet the name Jehovah Lord of heaven
and earth whose servants they are, wipes away this blot. How earnest are we to
sue and seek to be in some service about the King? and there is no service we
say unto such. And yet when we have spent our selves in great men's service,
either they cannot give us all they would* or they will not always give us
what they can, or if they both would and could they know not what is best for
them to give or us to have: But if we serve God we are sure to lack nothing
that is good. We may want gold Psalm 34. 10.
and goods, and health and wealth, but then we may assure our selves that God
sees these are not good for us, else he would not keep them from us. For
howsoever men make difference of servants and sons and friends; to servants
they commend their business, to our friends we commit our counsel, but for our
sons we keep our choicest gold, our choicest Jewels, yea the whole
inheritance; Yet these are all one to God. His servants are his friends, his
friends are* his sons, and his sons are both his friends and servants. It
is great favor in God, great honor to us that he will vouchsafe us to be his
servants: but for our service to make us his sons and friends, what honor and
dignity on earth if cast in balance of comparison herein would not be found
to light? Therefore David though a king counts this his greatest credit; I had
rather be a door keeper in Ps. 84. 10.
the house of my God, then to dwell in the tents of ungodliness. For whether
we consider the work or the wages both will prove this service to surpass all
earthly things. For what is the service of God but sanctity? and what is
sanctity but the renewing of that decayed image of God according to which we
were created, and the quieting of our clamorous conscience, which will not be
friends with us, unless we be friends with God, and dare not prove so kind to
us, as prove false to our master. Now what work so worthy upon earth as to
pray unto God, to praise his name, to feed the poor and hungry, to cloth the
naked, to comfort the comfortless, to do good to al, especially our own
souls? and this is such service as we are set about, the worst work that in
Gods house his basest servant sets his hand unto. Secondly^, the wages
wherewith God of his mercy not our merit crowns our work makes it much more
glorious. Blessings are upon the head of the righteous but iniquity shall cover
the mouth of the wicked. And salvation Prove 10. 6.
says David, belongs unto the Lord and thy blessing is upon thy people.
Salvation which is the greatest blessing Psalm. 3 8.
is peculiarly appropriated to such as serve God, as the greatest prerogative
God can give; none are blessed but such as are saved, and none are either
blessed or saved but such as serve him; and if we respect either this life not
only while they live on the earth which is their inheritance, (the righteous
man shall inherit the earth and dwell therein for ever,) but even when they
Psalm. 37. 29.
are gone their name and memory is blessed, they grow in credit when the glory
of sinners shall end in shame. Therefore, says Solomon, the memorial of the
just shall be blessed, but the name of the wicked shall rot; though Prove. 10 7.
sinful me^ are magnified by sinners, yet they are made abominable to Saints:
you shall leave your name as a curse to my chosen, for the Lord God shall slay
yor, and call Isa. 65. 15.
his servants by a new name. But if they live never so meanly here, yet the
glory they shall have hereafter, will recompense all. For if either life, or
glory, or a kingdom, or inheritance, will give content, we shall have them in
abundance. What more desired among men then life? What life more desired then a
life of glory? What glory compared to the glory of a kingdom? What more
glorious kingdom then that that is had by inheritance? What
inherita^c(...)gdome like to that which cannot be shaken? When the Apostles
were little less the^ proud that devils were subdued unto the^ in his name
whom they served: true, says Christ, I saw Satanfall down fro^heaven like
lightning; nevertheless rejoice not that spirits obey you, but rejoice that
Luk 18. 18, 20
your names are written in heaven. Rejoice not in your enobled bloods, admired
with living praises, and preserved the jaws of oblivion by sumptuous
sepulchers, ancient coats and arms, large revenews; alas it is theleast
matter of joy that the name lives in bright honor on earth, when the soul
lies in the rusting restless miseries of hell: to have all the kingdoms in
the earth to command, and not to have the lowest place in the kingdom of
heaven; to quarter our arms with kings, and to want the arms of
Christianity, to have no part in the red cross of our crucified Savior.
These latter only behold as in a mirror the glory of the Lord 2 Cor. 3. 18.
with open face, and are changed by the same image from glory to glory: from
glory here, for the spirit of glory rests 1. Pet. 4. 14. Psalm. 149. 9.
upon us, unto glory hereafter, such honor have all his saints.

Let this then pull down the pride of all wicked men: be they never so high
and honorable here in Use. 1.
this world, they are worthless and base if this testimony of Moses may not
worthily be sent after them, that they are the servants of the Lord. For
howsoever generous and noble spirits, are ready to spit at the name of slave
and baseness, yet their sinful carriage proves them plainly to be such.
Know you not, says Romans 6 16.
the Apostle, that to whomesoever you give your selves as servants to obey, his
servants you are to whom you obey, whether it be of sin unto death, or of
obedience unto righteousness? Yea, says St Austine, Quot vitiorum servus tot
dominorum, and quot dominorum tot daemoniorum: so many sins thou servest, so
many masters, and so many masters in this matter, so many devils. For what is
it but the powerful command of sin, which like Mark 9 22.
the devil in the man possessed, casts us sometimes into the fire, where we
burn and boil with lust; sometimes into the water, where either we swim in
vain delights, or are drowned in the drunken pleasures of this flattering
world; sometimes it blows us up into the air, with a giddy desire to hunt and
hawk after the honors and preferments of the world; and anon again throws
us down groueling upon the ground, nayling our affections to this earth with
the covetous desires of worldly goods? In choosing a master one wisely
admonishes us to beware of three sorts of men, thy enemy, thy servant, thy
fellow servant. He serves his greatest enemy that serves the devil, he
serves his fellow servant that serves the flesh, and he serves his servant
that serves the world. It is base then to serve the world, for that is to
become a vassal to our servant: it is an uncertain service to serve the flesh
so wayward, so weak, so frail, so fickle, that we may fear every hour to be
turned out of doors: it is an unthrifty service to serve the devil, the more
work we do him, the worse wages, and the more stripes, and the wages of the
least work we do him is death. It is folly Romans 6. 23.
then to forgo Gods service, and serve any of them, for they will bring shame
at the last. Where then is the glory of our gray hairs? where is the honor of
our houses and blood? where the credit of our politic heads, when we suffer
our selves to be ensnared with sin? we know it is evil, and we know it is of
the devil, and all the world knows that we are wise enough to know it; we
hate the name of it, and we are ashamed of the sun when we commit it, we know
that the end of it is death, and the fruit of it shame to our honor and houses,
and yet we will not forsake it. Look but back upon your sinful lives you
that live still in the same; and tell me what comfort take you now in the
pleasure of those sins which you have committed? What profit in those Romans 6.
21.
things whereof you are ashamed? as the Apostle speaks. Nay where is your
reason and understanding that suffers you not to see that by your sins, you
are no better then beasts, and in a fair forwardnes to degenerate into devils?
I will conclude this use with the words of S. Bernard, verily, if the beasts
could speak they would call wicked men beasts.

A second use is for instruction, that as we desire that Use, 2.
praise which is perpetual, and that honor which will both hold out here on
earth, and help us to heaven, we will make the service of God our chiefest and
greatest care. Many courses there are to compass seeming honor, but all of
them are quickly blasted and will wither away. Nay, they are all accursed and
will bring shame in the end, but he that honors me him will I honor, 1. Sam.
2 30.
says the man of God unto old Ely. Diverse men propose diverse ends unto their
lives and actions, and therefore use diverse means; One runs to the court,
another to the camp, a third to the schools, all in hope of honor. Would you
know the safest course in this case? Let the honor and service of God be your
chief aim, so shall you be sure, your end cannot be dishonorable. For else
what will you do? Whither will you go to get you a great name? To the court?
This glory is like glass, bright but brittle, and courtiers, says one,
Plutarch.
are like counters which sometime in account go for a thousand pound, and
presently before the count be cast, but for a single penny. But for true
commendations, when all the glory of court and kingdoms shall be dashed, and
dampt, and the luster of their honor be wrapped up in darkness or covered in the
dust, the memory of our Moses shall ever be blessed; who being in great credit
in Pharaohs court, and accounted the son of Pharaohs daughter, chose rather
to endure affliction with the children of God, then enjoy the pleasures of
sin for a season, Heb* 11. 25.
esteeming the rebukes of Christ greater riches then the treasures of Egypt.
Will thou show thy wisdom in deep plots and politic employments, in church
or common wealth? Believe it, no wisdom that is not from heaven and has
ground out of Gods word will hold out long. Whatsoever is repugnant unto it, or
is not sanctified by it, will end in shame: labor rather for a sanctified heart
then a politic head. Achitophel was as wise as the most, and yet who ever
played the fool so 2. Sam. 16. 23.
much as he? The shame of his fact like Naamans lepro sic cleaues unto his
name; he saw his counsel contemned, 2. Sam. 17. 23.
and therefore goes home, sets his house in order, and wisely hangs himself.
Yea the devil as deep a politician as all the men in the world, yet the
foolishest creature that ever God made to work his own woe. It is not policy
then that can praise thee. What is it a sweet and fluent tongue, whereby thou
can tie the ears of those that hear thee, and ravish them with admiration
of thy eloquence? Herod had this and yet he could Act. 12. 23.
not persuade the worms to pity him, nor preserve his name from everlasting
infamy. Is it gay and gorgeous apparel will grace thee? No: if every silken coat
had care to save his soul, and all that glister with gold without had grace
within, what a happy world were we in? But all the pomp of apparel, in silks
and velvets gold and silver, cheines and ornaments, will never have that
honorable commendations, that the holy Ghost gives to those poor persecuted
Christians, which wandered up and down in sheep skins and in goats skins,
who notwithstanding through their faith and patience, obtained a good report.
Will you build up your Heb. 11. 39.
names by some glorious buildings? Look you lay the groundworke in sanctity
and the true service of God; else building you may build, but nothing but a
Babel, a tower of confusion which will fall down and crush you to pieces.
Where is now the praise of Nabuchadnezzers pomp? The very rubbish and ruins
of it, are long since ruinated, but his shame for his proud boasting, is not
this great Babell, etc, and his punishment to feed Dan. 4. 30, Ibid. 28.
with the beasts of the field, shall never be blotted out. Build up your
selves, your sons and families, in the fear of God, and then your houses and
honors shall continue longer then those that build them castles and call their
lands and livings after their own names. Else fear the curse which the Prophet
has pronounced. Woe unto Psalm. 49. 11. Jer. 22. 13.
him that builds his house by unrighteousness, and his chambers without
equity, and uses his neighbor without wages, and gives him not for his work;
he says, I will build me a wide house and large chambers, so he will make
himself large windows and seeling with cedar, and paint them with vermilion;
shall thou reign because thou closest thy self in Cedar? Did not thy father
eat and drink and prosper when he executed judgment? Will you continue you
name by your numerous progeny and multitude of children descended from your
loins? So might Ahab have hoped, if his sins had not been a cause to cut of
his seed and posterity. But we know how his seventy sons had all their heads
laid in a basket 2 King. 10. 6, 7 2. King. 9. 33.
on one day, his wife Iezabell eaten up with dogs and all his posterity rooted
out as the Prophet had pronounced. To conclude this point then; let the glory
of God, and his service be your chiefest aim, speak for it, stand for it,
fight for it, die for it. Sound it in your mouths, manifest it in your lives,
defend it with your swords, and if need be seal it with your blood, and so
your names shall be blessed when your flesh and bones shall be consumed, yea both
body and soul happy when your names shall be buried in oblivion. The court you
see cannot truly commend you, your politic heads will no way profit you,
your moving eloquence cannot better you, your gay clothes cannot grace you,
your stately house little help you, nor your multitude of children maintain
your honor hear on earth, or procure your happiness in heaven: this only
title given by the spirit of God unto Moses to be the servant of the Lord is
worth all the rest and will last for ever.

From the person, Moses, and his praise, the servant of the Lord, I proceed to
his end or period, death; Moses 3. Part.
the servant of the Lord died. His period, or end. Doct. Neither great nes nor
good nes is a good pleate against death.


It is neither his greatness you see nor his goodness that can purchase him a
supersedeas against the arrest of death; he that had fed many when they were
ready to starve for hunger, and refreshed many when their souls fainted
within them for want of drink, he at whose command came frogs and lice,
and hail and darkness and blood and blisters, has not his breath in his own
hand. But I have heretofore spent much time in pressing this point of man's
mortality, how death without difference of degree or condition summons all
sorts of men. Prince and Priest, and people the captain and the common
iouldier, the master and the man, the mistress and her maid, have the same
end; they may die of diverse diseases, at diverse times, in diverse places, but
they all die; death has the sole sovereignty of all the world, and knockes
as soon at the great man's castle, as at the poor man's cottage.

Would to God we were wise to apply this to our Use.
own selves: for does it not justly reprove, such as seldom so much as mind
their mortality, but live here as though they thought verily they should never
die? If these men had no religion, yet reason would teach them, that their
strength is not the strength of stone, and yet this the very drops of water
wears; nor our sinews of brass or iron, and yet this the rust and canker
consumes; but a vapor, but a smoke* which the sun soon dries, or the
wind drives away. It was wittily said of Epictetus the Philosopher, who going
forth one day and seeing a woman weeping that had broken her pitcher, and the
next day meeting another woman weeping that had lost her son; heri vidi
fragilem fran*gi, hodie video mortalem mori: Yesterday, says he, I saw a
brittle thing broken, and to day I see a mortal man die. And what difference
betwixt these two? Much one manner of way: for take a glass, says St Austine,
(which as it is bright so is it much more brittle then an earthen pitcher)
keep it fafe in a cupboord, where it may be free from the violence of outward
wrong, and it may continue many thousand years: but take a man of the most
pure complexion, of the strongest constitution, and keep him as safe as thou
can, he has that in his bosom, and within his own bones that will bring
him to his end. Nay, I hear some say (says the same Father, as I remember)
that such a one has the plague or the plurisie, and therefore sure he will die,
but we may rather say such a one lives, and therefore sure he will die; for
diverse have had those diseases, and did not die of them, but never any man
lived that did not die. The consumption of the liver is a messenger of death,
the consumption of the lungs the minister of death, the consumption of the
marrow is the very mother of death, and yet many have had these diseases and
not died of them: but there is another kind of consumption which could never
yet be cured. It is the consumption of the days, the common disease of all
mankind, and whereof all must die: David spoke of it, my days are consumed
like smoke. Let me then warn Psalm. 102. 3.
you, and stir up your meditations of your mortasity with the words of our
Moses, who has walked that way before us, Deuteronomy. 32. 29. O that men were wise
then would they understand this, then would they consider their Deu. 32. 29.
latter end. We are unwise that we consider not the times past, the evil we
have committed, the good we have omitted, the benefits of God we have abused,
the time we have misspent; and yet we grieve not, because we think not yet
whether we shall die. More unwise are we not to consider things present, as the
shortness of life, the difficulty of salvation, the small number of such as
shall be saved; and yet we shame not, because we think we shall not yet die.
But most unwise that we consider not things to come, death, judgment, hell, al
to come; and yet we fear not, because (I fear) we think we shall never die.
O that we were wise, then would we consider our latter end. Wise Princes use to
prepare ten years before hand for a field of one day; beloved, let us lay up
something every day for the last* When we shall wrestle with death, if we
win that skirmish we have enough, and when or where we shall come to the
conflict who can tell? For Moses when he was now ready to set foot in the
promised land, lives not to enjoy it, but when he comes within kenne of it, it
pleases God to prevent him by death, and to take him away in the land of Moab.
Which is the fourth particular that I proposed to be handled, name ly the place
where Moses died.

In the land of Moab.] See after all the care and pains that Moses has taken
with this people, to bring them 4, Part. The place
to the promised land, now that he was come near the confines and borders of
it, and God had set him in such a place where he might see it, he suddenly
here calls him out of this life. Whence we might well observe the fickle state
and condition of all worldly things. Moses greatest comfort, I imagine, both
against the tediousness of the way, and weiwardnesse of this people, and the
perplexities of his own soul, was to consider how happy he should be, when
after all this he should come to live quietly in the land of Canaan: and now
behold that he is ready to come into it, he is suddenly Doct. All worldly hopes
quickly vanish.
cut of. O the uncertainty of these worldly things, O the vanity of those men
that vex themselves with hope of such things as they shall never have! Great
men's favors, and old men's shoes, thou may look for, perhaps hope for, but
never trust to. And yet how many Cameleons are there that live only by the
air and breath of hope (not of heavenly, but) of earthly things, which when a
man should put forth his hand to lay hold upon, vanishes away and is seen no
more? One hopes to grow rich, and suddenly his trade fails him; another hopes
for his fathers, or some other old man's living, and the old man outliues him; a
third hopes to rise to honor, and his means are taken from him. The hope that
is deferred, says Solomon, Prou. 13. 12.
makes the heart sick; If then the hope be defeated, me thinks it should
die. Moses had as much reason to hope to come to this happy land, as any man
living of any earthly thing: and yet how is his hope quite dashed, when a man
would not have dreamed how his comfort could have been crossed? It is wisdom
then to hope for such things as we may have, and to ground our hope upon such a
foundation as cannot fail. Let the word of God be the ground of thy Christian
persuasion, and so thou may boldly hope for heaven.

A second point which from the consideration of the place I will propose and
lightly pass by, is the uncertainty of the place where we shall die. As
death spares not any persons, so it respects not any place. When thou art
walking peaceably with thy brother in the fields thou may be murdered as
Cain was; Genesis 4. 8.
when thou art sitting quietly in thy chair, thou may fall backward and
break thy neck, as old Eli did: when thou art at thy devotions in the Temple,
thou may 1. Sam. 4. 18.
die there as Zenacherib did: yea at the very altar, as Ioab: Isay, 37. 37. 1.
King. 2. 34. Job 1. 19. 2. King. 2. 24.
while Jobs sons were feasting, the house falls upon them; while the scoffing
boys are mocking, bears come from the wilderness and devour them; while
Chore and his company are contending, the earth opens Number. 16. 31.
and swallows them: while the captains and their fifties are fetching the
Prophet perforce to the King, 2. King. 1. 10.
fire falls from heaven and consumes them. Thus death dogs us wheresoever we
go, and has his darts ready wheresoever we are.

Let this then teach us to take heed that we be always Use.
prepared for death, seeing it is so uncertain where it will meet us. Go to
now, you that say to day or to morrow, we will go into such a city, and
continue there a Jam. 4. 13. 14, 15.
year, and buy and sell and get gain, and yet cannot tell what shall be to
morrow; for what is your life? it is even a vapor that appears for a little
time, and afterward vanishes away; for that you ought to say if the Lord will,
and if we live, we^ will do this or that. Nay go to you, that by play and
pastime, drive away the remembrance of death, nay by surfeiting and
drunkenness, hasten your own death, and yet never think of dying. How will
you dare to look death in the face, whom you would not vouchsafe the least
room in your hearts, nay whom eftsoons you did in your daring humors scorn
and defy? Let experience tell whether many do not meet with death in places of
greatest mirth, now merry and presently mourned for: whether a bone in our
meat may not choke us, or a hair in our milk strangle us, or a stone in a
raisin stop our breath, as it did Anacreo^s. O the^ let us whersoever we are,
whithersoever we walk, make the meditation of our end, our vade mecum and best
companion! least, like unthrifty servants in great men's houses, having their
allowance of light and mispending the same in dicing or dancing, or
drunkenness; at last are feign or rather forced to go to bed darkling; so
while we neglect the time of light in this life which God has granted, the
night of our death do suddenly surprise us when we do little dream of it. To
him that is to walk through some dark and dangerous place, one light carried
before, will do more good then many that are brought behind: so the serious
preparation for death before it come, arms us both with more confidence
against it and comfort in it* then that which comes not till death call. I will
conclude this point with our Saviors words; Take heed to your selves least at
any time your hearts be oppressed with surfeiting and dru^kennesse, Luke 21 34.
35 26.
and cares of this life and least that day come upon you at unawares, for as a
snare shall it come on all the^ that dwell upon the face of the earth; watch
therefore and pray continually that you may be accounted worthy to escape all
these things that shall come to pass, and that you may stand before the son
of man.

Give me leave now, I beseech you, to apply these things to our present
occasion before I proceed to the last particular in my text.

When our Savior, Luke 4. 20. light upon a place of Luk 4 20.
the prophet Isaias, and had red it in the audience of the people, he closed
the book, and gave it again to the Minister, and sat down and said; this
day is this scripture fulfilled in your ears, and all bare him witness. I
doubt not, beloved, but you will all witness with me this day, that what you
have hard, the same you have seen, and the words which I have handled, are
fulfilled in your hearing. Moses a great man, and our Moses the servant of the
Lord, is dead, and he died in the land of Moab from his own house and home,
but it is according to the word and the will of the Lord. That he is dead, I
wish, (if it had bin the will of the supremest,) that we had cause to doubt.
That he was a Moses, and the servant of the Lord, lend me but your patience a
little longer and you shall hear.

Moses is as much as drawn out, Ex. 2. 10. And might Moses in name.
not he say with David, Psalm. 18. 16. He has sent down from above and saved
me, he has drawn me out of many waters?

Moses pitied, the distressed and oppressed estate of his poor country in
their misery: and when he could In nature 1* His pity.
do no more, he looked upon them, no doubt, with a heavy countenance and a
sorrowful heart, yea with hazard of his own life he was ready to redress
their wrong, Exodus 2. 11. 12. And was not our Moses the only man that would
step forth and stand up to free his country from all such taxes and toules, as
cunning catchpoles and prouling officers could have been content to have
imposed upon the people? And when they were such as could not be helped, yet I
know he did heartily grieve at them, and heavily look upon them that were
oppressed.

Moses was a man of peace, not a peace keeper only 2 His peacemaking.
but a peace- maker. When he saw two Hebrews strive together, he said, Sirs,
you are brethren, why do you wrong one another? Act. 7. 26. And who knows not
what care he had, what comfort he took, what pains he endured, to compose
controversies, to prevent law suits, to persuade peace, to procure love among
neighbors?

Moses was content to leave the court, where he might have lived in great
credit and account, and to 3. His piety.
employ his pains for the good of his country, Heb. 11. 24. 25. And who knows
not that it was neither want of wit, or wisdom to commend him, nor want of
friends to countenance him, nor want of means to mainetaine him, that kept our
Moses from the court; but a godly desire to do his country good, wherein
neither his purse nor his pains were at any time wanting? for did he not many
times as Moses did, Exo. 18. 14 Sit from morning till even to hear the matters
of the people 4. His pains.
and to judge amongst them? Till of late either his own experience taught him,
or his friends advised him, as Iethro did Moses. Thou weariest thy self
greatly and the Ex. 18. 18, etc.
people with thee, for the thing is too heavy for thee, thou art not able to do
it thy self alone; prepare thee helpers and let them judge the people at all
seasons, but every great matter let them bring unto thee and let them judge all
small causes; so shall it be easier for thee, when they shall bear the burden
with thee.

In the executing of which works of justice howsoever His just dealing in
public.
fear, or favor, or gain makes many fail, or faint, or deal unfaithfully:
yet surely, says God, my servant Moses is not so, who is faithful in all my
house, Number. 12. 7. And who ever could say of our Moses that in matters of
justice, or such causes as concerned the good of the common wealth, either
fear of great men, or favor of friends could stop his mouth, or bribes
blind his eyes, or his own private passion or profit prevail so far, as to
move him to speak or do any thing, against the known truth of the cause? but
as he was singular in searching out of the truth, so was he sincere in judging.
I know not whether ever he did see that table of Ptolome Arsacides which the
Emperor Marcus Aurelius found at Thebes, and was by the same Marcus left as a
singular treasure to his son Commodus; but sure me thought I could plainly
in his life and carriage of matters in the course of justice, read the sum and
sentences which were written in that table, which were these: I never preferred
the proud man though he were rich, nor hindered the poor if he were just: I
never denied justice to the poor for his poverty, nor pardoned the rich
because he was wealthy: I never gave reward for affection, nor punished upon
passion: I never suffered evil to escape unpunished, nor goodness to go
unrewarded: I never committed the execution of manifest justice to another,
neither determined that which was difficult by my self: I never denied justice
to him that desired it, nor mercy to him that deserved it: I never opened my
gate to the flatterer, nor my ear to the backbiter: I always sought to be
loved of the good, and feared of the wicked: Lastly, I always favored the
poor that was able to do little, and God who was able to do much always
favored me. This was his faithfulness in public. Neither did it in his
private carriage less appear. For In Private.
which of his neighbors has he causelessly vexed? nay whom did he ever vex?
which of his tenants has he cruelly oppressed? which of his creditors has he
craftily defeated? whom that ever dealt with him has he deceived? Surely in
this faithless age cum annulis Senee.
magis creditur quam animis, as Seneca speaks, wherein a man's hand or signet
is better to be trusted, then his faith and soul, he was not fit to live. He
trusted every one, and every one (shall I say) deceived him? no, not every
one. He had those with whom he might, with whom he durst have trusted his own
soul, who may now sit down, and sorrow as David did, for the death of his
dear Jonathan, 2. Sam. 1, 26. Woe is me for thee my brother Jonathan: very
kind have thou been unto me, thy love to me was wonderful, passing the love
of women.

Another singular commendation the holy Ghost has 6. His meekness.
given to Moses, Number. 12. 3 Moses was a very meek man above all the me^ that
were upon the earth. And surely such as heard the conference, or heeded the
common talk, or In his conference.
observed the carriage of our noble Moses, know that not many men will be found
more meek then he. In conference who has ever hard him clamorous and
contentious? or seeking as some do rather the victory and last word, then the
truth and verity? yea he would rather meekely yield, then multiply words so
that with whomsoever he did confer, his mildnes made it sweet or profitable.
For where two meek men meet together, their conference, says S. Bernard, is
sweet and profitable: where one man is meek, it is profitable; where neither,
it proves pernicious. And therefore it was S. Bernards manner, (and our Moses
had learned it,) because he would be sure to retain this modesty, on the one
side, to be very urgent upon those that in their meeknes would yield much, and
to yield another time to him that urged. And as his graver conference, so his
common talk In his common talk.
did taste and relish much more of meekness. I have often been vouchsafed
his company, yet I never hard him speak evil of others, or good of himself.
But his carriage was the map of meeknes. For besides his low ly In his carriage
and loving carriage even to the poorest, would he not quietly rather endure
two wrongs; then complain of one? rather suffer many wrongs, then return one?
rather put up al wrongs, then revenge one? And had he not the happy reward of
meekenes attending him, even sweet content of mind, and a quiet passage of
such crosses as accompany this life: whereby he did enjoy both his rest and
sleep more soundly, and received his meat and drink more merrily and
thankefully then most men do. So in him we might see it true: that, that which
will break a proud and angry man's heart, will not break an humble, and meek
man's sleep. I proceed. Moses was learned in all the knowledge of the
Egyptians; Act. 7. 22.
In this indeed Moses did overmatch our Moses: but herein our Moses did
overmatch the most that I have known, that having no greater depth of
learning, he could in any point both conceive so quickly, and object so
acutely, and speak so iudiciously, and to purpose as he did. Thus you see that
Moses is dead; Moses for his place of government, Moses for his pity, Moses
for his peacemaking, Moses for his piety, Moses for his pain fullness in his
place of justice, Moses for his faithfulness in public, and his true heartednes
to his private friends, Moses for his meekness; and in what one thing he came
short of Moses; it was not so much as most of his rank came short of him.

But that which commends all these former commendations, 7. His zeal.
is the praise of Moses in this place, the servant of the Lord. And was not our
Moses such? For his soundness and sincerity in the true religion and service
of God, and perfect hatred of Popery, and superstition, all the country can
witness with me. Who has been more ready to put in execution those good
laws of our land, against our wilful Recusants? Who was so great or dear
unto him that he would wink at, in this case which concerns Gods glory, and
the advancement of religion? And though in other matters of justice he was as
merciful as any man living, yet in the service of God, and punishing of
Idolaters, his zeal has been hot like Moses, who when he saw the people
Exodus 32. 19.
fall to Idolatry dancing about the calfe; his wrath waxed hot, and he cast
the tables out of his hands and brake them in pieces, and burned the calfe in
the fire, and ground it to powder, and made the people of Israel to drink of
it, Exodus 32. 19. which godly zeal of this our Moses made him often say, (and
me thinks I see with what feeling and fervencie he spoke it, when there was
none present but my self alone,) that til we might see them hansomely shipped,
and the sea betwixt us and such as have a Pope in their heart, neither can we
be safe, nor the service of God pure and sincere. Neither can the country only
witness, but the King and Council confirm their assured persuasion of our
Moses his zeal: when in those disastrous, and dangerous times of the
powderplot, they pleased to appoint him to that high and most honorable
office the command of the whole Country, though he had not long before borne
the burden of that office. What shall I say of his particular carriage in the
service of God? I have often seen him at public Sermons and service: sometime
in private we hane prayed together, and praised God together. And sure his
diligent attention in the one, as unwilling that a word should pass him, and
his devout carriage in the other, gave good signs of a sincere heart, not
willingly sinning, but willingly sorrowing when he had sinned. What shall I say
more? You see now, and cannot but say, that he was a Moses, and the servant of
the Lord; yet Moses was a man, else he had not died; and subject to his
personal sins, his faults, his frailties, which God does punish, else he had
not died in the land of Moab. For if you would know the cause why Moses must
not come into the land of Canaan, but die in the land of Moab, when he is now
within kenne of that pleasant country: the holy Ghost has expressed it, Deuteronomy.
32. 51. Because you have trespassed Deuteronomy. 32. 51. 52.
against me among the children of Israel in Kadesh, in the wilderness of Zin;
for you sanctified me not among the children of Israel: Thou shall therefore
see the land before thee, but shall not go thither.

See then, and observe hence another point of Doctrine, which in my passage I
purposely omitted, but The best men are subject to their frailties and faults.
now comes fitly to be handled, namely; The best men are subject to their
frailties and falls. Even Moses though a rare man, yet cannot be free from
infirmities; yea sometime falls into such sins, as God does severely punish.
In many things, says St James, we sin all, as Iam. 3. 2.
might be made plain by particular instances in the best servants of God. But
I take no comfort to uncover the nakedness of worthy Patriarchs and
Prophets, who when God but for a time did leave the^ to themseiues, did stumble
and fall and lie along under their sins. Optimus ille qui minimis vrgetur; he
is happy, could the heathen say, that has fewest faults, and those the least;
for there is none so happy as to have none. Which as Use.
it serves for a just reproof for all such as are ready to condemn their
brethren, and cast of their Christian company and kindness, for some one fault
they find in him, and never look to commend those good graces, which they
might see; so it serves

Secondly, for instruction unto the best, willingly to submit themselves to the
word of God to godly instru ctions, Christian admonitions, and wholesome
reprehensions. For none so good but something the word of God will find amisle
in them which they cannot amend till they see, nor well see till the word of
God show it unto them. Will not the best garments grow dustie; if they be not
brushed? the finest lane and linne^ grow loathsome, if it be not washed? the
sweetest garden overgrown with netles or worse, if it be not weeded? and the
best man, worse if he will not be admonished?

of God, and lay hold upon the horns of that altar. Co^missum atque
conscriptum est, (says S. Austine upon the 51. Psalm, concerning the adultery
and murder of David;) It is committed by him, and by him committed to writing,
for our learning, that those who yet stand fall not, and those that fall lie
not still but may rise again. Stand not upon the perfection of thy purity.
Patriarchs have fallen, Prophets have fallen, Apostles have fallen, stars
have not been so fixed but they have fallen, Angels not so firm but they have
fallen. Trust not then in the righteousness of thy works; for they are but
polluted; trust not in the integrity of thy nature, for even it is defiled: but
rely upon the mercy of God, for that only is absolute, and in the merits of
Christ, for they and they only are alsufficient. And say with David: If thou,
Lord, wilt be extreme to mark what is Ps. 130. 3, 4.
done amiss, O Lord who may abide? but there is mercy with thee that thou
may be feared.

Thus you have seen both the party, Moses, and his praise, the servant of the
Lord, and his end, he is dead, and the place where, in the land of Moab. And as
in their lives you have seen how like they were, so were they in many
particulars like in the manner of their death. I will only point at them. Both
died in a strange place, where they were but within view, and were now come to
take the comfort of that pleasant country, that God had promised and provided
for their posterity. Both died when they were in outward appearancelike to live
long. For of Moses it is said here, that his eyes were not Deuteronomy 34. 37.
dim, nor his natural force abated. And may we not say so of this second
Moses, whose understanding and sight and hearing, and other senses, might
easily be observed to have been more sharp and quick then many that have not
past half his years? was it not much that a man of his years, and of so much
employment should have at his dying day neither gray hair nor unsound tooth?
Yea, I may say it was little less then a miracle, that his vital and natural
powers should continue eve^ until his dying day in that perfection; when all
his vital parts as appeared afterward were so stra^gely corrupted, as that if
the most learned Physicians had known the state of his body as they imagine it
has been these many years, they could not have hoped nor conceived how he
should continue so long in that health and strength as continually he did. His
sickness was but short, and (saving some fits) not very sharp: his carriage
therein (I dare speak it upon the word of those that were continually with
him) very quiet and patient. When the Minister of God came to him, to fit him
with comfort and confidence against the terrors of death, having prepared
himself for this purpose, he entertained him kindly, hard him attentively,
professed he received much comfort by him, made a worthy confession of his
faith with his own mouth, and entreated his company and comfort again as soon
as conveniently he could resort unto him. In the mean time how his mind was
busied, we may imagine by that worthy acknowledgement of Gods love unto him,
when he thanked God, that in all that time of his sickness he had neither a
bad thought, nor a bad dream. But death is now at his doors, and as he lived
quietly and peaceably, so he lays him down like a lamb: never opened his
mouth to murmr, nor moved any part of his body to strive and struggle with
death: but with a deep groan, as from a sorrowful and repenta^t soul, sends
his soul into the hand of his Savior, where now, no doubt, he rests in joy.

There follows now Moses his funeral, which (as appears in the next verse)
was performed as honorably Ver 6.
as ever was hard of, even by God himself; yet so secretly, as his sepulcher
could never be seen unto this day. And have not the godly friends of our
honorable Moses, herein showed their love and care, by as honorable a
solemnity, as (I think) most of our eyes have seen? The last thing is the
mourning and sorrow which followed upon his death. The children of Israel wept
for Ver. 8.
him in the plain of Moab thirty days, and have not we as great cause to
sorrow in respect of our selves? And yet that our sorrow may not exceed,
know that though Moses a great man, and Moses a good man, the servant of the
Lord, be dead, and in the land of Moab: yet nothing has happened in all this,
but by Gods appointment, according to the will of the Lord, which was the last
point I proposed out of the words of my text, and which I can only touch now.

The point of doctrine which we may observe from Doct. All crosses comes
from God. Amos, 3. 5.
hence is this: What soever crosses and calamities do befall us here, they
come not by fortune or hap-hazard, but at Gods appointment and his all-ruling
providence. Can a bird fall into a snare where no fowler is? Amos, 3. 5. Men
that lie under Gods punishing hand or some heavy cross, are like a bird in a
net whereinto we often fall, before we see the fowler; and being caught, the
more we strive and struggle to get out, the more we inta^gle our selves
therein. Now it were a strange thing to see nets and snares set themselves to
catch birds without a fowler; and no less strange it is that crosses and
calamities should befall any man at hap-hazard without a guide and governor.
Which the Prophet plainly proposes, Ibid. v. 6.
ver. 6. Shall there be any evil in the city and the Lord has not done it?
Who gave Jacob for a spoil and Israel Isay, 42. 24.
to the robbers? Did not the Lord because we have sinned against him? Isa. 42.
24. Howsoever men may attribute the plague of pestilence, to the infection of
the air, or party about us; the calamity of the sword, to the malue of the
enemy; the desolation of famine to foul wether, consumptions unto want of
exercise, fevers and burning agues to the malignitie of some dish of meat or
draught of drink, (and rightly too, as to the second causes:) yet the holy
Ghost would have us to look to a higher hand in all these: for it is God that
sends both pestilence Deuteronomy 28. 21. 22.
and famine, and the sword, and consumptions and fevers and burning agues,
Deuteronomy. 28. 21. 22.

Let this then (for this present) persuade us to patience Use.
under al crosses. Thou have lost thy father or friend or child by untimely
death as thou do imagine, and therefore criest out either of want of care in
their keeper, or want of skill in the Physician, or absence of friends, and
say as Mary did to our Savior, if thou had been here my brother had not
been dead, or thou Ioh 11. 32.
condemnest thy hard hap, and considerest not, that it is Gods hand. Thus have
the children of God begun their serious consultations in the day of
affliction, and hereby beckned as it were to themselves for silence, Dominus
est, it is the Lord. When that heavy news came to old Elies ears, which
whosoever should hear his two ears should tingle: he imposes silence to
himself, and arms himself with this resolution, it is the Lord let him do
what seems him good. It is the Lord, 1. Sam. 3, 18.
who has more right to my soul, then I have to my self, more power over my
body, then I hane over a thought in my soul; and shall I not be silent when he
sends for one of them, and says they shall be sundred? What other shield was
it wherewith Job repelled all those venomous darts, which either in the death
of his children, or loss of his substance, or the running of his sores, or the
cursed persuasion of his wife, or the miserable comforts of his friends, or the
malicious and importunate accusations of Satan were cast upon him, when in all
this nothing came from his mouth, but thanked be God? The devil made no doubt,
I think, but he would have blasphemed, and his wife a more dangerous devil in
his bosom persuaded him to curse, and his flesh and fraikie no doubt was
forward enough; but what kept him back? even this resolution; The Lord gives
and the Lord takes away, even as it Job. 1. 21.
pleases the Lord so come things to pass. I conclude with Tertullian:
Totu^licet seculum pereat, dum patientiam lucrifaciam; I care not though the
whole world perish so I may gain patience. But our Moses is not perished, his
soul lives in heaven, and himself lives still on earth in that noble slemme,
that has sprung from his stock, and is now rise^ up in his stead. Whom I will
humbly solicit in the same words that God speaks unto Joshua: Moses my
servant is dead, now therefore arise. It is now no longer Joshua, 1. 2.
time for you to pin up your self within your private walls, no time now to
sleep upon the bed of pleasure and delight. Arise, the Commonwealth calls for
you to stand up in the room of your honorable Father; the eyes of all are
cast upon you, from their hearts wishing you would be pleased, to set before
your eyes your fathers footsteps, and to walk therein. Doubt not of Gods
blessing upon you in such courses: but what God speaks to Joshua in the same
Chap. v. 5. you may imagine even spoken to you: As I was with Moses, so will I
be with thee, I will not leave thee, neither for sake Ver. 5.
thee, be strong and of a good courage. And again, verse. 7. Only be thou
strong and of a most valiant courage. And again, V. 7.
ver. 8. Have I not commanded thee saying, be strong V. 8.
and of a good courage? fear not nor be discouraged, for I the Lord thy God
will be with thee whither soever* thou go. Behold a threefold exhertation,
let it arm you against a threefold temptation: the world, the flesh, and the
devil; all which are linked in a hellish conspiracy, to hinder and discourage
every one in any good course, especially such as are set in high place, or are
employed for the public good. He had need therefore both of a sound head, and
a sanctified heart that should hold out in a high place. Wherein consider, I
beseech you, that your care of religious carriage should be so much the
greater, as Gods love has been the more in raising you above many in the
world. The goodness of a private man is his own, and his sins seldom hurt
any but himself, but the goodness of a principal man is the whole countries,
and his sins infectious unto many. The common means which both the world,
the flesh, and the devil, use in this wanton age of the world, is the
contagio^ of bad company, which you have cause to curse and avoid, because the
canker common ly eats into the goodliest flowers in the garden, seldom
settles upon netles and such worthless weeds. And surely such as our company
is, such either we are, or such we will be shortly, or such we would be
thought to be, or at least the world will judge us to be such. Let me
therefore beseech you even for the glory of God, the honor of your house, the
good of your country, the comfort of your friends, the peace of your own
conscience, and the salvation of your own soul, take heed of bad company. Out
of good and godly minded men choose your acquaintance, out of your acquaintance
cull out some few for your friends, out of your friends some one familiar,
whom you may trust with your self; herein, I doubt not, you shall find more
sollid comfort and content, then in variety of company, which will be bold
enough to thrust in upon you, then in great multitudes which will be ready
enough to flatter you. In a word (for you are wise) use those good talents of
wisdom, and wealth, and honor (which God has given you) so, as Gods glory
may gain by them, and you shall be sure not to loose at the last. Nay, you may
assuredly look to hear both on earth, and in heaven, It is well done good
servant and faithful: thou have been faithful in much, I will make thee
ruler over more, enter into thy masters joy.

FINIS.

