A Looking-glass for the SOVLE, AND A DEFINITION thereof.

WRITTEN By Edward Popham Gentleman.

LONDON, Printed by T. S. for Nathanael Newbery, and are to be sold at the
sign of the Star in Pope's Head Alley, and under S. Peter's Church in Corne-hill
1619.

TO HIS BEST, worthy, and most endeered Friend, Mr. John de Hem, Merchant of
this Honorable City of London, Edward Popham wishes all terrestrial
blessings in this world, and the fullness of all celestial blessings in the
Life to come.
MY most loved and best esteemed Friend, I have read, that among that little
laborious Commonwealth of Bees, they have a law, that if a Drone having lost
his sting (which gave him spirit to labor, because being armed with that he
was able to encounter with his adversary) and now giving himself to sloth, and
suck the honey from the rest, he is (by a general consent) presently thrust
out, and banished, or put to death, as an unprofitable member: To avoid which
imputation, I have gathered up some remnants of time, to meditate upon an
everlasting subject (which is the Soul) a subject being created to serve her
immortal King, and everlasting, because a blessed everlasting life is her
reward if she persevere in her Creators service to the end. I confess it is a
large field, whereon in expert Artist may frame and build a goodly City; ^ut
I being but a simple la^ourer, dare not presume to speak of Colossus, or build
pyramides (wonders of the world) lest in piercing too high, I meet with
Babell, and so fall to ruin. Yet as the poor widow in the Gospel, amongst
the many great superfluous gifts did not doubt but her mite would be accepted;
so I doubt not but among those many huge vollumes that swarm in the world,
some well-iudging Christian may cast his eye on my poor work, and so may give
a gentle conclusion, saying, this poor man has cast in his Mite into the
treasury, and brought one little stone to the eternal building. To give a
better gloss to my small commodity, I have thought good (my dear Friend) to
patronize it under your protection, coniuring you by all the laws of
friendship, not to refuse the guardiance of this poor Infant, but nourish it
with your best love, for which you shall be sure to find double requital;
first, you shall bind my poor love and labor to your service; and last, (which
is best) you shall find Gods blessing to your soul and body; to whose
protection I leave you, and rest yours, ever devoted

Edward Popham.

THE PREFACE, OR Introduction.
THe sovereign decree of God, enacted by the Father of Heaven, ratified by his
Son, and daily repeated by the instinct of the Holy Ghost, binds every good
Christian to distribute according to their measure lent, be it more or less,
so it may any ways profit, following that saying of Plato, Non solum nobis
nati sumus. For it is a motive that allows of no excuse, but of necessity
presses every good mind to the performance of duty. Nature by grace is not
abolished but perfected, not murdered but manured; neither are her impressions
quite rased or anulled, but suited to the colors of faith and virtue.

And if Natures affections be so forcible, that even ^n Hell (where rankor and
(...) spite raineth, and all feeling of Gods goodness is overwhelmed in
malice) it moved the rich glutton by experience of his own misery, to carry a
desire of admonition to his friends; much more in the Church of God, where
grace quickens, charity inflameth, and Natures inclination (directed by
supernatural grace) provoke ought the duty of piety to prevail.

And who but more merciless then damned Creatures, could see their Christian
Brethren, almost plunged in like peril, and not be wounded with deep remorse,
of their lamentable and imminent hazard. If in beholding a mortal enemy, wrung
and tortured with deadly pangs, the toughest heart softneth with some Sorrow.
If the most fierce mind cannot but thaw and melt with pity, when it sees the
worst Miscreant suffer his deserved torments? how much less can a Christian
heart consider the number of such which daily fall into far more bitter
extreamities, and not bleed in grief for their uncomfortable case; nay, rather
employ all their cares, studies, and endeavors to win and reclaim them from
that dangerous brincke of perdition?

Surely, though I challenge not the prerogative of the best disposition; yet my
desire is, with young Tobias, to travel and bring home spiritual substance,
and medicinable receipts to cure such ghostly malladie, as evidently at this day
is to be seen, and did in no former Age more exceedingly abound. I have with
Esau provided Venison which may procure a blessing, and bread, with Joseph, for
the repast of their souls, which most carelessly they oppress with famine in
time of plenty. Let it not therefore be thought any dishonor to men of more
gravity, or disparagemement to any person whatsoever that I, in all humility,
offer my advise in a case so much to be pitied, and a time so dangerous. One
man cannot be perfect in all faculties, neither is it any disgrace to the
Goldsmith if he be ignorant of the Millers trade. Many are deep Lawyers, but
shallow Divines, and are far to seek in religious actions.

If therefore I offer the fruits of my labors, and make you apresent of my
zealous endeavors, I hope you will censure thereof, rather as of the part of a
dutiful Christian, then of any point of presumption. And so I humbly refer you
to the rest, as follows.

Demidium facti qui been coepit habet.
Jbi res humanae nunquam prospere succedunt vbi negliguntur diuinae.

A DEFINITION OF The Soul.
FIRST, it is an immateriall substance: While it does revive the body, it is
the Soul; when it wills or chooses any thing, it may (though improperly) be
called the Mind: While is knows any thing, it may be called (though
improperly again) the Understanding: While it judges, some have termed is
Reason: While it does breath or contemplate, a Spirit: While it calls any thing
to mind, the Memory: While it thinks any thing (though more grosely) the
Sense. But to speak of the Soul as it is, it is an immateriall substance, and
Reason, Memory, Sense, etc. are the several faculties and diverse opperations
thereof.

A Looking-glass for the Sovle.
MOst necessary and behoouefull it is for every good Christian humbly and
heartily to beseech God for his Son Christ his sake, the honor of his
glorious Name, our duty toward the Church, and the comfort of our Souls,
that we may seriously consider the terms of our present estate wherein we
stand, and weigh our selves in a Christian balance, taking for our
counterpoyze the Judgments of God.

Let us take heed in time that the word Tekel, written Dan 5. 25.
of old against Baltazar, and interpreted by Daniel, be not verified in us,
whose exposition was; You have been poyzed in the Balance, and found of too
light weight. Let us remember that we are in the waine, and the date of our
Pilgrimage is well-neare expired. Now therefore it behooves us to look to our
Country; our forces languish, our senses impair, our bodies droope, and on
every side the ruinous Cottage of our faint and feeble flesh threatens fall.

Having then so many harbingers of death for to premonish us of our end, O let
us then with all care endeavor our selves to be prepared for so dreadful a
stranger. The young may die quickly, but the old cannot live long; young men's
lives may by casualties be abridged, but the old men's can by no physic be
long adiourned: If then green years ought to be mindful of the grave, the
thoughts of seere Age, must continually dwell in the same: Whereby we may see
that old and young of what estate and condition soever, are seriously to provide
for the intertainment of so fearful a stranger. The prerogative of Infancy is
innocence, of Childehoode reverence, of Man-hoode maturity, and of Age
wisdom: the chief properties of wisdom are to be mindful of things past,
careful of things present, and provident of things to come. Let us use then
the privilege of Natures tallent to the benefit of our Souls, and endeavor
hereafter to be wise, and delight in well-doing, and watchful in foresight of
future harms: for to continue our course in service of the world we have
little cause, seeing it yields but an unhappy welcome, a churlish
entertainment, and does abandon us with an unfortunate farewell. Who then
would sow in such a flinty field, where we shall reap nothing but a crop of
cares, and affliction of spirit, rewarding our labors with remorse, and
affording us for gain eternal damage?

It is now more then a seasonable time to alter the course of so vnthriuing a
husbandry, and enter into the field of Gods Church, in which sowing the seeds
of repentant sorrow, and watering them with the tears of humble contrition, we
may have a more beneficial harvest, and gather the fruits of everlasting
comfort. Let us remember that our spring is spent, our Summer ouer-past, and
we are now arrived at the fall of the leaf. And that S. Augustine says,
Though our loving Lord bear long with offenders, be not careless, for the
longer he staieth, not finding amendment, the sorer will he scourge when he
comes to judgment, and his patience in long expecting is only to lend us
respite to repent, and not any way to enlarge our leisure to sin.

He that is tossed with variety of storms, and cannot come to his desired
port, makes not much way, but is turmoiled; So he that has passed many
years, and purchased little profit, has had a long being but a short life:
for life is more to be measured, by goodness then number of days, seeing most
men by many days do but procure many deaths; and others in short space of
time do attain the life of infinite Ages.

What is the body without the Soul, but a corrupt carcass? And what is the
Soul without God, but a Sepulcher of sin? If God be the way, the truth, and
the life, he that goes without him strayeth, he that lives without him dies,
and he that is not taught by him erreth, Well said S. Augustine, God is our
true and chief life, reuolting from whom is falling, to whom returning is
rising, in whom staying is sure standing. God is he, from whom to depart is to
dye, in whom to dwell is to live. Be not therefore like to those that begin
not to live, until they be ready to dye; and after a foes desert, come to
crave of God a friendly entertainment.

Some think to snatch heaven in a moment, which the best could scarce do in
the continuance of many years: and when they have glutted themselves with many
delights, they would iumpe from Dives diet to Lazarus Crown, and from the
service of Satan, to the sollace of Saints; But let them be well assured, that
God is not so pennurious of friends, as to hold himself and kingdom saleable
for the reuersion and refuse of their lives, who have sacrificed the principal
part thereof to his enemies, and their own brutish appetites, then only
ceasing to offend, when ability of offending is taken away.

And true it is a Thief may be saved upon the Cross, and mercy found at the
last gasp: But well said S. Augustine, Though with God it be possible, yet is
it scarce credible, that his death should find favor, whose whole life has
earned wrath; And that his Repentance should be accepted that more for fear of
Hell, and love of himself, then for the love of God cries for mercy.
Wherefore let us make no longer delay, but being so nigh the breaking up of our
mortal house, take time before extremity, to appease Gods justice.

Though we have suffered the bud to be blasted, and the flower to fade, and
though we have permitted the fruit to perish, and the body of the Tree to
decay, yet let us keep life in the root, for fear lest the whole become
fuel for hell fire: for surely wheresoever the Tree falls, there shall it
be, whether to the South or North, Hell or Heaven. Such sap as it yields,
such fruit shall it ever bear.

And now seeing we are left unto the remisals of our wearish and dying days,
the remainder whereof as it cannot be long, so it does warn us speedily to
return, and to ransom our former losses, that against the approaching of our
desolution and period of our course, we may not be unprovided of such
appurtenances as are behoouefull in such a perilous and perplexed a journey.

Death in it self is very fearful, but much more terrible in respect of the
judgment it summoneth us unto. If we were laid on our departing Bed, burdened
with the load of our former trespasses, and goared with the sting and prick of
a festered conscience, if we felt the crampe of death wresting our
heartstrings, and ready to make the ruefull divorce between body and Soul. If
we lay panting for breath, and swimming in a cold and fatal sweat, wearied
with struggling against our deadly pangs. How much would we give for an hour
of repentance? At what rate would we value a days contrition? Then worlds
would be worthless in respect of a little respite, a short truce would seem
more precious then all the treasures of Empiers, nothing would be so much
esteemed as a trice of time, which now by months and years, is lauishly
spent. How deep it would wound our hearts, when looking back into our lives,
we consider so many faults committed and not repented of, many good works
omitted and not recovered, our service to God promised, and not performed. How
inconsolable were our case, our friends being fled, our senses frighted, our
thoughts amazed, and our memory decayed, our whole minds aghast, and no part
able to perform that it should, but only our guilty consciences pestered with
Sin, that would continually vpbraid us with most bitter accusation.

What would we think when stripped out of our mortal weed, and turned out
of the service and house-roome of this world, we were forced to enter into
uncouth and strange paths; and with unknown, strange, and ougly company, be
convented before a most severe Judge, carrying in our consciences our judgment
written, and a perfect register of our misdeeds, when we should see him
prepared to pass sentence upon us, against whom we have grievously
transgressed; and the same to be our Vmper, whom by many offenses we have urged
to be our adversary, when not only the Devils but Angels should plead against
us; and our selves maugre our wills should be our sharpest appeachers: What
should we do in these dreadful exigents, when we saw that ghastly Dungeon, and
huge gulf of Hell, breaking out with most dreadful flames? when we should
see the weeping, howling, and gnashing of teeth, the rage of hellish Monsters,
the horror of the place, the rigor of the pain, the terror of the company,
and eternity of the punishment, we would not think it time to delay such
weighty matters, and idly to play away the time allotted to prevent those
intolerable punishments.

And would we then think it secure to nurse in our bosoms as many Serpents as
sins, or to foster in our Souls so many malicious accusers, as mortal
faults, would we not think one life too little to do penance for so many
Sins? Why then do we not deuote thesmall remnant of our time, and
surplussage of our days to make Atonement with God by the blood of Jesus
Christ?

What have we gotten by being so long a customer to the world, but false ware,
suitable to the shop of such a Merchant, whose traffic is toil, and wealth
is trash; and whose gain is misery? What interest have we got that may equal
our detrements in grace and virtue? Or what could we find in a Vale of tears
proportionable to the favor of God, with the loss whereof we were contented
to buy it?

Let us not still be inueagled with the passions of youth, which make a partial
estimate of things, setting no difference between current and counterfeit. But
let such passions either now be worn out of force by tract of time, or fall
into reproof by the trial of folly.

If this carnal security be but an ungrounded presumption of the mercy of God,
and the flattring hope of his assistance at the last plunge, but the ordinary
Lure of the Devil to reclaim Sinners from the pursuit of virtue, (as it is
with many) it were too palpable a collusion to mislead sound sensible people,
howsoever it prevail with sick and infected Judgments. For who would rely
eternal affairs upon the gliding slipperinesse, and running stream of our
uncertain life? Or who but of distempered wits, would offer fraud, to the
decipherer of al thoughts? With whom dissemble we may to our costs, but to
deceive him it is vnpossiible. Shall we esteem it cunning to rob the time from
him and bestow it on his enemies? who keeps a talle of the lest minutes of
our life, and will examine in the end, how each moment has been employed.

It is a preposterous policy, in any wise conceit, to fight against God, till
our weapons be blunted, our forces consumed, our limbs impotent, and our best
time spent; and when we fall for faintnes, and have fought our selves almost
dead, to presume of his mercy; The wounds of his sacred Body so often rubbed
and renewed by our sins, and every parcel of our own so sundry ways abused,
being so many whetstones to edge and exasperate his revenge against us; why
should we then presume of mercy?

It were a strange piece of Art, and a very exorbitant course while the Ship is
sound, the Pylot well, the Sailers strong, and the Gale forcible, to lie idly
at Road, burning so seasonable weather; and when the Ship leaketh, the Pylot
is sick, the Mariners faint, the storm boisterous, and the Sea a turmoile of
outrageous surges; to hoise up sails and set out for a far voyage into a
strange Country. Such is the skill of these evening Repenters, who though in
the soundness of health, and perfect use of reason, they cannot endeavor to
cut the Cables, and weigh the Anchors that withhold them from God. Nevertheless,
they feed themselves with a strong persuasion, that when their senses are
astonished, their wits distracted, their understanding dusked, and both body and
mind racked, and tormented with the throbs and gripes of a mortal sickness.
Then forsooth they will think of the weightiest matters, and become sudden
Saints, when they are scarce able to behave themselves like reasonable
creatures.

If neither the Cannon, Civil, nor Common Law allows that a man perished in
judgment shall make any Testament or bequest of his temporal substance, being
then thoughtto belesse then a man: How can he that is turmoiled with inward
garboiles of an unsettled Conscience, distrained with the wringing fits of his
dying flesh, maimed in all his abilities, and circled in with so strange
encumbrances, bethought of due discretion to dispose of his chiefest treasure
(which is his Soul) and to dispatch the whole mannaging of eternity, and the
treasures of heaven in so short a space of time. No, no, they that loiter in
seed time, and begin only to sow when others reap, they that will riot out
their health, and cast their accounts when they can scarce speak, they that
do slumber out the day, and enter their journey, when the light does fail
them; let them thank their own folly if they dye in debt, and eternal
beggary, and fall headlong into the lapse of everlasting perdition. Let such
hearken unto S. Cyprians lesson, who says, Let the grieuousnes of our sin,
be the measure of our sorrow: let a deep wound have a diligent cure, let no
man's contrition be less then his crime.

Think we that our Lord, can so soon be appeased, whom with perditious words
we have offended? No, we must fall prostrate on the ground, humbling our
seiues in Sackclothe and Ashes, and having forced our stomachs with the surfeit
of the Devil, we must now desire to fast from all earthly food, applying our
selves to good works instead of offenses, and in singleness of heart effect
our Christian duties, to avoid the death of our Souls, that Christ may
receive that which the persecuter would have spoiled.

Every short sigh will not be a sufficient satisfaction, nor every knock a
warrant to get in, many cry Lord, Lord, and are not accepted, the foolish
Virgins knocked, and were not admitted, Judas had some sorrow, and yet died
desperate: forslowe not the time says the Holy Ghost to be converted to God,
linger not off from day to day, for suddenly will his wrath come, and in his
revenge, he will destroy thee.

Let us not soiourne long in sinful security, nor pass over Repentance till
fear enforce us to it, let us frame our premises, as we would find our
conclusion, and indeauor to live, as we desire to dye. Shall we offer the
maine crop to the devil, and set God to gleane the remainder of the harvest,
or gorge the devil with the fairest fruits, and turn God to feed on the
filthy scraps of his leauings?

How great a folly were it, when a man pyneth away in perilous languor, to
provide gorgious Apparel, and take order for the rearing of stately buildings,
and never think of his own recovery, but let the disease take root in him?

Chrysostom says, When man's Soul has surfeited in all kind of sin, and
is drenched in manifold diseases, they pamper the body, with all possible
delight: Where as the Soul should have the sovereignty, and the body follow
the sway of her directions; but servile senses and lawless appetites, rule her
as superior, and so make her as a Vassal, or servile in her own dominions.

What is there (says S. Augustine) in thy meanest necessaries, that thou
would not have good; Thou would have a good house, good furniture, good
apparel, good fare, good cattle, and not so little as thy Hose and Shoes,
but thou would have it good, only thy Life and poor Soul; thy principal
charge, and of other things the most worthiest, thou art content should be
naught, by cankering and rusting in all kind of evil.

Oh unspeakable blindness, to prefer our shoes before our Souls, refusing
to wear an unseemly shoe, and not caring to carry an ugly Soul! Alas, let
us not set so light by that which God prized so high, let us not rate our
selves at so base a worth, being bought to so peerless a dignity. The Soul
is such, that all the gold in the world, nor any thing less worth then the
body, blood and death of the Son of God, was able to buy it. If not all the
treasures of the world, nor any thing that wit can devise, but only Gods own
precious body, was by him deemed, a fit repast to feed it; If not all the
creatures of the world, nor Millions of worlds, if so many were created, but
only the illimitable Majesty and goodness of God can satisfy the desire, and
fill of the capacity of it, who but one of lame judgment or perverse will;
yea, who but of incredulous mind, and pitiless spirit, could set more by his
old shoes then by his Soul, and suffer so noble a Paragon so long time to be
channelled in ordure, and myred in sin.

If we see our servant sick we allow him a Physician, if our Horse be
diseased, we send for a Leach, nor our garment torn, but we seek to amend it;
and yet malign our own Soul, and let it dye for want of Cure, and being
mingled with so many vices, never seek means to restore it to the former
integrity.

If any should call us Epicures, Atheists, or Rebels, we should take it a
reproach and think it a most disgraceful and approbrious calumniation, yea
but to live Epicures, to finne like Atheists, or like violent Rebels to scorn
Gods commandments, and daily with damnable wounds barbarously to stabbe in our
unfortunate Souls, we account no contumely, but rather register it in the
vaunt of our chief praises. O yec sons of Men, how long will you carry this
carelessness of heart, following Vanity and seek after Lies? how long will
Children love the follies of Infancy, and sinners run wilfully to their own
ruin and destruction?

You keep your Chickens from the Kite, your Lambs from the Wolf; you will not
suffer a Spider in your bosom; nay, scarce in your house: And yet nestle in
your Soul so many Vipers as vices, and suffer it to be long chewed with the
poisoned Jaws and Tuskes of the Devil. And is your Soul so vain a
substance, as to be had in so little estimation? Had Christ made shipwreck of
his wisdom? Or was he but in a fit of passion? when he became a wandering
Pilgrim, exiling as it were himself from the comfort of his godhead, and
passing three and thirty years in pain and penury for the behoof of our
Souls? Or was he surprised with a distempered spirit, when in the Tragedy of
his Passion so grievously in flicted, and patiently endured, he made his body
as a cloud to disolue into showers of most innocent blood, and suffered the
dearest veins of his heart to be launced, to give full issue to the prize of
our Souls redemption.

But if (as indeed) Christ did not ere, or deem amiss when it pleased him to
redeem us with so excessive a ransom. Then what shall we deem of our most
monstrous abuses, that sell our Souls to the Devil for every vain delight,
and rather venture the hazard thereof, then the silly pittance of worldly pelf.

Oh that a creature of so incomparable a price should be in the demaine of so
unnatural keepers; and that which in it self is so gracious and amiable, that
the Angels and Saints delight to behold it; alas, if the care of our own Soul
move us no more, but that we remain negligent of the better portion of our
selves, let us at least fear to do injury to an other very careful and
jealous over it, who will never endure so deep an impeachment of his interest
to pass unrevenged.

We must remember that our Soul is not only a part of us, but also the
Temple, the Paradise and Spouse of Almighty God, by him in Baptism garnished,
stored, and endowed with most gracious ornaments. And how (think ye) he can
brook to see his Temple profaned, and turned into a den of Devils; his
Paradise displanted, and changed into a wilderness of Serpents; his Spouse
defloured, and become an Adulteress to his utter Enemy?

If Man, offering such usage to one of mean estate, for fear of the law and
popular shame, forbeareth to effect the same; shall not then the reverend
Majesty of God, and the vnabated justice of his angry sword terrify us from
offering the like to his own Spouse, shall we think God either so impotent,
that he cannot, or so base and sottish that he will not, or so weak witted
that he knows not how for to wreake himself on such daring offenders? Will
he so neglect and loose his honor, which of all things he claims as his
chief peculiar? Will he that for the Souls sake keeps a reckoning of our
very hairs, which are but the excrements of our earthly weed, see himself so
much wronged in the principal, and pass by it without demonstration of his
just indignation.

Oh let us remember that the Scripture terms it a fearful thing to fall
into the hands and justice of God, who is able to crush the proud spirit of the
obstinate, and make his enemies his foote-stoole. Let us then wrestle no longer
with the cries of our own conscience, and the forcible inspirations of the
Holy Ghost.

Let us, I say, embrace his mercy before the time of rigor, and like penitent
children return to the obedience of his will, lest he debar us of his
Kingdom: And as the members of one body (whereof Christ is the head) let us
live in humble obedience of the Church millitant here on earth, that we may
atchieue to the Church triumphant in Heaven; knowing that we have been long
aliants in the Tabernacles of sinners, and straied too long from the fold of
Gods flock.

Let us now turn the biace of our hearts toward the Sanctuary of Salvation,
and City of refuge, seeking to recompense our wandering steps trodden in sin
and wickedness, with a swift gate, and zealous progress to Christian
perfection, redeeming the time because the days be evil.

The fall of our spring is past, and the stream of our life runs at a low
rate or ebb, our tired Ship begins to leake, and grateth on the gravel of
our grave; it is high time for us to strike sail and put in harbor, lest
remaining in the scope of wicked winds and weather, some unexpected gulf and
sudden storm, dash us upon the Rock of eternal ruin.

Let us tender the pitiful estate of our distressed Souls, and be hereafter
more fearful of Hell, and more desirous of Heaven, then worldly repose, that
at the great day of our Lord, Christ Jesus may acknowledge us to be his; and
that our Souls and bodies may enjoy the fruition of his most glorious death
and passion; unto which God for his mercy sake, say yea, and Amen.

The Conclusion.
IF God the Father had been the indighter hereof, God the Son the sender,
and God the holy Ghost the Scribe and writer of the same; If he had dipped his
pen in the wounds of our Savior and used his precious blood in liew of Ink?
If one of the highest Seraphins had been formed into some visible personage,
and come in most solemn embassage for to deliver this unto you, would it not
strain your hearts and enforce your thoughts to fulfill the contents, and
alter your courses according to the Tennor of it; Oh I beseech you let it take
a proportionable effect, knowing that the Scripture teaches us, that God
reuealeth to little ones, that which he often times concealeth from the wisest
Sages, and his truth is not abased by the means of the speaker, for if men
should be silent, he would cause the very stones to cry out in these times,
wherein sin and wickedness so exceedingly abounds.

Wherefore I humbly pray and exhort you, for to surrender your Assents that we
may yield our selves happy Captives to Gods merciful inspirations. That he
may in the temptations of our three ghostly enemies the World, the Flesh, and
the Devil, (even for his Sons sake) shroud us under the shadow of his
merciful wings, and close up the day of our life with a clear Sunset; that
leaving all darkness behind us, and carrying in our consciences the light of
grace, we may escape the horror of an eternal Night, and pass from a
Mortal day, to an everlasting Morrow.

The God of peace who has brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, the
great shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting covenant,
make us perfect in all good works to do his will, working in us that which is
pleasant in his sight, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

The Prayer.
What was I Lord? what am I? what shall I be? I was nothing, I am now nothing
worth, and am (without thy grace) in hazard to be worse then nothing. I was
conceived in original sin, now full of actual sin, and (but for thy
goodness) may hereafter feel the eternal smart for sin. I was in my mother
a loathsome substance. I am in the world a sack of corruption, and I shall be
in the Grave a prey for vermin: when I was nothing I was without hope to be
saved, or fear to be damned: I am now (if I look upon my self rightly) in no
hope of the one, and in manifest danger of the other. I was so that I could not
then be damned; and now such are my sins, that in thy instice I cannot be
saved: But I know (sweet Jesus) thy grace is sufficient for me. Wherefore I
humbly beseech thy Majesty to turn from me those plagues which my sins cry
out for. I confess (oh Savior Jesus) that my sins are exceeding many, and
fearful; yet thy Mercy is far greater, for thou art infinite in mercy, but
I cannot be infinite in sinning, and thy righteousness is more for me, then my
own unrighteousness can be against my self. I beseech thee therefore
strengthen my weakness, correct my sinnefulnesse, direct my future frailty,
and through thy precious Blood and Passion convert my passed evils to present
good, and future joys in thy eternal and most glorious Kingdom.

Amen.
FINIS.

