THE LOVE OF WALES to their sovereign Prince, Expressed In a true Relation of
the solemnity held at Ludlow in the County of Salop, upon the fourth of
November last past. Anno Domini. 1616.

Being the day of the Creation of the high and mighty CHARLES, Prince of WALES,
and Earl of CHESTER, in his Majesty's Palace of White Hall.

LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Oaks, 1616.

To the high and mighty Prince CHARLES, Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall and
York, and Earl of Chester, etc.
Most Illustrious and Peerless Prince,
THat which your Highness beholds in the Sun rising, how in displaying his
bright Beams, he dispells all mistie vapors, and comforts, by the vigorous
influence thereof, the feeble senses of inferior bodies: the same might easily
have bin discerned in the faces of all his Majesty's subjects (who formerly
drouping through the Fates destiny) are at last cheered and revived by the
happy Rise of your Highness into the Princely throne of Wales, where you were no
sooner enthronized by Gods gracious providence, by lawful authority, and by
the love of all his Majesty's liege people (who are the Princes principal
Supporters) but it was a wonder to see of a sudden, what a sweet spring, what a
happy change, what a powerful renouation was wrought in the vital spirits of
his Majesty's said subjects, who daunced for joy, filled the Air with shouts
and acclamations in all quarters, but specially in your proper Meridian of
Ludlow, the beautiful seat of his Majesty's chief Castle and Counsel of
Wales, where my self (being not altogether an idle Actor, nor unwilling
Spectator) was so ravished with the fulness of joy, which I saw in the hearts
of the people, as I wished my self then to be transformed into the shape of
the sweet Nightingale, which was counted Vox praeterea nihil, that with Fames
golden wings I might echo out to the ears of all men, the loyal affection of
the British Nation to their royal Prince, and the royal favors of their
gracious Prince intended to them, whose very Name caused such a surplusage of
mirth and admiration, as my Pen is not able to decipher the half of the
rejoicing which they expressed, nor were they any way able with all their
endeavors, to testify the full measure of Gladness which their hearts conceived:
If then in the divulging of this plain Narration, I eclipse much of the
glorious substance of the Show, I hope your Highness in beholding my loyal
intention, will be induced to pardon my daring presumption. And what is now the
period of all our Petitions, but that Heaven may add constancy to the
felicity of your Triumph, and then we doubt not that our Joys shall ever wax
old, but whiles your Highness continues to accept of the royal Title of
Prince of Wales, his Majesty's people will still have new matter of rejoicing
in your gracious Government and powerful protection: Thus in most lowly manner
upon my knee, craving pardon for this my presumption, hoping your Excellency
will not discuss Nec quis, nec quid, sed quo animo, neither the meandness of
my self, nor the smallness of the matter, but only the mind and heart of
your poor Vassal, I rest praying for all blessings external, internal, and
eternal to your Highness.

From Ludlow this last of November 1616. Your Highness devoted in all
observance Daniel Powel.

To the Reader.
THat which Virgill writes of Ascanius his following his Father Aeneas, I must
apply at this time to my self;

sequiturque patrem, haud passibus aequis. My natural Father so loved his
native Country, that (amongst other Writings) he wrote a Chronicle of Wales;
Doctor Powels Chronicle.
and I, howbeit not able to follow him in like maturitie and perfection, yet
striving to follow him in the like matter and affection, have adventured to
relate the great cheerfulness and exceeding forwardness, which was in my
Countrymen, and all in these parts, upon the day of his Highness Creation
Prince of Wales. And how ever the carping Critickes may calumniate my honest
endeavors, yet I am sure they can never obliterate the memory of that days
mirth, which still remains niueo signanda lapillo, so registered in the hearts
of the people; Vt nulla vnquam aetas, nulla aetatis vetustas, nulla vetustatis
antiquitas illam aboleuerit. Which if thou take in good part, it is all I
desire; if thou do not, it is enough that I testify my humble duty unto my
Prince for his content, and my love to my Countrymen for their commendations,
and so I leave thee.

Apud Ludlow quarto die Nouembris, Anno Domini 1616. Annoque Regni Regis IACOBI
nunc, etc. Angliae, Franciae, and Hyberniae, etc. Quartodecimo: Et Scociae
Quinquagesimo.
The names of such of the Counsel there, as then were present.
Sir THOMAS CHAMBERLAIN Knight, Sergeant at Law, chief Justice of Chester,
and of his Majesty's Counsel in the Marches of Wales. Sir THOMAS CORNEVVAILE
Knight, Baron of Burford, one of the Gentlemen of his Majesty's privy Chamber,
high Sheriff of the County of Salop, one other of his Majesty's said Counsel
there. THOMAS HARLEY Esquier, one other of his Majesty's said Counsel there.
THE LOVE OF WALES to their sovereign Prince.
HIs Majesty's said Counsel in the Dominion and Principality of Wales, and
the Marches of the same (being at Ludlow, where his Highness chief Seat and
Castle for the said Principality, now is, and of a long time has been) for a
Remembrance to all succeeding Ages, have (by the appointment and direction of
the right honorable Raph Lord Eure, Lord President of the said Counsel being
then absent) commanded, that the said day, in the year aforesaid, being
Monday the first day of this present Term, holden before the said Counsel
(being the very day, whereon the most renowned, high, and mighty Prince
CHARLES Prince of Great Britain, etc. was at his Majesty's Palace of
White Hall created Prince of Wales, and Earl of Chester) should be solemnized.

For which purpose, the said Justice took special care, as the shortness of
the time would permit, being newly come from London, where he left sir Henry
Touneshend, and sir Francis Eure Knights, with Nicholas Ouerbury Esquier, three
of the learned Counsel Resident for the said Principality and Marches
thereof, at that time attending his Majesty's special service at London:) and
caused to repair, and assemble at the said Castle of Ludlow, the forenamed sir
Thomas Cornewaile high Sheriff of the said County, with his Staff of Office,
and the said Thomas Harley Esquier (being two of his Counsel there as
aforesaid) together with sir Robert Harley Knight of the Bath, sir Francis
Cornwaile Knight, Marmaduke Lloyd Esquier, his Majesty's Attorney there, Thomas
Powell Esquier his Highness Solicitor, attending the said Counsel, John
Delabere Doctor of Physic, William Fox, William Vaughan, Gruffith Lloyd
Esquiers, and many other worthy Gentlemen and persons of good account of the
Counties of Salop, Hereford, Denbigh, Mountgogomery, Caeruaruon, Merioneth, and
other countries adjoining, to the number of many thousand persons.

The true manner of which Solemnization was as follows:

FIrst, the said Justice commanded that our said Prince his Arms, with his
Name, and Style there-vnder in Characters fairly subscribed, should be set up
and published, as well under the Pulpit in the church of Saint Laurence in
Ludlow, and in his Majesty's Chapel within the said Castle, and in the
Courthouse of the Principality there, as also upon the gates of the said
Town, and high Cross there, and likewise upon the principal Posts and
Pillars standing in the Market place within the said Town of Ludlow.

The tenor of which Style and Subscription here insueth.

Quarto Nouembris. Anno Dom. 1616.
THe right high, Mighty and excellent Prince Charles, Prince of great Britain
and Ireland, Duke of Cornwall, York and of Albany, Marquess of Ormont, Earl
of Rosse, Baron of Armanoch, of the most noble order of the Garter, Knight,
Second Son by Birth, and now the only and first begotten son of the most
puissant and potent James by the grace of God, of England, Scotland France and
Ireland King, is this day at Ludlow by us of the Counsel solemnized within the
said Principality of Wales.

Afterward, about nine of the Clock in the fore-noone of the said fourth of
November, William Gregory, and Thomas Blashfield Esquiers, Bailifes of the said
Town of Ludlow, accompanied with the Magistrates their Brethren, and all the
chief Burgesses of the said Town, very richly clad and apparrelled, attended
by their Officers with their Maces before them, and all the Quire of the Church
there, singing of Hymns and Psalms of thanksgiving and praise for our said
Prince, bringing with them six young Youths, being Scholars of the Kings free
School of the said Town, well and richly decked and adorned, who did bear in
their hands several Penons and Bannerolls of the Arms and Atchiuements of our
said Prince Charles, that is to say:

The foremost Scholar bore in his hand the Arms of England and Scotland.

The second carried the Arms of the Britains and Saxons.

The third, France and Ireland.

The fourth, Northwales and Southwales.

The fifth, Cornwall and Chester.

The sixth and the last, carried the Arms of York and Lancaster, with the
Plume of feathers and the Prince his Name;

Having before them the Town Waits and other loud Instruments of Music, and
before the music marched a long the number of two hundred soldiers being
well appointed and furnished with Halberds, Pikes, Corslets, Muskets, and
Caliuers, under the conduct and leading of Leonard Lloyd there then Captain
(who in good order had his Lieutenants, and Sergeants bravely arrayed, having
four Drums, and two Trumpets sounding before them, besides Fifes, and other
wind Instruments, who all of them thus appointed, came up to the Castle to
attend and bring the said Justice and Counsel to the Church:

And having repaired to the Castle Green there, and meeting Master Justice in
his Scarlet Robes, with the rest of the Counsel before named in decent manner,
upon the Castle bridge, accompanied with all the worshipful Counselors of
Law, Atturneis and Clarks belonging to that Court, with sundry Esquiers and
Gentlemen, having before them Richard Jones Esquier, Sergeant at Arms,
carrying his Majesty's Mace, William Gooderick Esquier, gentleman Porter,
Richard Collins, one of the Vshers of his Majesty's Chamber, and the two
messengers of the Court, viz. Piers Gruffith, and Thomas Pingle gentlemen, in
rich coats; Francis Trollop gentleman, Marshall of the said Court, Thomas
Steuens Gentleman, Yeoman of the Kings Wardrobe there, Gruffith Jones Constable
of the Castle, together with all the chief Officers of the said Castle (being
all of them very richly apparrelled, and having another company of Waits and
good consorts of Music, as Cornets, Sagbuts, and other wind Instruments,
playing and sounding all along the way before them) a great Volley of shot was
discharged by the said Musketeers and Caliuers, which so pierced the Air with
the great noise of Drums, and sound of Trumpets, Fifes, Flutes, and other
Instruments, as the like in these parts has not been seen, to the great
admiration, and much rejoicing of all the Spectators.

And thereupon marshalling themselves in good array, they all went through the
Town streets, to the Church, singing and rejoicing all the way they went,
where was another Volley of shot discharged.

After Prayers said, and Psalms sung, one M. Thomas Pierson, a grave reverend
divine and worthy Preacher, made a very learned Sermon of an hour and half
long, upon the first verse of the 72. Psalm, viz.

Give the King thy Judgments, O God, and thy Righteousness to the Kings
son. Which Sermon being ended, and Psalms sung by the Singing-men and
Quiristers, to and with the great Organs there, all the whole Company returned.

And as they issued out of the Church and Churchyard into the Market place,
there was a new Scaffolde purposly erected near unto the high Cross (with a
great Bonefire not far distant) upon which Scaffolde the said Scholars with
their Penons or Banerols of Arms in their hands, as aforesaid, ascended; and
as the said Justice and Counsel passed by, alternatim uttered, and pronounced
these several Speeches following:

CAmbria toll caput nuper perpessa dolores
Gaudia nunc animo conduplicata tuo.
Auspicijs laetis Princeps hac luce creatur,
Carolus: o totus Gratia, totus Amor!
Splendida progenies coelo delapsa supremo
Deliciae nostri dimidiumque Iouis!
Pluribus obsequijs nos hac de gente tenemur
o Princeps lauds amplificare tuas.
Pluribus officijs nos hac de sede locoque
Debemus titulos concelebrare tuos.
Ecce tua ipsius proprio tibi iure dicata
Symbola: iudicibus conueneranda Dijs
Pluma triplex rutila pulchre deuincta corona
Orbis inexhaustas flammeus ambit eas
Illa feras, pardosque truces, aquilasque fugaces
Exuperant titulis nobilitata suis.
Scilicet in coelum super aetheris ardua Sanctos
Virtutum studijs penna volare notat.
Vox diuina subest coelesti pectore digna
Ych Din,
Sub Iouis Imperijs * Seruio non alijs.
Nemo meis dignus nisi qui sit Summus in orb
Officijs: Sors est libera namque mea.
Sic antiqua docent nos Vatum oracula recte
(Sors est a prima Sort secunda mea.)
Clara coronatae nos hic Insignia plumae
Principis armigeri scutiferique damus.
Vir venerande tibi; quae (te custode) reposta
Principis hinc nostri nomen in astra ferant.
Dixit JOHANNES COTTON.
POndera magna (licet pueri) gestamus; HOnoris
Plena; sed Herculeis viribus aequa satis
Atlantisque Humeris: de Gentibus vndique nostris
Debetur titulis Imperialis honos.
Anglia prima suos clarissima signa Leones
Gestat: cognatos Scotia gestat eos
Inde perantiquo splendentes lumine Gentes
Brito Leone nitet: Saxo crucemque gerit.
Gallia succedit, cui iuncta Hybernica tellus
Portans dulcisonae Lilia nexa Lyrae.
Hinc diuisa Ordouices and Silures. Northwales and Southwales.
duas in parts Cambria: Suntque
Signa Leone rapax cum gradiente Leo.
Cestria gestit ouans and ouans Cornubia quinto
Ostentans titulos amplificansque suos
Eboraco tandem Lancastria iungitur: illis
Candida purpureae sic rosa iuncta rosae.
Singula pulchra satis licet ingens pondus Honoris
Sola tenent: Ducibus nobilitata suis
Vnde paterna fluit maternaque Gentis origo
Regibus innumeris quae numeretur auis
At splendoris habent immensum corpore in vno
Crux, Rosa, Spica, Globi, Lilia, Plectra, Leo.
Vis vnita valet: virtus coniuncta nitescit
Clarior: Haec nostri Principis arma docent
Significantque suis. Quaeque haec dignissima sacris
Arcanis, (Vatum ni minuenda fides)
Diuinos mores, coelestia pectora, Mentes
Plusquam mortales Regibus esse pijs.
Hos fidei curaeque tuae mandamus Honores
O princeps nostri luxque decusque Fori.
Dixit THO: FISHER.
QVid Phaebaea canit vel iactat nomina Delos?
Creta quid omnipotens nomen Iouiale recenset?
Principis haec nostri superabit nomina nomen
Clara per immensum fundens miracula mundum?
Illum pro cunctis sua Cambria praedicet vnum
Vnum prae cunctis vaga fama recenseat illum,
Spargat and Argolicas tua nomina clara per vrbes
Vrbes Italiae noscant tua nomina tanta
Tanta per Assyrios volitent tua nomina muros
Muros Barbariae collustrent nomina sacra
Sacra vel extremae captant tua nomina Gentes
Gentes condiscant and tradant Posteritati,
Posteritas tanto gaudebit nomine laeta
Carole gentis honos nostrae, Lux altera Mundi.
Dixit SIMON COTTON.
Haec dies nobis niueo lapillo
Haec dies festo numeranda ramo
Carolus Princeps pius hac nitenti Luce creatur.
Principi nostro meritos honores
Maximos illi meritosque amores
Demus: and quartae memores Nouembris Simus in aeuum.
Bellicus arts amet and Trophaea
Candidus doctis faueat Camoenis
Victor educto gladio rebellem Terreat hostem.
Inclytus factis super astra notis
Exprimat patrem, pietate matrem
Et Senex vitae numeret beatae Tempora longa.
Dixit EDOARDVS SAVNDERS.
All which were principally invented and made by the painful industry of that
judicious and laborious master of Arts Humfrey Herbert chief Schoole-maister
of his Majesty's free-Schoole there, upon one days warning.

As also these that follow, were then pronounced, being made by that worthy
Alderman of Ludlow master Richard Fisher.

That which the fulness of our Joy brings forth,
Although not equal to the causes worth;
That which our humble duty moves us to,
All that our mean Ability can do,
Unto our dear Prince Charles we consecrate,
His fair beginning to congratulate,
Charles Camdens Remains.
Valiant and Verstegans etymolog.
All-Noble signifies,
And lo, these Emblemes well the same implies
The Cardan. inuicta superare significat.
Ostrich feathers, Fortitude express
The Kingly Principem and virum magnanimum.
Lions intimate no less:
The Symbolu^ christianae prosessionis.
Cross Religion, and these fragrant Lilium and rosae, pulchritudinem, gratiam,
bonam famam, and iusta facta pollicentur.
flowers
The Harmonia, sapientiam diuinam.
Slash, the Vnitatem and securitatem.
Globes and Garbae, spicae deorum sunt coronae, prosperitatem and benignitatem
significant and denotant. Cardan.
Crown of heavenly powers,
Are Hieroglyphics of Nobility,
High Birth, true Wisdom, Justice, Piety.
These we present unto his sacred Name,
Whose worth contains the Character of Fame.
THOMAS GREGORY.
THrice blessed be the heavenly Providence,
That gau's a Prince of such magnificence,
Who is the most illustrious flowring Bud
Of many famous Kingdoms royal Blud,
And our great Britains hopeful ornament
He shall protect this happy The Honorable Counsel of the Marches.
Government.
And proudest opposition learn to know,
The Duty to our Sovereign King we owe.
Now Ludlow may thou hope (if Gods will be)
Thy Princes sacred person here to see,
And stream out all thy Joys to veiw his Face,
And some officious service do his Grace.
O prosper may he, and his glory more,
Then any Charles the World had e're before:
His future years exceeding ten times ten,
All those that love Prince Charles will say Amen.
WALTER ASTON.
THe which Speeches being ended by the said Scholars (who thereby for their
gracious boldness in the delivery thereof, got great applause by the said
Justice and all the Auditorie) and after another volley of shot discharged,
they marched and passed by sundry other great Bonfires, whereof one was by the
Castle Gate, and another was within the utter Court, or Green of the said
Castle, and there marching, discharging of shot, singing, playing on
instruments and heartily rejoicing, proceeded into the Courthouse of the said
Principality, where the said Justice very gravely, in the presence and
audience of all the whole Company there assembled, delivered these words
following, or the like in effect, viz.

THis happy and glorious Day, the bright Sunneshining glory of Great Britain,
being the first day of the Week, and the first day of our Term, and the next
day to the Lords own Day, his holy Sabbath: and the next day before our
wonderful day of our great deliverance from the Gunpowder-Treason, the Kings
day:

The High and Mighty Prince Charles our first Prince of that Name, Prince of
Great Britain and Ireland, Duke of Cornwall, York, and Albany, Marquis of
Ormont, Earl of Rosse, Baron of Armanoch, of the most Noble Order of the
Garter, Knight: Second Son by Birth, and now the Only, and First Begotten
Son of the most potent and puissant JAMES, by the Grace of God, of England,
Scotland, France and Ireland, King; is this day, at his Majesty's Palace of
White Hall, created Prince of Wales and Earl of Chester, being the thirteenth
Prince by Creation, in succession of this his Noble Principality of Wales.

This most excellent Prince thus stated and styled, takes it for a high honor,
and great dignity unto himself to be created Prince of Wales; and therefore
all we of this Principality and Jurisdiction, are the rather bound to yield
all honor, duty and service to him who has so much honored us, and all
Wales.

And therefore let none scorn nor contemn the power and authority thereof,
(his Highness being graciously pleased to signify his pleasure to me and my
said Brethren of this Counsel) That he would protect and defend the same both
by his Highness himself, and by his Princely means to the King his father.

And as he is now our first Prince of that name, so I hope he shall be as
religious, victorious, and renowned within these his Majesty's Kingdoms and the
Dominions thereof in future times, as those of his Name have been in other
Kingdoms in former Ages before him, to the great glory of great Britain.

Therefore all our Prayers to God shall be, that our said Prince may be a
continual comfort and Honor to the King his father, our dread Sovereign,
during his reign (which God long continue) and afterward to be the staff and
strength of us and all Christendom, for the protection and defense of the
Church of God, his holy word and Gospel, and that God will bless Prince
Charles our said Prince of Wales, with all his blessings from Heaven, fit for
so high and mighty a Prince as he is; as also with long life, royal issue, and
happy days, for the good and welfare of this our Church and Commonwealth.

And let this happy day of the Creation of our said Prince of Wales be here
recorded by us, for a memorial to all succeeding times: and so again we say;
God save and bless Prince Charles our said Prince of Wales, and his royal
Posterity for ever.

These were the words of that reverend Judge, there wants nothing save that
Grace and Zeal wherewith he pronounced them.

Whereunto all the people with a loud voice prayed and cried, Amen, Amen.

And thereupon all the Music played, Drums were struck, Flutes whistled,
Trumpets sounded, people showted, and another piercing and thundering Volley of
shot was let fly, the echo and report whereof resounded admirably, to the
great solace and comfort of all present.

And then being full one of the clock in the after noone, the said Justice,
and Counsel, with the Knights, Esquiers, and best sort of Gentlemen returned
into the Castle to dinner (where was a great Feast provided, with excellent
music) the Bailiffes also with their Brethren and Burgesses went down to the
Town, to spend the rest of the day in all joyful and iouiall manner, having
all of them, before their departure thence, in the presence, and by the
appointment of Raph Mansfield Esquier, chief Steward to the Kings Household
there, drunk plentifully of wine, to the happy health and prosperity, of our
said gracious Prince of Wales.

Dinner being scarce ended in the Castle, the aforesaid Bailiffes in like
pomp, being again accompanied with the whole Quire of the Church, and the
Penon-bearers with their Banerols of Arms in their hands, and their Music
playing before them, came up in great solemnity into the Castle, where Master
Justice joyfully receiving them, brought them straight into the Chapel, there
to offer their Evening Sacrifice, where much rejoicing was without doors, and
excellent Music of Voices, in singing many Psalms and new Anthemes within
the said Chapel.

Which being finished, the aforesaid Scholars very humbly prostrating
themselves with low obeisance, delivered up their said several Banerolls into
the hands of the said Justice, who willed Richard Adams Gentleman, being
skillful in Heraldrie there present, to see them orderly placed in the said
Chapel, where they now remain as remarkable Trophies of that Solemnity.

And after Prayers ended, the Bailiffes with their company humbly taking their
leave of the Counsel, Master Justice required them still to continue their
Ringing, as well for the full solemnizing of the said day of our Prince his
said Creation, as also to express their joy and thanksgiving unto Almighty
God for our said dread Sovereigns most admirable Deliverance, with the royal
Queen, illustrious Prince, all the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons
of this Realm assembled together in Parliament from the Papists treasonable
and horrible conspiracy, and unmatchable intended Practice of the Gunne-powder
treason, in the year of our Lord God, one thousand six hundred and five, and
to be in a readiness with the said Justice, and Counsel the next morning, to
praise God for the same.

Which accordingly was performed the next day, and a very learned Sermon
preached by Master Thomas Kaye, the Kings Chaplain, attending the Lord
President and Counsel there, upon the twelve and thirteen Verses of the 116.
Psalm.

What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits toward me?
I will take the cup of Salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord.
Which Sermon being ended, every man returned to their home, the Music,
Ringing, and Bonefires continuing to the great comfort of all his Majesty's
said loving and faithful Subjects all the said day.

This Solemnization the said Justice was careful to observe, for the Glory of
God, the Honor of the King, and Prince of Wales; as well to testify and
express his Duty and Service, as also the loyalty and hearty joy of all
his Majesty's loving Subjects then assembled.

FINIS.

