A DISCOURSE, OF the true and visible Marks of the Catholic Church

Written by M. THEOD. BEZA. Vezelius.

printer's device with bird GOD IS MY HELPER


GOD IS MY HELPER. Psalm. 7.11 AT LONDON; Printed by Robert Walde-graue,
dwelling without Temple Bar, in the Strond, near unto Sommerset-house.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful, Sir George Carey knight, knight Marshall of her
Majesty's bousholde, etc. T. VV. his poor welwiller, wishes abundance of
all good things in this life, and eternal blessedness in the life to come,
through Christ.
HOW glorious and excellent a thing the church it self is; may appear
(Right Worshipful) by many means: And amongst the rest, even by this: that
all; both good and bad, do challenge and claim (whether justly or unjustly, I
mind not much now to dispute) not only the name and ty^le thereof. but the
very possession of it also. I hope I shall not need much to busy my self in
the proof of this point: Because, as it manifestly appears, by sundry
examples of former times, and particularly, by the people of the Jews in the
days of Jeremiah the prophet: who cried out: The Temple of the Lord, the
Temple of the Lord: this is the Temple of the Lord: as is to be seen in the
seventh chapter of his book: So have we a most evident and plain testimony
of the same in this declining and doting old age of the world: For whereabout
are those large disputations which at this day are handled betvveene the
catholics, as they would be called, and the true professors of Christ's
Gospel, most occupied; I pray you; but specially about this question, and
other controversies concerning the same? The thing rather, that in my mind is
more to be stood upon, is this: namely, to see: what should be the cause why,
that notwithstanding that same greedye desire that the greatest number have, to
retain with them both the name of the Church, and the Church it self: yet so
few have it and hold it fast. All men have in them, notwithstanding the
defacing of God his image in them through sin, by some small sparks of
reason and judgment; which yet remain in them undefaced, A certain thirsting
after Blessedness, and the hope of a better life: And this is the more inkindled
in men's hearts and heads, when it pleases God, to vouchsafe them in some
measure of his mercy, some light and knowledge of his holy truth: by which they
see, that with out the Church there can be no salvation. And that causes them
to press on forward to vvish to be of that number that has so gracious a
Privilege granted unto the same: And yet all this notwithstanding, it is a
vvonder to see, how the greatest part of the world is deceived, with a bare
shadow and shevve of the same: For, that I may speak nothing of the Infidelles
in their idolatries; nor of the Turks, cleaving fast to their Mahomet; Nor of
the Jews, openly dispiting Christ the Savior of the world: and therefore
all of them, of necessitye out of the Church, and consequently void of
salvation also: because they hold not the head, which is Christ. To let all
these pass, I say, and to come to them which in outvvard show make
profession of Christianity and true religion; how many of them are there that
are violently carried away with as gross and palpable Idolatry, as the
heathen? What infinite multitudes perish thorough ignorance, and want of the
sound knowledge of God in Christ? how many are drowned, to the hazarding of
their own souls, with horrible erroures and heresies? And what a number are
there in the world beside, that shaking hands, as it were with Atheists
(ye the vvorst people of al) do lie vveltring in the pleasures and profits of
this life; making no account at all, either of God in heaven, or of his Church
here in earth? And what would the Lord teach us by all this: verily first that
we must have better eyes to discern his congregation by, then the light of our
own reason: for if even then when we have his word, we can yet hardly
discry it, partly because it is discerned spiritually, and partly because by
the hard dealings of the enemies it is sundry times brought to so lovv an eb,
that it seems to be shut up in one man's person. And therefore do say in the
confession of our Christian faith, that we do believe that there is a holy
catholic Church: that then we shall never be able to separate it from the
Synagogue of Satan by our own understanding and wit: which consideration is
yet further profitable; even for the confutation of that immagination and
conceit, which our adversaries have and hold concerning man's freevvil: for if
we cannot by our own co^prehension perceive either the place in which, or
the persons amongst whom, the Church it self is, but that we must have
from above, for that purpose, great enlightening both of knowledge and faith,
much less shall we be able to comprehend those vvonderfull treasures of most
sound, comfortable, and profitable doctrine that the Lord has freely
bestovved upon his said Church: Of which the Apostle says: that the eye
has not seen them, the ear has not heard them, neither can man's heart
comprehend them. 2. Cor. 2.9. Wherefore the case stands not with us as
heretofore we have been borne in hand: And as yet to this day, is openly
defended amongst Papists: that man in his mere natural gifts, has will to
desire, and power to perfourm such things as are good: for if it be God
that works in us both the will and the deed; and that according to his own
good pleasure. Philip. 2.13. And that we are not sufficient of our selves, as
of our selves to think a good thought. 2. Cor. 3.5. It must needs follow
that we can not claim any such thing unto our selves, without robbing God of
his glory, without lifting up of our selves above measure and truth, and
without impeaching the authority and credit of the Scriptures, which in many
places affirms, and namely Genes. 6.5. that all the immaginations of the
thoughts of man's heart are only evil every day: But to let this pass, and to
come to the things we have in hand, We are hereby in the second place
instructed, that we must have more sure and infallible marks, to know God
his Church by, than those which the Papists give us, to wit: universality,
Antiquity, and consent: for if beside that great number of Idolatours, and
misbeleeuers mentioned before; who also can allege for themselves great
antiquity and agree, and (as he that is not vvilfully blind, may easilye see)
there are, and that even in the lap and bosom of the Church, many hypocrites
and heretics also, which yet shall not be saved: we may then safely conclude
that the forenamed things are not only not the assured notes: but no notes at
all rather of the true Church of God: both because they are common to many
things besides the Church; yea even to evil things, and also because that
though that assemblye which pretends to be the Church, should have them;
and yet have not therevvithal the truth and sincerity of God his doctrine; it
is no whit at all the better for all that. All these things tend to this end:
that for as much as in truth there is but one Church, even as the head
thereof is one, and therefore so must the body be: or else it should be
monstrous, notvvithstanding that there be sundry particular parts and members
thereof, as we see in a man's body; all yet making but one and the self same
body: And forasmuch also, as without that Church there can be no salvation,
because unto it alone is it; that the Lord has made such large and gracious
promises: as; The gates of Hell shall not prevail against it: and that to it
only belongs the forgiveness of sins in this life, and everlasting
salvation in the life to come: And lastly, forasmuch as it behooves every one,
even as he tends his own peace of conscience, and regards the hope of
eternal blessedness; to be vvatchfull, in discrying and knovving this Church;
and careful in uniting himself unto the same: every good man therefore
should earnestly labor, not only to know it: but also steadfastly, to join
himself unto it in the religious exercises thereof: That so in the holy
feeling of the communion of Saints, he may be a fruitful partaker of all
those excellent graces that God in great mercy has bequethed to the same.
True it is, that Satan, the common enemy of mankind (who in his own person,
and the person of his instruments and ministers laboreth to hinder, what he
may, the work of our salvation) has in all ages used, and yet presently
does use many subtle and sly shifts, to let us from the apprehension and
understanding of these great graces: for sometimes he makes men utterly and
altogether careless of the Church, and of the benefits and blessings of God
promised thereto: As we may see in that troup of profane Atheistes and
vvorldly minded men: who make no more account of the Church, and the holy
exercises thereof; than of a vain tale, or unholy matter: no, nor so much
neither many times; for the one they embrace with greedines and vvonderfull
delight; and the other they do, either most dispitefullie contemn, or most
negligently use without any spiritual profit at all unto themselves. But to
beat down these men, there is no better VVeapon and way, then to send them
to the fearful judgments of Almighty God, and to the horrors of hell and
eternal comdemnation (which many times they feel in themselves, though
thorough the profits and pleasures of this present evil world, they utterly
put them out) already prepared for them, and in due time to be performed to
them. Sometimes again, he discourageth men, by setting before them the
fearful persecutions and troubles that follow, and take hold of the
particular members of the Church, for the sincere profession of God his word:
for the surmounting of which assault, men must often meditate upon those
same large and comfortable discourses that are put down and contained in God
his word for their comfort in that behalf, and to hold them back from the
fearful fall of renouncing god his truth, having their eye fast fixed also upon
the particular deliverances, that God in all ages has vvroght for his children:
which are as it were so many seals set unto the vvriting; that he will
alvvaies deal so graciouslye with his children, as shall make most for his
own glory. and their eternal comfort. Sometimes he deceives other sum,
and that no small some by the bare name and vizor of the Church alone; as we
may see in that miserable sect of seduced Papists (unjustly called, and
claiming unto themselves: the name of Catholics) who willingly embrace
under the title of the Church, every fabulous falsehood and corruption
whatsoever, not only not looking upon the things, given or offered: which
every wise man will do, least he receive poison in steed of vvholsom and
nourishing food: but also not considering the person of the giver, neither
yet what right and authority he has to bestovv the things given; which
blockishnesse of the adversaries, is rather to be lamented, because it is
altogether void of common sense and reason, than largely or learnedly
confuted: And yet we see that many good men have not spared to take great
pains in that behalf, both by preaching and vvriting, to win seduced souls
unto Cod. Sometimes he sets before other some, either the hardness that
there is, to discrie the true Church from the false Church by, (remember I pray
you that when I give the name Church, to corrupted and counterfaited
assemblies, I do it by abusion, as they say) or else lays out the great
iarres and dissentions, that many times are in the same, that so he may
discourage them from joining themselves, to that holy society, And indeed by
this assault he specially prevails against them that are in some forvvardnes
to incline to the truth: And yet by reason of some certain weakness in
them, are easily turned the one way or the other: but these men, for the
better stay of themselves, are to know, that there must be heresies, even
among the godly; that they which are approved among them might be known. 1
Cor. 11.19. and to be exhorted; that they labor to abound in all holy
knowledge of God his vvil revealed in his word; For therefore they err, and
are so unstable in their opinions, because they know not the Scriptures; nor
the power of God. Now therefore, necessary is it, that these stumbling
blocks, cast by Satan and his servants in our ways to hinder us in the race
and course of Godliness, should be removed: that so we may the more
cheerfully and readily go forevvard with faith, patience, and constancy,
even to the goal that is set before us. In which respect, that excellent
instrument of God in his Church; M. Theodor Beza, hah notably travailed by
publishing in the Latin tongue; a most learned Treaty of the visible Notes of
the visible Church: And I, for the same consideration, have according to my
small measure, faithfully turned the same into our vulger speech, offering these
my poor travails unto you (right worshipful) and in you, to the whole
Church of God in this land; as a sure testimony of that unfeigned good will
which in the Lord, I have carried and will carry toward you all the days
of my life. I hope, I shall not need to spend many words either in commending
the work it self, or in declaring the resons that have moved me to attempt
this matter: for if either the man who is the author thereof, or the matter
which is propounded, or the manner that he uses in laying out of the thing,
may add commendation unto it, it shall not want any grace that may bring it
into love and lyking with the Godly: for as touching the man himself; he is
even the miror of the world in these our days, for true knowledge and
unfeigned godliness, whatsoever the papists do lyingly and slanderously babble
to the contrary: And as touching the matter, it is that which ought to be of
greatest account amongst men, and which even in respect of the bare name and
title of it, is very glorious and excellent much more in respect of the
substance thereof it self: And for the manner of handling the things
propounded, it is short for avoiding of tediosnes, it is plain, even for the
capacity of the simple; it is sound in respect of the truth it propounds:
And it is sufficient, not only to instruct God his children, but also to stop
up the adversaries mouths in this matter; and what then wants? or what can
be more acceptable and profitable? wherefore I doubt not but it shall have
good entertainment as amongst all the godly generally, so particulerly of your
worship; who I know does heartily love the Church, and carefully like, and
tender the causes thereof; which also has been the principal matter moving
me, to undertake this travail, and to dedicate the same, whatsoever it be,
unto your vvorshippe; whom (for sundry good graces, that God has bestovved
upon you) I do unfeignedly love and reverence in Christ. Humbly praying and
earnestly exhorting you according to your measure of light and knowledge
received from the Lord, to enforce your self to the uttermost of your
ability every manner of way to the preferring and promoting of these
excellent matters, and namely those that concern the reformation of such
corruptions as yet remain amongst us, either touching the ministry, or the
discipline of the Church: for to this end has God endued you with all the
graces that you have presently received, or may hereafter thorovv his goodness
attain unto; either of wit, wealth, learning, credit, countenance, birth,
office, honor, or whatsoever else: whereunto I will (thorovv God his grace)
not only stir you up by all the holy and lavvfull means I can: but also
further you in my poor prayers to almighty God in that behalf; that you may
daily increase and continue in the sound knowledge of his truth, in the
steadfast faith of his promises, in the sincere zeal of his glory, in unfeigned
love of his holy word and the exercises thereof, and in care and conscience to
put in practice, those good things that are enjoined you therein, that your
whole life may tend to the glory of God, the good of the Church and common
wealth, and the faithful service of her majesty, and your death be
comfortable to your self; as being the speedy passage to eternal life, and
profitable unto others; while they be by your example instructed, both to live
and die well: which God grant for his crucified Christ his sake; To whose
gracious government and good direction, I do humbly commend your worship,
and all yours both now and for ever. London the 16. of this November. 1582.

Your worships always ready in Christ Jesus: T. W. the Lord his unworthy.

A TREATISE OF THE TRVE AND visible Notes of the Catholic Church.
MEN demand at this day, concerning the marks and authority of the church:
the question being raised by those, who, when they see their erroures to be
refelled, by the word of God, obiecte unto men, that are unskillful of these
matters, the sacred name of the Church: and by heaping up the disputations of
ancient fathers against Heretics, they bring us into hatred, as though we
had corrupted both the books of Gods word, and also, as though by violating
all authority of the church, we had (after the example of the They were so
called of one Donatus, who baptized such as embraced his opinions, though they
were baptized before, and made a schism in the Church, about the year. 334.
Donatistes) set up altar against altar: to be short, as though because we
have shaken of the yoke of Babylon, we had forsaken the Church, without the
which notwithstanding (even as we our selves confess) there is no salvation.
And neither does this subtle kind of reasoning, drive away the unskillful
only, from the knowledge of the truth, but also causes, some even amongst
them, which seemed most steadfast to waver. Furthermore, by this occasion very
many take counsel between both sides, and as in opinions, they endeavor to
mingle light with darkness: so also in discerning of the true Church, they
labor to mingle the bastardly or false marks, with the true and proper marks
thereof. But except men would willingly be deceived, the deceit of these men,
might be very easily perceived and avoided. Men must first define the Church,
before they enquire any thing of the authority thereof.
For, first men should demand, what that Church should be, before they
determine of the bounds of her authority: which order they that do not
follow, commit truly that gross error, and worthy of stripes, which they call
That is, the begging or taking of that as granted: which is in controversy
Petitio principij. Go to then let us see what these men mean by the
Catholic Church.

These men hold (what so ever they dissemble) that the Church (in which we
ought to abide, That the Catholic Church is not rightly called every
congregation, in which is a succession of Bishops.
if we will be saved) is an assembly of Bishops, whose calling and names may
be fet from the Apostles them selves. We say that this succession which is
merely personal, neither is

That it is not the church, may appear The order of Bishops is not the church.
yt under the name of the church, properly taken, it is certain, that not only
the Pastors, but also the flocks are comprehended: Now it is altogether
ridiculous to define a part, as the whole it self, because by that means the
whole and the part, should be one and the self same thing.

They reply, The consent of a bishop and of a flock is not always a note of a
true church.
that they understand together with the Pastors, the very flocks them selves,
cleaving unto them. But this thing is also ridiculous, seeing that both
heretical, and backesliding Pastors, judgment, and heretical flocks true
from the sheep, or the sheep from the pastor. Now, that men may, by examples
both past and present, prove that these things have too often times fallen
out, no man I suppose will deny.

But again they say, that they dispute not of particular Churches, which they
grant may fall away, but of that Catholic or universal Church, 1. Tim. 3.15.
which is the pillar and foundation of truth. But how I pray you do they define
this catholic Church. First by a certain place, as Roman to be al one:
Secondly, by the multitude, Catholic and Roman are not all one.
as they which vpbraide us with fewnes. Let us see, therefore what manner of
arguments these be. They be (if they be kept within the just rules of
reasoning) unless I be deceived, these and such like. The church of Rome
teaches so: very many, in respect of a very few so believe, and so it was from
hand delivered unto us. Therefore this is the catholic truth. But who is so
far void of all reason, that he sees not here again, Petitio principij, and
the thing in controversy to be taken as granted? Show us therefore, ye
Sophisters, or at least wise teach us probably, first how a part should be ye
whole (yt we may grant unto you your Romish church, to be a principal member
of the catholic church). And then from whence, I pray you, have ye learned,
this Romish Church, to be ordained for a perpetual rule of truth? and from
whence have ye drawn that to be true, which is approved of the greatest
number? Verily ye shall never prove this, out of the books of the old or new
Testament. For those corrupt arguments: Upon this rock I have builded my
Church: Mat. 16.18. Luke 22.23.
I baue prayed for thee Peter that thy faith fail not: and that saying of
Christ thrice repeated, feed my sheep, Ioh. 21.15.16
with men not altogether ignorant of these things, need not any further
confutation. But happily, ye will prove it out of the writings of ancient
fathers. As though for sooth it were the same thing, to commend the faith and
religion of the church of Rome (as long as it was worthy praise) and to
establish her for the catholic church, or a perpetual rule to the catholic
church. And seeing that by the name of the church of Rome (if these flatterers
will speak that they think) they do understand no other thing, than the
bishop of Rome him self, what madness is this, I beseech you, to have the
deciding of so great a controversy, to depend upon yt seat, in which their own
writers being witness, not so much the monsters of men, as Satan himself, does
seem to have sit so many ages together.

These men reply, that the dignity it that the Bishop of Rome is that head,
that should stand the catholic church, as in stead of a soul) it must
altogether follow, that this head be wise, if they will have all his members,
that is, the particular Churches to be wise: And again, if that be frantic,
that the whole Church must be frantic also. Now, that the Romish Bishops
have been frantic many ages together, not only as private men, but
specially also as Bishops: that is to say, that every one of them almost have
been, not only the most wicked of all men in respect of their conversation,
(which thing these men can not deny, unless they would rather be convinced
by their own testimonies:) but also as concerning the points of our religion,
whilst that, partly they have neglected all true religion, and partly also have
set them selves against it, so much that (which thing two or three ages ago
Petrarcha has written, whose verses they commend.) Rome has been a thousand
years at the least, the temple of heresy, and has utterly subverted (as much
as was in her) all the offices of Christ, yea so far forth that she has
exalted her self, above Christ him self (as the Apostles John and Paul,
greater than all exception have fore told: all the best approved writers,
Greek and Latin, being the Bishops of other churches, so interpreting the
same) unless we have sufficiently heretofore proved it, we are ready again to
prove it, before all upright judges. Let this controversy therefore, be
first decided, O yea Sophisters, before that ye of this fained foundation, as
it were, granted unto you.

But go to, let us grant that the Bishops of Rome were such, whose so great
and large succession is alleged by these men. Who yet unless he be utterly
out of his wits, will therefore conclude, that the bishop of Rome, is the
universal head, to whom who so ever does cleave, is to be judged a true
member of the Catholic Church? And yet these be the sophistications of these
goodly fellows, which will have catholic and Roman to be one and the self
same thing: to wit, because Paul wrote, that in his time, Romans 1.18.
the faith of the Romans, was famous throughout all the world. But how much
more rightly now, may we say, that the stenche of that whore, has not only
filled the earth, but has ascended also, even to heaven: and that excellent
epistle of the Apostle written to the old Romans, ought now truly to be
written against the Romans their successors.

The Catholic Church must not be esteemed by the multitude.
by the number and glorious show of pages or seriaunts. Verily if these men
speak truth, Christ and his flock, shall justly be pronounced excommunicat,
and that multitude shall be the catholic church, which so often times cried
out, Take him away, Mat. 26.23.
take him away, crucify him. The Apostle also shall be found a liar, writing
to the Corinthians: Brethren ye see your calling: 1. Cor. 1.26.
that we are not many wise according to the flesh, not many mighty, not many
noble: to be short, then these men shall be worthy, (whom to confute we may
take pains) when either by reason or examples, they shall prove, that there
are more wise men than fools. Now then, I think it does sufficiently appear,
that, by this bare succession, which they brag of, that true catholic church,
wherein we must abide, cannot be discerned from the false Church, from which
we ought of necessity to depart.

But yet, before that we conclude this place, we must refell an argument,
which these Sophisters would have to be deemed such a one as cannot be
overcome. For say they, How the fathers used the argument of personal
succession.
the fathers so dispute, from the succession of bishops, against ancient
heretics. But again what can be more corrupt than this subtle kind of
reasoning? for this is that which is well known, even to children which they
are wount to call an elench, The fallacy of composition or division is a false
conclusion, made by a wrong application of words alleged or spoken:
referring that to one, which is alleged, or spoken to an other.
or a fallacy of composition and diuysion. First therefore I deny, that any of
the ancient fathers, were minded to use the recital of Bishops, but to have
recourse rather even to the Apostles. And why so? that the authority of
doctrine, rather than of persons should be maintained? But these men object
unto us, the succession of their bishops, not in deed bishops, so far letting
pass the mention of that Apostolical doctrine, that they would have it
accounted a wicked thing, to demand it at his hands, that would prove him
self to succeed the ancient bishops. Now I pray you, how many authors of
blasphemies, have sit in those chief seats of Alexandria, Antioche,
Constantinople? yea, what seat will these men show me somewhat more famous,
where some heretical bishops, have not held their seat? And as touching the
Romish chair, from which these men by a rotten coard hang the catholic
church. Honorius the Monothelites, were certain heretics about the year. 565,
who affirmed that there was but one will and one action in Christ: denying
that there was in him two natural wills and actions, which might aunsvvere to
his two natures.
Monothelite, openly condemned of the sixth general council and privately of
Agatho another Roman Bishop: And John the 22. thinking evil touching the
soul of man: in like manner condemned of the college of Sorbon in Paris, were
sound to have sit in that seat. To let pass, Liberius for ambitions sake
fell into the Arrian heresy.
Liberius, He, while Siluerius the Pope lived (by the aid of Belisarius, the
captain of the Emperors army, obtained the popedom.
Vigilius, and He means of Anastasius the 2. who fell into the heresy of
Arrius and Eutiches, which heresies Acatius also him self did propound, about
the year, 484.
Anastasius, whom I see of some to be excused, although Gratian. 2. Disti. 19.
reckeneth this last also as an Acatian heretic amongst the condemned Popes.

But if any man would object, yt these are blotted out of the number of
Bishops, and therefore are not comprehended in that title or role of succession:
yet this he shall be enforced to grant us, to wit, that the succession of ye
seat of Rome, was then at the least broken of, when these were therefore
blotted out (which persons notwithstanding they themselves as yet number in
their Catologue) because they had declined from the Apostolical doctrine.
Whereupon follows that which Tertulian rightly affirms that religion ought
to be proved or tried not by the persons, Tertulian.
but the persons by religion. But here truly I confess, that I do somewhat
ouershoot my self, for seeing the question is of doctrine, what does this
appertain, to the Bishops of the Church of Rome, whom all Christendom
knows now so many years, to have been for nothing less careful, then
for any doctrine, either true or false, but only for to establishe and
enlarge their own tyranny.

But they will say, no man has condemned these Popes. I confess it. For who
would have taken to himself this lawful authority against their tyranny, who
had persuaded all men, that they ought to be judged of none? Therefore there
has been not of late only, but many ages together, not an interruption, but a
full abruption or renting of the succession of Rome, from the body of the
catholic true church, except peradventure these men judge, that it is
something less, either to belleeue nothing, or to teach nothing, than to be
an Heretic.

And I beseech you what impudency is this, True doctrine ought to go before
true succession.
to have the knowledge of truth to hang upon succession? whereas on the
contrary, these men themselves can not deny, but that the truth ought
necessarily to go before succession.

And these Sophisters, The Christian church in the time of Christ, could not
be known by the succession of Persons.
if they had been in the times of Christ, by what Bishoply succession, would
they have acknowledged the true church? surely not by the title or name of the
Leuiticall high priests? because that priesthood was then at an end: and Christ
cannot be called the successor of Aaron unless Iudaisme be again
established: wherefore also he is said to be made a high priest, Heb. 7.16.17
not according to the order of Leui, but according to the order of Melchisedec,
Therefore the holy men at that time, acknowledged the Catholic church,
without the mark of personal succession: to wit, by the comparison of the
doctrine of the Prophets, with the doctrine of Christ him self, and the
Apostles. Which is so far true, that on the contrary, none have less
acknowledged Christ, than they that have cleaued to a Byshoply succession.
Therefore that personal succession, is no true and perpetual mark of the
Catholic Church.

These men happily, being driven from the Leuiticall succession, will again
object another succession from the Prophets. But neither so, shall they speak
the truth, if they stick in the persons them selves, for the succession of
Prophets was not perpetual, no more than the succession of Priests: yea
rather it was broken of a long time, especially after Malachie. They will also
object unto us that saying: Mat. 23.2.
The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses chair. But again, they should remember,
ye same Christ to have said: Take heed of the leaven of the Pharisees: Mat.
16.6.
And therefore by that saying of Christ, we are not called back to a
succession of persons, but to a succession of doctrine.

But I have besides an other thing more peremptorye (as they them selves
speak) to answer against that, in which these men falsely boast themselves
to follow the authority of the Fathers in discrying the church, by which
thing also their wilines may more and more be made manifest. I deny therefore,
The ancient fathers used not the argument of personal succession against all
heretics.
that any of the ancient fathers have at any time made mention of this
succession, but either against Schismatiques, whilst yet a lawful succession
remained, (as it was done against the Donatistes) or against them, which
brought forth new books of our religion, as were, in the beginning almost an
infinite number as I suppose that he speaks here of Simo^ Magus, mentioned in
Act. 8. of whom many things are written in the old writers, specially he
affirmed that Christ was not come, neither suffered any thing of the Jews,
but that he himself was Christ
Simon, He amongst other things taught, that Christ the son of God, took not
man's flesh of the virgin, but that he had a spiritual or heavenly body, which
passed through the virgin Marie, as water thorovv a pipe or Conduit. He was
about the year. 150.
Valentine, He affirmed, that Christ appeared not in the substance of flesh,
but in a fantastical body, and that one Simon was crucified in his steed,
about the year. 124.
Basilides, He taught that Christ was not very man, and that he ascended into
heaven without his flesh, and first made laws for abstinence from meats and
marriages, he was in the year. 180.
Montane, to conclude ye whole troup of most shameless men. After this sort
the Fathers of right judgment, gathered and reserved against these Such as
pretended to be inspired with revelations. The Messalian heretics were so
called, who affirmed that baptism and the Lords supper did neither profit nor
hurt, but that those which gave themselves to prayer only or sleeping should
be inspired with the spirit, which being once received, afterward they had
no need of the word, or any other exercise of godliness, but that he that was
so inspired, was altogether without sin, and did foresee things to come,
and did sometimes behold God with their eyes.
Enthusiasts, saying. If your doctrine be true, either there has not been
ever yet any church, or the doctrine which you allege is old and ancient.
But that both these things are false, appears by that, both because the
apostles have gathered together the church of Christ, and you teach your
doctrines, as taken not out of the writings of the Apostles, but as newely
revealed unto you by the holy ghost. And again, (said the fathers,) both these
things appear by that, that we count the beginnings of our churches, by
ascending upward, even to the Apostles themselves: but you could not have
received from the Apostles your things, which ye first devised.

Here remained one thing, which the most subtle of those most fantastical
persons objected, to wit, that all things were not revealed to the apostles,
and therefore that men ought to believe their revelations also. But Tertulian
(whom I maruail, could afterward be deceived wc Montanus holy ghost) most
plentifully, and strongly confuteth this prescription, showing that the Lord
has neither kept back any thing from the apostles, (the chief builders of
his church:) nor again, that the apostles have concealed, any of those things,
which they had received of Christ. After this sort I say, the fathers used,
the argument of the succession of persons against those heretics, altogether
by demonstration as it were. But they used it not in like sort, against ye So
called of Paulus Samosatenus, who denied the son of God, to have descended
from heaven, but that Christ did proceed from Marie in the earth, he was about
the year, 372.
Samosatans So called of one Sabellius, who taught that there was but only one
person in the godhead, and confessed that the trinity was distincted in respect
of names only, and not in respect of persons. He was about the year 320.
Sabellians, So called of one Arrius, who affirmed, that the Son was not truly
and naturally God, neither coeternall with the father, but to have had a
beginning, and to be made of nothing, he was about the year, 320
Arrians, So called of one Pellagius, who held free will, and that every man
might obtain salvation by his own works: that infants were borne, without
original sin: and that Adam hurt himself only by his fall. He was about the
year, 466.
Pelagians: to be short, against any with whom, the questyon was not of the
very books, but of the meaning, because this had been very foolish.

Briefly therefore I answer these two things: that the ancient Fathers, whose
authority these men shamelessly abuse, have, neither at any time separated the
succession of their bishops, from the succession of the Apostolical doctrine:
nor have set this succession, against any other heretics, but against those,
of whom some new revelation was pretended: As at this day of the They mayntaine
amongst other errors, revelations, and take away the baptism of infants.
Anabaptists, They (casting a side all fear of God what so ever) hold, that
men may live as they list.
Libertines So called of one Casper Svvingfeldius, who held, the same matters
that the Anabaptists do.
Swingfeldians. And therefore, for as much as now the controversy is, betwixt
the Romanistes and us, for two things only, to wit, for the interpretation of
the Scripture: and whether the wrytinges of the Prophets and Apostles, do
most fully contain, what so ever we ought to believe, it is proved that they,
in the first point, impudently abuse the example of the fathers, in alleging
against us the argument of succession: and in the other, is ministered unto us a
sure weapon, to confute them. And that this succession also was alleged
against the Donatistes as Schismatickes, this nothing touches us, whom these
men account, not properly for Scismatickes, but for heretics: of which thing
notwithstanding, we will say some thing in his proper place.

That the false church of Rome, is not only not propped up, by the argument
derived from the personal succession of the apostles: but also ouerthrown,
although the question, be not of the doctrine
But go to, let us gratify them a little.

That there was never any Apostolical, universal ministerial head, and
therefore that his succession is not Apostolical.
For, that we may begin, at the highest step of their Hierarchy, or priestlike
government, as they call it, that is, at that universal mynisteriall head
(unto whom they afterward, appropriated the name of Pope, which before was
common to all Bishops,) they shall as easily find the Devil him self in the
kingdom of God, as any such head, either in the books of the^ new Testament,
or in the ancient church. For very children know this, how false, folish, and
absurd arguments they be, whatsoever they bring out of the scriptures to prove
the same. And as concerning the history of that ancient purer church: (that is
to say, in this behalf verelie, even to the times of that manslaier Phocas)
they shall find none, that so interpreted the primacies, and glorious titles,
which are attributed to the bishop of Rome (although in deed the bishops of
Rome, ambitiouslie sought nothing more, and there wanted not some, who most
shamlesly even then flattered the^) as that they did for all that, give this
degree of universal head unto him. Therefore, they have not Christ, nor Peter,
but that most vile man of al, Phocas I say, the emperor, for the author of this
vniuersallitie: and they have Boniface the third, the head or beginner of this
tyranny: or (that I may use the words of Gregory the great himself) the
chief or head of Antichristianisme: in so much, that the Romish popedom,
does but only sixtene years at the most, go before Mahumetisme, or the
turkishe religion.

But, by what sleightes, that monster has usurped, and attained this tyranny,
who, I pray you, at this day can be ignorant, unless he be ignorant of
histories, or whose eyes Satan has blinded? yea, seeing that this most holy
father, does boast him self to be, not the successor of Peter alone, but of
Paul also (whose heads being cut off, not so much by news hang men, as by the
Pope himself, he ingraueth in these his leaden seals): it must needs be,
either that afterward two heads were grown into one, whose authority
afterward, passed for sooth to this successor of them both: or else that neither
Peter nor Paul, were this only universal, ministerial head: except he would
rather acknowledge, that the catholic church, has had at the beginning two
heads upon the earth.

But what say I? that I may speak nothing here of so many Antipopes, or Popes
one against an other, when as Liberius and Damasus, at one and the same time,
(as all men affirm), obtained that seat of Rome, where was then that one
universal head? And let these things be sufficiently spoken, touching the
delivery of that spiritual sword from hand to hand.

And as concerning that other sword, which they call, secular or politic,
wherewith they have overthrown all magistracy: From whence I pray you do they
take the beginning of this jurisdiction? for, though we should believe that
fable, of the donation or gift of Constantine, to be as true, as it was
shamelesly feigned, yet truly it shall not be set from the apostles, but from
the emperor: neither yet granted by Christ, or by Peter, but by men. Which
thing notwithstanding, was neither lawful for Constantine to do, nor for the
Bishop of Rome to receive, although it had been willingly offered him.
Wherefore, if they shall of their own authority, require again these two
feathers, the church those former, to wit, the ecclesiastical government,
and Kings and Princes these latter, to wit, civil jurisdiction and authority
(both which in their time shall come to pass) this fellow will then appear,
not the head of the church, but an unfeathered cuckoo. And these things
concerning this head, have I put down in few words, because they have of late,
by them of our side very plentifully, both out of the word of God, and out of
the truest histories of former times, and to be short, out of the testimonies
of ye Popes themselves, ben manifestly declared and plentifully proved.

Now the head of this succession being cut off, That there can be noe
Apostolical succession in the Cardinals, Metrapolitanes, Primates, or
Archbishops
what shall the rest of the body be, but a roteen and stinking carkas? Truly
them selves are compelled to confess, that the next degree unto this head, to
wit, the order of cardinals, as it is now, cannot be set from the more
ancient time. There follow primates and Archbishoppes, for scarce the very
name of Patriarkshippe, is yet remaining, and Mahomet, at the length has ended
the matter incontrouersie, which first arose, between the That is, those
four men that took upon them, the government of the whole world he means
the four Patriarchs, to wit, Jerusalem, Alexandria, Constantinople and Rome.
Quartumvi. i, and afterward between the That is the five me^ that took upon
them the government of the world.
Quintumuiri. Therefore the Nicene council it self, does not refer the
beginning of these offices, to the word of God, or Apostolical institution,
either written, or not written, but to ancient custom. So that neither can
this succession, be thought to be Apostolical.

The degree of Bishopps wherein they are exalted above the rest of the Ministers
or Pastors, was unknown to the Apostles and therefore that there is no
Apostolical succession thereof.
There rest yet Bishops so called of them, to wit, which are set in every
diocese above ministers (for the other inferior orders, these pleaders of
succession, nothing esteem,) whose only succession nevertheless, has some
show of Apostolical succession. But it may plainly apeare, out of the first
Epistle to the Corinth: not only that there was no such degree of Bishops
ordained by the Apostles, as immediately afterward was brought into the Church,
after the times of ye apostles: neither yt there was any such allowed of the
Apostle, to wit, yt there should be one degree of a bishop, and an other of a
minister, or that some man should be called a Bishop, not in respect of a
flock, but in respect of his fellow elders. For who doubts, but that the
Apostle, would have given this counsel unto the Corinthians, or himself
would have performed it, or have attributed it to Caephas or Apollo, if
(which thing Hierome has written to Euagrius, and in his commentaries upon the
first Epistle to Titus) he had judged this remedy profitable, much more
necessary, for the brydling of Schisms? But whether it were lawful, to
ordain this degree in the Church, or not (for of this I like not now to
dispute) that thing is not only apparent out of Hierom, upon ye epistle to
Titus, ye Bishops are greater than ministers, rather by custom, than by the
truth of the Lords appointment: But also by witnesses which these men (as
greater than all exception), are accustomed to allege, as Lucius ye Pope,
Clement the second, Anacletus (unless their Epistles be rather counterfaite,
which yet these men cite for authentical.) Lombard in his fourth book of
sentences the 24. distinct: Gratian, and to be short Cardinal Cusan, in his
book of the universal unity, and Platina, in the life of Pope Bonifacius ye
third: al which plainly witness, that all this Hierarchicall or priestlike
government above ministers was devised by men, after the example of the Roman
empire, that is to say, that it is the true Imag^ of the beast, described in
the reuelalion of John. Revel. 13.1. Revel, 14.9.
For whose cause some, in the beginning also did travail which meant not to
perform that which afterward insued. The thing it self in fine, taught us,
that it was a matter of great importance to decline, even but a nails breadth
from the word of God.

The conclusion of the disputation, touching the succession of persons, sundred
from the succession of doctrine.
Now, for as much as these things be so, that is, seeing neither this
succession of persons, is a sufficient, true and proper mark of the Church,
nor (though we should grant it such) pertayneth any thing at all, to this
popish vizard. What is then the matter, wherein we see some at this day so
greatly to stick, that no small number (as though That is some fearful and
terrible thing.
Gorgons head were cast in the way), go back? Verily this is the strength of
the spirit of error, that they which are proved and pure, may be made
manifest.

Now let us hear also, such an other testimony of their impudency: That the
canonical ordeyning of Ministers, i^ not a perpetual and necessary mark of
the Catholic Church.
they will have that to be judged a Church, where there continues an ordinary
calling, to the holy ministry. But what other thing is this, than (after the
example of that hostise of Chalcis) to set before us again, the same meat new
dressed? Notwithstanding, because here again, I see some stick as it were at a
rock, and that, not without danger of shipwreck: I will endeavor and that as
it were by the wind of truth, hence to deliver them, that are cast upon this
coast.

Truly, Pastors must in deed, always be sent by the Lord, but there is not
always alike order of their sending
if a man bid them declare unto us, what they understand, by the name of
ordination, (which request in this question, is altogether honest and very
necessary) then the claws of these Lions, will openly show themselves. They
will allege, that of the Apostle: How shall they preach unless they be
sent: and that saying: Romans 10.15. 1. Cor. 14.40
All things ought to be done in the house of God, rightly and in order. We
agree unto it. They will say, that, all that order is comprehended, in the old
Canons, which may not or ought not, by any means be broken.

First, we answer, that it is plain, by the comparison of the very Canons,
that one, and the same order in the Christian Churches, neither always has
been prescribed, nor every where kept: and that also, the diversity of
circumstances, cannot suffer this, that one order in these things, should be
every where, and always exactly observed: and therefore very vnseasonablie,
is the observation, even of the most ancient and best Canons required, as
absolutely and necessarily to be kept. And if they be here so impudent, that
they will deny this thing, truly I will convince them as manifest offenders.
For, if it be unlawful, Although the canonical ordination be established for
a perpetual mark of the catholic church, yet it reproves the false church
of Rome.
to omit any thing of the Canons without any exception? From whence comes
that great gain, unto the court of Rome, by dispensation also even with the
law of God? neither truly will I easily suffer my self, to be thrust from this
exception.

a But go to, we are content here to do these men a pleasure, let us therefore
say (the disputation of this exception being deferred) that vocation is an
order, not only agreeable to the word of God, but also even to the very
ancient pure Canons, by which an ecclesiastical office, is committed to some
man. Let us grant them also (yet with no prejudice of the truth) that there
also the true Church is to be seen, where this order continues sound and
pure, yet I say, that by that means, it most certainly appears that that
Popish Church is, nothing less than that catholic church, whose name it
chalengeth to her self? For tell me, what is this order? to wit, that a
lawful knowledge of learning, and of manners going before, and the order of
ecclesiastical degrees being not rashly violated: some man (by the free
consent of any whole Church, touching which ye question is) being appointed to
this holy ministry, is ordained by the^, of whom he ought, that is, is put
into the possession as it were of his office. And if any man break this
order, that is, if a fault happen, either in the examination, or in the
election, all the pure Canons command, all that, to be judged of no effect:
and so they subject him, that ordayneth the minister, to most grievous
punishments. That this is so, they them selves cannot deny. Wherefore I
would not load many leaves, with the alleging of Canons.

Now let these men come forth, and let them allege unto us, even one amongst
all their clergy, in whom this order, has been thoroughly observed. I demand
not, whether these things, prescribed both by the word of God, and also by the
pure Canons, have been exactly observed of them now a long time. But this I
ask, whether there be any use of election, amongst them in the most places,
seeing that ye Romish harlot, has couenaunted with Kings and Princes, for the
abolishment of it, and suffers those bargains to be printed, and set out to
sale. Now where there remains any show of election, would a man have thought
any of them, could have been so impudent, yt they should be so bold, as to
deny, that those offices which the whole world knows, are openly gotten by
purchase: and that by buying free voices (which thing is specially practiced,
amongst them that seek for priesthood, and Canonical persons (as they call
them, that is to say amongst swine and asses, which are altogether unclean
beasts) to be so bold I say, as to deny it, to be any other thing, than an
abominable treading under foot of all law, both Gods own, and of that purer
part of the canon law (as they call it)? And of the trial, both of doctrine
and manners, the lawful witnesses, for sooth, be those wicked men, getting their
living by no other means but by daily and open periuries, partly in the
provinces of the Church of Rome, partly, in the lap of that Romish harlotte.
And this thing for sooth the high Bishops know not, which begin their bulls
with these words. The honesty of life and manners, upon which commending the
same unto us, by a credible ttstimonie, etc. What say I? their laws of giving,
either ordinary, or falling out upon some (as they call them): and the laws
of resignation, where were they devised, braied, strained out, and at length,
set out and delivered, to make mad, all both the highest and the lowest, but in
the deuilles kitchen? And yet these men for sooth, will prove the
Ecclesiastical calling, to remain in their possession.

That the false clergy of Rome does rashly dispute against us, for the laying
on of hands.
But again let us hear that, that may more convince these men's shamelessness.
When they dispute with us of a calling they are wont to urge the laying on of
hands, as though the true difference of a lawful and counterfaite calling
consisted in that. But I suppose, these good men have not forgotten, that,
which I even now said, to wit, that by all the old canons, his ordination
should be judged of no force, who has not been lawfully examined and chosen,
That no Pastors are ordained by the laying on of hands, but being already
ordained, are put into the possession of their office and commended unto God.
and they that ordeyne such, to be subject also to very grievous punishment.
And therefore they do vainly challenge unto them selves that, which is no
where found amongst them.

Moreover this also they should know, that Pastors, are not made by the laying
on of hands, but being ordained by a lawful calling (which is the voice of
God) are so commended, and put into ye possession of the ministry. For, whereas
they reckon, this ceremony of laying on of hands, amongst sacraments, by the
same reason that they reckon baptism, and the supper of the Lord: we say, that
it is altogether a vain dotage, seeing there is no express commandment of
that ceremony extant, neither is there joined unto it, any sacramental
promise, neither do we reject, either this ceremony, or judge to be
unprofitable the prayers of the church, commending and as it were, offering
unto God, the Pastor that he has sent them, for the sending of God, is a
lawful calling. But here surely, it falls out with these hypocrites, as it
has in other things also, to wit, that those things being omitted, in which a
true calling consists (that is to say the trial of doctrine, and of life, and
a lawful election of the whole Church) they stick in the outward ceremony,
which ceremony also they have defiled, with infinite vicelike rites: that I
may let pass, that horrible sale of benefices and treading underfoot of the
old cannons, made, touching the multiplication of benefices (as they call them)
and touching ordination, by over leaping (as they speak of inferior orders.)
And yet notwithstanding, they themselves are not ignorant, that, by the full
consent of the ancient Synodes, not only ordination, but also, other better
parts of a calling, are, by ye means, judged of no force.

That even a lawful ordination, is not a perpetual and altogether a
necessary mark of the true church, either Catholic or particular.
But go too, let us put the cafe also, that all these men, were both lawfullye
chosen and ordained. Shall therefore their congregation be the catholic church,
or not rather a den of thieves, if in abusing their calling, they turn
light into darkness, and perform this one thing alone, to make slaves to
Satan, the sheep, that should be brought to Christ? And yet if forsooth,
the head of his false Church do this (as what else I pray you does he?) he will
not endure this, that he may be judged of any mortal man. For so these men
have been bold, now a long time, not only to speak, but also to write. And
if this be plainly to play the Antichrist: what is this Catholic Church (I
beseech you) of which Antichrist is the head?

Wherefore, The conclusion of the whole former disputation, of the personal
succession and ordination.
(that I may at the length conclude this place) I suppose, that these two
things, do now sufficiently appear, that neither a base succession of
persons, nor the observation of an outward vocation, is that necessary, and
perpetual mark, of the true Church, which the Logitians call proper after
the That is, which agrees to every one of the kind, only to the kind, and
always to the kind: as to be apt to laugh, agrees to all men, to men only,
and always to them, and to every particular of that kind.
fourth sort. Neither although it should be so, do these things at any thing
at al, belong to the Church of Rome, (such as now it is) that is unto the
Popedom: but rather what arguments soever convince the Church of Antichrist,
the same do so evidently appear in this Harlot, that, he that would not
acknowledge, fly from, and detest her, as an adultresse forsaken of her
husband, truly, A true definition of the true church, and a proper,
necessary and perpetual mark of the same.
must either nothing regard these things or else be without all understanding.

Now, because we have determined, not only to set out the false marks,
(which things we suppose we have done?) but also, to point out as it were
with the finger, the true and proper marks of the Church. Go to let us attempt
this latter point. We say therefore, that a true definition of a true Church,
either particularly, or universally considered, is that, by which it is said to
be a congregation, that confesses the true Jesus Christ: their only savior.
For we say, that Jesus Christ, is that only foundation, of that true
spiritual house of God: Jesus Christ only, is the soul of that mystical
body: Jesus Christ only, is the square of that building.

The true Christ must be discerned from the false, by the only writings of
the Prophets and Apostles.
The adversaries will answer, that they also acknowledge, and preach the same
thing. Therefore we do add (seeing there be many false Christ's) that we
dispute of the true Christ. These men also will reply, that they have done,
and do the same. In the third place therefore we add, that he is in deed the
true Christ, that has most fully revealed him self, by the mouth of his
Prophets and Apostles. And the mouth of the Prophets and Apostles, we
interpret to be, their authentical writings, wherein we affirm, are most
fully, and most perfectly comprehended all the points of the Christian faith,
partly plainly, and partly by necessary consequences to be gathered thereof.

For, we believe it, to be as absurd, that the true Christ must therefore be
perfectly known by the writings of the Apostles and prophets, because they did
fully and plainly, both know and teach the whole Christian religion, and the
same Prophets and Apostles, do yet in their writings teach it unto us.
to think, that the Apostles were ignorant of some thing, of the mysteries of
christianity, or not to have revealed all things unto the world (both which
Tertulian has justly accounted, very great points of madness): as not to
have put in writing, all things necessary to salvation: or, to be short, not
so to have put them down, that, either they should not be plain enough of
them selves, or, if any thing be written somewhat more obscure, their true
interpretation should be else where sought, than out of their very writings.
But here we have the adversaries manifestly disagreeing from us, yet not al,
neither those which like shamelessness. For there be that grant both these
things, that is to say, that the Apostles knew perfectly all the doctrine of
salvation, and taught all the same most faithfully unto the Church: which thing
in deed they justly grant, for as much as Christ him self, in the 15. of John
and the 16.13. witnesses this in most plain words: And Paul in the 21.27.
of the Acts. Galathians, 1.8. Hehrews. 1.1. otherwise it should be false, at
least in some part, which the same Apostle speaks: to wit, That the Church is
builded upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles: And that, which he
witnesses of the holy scriptures. 2. Timot. 3.16.17. Moreover, that shall be
false to, which the same Apostle says: That the Church, is the pillar of
truth. 1. Tim. 3.15.
Unless all truth being engraven in that pillar should be manifest. Other
some, more shameless, suppose there is left unto these men, whom they call the
successors of the Apostles, I know not what excellent thing, and that they do
affirm so assuredly, that they hold, they can not be deceived in that matter,
whose opinion I suppose, needs not at this time, amongst men of sound
judgment, any confutation.

But, in the overthrow of these two latter, and especially of the last point, I
perceive, that all these men, What we ought to think of the unwritten word.
are altogether of one opinion against us. For they urge, I know not what
unwritten word, which they call Apostolical traditions. And verily I do not
unwillingly grant unto them, that all things were not severally put down in
writing, according to the circumstances of times, place and persons, which were
observed, either by the Apostles, or by their consent, in the very form and
order of the service of God.

But who will grant, that we must think the same, of the decrees of the very
doctrine it self? Finally, when the adversaries are bidden to bring forth,
what these points be, then that lying spirit bewraieth himself, because those
things, which they will have delivered from hand to hand, could neither by
word nor writings, have been delivered by the Apostles, but they should
dissent from themselves. But even all the fathers of sound judgment, have
judged far other wise, of the most excellent, and most sound perfection of
the holy scriptures, with whose testimonies being a thousand times alleged, I
thought it not good now to fill these leaves.

There remains the question to be handled, The interpretation of the written
word, is not else where to be fet, then from the word it self, to wit, by
comparing of the places one with another: and out of the analogy or
proportion of the articles of our faith.
touching the interpretation of the scripture. Which truly is so tossed to and
fro by these men, that they cannot eschew the sin of blasphemy. There be I
confess some places of the scripture (partly through the ignorance of tongs,
partly also, through other faults of our own) so dark unto us, even until this
day, that as yet even the most learned interpreters, and such as be of best
conscience, cannot thoroughly agree what should be the proper and natural
meaning thereof. There be some things also, in the holy scriptures, so
profoundly spoken, that every one may not lawfullye proceed so far. To be
short, there be some things also written in such terms, that (as Augustine
says) it should appear the holy ghost would whet our diligence in the serching
and meditating of them. And unless the necessary points of doctrine and
Christian religion were so plainly and clearly: to be short, so familiarly
declared in the writings of the Prophets and Apostles, that they may be (the
holy ghost being present amongst them, whereby God lightneth all his saints)
manifestly understood in the Church, to what end, should the Lord have sent
his hearers to the scriptures? Yea that more is, to what end have, both the
Prophets and Christ himself also, and the Apostles spoken, if they would not
have these things, to be understood, which all ought to know?

I will speak something more boldly, which yet I hope I can prove. We cannot
by natural understanding know, what the points of Christian religion are,
but by the writings of the Prophets and Apostles.
That we may consent unto the points of Christian religion, as unto true
grounds, and much more that we may apply them unto our selves, it behooves
surely that we should have our ears elsewhere opened, a fleshly beart given
us, to be short, that we should elsewhere be taught tban of flesh and blood,
because the church, is the congregation of them, that must be taught of God,
and to whom the arm of the Lord is revealed: Esai. 53.1.
and that men may understand, what the Prophets and Apostles, have briefly
thought and taught, concerning every article of our religion, they have need,
not only of a wit in some measure sharpened, but also of the knowledge of
tongues, and of careful and diligent reading.

For it is one manner of thing, to understand, what this or that man says,
then so to understand the things, which thou do perceive, that thou also
approve of them: Comprehension, knowledge, and full persuasion, must be
distinguished in the holy scriptures of which that, to wit comprehension, is
natural, the other is in deed spiritual, but also common to many reprobates:
The third is proper to the children of God.
and not only that thou understand what the thing is, but also wherefore it
is: and comprehension is another thing, than knowledge, even in profane
matters: and again in matter of divinity this knowledge is another thing, than
full persuasion, therefore comprehension belongs unto all men that are endued
with some judgment, and unto knowledge, there is required also an outward
lightning of Gods spirit, by reason of the blindenes of man's judgment, which
gift notwithstanding is common as well to many evil, as to many good men. But
full persuasion, does separate the chosen children of God from the castawayes,
and is the proper riches of the Saints.

Therefore we require, In what points we do at this day dissent, when the
question is demanded, touching the interpretation of Gods word.
the exposition of the word of God, not only as profitable, but also as
necessary, yet not for the same cause, as these me^ think, neither yet will we
fet it from ye place, from whom these men suppose we will take it, for they
think that that word is so darkly delivered, that (as though it were some dark
thing) it should need light, fetched elsewhere then from it self, and when we
demand of them, from whence at the length this light should be fet, the^ they
lay unto us, ye vizard or bare show of the Catholic Church, under which name
sometimes, they lay before the ignorant, these or those of the Fathers:
sometimes the fragments of particular or general counsels: to be short, they
lay before them very often, long custom for an argument that cannot be
refused, to which things, if a man do not forthwith consent, he is now laid
open to the slaughter of the outrageous people (no knowledge of his cause
being had before) as though he were guilty of some heinous crime, committed
against God or man, whereas in times past, he was condemned to be burned, under
some certain color of law.

And in deed this is now their zeal. But we, (that we may in one word declare
all things which belong to this matter) say, that the Church of Christ, is a
school, in which the word of the Lord is not only barely to be read, as out
of the letter written, but also to be taught, that it may be rightly
understood, and so to be taught, that exhortations, corrections and
consolations, both openly and privately, may be used, which in Paul is
understood by ye name of Prophesying. Romans 12.6.
Moreover this also we add, which thing ought here chiefly to be marked,
that the interpretation of those scriptures, are to be set, no where else, then
out of the scriptures themselves, not only because the word of God, is able to
give credit to it self: but also, because that truth is revealed unto us no
where else, then in ye writings of ye Prophets and Apostles, For that saying of
Austen is well known, and is most true, That the scripture is to be expounded
by the scripture: Neither shall it irke me here to put down, that nonotable
place, out of the 49. Homely, of the imperfect work upon Matthew, because it
agrees altogether with our times. He that will know (says he) which is the
true Church of Christ, let him not know it but only by the scriptures. And by
and by after. Christians therefore, being willing to receive, the certainetie
of true faith, let them fly to nothing but to the scriptures, otherwise if
they shall have respect to other things, they shall stumble and perish, not
understanding, which is the true Church: and by this means they shall fall
into the abhomintaion of desolation, which stands in the holy places of the
Church.

But to whom shall belong (will these men say) the interpretation of
scriptures? Verily all be not Prophets, all be not teachers. But again. Esaias.
Esaias as cries, that both Priests and Prophets, have erred in their vision:
neither would Christ have admonished, Math. 16.6. Math. 23.2.
That the leaven of the Pharisees, should be avoided, if we should without
exception, have consented unto them, That sit in Moses chair: Neither should
the false Prophets be eschued, if all the Prophets did speak the truth:
neither would Caiphas, and the whole Synod of the Priests, have condemned
Christ, if the holy Ghost, had been tried without exception to those, that sit
in Aarons seat: What then?

Antiquitye or noueltye makes nothing at all, to instruct men to discern the
true interpretation of scripture from the false.
Let these men therefore hear at length, that which we have so often times
cried out unto deaf men: to wit, that we do not simply reject, neither the old
nor the new counsels, whether they be particular or general, unless they be
plainly theeuish: that we do not simply refuse, neither old nor new writers,
unless they be manifestly, either superstitious or ridiculous, or by common
consent abrogated: That we do not simply cast from us, the writings, neither
of ancient nor new writers, whether they be Ecclesiastical or Laicall (as
these men call them, for God is no accepter of persons, and often times even by
the basest sort, he confounds the pride of the most wise), unless they be
plainly wicked, superstitious or foolish. But this only we require, which the
most learned, and every the most religious of the old writers, monish carefully
to be don, to wit, that all these things, should be diligently examined,
according to the rule of the written word of God. For antiquity and authority
of those that write, may in deed set some color of truth upon falsehood, but
that it should be true, which disagreeth never so little from the writings of
the Prophets and Apostles, that truly it can never bring to pass.
Furthermore, The Creeds of the ancient Synodes and the judgment of the fathers
against heretics, are at no hand rejected by us: yea rather, they are
strongly defended against adversaries although not as yielding credit
themselves.
experience it self more than sufficiently declares, that there have been
long time since, builded upon the foundation laid by the Apostles, not only
bay and stubble, but also iron and rust, to be short, lies upon truth: All
which things, must at the length be consumed by the light and fire of Gods
word.

Now least these men should again complain, that what soever has been
established by counsel after consell, in the ancient Church, should by this
means be called into doubt: we confess, that we do acknowledge the Creedes,
which were always approved by the common consent of the whole Church, to wit,
the Creed of the Apostles, Nice, Athanasius his creed, the creed of
Constantinople, Chalcedon, together with the curses pronounced in the second
counsel of Ephesus against Nestorius: And that we both with mouth and heart
detest, al heresies, which either by open or secret consent of the whole
Church, were out of ye word of God, condemned in those 4. councels, and also
over thrown, in the fifth and sixth councels of Constantinople: And all other
heresies whatsoever, which afterward, either newlye sprung up, or are newly
polished, not yt the truth hangs upon any Synods or Creedes, but because we
acknowledge, that the things which are prescribed and established in them, The
conclusion of the disputation of the true Christ, who is the only, true,
perpetual, and absolute necessary note of the true Church.
may be rightly judged, by the writings of the prophets and Apostles: so far of
is it, yt we take away the authority of ye church, or despise ye consent of the
godly, either ancient or new writers, which thing our adversaries, falsely and
shamlesly object unto us.

Now the sum of al these things is this, that Christ is the true, perpetual,
necessary: and to be short, the only mark of the Church: yea I say, the true
Christ that is, such a one, as he from the beginning has most perfectly
(touching the matter and manner of salvation, revealed him self, both in the
writings, of the prophets and of the Apostles. Mat. 12.13.
For that saying stands sure: He that gathers not with me, scatters
abroad: and that saying, 1. Pet. 2.7.
that christ is that corner stone of the foundation, upon whom the whole
building rises up: And that only head, which ministers unto his body, that
is unto the true catholic Church, al feeling and moving: To be short, John.
10.7. John. 14.6. John. 11.25.
he is the door, the way, the resurrection, and the life. Therefore, whersoeuer
yt word is heard, as it ought to be, there in deed Christ reigns, and where
Christ reigns, there in deed we judge the Catholic, visible Church to be,
neither tied to any certain place, nor unto the multitude: for where that dead
carkas is, Mat. 24.28.
to wit Christ crucified, there be those Egles: there is salvation, Act. 4.12.
where that only name is, in which we must be saved: there be the children of
light, where that son shines there be the true sheep. Where the voice of
that sheepeheard is heard, Mat. 18.20.
although two or three only, throughout all the world, shall be truly
gathered together in his name: And to speak in few words, where that true
seed is sown, there is the Lords field: and there that harvest grows, which
shall never be burned.

But again, because it falls out, partly thorough the weakness of man's wit,
even in the most excellent men, partly through the wickenesse or negligence of
the pastors, that scarce at any time, since ye time of the Apostles, ye
doctrine of Christ, has been so preached in the Church, but that some
blemish, has privily crept in, (which thing appears to be done, even by the
Epistles of the Apostles, and that whilst they also were living: Finally,
because the Lord has appointed, not only that the word should be taught: but
also that it should not be taught of every man: And for this cause, has
appointed certain laws, touching this order. I must here again declare two
things: to wit, how far it should be necessary, that that only mark of
the true Church, that is to say, the preaching of Gods word, should be pure,
and how much we should give, to the ordination and succession of the Pastors
themselves.

Therefore, How far it is necessary that the doctrine of faith, should be
pure in the Church. that the Church either particular or general, may be a true
church.
as touching that former point, I put down three things. One is, that
although there be nothing set out unto us in the holy Scriptures, which is not
most profitable and very necessary as it were unto salvation: yet there are
certain chief points, and as it were grounds of our religion, which are to be
discerned from the rest. The second point is, that there have been some
matters, which in times past have been rudimentes of the Catholic Church,
and may in other times also be rudiments of some particular churches, yet for
all that those points cease not, to belong to the true Church. The third is,
that the religion and mark of the Church, either universal or particular, is
not to be measured by some thing, that this or that Pastor teaches by word or
writing: neither by that, that some sheep by them selves have thought this: Or
by the disputations of some, whether they be many or few, but by that doctrine,
which is commonly received in the Churches, so that it be agreeable to the word
of God.

That all the points of christian religion, are not of the foundation thereof.
Now because these questions are called into controversy, go to, let us
confirm them by sure reasons and examples. As touching the first, the thing
it self shows, yt there may be variaunce touching some things, and yet the
soundation of christian religion, remain safe: And again some things cannot
be taken away, but that the whole building, be utterly ouerthrown. He that
denies Christ to have come in the flesh, John. 4.3.
is not of God, but is the spirit of Antichrist. Therefore the companies of ye
They denied Christ, to have come in the flesh.
Dochitae, of ye The Marcionistes of whom he speaks here, did hold that
Christ was not true man.
Marcionits, and of such like, be not the Church of Christ, whereby it is
proved, that the point, touching both the natures of Christ, is an article of
Christian religion, belonging to the foundation. Again, the Church of
Jerusalem (wherein who was better learned, than Peter) knew not the calling of
the uncircumcised, and yet what true Church was there then in the world, if
the Church of Jerusalem were not it? Therefore the point concerning the calling
of the uncircumcised, is not of it self, of the points of Christian religion,
which concern the foundation. Therefore, there is some difference between
those things which are set forth unto us in the scriptures, to be believed.

The second also may be proved, by a more evident example. For who doubts,
That there are some rudiments of particular Churches. Which thing also in
times past fall out, in the Catholic church.
but that if ever there were any where, a true, and almost only and wholly
Catholic Church, that was Christ's own household, being conuersaunt and that
according to the flesh, with those his twelve disciples? Who likewise is
ignorant, that the point of the resurrection (the foundation whereof is the
resurrection of Christ himself) is of so great weight, that the Apostle does
rightly pronounce, that (that being abolished) the whole fruit of the Gospel,
should be abolished? but yt very congregation could scarce believe, yt Christ
was yet risen. And Thomas gave not credit, to his own very fellow disciples:
yea the disciples, would not have believed, even their own very eyes, if the
Lord had not said, Luke. 24.39. We may not determine of the falsehood or truth
of any church by the doubting of either many or few.
A spirit has not flesh and bones.

And that third thing is confirmed, by the examples of the Churches of Achaia
and Galatia, which doubtless, the Apostle would not have called the churches
of Christ, and therefore true churches, if he had therefore thought that the
church of Corinth had denied that article of the resurrection of the flesh: and
the churches of Galatia, had rejected the benefit of their liberty, purchased
by Christ, because some in Corinth, yea perhaps some of the pastors
themselves, did doubt of the point of the resurrection: and the most part of
the Galathians, called back again the use of circumcision and other
ceremonies, seeing that yet notwithstanding, Gal. 5.2.
the same Paul says: If ye be circumcised, Christ does profit you nothing:
and seeing that he affirms that those which urged circumcision, not of
ignorance, but of stubbornnes, they were removed always unto another gospel,
Gal. 1.6. Phil. 3.2.
and therefore he openly calls the^ Apostatates or fallers away, and
compares them to Dogs, that is to say, to unclean beasts. But it is an other
thing, to err through ig^^^aunce, than obstinately to resist the truth, as
wiful fellows are wont. Heresy which is without the Church, if it be of some
point of the religion, that touches the foundation, is an other thing, than
being deceived or an error, which requires and suffers it self to be
taught. To be short, the Eclipse of the Sun, is an other thing, than the
absence of the same: and the evening is an other thing than the darkness of
the night: yea the night it self, which the day succeeds, is an other thing
than the darkness were, Genesis 1.2.
when they covered the depth.

These things then being put down, That some errors may creep into the
Catholic church yea and that in some point of faith, which concerns the
foundation.
it shall be easy to judge, that every error does not take away the name of the
true church, and with all that to be most false, which the adversaries say, to
wit, that the Catholic Church cannot err, and yet that every error does not
abolish the name of the Catholic Church. For as touching this latter point, if
some particular Church may err, even in some chief head or article of
Christian religion, and yet it ceasseth not therefore to be a true Church:
wherefore shall not a man say the same of al particular Churches, not considered
one by one, but universally, for this is the Catholic Church? Truly it is
not probable that there lived then any men (when Christ rose again) better or
more perfectly instructed in true faith, then those twelve Disciples: And yet
we see this whole congregation, for a time (as I even now said) so to have
doubted of the resurrection of Christ, that for that cause (as Luke writes)
Christ remained with them forty days after the resurrection, Act 1.3.
that he might fully assure them of his resurrection. Wherefore this thing we
conclude, that the chief points of our religion, ought of necessity to
remain sound, in the Catholic Church, that it may be called Catholic: But
there may some times fall in some cloud (specially through the negligence of
the Pastors) which may some times darken, one while this, an other while that
article, which never the less (when the holy Ghost appears) straight ways
vanishes away.

Therefore Catholic is not, (as the unlearned imagine) always and with out
exception the same, that right or sound is, seeing that even some universal
error, may continue for a time. And the same thing may and ought much more to
be spoken of the particular congregations of this vniuersallitie. And if these
things be true, even in the very grounds of our religion: how much more, may
we think the same to be true, as often as errors creep in, by which the
very foundations of religion, are not ouerthrown? And this is the stuble or
chafe which sometimes (as S. Paul says, 1. Cor. 3.12.
are builded upon the foundations of the Apostles, which at the length shall
vanish away, when the day of the Lord appears.

But this day shows it self sometimes sooner, sometimes later. (So I had
almost said, all the Bishops of Africa thought with Cyprian, that baptism
administered by heretics, was of no force. Which thing, although it were false,
might nevertheless (so long as the sum of faith remains sound and unhurt) be
wrongfully taught and believed. But this error continued not long. There is a
like consideration to be had of many traditions, which for that cause, began at
the length, falsely to be called, and to be deemed Apostolical, because that
being once confirmed by continual use, they were supposed to have come even
from the Apostles them selves: which traditions also, by reason thereof, the day
of the Lord (which has again in our times shined forth) cannot now abolish,
with out very great contentions. Be it therefore far from any to think, that
for such manner of blemishes, some congregations should be thought, not to
belong, to the body of the Catholic Church, That blemishes at the first
sometimes tolerable, cease to be blemishes, and grow to be cankers.
although godly and diligent Pastors, should give very great diligence, that
these spots also should be wiped away, with the sponge of Gods word.

But this thing first of al must here be marked, that these blemishes and as it
were byles or swellings, do some times so far increase, that they grow to a
canker, and that they pull away the very members from the body: which thing the
most shameful examples, both of ancient times, and also of our times, declare
to have fallen out, especially by the fault of the pastors. As for example,
exorcisme or cuniuring (one sort of it being proper to them that were possessed
with ill spirits, and an other common to all that were grown in years, and
came from Paganism to Christianity, brought in also by the negligence of
pastors, into the baptism of Infants, that were borne of Christians) was at
the beginning only a blemish, and yet not being looked into of the old
Bishops, at the length increased so far, that in the papacy it was
retained as necessary, and so became a wilworship, a matter now at no hand
indifferent: And in some Churches, (although lightened with the Gospel) it is
retained as not unprofitable, with great shame (truly) to the pastors: of so
great importance is it in season to prevent, even the smalest errors.

The ceremony of anointing with oil in baptism (which was ministered to those
that were as it were, to fight against the Devil, and the flesh) was in the
beginning chafe, but this chafe, how far in process of time it grew, we
see, Chrisme in baptism prefered before water, the element of the sacrament.
when the Crisme also began to be reverenced, which thing notwithstanding did
not fall out in the very water, a true and an essential sign of baptism. So it
is manifest, that the sign of the cross, was at the beginning an open
profession of christianity, the abuse whereof at the last, brought to pass,
that the very cross, was set up, in the place of Christ crucified, neither is
there any idolatry in all the world more detestable. So the remembrances of
martyrs, and the funerals of the more famous Bishops, were celebrated, both
with Orations in the praise of the^, and with incredible concourse of people,
from whence by and by after sprang up inuocations of the dead, at their
sepulchers, and in process of time, the worshippinges of relics also. The
paineting of walls, brought into the Christians temples, about four hundred
years after the death of Christ, and that without any worship thereof, was
in deed accounted, haie. But how far this blemish has grown we see,
insomuch, that the second of the ten commandments, was under that color,
openly by the Papists blotted out: and (which thing cannot bespoken, without
the incredible shame of some) that second commandment, is also at this day
numbered, by certain men (which should not so deal) amongst the ceremonial
commandementes. Such was in the beginning, the lenten fast, and some choice or
difference of meats, without any opinion of worship, added thereto. Which
things, we now see so established, that sundry and those no small persons,
but such as will seem to be most Catholic, do most obstinately defend, that
in the doing of them, consists in some respect, the forgiveness of sins,
yea the worthiness of merits or power to deserve. What I beseech you, could
seem at the first, to have been more indifferent then for the celebration of
the supper, to have a table of stone or of wood? But, if the Grecians in the
celebration of the said supper, had never used their That is, their Altars
dedicated to Devils.
(...) and the Latins their Alters, but had been content with their common
tables (which was in use in the Apostles times) likely it is, that the
controversy, touching that detestable idolatry of ye mass (by which we see,
the whole world at this day, to be set on fire) could never have sprung up.

Now, to what end, tend these things? to wit, that first in descrying the marks
of the true church, heresies might be distinguished from errors, and hay and
stubble, from those things, which either of themselves, or by reason of the
opinion of worship brought in, are either ungodly or superstitious: and yet
that all the governors of ye Chucch, ought to understand, that as the alter,
was not in time past to be builded of stones, garnished by the diligence of
man: neither yet that it was lawful for them, so much as to fasten a nail in
the Tabernacle, but according to the pattern which Moses had seen in the
mount: even so now also, all godly magistrates indeed, and all true
shepherds, ought to endeavor, that in restoring the temple of the Lord, by so
many means fallen down, they should not only restore those things, which
have been ouerthrown by Antichrists, but also that they should most
diligently wipe away all, even the lightest spots, that have proceeded from
the same Antichrists, although they be, as it were waxen hard upon the walls
of the temple: and that marking (partly by the story of former ages, and partly
by the beholding of the present ruins of the Church) these former evils of
Satan, they should at no hand suffer themselves to be mocked, by the allegation
of the fragmentes, of certain of the ancient fathers, or by any vayn show of
custom: but rather that they should not leave of, until by doctrine, both the
Ceremonies and all the Ecclesiastical government also, be apted, not unto some
figurative Image of show, which was needful under the schoolemastership of the
law, but exactly framed, according unto ye most perfect pattern, which the
son of God him self by his own mouth and his Apostles after him, have most
perfectly set forth unto us in their writings. But concerning this matter, we
will elsewhere speak more fully (as I hope) when we shall answer those notable
mean men, who reprehend us, as over severe exactors of yt work, and especially
when we shall severally answer, unto the writing of Cassander, to the end, al
men may understand, that none more hinder the work of the Lord, than these
Samaritans.

Which be the principal points of the Catholic faith or religion.
Now, because I see some (not yielding unto these things, which we have spoken
in general, concerning ye fundamental or principal points of our religion)
again to dema^d what those should be: I answer yt these articles are to be
called grounds or principles, which being laid, ye whole building remains:
and which being over thrown, al things builded thereupon fall to ye ground. And
al these things, we profes to have been described with great shortness and
plainnes, out of the word of God in ye Creed, which they call the Apostles.
Which thing ought to be added to ye ten commandments, and the Lords prayer of
the which, that, to wit, ye ten commandments, does very compendiously set
out the order of Christian life: and this, that is, ye Lords prayer, does very
briefly also set out, right invocation and prayer. This (I say) is yt
fundamental, true, and perpetual mark of ye Catholic church, which shall
never be blotted out unto the worlds end: but which nevertheless ought to be
expounded, out of the wrytings of the Prophets and Apostles, from whence it is
taken, that al men may understand it and keep it, as much as in them lies.

Now the order of this exposition is 2. What exposition of Catholic doctrine
is required in the Church.
fold: one more familiar, which is necessary for all men: an other more large,
and far more plentiful: as we see that the Apostles creed, was afterward
expounded, by some other Creedes of the holy Synodes, that heresies might be
met withal, and the Consciences established more and more in sound doctrine.
Therefore, albeit that to the end, that some man might be a true member of
Christ, it be not necessary, that he should most exactely understand, for what
cause things are spoken and set down, and should know the determinations of
disputations in divinity: Yet every one ought to know according to his
capacity, what he does believe, and why he does believe, and not to rest in
the deuilishe invention of faith, which they call unfolded, that is to believe,
as the Church has determined, and to ask no further: but to add also unto
that familiar instruction, the exposition of holy writings, That the true, yea
the Catholic church has more then once wanted, an ordinary and lawful
ministry, and therefore that that ordinary and lawful ordination and
succession of Pastors, was for a time broken off.
of which Paul sets before us four points 2. Tim. 3. to wit, doctrine,
reproof, correction, and comfort. All which are by diligent Pastors and
teachers, publicly and privately, to be applied, to the capacities of the
believers.

It remains that we declare, how much we ought to give to personal
succession and ordination. We have said, that the only, true, perpetual, and
necessary mark of the catholic Church is that doctrine, which diversely, and
sundry manner of ways, first by word, and afterward by wrytings, has been
delivered by the Prophets, and at the last most perfectly declared by Christ
him self, and that by his own mouth, and by his Apostles. For this word, as
(even after Christ him self), Peter says, is that seed, by which the
Catholic Church, both at the beginning of the world appeared, and by which
also it shall continue, even unto the end of the world. But seed is to no
purpose, except it be sown, and the Lord, (who both under the old, and under
the new Testament, appointed an order for the sowing of this seed, by the
ministry of men) has (I say) necessarily appointed this sowing (for otherwise
the spreading abroad of this Church would quickly end) to endure to the end
of the world: Be it so truly. Then thou will say, ordination also and
succession of those persons, is a true, perpetual, and necessary mark of the
catholic church, agreeing altogether with that other, to wit, the mark of
sowing. So our adversaries do conclude, but falsely and foolishly. For, (that I
may let pass those two things already confuted by us, that is to say, because
they babble of the succession of persons, omitting the succession of that
Apostolical doctrine: Moreover because yt they propou^d an other succession,
than that which has been begun by the Apostles them selves) either they do
not see, or they dissemble that they do see (albeit the sowing also, and the
sowers, are required no less than the seed, to the tilling of this field of
the Church) that the same order has not always been kept, either of sowing
the seed, or of ordeyning them, unto whom this sowing is committed. And this
notwithstanding, they ought to have learned, both by the fore tellings of the
prophets, and also by the holy histories, which things remains to be proved
of us. The Church therefore I confess, was never without ye word of God. But let
these men also show us, that there has been some one, certain, and perpetual
order both of that sowing, and of the persons admitted to that sowing, and that
the same has been tied also at all times, to the same laws of ordination,
before that first the lord had consecrated to him self the first begotten.
Exodus 3.2. and 19 22. and the 24.5. in whose steed afterward that Leuiticall
priesthood was ordained, almost with infinite ceremonies. Number. 8.18. Therefore
then at the length began, that certain and ordinary order of succession and
ordination, that is, of sowing, and of those unto whom the charge of that
sowing was committed. Which succession, and which manner of ordayning, if before
that time the Church lacked it, it is proved, that that ordinary succession
and calling, has neither bin always necessary nor continual, seeing that the
visible Church stood so many ages, before both of them,

Now let us see, whether ye Leuiticall priesthood, has continued without
interruption, even unto ye coming of Christ. In deed we read, yt the spreding
abraod of Aarons posterity, continued until the overthrow of the temple. But
even as we say, though David's stock were not abolished, yet David's kingdom
(even as amongst other the prophets, Ezechiel had foretold) was broken of, from
the days of Sedichia, unto Zorobabel, from whose tims in steed of kings they
were Dukes, and at the length (the Asmoney, taking all power unto themselves)
David's posterity, I say, in steed of Dukes became Senators, until at last
they being also taken away by Herod a forrainer borne, and Judea being reduced
to a Province, and so in fine as Jacob had foretold (all government being taken
from Judea) yt son of David sprang up, Genesis 49.10.
to sit in the throne of David for ever: So it appears, that all the
Leuiticall priesthood, was not at once broken off, until (the eternal
priesthood of Melchizedech succeeding) it was wholly abolished. For, (to let
pass those public miseries and slaughters of the people, under the judges,
and especially that time which is spoken of, in the five last chapters of the
story of the Judges, in which time it is evident that the public ministry was
greatly decayed, and sometimes almost abolished) who will deny, that there was
any true church, in the kingdom of the ten tribes, from the time of Jeroboam
the first king, unto the overthrow of Samaria? and yet that there was no
succession, nor ordination of Leuitical priesthood amongst them, appears by
this, because it is written of Leui, that he departed from ye kingdom of the
ten tribes: and by that same most heavy complaynt of Helias, which is reported
by the Apostle, Romans 11.2. for concerning that which is reported afterward of
these hundred prophets, hid in a cave. 1. Kings. 18.13. it does not prove,
that there was there, any ordinarye ministry.

The adversaries will reply, that the godly Israelites went to Jerusalem, and
therefore, that they perteined to the Leuiticall priesthood. Be it so that
some went, yet there was some true Church then, in the kingdom of the ten
tribes, not going to the City, neither using the ordinarye sacrifices, nor
reteining any use of the Leuiticall priesthood.

But again these men say, they had notwithstanding colleges of prophets, and
assemblies of Godly men also, at their appointed days, as appears namely out
of the 2. Kings. 4.23. and therefore the ordinary succession of the ministry,
did not then cease, And neither do I conclude out of this place, that there
was then no holy ministry in the kingdom of Israel. But this one thing I
gather, that the succession of the Leuiticall ministry (which was the only
ordinarye ministerye) was then all together broken off, in the kingdom of
Israel. For neither were the Prophets ordained by the ministrye of men,
neither was their order continual.

They will again reply, that an ordinary succession may cease, in particular
Churches: but at no hand in the Catholic church, that is to say, universally:
seeing that then also the temple continued in the kingdom of Judah. But beside
that, I can reply out of the testimony of the Prophets, that Judah so
behaved her self, not only in manners, but also in the very worship of God,
that she justified Israel her self: Ezech. 16.51.
and that also the temple of the Lord was shut up under Manasses, after that
it had been imbrued, with the blood of the Prophets: and that horrible
idolatry declared unto Ezechiel in a vision: beside these things I say, I
furthermore add two other: one is, that if some particular Church may be a
member of the catholic Church (without the mark of succession, and ordinary
ordination) it necessarily follows that those notes, are not that, which the
Logitians call proper, after the fourth sort: that is to say, a term that
always agrees unto one kind, and to every particular of the same kind,
whereof we now demand, and in deed do justly demand it, seeing the whole
force of the definition, consists properly, in the knowledge of the
difference. The other is, that if (which thing we have showed before) some
part of the Catholic Church, may lack that successien, and ordinary
ordination for a time, it follows that that thing may fall out in all
particular and several Churches. For why should it fall out to one, rather
than to an other? But where this thing shall fall out, in what general thing
I pray you, may a man find that, which he wants not in all and every
singular part of the same?

But least these men should again cry out, that yet that thing has not fallen,
which might have fallen out. Let us proceed further, and let us consider, what
the state of the Cotholike Church was, under the captivity of Babylon. Verily
these men shall never prove, that there was then any ordinary ministry of the
Levites. For the fable of Susanna is confuted, out of the true story of Daniel,
so that it must be a narration either fabulous, or merely allegorical: even
as also the book of Judith is. And though Ezechiel sometimes in some place,
exercised the office of a Prophet (as it is manifest by his Prophecies) yet by
that it shall at no hand be proved, that the Leuiticall Priesthood was not
discontinued.

But thou will say, Circumcision then continued. I grant it, for this was the
singular benefit of God: even as Satan could not (in our time, and in the time
of our Fathers) bring to pass, but that the Sacrament of Baptism should
remain. But the self same Circumcision was not used those forty years, being
the time of their wandering in the wilderness, where notwithstanding if the
Catholic Church were not, it was no where. Seeing therefore the Church may for
a time want some sacraments, truly this part of the public ministerye, is
not absolutely, the perpetual and necessary mark of the Church: which thing
yet cannot be said, of the seed of the word it self, for the patent it self
of a covenant, is another thing, than the seal put to the patent it self: so
that the church, may for a time lack this, by reason of many letts cast in the
way: but that, to wit, the word, it can never lack, although he that
dispiseth that, to wit the Sacrament, despises both, and therefore shall
worthily be judged out of the Covenant.

What then? truly the Church, can neither at any time lack the seeds of the
word, neither the sowing, nor the sowers: but yet the sluggishnesse and
wickedness of the Pastors chiefly hinders, that we cannot restrain both the
sowing and the sowers to an ordinary succession and calling. And this thing
falls out, by two means. By one, when the chayres or places be not empty,
but they which sit in them, have entered in, either by the door, or by the
window, and do either wholly neglect their duty, or mingle cockell with seed,
or else sow nothing but poison: as such was the state of ye ancient catholic
church, under the most part of the vacant governments of the judges:
afterward in Judah under the most of ye kings, and at the length, in the times
of Christ being conversant upon the earth. By the other, when as that ordinary
both sowing, and also ordinary calling of sowers cease, being for a time as
it were, more than half dead (for we do not acknowledge that these things,
can all together be abolished before the end of the world) and such was, as
we have said, the outward form and face of the Church of the ten Tribes,
and of the Catholic Church, in the captivity of Babylon.

I say therefore, that the very same thing, has some times through the just
judgment of God, fallen out in the Church, in respect of the sowing, and the
sowers, which often times falls out in the times of famine and war, to wit,
that there is utterly no place for sowing. Which when it comes to pass al do
not yet die, but the hunger staruen that remain, are relieved, by the fruits
gathered in the harvest of the former years, even as heretofore, in the times
of Joseph, the Egiptians did sow nothing, but in the very seventh year of the
famine. So it behooued Daniell, Ezechiell, Zorobabell, Ezra, Nehemia, and the
remnaunt of the godly in Babylon, when an ordinary ministry was wanting, to be
Prophets and Pastors unto themselves, joining with most fervent prayers the
continual reading and meditation of the holy scriptures, as in that story, we
read to have been done, unless we would rather say, that Moses and the other
Prophets (whose wrytinges were then extant, although they them selves were
dead long a go) were notwithstanding their Pastors in this exile, until the
Lord in his time, should have mercy upon Syon.

But amongst these breaches of the Church, That the mark of succession and
ordinary vocation, is nor abolished, by every fault that may fall out in the
minister.
there is yet much difference. For where the Pastors do their duties only
negligently, or else offend only in manners, nevertheless the double mark of the
Church, which is ordinary and to be seen, remains. By the double mark of the
Church I mean, the seed, and ye sowing, and also ordination, if so be that
these Pastors, although negligent, be notwithstanding lawfully called. And if
they mingle only some leaven, The leaven is to be taken beede off, but the
pastors notwithstanding are to be hard, so far forth, as they sit upon the
chair, not of Peter, but of Christ: neither does such a congregation,
therefore cease, to be deemed as a member of the Catholic Church, (or else
the Catholic visible Church is no where) although perhaps no other, but
negligent Pastors, corrupt in manners, and mixing some leaven, be found
throughout all the whole world. Such were in the times of Christ, the
Pharisees and Saduces, and the Doctors of the Law, whose Leaven he teaches,
Math. 16.6.
must be avoided, which yet he commands to be heard, Mat. 23.2.3.
So long as they sit in Moses Chair. But this place peradventure, is not of
every one diligently inoughe marked: for it is to be noted, out of other
places, that the writings of Moses, and of the Prophets, were read be
piecemeale in the Synagogues. Which thing, the Sections noted, even at this
day, by a true order in the Hebrewe Bybles, do declare. Now, unto this pure
and sincere reading, was added an interpretation; full of Leaven: of which
sort are these points which especially in Matthew are plentifully confuted by
Christ. Therefore Christ commands those things to be heard out of the
Pulpit, which were by custom, syncerely recited out of Moses and the
Prophets, in the Synagogues: but the Leaven, wherewith they did corrupt, the
puritye of Doctrine, to be eschewed. So it is not to be doubted, but that that
outward Worship in the Temple, was in the times of Christ, diligently
exercised without Idolatry, which also Godly men did diligently perform,
although the right use of the sacrifices, and of the whole law, was utterly
destroyed by the iusticiarie Pharisees, and by the S^duces, which denied the
resurrection, that is to say, the chief end of sacrifices. What manner of
merchandise of high priests office, there was then, and that against the
prescript of the law, appears by historyes. But this fault of persons, in so
great confusion of things, did not abolishe the very facts of the priesthood,
which did depend, not upon the priest, but upon the ordinance of God. For there
is some certain mean thing between men merely pryuate, and men lawfully
called: to wit, when as some (exercising the place of those that be lawfully
called) are either through ignorance, or through winking at them, borne with all:
and in their name execute some public office, as we read, that it was
ordained in the law of the Romans, concerning one Barbarius Philippus, of
which matter we have in an other place spoken more fullye. Therefore the Church
in deed retained (and that in Pharisiisme and Saducisme) her note, both of Gods
seed, and in some sort also, of the very sowing thereof, although it were some
what defaced, and yet neither Pharisijsme nor Saducijsme, was a part of the
sound Church.

But as often as even openly, In the Romish church such a one as now a good
while it has been, all the notes of the true Catholic Church, are not in
some sort defaced only, but even utterly taken away, as was foretold by the
Apostles.
the chair of truth is utterly destroyed, so that on the one side sincere
bread is not propounded unto us, so that a man may receive it: and on the
other side, some Leaven, is so set before us, that a man may not reject it, but
poisons are drunk to men unwilling of the same, who will account the
congregation of these Wolves (or of those which follow them) for the true
either Catholic or particular Church. Now I affirm, that the Popedom, that
is to say, the Church of Rome (as at this day they call it) has by little
and little grown to be such a one. Seeing that those things being in deed
fulfilled, which both Paul 1. Thessalonians 2. And also John in the
description of the Image of the beast, have now so many years paste, set
before our eyes to behold: and the ancient fathers, both Greek and Latin
interpreters, Irene, Chrysostom, Hierome, Augustine, Becla, and Cardinal
Cusan himself also, have interpreted the same of the seat of Rome. For which
of those three marks of the catholic Church (whereof we have showed, that one
of the^ only is immovable and perpetual, the other we have declared also to
be some time discontinued) remains in the popish Church? For to speak first
of that proper, perpetual, and absolutely necessary mark, that is, the holy
word written, seeing that that is in the popish Church, is not set forth unto
the people, but torn in sundry pieces, and that also in a strange tongue: and
further, seeing that their shamelessness has proceeded so far, that they can
not bear the same to be turned, into vulgar and common speches, neither yet
endure, that the Latin interpretation being barbarous, and in many places
false, should be amended, by the Hebrew and, Greek copies, is there any man,
unless he be by the just judgment of God blinded, that will judge these men,
to be the Catholic Church (in which only there is salvation) and not rather
take it to be that Babylon, out of which all, that will not perish ought to
depart? But some amongst them say. We do not only receive the writings of the
Prophets and Apostles, but also receive them, and in deed receive them more
large, than ye receive them. For for one and two places sake, they ad the
books which are Apocripha. As though in deed to have books decked with gold
and precious stones, to worship papers tra^sformed into idols, to sing in a
strange tongue, parcels torn in sundry pieces, or to hang them about the neck,
or to use them in magical enchantments, be the same, that it is to teach the
writings of the Prophets and Apostles, and by these to direct, the whole
service of God, and to be short, by these to order, the whole life of man.

But again they say we have every sunday sermons, and the readinges also and
homelies of the Doctors: and to be short, admonitions (as they call them) in
parishes Yea, have truly. But when what manner ones, of whom, and to what end
are they had?

Note.
Now, to comprehend all things in a few words, seeing there be three ways of
corrupting the holy books of scripture, one is, when some thing is taken away
from the^: the second is, when some thing is added to them: the third, when
some thing is changed in them. Who at the length sees not, that these men are
condemned as guilty of so many sorts of falsehood?

That I may begin with the law. That unwritten word, which they have devised
and will have to be ye chifest part of ye service of God, and that authority
which they take to themselves, to make laws to bynd men's consciences, by what
name shall we call it? Now, have they not utterly blotted out, without any
shame, ye second commandment, to the end they might openly and manifestly,
renew al kind of idolatry, while they have changed the names only of ancient
Idols? Have they not oppressed the miserable consciences of Christians, both by
new and directly repugnant traditions? and under that cloak, Mat. 23.14.
Have they not devoured widows houses only (as in times past the Pharisees
did): but also have swallowed up empires and kingdoms? To be short, have they
not overthrown from the very foundations, the use and end of the law?

And in the Gospel (the other and the chiefest part of Gods word) what have
they left sound? First, what manner of Christ do they set forth unto us? verily,
a christ now in deed endued with a body without a body? do they propound him,
1. Cor. 1.30.
as he which was made of God unto us wisdom? Yea for sooth, so far as he
helps our natural light. Do they propou^d him as our whole righteousness?
for sooth so far as this thing is attributed to us, who are thereto prepared,
partly of our selves, and partly by grace, that the reward of eternal life,
may, by desert be ascribed unto the deseruinges of our righteousness. But
what if our own deseruinges be not sufficient? Verily, the deseruings of some
certain saints (whose treasure is not yet in deed drawn dry) purchased by a
certain price at ye hand of these brokers, shall be added unto us. And the
merits of what saints I beseech you, do they set forth unto us? surely, such as
the Bishops of Rome them selves, shall put into their calender, and such as
every one shall choose to him self for Patrones and intercessors. But do they
propound Christ as our sanctification? yea for sooth again, so far as he
augmenteth the remnants of our natural holiness. Do they propound him, as
our only redemption? in deed they do it in word, but perform nothing less
in deed. For they except ye satisfaction of punishment, which being granted,
they make God himself most unjust. For what is more wicked, than to require of
him, which is not in fault, satisfacory of punishments? And to what end has
the Lord borne our sins upon the tree? Esai. 53.4.5.
to what end has our chastisment rested upon him? But now, seeing we are come
to those satisfactions, do they not most manifestly mock with God and men,
when they teach, that in the sprinkling of coniured water, in tapers, in
spittle, in oil, in the sign of the cross, in choice of meats, in the
murmuring up also of certain prayers not understood, in the prayers of
counterfeit saints for the most part in the worshipping of images, in the
ringing of bells, in a certain kind of apparel also, and that after death
such satisfactions do consist? what more? O the most abominable wickedness
that has at any time been committed of any man) in the very real offering of
Christ him self for the quick and the dead, which is therefore so much the more
effectual, as they say by how much it is the more often reiterated, but in
deed, is an open and manifest treading under foot, of the sacrifice, made once
for us: when they teach I say, that satisfaction for the punishment of sins,
may be bought at their hands, both for us that live, and also for them that be
dead, scorched in that their fire of purgatory? What manner of thing therefore
is this Gospel? And what manner of Christ is this of the Romish Popedom?
Who also perceives not, by the conference of the word of god, that these men,
by their doctrine of Opus operatum, that is of the work wrought, have
overthrown all the use of sacraments? That I may say nothing of the
destroying of the truth of Christ his body, of his Ascension into heaven,
and of the article of his descending out of heaven. And that by the opinion of
Transubstantiation, they have overthrown the definition of a Sacrament? And
that they have polluted the Sacrament of Baptism, with infinite corruptions?
And that they have taken away, even at the first, one Element of the Supper
of the Lord? And whilst that afterward by a more than abominable wickedness
(changing that Sacrament, into that detestable propitiatory Sacrifice) they
have utterly taken away, all that holy action, and therefore openly have by
violence pulled away the seal of the covenant of the new Testament? To be
short, that they have, by as many false Sacraments, as it pleased them to
devise, taken to them selves, the authority of Jesus Christ, our only law
gyuer? Therefore what part of Gods word, have not these men corrupted, or
rather clean taken away? And then where is that only, true, perpetual and
necessary mark of the Catholic Church? Where is that Seed, which being
taken away, the spreading of the Church also upon earth, must needs be taken
away?

Now, if the question be, touching that Ecclesiastical government (that I may
speak some what more fully of this matter, than heretofore I have done) what I
beseech you, can a man find, in the Popish clergy, but that Image of the
beast? Has not this high Bishop succeeded the other high Bishop of Rome,
which was wont to be therein the hyre of the Gentiles? What say I? Has not that
Romish Pope, snatched to him self, (by occupying now at the last, and in
some ages here to sore, by sittinge in Rome) the very name, and all the
authority of the very Emperor of Rome? For the things which yet remain
there, being Relics not so much of the Roman empire, as of ye Germane
kingdom and government, what are they more I pray you, but a bare show and
name, not only because, the emperors themselves do of their own accord; at
this day, worship the feet of this beast, but also, because, he suffers, not
so much as one of his false clergy, to be subject, to any secular power, as
they call it? yea rather who perceives not, this wicked fellow, not contented,
with this so great wickedness, to be the very same person, whom Paul fore told
should sit (after the empire of Rome was destroyed) In the temple of God, 2.
These. 2.4.
and exalt him self, above all that is called God? For is not this he, that
openly affirms, that he must be judged of no man, no not of the Aungelles?
Who (if his price be given him) boasts that he can open both heaven and hell?
who at his pleasure openly breaks all laws both of God and men? who also
more than once, with in these few years, has undone laws established by
nature it self: which wickedness also the profane city of Rome in time here
to fore, (in the reign of Claudius the emperor) abhorred? who has sold even
for a farthing those very canons, whose name was wont, to make a fraide the
ignorant people.

And as for those purpled Cardinals, what other thing are they, than an Image,
not of ye ancient senate of Rome, but of that senate which served the
emperors, and dividing the government between them: but who is so ignorant of
the state of Rome, that does not perceive, that that distribution of
governments, is a picture of ye empire of Rome ouerthrown, which thing also the
Bishops of Rome themselves, and the writers that be addicted to them, do
witness? And as concerning other ecclesiastical functions, such as they were
ordained of Christ by his Apostles, what does there remain among them, but
most vain names and bare titles? For the office of a bishop, which in the
beginning, that is, while the Church flourished, was (as Hierome also
witnesses) nothing else, but the office of an elder, whilst even immediately
after the time of the Apostles, it proceeded to those heights of dignities (or
as they them selves speak) prelacies, (of which we have before spoken) is now
a good while ago, wholly vanished away amongst them.

Now what is it with them to be a minister? Is it to be appointed to feed
some flock? Is it to have ye oversight of manners, and to bear rule in the
Censures of the Church? No in deed, but to have authority to offer Christ
again? What is it to be a Deacon? Is it to take charge of the goods of the
Church, and righty to dispense them to the ministers, and the poor, and to
render an account of that which is received and laid out? Fie, fie, for this
(except alwais the yielding of accounts) is rather the only chief and common
office, to all of the whole Popish clergy, and specially of the Pope himself:
and that so openly and so carefully indeed, or couetously rather exercised,
that they exact, (even of those that be dead many years before) a great
Tribute, and, unto them that be alive, they do not freely give any thing,
though never so little. Therefore there is no such, either Bishop or
Minister among them, as the apostle allows of: and as for Deacons, not so
much as one at all. And yet these be the men, that obiecte unto us, the
succession of the Apostles. And if so be, that that one old Canon so often
times repeated in the aunciente Synodes, and altogether agreeable to the word
of God, did prevail, to wit, that that ordination which is boughte by money
(that I may omit the principal parts of a just ecclesiastical calling, that is
to say, trial and election, joined with the free consent of the whole Church,
which are wholly abolished by them, if a man consider the thing it self,)
should be judged I say, altogether void, what mark of Apostolical ordination,
shall there be found amongst them? unless happelye they mean, that it is
one and the self same thing, to mock at the order instituted by the Apostles,
and to keep that Order diligently, which has been delivered from hand to
hand: and unless they would prove, that lawful and current coin, were to be
known from counterfeit money, by the bare image, graven upon it, and not
rather, by the matter it self, especially as often as, they show the same
image to both parties.

To be short therefore, what manner of one is that Catholic church, in which
in steed of true Christ, a most false idol, at least wise, in respect of his
office, is set up: and where in steed of Gods pure word, partly the traditions
of men, and partly, the traditions of the Devil are placed: and where also in
steed of succession, and Apostolical ordination, nothing has place all most
but most manifest and detestable, even to the Devil him self as it were, both
bying and selling of souls redeemed by the blood of Christ, in so much that
they would have it to be accounted, an unlawful thing to search into these
matters, yea so far have they proceeded that they would condemn men (though
their cause be not heard) if high treason against God and man, whereas on the
other side if a man should grant these things, there should be nothing so
wicked, so blasphemous and so horrible to be thought, which a man might not
with their good leave and liking, think, speak, and write.

But (these men will say) although we were nothing less, than we will seem to
be, does it follow that the name of Catholic Church, which ye take from us,
does agree unto your Churches? No verily. Wherefore we have in vain now a long
time ago desired trial to be made, by the matter it self, That our Churches
have all the true marks of the Catholic Church, and specially the pure
word of God.
if their bare denial may be accepted. We therefore affirm, that the three
notes of the Catholic Church (to wit, the seed of the written word, and the
right and lawful Ecclesiastical calling and succession, all which we have
restored, are in our possession, and stand on our side. These things they
stoutly deny. In deed this controversy cannot be decided in a few words,
neither do I at this present go about it. But that which I had taken in hand
to prove, I hope I have performed, to wit, that the false and counterfeit
notes of the Church, which they alleged, are sufficiently confuted, and the
true notes of the Church set forth and approved.

For it is one thing, to dispute of those marks, which they are, and another
to dispute, who have them. Notwithstanding, because I have in few words
declared, that they have not those marks, this thing also I may now speak,
that we have at least, two very weighty conjectures, which make for us against
them: to wit, that in discerning and triyng of opinions, we stay our selves,
upon the only written word of God, that is, the writings of the Prophets and
Apostles? and that we require the interpretation of it, by the only conference
of places, and proportion of the articles of faith. Neither do we refuse the
writings of any, either old or new author, so yt they may be examined, by the
rules before said: by Gods word, and the proportion of faith. But what these
me^ object against these upright requests, it sufficiently appears.

Now in the question of succession and ordination, they have thought that not
many years ago, they have found out, That our Churches, have the true
Apostolical succession.
a more certain reason to dispute against us. For they demand even with great
loftiness and pride, that we should show them, whom they have succeeded,
which in our times have established our Churches, as though we were no better
able, to show our original, tha^ the Donatistes could theirs. We answer that
the doctrine which we defend, has (even from the time of the Apostles,
although heresies have assaulted it, and the Romish false bishops, and others,
made drunk by ye harlot, have by all ye means they could, and that for the
space of certain years polluted it) continued notwtstanding, even until our
times, and shall continue, even to the end of ye world: and that about 200
years since this light of the Gospel began again, (and that through the
singular goodness of God) in ye west to apeare, out of ye filth of popery, and
those hidden places, into which these me^ had thrust it, until ye
ca^delsticks, which were taken away, were set again in their places, and by
that means the elect people of God, did from all quarters flow together unto
the said truth.

But as concerning the succession of the holy ministry, 2. The. 2.7.
we say, that that mystery of iniquity (which the Apostle witnesses in his
time to have been begun, was not accomplished, but in some process and length
of time, and therefore yt that old Church of Rome became, and that but by little
and little, of Apostolical, Apostatical, that is, fallen from the truth: and we
affirm that other Churches (as it is evident by histories) did not
straightwaies fall away from the foundation, but the^ verily, when as in the
church, the false bishop, 2. The. 2.4.
and son of perdition in deed, calling him self the universal head of the
Church) did at the length, exalt himself above all that is called God. And
that this was don when the kings and Princes, yea, and the very Pastors them
selves, in other countries, being bewitched by this harlot, had submitted them
selves to the feet of Antichrist. Now, when, and by what degrees and sleights
that has been brought to pass, cannot else where be better not only known, but
even perceived almost by the very eyes, than by the very lives of the bishops
the^ selves, declared by good and sufficient writers: ye events and falling out
of things iustlye agrreing with the foretellinges of ye Apostles, and ye
expositions of the learned, both ancient, and also certain new writers, which
our very adversaries, dare not refuse, in so much that ye which the Apostle
heretofore spoke of his ministry, 2. Cor. 4.24.
that his Gospel was had in deed from them that should perish, and whom the
God of this world had blinded, that the light of the Gospel of the glory of
Christ should not shine upon them, the same we may now most truly affirm of
this wicked Antichristian sinck, faining or pretending the name of the
Catholic Church. Therefore we have next after the Apostles, for successors,
those very right judging pastors, not only of the Roman church, but of other
churches also, whose succession (being broken of by these wolves and tirants)
we have begun through Gods goodness at the last to restore: so far of is it,
either that we are destitute of the lawful argument of succession, or that they
should be able to allege any Apostolical succession.

That the Catholic Church has been, and in some respect as yet is, in the
Popedom though the Popedom be not the Catholic church nor any part thereof.
Math. 21.33.34.
Therefore say these men, where was that Catholic visible Church, about two
hundred years past? Christ himself makes answer for us, that it has bin
heretofore, and as yet in some respect is, in the hands of the wicked
busbandemen, who themselves, slew the servants of the Lord, being sent unto
them, and with all, as much as they could, even the Son himself, being
cast out of the Vineyard: and in steed of him, they have placed a Christ in
words, wherewith they mock the people, but in deed every one, even the
wickedst of their own sort, that they can or could get. But it is well, that
neither the eternal keeper of that vine, can again in deed be cast out,
neither could again be slain. who lives unto God, and who also now again
appearing, has begun, to let out that Vineyard, to good and faithful
husbandmen, Paul also answers in our behalf, foretelling that which we
see fulfilled: To wit, that that wicked one, should usurp to him self the
Temple of the Lord, 2. These. 2.4.
until the Lord should again discover him. John also answers that that
woman, having lately brought forth her Child, bath together with her Child,
layen hidden in the wilderness, free from the Dragon, who trusted to, and used
also, and was even as it were uphold with the power of Kings and Princes: And
that that holy City, has in the mean time continued sure, not for a small
time, but for two and forty months, or a thousand two hundred and sixty
days. But we leave the acccount of those days to sharper witted men: we urge
only the matter it self. Therefore, to speak plainly, we say, that so long
as that great Michaell did appear by little and little, killing that Dragon
with the swoorde of his word (which he has again committed to his faithful
servants) or with the spirit of his mouth, that so long the Catholic
Church, (that is to say, every number though never so small, of such as held
fast both the person, and also the office of the true Christ) lay hid in
the filthinesses of the Romish Babylon, whilst ye wicked one with his angels,
usurping the seat of the ministry, and the harlot that sat upon the seven
hills, did make ye world drunk with her dreggs.

But they say, that this true Church, ought always to be visible.

To this, if I shall answer, that the true Church indeed, has always been
visible, and so shall be, so far forth as she consists, of true visible
members, and that it is not a counterfayte thing: In what sense the true Church
is called visible.
and also that it is visible so far forth, as it has outward and evident
marks: and yet not in such sort visible: as though they that embrace true
religion, should always so agree, that every man might point out with this
finger, both who they are, and where they are: if I say I shall answer this,
I shall indeed speak, as the matter is, and that which I have a little
before, by reasons and examples declared. But I make not this place my refuge:
for I say, that if we will fetch records, even from the Apostles themselves
(who have as it were with their finger poynted out this wicked one, and all
his false Church) that then we shall find, that there scarce has been any
age, but that therein, so soon as this Antichriste began to show his head, the
Lord has always stirred up some, who did set themselves against his tyranny.
If they deny this thing, let them lay a wager, but withal let them give
pledges or sureties for ye perfourmaunce, and I doubt not but we shall show
forth even to al men, yt the thing is so (unless they had rather be willingly
blind) yea and that by good and sufficient witnesses, and by clear, evident,
and manifest testimonies, drawn out of their very own courts and records.

But the adversaries cannot so be brideled, but that they will reply, That the
true laying on of hands remains wholy with us.
demanding at the last, what laying on of hands we are able to allege, that
they have received, by who^, in our time our churches have been established.
For so I remember, Spensa, a Doctor of the Sorbonistes, did cry out against us,
by whom afterward there was published concerning these matters, a voulome
very gross, and full of slanders.

How far forth the laying on of hands has been counted necessari to a
lavvfull calling.
First, I answer that, which he himself elsewhere has noted out of Hierom,
against the So called of one Lucifer, who held that the soul was of the
substance of the flesh.
Luciferians, which place also Gratian has put into his decrees: to wit, that
the laying on of hands after baptism pertains rather to the honor of
priesthood (as they call it) than to bind any by necessitye of law, to
observe it. After this sort therefore I say, did Hierome judge whom they call
upon amongste their Saints. But they will replye forsooth that he disputes
of laying on of haneds in confirmation, and not of laying on of hands in
ordination, as they are woonte to speak. Which that I may grant to be so,
(although Spensa thought otherwise) what shall this replication or exception
help them? for they themselves do not only number confirmation among the
Sacraments, but also (when it pleases them) they account it more excellent,
than Baptism it self. But let us omit this thing. They confess (unless they
will dissent from Bernard, in his Epistle 77. who notwithstanding, stands
both upon the word of God, and also upon the authority of Austen and
Ambrose) that those which are of the years of discretion, are blotted out of
the Church, for contempt of Baptism, and not for the want of it. And what
shall let us, that we may not much more speak the same thing, of the laying
on of hands, used in giving orders? unless peradventure, they shall say,
that that is more to be required unto the holy Ministerye, than Baptism unto
salvation. But how can these excellent servants of God, seem to have
contemned the laying on of hands, which in our time, by a very Heavenly
inspiration, have delivered the Church from the Tyranny of Antichriste, when
as they had none, of whom they could lawfully, even by the warrant of the old
Canons themselves, ask, or receive the same? for I have before showed, and yet
affirm this thing, that there can not be found one amongst the whole clergy
of Rome, which is able, by the pure and ancient canons, to defend their
ordination to be lawful. What say I? It appears that even in the most pure
Church also, the laying on of hands, was not counted so necessary? for who I
beseech you laid his hands upon Philip, that of a Deacon he should be made an
Evangelist? Act. 8.4.
who laid hands upon them, in that first dispersing of them selves abroad at
Jerusalem (the very Apostles also being ignorant thereof) preached the Gospel
with so great fruit in Samaria? but these men. Peter and John were afterward
sent, who should lay their hands upon them. Act. 8.14.
Yea for sooth upon those who believed and were baptized, for as for the^
which first had preached the Gospel unto the^: there is no mention at all made
of them. But let us put the case that this place were to be understood of these
men also. The Apostles therefore ratified that, which the other as occasion
served had done, even before examination, and before ordinary election, not
meaning to make the laying on of hands, to be absolutely necessary. And if
these men be the successors of the Apostles (as they will be called and
accounted) why have not they them selves also, and that by the example of the
Apostles, made haste, to approve at the least, the zeal of godly men? Or why
did they not help, the attempt of that Archbishop of Colen, rather tha^ they
should have betrayed him to that Romish Antichrist? for a reward also, of which
wicked deed Gropperus had the Cardinals hat bestowed upon him, a cover in deed
worthy for such a cup. For sooth (they will say) because ye are heretics.
Therefore the question must be of the doctrine and not of the laying on of
hands, and then (as I hope) we shall get the victory.

But they will again reply that that thing was lawful at the first, when the
Churches were springing: but now an order being once established, the same
thing is not lawful. I answer that I confess, there ought great regard, to
be had of the times, and that they are not to be borne with all, who violate
the laws of the Church, being well establshed. But what if I shall say that
the laws of right and lawful ordination are not violated by us, but that
(when they were taken away and defaced by them, that feigned them selves to be
the keepers of that order) we have applied our selves to the restitution, and
restoration of them? For, that this thing is so, it appears by this, that
(excepting the ceremonies which are justly abrogated) al things commanded in
the word of God, and prescribed in the ancient pure canons, are observed
exactly in our Churches, but amongst them, manifestly neglected. Now, who, when
Pastors by common consent, are changed into Wolves, would say, that the
sheep should look for such manner of aid, from Wolves: and that should be
condemned, which after the example of the Prophets, does willingly set him
self against wolves? Let this controversy therefore be first disputed of,
before the question be made, touching the form of ordination: and let these
men leave of to boast of the apparel and outward show of Pastors, when as
inwardly they be ravening wolves. Mat. 7.15.
Verily Christ commands true Pastors to be distinguished from false, not by
ye laying on of hands, Mat. 7.16.
But by their fruits, yt is, by doctrine and manners. But what will their Pastors
that be made, by Bulls and licenses, answer to these things?

They being enforced, to condemn extraordinary vocations, That miracles are
not necessary to prove any holy, lavvfull vocation, either ordinary or
extraordinary.
and that more than once, and without exception also, at the last they fly
unto miracles, which they will have of necessity to be required, to this
extraordinary vocation. But if a man bydde them allege, out of what place of
Scripture, they have at the length drawn this rule: then it necessarily
follows, either ye they can speak no more than fyshes, or else bewraie
extreem shamelessness.

Now, first it is manifest that the gift of miracles, has always been
free, that is, set in the power of God alone, who has given the same at
certain times, and to certain persons: Therefore we can make no rule of it.
Next, seeing that not only Christ has foretold, but also the old and new
stories witness, that this gift, was common both to true, and also to false
Prophets, what madness shall it argue, to be desirous to have the false
sending to be discerned from the true, by miracles?

By what means false vocations may be properly discerned.
Then you will say, it shall be lawful for every one to teach in the Church? no
in deed. For who soever (where there is place for order) dispiseth that order,
he declares by this very thing, that he is not of God and therefore not to be
heard. Therefore the Donatistes, who were in deed Schismatiques, are by this
reason justly condemned, because, though it had been most true, which they
objected unto Occilianus, yet the order of the church, was not for that cause
to be broken, and they were not to be borne with, when for the defection of
some Churches, they cried out, that all the world was fallen away. But where a
general disorder, under the show of order, bears sway, and no remedy can be
looked for, from the authors of this mischief: then doubtless, this must be
performed that even as when a fire is raised in a City, those men cessing, or
setting the city it self a fire, which by the ordinances of the city, ought to
have come to the quenching of that fire, it is the part of every good Citizen,
to carrye water, yea even without order, and to cast it upon the flames: so in
this, much more dangerous fire of the Temple of the Lord, it is the duty of
every godly man, as much as in him lies, to set him self against that evil:
and also of the godly magistrate, to provide that a lawful order be restored.
So have the godly Prophets in times past done: so have ye godly kings Ezechias
and Josias done: and unless ye very christian Emperors, when heresies bare
great sway, had interposed their authority, none had more beaten down the
Church (as at the length we see it to have been done) than they that governed
the chiefest seats. And if notwithstanding all this, there have been no
ordinary vocation, in the times of these ancient Synodes, we must know that
that fell out in deed, because, that a lawful order then established in the
church, was not altogether abolished, as it is manifest that it has been
performed, now sundry ages since, through the tyranny of the false Romish
Bishop: there remaining amongst them not so much as a very slender shadow of
the principal parts of Ecclesiastical vocacion: to wit, of trial and
election: but (after a most filthy sale of all things), they using only a
vicelike kind of laying on of hands, thereby to deceive the common people.

We want not even that laying on of hands which the false church of Rome,
does untruly make simply necessary to a lavvfull calling.
But though these things were not forcible (which indeed are yet
notwithstanding most strong) what does an extraordinary vocation appertain to
us? For it is most manifest, that those first restorers of Gods house, in the
days of our forefathers: to wit, Wickliffe, Hus, Hierome of Prage, Luther,
Bucer, Oecolampadius, Swinglius, Pelican, Haller, and very many other) had the
self same laying on of hands that these men require, given them by their
Bishops, to teach the people: by whom afterward the Churches were, by
little and little restored: In which Churches also, we affirm, that the true
vocation of pastors, Doctors, and Deacons, was restored. Now I call that a true
calling, which is according to the prescript of Gods word.

But here again our unorderly ordinaries suppose, The laying on of hands,
belongs to the presbiterie and not to that state of Bishops which men have
devised.
that they have found out somewhat, wherein they may manifestly blame us. For
they deny, that albeit those men, whom even now we named, were ministers, yt
therefore we are lawfully ordained, seeing that bishops only may ordain
ministers, much less say they, can we be bishops. I in deed do willingly
leave unto them, all this state of bishoppely government, whereof I plainly
say, that the holy Ghost was not the aucthor, but man's wisdom, and upon
which, unless we perceive that God has laid a curse, verily we do as yet see
nothing at all: and we foster a Viper in our bosom, which will again kill the
mother. But of this matter we will speak in an other place.

Now only I demand of these men, from whence they have fet this: for sooth
from the second Canon of the Apostles, (as they call it). But Gelasius the Pope
him self does reckon these Canons, amongst the writings counted Apocrapha: to
wit I suppose, at the least for the titles sake. For he must needs be too
impudent, that would deny these Canons, to have been made in more ages than
one, so far is it of, that ridiculous invention (attributed to I cannot tell to
what Clement, and lately published in Greek and Latin, in which the Apostles
are brought in one by one establshing these matters, may be allowed of any man
that is of any sound sense or judgment. But to what end should we handle these
things so largely? That the Evangelists were above the ministers of which we
speak (for otherwise Peter the Apostle, calls even him self a fellow
minister with the^. 1. Pet. 5.1.) these men dare not deny, because the Apostle
him self sets them before Pastors and Doctors. Ephe. 4.11. But even Paul
him self witnesses, that Timothy, not appointed a Bishop to Ephesus, or any
other Church, but an Evangelist, and the companion of Paul the Apostle, did
not receive the imposition, or laying on of hands, no not from Paul him
self, but from the presbiterie, that is, from the company or fellowship of
Elders. Wherefore if these men that mind to defend the false bishoply tyranny,
be disposed to reason, let the^ dispute not with Geminianus (as ye civil
lawiers are wont to say) but with Paul him self. We verily think those to be
lawfully ordained, who having according to the Apostles rule, and exact
inquiry of their doctrine and manners going before, and a free and holy
election, by the consent of the whole Church, which they are to govern, are
consecrated and dedicated to God by solemn prays, and the very rite of laying
on of hands used (if men shall so think good) but yet simple, and of it
self, and not defiled with any traditions of men.

Now seeing these things are so, The conclusion of the whole Treaty.
I say that the favorers of the false Romish Church, do in vain set out or
object, those three notes of the Church: to wit, succession merely personal,
a calling sundred from the doctrine of the Apostles: and the laying on of
hands. And I say this, both because that none of these by it self, can be
either, a true, or simple necessary, or perpetual note of the universal
Church: and also, because that though it were so, yet that no one of these
notes at all, can be found, in the false Romish Church, which does
notwithstanding call her self, (though most falsely,) the universal Church:
and on the other side I affirm, that that only, true, necessary and
perpetual mark of the Catholic Church, that is to say, that doctrine,
which is most perfectly contained in the wrytings of the Prophets and
Apostles, does once again shine bright and clear in our Churches: and to be
short, that the very personal succession, vocation, and ordination of the
holy and right ministry, are restored in the same our Churches: and that we
have not forsaken Syon, but have fled out of Babylon as the Lord warns us:
Revel. 18.4.
and that, we have not rent in sunder the Church, but following Paul's fact, in
the Church of Ephesus, mentioned Acts. 19.9. have separated Disciples to the
Lord: and that we have not by the example of Jeroboam, 2. King. 16.10. etc.
or the Donatistes, set up altar against altar, but casting the altar brought
from Damascus out of the Lords house, we have begun to restore the true and
sincere worship of God, which work also I hope (although Satan, do by his
ministers set himself against the same, both within the Church, and without
it) shall yet notwithstanding (when that son of perdition, 2. These. 2.8.
shall at the last be thoroughly overthrown, by the spirit of Gods mouth) be
blessedly achieved and finished.

(...)
Imprinted at London by Robert Walde-graue, dwelling without Temple-barre, in
the Stronde, near unto Somet-set house.


