THE POPES PYRAMIDES.
intertwined pyramid of serpents and papal regalia Blasphemy.

Prophanes.

Pride.

Covetousness.

Idleness.

Envy.

Cruelty.

Heresy.

H^pocrisie.

(...)

Sodomie.

Rebellion.

Ignorance.



The fruits of Rome, thou here protractur'd see,
And sins begotten by her Antichrist;
Who like a Serpent with despightfull ire,
With poison armed, with eyes as red as fire,
With Triple crown, and with his horned might,
In wait lies for, the children of the light:
Whose cursed brood, about their damme within,
Breathe out the venom of a several sin.
The chief in order, horrid Blasphemy,
Their parent takes against the Deity,
What is it else? when us he makes believe,
Salvation at his pleasure he can give?
In heaven, in hell, in purgato^y to
He can do much, nay more then God can do;
Rome's Temples built, for pure Religion,
Are all profaned now (says Mantuan,)
Base parasites her Church-reuenew feeds,
And sacred Altars serve but Ganimedes:
In Bull, in Pardons, Peter's keys are sold,
With Christ himself, (to who'ule give most) for gold:
Whiles that Christ's flock, unto his chardge assigned,
For want of food, is cast away and pined,
Or naked left, as seely lambkins be,
To the world's mercy, or wolves cruelty,
As Heretics, Gods children she does hold,
And all that are not hemmed within her fold,
When she her self, the root of error is,
And has maintained the grossest Heresies.
How many Popes does Platina record,
Vile Heretics, did whilome Row afford?
Of whom Monothelites, some Arrians were,
Some others Athe^sts, one a coniurer:
Of Holiness thus does she bear a show,
And with the Church's title masked go,
Depainted outward glorious to the ere,
When her devotion's but Hypocrisy:
They fasting teach, yet daintyest cates do buy,
To please the taste, and serve their gluttony:
That here again, should Epicurus live,
He would the Palm unto the Friars give:
Sardanapalus, Nero, and the rest,
Whose very names, you chaster ears detest
Of Nature never deserved greater blame,
Then Rome, for one thing, which I dare not name:
Rome, thou that Traitors their bad lessons teach,
And great'st estates, t'aduance thy; ride impeachest:
Lo here the picture of thy Tyranny,
As Pasquill sent it to our Britany.
A Pyramid, of Serpents poisonous brood;
( Rome,) here behold, erected is on high
Upon seven hills, where once thy glory stood
Sad Monument of thy Impiety:
Which all the world infecteth, far and nigh,
Like the Cerastes, threatening speedy death,
If unawares we come within her breath.
About whose head, in knots, and wreathings strange,
Her cursed Impes, on every side do crall,
While she about her horned head does raunge,
With poisoned spite, empeiring over all:
That Sheepeheard, nor his flock hereafter shall
Be ( Tyber,) with thy pleasant streams acquainted,
Which this foul Serpent with all sin has tainted.
Where once good Pastors Halleluiabs sang,
And sat, their snowy flocks in quiet tending,
That all thy banks with heavenly Music rang,
The Laurel groves, their friendly shadows lending;
But now (alas) those happy days have ending,
And by thy shore, (as Sybill did foretell,)
This hateful brood, of Antichrist does dwell.
But lo exalted to the highest degree,
That Pride, or vain Ambition could devise;
Gods word (a double edged sword) we see
Does deadly wound this Serpent from the skies;
That never fear him now, if you be wise:
But pray the Lord, that he his grace would send,
And in his Truth instruct you to the end.
LONDON Printed in Shoe-lane, at the sign of the Faulcon.


