(...) ^^S^^VERIE OF W^^^^^^ IN THE COVNTIE OF LANCASTER.

With the Arraignement and Trial (...) notorious WITCHES, at the Assi^^^
(...) general Jail delivery, holden at the Castle of LANCASTER, upon Monday,
the seventeenth of August last, 1612.

Before Sir JAMES ALTHAM, (...) Sir EDWARD BROMLEY, Knights; BARONS (...) Court
of (...): And Iusti^^^ (...)

Together with the (...) and Trial of IENNET PRESTON, at the Assizes (...) at
the Castle of York^, (...)

Published and set forth by commandment of his (...)

LONDON, (...)

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THOMAS, LORD KNYVET, BARON OF ESCRICK in the County
of York, my very honorable good Lord and Master. AND TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE
AND VIRTUOUS LADY, THE Lady ELIZABETH KNYVET his Wife, my honorable good
Lady and MISTRESS.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
LET it stand (I beseech you) with your favors whom profession of the same
true Religion toward God, and so great love has united together in one,
Jointly to accept the Protection and Patronage of these my labors, which not
their own worth has encouraged, but your Worthiness has enforced me to
consecrate unto your Honors.

To you (Right Honorable my very good Lord) of Right do they belong: for to
whom shall J rather present the first fruits of my learning then to your
Lordship: who nourished then both me and them, when there was scarce any being
to me or them? And whose just and vprght carriage of causes, whose zeal to
Justice and Honorable courtesy to all men, have purchased you a Reverend and
worthy Respect of all men in all parts of this Kingdom, where you are
known. And to your good Ladyship they do of great right belong likewise;
Whose Religion, Justice, and Honorable admittance of my Unworthy Service to
your Ladyship do challenge at my hands the uttermost of what ever J may be
able to perform.

Here is nothing of my own act worthy to be commended to your Honors, it is
the work, of those Reverend Magistrates, His Majesty's Justices of Assizes in
the North parts, and no more then a Particular Declaration of the proceedings
of Justice in those parts. Here shall you behold the Justice of this Land,
truly administered, Proemium and Poenam, Mercy and Judgment, freely and
indifferently bestowed and inflicted; And above all things to be remembered,
the excellent care of these Judges in the Trial of offenders.

It has pleased them out of their respect to me to impose this work upon
me, and according to my understanding, I have taken pains to finish, and now
confirmed by their Judgment to publish the same, for the benefit of my
Country. That the example of these convicted upon their own Examinations,
Confessions, and Evidence at the Bar, may work good in others, Rather by
withholding them from, then imboldening them to, the Atcheiuing such desperate
acts as these or the like.

These are some part of the fruits of my time spent in the Service of my
Country, Since by your Grave and Reverend Counsel (my Good Lord) I reduced my
wavering and wandering thoughts to a more quiet harbor of repose.

If it please your Honors to give them your Honorable respect, the world may
judge them the more worthy of acceptance, to whose various censures they are
now exposed.

God of Heaven whose eyes are on them that fear him, to be their Protector
and guide, behold your Honors with the eye of favor, be evermore your strong
hold, and your great reward, and bless you with blessings in this life,
External and Internal, Temporal and Spiritual, and with Eternal happiness
in the World to come: to which I commend your Honors; And rest both now and
ever,

From my Lodging in Chancerie Lane, the sixteenth of November 1612. Your
Honors humbly devoted Servant, Thomas Potts.

Upon the Arraignement and trial of these Witches at the last Assizes and
General Gaole-deliuerie, holden at Lancaster, we found such apparent matters
against them, that we thought it necessary to publish them to the World, and
thereupon imposed the labor of this Work upon this Gentleman, by reason of
his place, being a Clerk at that time in Court, employed in the Arraignement
and trial of them.

Ja. Altham. Edw. Bromley.

AFter he had taken great pains to finish it, J took upon me to reuise and
correct it, that nothing might pass but matter of Fact, apparent against them
by record. It is very little he has inserted, and that necessary, to show
what their offenses were, what people, and of what condition they were: The
whole proceedings and Evidence against them, J find upon examination carefully
set forth, and truly reported, and judge the work fit and worthy to be
published.

Edward Bromley.

Faults escaped in the Printing.
Page, C 3: M. Banester, for Bannester, brough, for brought. Page, E 2 This
people, for these. Page, H Here they parted, for there. page, K 2 these, for
this hellish. page, S 3 In the Verdict of Life and Death, Not guilty, for
guilty. page, S 3 one Horse or Mare, for one Mare in the Indictment. page
eadem, for the Trial of her life, read for the trial of her offense. page, T
their view, for your view.

Gentle Reader, although the care of this Gentleman the Author, was great to
examine and publish this his work perfect according to the Honorable
testimony of the Judges, yet some faults are committed by me in the Printing,
and yet not many, being a work done in such great haste, at the end of a
Term, which I pray you, with your favor to excuse.



A particular Declaration of the most barberous and damnable Practices.
Murders, wicked and devilish Conspiracies, practiced and executed by the most
dangerous and malicious Witch Elizabeth Sowthernes alias Demdike, of the
Forest of Pendle in the County of Lancaster Widow, who died in the Castle at
Lancaster before she came to receive her trial.
THough public Justice has passed at these Assizes upon the Capital
offenders, and after the Arraignement and trial of them, Judgment being
given, due and timely Execution succeeded; which does import and give the
greatest satisfaction that can be, to all men; yet because upon the caryage,
and event of this business, the Eyes of all the parts of Lancashire, and
other Counties in the North parts thereunto adjoining were bent: And so
infinite a multitude came to the Arraignement and trial of these Witches at
Lancaster, the number of them being known to exceed all others at any time
heretofore, at one time to be indicted, arraigned, and receive their trial,
especially for so many Murders, Conspiracies, Charms, Meetinges, hellish and
damnable practices, so apparent upon their own examinations and confessions.
These my honorable and worthy Lords, the Judges of Assise, upon great
consideration, thought to necessary and profitable, to publish to the whole
world, their most barbarous and damnable practices, with the direct
proceedinges of the Court against them, as well for that there do pass diverse
uncertain reports and relations of such Evidences, as was publicly given
against them at their Arraignement. As for that diverse came to prosecute
against many of them that were not found guilty, and so rest very
discontented, and not satisfied. As also for that it is necessary for men to
know and understand the means whereby they work their mischief, the hidden
mysteries of their devilish and wicked Inchauntmentes, Charms, and Sorceries,
the better to prevent and avoid the danger that may ensue. And lastly, who
were the principal authors and actors in this late woeful and lamentable
Tragedy, wherein so much Blood was spilt.

Therefore I pray you give me leave, (with your patience and favor,) before I
proceed to the Indictment, Arraignement, and Trial of such as were Prisoners
in the Castle, to lay open the life and death of this damnable and malicious
Witch, of so long continuance (old Demdike) of whom our whole business has
such dependence, that without the particular Declaration and Record of her
Evidence, with the circumstaunces, we shall never bring any thing to good
perfection: for from this Sincke of villainy and mischief, have all the rest
proceeded; as you shall have them in order.

She was a very old woman, about the age of Foure-score years, and had been a
Witch for fifty years. She dwelt in the Forest of Pendle, a vaste place,
fit for her profession: What she committed in her time, no man knows.

Thus lived she securely for many years, brought up her own Children,
instructed her Graund-children, and took great care and pains to bring them
to be Witches. She was a general agent for the Devil in all these parts: no
man escaped her, or her Furies, that ever gave them any occasion of offense, or
denied them any thing they stood need of: And certain it is, no man near
them, was secure or free from danger.

But God, who had in his divine providence provided to cut them off, and root
them out of the Commonwealth, so disposed above, that the Justices of those
parts, understanding by a general charm and muttering, the great and
universal resort to Maulking Tower, the common opinion, with the report of
these suspected people, the complaint of the Kings subjects for the loss of
their Children, Friends, Goods, and Cattle, (as there could not be so great
Fire without some Smoke,) sent for some of the Country, and took great
pains to enquire after their proceedinges, and courses of life.

In the end, Roger Nowell Esquire, one of his Majesty's Justices in these
parts, a very religious honest Gentleman, painful in the service of his
Country: whose fame for this great service to his Country, shall live after
him, took upon him to enter into the particular examination of these suspected
persons: And to the honor of God, and the great comfort of all his Country,
made such a discovery of them in order, as the like has not been heard of:
which for your better satisfaction. I have here placed in order against her,
as they are upon Record, amongst the Records of the Crown at Lancaster,
certified by M. Nowell, and others.

The voluntary Confession and Examination of Elizabeth Sowtherns alias
Demdike, taken at the Fence in the Forest of Pendle in the County of
Lancaster. The second day of April, Annoque Regni Regis Iacobi Angliae. etc.
Decimo, et Scotiae Quadragesimo quinto; Before Roger Nowell of Read Esquire,
one of his Majesty's Justices of the peace within the said County. Viz.
THe said Elizabeth Sowtherns confesses, and says; That about twenty years
past, as she was coming homeward from begging, there met her this Examinate
near unto a Stonepit in Gouldshey, in the said Forest of Pendle, a Spirit or
Devil in the shape of a Boy, the one half of his Coat black, and the other
brown, who bade this Examinate stay, saying to her, that if she would give him
her Soul, she should have any thing that she would request. Whereupon this
Examinat demanded his name? and the Spirit answered, his name was Tibb: and so
this Examinate in hope of such gain as was promised by the said Devil or
Tibb, was contented to give her Soul to the said Spirit: And for the space of
five of six years next after, the said Spirit or Devil appeared at sundry
times unto her this Examinate about Daylight Gate, always bidding her stay,
and asking her this Examinate what she would have or do? To whom this
Examinate replied, Nay nothing: for she this Examinate said, she wanted nothing
yet. And so about the end of the said six years, upon a Sabbath day in the
morning, this Examinate having a little Child upon her knee, and she being in a
slumber, the said Spirit appeared unto her in the likeness of a brown Dog,
forcing himself to her knee, to get blood under her left Arm: and she being
without any apparel saving her Smock, the said Devil did get blood under
her left arm. And this Examinate awaking, said, Jesus save my Child; but had
no power, nor could not say, Jesus save her self: whereupon the Brown Dog
vanished out of this Examinats sight: after which, this Examinate was almost
stark madd for the space of eight weeks.

And upon her examination, she further confesses, and says. That a little
before Christmas last, this Examinates Daughter having been to help Richard
Baldwyns Folks at the Mill: This Examinates Daughter did bid her this
Examinate go to the said Baldwyns house, and ask him something for her
helping of his Folks at the Mill, (as aforesaid:) and in this Examinates going
to the said Baldwyns house, and near to the said house, she met with the
said Richard Baldwyn; Which Baldwyn said to this Examinate, and the said Alizon
Device (who at that time led this Examinate, being blind) get out of my
ground Whores and Witches, I will burn the one of you, and hang the other. To
whom this Examinate answered: I care not for thee, hang thy self: Presently
whereupon, at this Examinates going over the next hedge, the said Spirit or
Devil called Tibb, appeared unto this Examinat, and said, Revenge thee of him.
To whom, this Examinate said again to the said Spirit. Revenge thee either of
him, or his. And so the said Spirit vanished out of her sight, and she never
saw him since.

And further this Examinate confesses, and says, that the speediest way to
take a man's life away by VVitchcraft, is to make a Picture of Clay, like unto
the shape of the person whom they mean to kill, and dry it thoroughly: and when
they would have them to be ill in any one place more then an other; then take a
Thorn or Pin, and prick it in that part of the Picture you would so have to
be ill: and when they would have any part of the Body to consume away, then
take that part of the Picture, and burn it. And when they would have the whole
body to consume away, then take the remnant of the said Picture, and burn it:
and so thereupon by that means, the body shall die.

The Confession and Examination of Anne Whittle alias Chattox, being Prisoner
at Lancaster; taken the 19. day of May, Annoque Regni Regis Iacobi Angliae,
Decimo: ac Scotie Quadragesimo quinto; Before William Sands Mayor of the
Borrough town of Lancaster. James Anderton of Clayton, one of his Majesty's
Justices of Peace within the same County, and Thomas Cowell one of his
Majesty's Coroners in the said County of Lancaster. Viz.
FIrst, the said Anne Whittle, alias Chattox, says, that about fourteen
years past she entered, through the wicked persuasions and counsel of
Elizabeth Southerns, alias Demdike, and was seduced to condescent and agree to
become subject unto that devilish abominable profession of Witchcraft: Soon
after which, the Devil appeared unto her in the liknes of a Man, about
midnight, at the house of the said Demdike: and thereupon the said Demdike and
she, went forth of the said house unto him; whereupon the said wicked Spirit
moved this Examinate, that she would become his Subject, and give her Soul
unto him: the which at first, she refused to assent unto; but after, by the
great persuasions made by the said Demdike, she yielded to be at his
commandment and appointment: whereupon the said wicked Spirit then said unto
her, that he must have one part of her body for him to suck upon; the which
she denied then to grant unto him; and withal asked him, what part of her
body he would have for that use; who said, he would have a place of her right
side near to her ribs, for him to suck upon: whereunto she assented.

And she further says, that at the same time, there was a thing in the likeness
of a spotted Bitch, that came with the said Spirit unto the said Demdike, which
then did speak unto her in this Examinates hearing, and said, that she should
have Gould, Silver, and worldly Wealth, at her will. And at the same time she
says, there was victuals, viz. Flesh, Butter, Cheese, Bread, and Drink, and
bid them eat enough. And after their eating, the Devil called Fancy, and
the other Spirit calling himself Tibbe, carried the remnant away: And she
says, that although they did eat, they were never the fuller, nor better for
the same; and that at their said Banquet, the said Spirits gave them light to
see what they did, although they neither had fire nor Candle light; and that
they were both she Spirits, and Devils.

And being further examined how many sundry Persons have been bewitched to
death, and by whom they were so bewitched: She says, that one Robert Nuter,
late of the Greene-head in Pendle, was bewitched by this Examinate, the said
Demdike, and Widow Lomshawe, (late of Burneley) now deceased.

And she further says, that the said Demdike showed her, that she had
bewitched to death, Richard Ashton, Son of Richard Ashton of Downeham Esquire.

The Examination of Alizon Device, of the Forest of Pendle, in the County of
Lancaster Spinster, taken at Read in the said County of Lancaster, the xiij*
day of March, Anno Regni Jacobi Angliae. etc. Nono: et Scotiae xlv. Before
Roger Nowell of Read aforesaid Esquire, one of his Majesty's Justices of the
Peace within the said County, against Elizabeth Sowtherns, alias Demdike her
Graund-mother. Viz.
THe said Alizon Device says, that about two years agon, her Graund-mother
(called Elizabeth Sowtherns, alias old Demdike) did sundry times in going or
walking together as they went begging, persuade and advise this Examinate to
let a Devil or Familiar appear unto her; and that she this Examinate, would
let him suck at some part of her, and she might have, and do what she would.

And she further says, that one John Nutter of the Bulhole in Pendle
aforesaid, had a Cow which was sick, and requested this examinats Grandmother
to amend the said Cow; and her said Graund-mother said she would, and so her
said Graund-mother about ten of the clock in the night, desired this examinate
to lead her forth; which this Examinate did, being then blind: and her
Graund-mother did remain about half an hour forth: and this Examinates
sister did fetch her in again; but what she did when she was so forth, this
Examinate cannot tell. But the next morning this Examinate heard that the said
Cow was dead. And this Examinate verily thinks, that her said Graund-mother
did bewitch the said Cow to death.

And further, this Examinate says, that about two years agon, this Examinate
having gotten a Piggin full of blew Milk by begging, brought it into the house
of her Graund-mother, where (this Examinate going forth presently, and staying
about half an hour) there was Butter to the quantity of a quarterne of a
pound in the said milk, and the quantity of the said milk still remaining;
and her Graund-mother had no Butter in the house when this Examinate went
forth: duering which time, this Examinates Graund-mother still lay in her bed.

And further this Examinate says, that Richord Baldwin of Weethead within the
Forest of Pendle, about 2. years ago, fell out with this Examinates
Graund-mother, and so would not let her come upon his Land: and about four or
five days then next after, her said Graund-mother did request this Examinate
to lead her forth about ten of the clock in the night: which this Examinate
accordingly did, and she stayed forth then about an hour, and this Examinates
sister fetched her in again. And this Examinate heard the next morning, that a
woman Child of the said Richard Baldwins was fallen sick; and as this
Examinate did then hear, the said Child did languish afterward by the space
of a year, or thereaboutes, and dyed: And this Examinate verily thinks, that
her said Graund-mother did bewitch the said Child to death.

And further, this Examinate says, that she heard her said Graund-mother say
presently after her falling out with the said Baldwin, she would pray for the
said Baldwin both still and loud: and this Examinate heard her curse the said
Baldwin sundry times.

The Examination of James Device of the Forest of Pendle, in the County of
Lancaster Labourer, taken the 27. day of April, Annoque Regni Regis Iacobi,
Anglia, etc. Decimo: ac Scotie Quadragesimo quinto: Before Roger Nowell, and
Nicholas Banister Esquire, two of his Majesty's Justices of Peace within the said
County.
THE said Examinate James Device says, that about a month ago, as this
Examinate was coming toward his Mothers house, and at day-gate of the same
night, Evening.
this Examinate met a brown Dog coming from his Graund-mothers house,
about ten Roodes distant from the same house: and about two or three nights
after, that this Examinate heard a voice of a great number of Children
screiking and crying pitifully, about daylight gate; and likewise, about ten
Roodes distant of this Examinates said Graund-mothers house. And about five
nights then next following, presently after daylight, within 20. Roodes of the
said Elizabeth Sowtherns house, he heard a foul yelling like unto a great
number of Cattes: but what they were, this Examinate cannot tell. And he
further says, that about three nights after that, about midnight of the same,
there came a thing, and lay upon him very heavily about an hour, and went then
from him out of his Chamber window, colored black, and about the bigness of
a Hare or Catte. And he further says, that about S. Peter's day last, one Henry
Bullock came to the said Elizabeth Sowtherns house, and said, that her
Graund-child Alizon Device, had bewitched a Child of his, and desired her that
she would go with him to his house; which accordingly she did: And thereupon
she the said Alizon fell down on her knees, and asked the said Bullock
forgiveness, and confessed to him, that she had bewitched the said child, as
this Examinate heard his said sister confess unto him this Examinate.

The Examination of Elizabeth Device, Daughter of old Demdike, taken at Read
before Roger Nowell Esquire, one of his Majesty's Justices of Peace within the
County of Lancaster the xxx. day of March, Annoque Regni Jacobi Decimo, ac
Scotie xlv.
THe said Elizabeth Device the Examinate, says, that the said Elizabeth
Sowtherns, alias Demdike, has had a place on her left side by the space of
forty years, in such sort, as was to be seen at this Examinates Examination
taking, at this present time.

Here this worthy Justice M. Nowell, out of these particular Examinations, or
rather Accusations, finding matter to proceed; and having now before him old
Demdike, old Chattox, Alizon Device, and Redferne both old and young, Reos
confitentes, et Accusantes Inuicem. About the second of April last past,
committed and sent them away to the Castle at Lancaster, there to remain
until the coming of the Kings Majesty's Justices of Assise, then to receive
their trial.

But here they had not stayed a week, when their Children and Friends being
abroad at liberty, labored a special meeting at Malking Tower in the Forest
of Pendle, upon Good-fryday, within a week after they were, committed, of all
the most dangerous, wicked, and damnable Witches in the County far and near.
Upon Good-fryday they met, according to solemn appointment, solemnized this
great Feastiuall day according to their former order, with great cheer,
merry-company, and much conference.

In the end, in this great Assembly, it was decreed M. Couell by reason of his
Office, shall be slain before the next Assizes: The Castle of Lancaster to be
blown up, and aid and assistance to be sent to kill M. Lister, with his old
Enemy and wicked Neighbor Iennet Preston; with some other such like
practices: as upon their Arraignement and Trial, are particularly set forth,
and given in evidence against them.

This was not so secret, but some notice of it came to M. Nowell, and by his
great pains taken in the Examination of Iennet Device, al their practices are
now made known. Their purpose to kill M. Couell, and blow up the Castle, is
prevented. All their Murders, Witchcraftes, Inchauntments, Charms, and
Sorceries, are discovered; and even in the midst of their Consultations, they
are all confounded, and arrested by Gods Justice: brough before M. Nowell, and
M. Bauester, upon their voluntary confessions, Examinations, and other Evidence
accused, and so by them committed to the Castle: So as now both old and young,
have taken up their lodgings with M. Couell, until the next Assizes, expecting
their Trial and deliverance, according to the Laws provided for such like.

In the mean time, M. Nowell having knowledge by this discovery of their
meeting at Malkeing Tower, and their resolution to execute mischief, takes
great pains to apprehend such as were at liberty, and prepared Evidence
against all such as were in question for Witches.

Afterward sendes some of these Examinations, to the Assizes at York, to be
given in Evidence against Iennet Preston, who for the murder of M. Lister, is
condemned and executed.

The Circuit of the North parts being now almost ended.

The 16. of August.
Upon Sunday in the after noone, my honorable Lords the Judges of Assise, came
from Kendall to Lancaster.

Whereupon M. Couell presented unto their Lordships a Calender, containing the
Names of the Prisoners committed to his charge, which were to receive their
Trial at the Assizes: Out of which, we are only to deal with the proceedings
against Witches, which were as follows. Viz.

The Names of the Witches committed to the Castle of Lancaster.
Elizabeth Sowtherns. alias Old Demdike. Who dyed before she came to her
trial. Anne Whittle, alias Chattox, Elizabeth Device, Daughter of old Demdike.
James Device, Son of Elizabeth Device. Anne Readfearne, Daughter of Anne
Chattox. Alice Nutter. Katherine Hewytte. John Bulcocke. Iaue Bulcocke. Alizon
Device, Daughter of Elizabeth Device. Isabell Robey. Margaret Pearson.
The Witches of Salmesbury.
Iennet Bierley. Elen Bierley. Jane Southworth. John Ramesden. Elizabeth
Astley. Alice Gray. Isabell Sidegraues. Lawrence Hay.
The next day, being Monday, the 17. of August, were the Assizes holden in the
Castle of Lancaster, as follows.

PLACITA CORONE, (...) Lancasterium.
DEliberatio Gaolae Domini Regis Castri sui Lancastrii ac Prisonarioru^ in
eadem existent. Tenta apud Lancasterium in com. Lancasterij. Die Lunae, Decimo
septimo die Augusti, Anno Regni Domini nostri Iacobi dei gratia Angliae,
Franciae, et Hiberniae, Regis fidei defensoris; Decimo: et Scotiae Quadragesimo
sexto; Coram Iacobo Altham Milit. vno Baronum Scaccarij Domini Regis, et
Edwardo Bromley Milit. altero Barono, eiusdem Scaccarij Domini Regis: ac
Justice, Domini Regis apud Lancastr.

Upon the Tewesday in the after noone, the Judges according to the course and
order, divided them selves, whereupon my Lord Bromley, one of his Maiestices
Judges of Assise coming into the Hall to proceed with the Pleaes of the
Crown, and the Arraignement and Trial of Prisoners, commanded a general
Proclamation, that all Justices of Peace that had taken any Recognisaunces, or
Examinations of Prisoners, should make Return of them: And all such as were
bound to prosecute Indictmentes, and give Evidence against Witches, should
proceed, and give attendance: For he now intended to proceed to the
Arraignement and Trial of Witches.

After which, the Court being set, M. Sherieffe was commanded to present his
Prisoners before his Lordship, and prepare a sufficient Jury of Gentlemen for
life and death. But here we want old Demdike, who dyed in the Castle before
she came to her Trial.

Here you may not expect the exact order of the Assizes, with the
Proclamations, and other solemnities belonging to so great a Court of Justice*
but the proceedinges against the Witches, who are now upon their deliverance
here in order as they came to the Bar, with the particular points of
Evidence against them: which is the labor and work we now intend (by Gods
grace) to perform as we may, to your general contentment.

Whereupon, the first of all these, Anne Whittle, alias Chattox, was brought to
the Bar: against whom we are now ready to proceed.

The Arraignement and Trial of Anne Whittle, alias Chattox, of the Forest of
Pendle, in the County of Lancaster, Widow; about the age of Fourscore
years, or thereaboutes.
Anne Whittle, alias Chattox.
IF in this damnable course of life, and offenses, more horrible and odious,
then any man is able to express: any man living could lament the estate of any
such like upon earth: The example of this poor creature, would have moved
pity, in respect of her great contrition and repentance, after she was
committed to the Castle at Lancaster, until the coming of his Majesty's
Judges of Assise. But such was the nature of her offenses, and the multitude of
her crying sins, as it took away all sense of humanity. And the repetition
of her hellish practices, and Revenge; being the chiefest things wherein she
always took great delight, together with a particular declaration of the
Murders she had committed, laid open to the world, and given in Evidence
against her at the time of her Arraignement and Trial; as certainly it did
beget contempt in the Audience, and such as she never offended.

This Anne Whittle, alias Chattox, was a very old withered spent and decreped
creature, her sight almost gone: A dangerous Witch, of very long continuance;
always opposite to old Demdike: For whom the one favored, Her own examination
the other hated deadly: and how they envy and accuse one an other, in their
Examinations, may appear.

In her Witchcraft, always more ready to do mischief to men's goods, then
themselves. Her lips ever chattering and walking: but no man knew what. She
lived in the Forest of Pendle, amongst this wicked company of dangerous
Witches. Yet in her Examination and Confession, she dealt always very plainly
and truly: for upon a special occasion being oftentimes examined in open
Court, she was never found to vary, but always to agree in one, and the self
same thing.

I place her in order, next to that wicked firebrand of mischief, old
Demdike, because from these two, sprung all the rest in order: and were the
Children and Friends, of these two notorious Witches.

Many things in the discovery of them, shall be very worthy your observation.
As the times and occasions to execute their mischief. And this in general:
the Spirit could never hurt, till they gave consent.

And, but that it is my charge, to set forth a particular Declaration of the
Evidence against them, upon their Arraignement and Trial; with their Devilish
practices, consultations, meetings, and murders committed by them, in such
sort, as they were given in Evidence against them* for the which, I shall have
matter upon Record. I could make a large Comentarie of them: But it is my
humble duty, to observe the Charge and Commandment of these my Honorable
good Lords the Judges of Assise, and not to exceed the limits of my
Commission. Wherefore I shall now bring this ancient Witch, to the due course
of her Trial, in order. viz.

Indictment.
THis Anne Whittle, alias Chattox, of the Forest of Pendle in the County of
Lancaster Widow, being Indicted, for that she feloniously had practiced,
used, and exercised diverse wicked and devilish Arts called Witchcraftes,
Inchauntmentes, Charms, and Sorceries, in and upon one Robert Nutter of
Greenehead, in the Forest of Pendle, in the County of Lanc: and by force of
the same Witchcraft, feloniously the said Robert Nutter had killed, Contra
Pacem, etc. Being at the Bar, was arraigned.

To this Indictment, upon her Arraignement, she pleaded, Not guilty: and for
the trial of her life, put her self upon God and her Country.

Whereupon my Lord Bromley commanded M. Sheriff of the County of Lancaster in
open Court, to return a Jury of worthy sufficient Gentlemen of understanding,
to pass between our sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty, and her, and others
the Prisoners, upon their lives and deaths; as hereafter follow in order: who
were afterward sworn, according to the form and order of the Court, the
Prisoners being admitted to their lawfully challenges.

Which being done, and the Prisoner at the Bar ready to receive her Trial:
M. Nowell, being the best instructed of any man, of all the particular points
of Evidence against her, and her fellows, having taken great pains in the
proceedinges against her and her fellows; Humbly prayed, her own voluntary
Confession and Examination taken before him, when she was apprehended and
committed to the Castle of Lancaster for Witchcraft; might openly be published
against her: which hereafter follows. Viz.

The voluntary Confession and Examination of Anne Whittle, alias Chattox, taken
at the Fence in the Forest of Pendle, in the County of Lancaster; Before
Roger Nowell Esquire, one of the Kings Majesty's Justices of Peace in the County
of Lancaster. Viz.
THe said Anne Whittle, alias Chattox, upon her Examination, voluntarily
confesses, and says, That about fourteen or fifteen years ago, a thing
like a Christian man for four years together, did sundry times come to this
Examinate, and requested this Examinate to give him her Soul: And in the end,
this Examinate was contented to give him her said Soul, she being then in her
own house, in the Forest of Pendle; whereupon the Devil then in the shape of
a Man, said to this Examinate: Thou shall want nothing; and be revenged of whom
thou list. And the Devil then further commanded this Examinate, to call him
by the name of Fancy; and when she wanted any thing, or would be revenged of
any, call on Fancy, and he would be ready. And the said Spirit or Devil, did
appear unto her not long after, in man's likeness, and would have had this
Examinate to have consented, that he might hurt the wife of Richard Baldwin of
Pendle; But this Examinate would not then consent unto him: For which cause,
the said Devil would then have bitten her by the arm; and so vanished away,
for that time.

And this Examinate further says; that Robert Nutter did desire her Daughter
one Redfearns wife, to have his pleasure of her, being then in Redfearns house:
but the said Redfearns wife denied the said Robert; whereupon the said Robert
seeming to be greatly displeased therewith, in a great anger took his Horse,
and went away, saying in a great rage, that if ever the Ground came to him,
she should never dwell upon his Land. Whereupon this Examinate called Fancy
to her; who came to her in the likeness of a Man in a parcel of Ground
called, The Laund; asking this Examinate, what she would have him to do? And
this Examinate bade him go revenge her of the said Robert Nutter. After which
time, the said Robert Nutter lived about a quarter of a year, and then dyed.

And this Examinate further says, that Elizabeth Nutter, wife to old Robert
Nutter, did request this Examinate, and Loomeshaws wife of Burley, and one Jane
Boothman, of the same, who are now both dead, (which time of request, was
before that Robert Nutter desired the company of Redfearns wife) to get young
Robert Nutter his death, if they could; all being together then at that time,
to that end, that if Robert were dead, then the Women their Coosens might have
the Land: By whose persuasion, they all consented unto it. After which time,
this Examinates Son in law Thomas Redfearne, did persuade this Examinate, not
to kill or hurt the said Robert Nutter; for which persuasion, the said
Loomeshaws Wife, had like to have killed the said Redfearne, but that one M.
Baldwyn (the late Schoole-maister at Coulne) did by his learning, stay the said
Loomeshaws wife, and therefore had a Capon from Redfearne.

And this Examinate further says, that she thinks the said Loomeshaws wife,
and lane Boothman, did what they could to kill the said Robert Nutter, as well
as this Examinate did.

The Examination of ELIZABETH SOTHERNES, alias OLD DEMBDIKE: taken at the Fence
in the Forest of Pendle in the County of Lancaster, the day and year
aforesaid.
Before, ROGER NOWEL Esquire, one of the Kings Majesty's Justices of Peace in
the said County, against ANNE WHITTLE, alias CHATTOX.
THe said Elizabeth Southernes says upon her Examination, that about half a
year before Robert Nutter died, as this Examinate thinks, this Examinate
went to the house of Thomas Redfearne, which was about Mid-sommer, as this
Examinate remembers it. And there within three yards of the East end of the
said house, she saw the said Anne Whittle, alias Chattox, and Anne Redferne
wife of the said Thomas Redferne, and Daughter of the said Anne Whittle, alias
Chattox: the one on the one side of the Ditch, and the other on the other: and
two Pictures of Clay or Marle lying by them: and the third Picture the said
Anne Whittle, alias Chattox, was making: and the said Anne Redferne her said
Daughter, wrought her Clay or Marle to make the third picture withal. And this
Examinate passing by them, the said Spirit, called Tibb, in the shape of a
black Cat, appeared unto her this Examinate, and said, turn back again, and
do as they do: To whom this Examinate said, what are they doing? whereunto
the said Spirit said; they are making three Pictures: whereupon she asked whose
pictures they were? whereunto the said Spirit said; they are the pictures of
Christopher Nutter, Robert Nutter, and Marie, wife of the said Robert Nutter:
But this Examinate denying to go back to help them to make the Pictures
aforesaid; the said Spirit seeming to be angry, therefore shoue or pushed this
Examinate into the ditch, and so shed the Milk which this Examinate had in a
Can or Kit: and so thereupon the Spirit at that time vanished out of this
Examinates sight: But presently after that, the said Spirit appeared to this
Examinate again in the shape of a Hare, and so went with her about a quarter
of a mile, but said nothing to this Examinate, nor she to it.

The Examination and evidence of JAMES ROBINSON, taken the day and year
aforesaid. Before ROGER NOWEL Esquire aforesaid, against ANNE WHITTLE, alias
CHATTOX, Prisoner at the Bar as follows. viz.
THe said Examinate says, that about six years ago, Anne Whittle, alias
Chattox, was hired by this Examinates wife to card wool; and so upon a Friday
and Saturday, she came and carded wool with this Examinates wife, and so the
Monday then next after she came likewise to card: and this Examinates wife
having newly tunned drink into Stands, which stood by the said Anne Whittle,
alias Chattox: and the said Anne Whittle taking a Dish or Cup, and drawing
drink several times: and so never after that time, for some eight or nine
weeks, they could have any drink, but spoiled, and as this Examinate thinks
was by the means of the said Chattox. And further he says, that the said Anne
Whittle, alias Chattox, and Anne Redferne her said Daughter, are commonly
reputed and reported to be Witches. And he also says, that about some
eighteen years ago, he dwelled with one Robert Nutter the elder, of Pendle
aforesaid. And that young Robert Nutter, who dwelled with his Grandfather, in
the Summer time, he fell sick, and in his said sickness he did several
times complain, that he had harm by them: and this Examinate asking him what
he meant by that word Them, He said, that he verily thought that the said Anne
Whittle, alias Chattox, and the said Redfernes wife, had bewitched him: and the
said Robert Nutter shortly after, being to go with his then Master, called Sir
Richard Shattleworth, into Wales, this Examinate heard him say before his then
going, unto the said Thomas Redferne, that if ever he came again he would get
his Father to put the said Redferne out of his house, or he himself would pull
it down; to whom the said Redferne replied, saying; when you come back again
you will be in a better mind: but he never came back again, but died before
Candlemas in Cheshire, as he was coming homeward.

Since the voluntary confession and examination of a Witch, does exceed all
other evidence, I spare to trouble you with a multitude of Examinations, or
Depositions of any other witnesses, by reason this bloody fact, for the Murder
of Robert Nutter, upon so small an occasion, as to threaten to take away his
own land from such as were not worthy to inhabit or dwell upon it, is now
made by that which you have already heard, so apparent, as no indifferent man
will question it, or rest unsatisfied: I shall now proceed to set forth unto
you the rest of her actions, remaining upon Record. And how dangerous it was
for any man to live near this people, to give them any occasion of offense, I
leave it to your good consideration.

The Examination and voluntary Confession of ANNE WHITTLE, alias CHATTOX,
taken at the Fence in the Forest of Pendle, in the County of Lancaster, the
second day of April, Anno Regni Regis IACOBI Angliae, Franciae, and Hiberniae,
decimo, and Scotiae xlv. Before ROGER NOVVEL, Esquire, one of his Majesty's
Justices of Peace within the County of Lancaster.
SHe the said Examinate says, That she was sent for by the wife of John
Moore, to help drink that was forspoken or bewitched: at which time she used
this Prayer for the amending of it, viz.

A Charm.
Three Biters have thou bitten,
The Heart, ill Eye, ill Tongue:
Three bitter shall be thy Boot,
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost
a Gods name.
Five Pater-nosters, five Auies,
and a Creed,
In worship of five wounds
of our Lord.
After which time that this Examinate had used these prayers, and amended her
drink, the said Moeres wife did chide this Examinate, and was grieved at her.

And thereupon this Examinate called for her Devil Fancy, and bad him go
bite a brown Cow of the said Moors by the head, and make the Cow go mad:
and the Devil then, in the likeness of a brown Dog, went to the said Cow,
and bit her: which Cow went mad accordingly, and died within six weeks next
after, or thereabouts.

Also this Examinate says, That she perceiving Anthony Nutter of Pendle to
favor Elizabeth Sothernes, alias Dembdike, she, this Examinate, called Fancy
to her, (who appeared like a man) and bad him go kill a Cow of the said
Anthonies; which the said Devil did, and that Cow died also.

And further this Examinate says, That the Devil, or Fancy, has taken most
of her sight away from her. And further this Examinate says, That in Summer
last, save one, the said Devil, or Fancy, came upon this Examinate in the
night time: and at diverse and sundry times in the likeness of a Bear, gaping
as though he would have wearied this Examinate. And the last time of all she,
this Examinate, saw him, was upon Thursday last year but one, next before
Midsummer day, in the evening, like a Bear, and this Examinate would not then
speak unto him, for the which the said Devil pulled this Examinate down.

The Examination of JAMES DEVICE, son of ELIZABETH DEVICE, taken the seven
and twentieth day of April, Annoque Reg. Regis IACOBI Angliae, etc. Decimo ac
Scotiae xlv. Before ROGER NOVVEL and NICHOLAS BANISTER, Esquires, two of his
Majesty's Justices of the Peace within the said County. viz.
ANd further says, That twelve years ago, the said Anne Chattox at a Burial
at the new Church in Pendle, did take three scalpes of people, which had been
buried, and then cast out of a grave, as she the said Chattox told this
Examinate; and took eight teeth out of the said Scalpes, whereof she kept
four to her self, and gave other four to the said Demdike, this Examinates
Grandmother: which foureteeth now showed to this Examinate, are the foureteeth
that the said Chattox gave to his said Grandmother, as aforesaid; which said
teeth have ever since been kept, until now found by the said Henry Hargreiues
and this Examinate, at the West End of this Examinates Grand-mothers house, and
there buried in the earth, and a Picture of Clay there likewise found by them,
about half a yard over in the earth, where the said teeth lay, which said
picture so found, was almost withered away, and was the Picture of Anne,
Anthony Nutters daughter; as this Examinates Grandmother told him.

The Examination of ALLIZON DEVICE daughter of ELIZABETH DEVICE: Taken at
Read, in the County of Lancaster, the thirtieth day of March, Annoque Reg.
Regis IACOBI nunc Angliae, etc. Decimo, and Scotiae Quadragesimo quinto. Before
ROGER NOVVEL of Read aforesaid, Esquire, one of his Majesty's Justices of the
Peace, within the said County.
THis Examinate says, That about eleven years ago, this Examinate and her
mother had their firehouse broken, and all, or the most part of their linen
clothes and half a peck of cut oat-meale, and a quantity of meal gone, all
which was worth twenty shillings or above: and upon a Sunday then next after,
this Examinate did take a band and a coife, parcel of the goods aforesaid,
upon the daughter of Anne Whittle, alias Chattox, and claimed them to be
parcel of the goods stolen, as aforesaid.

And this Examinate further says, That her father, called John Device, being
afraid, that the said Anne Chattox should do him or his goods any hurt by
Witchcraft; did covenant with the said Anne, that if she would hurt neither of
them, she should yearly have one Aghen-dole of meal; which meal was yearly
paid, until the year which her father died in, which was about eleven years
since: Her father upon his then-death-bed, taking it that the said Anne
Whittle, alias Chattox, did bewitch him to death, because the said meal was
not paid the last year.

And she also says, That about two years agone, this Examinate being in the
house of Anthony Nutter of Pendle aforesaid, and being then in company with
Anne Nutter, daughter of the said Anthony: the said Anne Whittle, alias
Chattox, came into the said Anthony Nutters house, and seeing this Examinate,
and the said Anne Nutter laughing and saying, that they laughed at her the said
Chattox: well said then (says Anne Chattox) I will be meet with the one of
you. And upon the next day after she the said Anne Nutter fell sick and within
three weeks after died. And further, this Examinate says, That about two
years ago, she, this Examinate, has heard, That the said Anne Whittle, alias
Chattox, was suspected for bewitching the drink of John Moore of Higham
Gentleman: and not long after, she this Examinate heard the said Chattox say,
that she would meet with the said John Moore, or his. Whereupon a child of the
said John Moors, called John, fell sick, and languished about half a year,
and then died; during which languishing, this Examinate saw the said Chattox
sitting in her own garden, and a picture of Clay like unto a child in her
Apron; which this Examinate espying, the said Anne Chattox would have hid
with her Apron: and this Examinate declaring the same to her mother, her mother
thought it was the picture of the said John Moors child.

And she this Examinate further says, That about six or seven years ago,
the said Chattox did fall out with one Hugh Moore of Pendle, as aforesaid,
about certain cattle of the said Moors, which the said Moore did charge the
said Chattox to have bewitched: for which the said Chattox did curse and worry
the said Moore, and said she would be Revenged of the said Moore: whereupon the
said Moore presently fell sick, and languished about half a year, and then
died. Which Moore upon his deathbed said, that the said Chattox had bewitched
him to death. And she further says, That about six years ago, a daughter of
the said Anne Chattox, called Elizabeth, having been at the house of John
Nutter of the Bull-hole, to beg or get a dish full of milk, which she had,
and brought to her mother, who was about a fields breadth of the said Nutters
house, which her said mother Anne Chattox took and put into a Kan; and did
charne the same with two sticks acrosse in the same field: whereupon the said
John Nutters son came unto her, the said Chattox, and misliking her doings,
put the said Kan and milk over with his foot; and the morning next after, a
Cow of the said John Nutters fell sick, and so languished three or four
days, and then died.

In the end being openly charged with all this in open Court; with weeping
tears she humbly acknowledged them to be true, and cried out unto God for
Mercy and forgiveness of her sins, and humbly prayed my Lord to be merciful
unto Anne Redfearne her daughter, of whose life and condition you shall hear
more upon her Arraignement and Trial: whereupon she being taken away,
Elizabeth Device comes now to receive her Trial being the next in order, of
whom you shall hear at large.

THE ARRAIGNMENT and Trial of ELIZABETH DEVICE ( Daughter of ELIZABETH
SOTHERNES, alias OLD DEMBDIKE) late wife of Io. DEVICE, of the Forest of
Pendle, in the County of Lancaster, widow, for Witchcraft; Upon Tuesday the
eighteenth of August, at the Assizes and general Gaole-Deliuerie holden at
Lancaster Before Sir EDWARD BROMLEY Knight, one of his Majesty's Justices of
Assise at Lancaster.
Elizabeth Device*
O Barbarous and inhumane Monster, beyond example; so far from sensible
understanding of thy own misery, as to bring thy own natural children into
mischief and bondage; and thy self to be a witness upon the Gallows, to see
thy own children, by thy deuillish instructions hatched up in Villainy and
Witchcraft, to suffer with thee, even in the beginning of their time, a
shameful and untimely Death. Too much (so it be true) cannot be said or
written of her. Such was her life and condition: that even at the Bar, when
she came to receive her Trial (where the least spark of Grace or modesty
would have procured favor, or moved pity) she was not able to contain her
self within the limits of any order or government: but exclaiming, in very
outrageous manner crying out against her own children, and such as came to
prosecute Indictments and Evidence for the Kings Majesty against her, for the
death of their Children, Friends, and Kinsfolks, whom cruelly and bloudily,
by her Enchauntments, Charms, and Sorceries she had murdered and cut off;
sparing no man with fearful execrable curses and banning: Such in general
was the common opinion of the Country where she dwelt, in the Forest of
Pendle (a place fit for people of such condition) that no man near her,
neither his wife, children, goods, or cattle should be secure or free from
danger.

This Elizabeth Device was the daughter of Elizabeth Sothernes, old Dembdike, a
malicious, wicked, and dangerous Witch for fifty years, as appears by
Record: and how much longer, the Devil and she knew best, with whom she
made her covenant.

It is very certain, that amongst all these Witches there was not a more
dangerous and deuillish Witch to execute mischief, having old Dembdike* her
mother, to assist her; James Device and Alizon Device, her own natural
children, all provided with Spirits, upon any occasion of offense ready to
assist her.

Upon her Examination* although Master Nowel was very circumspect, and
exceeding careful in dealing with her, yet she would confess nothing, until
it pleased God to raise up a young maid Iennet Device, her own daughter, about
the age of nine years (a witness unexpected) to discover all their Practices,
Meetings, Consultations, Murders, Charms, and Villainies: such, and in such
sort, as I may justly say of them, as a reverend and learned Judge of this
Kingdom speaks of the greatest Treason that ever was in this Kingdom, Quis
haec posteris sic narrare poterit, vt facta non ficta esse videantur? That when
these things shall be related to Posterity, they will be reputed matters
fained, not done.

And then knowing, that both Iennet Device, her daughter, James Device, her
son, and Alizon Device, with others, had accused her and laid open all
things, in their Examinations taken before Master Nowel, and although she were
their own natural mother, yet they did not spare to accuse her of every
particular fact, which in her time she had committed, to their knowledge; she
made a very liberal and voluntary Confession, as hereafter shall be given in
evidence against her, upon her Arraignment and Trial.

This Elizabeth Device being at liberty, after Old Dembdike her mother, Alizon
Device, her daughter, and old Chattocks were committed to the Castle of
Lancaster for Witchcraft; labored not a little to procure a solemn meeting at
Malkyn-Tower of the Graund Witches of the Counties of Lancaster and York,
being yet unsuspected and untaken, to consult of some speedy course for the
deliverance of their friends, the Witches at Lancaster, and for the putting in
execution of some other deuillish practices of Murder and Mischief: as upon
the Arraignement and Trial of James Device, her son, shall hereafter in
every particular point appear at large against her.

The first Indictment.
THis Elizabeth Device, late the wife of John Device, of the Forest of Pendle,
in the County of Lancaster Widow, being indicted, for that thee felloniously
had practiced, used, and exercised diverse wicked and deuillish Arts, called
Witch-crafts, Enchantments, Charms, and Sorceries, in, and upon one John
Robinson, alias Swyer: and by force of the same felloniously, the said John
Robinson, alias Swyer, had killed. Contra pacem, and. being at the Bar was
arraigned.

2. Indictment.
The said Elizabeth Device was the second time indicted in the same manner and
form, for the death of James Robinson, by Witchcraft. Contra pacem, etc.

3. Indictment.
The said Elizabeth Device, was the third time with others, viz. Alice Nutter,
and Elizabeth Sothernes, alias Old-Dembdike, her Grandmother, Indicted in the
same manner and form, for the death of Henry Mytton. Contra pacem, etc.

To these three several Indictments upon her Arraignement, she pleaded not
guilty; and for the trial of her life, put her self upon God and her
Country.

So as now the Gentlemen of the Jury of life and death, stand charged to
find, whether she be guilty of them, or any of them.

Whereupon there was openly read, and given in evidence against her, for the
Kings Majesty, her own voluntary Confession and Examination, when she was
apprehended, taken, and committed to the Castle of Lancaster by M. Nowel, and
M. Bannester, two of his Majesty's Justices of Peace in the same County. viz.

The Examination and voluntary confession of ELIZABETH DEVICE, taken at the
house of JAMES WILSEY of the Forest of Pendle, in the County of Lancaster,
the seven and twentieth day of April: Anno Reg. IACOBI, Angl. etc. decimo, and
Scotiae xlv. Before ROGER NOWEL, and NICHOLAS BANNESTER, Esquires; two of his
Majesty's Justices of the Peace within the same County. viz. The said
Elizabeth Device, Mother of the said James, being examined, confesses and
says.
THat at the third time her Spirit, the Spirit Ball, appeared to her in the
shape of a brown Dog, at, or in her Mothers house in Pendle Forest
aforesaid: about four years ago the said Spirit bid this Examinate make a
picture of Clay after the said John Robinson, alias Swyer, which this Examinate
did make accordingly at the West end of her said Mothers house, and dried the
same picture with the fire and crumbled all the same picture away within a
week or thereabouts, and about a week after the Picture was crumbled or
mulled away; the said Robinson dyed.

The reason wherefore she this Examinate did so bewitch the said Robinson to
death, was: for that the said Robinson had chidden and becalled this Examinate,
for having a Bastard child with one Seller.

And this Examinate further says and confesses, that she did bewitch the
said James Robinson to death, as in the said Iennet Device her examination is
confessed.

And further she says, and confesses, that she with the wife of Richard
Nutter, and this Examinates said Mother, joined altogether, and did bewitch the
said Henry Mytton to death.

The Examination and Evidence of IENNET DEVICE, Daughter of the said ELIZABETH
DEVICE, late Wife of JOHN DEVICE, of the Forest of Pendle, in the County of
Lancaster. Against ELIZABETH DEVICE her Mother, Prisoner at the Bar upon her
Arraignement and Trial. viz.
THe said Iennet Device, being a young Maid, about the age of nine years, and
commanded to stand up to give evidence against her Mother, Prisoner at the
Bar: Her Mother, according to her accustomed manner, outragiously cursing,
cried out against the child in such fearful manner, as all the Court did not
a little wonder at her, and so amazed the child, as with weeping tears she
cried out unto my Lord the Judge, and told him, she was not able to speak in
the presence of her Mother.

This odious Witch was branded with a preposterous mark in Nature, even from
her birth, which was her left eye, standing lower then the other; the one
looking down, the other looking up, so strangely deformed, as the best that
were present in that Honorable Assembly, and great Audience, did affirm, they
had not often seen the like.

No entreaty, promise of favor, or other respect, could put her to silence,
thinking by this her outrageous cursing and threatening of the child, to enforce
her to deny that which she had formerly confessed against her Mother, before
M. Nowel: Forswearing and denying her own voluntary confession, which you
have heard, given in evidence against her at large, and so for want of further
evidence to escape that, which the Justice of the Law had provided as a
condign punishment for the innocent blood she had spilt, and her wicked and
deuillish course of life.

In the end, when no means would serve, his Lordship commanded the Prisoner to
be taken away, and the Maid to be set upon the Table in the presence of the
whole Court, who delivered her evidence in that Honorable assembly, to the
Gentlemen of the Jury of life and death, as follows. viz.

Iennet Device, Daughter of Elizabeth Device, late Wife of John Device, of the
Forest of Pendle aforesaid Widow, confesses and says, that her said Mother
is a Witch, and that this she knows to be true; for, that she has seen
her Spirit sundry times come unto her said Mother in her own house, called
Malking-Tower, in the likeness of a brown Dog, which she called Ball; and
at one time amongst others, the said Ball did ask this Examinates Mother what
she would have him to do: and this Examinates Mother answered, that she would
have the said Ball to help her to kill John Robinson of Barley, alias Swyre:
by help of which said Ball, the said Swyer was killed by witchcraft
accordingly; and that this Examinates Mother has continued a Witch for these
three or four years last past. And further, this Examinate confesses, that
about a year after, this Examinates Mother called for the said Ball, who
appeared as aforesaid, asking this Examinates Mother what she would have done,
who said, that she would have him to kill James Robinson, alias Swyer, of
Barlow aforesaid, Brother to the said John: whereunto Ball answered, he would
do it; and about three weeks after, the said James dyed.

And this Examinate also says, that one other time she was present, when her
said Mother did call for the said Ball, Her Spirit.
who appeared in manner as aforesaid, and asked this Examinates Mother what
she would have him to do, whereunto this Examinates Mother then said she
would have him to kill one Mitton of the Rough-Lee, whereupon the said Ball
said, he would do it, and so vanished away, and about three weeks after, the
said Mitton likewise dyed.

The Examination of JAMES DEVICE, son of the said ELIZABETH DEVICE: Taken the
seven and twentieth day of of April, Annoque Reg. Regis IACOBI Angliae, etc.
Decimo as Scociae, xlv. Before ROGER NOVVEL and NICHOLAS BANESTER, Esquires,
two of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace, within the said County. viz.
THe said James Device being examined, says, That he heard his Grandmother
say, about a year ago, That his mother, called Elizabeth Device, and others,
had killed one Henry Mitton of the Rough-Lee aforesaid, by Witchcraft. The
reason wherefore he was so killed, was for that this Examinates said
Grandmother Old Demdike, had asked the said Mitton a penny; and he denying her
thereof, thereupon she procured his death, as aforesaid.

And he, this Examinate also says, That about three years ago, this Examinate
being in his Grand-mothers house, with his said mother; there came a thing in
shape of a brown dog, which his mother called Ball, who spoke to this
Examinates mother, in the sight and hearing of this Examinates, and bad her
make a Picture of Clay like unto John Robinson, alias Swyer, and dry it hard,
and then crumble it by little and little; and as the said Picture should
crumble or mull away, so should the said Io. Robinson alias Swyer his body
decay and wear away. And within two or three days after, the Picture shall so
all be wasted, and mulled away; so then the said John Robinson should die
presently. Upon the agreement betwixt the said dog and this Examinates
mother; the said dog suddenly vanished out of this Examinates sight. And the
next day, this Examinate saw his said mother take Clay at the West End of her
said house, and make a Picture of it after the said Robinson, and brought into
her house, and dried in some two days: and about two days after the drying
thereof this Examinates said mother fell on crumbling the said Picture of Clay,
every day some, for some three weeks together; and within two days after all
was crumbled or mulled away, the said John Robinson died.

Being demanded by the Court, what answer she could give to the particular
points of the Evidence against her, for the death of these several persons;
Impudently she denied them, crying out against her children, and the rest of
the Witnesses against her.

But because I have charged her to be the principal Agent, to procure a
solemn meeting at Malking-Tower of the Grand-witches, to consult of some
speedy course for the deliverance of her mother, Old Demdike, her daughter, and
other Witches at Lancaster: the speedy Execution of Master Couell, who little
suspected or deserved any such practice or villainy against him: The blowing up
of the Castle, with diverse other wicked and devilish practices and murders; I
shall make it apparent unto you, by the particular Examinations and Evidence of
her own children, such as were present at the time of their Consultation,
together with her own Examination and Confession, amongst the Records of the
Crown at the Lancaster, as hereafter follows.

The voluntary Confession and Examination of ELIZABETH DEVICE, taken at the
house of JAMES WILSEY, of the Forest of Pendle, in the County of Lancaster,
the seven and twentieth day of April, Annoque Reg. Regis IACOBI Angliae, etc.
Decimo, and Scotiae Quadragesimo quinto. Before ROGER NOVVEL and NICHOLAS
BANISTER, Esquires, two of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace within the same
County. viz.
THe said Elizabeth Device being further Examined, confesses, that upon
Good Friday last, there dined at this Examinates house, called Malking-Tower,
those which she has said are Witches, and does verily think them to be
Witches: and their names are those whom James Device has formerly spoken of to
be there. And she further says, that there was also at her said mothers house,
at the day and time aforesaid, two women of Burneley Parish, whose names the
wife of Richard Nutter does know. And there was likewise there one Anne
Crouckshey of Marsden: And she also confesses, in all things touching the
Christening of the Spirit, and the killing of Master Lister of Westbie, as the
said James Device has before confessed; but denies of any talk was amongst
them the said Witches, to her now remembrance, at the said meeting together,
touching the killing of the Galoer, or the blowing up of Lancaster Castle.

The Examination and Evidence of IENNET DEVICE, daughter of the said ELIZABETH
DEVICE, late wife of JOHN DEVICE, of the Forest of Pendle, in the County of
Lancaster. Against ELIZABETH DEVICE, her Mother, prisoner at the Bar, upon
her Arraignement and Trial, viz.
THe said Iennet Device says, That upon Good Friday last there was about
twenty persons (whereof only two were men, to this Examinates remembrance) at
her said Grandmothers house, called Malking-Tower aforesaid, about twelve of
the clock: all which persons this Examinates said mother told her, were
Witches, and that they came to give a name to Alizon Device Spirit, or
Familiar, sister to this Examinate, and now prisoner at Lancaster. And also
this Examinate says, That the persons aforesaid had to their dinners Beef,
Bacon, and roasted Mutton; which Mutton (as this Examinates said brother said)
was of a Wether of Christopher Swyers of Barley: which Wether was brought in
the night before into this Examinates mothers house by the said James Device,
this Examinates said brother: and in this Examinates sight killed and eaten, as
aforesaid. And she further says, That she knows the names of six of the
said Witches, viz. the wife of Hugh Hargraues under Pendle, Christopher Howgate
of Pendle, uncle to this Examinate, and Elizabeth his wife, and Dicke Miles
his wife of the Rough-Lee; Christopher Iackes of Thorny-holme, and his wife:
and the names of the residue she this Examinate does not know, saving that
this Examinates mother and brother were both there. And lastly, she this
Examinate confesses and says, That her mother has taught her two prayers:
the one to cure the bewitched, and the other to get drink; both which
particularly appear.

The Examination and Evidence of JAMES DEVICE, son of the said ELIZABETH
DEVICE, late wife of JOHN DEVICE, of the Forest of Pendle, in the County of
Lancaster. Against ELIZABETH DEVICE, his Mother, prisoner at the Bar, upon
her Arraignement and Trial, viz.
THe said James Device says, That on Good Friday last, about twelve of the
clock in the day time, there dined in this Examinates said mothers house, at
Malking-Tower, a number of persons, whereof three were men, with this
Examinate, and the rest women; and that they met there for three causes
following (as this Examinates said mother told this Examinate) The first was,
for the naming of the Spirit, which Alizon Device, now prisoner at Lancaster,
had: But did not, name him, because she was not there. The second was, for the
delivery of his said Grandmother, old Dembdike; this Examinates said sister
Allizon; the said Anne Chattox, and her daughter Redferne; killing the Jailer
at Lancaster; and before the next Assizes to blow up the Castle there: and to
that end the aforesaid prisoners might by that time make an escape, and get
away. All which this Examinate then heard them confer of.

And he also says, That the names of the said Witches as were on Good Friday
at this Examinates said Grandmothers house, and now this Examinates own
mothers, for so many of them as he did know, were these, viz. The wife of Hugh
Hargreiues of Burley; the wife of Christopher Bulcock, of the Moss end, and
John her son; the mother of Miles Nutter; Elizabeth, the wife of Christopher
Hargreiues, of Thurniholme; Christopher Howgate, and Elizabeth, his wife; Alice
Graye of Coulne, and one Mould-heeles wife, of the same: and this Examinate,
and his Mother. And this Examinate further says, That all the Witches went out
of the said House in their own shapes and likenesses. And they all, by that
they were forth of the doors, gotten on Horseback, like unto Foales, some of
one color, some of another; and Prestons wife was the last: and when she got
on Horseback, they all presently vanished out of this Examinates sight. And
before their said parting away, Executed at York the last Assizes.
they all appointed to meet at the said Prestons wives house that day
twelue-moneths; at which time the said Prestons wife promised to make them a
great Feast. And if they had occasion to meet in the mean time, then should
warning be given, that they all should meet upon Romleyes Moore.

And here they parted, with resolution to execute their deuillish and bloody
practices, for the deliverance of their friends, until they came to meet
here, where their power and strength was gone. And now finding her Means was
gone, she cried out for Mercy. Whereupon she being taken away, the next in
order was her son James Device, whom she and her Mother, old Dembdike,
brought to act his part in this woeful Tragedy.

THE ARRAIGNMENT and Trial of JAMES DEVICE, Son of ELIZABETH DEVICE, of the
Forest of Pendle, within the County of Lancaster aforesaid, Laborer, for
Witchcraft; Upon Tuesday the eighteenth of August, at the Assizes and general
Gaole-Deliuerie holden at Lancaster Before Sir EDWARD BROMLEY Knight, one of
his Majesty's Justices of Assise at Lancaster.
James Device.
THis wicked and miserable Wretch, whether by practice, or means, to bring
himself to some untimely death, and thereby to avoid his Trial by his
Country, and just judgment of the Law; or ashamed to be openly charged with
so many deuillish practices, and so much innocent blood as he had spilt; or by
reason of his Imprisonment so long time before his Trial (which was with more
favor, commiseration, and relief then he deserved) I know not: But being
brought forth to the Bar, to receive his Trial before this worthy Judge,
and so Honorable and Worshipful an Assembly of Justices for this service, was
so insensible, weak, and unable in all things, as he could neither speak,
hear, or stand, but was holden up when he was brought to the place of his
Arraignement, to receive his trial.

This James Device of the Forest of Pendle, being brought to the Bar, was
there according to the form, order, and course, Indicted and Arraigned; for
that he Felloniously had practiced, used, and exercised diverse wicked and
deuillish Arts, called Witch-crafts, Inchauntments, Charms, and Sorceries, in,
and upon one Anne Towneley, wife of Henry Towneley of the Carre, in the
County of Lancaster Gentleman, and her by force of the same, felloniously had
killed. Contra pacem, etc.

The said James Device was the second time Indicted and Arraigned in the same
manner and form, for the death of John Duckworth, by witchcraft. Contra
pacem, etc.

To these two several Indictments upon his Arraignment, he pleaded not
guilty, and for the trial of his life put himself upon God and his Country.

So as now the Gentlemen of the Jury of life and death stand charged to find,
whether he be guilty of these, or either of them.

Whereupon Master Nowel humbly prayed Master Towneley might be called, who
attended to prosecute and give evidence against him for the Kings Majesty, and
that the particular Examinations taken before him and others, might be openly
published and read in Court, in the hearing of the Prisoner.

But because it were infinite to bring him to his particular Trial for every
offense, which he has committed in his time, and every practice wherein he
has had his hand: I shall proceed in order with the Evidence remaining upon
Record against him, amongst the Records of the Crown; both how, and in what
sort he came to be a witch: and show you what apparent proof there is to
charge him with the death of these two several persons, for the which he now
stands upon his trial for all the rest of his deuillish practices,
incantations, murders, charms, sorceries, meetings to consult with Witches, to
execute mischief (take them as they are against him upon Record:) Enough, I
doubt not. For these with the course of his life will serve his turn to
deliver you from the danger of him that never took felicity in any things,
but in revenge, blood, and mischief with crying out unto God for vengeance;
which has now at the length brought him to the place where he stands to
receive his Trial with more honor, favor, and respect, then such a Monster in
Nature does deserve; And I doubt not, but in due time by the Justice of the
Law, to an untimely and shameful death.

The Examination of JAMES DEVICE, son of ELIZABETH DEVICE, of the Forest of
Pendle, in the County of Lancaster, Labourer. Taken the seven and twentieth
day of April, Annoque, Reg. Regis IACOBI, Angliae, etc. xo. and Scotiae
Quadragesimo quinto Before ROGER NOWEL, and NICHOLAS BANNESTER, Esquires: two
of his Majesty's Justices of Peace within the said County.
HE says, that upon Sheare Thursday was two years, his Grandmother Elizabeth
Sothernes, alias Dembdike, did bid him this Examinate go to the church to
receive the Communion (the next day after being Good Friday) and then not to
eat the Bread the Minister gave him, but to bring it and deliver it to such a
thing as should meet him in his way homewards: Notwithstanding her persuasions,
this Examinate did eat the Bread: and so in his coming, homeward some forty
roodes off the said Church, there met him a thing in the shape of a Hare, who
spoke unto this Examinate, and asked him whether he had brought the Bread that
his Grandmother had bidden him, or no? whereupon this Examinate answered, he
had not: and thereupon the said thing threatened to pull this Examinate in
pieces, and so this Examinate thereupon marked himself to God, and so the said
thing vanished out of this Examinates sight. And within some four days after
that, there appeared in this Examinates sight, hard by the new Church in
Pendle, a thing like unto a brown

Dog, who asked this Examinate to give him his Soul, and he should be
revenged of any whom he would: whereunto this Examinate answered, that his
Soul was not his to give, but was his Savior Jesus Christ's, but as much as
was in him this Examinate to give, he was contented he should have it.

And within two or three days after, this Examinate went to the Carre-Hall,
and upon some speeches betwixt Mistress Towneley and this Examinate; She
charging this Examinate and his said mother, to have stolen some Turues of
hers, badde him pack the doors: and withal as he went forth of the door,
the said Mistress Towneley gave him a knock between the shoulders: and about a
day or two after that, there appeared unto this Examinate in his way, a thing
like unto a black dog, who put this Examinate in mind of the said Mistress
Towneleyes falling out with him this Examinate; who bad this Examinate make a
Picture of Clay, like unto the said Mistress Towneley: and that this Examinate
with the help of his Spirit (who then ever after bid this Examinate to call
it Dandy) would kill or destroy the said Mistress Towneley: and so the said
dog vanished out of this Examinates sight. And the next morning after, this
Examinate took Clay, and made a Picture of the said Mistress Towneley, and
dried it the same night by the fire: and within a day after, he, this
Examinate began to crumble the said Picture, every day some, for the space of a
week: and within two days after all was crumbled away; the said Mistress
Towneley died.

And he further says, That in Lent last one John Duckworth of the Lawnde,
promised this Examinate an old shirt: and within a fortnight after, this
Examinate went to the said Duckworthes house, and demanded the said old shirt;
but the said Duckworth denied him thereof. And going out of the said house, the
said Spirit Dandy appeared unto this Examinate, and said, Thou did touch the
said Duckworth; whereunto this Examinate answered, he did not touch him: yes
(said the Spirit again) thou did touch him, and therefore I have power of
him: whereupon this Examinate joined with the said Spirit, and then wished the
said Spirit to kill the said Duckworth: and within one week, then next after,
Duckworth died.

This voluntary Confession and Examination of his own, containing in itself
matter sufficient in Law to charge him, and to prove his offenses, contained in
the two several Indictments, was sufficient to satisfy the Gentlemen of the
Jury of Life and Death, that he is guilty of them, and either of them: yet my
Lord Bromley commanded, for their better satisfaction, that the Witnesses
present in Court against any of the Prisoners, should be examined openly, viua
voce, that the Prisoner might both hear and answer to every particular point
of their Evidence; notwithstanding any of their Examinations taken before any
of his Majesty's Justices of Peace within the same County.

Herein do but observe the wonderful work of God; to raise up a young Infant,
the very sister of the Prisonr, Iennet Device, to discover, justify and prove
these things against him at the time of his Arraignement and Trial, as
hereafter follows. viz.

The Examination and Evidence of IENNET DEVICE daughter of ELIZABETH DEVICE,
late wife of JOHN DEVICE of of the Forest of Pendle, in the County of
Lancaster. Against JAMES DEVICE, Prisoner at the Bar, upon his Arraignement
and Trial. viz.
BEing examined in open Court, she says, That her brother James Device, the
Prisoner at the Bar, has been a Witch for the space of three years: about
the beginning of which time, there appeared unto him, in this Examinates
mothers house, a Black-Dogge, which her said brother called Dandy. Dandy.
And further, this Examinate confesses, and says: That her said brother about
a twelve month since, in the presence of this Examinate, and in the house
aforesaid, called for the said Dandy, who thereupon appeared; asking this
Examinates brother what he would have him to do. This Examinates brother then
said, he would have him to help him to kill old Mistress Towneley of the Carre:
whereunto the said Dandy answered, and said, That her said brother should have
his best help for the doing of the same; and that her said brother, and the
said Dandy, did both in this Examinates hearing, say, they would make away the
said Mistress Towneley. And about a week after, this Examinate coming to the
Carre-Hall, saw the said Mistress Towneley in the Kitchen there, nothing well:
whereupon it came into this Examinates mind, that her said brother, by the
help of Dandy, had brought the said Mistress Towneley into the state she then
was in.

Which Examinat, although she were but very young, yet it was wonderful to the
Court, in so great a Presence and Audience, with what modesty, government,
and understanding, she delivered this Evidence against the Prisoner at the
Bar, being her own natural brother, which he himself could not deny, but
there acknowledged in every particular to be just and true.

But behold a little further, for here this bloody Monster did not stay his
hands: for besides his wicked and devilish Spells, practices, meetings to
consult of murder and mischief, which (by Gods grace) hereafter shall follow
in order against him; there is yet more blood to be laid unto his charge. For
although he were but young, and in the beginning of his Time, yet was he
careful to observe his Instructions from Old Demdike his Grandmother, and
Elizabeth Device his mother, in so much that no time should pass since his
first entrance into that damnable Art and exercise of Witchcrafts,
Enchantments, Charms and Sorceries, without mischief or murder. Neither
should any man upon the least occasion of offense given unto him, escape his
hands, without some danger. For these particulars were no sooner given in
Evidence against him, when he was again Indicted and Arraigned for the murder
of these two. viz.

James Device of the Forest of Pendle aforesaid, in the County of Lancaster,
Labourer, the third time Indicted and Arraigned for the death of John Hargraues
of Gould-shey-booth, in the County of Lancaster, by Witchcraft, as aforesaid.
Contra etc.

To this Indictment upon his Arraignement, he pleaded thereunto not guilty:
and for his Trial put himself upon God and his Country, etc.

James Device of the Forest of Pendle aforesaid, in the County of Lancaster,
Labourer, the fourth time Indicted and Arraigned for the death of Blaze
Hargreues of Higham, in the County of Lancaster, by Witchcraft, as aforesaid.
Contra Pacem, etc.

To this Indictment upon his Arraignement, he pleaded thereunto not guilty;
and for the Trial of his life, put himself upon God and the Country, etc.

Hereupon Iennet Device produced, sworn and examined, as a witness on his
Majesty's behalf, against the said James Device, was examined in open Court,
as follows. viz.

The Examination and Evidence of IENNET DEVICE aforesaid. Against JAMES DEVICE,
her brother, Prisoner at the Bar, upon his Arraignement and Trial. viz.
BEing sworn and examined in open Court, she says, That her brother James
Device has been a Witch for the space of three years: about the beginning of
which time, there appeared unto him, in this Examinates mothers house, a
Blacke-Dogge, which her said brother called Dandy, which Dandy did ask her
said brother what he would have him to do, whereunto he answered, he would
have him to kill John Hargreiues, of Gold-shey-booth: whereunto Dandy answered
that he would do it; since which time the said John is dead.

And at another time this Examinate confesses and says, That her said brother
did call the said Dandy: who thereupon appeared in the said house, asking this
Examinates brother what he would have him to do: whereupon this Examinates
said brother said, he would have him to kill Blaze Hargreiues of Higham:
whereupon Dandy answered, he should have his best help, and so vanished away:
and she says, that since that time the said Hargreiues is dead; but how long
after, this Examinate does not now remember.

All which things, when he heard his sister upon her Oath affirm, knowing them
in his conscience to be just and true, slenderly denied them, and thereupon
insisted.

To this Examination were diverse witnesses examined in open Court vina voce,
concerning the death of the parties, in such manner and form, and at such time
as the said Iennet Device in her Evidence has formerly declared to the Court.

Which is all, and I doubt not but matter sufficient in Law to charge him with,
for the death of these parties.

For the proof of his Practices, Charms, Meetings at Malking-Tower, to
consult with Witches to execute mischief, Master Nowel humbly prayed; his own
Examination, taken and certified, might openly be read; and the rest in order,
as they remain upon Record amongst the Records of the Crown at Lancaster: as
hereafter follows* viz.

The Examination of JAMES DEVICE, Son of ELIZABETH DEVICE, of the Forest of
Pendle: Taken the seven and twentieth day of April aforesaid, Before ROGER
NOVVEL and NICHOLAS BANESTER Esquires, two of his Majesty's Justices of Peace
within the said County, viz.
ANd being examined, he further says, That upon Sheare-Thursday last, in the
evening, he this Examinate stole a Wether from John Robinson of Barley, and
brought it to his Grand-mothers house, old Dembdike, and there killed it: and
that upon the day following, being Good Friday, about twelve of the clock in
the day time, there dined in this Examinates mothers house a number of persons,
whereof three were men, with this Examinate, and the rest women; and that they
met there for three Causes following, as this Examinates said Mother told this
Examinate.

1. The first was, for the naming of the Spirit which Alizon Device, now
prisoner at Lancaster, had, but did not name him, because she was not there.

2. The second Cause was, for the delivery of his said Grandmother; this
Examinates said sister Alizon; the said Anne Chattox, and her daughter,
Redfernes; killing the Jailer at Lancaster; and before the next Assizes to blow
up the Castle there, to the end the aforesaid persons might by that means make
an escape and get away: all which this Examinate then heard them confer of.

3. And the third Cause was, for that there was a woman dwelling in Gisborne
Parish, who came into this Examinates said Grandmothers house, who there came
and craved assistance of the rest of them that were then there, for the killing
of Master Lister of Westby, because (as she then said) he had borne malice
unto her, and had thought to have put her away at the last Assizes at York,
but could not and this Examinate heard the said woman say, That her power was
not strong enough to do it her self, being now less then before time it had
been.

And also, that the said Iennet Preston had a Spirit with her like unto a white
Foale, with a black spot in the forhead.

And he also says, That the names of the said Witches as were on Good Friday
at this Examinates said Grandmothers house, and now this Examinates own
mothers, for so many of them as he did know, were these, viz. the wife of Hugh
Hargreiues of Barley; the wife of Christopher Bulcock of the Moss end, and
John her son; the mother of Miles Nutter; Elizabeth, the wife of Christopher
Hargreiues, of Thurniholme; Christopher Howgate, and Elizabeth his wife; Alice
Graye of Coulne, and one Mouldheeles wife, of the same: and this Examinate, and
his Mother. And this Examinate further says, That all the said Witches went
out of the said House in their own shapes and likenesses. And they all, by
that they were forth of the doors, were gotten on Horseback, like unto Foales,
some of one color, some of another; and Prestons wife was the last; and when
she got on Horseback, they all presently vanished out of this Examinates
sight. And before their said parting away, they all appointed to meet at the
said Prestons wives house that day twelue-moneths; at which time the said
Prestons wife promised to make them a great Feast. And if they had occasion to
meet in the mean time, then should warning be given, that they all should
meet upon Romleyes Moore.

The Examination and Evidence of IENNET DEVICE. Against JAMES DEVICE her said
Brother, Prisoner at the Bar, upon his Arraignement and Trial: Taken before
ROGER NOWEL, and NICHOLAS BANNESTER, Esquires: two of his Majesty's Justices of
Peace within the said County. viz.
She says, that upon Good Friday last there was about twenty persons,
whereof only two were men, to this Examinates remembrance, at her said
Grandmothers house, called Malking-Tower aforesaid, about twelve of the clock:
all which persons this Examinates said Mother told her were Witches, and that
they came to give a name to Alizon Device Spirit or Familiar, Sister to this
Examinate, and now Prisoner, in the Castle of Lancaster: And also this
Examinate says, that the persons aforesaid had to their Dinnors, Beef, Bacon,
and roasted Mutton, which Mutton, as this Examinates said brother said, was of a
Weather of Robinsons of Barley: which Weather was brought in the night before
into this Examinates mothers house, by the said James Device this Examinates
said brother, and in this Examinates sight killed, and eaten, as aforesaid: And
she further says, that she knows the names of six of the said Witches,
viz. the wife of the said Hugh Hargreiues, under Pendle: Christopher Howget, of
Pendle, Uncle to this Examinate: and Dick Miles wife, of the Rough-Lee:
Christopher Iacks, of Thorne-holme, and his Wife: and the names of the residue
she this Examinate does not know, saving that this Examinates Mother and
Brother were both there.

The Examination of ELIZABETH DEVICE, Mother of the said JAMES DEVICE, of the
Forest of Pendle: taken the seven and twentieth day of April aforesaid.
Before ROGER NOWEL, and NICHOLAS BANNESTER, Esquires; as aforesaid. viz.
BEing examined, the said Elizabeth says and confesses, that upon Good Friday
last there dined at this Examinates house, those which she has said to be
Witches, and does verily think them to be Witches, and their names are those,
whom James Device has formerly spoken of to be there.

And she also confesses in all things touching the Christning of her Spirit,
and the killing of Master Lister of Westby, as the said James (...) confesses.
But denies that any talk was amongst (...) the said Witches, to her now
remembrance, at the said meeting together, touching the killing of the Jailer
at Lancaster; blowing up of the Castle* thereby to deliver old Dembdike her
Mother; Alizon Device her Daughter, and other Prisoners, committed to the said
Castle for Witchcraft.

After all these things opened, and delivered in evidence against him; Master
Couil, who has the custody of the Jail at Lancaster, having taken great
pains with him during the time of his imprisonment, to procure him to discover
his practizes, and such other Witches as he knew to be dangerous* Humbly
prayed the favor of the Court, that this voluntary confession to M. Anderton,
M. Sands the Major of Lancaster, M. Couel, and others, might openly be
published and declared in Court.

The voluntary confession and declaration of JAMES DEVICE, Prisoner in the
Castle at Lancaster. Before WILLIAM SANDS, Mayor of Lancaster, JAMES ANDERTON,
Esquire, one of his Majesty's Justices of Peace within the County of
Lancaster: And THOMAS COVEL, Gentleman, one of his Majesty's Coroners in the
same County. viz.
JAMES Device, Prisoner in the Castle at Lancaster, says; That his said Spirit
Dandie, being very earnest with him to give him his soul. He answered, he
would give him that part thereof that was his own to give: and thereupon the
said Spirit said, he was above CHRIST JESUS, and therefore he must absolutely
give him his Soul: and that done, he would give him power to revenge himself
against any whom he disliked.

And he further says, that the said Spirit did appear unto him after sundry
times, in the likeness of a Dog, and at every time most earnestly persuaded
him to give him his Soul absolutely: who answered as before, that he would
give him his own part and no further. And he says, that at the last time
that the said Spirit was with him, which was the Tuesday next before his
apprehension, when as he could not prevail with him to have his Soul
absolutely granted unto him, as aforesaid; the said Spirit departed from him,
then giving a most fearful cry and yell, and withal caused a great flash of
fire to show about him: which said Spirit did never after trouble this
Examinate.

William Sands, James Anderton. Tho. Couel, Coroner.
The said Iennet Device, his Sister, in the very end of her Examination against
the said James Device, confesses and says, that her Mother taught her two
Prayers: the one to get drink, which was this. viz.

Crucifixus hoc signum vitam Eternam. Amen. And she further says, That her
Brother James Device, the Prisoner at the Bar, has confessed to her this
Examinate, that he by this Prayer has gotten drink: and that within an hour
after the saying the said Prayer, drink has come into the house after a very
strange manner. And the other Prayer, the said James Device affirmed, would
cure one bewitched, which she recited as follows. viz.

A Charm.
Upon Good Friday, I will fast while I may
Until I hear them knell
Our Lords own Bell,
Lord in his mess
With his twelve Apostles good,
What has he in his hand
Ligh in leath wand:
What has he in his other hand?
Heavens door key,
Open, open Heaven door keys,
Steck, steck hell door.
Let Crizum child
Go to it Mother mild,
What is yonder that casts a light so farrandly,
Mine own dear Son that is naild to the Tree.
He is naild sore by the heart and hand,
And holy barn Pan,
Well is that man
That Friday spell can,
His Child to learn;
A Cross of Blew, and another of Red,
As good Lord was to the Roode.
Gabriel laid him down to sleep
Upon the ground of holy weep:
Good Lord came walking by,
Sleep'st thou, wak'st thou Gabriel,
No Lord I am sted with stick and stake,
That I can neither sleep nor wake:
Rise up Gabriel and go with me,
The stick nor the stake shall never dear thee.
Sweet Jesus our Lord, Amen.
James Device.
What can be said more of this painful Steward* that was so careful to
provide Mutton against this Feast and solemn meeting at Malking-Tower, of
these hellish and devilish band of Witches, (the like whereof has not been
heard of) then has been openly published and declared against him at the
Bar, upon his Arraignement and Trial: wherein it pleased God to raise up
Witnesses beyond expectation to convince him; besides his own particular
Examinations, which being showed and read unto him; he acknowledged to be just
and true. And what I promised to set forth against him, in the beginning of his
Arraignment and Trial, I doubt nor but therein I have satisfied your
expectation at large, wherein I have been very sparing to charge him with
anything, but with sufficient matter of Record and Evidence, able to satisfy
the consciences of the Gentlemen of the Jury of Life and Death; to whose good
consideration I leave him, with the perpetual Badge and Brand of as dangerous
and malicious a Witch, as ever lived in these parts of Lancashire, of his time:
and spotted with as much Innocent blood, as ever any Witch of his years.

After all these proceedings, by direction of his Lordship, were their several
Examinations, subscribed by every one of them in particular, showed unto them
at the time of their Trial, and acknowledged by the^ to be true, delivered to
the gentlemen of the Jury of Life and Death, for the better satisfaction of
their consciences: after due consideration of which said several examinations,
confessions, and voluntary declarations, as well of themselves as of their
children, friends and confederates, The Gentlemen delivered up their Verdict
against the Prisoners, as follows. viz.

The Verdict of Life and Death.
WHo found Anne Whittle, alias Chattox, Elizabeth Device, and James Device,
guilty of the several murders by Witchcraft, contained in the Indictments
against them, and every of them.

THE WITCHES OF SALMESBVRY.
The Arraignement and Trial of IENNET BIERLEY ELLEN BIERLEY, and JANE
SOVTHVVORTH of Salmesbury, in the County of Lancaster; for Witchcraft upon the
body of GRACE SOUR BVTTS, upon Wednesday the nineteenth of August: At the
Assizes and general Gaole-deliuery, holden at Lancaster. Before Sir EDWARD
BROMLEY Knight, one of his Maiestices Justices of Assize at Lancaster: as
hereafter follows. viz. Iennet Bierley. Ellen Bierley. Jane Southworth.

THus have we for a time left the Graund Witches of the Forest of Pendle, to
the good consideration of a very sufficient Jury of worthy Gentlemen of their
Country. We are now come to the famous Witches of Salmesbury, as the Country
called them, who by such a subtle practice and conspiracy of a Seminary
Priest, or, as the best in this Honorable Assembly think, a Jesuit, whereof
this County of Lancaster has good store, who by reason of the general
entertainment they find, and great maintenance they have, resort hither, being
far from the Eye of Justice, and therefore, Procul a fulmine; are now brought
to the Bar, to receive their Trial, and such a young witness prepared and
instructed to give Evidence against them, that it must be the Act of GOD that
must be the means to discover their Practices and Murders, and by an infant:
but how and in what sort Almighty GOD delivered them from the stroke of
Death, when the Axe was laid to the Tree, and made frustrate the practice of
this bloody Butcher, it shall appear unto you upon their Arraignement and
Trial, whereunto they are now come.

Master Thomas Couel, who has the charge of the prisoners in the Castle at
Lancaster, was commanded to bring forth the said Jennet Bierley, Ellen
Bierley, Jane Southworth,
to the Bar to receive their Trial.

Indictment.
THe said Iennet Bierley, Ellen Bierly, and Jane Southworth of Salmesbury, in
the County of Lancaster, being indicted, for that they and every of them
felloniously had practiced, exercised, and used diverse deuillish and wicked
Arts, called Witchcrafts, Inchauntments, Charms, and Sorceries, in and upon
one Grace Sowerbuts: so that by means thereof her body wasted and consumed,
Contra formam Statuti etc. Et Contra Pacem dicti Domini Regis Coronam and
dignitatem etc.

To this Indictment upon their Arraignement, they pleaded Not-Guiltie; and for
the Trial of their lives put themselves upon GOD and their Country.

Whereupon Master Sheriff of the County of Lancaster, by direction of the
Court, made return of a very sufficient Jury to pass between the Kings
Majesty and them, upon their lives and deaths, with such others as follow in
order.

The Prisoners being now at the Bar upon their Trial, Grace Sowerbutts, the
daughter of Thomas Sowerbutts, about the age of fourteen years, was produced
to give Evidence for the Kings Majesty against them: who standing up, she was
commanded to point out the Prisoners, which she did, and said as follows,
viz. *

The Examination and Evidence of GRACE SOVVERBVTTS, daughter of THOMAS
SOVVERBVTTS, of Salmesbury, in the County of Lancaster Husbandman, upon her
Oath, Against IENNET BIERLEY, ELLEN BIERLEY, and JANE SOVTHVVORTH, prisoners at
the Bar, upon their Arraignement and Trial, viz.
THe said Grace Sowerbutts upon her oath says, That for the space of some
years now last past she has been haunted and vexed with some women, who
have used to come to her: which women, she says, were Iennet Bierley, this
Informers Grandmother; Ellen Bierley, wife to Henry Bierley; Jane Southworth,
late the wife of John Southworth, and one Old Doewife, all of Salmesburie
aforesaid. And she says, That now lately those four women did violently draw
her by the hair of the head, and laid her on the top of a Hay-mowe, in the
said Henry Bierleyes Barn. And she says further, That not long after the
said Iennet Bierley did meet this Examinate near unto the place where she
dwells, and first appeared in her own likeness, and after that in the
likeness of a black Dog, and as this Examinate did go over a Style, she
picked her off: howbeit she says she had no hurt then, but rose again, and
went to her Aunts in Osbaldeston, and returned back again to her Fathers
house the same night, being fetched home by her father. And she says, That in
her way homewards she did then tell her Father, how she had been dealt
withal both then and at sundry times before that; and before that time she
never told any body thereof: and being examined why she did not, she says,
she could not speak thereof, though she desired so to do. And she further
says, That upon Saturday, being the fourth of this instant April, she this
Examinate going toward Salmesbury bote, to meet her mother, coming from
Preston, she saw the said Iennet Bierley, who met this Examinate at a place
called the Two Brigges, first in her own shape, and afterward in the
likeness of a black Dog, with two legs, which Dog went close by the
left side of this Examinate, till they came to a Pit of Water, and then the
said Dog spoke, and persuaded this Examinate to drown her self there,
saying, it was a fair and an easy death: Whereupon this Examinate thought
there came one to her in a white sheet, and carried her away from the said
Pit, upon the coming whereof the said black Dog departed away; and
shortly after the said white thing departed also: And after this Examinate had
gone further on her way, about the length of two or three Fields, the said
black Dog did meet her again, and going on her left side, as aforesaid,
did carry her into a Barn of one Hugh Walshmans, near there by, and laid
her upon the Barne-floore, and covered this Examinate with Straw on her body,
and Hay on her head, and the Dog it self lay on the top of the said
Straw, but how long the said Dog lay there, this Examinate cannot tell, nor
how long her self lay there: for she says, That upon her lying down there,
as aforesaid, her Speech and Senses were taken from her: and the first time
she knew where she was, she was laid upon a bed in the said Walshmans
house, which (as she has since been told) was upon the Monday at night
following: and she was also told, That she was found and taken from the place
where she first lay, by some of her friends, and carried into the said
Walshmans house, within a few hours after she was laid in the Barn, as
aforesaid. And she further says, That upon the day following, being Tuesday,
near night of the same day, she this Examinate was fetched by her Father and
Mother from the said Walshmans house to her Fathers house. And she says, That
at the place before specified, called the Two Brigges, the said Iennet Bierley
and Ellen Bierley did appear unto her in their own shapes: whereupon this
Examinate fell down, and after that was not able to speak, or go, till the
Friday following: during which time, as she lay in her Fathers house, the said
Iennet Bierley and Ellen Bierley did once appear unto her in their own
shapes, but they did nothing unto her then, neither did she ever see them
since. And she further says, That a good while before all this, this
Examinate did go with the said Iennet Bierley, her Grandmother, and the said
Ellen Bierley her Aunt, at the bidding of her said Grandmother, to the house
of one Thomas Walshman, in Salmesbury aforesaid. And coming thither in the
night, when all the household was abed, the doors being shut, the said Iennet
Bierley did open them, but this Examinate knows not how: and being come into
the said house, this Examinate and the said Ellen Bierley stayed there, and the
said Iennet Bierley went into the Chamber where the said Walshman and his wife
lay, and from thence brought a little child, which this Examinate thinks was
in bed with it Father and Mother: and after the said Iennet Bierley had set her
down by the fire, with the said child, she did thrust a nail into the navel
of the said child: and afterward did take a pen and put it in at the said
place, and did suck there a good space, and afterward laid the child in bed
again: and then the said Iennet and the said Ellen returned to their own
houses, and this Examinate with them. And she thinks that neither the said
Thomas Walshman, nor his wife knew that the said child was taken out of the bed
from them. And she says also, that the said child did not cry when it was
hurt, as aforesaid: But she says, that she thinks that the said child did
thenceforth languish, and not long after dyed. And after the death of the said
child; the next night after the burial thereof, the said Iennet Bierley and
Ellen Bierley, taking this Examinate with them, went to Salmesburie Church, and
there did take up the said child, and the said Iennet did carry it out of the
Churchyard in her arms, and then did put it in her lap and carried it home to
her own house, and having it there did boil some thereof in a Pot, and some
did broile on the coals, of both which the said Iennet and Ellen did eat, and
would have had this Examinate and one Grace Bierley, Daughter of the said
Ellen, to have eaten with them, but they refused so to do: And afterward the
said Iennet and Ellen did seethe the bones of the said child in a pot, and with
the Fat that came out of the said bones, they said they would anoint
themselves, that thereby they might sometimes change themselves into other
shapes. And after all this being done, they said they would lay the bones
again in the grave the next night following, but whether they did so or not,
this Examinate knows not: Neither does she know how they got it out of the
grave at the first taking of it up. And being further sworn and examined, she
deposes and says, that about half a year ago, the said Iennet Bierley,
Ellen Bierley, Jane Southworth, and this Examinate (who went by the appointment
of the said Iennet her Grand mother) did meet at a place called Red banck,
upon the North-side of the water of Ribble, every Thursday and Sunday at night
by the space of a fortnight, and at the water side there came unto them, as
they went thither, four black things, going upright, and yet not like men in
the face: which ^oure did carry the said three women and this Examinate over
the Water, and when they came to the said Red Banck they found some thing there
which they did eat. But this Examinate says, she never saw such meat; and
therefore she durst not eat thereof, although her said Grand mother did bid
her eat. And after they had eaten, the said three Women and this Examinate
danced, every one of them with one of the black things aforesaid, and after
their dancing the said black things did pull down the said three Women, and
did abuse their bodies, as this Examinate thinks, for she says, that the
black thing that was with her, did abuse her body.

The said Examinate further says upon her Oath, That about ten days after her
Examination taken at Blackborne, she this Examinate being then come to her
Fathers house again, after she had been certain days at her Uncles house
in Houghton: Jane Southworth widow, did meet this Examinate at her Fathers
house door and did carry her into the loft, and there did lay her upon the
floor, where she was shortly found by her Father and brought down, and laid
in a bed, as afterward she was told: for she says, that from the first
meeting of the said Jane Southworth, she this Examinate had her speech and
senses taken from her. But the next day she says, she came somewhat to her
self, and then the said Widow Southworth came again to this Examinate to her
bedside, and took her out of bed, and said to this Examinate, that she did
her no harm the other time, in respect of that she now would after do to
her, and thereupon put her upon a hey-stack, standing some three or four yards
high from the earth, where she was found after great search made, by a
neighbors Wife near dwelling, and then laid in her bed again, where she
remained speechless and senseless as before, by the space of two or three
days: And being recovered, within a week after she says, that the said Jane
Southworth did come again to this Examinate at her fathers house and did take
her away, and laid her in a ditch near to the house upon her face, and left
her there, where she was found shortly after, and laid upon a bed, but had
not her senses again of a day and a night, or thereabouts. And she further
says, that upon Tuesday last before the taking of this her Examination, the
said Jane Southworth, came to this Examinates Fathers house, and finding this
Examinate without the door, took her and carried her into the Barn, and
thrust her head amongst a company of boords that were there standing, where
she was shortly after found and laid in a bed, and remained in her old fit
till the Thursday at night following.

And being further examined touching her being at Red-bancke, she says, That
the three women, by her before named, were carried back again over Ribble, by
the same black things that carried them thither; and says that at their said
meeting in the Red-bancke, there did come also diverse other women, and did
meet them there, some old, some young, which this Examinate thinks did dwell
upon the North-side of Ribble, because she saw them not come over the Water:
but this Examinate knew none of them, neither did she see them eat or dance, or
do any thing else that the rest did, saving that they were there and looked on.

These particular points of Evidence being thus urged against the Prisoners:
the father of this Grace Sowerbutts prayed that Thomas Walshman, whose child
they are charged to murder, might be examined as a witness upon his oath, for
the Kings Majesty, against the Prisoners at the Bar: who upon this strange
devised accusation, delivered by this impudent wench, were in opinion of many
of that great Audience guilty of this bloody murder, and more worthy to die
then any of these Witches.

The Examination and Evidence of THOMAS WALSHMAN, of Salmesbury, in the County
of Lancaster, Yeoman. Against IENNET BIERLEY, ELLEN BIERLEY, and JANE
SOVTHVVORTH, Prisoners at the Bar, upon their Arraignement and Trial, as
follows. viz.
THe said Examinate, Thomas Walshman, upon his oath says, That he had a
child died about Lent was twelue-month, who had been sick by the space of a
fortnight or three weeks, and was afterward buried in Salmesburie Church:
which child when it died was about a year old; But how it came to the death
of it this Examinate knows not. And he further says, that about the
fifteenth of April last, or thereabouts, the said Grace Sowerbutts was found
in this Examinates fathers Barn, laid under a little hay and straw, and from
thence was carried into this Examinates house, and there laid till the Monday
at night following: during which time she did not speak, but lay as if she had
been dead.

The Examination of JOHN SINGLETON: Taken at Salmesbury, in the County of
Lancaster, the seventh day of August: Anno Reg. Regis IACOBI Angliae, Franciae,
and Hiberniae, Fidei Defensor. etc. Decimo and Scotiae, xlvj. Before ROBERT
HOVLDEN, Esquire, one of his Majesty's Justices of Peace in the County of
Lancaster. Against. IENNET BIERLEY, ELLEN BIERLEY, and JANE SOVTHVVORTH, which
hereafter follows.
THe said Examinate upon his oath says, That he has often heard his old
Master, Sir John Southworth Knight, now deceased, say, touching the late wife
of John Southworth, now in the Jail, for suspicion of Witchcraft: That the
said wife was as he thought an evil woman, and a Witch: and he said that he
was sorry for her husband, that was his kinsman, for he thought she would kill
him. And this Examinate further says, That the said Sir John Southworth in his
coming or going between his own house at Salmesbury, and the Town of
Preston, did for the most part forbear to pass by the house, where the said
wife dwelled, though it was his nearest and best way; and rode another way,
only for fear of the said wife, as this Examinate verily thinks.

The Examination of WILLIAM ALKER of Salmesbury, in the County of Lancaster,
Yeoman: Taken the fifteenth day of April, Anno Reg. Regis IACOBI, Angliae,
Franciae, and Hiberniae, Decimo and Scotiae, quadragesimo quinto. Before ROBERT
HOVLDEN, one of his Majesty's Justices of Peace in the County of Lancaster:
Against IENNET BIERLEY, ELLEN BIERLEY, and JANE BIERLEY, which hereafter
follows. viz.
THe said Examinate upon his oath says, That he has seen the said Sir John
Southworth shun to meet the said wife of John Southworth, now Prisoner in the
Jail, when he came near where she was. And has heard the said Sir John
Southworth say, that he liked her not, and that he doubted she would bewitch
him.

Here was likewise Thomas Sowerbutts, father of Grace Sowerbutts, examined upon
his oath, and many other witnesses to little purpose: who being examined by the
Court, could depose little against them: But the finding of the wench upon the
hay in her counterfeit fits: wherefore I leave to trouble you with the
particular declaration of their Evidence against the Prisoners, In respect
there was not any one witness able to charge them with one direct matter of
Withcraft; nor prove any thing for the murder of the child.

Herein, before we come to the particular declaration of that wicked and
damnable practice of this Jesuit or Seminary. I shall commend unto your
examination and judgment some points of her Evidence, wherein you shall see
what impossibilities are in this accusation brought to this perfection, by the
great care and pains of this officious Doctor, Master Tompson or Southworth,
who commonly works upon the Feminine disposition, being more Passive then
Active.

The particular points of the Evidence of GRACE SOVVERBVTTS, viz. Evidence.
THat for the space of some years she has been haunted and vexed with some
women, who have used to come to her.
The Jesuit forgot to instruct his Scholar how long it is since she was
tormented: it seems it is long since he read the old Badge of a Liar, Oportet
mendacem esse memorem. He knows not how long it is since they came to church,
after which time they began to practice Witchcraft. It is a likely thing the
Torment and Panges of Witchcraft can be forgotten; and therefore no time can be
set down.

She says that now lately these four women did violently draw her by the
hair of the head, and lay her on the top of a Hay-mow. Here they use great
violence to her, whom in another place they make choice to be of their
counsel, to go with them to the house of Walshman to murder the child. This
courtesy deserves no discovery of so foul a Fact.

Not long after, the said Iennet Bierley did meet this Examinate near unto the
place where she dwelled, and first appeared in her own likeness, and after
that in the likeness of a black Dog. Vno and eodem tempore, she
transformed her self into a Dog. I would know by what means any Priest can
maintain this point of Evidence.

And as she went over a Style, she picked her over, but had no hurt. This is
as likely to be true as the rest, to throw a child down from the top of a
House, and never hurt her great toe.

She rose again; had no hurt, went to her Aunt, and returned back again to
her Fathers house, being fetched home. I pray you observe these contrarieties,
in order as they are placed, to accuse the Prisoners.

Saturday the fourth of this instant April. Which was about the very day the
Witches of the Forest of Pendle were sent to Lancaster. Now was the time for
the Seminary to instruct, accuse, and call into question these poor women:
for the wrinckles of an old wives face is good evidence to the Jury against a
Witch. And how often will the common people say (Her eyes are sunk in her
head, GOD bless us from her.) But old Chattox had Faencie, besides her
withered face, to accuse her.

This Examinate did go with the said Iennet Bierley her Grandmother, and
Ellen Bierley her Aunt, to the house of Walshman, in the nighttime, to murder
a Child in a strange manner. This of all the rest is impossible, to make her of
their counsel, to do murder, whom so cruelly and barbarously they pursue
from day to day, and torment her. The Witches of the Forest of Pendle were
never so cruel nor barbarous.

And she also says, the Child cried not when it was hurt. All this time the
Child was asleep, or the Child was of an extraordinary patience, o inauditum
facinus!

After they had eaten, the said three women and this Examinate daunced every
one of them with one of the Black things: and after, the Black things abused
the said women. Here is good Evidence to take away their lives. This is more
proper for the Legend of Lies, then the Evidence of a witness upon Oath,
before a reverend and learned Judge, able to conceive this Villainy, and find
out the practice. Here is the Religious act of a Priest, but behold the event
of it.

She describes the four Black things to go upright, but not like Men in the
face. The Seminary mistakes the face for the feet. For Chattox and all her
fellow Witches agree, the Devil is clouen-footed: but Fancy had a very good
face, and was a very proper Man.

About ten days after her Examination taken at Black-borne, then she was
tormented. Still he pursues his Project: for hearing his Scholar had done
well, he labored she might do more in this nature. But notwithstanding, many
things are laid to be in the times when they were Papists: yet the Priest never
took pains to discover them, nor instruct his Scholar, until they came to
Church. Then all this was the Act of GOD, to raise a child to open all things,
and then to discover his plotted Tragedy. Yet in this great discovery, the
Seminary forgot to devise a Spirit for them.

And for Thomas Walshman, upon his Oath he says, That his Child had been
sick by the space of a fortnight, or three weeks, before it died. And Grace
Sowerbutts says, they took it out of the bed, struck a nail into the
Navel, sucked blood, laid it down again; and after, took it out of the
Grave, with all the rest, as you have heard. How these two agree, you may, upon
view of their Evidence, the better conceive, and be able to judge.

How well this project, to take away the lives of three innocent poor
creatures by practice and villainy; to induce a young Scholar to commit
perjury, to accuse her own Grandmother, Aunt, etc agrees either with the
Title of a Jesuit, or the duty of a Religious Priest, who should rather
profess Sincerity and Innocence, then practice Treachery: But this was
lawful; for they are Heretics accursed, to leave the company of Priests; to
frequent Churches, hear the word of GOD preached, and profess Religion
sincerely.

But by the course of Times and Accidents, wise men observe, that very seldom
has any mischievous attempt been undertaken without the direction or
assistance of a Jesuit, or Seminary Priest.

Who did not condemn these Women upon this evidence, and hold them guilty of
this so foul and horrible murder? But Almighty God, who in his providence had
provided means for their deliverance, although the Priest by the help of the
Devil, had provided false witnesses to accuse them; yet GOD had prepared and
placed in the Seat of Justice, an upright Judge to sit in Judgment upon their
lives, who after he had heard all the evidence at large against the Prisoners
for the Kings Majesty, demanded of them what answer they could make. They
humbly upon their knees with weeping tears, desired him for Gods cause to
examine Grace Sowerbuts, who set her on, or by whose means this accusation
came against them.

Immediately the countenance of this Grace Sowerbuts changed: The witnesses
being behind, began to quarrel and accuse one an other. In the end his
Lordship examined the Girl, who could not for her life make any direct
answer, but strangely amazed, told him, she was put to a Master to learn,
but he told her nothing of this.

But here as his Lordships care and pains was great to discover the practices
of these odious Witches of the Forest of Pendle, and other places, now upon
their trial before him: So was he desirous to discover this damnable practice,
to accuse these poor Women, and bring their lives in danger, and thereby to
deliver the innocent.

And as he openly delivered it upon the Bench, in the hearing of this great
Audience: That if a Priest or Jesuit had a hand in one end of it, there would
appear to be knauerie, and practice in the other end of it. And that it might
the better appear to the whole World, examined Thomas Sowerbuts, what Master
taught his daughter: in general terms, he denied all.

The Wench had nothing to say, but her Master told her nothing of this. In the
end, some that were present told his Lordship the truth, and the Prisoners
informed him how she went to learn with one Thompson a Seminary Priest, who
had instructed and taught her this accusation against them, because they were
once obstinate Papists, and now came to Church. Here is the discovery of this
Priest, and of his whole practice. Still this fire increased more and more, and
one witness accusing an other, all things were laid open at large.

In the end his Lordship took away the Girl from her Father, and committed
her to M. Leigh, a very religious Preacher, and M. Chisnal, two Justices of the
Peace, to be carefully examined. Who took great pains to examine her of every
particular point: In the end they came into the Court, and there delivered this
Examination as follows.

The Examination of GRACE SOWERBVTS, of Salmesburie, in the County of
Lancaster, Spinster: Taken upon Wednesday the 19. of August 1612. Annoque Reg.
Regis, IACOBI Angliae, Franciae, and Hiberniae, Fidei Defensoris, etc. decimo
and Scotiae, xlvi. Before WILLIAM LEICH, and EDWARD CHISNAL, Esquires; two of
his Majesty's Justices of Peace in the same County: At the Assizes and
general Jail delivery, holden at Lancaster. By Direction of Sir EDWARD
BROMLEY Knight, one of his Majesty's Justices of Assize at Lancaster.
BEing demanded whether the accusation she laid upon her Grandmother, Iennet
Bierley, Ellen Bierley, and Jane Southworth, of Witchcraft, viz. of the killing
of the child of Thomas Walshman, with a nail in the Navel, the boiling,
eating, and oyling, thereby to transform themselves into diverse shapes, was
true; she does utterly deny the same; or that ever she saw any such
practices done by them.

She further says, that one Master Thompson, which she takes to be Master
Christopher Southworth, to whom she was sent to learn her prayers, did
persuade, counsel, and advise her, to deal as formerly has been said
against her said Grandmother, Aunt, and Southworths wife.

And further she confesses and says, that she never did know, or saw any
Devils, nor any other Visions, as formerly by her has been alleged and
informed.

Also she confesses and says, That she was not thrown or cast upon the
Henne-ruffe, and Hay-mow in the Barn, but that she went up upon the Mow her
self by the wall side.

Being further demanded whether she ever was at the Church, she says, she
was not, but promised her after to go to the Church, and that very willingly.

Signum, Grace Sowerbuts. William Leigh. Edward Chisnal.

The Examination of IENNET BIERLEY, ELLEN BIERLEY, and JANE SOVTHWORTH, of
Salmesburie, in the County of Lancaster, Taken upon Wednesday the nineteenth
of August 1612. Annoque Reg. Regis, IACOBI Angliae, Franciae, and Hiberniae,
Fidei Defensoris, etc. decimo and Scotiae, xlvi. Before WILLIAM LEIGH, and
EDWARD CHISNAL, Esquires; two of his Majesty's Justices of Peace in the same
County: At the Assizes and general Jail delivery, holden at Lancaster. By
Direction of Sir EDWARD BROMLEY Knight, one of his Majesty's Justices of Assize
at Lancaster.
IEnnet Bierley being demanded what she knows, or has heard, how Grace
Sowerbuts was brought to Christopher Southworth, Priest; she answers, that
she was brought to M. Singletons house by her own Mother, where the said
Priest was, and that she further heard her said Mother say, after her Daughter
had been in her fit, that she should be brought unto her Master, meaning the
said Priest.

And she further says, that she thinks it was by and through the Counsel
of the said M. Thomson, alias Southworth, Priest, That Grace Sowerbuts her
Grandchild accused her of Witchcraft, and of such practices as she is accused
of: And thinks further, the cause why the said Thompson, alias Southworth
Priest, should practice with the Wench to do it was for that she went to the
Church.

Jane Southworth says she saw Master Thompson, alias Southworth, the Priest,
a month or six weeks before she was committed to the Jail; and had
conference with him in a place called Barne-hey-lane, where and when she
challenged him for slandering her to be a Witch: whereunto he answered, that
what he had heard thereof, he heard from her mother and her Aunt: yet she, this
Examinate, thinks in her heart it was by his procurement, and is moved so to
think, for that she would not be dissuaded from the Church.

Ellen Bierley says, She saw Master Thompson, alias Southworth, six or eight
weeks before she was committed, and thinks the said Priest was the practiser
with Grace Sowerbutts, to accuse her of Witchcraft, and knows no cause why he
should so do, but because she goes to the Church.

Signum, Iennet Bierley. Signum, L Jane Southworth. Signum, TH Ellen Bierley.
William Leigh. Edward Chisnall.


These Examinations being taken, they were brought into the Court, and there
openly in the presence of this great Audience published, and declared to the
Jury of Life and Death; and thereupon the Gentlemen of their Jury required to
consider of them. For although they stood upon their Trial, for matter of Fact
of Witchcraft, Murder, and much more of the like nature: yet in respect all
their Accusations did appear to be practice: they were now to consider of
them, and to acquit them. Thus were these poor Innocent creatures, by the
great care and pains of this honorable Judge, delivered from the danger of
this conspiracy; this bloody practice of the Priest laid open: of whose fact
I may lawfully say; Etiam si ego tacuero clamabunt lapides.

These are but ordinary with Priests and Jesuits: no respect of Blood,
kindred, or friendship, can move them to forbear their Conspiracies: for when
he had labored treacherously to seduce and convert them, and yet could do no
good; then devised he this means.

God of his great mercy deliver us all from them and their damnable
conspiracies: and when any of his Majesty's subjects, so free and innocent as
these, shall come in question grant them as honorable a Trial as Reverend and
worthy a Judge to sit in Judgment upon them; and in the end as speedy a
deliverance. And for that which I have heard of them; seen with my eyes, and
taken pains to Read of them: My humble prayer shall be to God Almighty. Vt
Conuertantur ne pereant. Aut consundantur ne noceant.

To conclude, because the discourse of these three women of Salmesbury has
been long and troublesome to you; it is here placed amongst the Witches, by
special order and commandment, to set forth to the World the practice and
conspiracy of this bloody Butcher. And because I have presented to your view a
Calendar in the Frontispice of this Book, of twenty notorious Witches: I
shall show you their deliverance in order, as they came to their Arraignement
and Trial every day, and as the Gentlemen of every Jury for life and death
stood charged with them.

THE ARRAIGNMENT and Trial of ANNE REDFERNE, Daughter of ANNE WHITTLE, alias
CHATTOX, of the Forest of Pendle, in the County of Lancaster, for Witchcraft;
upon Wednesday the nineteenth of August, at the Assizes and General
Gaole-deliuerie, holden at Lancaster, Before Sir EDWARD BROMLEY Knight, one of
his Majesty's Justices of Assise at Lancaster.
Anne Redferne.
SVch is the horror of Murder, and the crying sin of Blood, that it will
never be satisfied but with Blood. So fell it out with this miserable
creature, Anne Redferne, the daughter of Anne Whittle, alias Chattox: who, as
she was her Mother, and brought her into the World, so was she the means to
bring her into this danger, and in the end to her Execution, for much Blood
spilt, and many other mischiefs done.

For upon Tuesday night (although you hear little of her at the Arraignement
and Trial of old Chattox, her Mother) yet was she arraigned for the murder
of Robert Nutter, and others: and by the favor and merciful consideration of
the Jury, the Evidence being not very pregnant against her, she was acquitted,
and found Not guilty.

Such was her condition and course of life, as had she lived, she would have
been very dangerous: for in making pictures of Clay, she was more cunning then
any: But the innocent blood yet unsatisfied, and crying out unto GOD for
satisfaction and revenge; the cry of his people (to deliver them from the
danger of such horrible and bloody executioners, and from her wicked and
damnable practices) has now again brought her to a second Trial, where you
shall hear what we have upon Record against her.

This Anne Redferne, prisoner in the Castle at Lancaster, being brought to the
Bar, before the great Seat of Justice, was there, according to the former
order and course, indicted and arraigned, for that she felloniously had
practiced, exercised, and used her deuillish and wicked Arts, called
Witchcrafts, Inchauntments, Charms, and Sorceries, in and upon one Christopher
Nutter, and him the said Christopher Nutter, by force of the same Witchcrafts,
felloniously did kill and murder, Contra formam Statuti etc. Et Contra Pacem
etc.

Upon her Arraignement to this Indictment, she pleaded Not-Guiltie; and for the
trial of her life put her self upon GOD and the Country.

So as now the Gentlemen of the Jury of Life and Death stand charged with her
as with others.

The Evidence against Anne Redferne, Prisoner at the Bar.

The Examination of ELIZABETH SOTHERNES, alias OLD DEMBDIKE, taken at the
Fence, in the Forest of Pendle, in the County of Lancaster, the second day of
April, Anno Reg. Regis IACOBI, Angliae, etc. decimo, and Scotiae xlv. Against
ANNE REDFERNE ( the daughter of ANNE WHITTLE, alias CHATTOX) Prisoner at the
Bar: Before ROGER NOVVEL of Read, Esquire, one of his Majesty's Justices of
Peace within the said County.
THis Examinate says, That about half a year before Robert Nutter died, as
this Examinate thinks, this Examinate went to the house of Thomas Redferne,
which was about Midsummer, as she this Examinate now remembers it: and there,
within three yards of the East end of the said house, she saw the said Anne
Whittle and Anne Redferne, wife of the said Thomas Redferne, and daughter of
the said Anne Whittle, the one on the one side of a Ditch, and the other on the
other side, and two pictures of Clay or Marle lying by them, and the third
picture the said Anne Whittle was making. And the said Anne Redferne, her said
daughter, wrought her Clay or Marle to make the third picture withal. And this
Examinate passing by them, a Spirit, called Tibbe, in the shape of a black
Cat, appeared unto her this Examinate* and said, Turn back again, and do as
they do. To whom this Examinate said, What are they doing? Whereunto the said
Spirit said, They are making three pictures: whereupon she asked, whose
pictures they were? whereunto the said Spirit said, They are the pictures of
Christopher Nutter, Robert Nutter, and Mary, wife of the said Robert Nutter.
But this Examinate denying to go back to help them to make the pictures
aforesaid, the said Spirit seeming to be angry therefore, shot or pushed this
Examinate into the Ditch; and so shed the milk which this Examinate had in a
Kanne, or Kitt: and so thereupon the Spirit at that time vanished out of this
Examinates sight. But presently after that, the said Spirit appeared unto this
Examinate again in the shape of a Hare, and so went with her about a quarter of
a mile, but said nothing unto her this Examinate, nor she to it.

The Examination of MARGARET CROOK Against the said ANNE REDFERNE: Taken the
day and year aforesaid, Before ROGER NOVVEL aforesaid, Esquire, one of his
Majesty's Justices of the Peace in the County of Lancaster.
THis Examinate, sworn and examined upon her oath, says, That about eighteen
or nineteen years ago, this Examinates brother, called Robert Nutter, about
Whitsontide the same year, meeting with the said Anne Redferne, upon some
speeches between them they fell out, as this Examinats said brother told this
Examinat: and within some week, or fort-night, then next after, this Examinats
said brother fell sick, and so languished until about Candlemas then next
after, and then died. In which time of his sickness, he did a hundred times at
the least say, That the said Anne Redferne and her associates had bewitched him
to death. And this Examinate further says, That this Examinates Father, called
Christopher Nutter, about Maudlint^de next after following fell sick, and so
languished, until Michaelmas then next after, and then died: during which time
of his sickness, he did sundry times say, That he was bewitched; but named
no body that should do the same.

The Examination of JOHN NVTTER, of Higham Booth, in the Forest of Pendle, in
the County of Lancaster, yeoman, Against the said ANNE REDFERNE: Taken the day
and year aforesaid, Before ROGER NOVVEL Esquire, one of his Majesty's Justices
of Peace in the County of Lancaster.
THis Examinate, sworn and examined upon his oath, says, That in or about
Christmas, some eighteen or nineteen years ago, this Examinat coming from
Burnley with Christopher Nutter and Robert Nutter, this Examinates Father and
Brother, this Examinate heard his said Brother then say unto his said Father
these words, or to this effect. Father, I am sure I am bewitched by the
Chattox, Anne Chattox, and Anne Redferne her daughter, I pray you cause them to
be laid in Lancaster Castle: Whereunto this Examinates Father answered, Thou
art a foolish Ladde, it is not so, it is thy miscarriage. Then this Examinates
Brother weeping, said; nay, I am sure that I am bewitched by them, and if ever
I come again (for he was ready to go to Sir Richard Shuttleworths, then his
Master) I will procure them to be laid where they shall be glad to bite Lice
in two with their teeth.

Hereupon Anne Whittle, alias Chattox, her Mother, was brought forth to be
examined, who confessed the making of the pictures of Clay, and in the end
cried out very heartily to God to forgive her sins, and upon her knees
entreated for this Redferne, her daughter.

Here was likewise many witnesses examined upon oath Viua voce, who charged her
with many strange practices, and declared the death of the parties, all in such
sort, and about the time in the Examinations formerly mentioned.

All men that knew her affirmed, she was more dangerous then her Mother, for
she made all or most of the Pictures of Clay, that were made or found at any
time. Wherefore I leave her to make good use of the little time she has to
repent in: but no means could move her to repentance, for as she lived, so
she dyed.

The Examination of JAMES DEVICE, taken the day and year aforesaid. Before
ROGER NOWEL, and NICHOLAS BANNESTER, Esquires: two of his Majesty's Justices of
Peace within the said County of Lancaster. viz.
THe said Examinate upon his oath says, That about two years ago, he this
Examinate saw three Pictures of Clay, of half a yard long, at the end of
Redfernes house, which Redferne had one of the Pictures in his hand, Marie his
Daughter had another in her hand, and the said Redfernes wife, Anne Redferne
the Witch.
now prisoner at Lancaster, had an other Picture in her hand, which Picture she
the said Redfernes wife, was then crumbling, but whose Pictures they were, this
Examinate cannot tell. And at his returning back again, some ten Roods off
them there appeared unto him this Examinate a thing like a Hare, which spit
fire at him this Examinate.

THE ARRAIGNMENT and Trial of ALICE NVTTER, of the Forest of Pendle, in the
County of Lancaster, for Witchcraft; upon Wednesday the nineteenth of August,
at the Assizes and general Jail delivery, holden at Lancaster. Before Sir
EDWARD BROMLEY Knight, one of his Majesty's Justices of Assize, at Lancaster.
Alice Nutter.
THe two degrees of persons which chiefly practice Witchcraft, are such, as
are in great misery and poverty, for such the Devil allures to follow him, by
promising great riches, and worldly commodity; Others, though rich, yet burn
in a desperate desire of Revenge; He allures them by promises, to get their
turn satisfied to their hearts contentment, as in the whole proceedings
against old Chattox: the examinations of old Dembdike; and her children, there
was not one of them, but have declared the like, when the Devil first
assaulted them.

But to attempt this woman in that sort, the Devil had small means: For it is
certain she was a rich woman; had a great estate, and children of good hope:
in the common opinion of the world, of good temper, free from envy or malice;
yet whether by the means of the rest of the Witches, or some unfortunate
occasion, she was drawn to fall to this wicked course of life, I know not:
but hither she is now come to receive her Trial, both for Murder, and many
other vilde and damnable practices.

Great was the care and pains of his Lordship, to make trial of the
Innocence of this woman, as shall appear unto you upon the Examination of
Iennet Device, in open Court, at the time of her Arraignement and Trial; by an
extraordinary means of Trial, to mark her out from the rest.

It is very certain she was of the Grand-counsell at Malking-Tower upon
Good Friday, and was there present, which was a very great argument to condemn
her.

This Alice Nutter, Prisoner in the Castle at Lancaster: Being brought to the
Bar before the Great Seat of Justice; was there according to the former order
and course Indicted and Arraigned, for that she felloniously had practiced,
exercised, and used her devilish and wicked Arts, called Witchcrafts,
Enchantments, Charms and Sorceries, in and upon Henry Mitton: and him the said
Henry Mitton, by force of the same Witchcrafts, felloniously did kill and
murder. Contra formam Statuti, etc. Et Contra Pacem, etc.

Upon her Arraignement, to this Indictment she pleaded not guilty; and for
the trial of her life, put her self upon God and the Country.

So as now the Gentlemen of the Jury of life and death stand charged with her,
as with others.

The Evidence against Alice Nutter Prisoner at the Bar.

The Examination of JAMES DEVICE son of ELIZABETH DEVICE: Taken the seven and
twentieth day of April: Anno Reg. Regis IACOBI Angliae, Franciae, and
Hiberniae, Fidei Defensor. etc. Decimo and Scotiae, xlvj. Before ROGER NOVVEL
and NICHOLAS BANESTER, two of his Majesty's Justices of Peace in the County of
Lancaster. Against Alice Nutter.
THe said Examinate says upon his oath, That he heard his Grandmother say,
about a year ago, that his mother, called Elizabeth Device, and his
Grandmother, and the wife of Richard Nutter, Alice Nutter the Prisoner.
of the Rough-Lee aforesaid, had killed one Henry Mitton, of the Rough-Lee
aforesaid, by Witchcraft. The reason wherefore he was so killed, was for that
this Examinats said Grandmother had asked the said Mitton a penny: and he
denying her thereof; thereupon she procured his death as aforesaid.

The Examination of ELIZABETH DEVICE, mother of the said JAMES DEVICE. Against
ALICE NVTTER, wife of RICHARD NVTTER, Prisoner at the Bar, upon her
Arraignement and Trial. Before ROGER NOVVEL and NICHOLAS BANETER, Esquires,
the day and year aforesaid.
THis Examinate upon her oath confesses, and says, That she, with the wife of
Richard Nutter, called Alice Nutter, Prisoner at the Bar; and this Examinates
said mother, Elizabeth Sotherne, alias Old Demdike; joined altogether, and
bewitched the said Henry Mitton to death.

This Examinate further says, That upon Good Friday last, there dined at this
examinats house two women of Burneley Parish, whose names the said Richard
Nutters wife, Alice Nutter, now Prisoner at the Bar, does know.

The Examination of JAMES DEVICE aforesaid, Against The said ALICE NVTTER, the
day and year aforesaid.
THe said Examinate upon his oath says, That upon Good Friday about twelve of
the clock in the day time, there dined in this Examinats said mothers house, a
number of persons, whereof three were men, with this Examinate, and the rest
women: and that they met there for these three causes following, as this
Examinats said mother told this Examinate.

The first was for the naming of the Spirit, which Alizon Device, now Prisoner
at Lancaster, had, but did not name him, because she was not there.

The second cause was, for the delivery of his said Grandmother; this
Examinates said sister, Alizon; the said Anne Chattox, and her daughter
Redferne; killing the Jailer at Lancaster, and before the next Assizes to blow
up the Castle there; to the end that the foresaid Prisoners might by that
means make an escape, and get away: all which this Examinate then heard them
confer of.

And he also says, The names of such Witches as were on Good Friday at this
Examinats said Grand mothers house, and now this Examinates own mothers, for
so many of them as he does know, were amongst others, Alice Nutter, mother of
Miles Nutter, now Prisoner at the Bar. And this Examinate further says, That
all the said Witches went out of the said house in their own shapes and
likenesses; and they all, by that time they were forth of the doors, were
gotten on horseback, like unto Foales, some of one color, and some of
another; and Prestons wife was the last: and when she got on horseback, they
all presently vanished out of this Examinates sight: and before their said
parting away, they all appointed to meet at the said Prestons wifes house that
day twelve month, at which time the said Prestons wife promised to make them a
great feast: and if they had occasion to meet in the mean time, then should
warning be given to meet upon Romleys Moore.

The Examination and Evidence of IENNET DEVICE, daughter of ELIZABETH DEVICE.
Against ALICE NVTTER, Prisoner at the Bar.
THe said Examinate says, That on Good Friday last, there was about 20.
persons, whereof only two were men (to this Examinates remembrance) at her said
Grand-mothers house at Malking-Tower, about twelve of the clock; all which
persons, this Examinats said mother told her, were Witches. And she further
says, she knows the names of six of them, viz. the wife of Hugh Hargreiues
under Pendle, Christopher Howgate of Pendle, Uncle to this Examinat and
Elizabeth his wife; and Dick Miles wife of the Rough-Lee, Christopher Iacks of
Thorniholme, and his wife; and the names of the residue, she this Examinate
does not know.

AFter these Examinations were openly read, his Lordship being very suspicious
of the accusation of this young wench Iennet Device, commanded one to take her
away into the upper Hall, intending in the mean time to make Trial of her
Evidence, and the Accusation especially against this woman, who is charged to
have been at Malking-Tower, at this great meeting. Master Couel was commanded
to set all his Prisoners by themselves, and betwixt every Witch another
Prisoner, and some other strange women amongst them, so as no man could judge
the one from the other: and these being set in order before the Court from the
prisoners, then was the Wench Iennet Device commanded to be brought into the
Court: and being set before my Lord, he took great pains to examine her of
every particular Point, What women were at Malking-Tower upon Good Friday? How
she knew them? What were the names of any of them? And how she knew them to be
such as she named?

In the end being examined by my Lord, Whether she knew them that were there by
their faces, if she saw them? she told my Lord she should: whereupon in the
presence of this great Audience, in open Court, she went and took Alice
Nutter, this prisoner, by the hand, and accused her to be one: and told her in
what place she sat at the Feast at Malking-Tower, at the great assembly of the
Witches, and who sat next her: what conference they had, and all the rest of
their proceedings at large, without any manner of contrariety.

Being demanded further by his Lordship, Whether she knew Johan a Style? she
alleged, she knew no such woman to be there, neither did she ever hear her
name.

This could be no forged or false Accusation, but the very Act of GOD to
discover her.

Thus was no means left to do her all indifferent favor, but it was used to
save her life; and to this she could give no answer.

But nothing would serve: for old Dembdike, old Chattox, and others, had
charged her with innocent blood, which cries out for Revenge, and will be
satisfied. And therefore Almighty GOD, in his Justice, has cut her off.

And here I leave her, until she come to her Execution, where you shall hear
she died very impenitent; insomuch as her own children were never able to
move her to confess any particular offense, or declare anything, even in
Articulo Mortis: which was a very fearful thing to all that were present, who
knew she was guilty.

THE ARRAIGNMENT and Trial of KATHERINE HEVVIT, Wife of JOHN HEVVIT, alias
MOVLD-HEELES, of Coulne, in the County of Lancaster Clothier, for Witchcraft;
upon Wednesday the nineteenth of August, at the Assizes and General
Gaole-deliuerie, holden at Lancaster, Before Sir EDWARD BROMLEY Knight, one of
his Majesty's Justices of Assise at Lancaster.
Katherine Hewit.
WHo but Witches can be proofs, and so witnesses of the doings of Witches?
since all their Meetings, Conspiracies, Practices, and Murders, are the works
of Darkness: But to discover this wicked Fury, GOD has not only raised
means beyond expectation, by the voluntary Confession and Accusation of all
that are gone before, to accuse this Witch (being Witches, and thereby
witnesses of her doings) but after they were committed, by means of a Child,
to discover her to be one, and a Principal in that wicked assembly at
Malking-Tower, to devise such a damnable course for the deliverance of their
friends at Lancaster, as to kill the Jailer, and blow up the Castle, wherein
the Devil did but labor to assemble them together, and so being known to
send them all one way: And herein I shall commend unto your good consideration
the wonderful means to condemn these parties, that lived in the world, free
from suspicion of any such offenses, as are proved against them: And thereby
the more dangerous, that in the success we may lawfully say, the very Finger
of God did point the^ out. And she that never saw them, but in that meeting,
did accuse them, and by their faces discover them.

This Katherine Hewyt, Prisoner in the Castle at Lancaster, being brought to
the Bar before the great Seat of Justice, was there according to the former
order and course Indicted and Arraigned, for that she felloniously had
practiced, exercised, and used her Deuillish and wicked Arts, called
Witch-crafts, Enchantments, Charms, and Sorceries, in, and upon Anne Foulds;
and the same Anne Foulds, by force of the same witchcraft, felloniously did
kill and murder. Contra formam Statuti, etc. Et contra Pacem dicti Domini
Regis, etc.

Upon her Arraignement to this Indictment, she pleaded not guilty; And for
the trial of her life put her self upon God and her Country.

So as now the Gentlemen of the Jury of life and death, stand charged with her
as with others.

The Evidence against Katherine Hewyt, Prisoner at the Bar.

The Examination of JAMES DEVICE, Son of ELIZABETH DEVICE, taken the seven
and twentieth day of April, Anno Reg. Regis IACOBI, Angliae, Franciae, and
Hiberniae, decimo, and Scotiae quadragesimo quarto. Before ROGER NOWEL, and
NICHOLAS BANNESTER, Esquires; two of his Majesty's Justices of Peace, in the
County of Lancaster. Against KATHERINE HEWYT, alias MOVLD-HEELES of Colne. viz.
THis Examinate says, that upon Good Friday last, about twelve of the Clock in
the day time, there dined at this Examinates Mothers house a number of persons:
And he also says, that they were Witches; and that the names of the said
Witches, that were there, for so many of them as he did know, were amongst
others Katherine Hewyt, wife of John Hewyt, alias Mould-heeles, of Colne, in
the County of Lancaster Clothier; And that the said Witch, called Katherine
Hewyt, alias Mould-heeles, and one Alice Gray, did confess amongst the said
Witches at their meeting at Malkin-Tower aforesaid, that they had killed Foulds
wifes child, called Anne Foulds, of Colne: And also said, that they had then in
hanck a child of Michael Hartleys of Colne.

And this Examinate further says, that all the said Witches went out of the
said house in their own shapes and likenesses, and by that time they were
gotten forth of the doors, they were gotten on Horseback like unto foales,
some of one color, some of an other, and the said Prestons wife was the last:
And when she got on Horseback, they all presently vanished out of this
Examinates sight. And before their said parting away they all appointed to
meet at the said Prestons wifes house that day twelve Months: at which time
the said Prestons wife promised to make them a great feast, and if they had
occasion to meet in the mean time, then should warning be given that they all
should meet upon Romlesmoore.

The Examination and Evidence of ELIZABETH DEVICE, Mother of the said JAMES
DEVICE, Against KATHERINE HEWYT, alias MOVLD-HEELES, Prisoner at the Bar upon
her Arraignement and Trial, taken the day and year aforesaid. viz.
THis Examinate upon her oath confesses, that upon Good Friday last there
dyned at this Examinates house, which she has said are Witches, and verily
thinks to be Witches, such as the said James Device has formerly spoken of;
amongst which was Katherine Hewyt, alias Mould-heeles, now Prisoner at the
Bar: and she also says, that at their meeting on Good Friday at
Malkin-Tower aforesaid, the said Katherine Hewyt, alias Mould-heeles, and Alice
Gray, did confess, they had killed a child of Foulds of Colne, called Anne
Foulds, and had gotten hold of an other.

And she further says, the said Katherine Hewyt with all the rest, there gave
her consent with the said Prestons wife for the murder of Master Lister.

The Examination and Evidence of IENNET DEVICE, Against KATHERINE HEWYT, alias
MOVLD-HEELES, Prisoner at the Bar.
THe said Examinate says, That upon Good Friday last, there was about twenty
persons, where of two were men to this Examinates remembrance, at her said
Grand-mothers house, called Malkin-Tower aforesaid, about twelve of the clock:
All which persons this Examinates said mother told her were Witches, and that
she knows the names of six of the said Witches.

Then was the said Iennet Device commanded by his Lordship, to find and point
out the said Katherine Hewyt, alias Mould-heeles, amongst all the rest of the
said Women, whereupon she went and took the said Katherine Hewyt by the hand:
Accused her to be one, and told her in what place she sat at the feast at
Malkin-Tower, at the great Assembly of the Witches, and who sat next her; what
conference they had, and all the rest of their proceedings at large, without
any manner of contrariety: Being demanded further by his Lordship, whether
Ioane a Down were at that Feast, and meeting, or no? she alleged she knew
no such woman to be there, neither did she ever hear her name.

If this were not an Honorable means to try the accusation against them, let
all the World upon due examination give judgment of it. And here I leave her
the last of this company, to the Verdict of the Gentlemen of the Jury of life
and death, as hereafter shall appear.

Here the Jury of Life and Death, having spent the most part of the day, in
due consideration of their offenses; Returned into the Court to deliver up
their Verdict against them, as follows.

The Verdict of Life and Death.
WHo upon their Oaths found Iennet Bierley, Ellen Bierley, and Jane
Southworth, not guilty of the offense of Witchcraft* contained in the
Indictment against them.

Anne Redferne, guilty of the fellonie and murder, contained in the Indictment
against her.

Alice Nutter, guilty of the fellonie and murder contained in the Indictment
against her.

And

Katherine Hewyt, guilty of the fellonie and murder contained in the
Indictment against her.

Whereupon Master Couell was commanded by the Court to take away the Prisoners
Convicted, and to bring forth John Bulcocke, Jane Bulcocke his mother, and
Alizon Device, Prisoners in the Castle at Lancaster, to receive their Trialls.

Who were brought to their Arraignement and Trial as hereafter follows.

THE ARRAIGNMENT and Trial of JOHN BVLCOCK and JANE BVLCOCK his mother, wife
of C^^ISTOPHER BVLCOCK, of the Mosse-end, in the County of Lancaster, for
Witchcraft: upon Wednesday in the afternoon, the nineteenth of August, 1612.
At the Assizes and general Jail delivery, holden at Lancaster. Before Sir
EDWARD BROMLEY, Knight, one of his Majesty's Justices of Assizes at Lancaster.
John Bulcock, and Jane Bulcock his mother.
IF there were nothing to charge these Prisoners withal, whom now you may
behold upon their Arraignement and Trial but their poasting in haste to the
great Assembly at Malking-Tower, there to advise and consult amongst the
Witches, what were to be done to set at liberty the Witches in the Castle at
Lancaster: Join with Iennet Preston for the murder of Master Lister; and such
like wicked and devilish practices: It were sufficient to accuse them for
Witches, and to bring their lives to a lawful Trial. But amongst all the
Witches in this company, there is not a more fearful and devilish Act
committed, and voluntarily confessed by any of them, comparable to this, under
the degree of Murder* which impudently now (at the Bar having formerly
confessed;) they forswear, swearing they were never at the great assembly at
Malking Tower; although the very Witches that were present in that action with
them, justify, maintain, and swear the same to be true against them: Crying
out in very violent and outrageous manner, even to the gallows, where they
died impenitent for any thing we know, because they died silent in the
particulars. These of all others were the most desperate wretches (void of all
fear or grace) in all this Pack; Their offenses not much inferior to
Murder: for which you shall hear what matter of Record we have against them;
and whether they be worthy to continue, we leave it to the good consideration
of the Jury.

The said John Bulcock, and Jane Bulcock his mother, Prisoners in the Castle at
Lancaster, being brought to the Bar before the great Seat of Justice: were
there according to the former order and course Indicted and Arraigned, for that
they felloniously had practiced, exercised and used their devilish and wicked
Arts, called Witchcrafts, Enchantments, Charms and Sorceries, in and upon the
body of Iennet Deane: so as the body of the said Iennet Deane, by force of the
said Witchcrafts, wasted and consumed; and after she, the said Iennet, became
mad. Contra formam Statuti, etc. Et Contra Pacem, etc.

Upon their Arraignement, to this Indictment they pleaded not guilty; and for
the trial of their lives put themselves upon God and their Country.

So as now the Gentlemen of the Jury of Life and Death stand charged with them
as with others.

The Evidence against John Bulcock, and Jane Bulcock his mother, Prisoners at
the Bar.

The Examination of JAMES DEVICE taken the seven and twentieth day of April
aforesaid. Before ROGER NOVVEL and NICHOLAS BANESTER, Esquires, two of his
Majesty's Justices of Peace in the County of Lancaster. Against JOHN BVLCOCK
and JANE BVLCOCK his mother.
THis Examinate says, That upon Good Friday, about twelve of the clock in the
day time, there dined in this Examinates said Mothers house a number of
persons, whereof three were men with this Examinate and the rest women, and
that they met there for these three causes following, as this Examinates said
mother told this Examinate. The first was, for the naming of the Spirit which
Allison Device, now prisoner at Lancaster had, but did not name him, because
she was not there. The second cause was, for the delivery of his said
Grandmother; this Examinates said sister Allison; the said Anne Chattox, and
her daughter Redferne, killing the Jailer at Lancaster, and before the next
Assizes to blow up the Castle there, to that end the aforesaid prisoners might
by that means make an escape, and get away: All which this Examinate then
heard them confer of.

And he also says, That the names of such said Witches as were on Good Friday
at this Examinates said Grand-mothers house, and now this Examinates own
mothers, for so many of them as he did know, were these, viz. Jane Bulcock,
wife of Christopher Bulcock, of the Moss end, and John her son amongst
others, etc.

And this Examinate further says, That all the said Witches went out of the
said house in their own shapes and likenesses: and they all, by that they were
forth of the doors, were gotten on horseback, like unto Foales, some of one
color, and some of another, and Prestons wife was the last: and when she got
on horseback, they all presently vanished out of this Examinates sight.

And further he says, That the said John Bulcock and Jane his said Mother, did
confess upon Good Friday last, at the said Malking-Tower, in the hearing of
this Examinate, That they had bewitched, at the new-field Edge in Yorkshire, a
woman called Iennet, wife of John Deyne, besides, her Reason; and the said
Woman's name so bewitched, he did not hear them speak of* And this Examinate
further says, That at the said Feast at Malking-Tower this Examinate heard
them all give their consents to put the said Master Thomas Lister of Westby to
death. And after Master Lister should be made away by Witchcraft, then all the
said Witches gave their consents to join all together, to hanck Master Leonard
Lister, when he should come to dwell at the Cow-gill, and so put him to death.

The Examination of ELIZABETH DEVICE, Taken the day and year aforesaid, Before
ROGER NOVVEL and NICHOLAS BANESTER, Esquires, two of his Majesty's Justices of
Peace in the County of Lancaster, Against JOHN BVLCOCK, and JANE BVLCOCK, his
mother.
THis Examinate says upon her oath, That she does verily think, that the said
Bulcockes wife does know of some Witches to be about Padyham and Burnley.

And she further says, That at the said meeting at Malking-Tower, as
aforesaid, Katherine Hewit and John Bulcock, with all the rest then there, gave
their consents, with the said Prestons wife, for the killing of the said Master
Lister.

The Examination and Evidence of IENNET DEVICE Against JOHN BVLCOCKE and JANE
his mother, prisoners at the Bar.
THe said Examinate says, That upon Good Friday last there was about twenty
persons, whereof two were men, to this Examinates remembrance, at her said
Grand-mothers house, called Malking-Tower aforesaid: all which persons, this
Examinates said mother told her were Witches, and that she knows the names of
six of the said Witches.

Then was the said Iennet Device commanded by his Lordship to find and point
out the said John Bulcock and Jane Bulcock amongst all the rest: whereupon she
went and took Jane Bulcock by the hand, accused her to be one, and told her in
what place she sat at the Feast at Malking-Tower, at the great Assembly of the
Witches; and who sat next her: and accused the said John Bulcock to turn the
Spitt there; what conference they had, and all the rest of their proceedings at
large, without any manner of contrariety.

She further told his Lordship, there was a woman that came out of Craven to
that Great Feast at Malking-Tower, but she could not find her out amongst all
those women.

The names of the Witches at the Great Assembly and Feast at Malking-Tower,
viz. upon Good Friday last, 1612.
Elizabeth Device. Alice Nutter. Katherine Hewit, alias Mould-heeles. John
Bulcock. Jane Bulcock. Alice Graie. Jennet Hargraues. Elizabeth Hargraues.
Christopher Howgate, Son to old Dembdike. Christopher Hargraues. Grace Hay,
of Padiham. Anne Crunckshey, of Marchden. Elizabeth Howgate. Jennet Preston,
Executed at York for the Murder of Master Lister.
With many more, which being bound over to appear at the last Assizes, are
since that time fled to save themselves.

THE ARRAIGNMENT and Trial of ALIZON DEVICE, Daughter of ELIZABETH DEVICE,
within the Forest of Pendle, in the County of Lancaster aforesaid, for
Witchcraft.
Alizon Device.
BEhold, above all the rest, this lamentable spectacle of a poor distressed
Peddler; how miserably he was tormented, and what punishment he endured for a
small offense, by the wicked and damnable practice of this odious Witch, first
instructed therein by old Dembdike her Grandmother, of whose life and death
with her good conditions, I have written at large before in the beginning of
this work, out of her own Examinations and other Records, now remaining with
the Clarke of the Crown at Lancaster: And by her Mother brought up in this
detestable course of life; wherein I pray you observe but the manner and course
of it in order, even to the last period at her Execution, for this horrible
fact, able to terrify and astonish any man living.

This Alizon Device, Prisoner in the Castle of Lancaster, being brought to the
Bar before the great Seat of Justice, was there according to the former order
and course indicted and arraigned, for that she felloniously had practiced,
exercised, and used her Deuillish and wicked Arts, called Witch-craf^s,
Enchantments, Charms, and Sorceries, in, and upon one John Law, a
Petti-chapman, and him had lamed, so that his body wasted and consumed, etc.
Contra formam Statuti, etc. Et contra pacem dicti Domini Regis, Coronam and
Dignitatem, etc.

Upon the Arraignement, The poor Peddler, by name John Law, being in the Castle
about the Moot-hall, attending to be called, not well able to go or stand,
being led thither by his poor son Abraham Law: My Lord Gerrard moved the
Court to call the poor Peddler, who was there ready, and had attended all the
Assizes, to give evidence for the Kings Majesty, against the said Alizon
Device, Prisoner at the Bar, even now upon her Trial. The Prisoner being at
the Bar, and now beholding the Peddler, deformed by her Witchcraft, and
transformed beyond the course of Nature, appeared to give evidence against her;
having not yet pleaded to her Indictment, saw it was in vain to deny it, or
stand upon her justification: She humbly upon her knees at the Bar with
weeping tears, prayed the Court to hear her.

Whereupon my Lord Bromley commanded she should be brought out from the
Prisoners near unto the Court, and there on her knees, she humbly asked
forgiveness for her offense: And being required to make an open declaration or
confession of her offense: She confessed as follows. viz.

The Confession of ALIZON DEVICE, Prisoner at the Bar: published and declared
at time of her Arraignement and Trial in open Court.
SHe says, That about two years agone, her Grandmother, called Elizabeth
Sothernes, alias Dembdike, did (sundry times in going or walking together, as
they went begging) persuade and advise this Examinate to let a Devil or a
Familiar appear to her, and that she, this Examinate would let him suck at
some part of her; and she might have and do what she would. And so not long
after these persuasions, this Examinate being walking toward the Rough-Lee, in
a Close of one John Robinsons, there appeared unto her a thing like unto a
Black Dog: speaking unto her, this Examinate, and desiring her to give him
her Soul, and he would give her power to do any thing she would: whereupon
this Examinate being therewithal enticed, and setting her down; the said
Blacke-Dogge did with his mouth (as this Examinate then thought) suck at her
breast, a little below her Paps, which place did remain blew half a year
next after: which said Blacke-Dogge did not appear to this Examinate, until
the eighteenth day of March last: at which time this Examinate met with a
Peddler on the highway, called Colne-field, near unto Colne: and this
Examinate demanded of the said Peddler to buy some pinnes of him; but the said
Peddler sturdily answered this Examinate that he would not loose his Pack; and
so this Examinate parting with him: presently there appeared to this Examinate
the Blacke-Dogge, which appeared unto her as before: which Black Dog spoke
unto this Examinate in English, saying; What would thou have me to do unto
yonder man? to whom this Examinate said, What can thou do at him? and the
Dog answered again, I can lame him: whereupon this Examinat answered, and
said to the said Black Dog, Lame him: and before the Peddler was gone fortic
Rods further, he fell down Lame: and this Examinate then went after the said
Peddler; and in a house about the distance aforesaid, he was lying Lame: and so
this Examinate went begging in Trawden Forest that day, and came home at
night: and about five days next after, the said Black-Dogge did appear to
this Examinate, as she was going a begging, in a Cloase near the New-Church in
Pendle, and spoke again to her, saying; Stay and speak with me; but this
Examinate would not: Sithence which time this Examinat never saw him.

Which agrees verbatim with her own Examination taken at Read, in the
County of Lancaster, the thirtieth day of March, before Master Nowel, when she
was apprehended and taken.

MY Lord Bromley, and all the whole Court not a little wondering, as they had
good cause, at this liberal and voluntary confession of the Witch; which is
not ordinary with people of their condition and quality: and beholding also
the poor distressed Peddler, standing by, commanded him upon his oath to
declare the manner how, and in what sort he was handled; how he came to be
lame, and so to be deformed; who deposed upon his oath, as follows.

The Evidence of JOHN LAW, Petty Chapman, upon his oath: Against ALIZON
DEVICE, Prisoner at the Bar.
HE deposes and says, That about the eighteenth of March last past, he being
a Peddler, went with his Pack of wares at his back through Colne-field: where
unluckily he met with Alizon Device, now Prisoner at the Bar, who was very
earnest with him for pinnes, but he would give her none: whereupon she seemed
to be very angry; and when he was past her, he fell down lame in great
extremity; and afterward by means got into an Alehouse in Colne, near unto
the place where he was first bewitched: and as he lay there in great pain,
not able to stir either hand or foot; he saw a great Black-Dogge stand by
him, with very fearful fiery eyes, great teeth, and a terrible countenance,
looking him in the face; whereat he was very sore afraid: and immediately after
came in the said Alizon Device, who staid not long there, but looked on him,
and went away.

After which time he was tormented both day and night with the said Alizon
Device; and so continued lame, not able to travel or take pains ever since
that time: which with weeping tears in great passion turned to the Prisoner;
in the hearing of all the Court he said to her, This thou know to be too
true: and thereupon she humbly acknowledged the same, and cried out to God to
forgive her; and upon her knees with weeping tears, humbly prayed him to
forgive her that wicked offense; which he very freely and voluntarily did.

Hereupon Master Nowel standing up, humbly prayed the favor of the Court, in
respect this Fact of Witchcraft was more eminent and apparent then the rest,
that for the better satisfaction of the Audience, the Examination of Abraham
Law might be read in Court.

The Examination of ABRAHAM LAW, of Hallifax, in the County of York,
Cloth-dier, taken upon oath the thirtieth day of March, 1612. Before ROGER
NOVVEL, Esquire, aforesaid.
BEing sworn and examined, says, That upon Saturday last save one, being the
one and twentieth day of this instant March, he, this Examinate was sent for,
by a letter that came from his father, that he should come to his father, John
Law, who then lay in Colne speechless, and had the left-side lamed all save
his eye: and when this Examinate came to his father, his said father had
something recovered his speech, and did complain that he was pricked with
Knives, Elsons and Sickles and that the same hurt was done unto him at
Colne-field, presently after that Alizon Device had offered to buy some pinnes
of him, and she had no money to pay for them withal; but as this Examinates
father told this Examinate, he gave her some pinnes. And this Examinate further
says, That he heard his said father say* that the hurt he had in his lamenesse
was done unto him by the said Alizon Device, by Witchcraft. And this Examinate
further says, that he heard his said Father further say, that the said Alizon
Device did lie upon him and trouble him. And this Examinate seeing his said
Father so tormented with the said Alizon and with one other old woman, whom
this Examinates Father did not know as it seemed: This Examinate made search
after the said Alizon, and having found her, brought her to his said Father
yesterday being the nine and twenteth of this instant March: whose said Father
in the hearing of this Examinate and diverse others did charge the said Alizon
to have bewitched him, which the said Alizon confessing did ask this
Examinates said Father forgiveness upon her knees for the same; whereupon this
Examinaes Father accordingly did forgive her. Which Examination in open Court
upon his oath he justified to be true.

Whereupon it was there affirmed to the Court that this John Law the Peddler,
before his unfortunate meeting with this Witch, was a very able sufficient
stout man of Body, and a goodly man of Stature. But by this Deuilish art of
Witchcraft his head is drawn awrie, his Eyes and face deformed, His speech
not well to be understood; his Thighs and Legs starcke lame: his Arms lame
especially the left side, his hands lame and turned out of their course, his
Body able to endure no travel: and thus remains at this present time.

The Prisoner being examined by the Court whether she could help the poor
Peddler to his former strength and health* she answered she could not, and so
did many of the rest of the Witches: But she, with others, affirmed, That if
old Dembdike had lived, she could and would have helped him out of that great
misery, which so long he has endured for so small an offense, as you have
heard.

These things being thus openly published against her, and she knowing her
self to be guilty of every particular, humbly acknowledged the Indictment
against her to be true, and that she was guilty of the offense therein
contained, and that she had justly deserved death for that and many other such
like: whereupon she was carried away, until she should come to the Bar to
receive her judgment of death.

Oh, who was present at this lamentable spectacle, that was not moved with
pity to behold it!

Hereupon my Lord Gerard, Sir Richard Houghton, and others, who much pitied the
poor Peddler, At the entreatie of my Lord Bromley the Judge, promised some
present course should be taken for his relief and maintenance; being now
discharged and sent away.

But here I may not let her pass; for that I find something more upon Record
to charge her withal: for although she were but a young Witch, of a years
standing, and thereunto induced by Dembdike her Grandmother, as you have
formerly heard, yet she was spotted with innocent blood among the rest: for in
one part of the Examination of James Device, her brother, he deposes as
follows, viz.

The Examination of JAMES DEVICE, brother to the said ALIZON DEVICE, Taken upon
Oath Before ROGER NOVVEL Esquire, aforesaid, the thirtieth day of March, 1612.
James Device, of the Forest of Pendle, in the County of Lancaster, Labourer,
sworn and examined, says, That about Saint Peter's day last one Henry Bulcock
came to the house of Elizabeth Sothernes, alias Dembdike, Grandmother to this
Examinate, and said, That the said Alizon Device had bewitched a Child of his,
and desired her, that she would go with him to his house: which accordingly
she did: and thereupon she the said Alizon fell down on her knees, and asked
the said Bulcock forgiveness; and confessed to him* that she had bewitched the
said Child, as this Examinate heard his said sister confess unto him this
Examinate.

And although she were never indicted for this offense, yet being matter upon
Record* I thought it convenient to join it unto her former Fact.

HEre the Jury of Life and Death having spent the most part of the day in due
consideration of their offenses, returned into the Court to deliver up their
Verdict against them, as follows.

The Verdict of Life and Death.
WHo upon their Oaths found John Bulcock and Jane Bulcock his mother, not
guilty of the Felony by Witchcraft, contained in the Indictment against them.

Alizon Device convicted upon her own Confession.

Whereupon Master Couel was commanded by the Court to take away the Prisoners
convicted, and to bring forth Margaret Pearson, and Isabell Robey, Prisoners in
the Castle at Lancaster, to receive their Trial.

Who were brought to their Arraignement and Trialls, as hereafter follows,
viz.

THE ARRAIGNMENT and Trial of MARGARET PEARSON of Paddiham, in the County of
Lancaster, for Witchcraft; the nineteenth of August 1612, at the Assizes and
General Gaole-deliuerie, holden at Lancaster, Before Sir EDWARD BROMLEY
Knight, one of his Majesty's Justices of Assise at Lancaster.
Margaret Pearson.
THus far have I proceeded in hope your patience will endure the end of this
discourse, which craves time, and were better not begun at all, then not
perfected.

This Margaret Pearson was the wife of Edward Pearson of Paddiham, in the
County of Lancaster; little inferior in her wicked and malicious course of
life to any that has gone before her: A very dangerous Witch of long
continuance, generally suspected and feared in all parts of the Country, and
of all good people near her, and not without great cause: For whosoever gave
her any just occasion of offense, she tormented with great misery, or cut off
their children, goods, or friends.

This wicked and ungodly Witch revenged her fury upon goods, so that every one
near her sustained great loss. I place her in the end of these notorious
Witches, by reason her judgment is of an other Nature, according to her
offense; yet had not the favor and mercy of the Jury been more then her
desert, you had found her next to old Dembdike; for this is the third time she
is come to receive her Trial; one time for murder by Witchcraft; an other
time for bewitching a Neighbor; now for goods.

How long she has been a Witch, the Devil and she knows best.

The Accusations, Depositions, and particular Examinations upon Record against
her are infinite, and were able to fill a large Volume; But since she is now
only to receive her Trial for this last offense. I shall proceed against her
in order, and set forth what matter we have upon Record, to charge her withal.

This Margaret Pearson, Prisoner in the Castle at Lancaster: Being brought to
the Bar before the great Seat of Justice; was there according to the course
and order of the Law Indicted and Arraigned, for that she had practiced,
exercised, and used her devilish and wicked Arts, called Witchcrafts,
Enchantments, Charms and Sorceries, and one Horse or Mare of the goods and
Chattels of one Dodgeson of Padiham, in the County of Lancaster, wickedly,
maliciously, and voluntarily did kill. Contra formam Statuti, etc. Et contra
Pacem dicti Domini Regis. etc.

Upon her Arraignement to this Indictment, she pleaded not guilty; And for
the trial of her life put her self upon God and her Country.

So as now the Gentlemen of the Jury of her offense and death, stand charged
with her as with others.

The Evidence against Margaret Pearson, Prisoner at the Bar.

The Examination and Evidence of ANNE WHITTLE, alias CHATTOX. Against MARGARET
PEARSON, Prisoner at the Bar.
THe said Anne Chattox being examined says, That the wife of one Pearson of
Paddiham, is a very evil Woman, and confessed to this Examinate, that she is
a Witch, and has a Spirit which came to her the first time in likeness of a
Man, and cloven footed, and that she the said Pearsons wife has done very
much harm to one Dodgesons goods, who came in at a loope-hole into the said
Dodgesons Stable, and she and her Spirit together did sit upon his Horse or
Mare, until the said Horse or Mare died. And likewise, that she the said
Pearsons wife did confess unto her this Examinate, that she bewitched unto
death one Childers wife, and her Daughter, and that she the said Pearsons wife
is as ill as she.

The Examination of IENNET BOOTH, of Paddiham, in the County of Lancaster, the
ninth day of August 1612. Before NICHOLAS BANNESTER, Esquire; one of his
Majesty's Justices of Peace in the County of Lancaster.
IEnnet, the wife of James Booth, of Paddiham, upon her oath says, That the
Friday next after, the said Pearsons wife, was committed to the Jail at
Lancaster, this Examinate was carding in the said Pearsons house, having a
little child with her, and willed the said Margerie to give her a little Milk,
to make her said child a little meat, who fetched this Examinate some, and put
it in a pan; this examinat meaning to set it on the fire, found the said fire
very ill, and taking up a stick that lay by her, and brake it in three or four
pieces, and laid upon the coals to kindle the same, then set the pan and milk
on the fire: and when the milk was boild to this Examinates content, she took
the pan wherein the milk was, off the said fire, and with all, under the
bottom of the same, there came a Toade, or a thing very like a Toade, and to
this Examinates thinking came out of the fire, together with the said Pan, and
under the bottom of the same, and that the said Margerie did carry the said
Toade out of the said house in a pair of tongues; But what she the said
Margerie did therewith, this Examinate knows not.

After this were diverse witnesses examined against her in open Court, viua
voce, to prove the death of the Mare, and diverse other vild and odious
practices by her committed, who upon their Examinations made it so apparent to
the Jury as there was no question* But because the fact is of no great
importance, in respect her life is not in question by this Indictment, and the
Depositions and examinations are many, I leave to trouble you with any more of
them, for being found guilty of this offense, the penalty of the Law is as
much as her good* Neighbors do require, which is to be delivered from the
company of such a dangerous, wicked, and malicious Witch.

THE ARRAIGNMENT and Trial of ISABEL ROBEY in the County of Lancaster, for
Witchcraft: upon Wednesday the nineteenth of August, 1612. At the Assizes and
general Gaole-deliuery, holden at Lancaster. Before Sir EDWARD BROMLEY,
Knight, one of his Majesty's Justices of Assizes at Lancaster.
Isabel Robey.
THus at one time may you behold Witches of all sorts from many places in this
County of Lancaster which now may lawfully be said to abound as much in
Witches of diverse kinds as Seminaries, Jesuits, and Papists. Here then is the
last that came to act her part in this lamentable and woeful Tragedy, wherein
in his Majesty has lost somany Subjects, Mothers their Children, Fathers
their Friends, and Kinsfolks the like whereof of has not been set forth in
any age. What has the Kings Majesty written and published in his
Daemonologie, by way of premonition and prevention, which has not here by the
first or last been executed, put in practice or discovered? What Witches have
ever upon their Arraignement and Trial made such open liberal and voluntary
declarations of their lives, and such confessions of their offenses: The manner
of their attempts and their bloody practices, their meetings, consultations
and what not? Therefore I shall now conclude with this Isabel Robey who is now
come to her trial.

This Isabel Robey Prisoner in the Castle at Lancaster being brought to the
Bar before the great Seat of Justice was there according to the former order
and course Indicted and Arraigned, for that she Felloniously had practiced,
exercised and used her Deuilish and wicked Arts called Witchcrafts,
Inchantmnnts, Charms and Sorceries.

Upon her Arraignment to this Indictment she pleaded not guilty, and for the
trial of her life, put her self upon God and her Country.

So as now the Gentlemen of the Jury of life and death stand charged with her
as with others.

The Evidence against Isabel Robey Prisoner at the Bar.

The Examination of PETER CHADDOCK of Windle, in the County of Lancaster:
Taken at Windle aforesaid, the 12. day of July 1612. Anno Reg. Regis IACOBI,
Angliae, etc. decimo* and Scotiae xlv. Before Sir THOMAS GERRARD Knight, and
Barronet. One of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace within the said County.
THe said Examinate upon his Oath says, That before his Marriage he heard say
that the said Isabel Robey was not pleased that he should marry his now wife:
whereupon this Examinate called the said Isabel Witch, and said that he did
not care for her. Then within two days next after this Examinate was sore
pained in his bones: And this Examinate having occasion to meet Master John
Hawarden at Peaseley Cross, wished one Thomas Lion to go thither with him,
which they both did so; but as they came homewards, they both were in evil
case. But within a short time after, this Examinate and the said Thomas Lion
were both very well amended.

And this Examinate further says, that about four years last past, his now
wife was angry with the said Isabel, she then being in his house, and his
said Wife thereupon went out of the house, and presently after that the said
Isabel went likewise out of the house not well pleased, as this Examinate then
did think, and presently after upon the same day, this Examinate with his said
wife working in the Hay, a pain and a starknesse fell into the neck of this
Examinat which grieved him very whereupon this Examinate sent to one James a
Glouer, which then dwelt in Windle, and desired him to pray for him, and within
four or five days next after this Examinate did mend very well. Nevertheless
this Examinate during the same time was very sore pained, and so thirsty
withal, and hot within his body, that he would have given any thing he had,
to have slaked his thirst, having drink enough in the house, and yet could not
drink until the time that the said James the Glouer came to him, and this
Examinate then said before the said Glouer, I would to God that I could drink,
where upon the said Glouer said to this Examinate, take that drink, and in the
name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, drink it, saying; The
Devil and Witches are not able to prevail against GOD and his Word, whereupon
this Examinate then took the glass of drink, and did drink it all, and
afterward mended very well, and so did continue in good health, until our
Lady day in Lent was twelve month or thereabouts, since which time this
Examinate says, that he has been sore pained with great warch in his bones,
and all his limbs, and so yet continues, and this Examinate further says,
that his said warch and pain came to him rather by means of the said Isabel
Robey, then otherwise, as he verily thinks.

The Examination of JANE WILKINSON, Wife of FRANCIS WILKINSON, of Windle
aforesaid: Taken before the said Sir THOMAS GERRARD, Knight and Barronet, the
day and place aforesaid. Against the said ISABEL ROBEY.
THe said Examinate upon her oath says, that upon a time the said Isabel Robey
asked her milk, and she denied to give her any: And afterward she met the
said Isabel, whereupon this Examinate waxed afraid of her, and was then
presently sick, and so pained that she could not stand, and the next day after
this Examinate going to Warrington, was suddenly pinched on her Thigh as she
thought, with four fingers and a Thumb twice together, and thereupon was
sick, in so much as she could not get home but on horseback, yet soon
after she did mend.

The Examination of MARGARET LION wife of THOMAS LION the younger, of Windle
aforesaid: Taken before the said Sir THOMAS GERRARD, Knight and Barronet, the
day and place aforesaid. Against the said ISABEL ROBEY.
THe said Margaret Lion upon her Oath says, that upon a time Isabel Robey came
into her house and said that Peter Chaddock should never mend until he had
asked her forgiveness; and that she knew he would never do: whereupon this
Examinate said, how do you know that, for he is a true Christian, and he
would ask all the world forgiveness? then the said Isabel said, that is all
one, for he will never ask me forgiveness, therefore he shall never mend;
And this Examinate further says, that she being in the house of the said
Peter* Chaddock, the wife of the said Peter, who is God-Daughter of the said
Isabel, and has in times past used her company much, did affirm, that the
said Peter was now satisfied, that the said Isabel Robey was no Witch, by
sending to one Halseworths, which they call a wiseman, and the wife of the said
Peter then said, to abide upon it, I think that my Husband will never mend
until he have asked her forgiveness, choose him whether he will be angry
or pleased, for this is my opinion: to which he answered, when he did need to
ask her forgiveness, he would, but he thought he did not need, for any
thing he knew: and yet this Examinate further says, That the said Peter
Chaddock had very often told her, that he was very afraid that the said Isabel
had done him much hurt; and that he being fearful to meet her, he has
turned back at such time as he did meet her alone, which the said Isabel has
since then affirmed to be true, saying, that he the said Peter did turn
again when he met her in the Lane.

The Examination of MARGARET PARRE wife of HVGH PARRE of Windle aforesaid.
Taken before the said Sir THOMAS GERARD Knight and Baronet, the day and place
aforesaid. Against the said ISABEL ROBEY.
THE said Examinate upon her oath says, that upon a time, the said Isabel
Robey came to her house, and this Examinate asked her how Peter Chaddock did,
And the said Isabel answered she knew not, for she went not to see, and then
this Examinate asked her how Jane Wilkinson did, for that she had been lately
sick and suspected to have been bewitched: then the said Isabel said twice
together, I have bewitched her too: and then this Examinate said that she
trusted she could bless her self from all Witches and defied them; and then
the said Isabel said twice together, would you defy me? and afterward the
said Isabel went away not well pleased.

Here the Gentlemen of the last Jury of Life and Death having taken great
pains, the time being far spent, and the number of the Prisoners great,
returned into the Court to deliver up their Verdict against them as follows.
viz.

The Verdict of Life and Death.
WHo upon their Oaths found the said Isabel Robey guilty of the Fellonie by
Witchcraft, contained in the Indictment against her. And Margaret Pearson
guilty of the offense by Witchcraft, contained in the Indictment against her.

Whereupon Master Couell was commanded by the Court in the afternoon to bring
forth all the Prisoners that stood Convicted, to receive their Judgment of Life
and Death.

For his Lordship now intended to proceed to a final dispatch of the Pleas of
the Crown. And here ends the Arraignement and Trial of the Witches at
Lancaster.

THus at the length have we brought to perfection this intended Discovery of
Witches, with the Arraignement and Trial of every one of them in order, by the
help of Almighty God, and this Reverend Judge; the Lantern from whom I have
received light to direct me in this course to the end. And as in the beginning,
I presented unto their view a Calendar containing the names of all the witches:
So now, I shall present unto you in the conclusion and end, such as stand
convicted, and come to the Bar to receive the judgment of the Law for their
offenses, and the proceedings of the Court against such as were acquitted, and
found not guilty: with the religious Exhortation of this Honorable Judge, as
eminent in gifts and graces as in place and preeminence, which I may lawfully
affirm without base flattery (the canker of all honest and worthy minds) drew
the eyes and reverend respect of all that great Audience present, to hear
their Judgment, and the end of these proceedings.

The Prisoners being brought to the Bar.
THe Court commanded three solemn Proclamations for silence, until Judgment
for Life and Death were given.

Whereupon I presented to his Lordship the names of the Prisoners in order,
which were now to receive their Judgment. *

The names of the Prisoners at the Bar to receive their Judgment of Life and
Death.
Anne Whittle, alias Chattox. Elizabeth Device. James Device. Anne Redferne.
Alice Nutter. Katherine Hewet. John Bulcock. Jane Bulcock. Alizon Device.
Isabel Robey.
THE IVDGEMENT OF THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sir EDWARD BROMLEY, Knight, one of his
Majesty's Justices of Assize at Lancaster upon the Witches convicted, as
follows.
THere is no man alive more unwilling to pronounce this woeful and heavy
Judgment against you, then my self: and if it were possible, I would to God
this cup might pass from me. But since it is otherwise provided, that after
all proceedings of the Law, there must be a Judgment; and the Execution of
that Judgment must succeed and follow in due time: I pray you have patience to
receive that which the Law does lay upon you. You of all people have the least
cause to complain: since in the Trial of your lives there has been great
care and pains taken, and much time spent: and very few or none of you, but
stand convicted upon your own voluntary confessions and Examinations, Ex ore
proprio: Few Witnesses examined against you, but such as were present, and
parties in your Assemblies. Nay I may further affirm, What persons of your
nature and condition, ever were Arraigned and Tried with more solemnity, had
more liberty given to plead or answer to every particular point of Evidence
against you? In conclusion such has been the general care of all, that had
to deal with you, that you have neither cause to be offended in the
proceedings of the Justices, that first took pains in these businesses, nor
with the Court that has had great care to give nothing in evidence against
you, but matter of fact; Sufficient matter upon Record, and not to induce, or
lead the Jury to find any one of you guilty upon matter of suspicion or
presumption, nor with the witnesses who have been tried, as it were in the
fire: Nay, you cannot deny but must confess what extraordinary means has
been used to make trial of their evidence, and to discover the least intended
practice in any one of them, to touch your lives unjustly.

As you stand simply (your offenses and bloody practices not considered) your
fall would rather move compassion, then exasperate any man. For whom would not
the ruin of so many poor creatures at one time, touch, as in appearance
simple, and of little understanding?

But the blood of those innocent children, and others his Majesty's Subjects,
whom cruelly and barbarously you have murdered, and cut off, with all the rest
of your offenses, has cried out unto the Lord against you, and solicited for
satisfaction and revenge, and that has brought this heavy judgment upon you
at this time.

It is therefore now time no longer wilfully to strive, both against the
providence of God, and the Justice of the Land: the more you labor to acquit
your selves, the more evident and apparent you make your offenses to the World.
And impossible it is that they shall either prosper or continue in this World,
or receive reward in the next, that are stained with so much innocent blood.

The worst then I wish to you, standing at the Bar convicted, to receive your
Judgment, is, Remorse, and true Repentance, for the safeguard of your Souls,
and after* an humble, penitent, and hearty acknowledgement of your grievous
sins and offenses committed both against GOD and Man.

First, yield humble and hearty thanks to Almighty GOD for taking hold of
you in your beginning, and making stay of your intended bloody practices
(although GOD knows there is too much done already) which would in time have
cast so great a weight of Judgment upon your Souls.

Then praise GOD that it pleased him not to surprise or strike you suddenly,
even in the execution of your bloody Murders, and in the midst of your
wicked practices, but has given you time, and takes you away by a judicial
course and trial of the Law.

Last of all, crave pardon of the World, and especially of all such as you have
justly offended, either by tormenting themselves, children, or friends, murder
of their kinsfolks, or loss of any their goods.

And for leaving to future times the president of so many barbarous and bloody
murders, with such meetings, practices, consultations, and means to execute
revenge, being the greatest part of your comfort in all your actions, which may
instruct others to hold the like course, or fall in the like sort:

It only remains I pronounce the Judgment of the Court against you by the
Kings authority, which is; You shall all go from hence to the Castle, from
whence you came; from thence you shall be carried to the place of Execution
for this County: where your bodies shall be hanged until you be dead; And
GOD HAVE MERCY UPON YOUR SOVLES: For your comfort in this world I shall
commend a learned and worthy Preacher to instruct you, and prepare you for an
other World: All I can do for you is to pray for your Repentance in this
World, for the satisfaction of many; And forgiveness in the next world, for
saving of your Souls. And God grant you may make good use of the time you
have in this World, to his glory and your own comfort.

Margaret Pearson.
THe Judgment of the Court against you, is, You shall stand upon the Pillarie
in open Market, at Clitheroe, Paddiham, Whalley, and Lancaster, four Market
days, with a Paper upon your head, in great Letters, declaring your offense,
and there you shall confess your offense, and after to remain in Prison for
one year without Bail, and after to be bound with good Suerties, to be of the
good behavior.

To the Prisoners found not guilty by the IVRIES. Elizabeth Astley. John
Ramsden. Alice Gray. Isabel Sidegraues. Lawrence Hay.

TO you that are found not guilty, and are by the Law to be acquitted, presume
no further of your Innocence then you have just cause: for although it pleased
God out of his Mercy, to spare you at this time, yet without question there
are amongst you, that are as deep in this Action, as any of them that are
condemned to die for their offenses: The time is now for you to forsake the
Devil: Remember how, and in what sort he has dealt with all of you: make
good use of this great mercy and favor: and pray unto God you fall not
again: For great is your happiness to have time in this World, to prepare
your selves against the day when you shall appear before the Great Judge of
all.

Notwithstanding, the judgment of the Court, is, You shall all enter
Recognizances with good sufficient Suerties, to appear at the next Assizes at
Lancaster, and in the mean time to be of the good behavior. All I can say to
you: Jennet Bierley, Ellen Bierley, Jane Southworth,
is, That GOD has delivered you beyond expectation, I pray GOD you may use
this mercy and favor well; and take heed you fall not hereafter: And so the
Court does order you shall be delivered.

What more can be written or published of the proceedings of this honorable
Court: but to conclude with the Execution of the Witches, who were executed the
next day following at the common place of Execution, near unto Lancaster. Yet
in the end give me leave to entreat some favor that have been afraid to
speak until my work were finished. If I have omitted any thing material, or
published any thing imperfect, excuse me for that I have done: It was a work
imposed upon me by the Judges in respect I was so well instructed in every
particular. In have I have undertaken to finish it in a busy Term amongst my
other imploiments.

My charge was to publish the proceedings of Justice, and matter of Fact,
wherein I wanted liberty to write what I would, and am limited to set forth
nothing against them, but matter upon Record, even in their own Country
terms, which may seem strange. And this I hope will give good satisfaction
to such as understand how to judge of a business of this nature. Such as have
no other imploiment but to question other men's Actions, I leave them to censure
what they please, It is no part of my profession to publish any thing in print,
neither can I paint in extraordinary terms. But if this discovery may serve
for your instruction, I shall think my self very happy in this Service, and
so leave it to your general censure.

Da ueniam Ignoto non displicuisse meretur,
Festinat studijs qui placuisse tibi.
THE ARRAIGNEMENT AND TRIAL OF IENNET PRESTON, OF GISBORNE IN CRAVEN, in the
County of York.

At the Assizes and General Jail* Delivery holden at the Castle of York in
the County of York, the xxvij. day of July last past, Anno Regni Regis IACOBI
Angliae, etc. Decimo, and Scotiae quadragesimo quinto.

Before Sir JAMES ALTHAM Knight, one of the Barons of his Majesty's Court of
Exchequer; and Sir EDWARD BROMLEY Knight, another of the Barons of his
Majesty's Court of Exchequer; his Majesty's Justices of Assise, Oyer and
Terminer, and general Gaole-Deliuerie, in the Circuit of the North-parts.

LONDON, Printed by W. STANSBY for JOHN BARNES, and are to be sold at his
Shop near Holborne Conduit, 1612.

THE ARRAIGNMENT and Trial of IENNET PRESTON of Gisborne in Crauen, in the
County of York, at the Assizes and General Gaole-deliuerie, holden at the
Castle of York, in the County of York, the seven and twentieth day of July
last past. Anno Regni Regis Iacobi Angliae etc. Decimo and Scotiae xlvj.
Jennet Preston.
MANY have undertaken to write great discourses of Witches and many more
dispute and speak of them. And it were not much if as many wrote of them as
could write at al, to set forth to the world the particular Rites and Secrets
of their unlawful Arts, with their infinite and wonderful practices which
many men little fear till they seize upon them. As by this late wonderful
discovery of Witches in the County of Lancaster may appear, wherein I find
such apparent matter to satisfy the World, how dangerous and malicious a Witch
this Iennet Preston was, How unfit to live, having once so great mercy
extended to her: And again to revive her practices, and return to her former
course of life, that I think it necessary not to let the memory of her life
and death die with her; But to place her next to her fellows and to set forth
the Arraignement Trial and Conviction of her, with her offenses for which she
was condemned and executed.

And a though she died for her offense before the rest, I yet can afford her
no better place then in the end of this Book in respect the proceedings was in
an other County;

You that were husband to this Iennet Preston; her friends and kinsfolks, who
have not been sparing to devise so scandalous a slander out of the malice of
your hearts, as that she was maliciously prosecuted by Master Lister and
others; Her life unjustly taken away by practice; and that (even at the
Gallows where she died impenitent and void of all fear or grace) she died an
Innocent woman, because she would confess nothing: You I say may not hold it
strange, though at this time, being not only moved in conscience, but directed,
for example sake, with that which I have to report of her, I suffer you not to
wander any further; but with this short discourse oppose your idle conceits
able to seduce others: And by Charms of Imputations and slander, laid upon the
Justice of the Land, to clear her that was justly condemned and executed for
her offense; That this Iennet Preston was for many years well thought of and
esteemed by Master Lister who afterward died for it Had free access to his
house, kind respect and entertainment; nothing denied her she stood in need of.
Which of you that dwells near them in Crauen but can and will witness it?
which might have encouraged a Woman of any good condition to have run a
better course.

The favor and goodness of this Gentleman Master Lister now living, at his
first entrance after the death of his Father extended toward her, and the
relief she had at all times, with many other favors that succeeded from time
to time, are so palpable and evident to all men as no man can deny them. These
were sufficient motives to have persuaded her from the murder of so good a
friend.

But such was her execrable Ingratitude, as even this grace and goodness was
the cause of his miserable and untimely death. And even in the beginning of his
greatest favors extended to her, began she to work this mischief, according
to the course of all Witches.

This Iennet Preston, whose Arraignment and Trial, with the particular
Evidence against her I am now to set forth unto you, one that lived at Gisborne
in Crauen, in the County of York, near Master Lister of Westbie, against
whom she practiced much mischief; for having cut off Thomas Lister Esquire,
father to this gentleman now living, she revenged her self upon his son:
who in short time received great loss in his goods and cattle by her means.

These things in time did beget suspicion, and at the Assizes and General
Jail delivery holden at the Castle of York in Lent last past, before my Lord
Bromley, she was Indicted and Arraigned for the murder of a Child of one
Dodg-sonnes, but by the favor and merciful consideration of the Jury thereof
acquitted.

But this favor and mercy was no sooner extended toward her, and she set
at liberty, But she began to practice the utter ruin and overthrow of the
name and blood of this Gentleman.

And the better to execute her mischief and wicked intent, within four days
after her deliverance out of the Castle at York, went to the great Assembly of
Witches at Malking-Tower upon Good Friday last: to pray aid and help, for the
murder of Master Lister, in respect he had prosecuted against her at the same
Assizes.

Which it pleased God in his mercy to discover, and in the end, howsoever he
had blinded her, as he did the King of Egypt and his Instruments, for the
brighter evidence of his own powerful glory; Yet by a Judicial course and
trial of the Law, cut her off, and so delivered his people from the danger of
her Deuilish and wicked practices: which you shall hear against her, at her
Arraignement and Trial, which I shall now set forth to you in order as it was
performed, with the wonderful signs and tokens of GOD, to satisfy the Jury
to find her guilty of this bloody murder, committed four years since.

Indictment.
THis Iennet Preston being Prisoner in the Castle at York, and indicted, for
that she felloniously had practiced, used, and exercised diverse wicked and
deuillish Arts, called Witchcrafts, Inchauntments, Charms, and Sorceries, in
and upon one Thomas Lister of Westby in Crauen, in the County of York
Esquire, and by force of the same Witchcraft felloniously the said Thomas
Lister had killed, Contra Pacem etc. being at the Bar, was arraigned.

To this Indictment upon her Arraignement, she pleaded not guilty, and for
the Trial of her life put her self upon GOD and her Country.

Whereupon my Lord Altham commanded Master Sheriff of the County of York,
in open Court to return a Jury of sufficient Gentlemen of understanding, to
pass between our Sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty and her, and others the
Prisoners, upon their lives and deaths; who were afterward sworn, according
to the form and order of the Court, the prisoner being admitted to her lawful
challenge.

Which being done, and the Prisoner at the Bar to receive her Trial, Master
Heyber, one of his Majesty's Justices of Peace in the same County, having taken
great pains in the proceedings against her; and being best instructed of any
man of all the particular points of Evidence against her, humbly prayed, the
witnesses hereafter following might be examined against her, and the several
Examinations, taken before Master Nowel, and certified, might openly be
published against her; which hereafter follow in order, viz.

The Evidence for the Kings Majesty Against IENNET PRESTON, Prisoner at the
Bar.
HEreupon were diverse Examinations taken and read openly against her, to
induce and satisfy the Gentlemen of the Jury of Life and Death, to find she
was a Witch; and many other circumstances for the death of M. Lister. In the
end Anne Robinson and others were both examined, who upon their Oaths declared
against her, That M. Lister lying in great extremity, upon his death-bedde,
cried out unto them that stood about him; that Iennet Preston was in the house,
look where she is, take hold of her: for Gods sake shut the doors, and take
her, she cannot escape away. Look about for her, and lay hold on her, for
she is in the house: and so cried very often in his great pains, to them that
came to visit him during his sickness.

Anne Robinson, and Thomas Lister
Being examined further, they both gave this in evidence against her, That when
Master Lister lay upon his death-bedde, he cried out in great extremity;
Iennet Preston lies heavy upon me, Prestons wife lies heavy upon me; help
me, help me: and so departed, crying out against her.

These, with many other witnesses, were further examined, and deposed, That
Iennet Preston, the Prisoner at the Bar, being brought to M. Lister after he
was dead, and laid out to be wound up in his winding sheet, the said Iennet
Preston coming to touch the dead corpse, they bled fresh blood presently, in
the presence of all that were there present: Which has ever been held a great
argument to induce a Jury to hold him guilty that shall be accused of
Murder, and has seldom, or never, failed in the Trial.

But these were not alone: for this wicked and bloud-thirstie Witch was no
sooner delivered at the Assizes holden at York in Lent last past, being
indicted, arraigned, and by the favor and mercy of the Jury found not
guilty, for the murder of a Child by Witchcraft: but upon the Friday
following, being Good Friday, she rode in have to the great meeting at
Malking-Tower, and there prayed aid for the murder of M. Thomas Lister: as at
large shall appear, by the several Examinations hereafter following; sent to
these Assizes from Master Nowel and other his Majesty's Justices of Peace in
the County of Lancaster, to be given in evidence against her, upon her Trial,
viz.

The Examination and Evidence of JAMES DEVICE, of the Forest of Pendle, in the
County of Lancaster, Labourer, taken at the house of JAMES WILSEY, of the
Forest of Pendle in the County of Lancaster, the seven and twentieth day of
April, Anno Reg. Regis IACOBI Angliae, etc. Decimo ac Scotiae quadragesimo
quinto. Before ROGER NOVVEL, and NICHOLAS BANESTER, Esquires, two of his
Majesty's Justices of the Peace within the County of Lancaster, viz.
THis Examinate says, That upon Good Friday last about twelve of the clock in
the daytime, there dined in this Examinates said mothers house a number of
persons, whereof three were men, with this Examinate, and the rest women: and
that they met there for these three causes following (as this Examinates said
mother told this Examinate): First was for the naming of the Spirit, which
Alizon Device, now Prisoner at Lancaster, had, but did not name him, because
she was not there. The second cause was for the delivery of his said
Grandmother, this Examinates said sister Alizon, the said Anne Chattox, and
her daughter Redferne: Killing the Jailer at Lancaster; and before the next
Assizes to blow up the Castle there; to that end the aforesaid Prisoners might
by that means make an escape and get away. All which this Examinate then heard
them confer of. And the third cause was, for that there was a woman dwelling
in Gisburne Parish, who came into this Examinates said Grand-mothers house, who
there came, and craved assistance of the rest of them that were then there, for
the killing of Master Lister of Westby: because, as she then said, he had borne
malice unto her, and had thought to have put her away at the last Assizes at
York; but could not. And then this Examinat heard the said woman say, that her
power was not strong enough to do it her self, being now less then
before-time it had been.

And he also further says, That the said Prestons wife had a Spirit with her
like unto a white Foale, with a blacke-spot in the forehead. And further, this
Examinat says, That since the said meeting, as aforesaid, this Examinate has
been brought to the wife of one Preston in Gisburne Parish aforesaid, by Henry
Hargreiues of Goldshey to see whether she was the woman that came amongst the
said Witches, on the said last Good Friday, to crave their aid and assistance
for the killing of the said Master Lister: and having had full view of her; he
this Examinate confesses, That she was the selfsame woman which came amongst
the said Witches on the said last Good Friday, for their aid for the killing
of the said Master Lister; and that brought the Spirit with her, in the shape
of a White Foale, as aforesaid.

And this Examinate further says, That all the said Witches went out of the
said house in their own shapes and likenesses, and they all, by that they were
forth of the doors, were gotten on horseback like unto Foales, some of one
color, some of another, and Prestons wife was the last; and when she got on
horseback, they all presently vanished out of this Examinats sight: and before
their said parting away, they all appointed to meet at the said Prestons wifes
house that day twelue-month; at which time the said Prestons wife promised to
make them a great feast; and if they had occasion to meet in the mean time,
then should warning be given that they all should meet upon Romles-Moore. And
this Examinate further says, That at the said feast at Malking-Tower, this
Examinat heard them all give their consents to put the said Master Thomas
Lister of Westby to death: and after Master Lister should be made away by
Witchcraft, then all the said Witches gave their consents to join altogether to
hancke Master Leonard Lister, when he should come to dwell at the Sowgill, and
so put him to death.

The Examination of HENRY HARGREIVES of Goldshey-booth, in the Forest of
Pendle, in the County of Lancaster Yeoman, taken the fifth day of May, Anno
Reg. Regis IACOBI Angliae, etc. Decimo, ac Scociae quadragesimo quinto. Before
ROGER NOVVEL, NICHOLAS BANNESTER, and ROBERT HOLDEN, Esquires; three of his
Majesty's Justices of Peace within the said County.
THis Examinat upon his oath says, That Anne Whittle, alias Chattox, confessed
unto him, that she knows one Prestons wife near Gisburne, and that the said
Prestons wife should have been at the said feast, upon the said Good Friday,
and that she was an ill woman, and had done Master Lister of Westby great hurt.

The Examination of ELIZABETH DEVICE, mother of JAMES DEVICE, taken before
ROGER NOVVELL and NICHOLAS BANESTER, Esquires, the day and year aforesaid, viz.
THe said Elizabeth Device upon her Examination confesses. That upon
Good Friday last, there dined at this Examinats house, which she has said are
Witches, and does verily think them to be Witches; and their names are those
whom James Device has formerly spoken of to be there.

She also confesses in all things touching the killing of Master Lister of
Westby, as the said James Device has before confessed.

And the said Elizabeth Device also further says, That at the said meeting at
Malking-Tower, as aforesaid, the said Katherine Hewyt and John Bulcock, with
all the rest then there, gave their consents, with the said Prestons wife, for
the killing of the said Master Lister. And for the killing of the said Master
Leonard Lister, she this Examinate says in all things, as the said James
Device has before confessed in his Examination.

The Examination of IENNET DEVICE, daughter of ELIZABETH late wife of JOHN
DEVICE, of the Forest of Pendle, in the County of Lancaster, about the age of
nine years or thereabouts, taken the day and year aboue-said: Before ROGER
NOVVEL and NICHOLAS BANESTER, Esquires, two of his Majesty's Justices of Peace
in the County of Lancaster.
THe said Examinate upon her Examination says, that upon Good Friday last
there was about twenty persons, whereof only two were men, to this Examinats
remembrance, at her said Grand*mothers house, called Malking-Tower aforesaid,
about twelve of the clock: all which persons, this Examinates said mother told
her were Witches, and that she knows the names of diverse of the said Witches.

AFter all these Examinations, Confessions, and Evidence, delivered in open
Court against her, His Lordship commanded the Jury to observe the particular
circumstances; first, Master Lister in his great extremity, to complain he
saw her, and requested them that were by him to lay hold on her.

After he cried out she lay heavy upon him, even at the time of his death.

But the Conclusion is of more consequence then all the rest, that Iennet
Preston being brought to the dead corpse, they bled freshly, And after her
deliverance in Lent, it is proved she rode upon a white Foale, and was present
in the great assembly at Malkin Tower with the Witches, to entreat and pray for
aid of them, to kill Master Lister, now living, for that he had prosequuted
against her.

And against these people you may not expect such direct evidence, since all
their works are the works of darkness, no witnesses are present to accuse
them, therefore I pray God direct your consciences.

After the Gentlemen of the Jury of Life and Death had spent the most part of
the day, in consideration of the evidence against her, they returned into the
Court and delivered up their Verdict of Life and Death.

The Verdict of Life and Death.
WHo found Iennet Preston guilty of the fellonie and murder by Witchcraft of
Thomas Lister, Esquire; contained in the Indictment against her, etc.

Afterward, according to the course and order of the Laws, his Lordship
pronounced Judgment against her to be hanged for her offense. And so the
Court arose.

HEre was the wonderful discovery of this Iennet Preston, who for so many
years had lived at Gisborne in Crauen, near Master Lister: one thing more I
shall add to all these particular Examinations, and evidence of witnesses,
which I saw, and was present in the Court at Lancaster, when it was done at the
Assizes holden in August following.

My Lord Bromley being very suspicious of the accusation of Iennet Device, the
little Wench, commanded her to look upon the Prisoners that were present, and
declare which of them were present at Malkin Tower, at the great assembly of
Witches upon Good Friday last: she looked upon and took many by the hands,
and accused them to be there, and when she had accused all that were there
present, she told his Lordship there was a Woman that came out of Crauen that
was amongst the Witches at that Feast, but she saw her not amongst the
Prisoners at the Bar.

What a singular note was this of a Child, amongst many to miss her, that
before that time was hanged for her offense, which she would never confess or
declare at her death? here was present old Preston her husband, who then cried
out and went away: being fully satisfied his wife had Justice, and was worthy
of death.

To conclude then this present discourse, I heartily desire you, my loving
Friends and Countrie-men, for whose particular instructions this is added to
the former of the wonderful discovery of Witches in the County of Lancaster:
And for whose particular satisfaction this is published; Awake in time, and
suffer not your selves to be thus assaulted.

Consider how barbarously this Gentleman has been dealt withal; and
especially you that hereafter shall pass upon any Iuries of Life and Death,
let not your conniuence, or rather foolish pity, spare such as these, to
exequute farther mischief.

Remember that she was no sooner set at liberty, but she plotted the ruin
and overthrow of this Gentleman, and his whole Family.

Expect not, as this reverend and learned Judge says, such apparent proof
against them, as against others, since all their works, are the works of
darkness: and unless it please Almighty God to raise witnesses to accuse
them, who is able to condemn them?

Forget not the blood that cries out unto God for revenge, bring it not upon
your own heads.

Neither do I urge this any farther, then with this, that I would always
entreat you to remember, that it is as great a crime (as Solomon says, Prove.
17) to condemn the innocent, as to let the guilty escape free.

Look not upon things strangely alleged, but iudiciously consider what is
justly proved against them.

And that as well all you that were witnesses, present at the Arraignement and
Trial of her, as all other strangers, to whom this Discourse shall come, may
take example by this Gentleman to prosecute these hellish Furies to their end:
labor to root them out of the Commonwealth, for the common good of your
Country. The greatest mercy extended to them, is soon forgotten.

GOD grant us the long and prosperous continuance of these Honorable and
Reverend Judges, under whose Government we live in these North parts: for we
may say, that GOD Almighty has singled them out, and set them on his Seat,
for the defense of Justice.

And for this great deliverance, let us all pray to GOD Almighty, that the
memory of these worthy Judges may be blessed to all Posterities.

FINIS.

