A true Report of the taking of the great town and Castle of Polotzko, by
the King of Polonia.

With the manner of the Assaults, Batteries, Vndermininges, Skirmishes and
Fyreworkes, that were there used, from the 11. of August to the.30 of the same
Month. 1579.



A true Report of the taking of the Town and Castle of Polotzko, by the King
of Polonia, the 30. of August 1579.
THe last of June the King of Polonia being at a Town called Wild, brake up
his Siege and came to Suerum, to muster there: in which place, his Majesty
called together his Lords and Captains and men of war, to know after what
order they should provide for the safegarde and defense of their Country, and
how for to keep the enemy, which was the Moscoue furre from them, and there
his Majesty agreed to beseege the City of Polotzko, because that Town lies
in the border of the great Dukedom of Litto, and principallye of the Town of
Villo, and there lies no Fortress between that and the Wild, and if he had
not taken the way to the same City, he should have given his enemy way to
have entered into the Dukedom of Litto, and also to the Wild: and therefore
his Majesty found it needful to look to, because he took this war in
hand, not only to recover that same Town to the Crown of Poland again, as
it has been in times past: but to withstand ye enimiy, and to keep him back.
In his Country, the winter is very hard, with very great raines, snowes,
fogges and continual trostes: and therefore very perilous to make war, in
which the king of Poland has found very daingerous in passing from the VVilde
to the said City of Polotzko, by reason of the clammye ground, with the
great thawes and caines, and deep ryuers, with the great trouble of his
caryage, of his great ordinance, powder, shot, munition, and all other kind
of artillerye, with the loss of his horses and other beasts for want of
sustenaunce travailing those barrame wilderness and heigh mountains: yet
nothing could discorage this mighty prince from taking of this enterprise in
hand, although many of his Noble men and wise Captains did show what peril
it were for him to pass with so great an Army, and telling of him the
strength of the Town and the Castle with all other inconueniaunces: yet could
he not be persuaded from his opinion, but rather the more encouraged, gathered
his people together: and hoping that if he could take that Town, it would be
a great discouragement to his enemies and a great encouragement to his own
Soldiors: because this City is the strongest and greatest in all his
Dominions. And his Majesty did send out of Suero, the honorable Nicolaum
Radzinil, chief Governor of the Town called the Wild, with a certain number
of Horsemen and Footmen with a certain number of Hungarians: with the
Honorable Casper Bekize to ye City of Polotzko, to stop the high ways, that
there might com no succor from ye Prince of Muscoue. And for all that he took
great pains for to be suddenly there: yet the ways was so foul, and the
passages so crooked, that it was long or ever that they could come there. And
because that the King of Polon had sent defyaunce to the Muscouo King: he
doubting of the besiege of them of Polotzko, sent ^yde to them of Polotzko,
which came two days before the Honorable Nicolaue came there: but he coming
thither did so stop the passages, that he could send no more succoures
thither. And immediatlye after the King of Polon with his whole camp
ordinance, bag and baggage, with great pains, having foul ways, with ye
continual rain yt fell and the foul wether, was constrained to make very
small i^rneyes: and in the mean time his forewarde took three Castles,
called, Cosianua, Crasne and Situo, in their journey, which they quickly spoiled
and burnt. And the 11. of August, his Majesty with all his power came near to
the Tower of Polozko, and pytched his Camp not far from the Walls of the
Town: and then his Majesty caused his Camp in three places to be entrenched
against the Town. And as the Town being very strongly fenced with very strong
Bulwarks and other Fortresses, and being very well provided of all manner
powder shot and other Engines, and putting great confidence in the Castle
which stood without the Town: issued out of the Town, and forced the king of
Po^on to withdraw him self from that part of the Town where the Subber^^s
were, in which place the Castle stood: but in the end the Polanes had the
victory, and chaeed the Moscoes into the Town and the Castle, and set the
Subbarbes a fire. And in short time wholly destroyed it. And after this they
did daily under mind the ground, till they came under the chief gate of the
Castle: but the almyghtye God at this time showed his mighty power, for many
days, without ceassing, we had great raynes: so that all labor and diligence
of the Soldior was hindered: yet for the desire that they had to overcome their
enimyes nothing could discourage them: but daily they did their endeavor against
the town and Castle. And those within the Town and the Castle, although
their enemy with out was fearce and daily did shoot at them with great
ordinance, and never c^ased day nor night shooting and throwing of wild fire
into the Town, and although their houses were covered with straw and reed,
and such things apt to take fire: yet they nothing dismayde, did daily
defend them selves with making provision with raw Hydes and other things fit
for yt purpose, for to withstand the violence of the fire: and very valiantlye
defended both the Town and Castle, and as fast as any was stricken down, an
other would step over him, and fight stoutly in his room: whereby it is seen
that the Moscoues are very valiant in keeping of a Hold: yet at the length
GOD of his mercy showed us a fair day. For the 29. of August, our people with
great diligence, and no small peril, waded thorough the river, carrying wild
fire in one hand, and their weapon in the other, and manfullye run up the
Hill, and made an assault to the breces of the Castle, and set the^ on fire,
and so with the shooting of the ordinance on the one side, and the casting of
ye fire on the other, the enemy was forced to forsake the Bulwark, and to
retire, which gave our Soldiors such courage, that they did follow the enimye
through the fire, and thought to win the Castle: but they did fail of their
purpose, because the force of the fire was great, and the force of the enemy
greater, they were forced to retire with the loss of 27. of their men, and
very many wounded: And of our enimyes were slain 200. The very same day
the enemy did make a sign as though he would have yielded, but they meant
nothing less: For they had provided new Bulwarks, and blinded our men with
the flames of fire: therefore the Kings Majesty was fullye bent to show the
uttermost that he could do, because the enimye should have no time to
fortifye him. And therefore the next day being the 30. day of August, he
caused all his army, as well Horsemen as footmen, to make an assault to the
Town: and caused certain Horsemen and Footmen to make an assault to an other
part of the Town, where they had undermined the Wall, and throw down a great
piece of it, and set fire one part of the Castle: and the place where they
were the day before they recovered, where they found the Musco digging and
defending of him self: but the Polon drove him back, and had him wholly in his
power: and so the king of Polon being moved with pittye, lothing to shed any
christian blood did give pardon to all them that he found in the Castle, and
them that would serve, he took into service, which was a great number,
because they would save their goods, and they that would, he gave them safe
conduct to go into Moscoui, and those yt would not yield were these: the
honorable Basilius Iuanowitz, Telateuski Nicole^ski Demetrius Michalowitz
Schitbathi, Oholeuski, Matthe Inanowitz: Rzowki. Iwan Hrechoriowitz, Susin,
Petrus Inanowitz: VVolenski Lutzian, Tretiakow, Kakouse: which were all
Captains and Officers in the town and Castle, and therefore the king took them
forceablye prisoners, and guarded the Town and Castle with his own Soldiors.
The number of the Moscoues that defended the Castle, were 6000. which most
part was slain and found dead in dyches, and of them in ye Town, there was
no certain number known, because a great number fled. And also there was found
within yse town and Castle such store of ordinance, with powder, shot, and
lead, and all other kind of Artillerye, that there was thought there was not
the like Town nor Castle in Christendom.

And therefore his Majesty seeing that GOD has given him such victory over his
enimyes, more then he deserved or looked for, gave commandment thorough all
his Realm, to give God praise and thanks.

FINIS.
Imprinted. 1579.


