THE Resolved Christian, exhorting to Resolution.

Written, To recall the Worldling, to comfort the Faint-harted, to strengthen
the Faithful, and to persuade all Men, so to run, that they may obtain.

By Gabriel Powel.

The night is past, and the day is at hand, let us therefore cast away the
works of darkness, and let us put on the armor of light.

Romans 13.12. LONDON Printed by V. S. for Thomas Bushel, and are to be sold at
the great north door of Paul's. 1600.

To the right honorable Sir Tho. Egerton knight, L. Keeper of the great Seal
of England, one of her Majesty's most honorable privy Council.
RIght Honorable, I make bold to present unto your Lo. patronage this small
Treatise: the Subject whereof, affoording store of weapons, to fight against
the allurements of the world, the frailty of the flesh, and the fear of death,
is neither triuiall nor unprofitable: the manner of handling, furnished with
sentences of holy Scripture, fraught with exampls, and garnished with variety
of familiar similitudes, not affected nor unpleasant: the Use, to recall the
unruly worldling, to comfort our distressed friend, and to solace our own
souls, very fruitful and necessary: and the End, to strengthen the faithful,
to arm them with Faith and Patience, against the serpentine assaults of the
Children of Babylon (who long since have heated their furnace hoter than that
of Nabuchad-nezzars, wherein they are ready to throw all those that will not
fall down and worship their golden Image) a strong and necessary provision.
Thus not doubting of your Lo. good liking, and acceptance hereof, such is your
zeal to Virtue and Piety: and humbly entreating that your L. good favor which
has been so much enlarged toward Doctor Powel my Father (who now with the
Lord has rest from his labors) will not be straightned unto us, his poor
Children: I beseech the Lord Jesus bless your Honor, and make you zealous
more and more, for the Gospel: give you a swift foot to hunt out the Bulls of
Basan, and the wily Fox-cubbes that destroy the young Vines: heap upon you
his blessings spiritual and temporal, that in a good hope you may run your
race, and in the end, obtain the high price of your calling.

Your Lordships to command, Gabriel Powel.

To the Reader.
Resolute, or Not-resolued Christian, seeing Delight is the only mark that
the Humors of our Age do aim at: Behold (Man described, the World displaid,
Death unmasked, Fear dispelled, Temptations retented: the Sick comforted, the
Prisoner cheered, the Faint-hearted strengthened, the Afflicted solaced, the
Strong emboldned, the Persecuted encouraged, and Persecutors warned) an
effectual, delightful, and sweet bait, to allure all men to Resolution, very
wholesome, profitable and necessary.

The Arguments of every Chapter and Section, of both the Books.
Chap. I Of the Misery of Man. Sect. 1 Of the miseries and calamities of this
life. 2 Of the miserable nature and condition of Man. 3 Of the miseries
incident to the several Ages of Man. 4 Of the miseries of all estates. 5 Of
man's three cruel enemies which further and increase his misery. 6 Why God
would have our life to be so miserable as it is.

Chap. II Of Death. Sect. 1 What Death is, and of the necessity thereof. 2 Of
the uncertainty of the hour of death. 3 That death is to be desired of the
godly.

Chap. III The causes why Man does fear death. Chap. IIII Of the first cause
that makes death fearful to a worldly man, which is, the loss of honors,
wealth, pleasure, etc. And the Remedies against the same. Sect. 1 How far we
ought to be addicted unto the world. 2 A Remedy against the temptation of
worldly honors and preferments. 3 A Remedy against the temptation of worldly
riches and wealth. 4 An other remedy against the same temptation. 5
Testimonies out of the word of God, against the vanity of worldly wealth. 6 A
remedy against the temptation of worldly pleasures. 7 A remedy against the
temptation of unwillingness to forsake Wife, Children, and Friends. 8 That
though a man die in debt, yet he should not fear Death. 9 Testimonies out of
the holy Scriptures, touching the care that God has over Widows and
fatherless Children.

Chap. V Of the second cause that makes death fearful to a worldely man:
which is, the pains and sicknesses which come before or accompany Death: And
the remedies against the same. Sect. 1 Unmortified men no fit inhabitants for
the heavenly Jerusalem. 2 That sickness and tribulation is a token of Gods
love. 3 That God has appointed his holy Angels to guarde and preserve us in
our sicknesses and troubles. 4 Comforts taken from the consequents following
death. 5 Testimonies out of the holy scriptures, that God is always ready to
help and assist them, that seek unto him in the time of affliction and
misery.

Chap. VI Of Patience. Sect. 1 An exhortation to Christian Patience, after the
example of Christ our savior. And how the wicked behave themselves in their
afflictions. 2 How the godly behave themselves in their sickenesses and other
calamities whatsoever. 3 That extreamitie of pains should not cause us to be
impacient. 4 That no man may assuage his grief, by laying violent hands on
himself. 5 That our impatiency does provoke God the more to punish us. 6
Testimonies out of the holy scriptures exhorting unto patience.

Chap. VII Of the third cause that makes a worldly man to fear death; which
is, the want of Faith and Hope. And the remedies against the same. Sect. 1 That
Faith is grounded upon the faithful promise of Almighty God: and of the
excellent effects of the same. 2 Remedies against the weakness of faith 3 That
though a man presently feels not the peace of conscience; nor has a lively
apprehension that he is the child of god, yet he may have true Faith. 4 That
god does oftentimes suffer his Children to be in a manner desperate; and yet
raises them up again. And how we may know if we have any faith 5 That the
least measure of true Faith that is, or can be, is effectual to salvation. 6
Testimonies out of the word of God, concerning life everlasting, unto the
which the Faithful do come by death.

Chap. VIII Of the fourth Cause that makes Death fearful to a worldly man:
which is, his guilty conscience, and the fear of Gods judgments and
punishments. And the remedies against the same. Sect. 1 That God is ready to
forgive our sins, and to receive a repentant sinner into grace and favor. 2
That the faithful ought not to fear damnation, for so much as they be the
children of God. 3 That the members of Christ ought not to fear death and
damnation, because Christ their head has vanquished and overcome them already.
4 That Forgiveness of sins, is not a common benefit, as the secure and
careless christian imagines. 5 What we must do for the obtaining of the
remission of our sins. 6 Testimonies out of the word of God concerning the
forgiveness of sins, promised to all such, as, cleaving fast to the merits
of Christ only, are truly penitent.


The Arguments of the Chapters and Sections of the second Book.
Chap. I A Remedy for unpenitent and obstinate Malefactors, that by the
Magistrate are adjudged to die. Sect. 1 That there is a God. 2 That the soul
of man is immortal. 3 The wrath of God against the transgressors of this
Commandments. 4 Transgressors of every one of the ten Commandments, and
their punishments. 5 God his punishments upon sinners at the day of Judgment,
with an exhortation to Repentance.

Chap. II Comforts for the brokenhearted and penitent Malefactors, that by the
Magistrate, are adjudged to die. Sect. 1 That judgment comes from God. 2
Particular directions for the distressed party. 3 How the place of Peter is to
be understood, where he says, Let none of you suffer as a murderer or as a
thief, etc. And that God sometimes does call men by this meafnes. 4 That the
multitude of our sins should not make us faint-hearted. 5 That late
repentance is good, if it be true repentance, and how a man may judge, whether
his repentance be unfeigned, or not.

Chap. III comforts for such condemned persons, who fear and dread the rigor
of the punishment they are enjoined to suffer. Sect. 1 What a man must do to be
eased to the painful apprehension of death. 2 How God ordinarily behaueth
himself toward the Elect in this life. 3 That the continuance of torments,
should not make us afraid or unwilling to die. 4 That God oftentimes deals
more mercifully with us, then we do perceive he does.

Chap. IIII Comforts for persons wrongfully condemned to death. Sect. 1 That
because we have deserved death by our manifold sins, we ought to die willingly,
though otherwise we be innocently condemned. 2 That we must not revenge our
wrongs. 3 Comforts taken from the examples of them that have been innocently
adjudged to die. 4 Comforts taken from the example of our savior Christ's
innocent suffering: with a brief declaration of the same.

Chap V Comforts for such as suffer persecution or death, for the Testimony of
a good conscience in matters of Religion or Justice. Sect. 1 Whereof it comes
that the wicked do persecute the godly. 2 That we must patiently suffer
persecution and affliction for Religion or Justice sake: and why? 3 That it is
a blessed thing to suffer persecution for Religion or Justice sake. 4 Of the
benefits that the Cross or affliction brings unto us. 5 That our
afflictions are foreseen, and appointed by God, and therefore to be taken in
good part. 6 That we ought not to be dismaide at persecution, for so much as
our cause is good. 7 That their estate is very dangerous that never suffer
affliction. 8 That whosoever will be ashamed of Christ, Christ will be ashamed
of him. 9 That worldely pleasure, wealth, etc. should not withdraw us from
the confession of the truth. 10 Conscience in religion must not be
dissembled. 11 Against the offense of the yielding of time-seruers, though they
be better learned and wiser then we be. 12 That though the world condemn us
for fools, and too nice, yet we must not take the start of profession. 13
That imprisonment for the testimony of a good conscience, is not thraldom and
bondage, but rather liberty and freedom. 14 That increase of torments should
not fear us, but rather comfort us the more. 15 That God loves us never the
less, though he suffer us to taste of his cup, but rather, that he does love
us the more. 16 That burning alive is not so extreme a torment, as commonly it
is thought to be. 17 That the patience of the saints is not Stoicall
indolencie. 18 That we must not be dismaide, though friends forsake us: and
that we must not yield unto their ungodly suggestions. 19 That the pretense of
nourishing of wife and children (when they have no other means to live) is no
cause why we should deny or dissemble the known truth. 20 That the Lord will
not fail his children in these days, no more then he did in times past, in
the old Testament, and in the time of the Primitive Church. 21 That we should
not be dismayed at the faces, behauior, and majesty of mortal men. 22 Comforts
against the dullness of spirit, and unfitness to suffer. 23 What a great
dignity Martyrdom is. And how we should not think our selves unworthy to
suffer for Christ's sake. 24 What the enemies of the truth procure unto
themselves by persecuting and murdering of Gods children.


THE FIRST Book of the Resolved Christian.
Chap. I. Of the misery of Man.
Of the miseries and calamities of this life. Sect. I
IF they be miserable, that Luc. 16.19 luc. 19.42
see not their own misery: how much Luc. 6.24.25, 26
more miserable are they that are so far in love with this mortal and
transitory life, that were they sure to live always in this world, they would
not set a Mat. 6.21 luc. 12.19
point by the kingdom of God! These be they, Phil. 3.19
whose end is damnation, whose God is their belly, and whose glory is to their
shame, which mind earthly things: These be they, 1. Lo 2.16
whom the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, do
rather allure to 2. Tim. 4.10
love and like this world, than the Luc. 16.25
pains of everlasting miseries to come, may cause to abhor and loathe it: And
these be they, who never tasted it Psalm. 34.8
how sweet the Lord is, nor the Cor. 2.14
spiritual consolation and joy of the godly 2. Pet. 2.12
But as natural bruit beasts led with sensuality, and made to be taken and
destroyed, speak evil of those things which they know not, and shall perish
through their own imagination. Psalm. 50.22
Oh consider this ye that forget God, lest he tear you in pieces, and there be
none that can deliver you. Romans 3.2
God is true and righteous; if you will not turn, Psalm. 7.12
he has whet his sword, he has bent his bow, and made it ready: Psalm. 68.21
Surely God will wound the head of his enemies, and the hairie pate of him that
walks in his sins: Psalm. 9.17
The wicked shall turn into hell, and all nations that forget God; Zeph. 1.18
ezech. 7.19.
neither shall their silver or gold, be able to deliver them, in the day of the
Lords wrath, but that they Zeph. 3.8
shall be devoured by the fire of his jealousy. Away then with profane Syrac.
19.5
pleasure, despise these Eccl. 1.2
vain delights, and contemn this 2. Pet. 1.4
wretched world: of whose 1. Io. 5.19
misery, 1 Thessalonians. 5.2
uncertainty, 1. Cor. 7.31
frailty, Iona. 2.8
changes and chances, not only the sacred Scriptures do cry out against, but
also many wise and learned Philosophers, though Pagans and Ethnikes, have left
sufficient testimony. Iam. 4.4
The amity of the world is the enimitie of God: whosoever therefore will be a
friend of the world, makes himself an enemy of God. Eccl. 1.14
I have considered (says Solomon) all the works that are done under the Sun,
and behold, all is vanity, and vexation of the spirit. For proof hereof to
insist only in the best creature in the world, for whose sake all things were
made, to wit MAN, Genesis 1.27
created after Gods own image: who when he had Genesis 3.6.
renounced his former integrity, into what Romans 3.16
calamities and miseries he fell, it is impossible to utter. For Nature being
fallen through the offense of the first Man, and defiled through Sin, the
punishment thereof has redounded unto all Rom 5.18
posterities the seed of Adam: So that Nature, which at the first was Genesis 1.27
made good, perfect, and righteous, is now become so Genes. 6.5
vain, so Iam. 4 9
miserable, so Psalm. 62 9
frail, and so 1. Cor. 15.42
corrupt, in as much as the motion left unto it, tends always unto evil and
inferior things.

Of the miserable Nature and Condition of Man. Sect. II
RIppe the whole condition and state of Mankind, and then you shall partly
perceive the frailetie thereof. Man is Genesis 2.7
made of the earth, Psalm. 51.5
conceived in sin, and Job 5.7
borne to pain. Man is Eccl. 9.3
evil Romans 7.24.
wretched, Job 15.16
filthy, Psalm. 14.1
corrupt and abominable, doing nothing that is good, Romans 6.12
mortal, Psalm. 62.9
vain and Esa. 9.17
unprofitable, Psalm. 62.12
vanity, altogether lighter than vanity, 1. Kin. 8.46
sinful, 1. Cor. 15.19
miserable, Genesis 18.27
dust and ashes, 1. Cor. 15.42 43
sown in corruption, dishonor and weakness, Ier. 17.9
deceitful, Job 1.21
naked, Eccl. 9.3
subject to death, Ephesians. 2.1
dead in sin, Romans 3 4
a liar, Esaias 9.17
an hypocrite, Romans 8.7
an ennemie unto God, a creature that Job 15.16
drinks iniquity like water, a Genesis 47.9
pilgrim, Esaias 40.6
grass, Job 8.9
ignorant, a 1. Chro 29.15
stranger and soiourner, of Job 14.2
no continuance, Psalm. 18 5
compassed with the snares of death, 2. Sam. 14.14
water spilt on the ground. Job 25.4
By birth unclean, a Ephesians. 2.3
child of wrath, a Luc. 13.27
worker of iniquity, Romans 3.13
an open sepulcher, Job 25.6
a worm, the Esaias 51.8
meat of worms, 1. Mac. 2.62
doung and worms, Romans 3.23
deprived of Gods glory, a Job 7.7
wind, Genesis 27.2
ignorant of the time when he came into the world, and when he shall depart, a
Iere 10.14
beast by his own knowledge, Genesis 6.5
from whom nothing can proceed but that which is corrupt, a Esaias 14.19
rotten carcass, Psalm. 146.3
in whom there is no help, To. 7.18
in whom dwells no good thing. Man is compared unto the Psa. 49.12
foolish beasts, to Esaias 51.12
grass, to a Job 14 2
flower that fades, to a Esaias 41.2
scattered stubble, to a Job 14.2
shadow, to Job. 8.9
yesterday and to Psalm 62.9
vanity. The Psalm 89.45
days of his youth are shortened, and he is covered with shame. Psalm 60.11
His help is vain, 1. Corinthians. 3.20
his thoughts are vain, his Psalm. 146.4
thoughts perish: His Iere. 17.9
heart is wicked and deceitful, Eccl. 9.3
full of evil and madness. His Psalm. 39.11
beauty consumes as a moath: his Romans 3.13
throat is an open sepulcher; he uses his tongue to deceit, the poison of
aspes is under his lips: his Romans 3.14
mouth is full of cursing and bitterness; his Romans 3.15
feet are swift to shed blood; The (...) fear of God is not before his eyes;
Romans 3.18
he shall Esaias 40.6
vanish as the grass. The 1. Pet. 1.24
glory of man is as the flower of grass, that Job 14.2
vanishes as a shadow, the Esaias 51.8
moath shall eat it up: his Esaias 64.6
righteousness is as filthy clowtes. His Wisd. 2 1
life is short and tedious, it Wisd. 2.4
passes away as a trace of cloud, as the mist, as a Wisd. 5.9
post that passes by, Wisd. 5.10
as a ship that passes over the waves of the water; as a Wisd. 5.11
bird that flies through the air, as an Wisd. 5.12
arrow that is shot, Wisd. 5.13
as soon as we are borne, we begin to draw toward an end. Wisd. 2.4
Our name shall be forgotten in time, and no man shall have our works in
remembrance. Man's Job 7.1
days are as the days of an hireling, as 1. Chro. 29.15
a shadow, as Psalm. 78.39
a wind that passes and comes not again, as a Psalm. 103.15
flower of the field, as a Psalm. 39.5
spanne long, as a Job 20.8
vision of the night, as a dream, they Esa. 64.6
fade like the leaf, Job 7.6
swifter than the weauers shuttle; they are Job 14.1
full of trouble, Genes. 3.17
full of sorrow, Job 7.16
vanity, Ierem. 17.9
deceitful, Esaias 40.17
nothing, yea less than nothing: whereupon Solomon said well, Eccl. 4.2
The dead are better than the living.

Of the miseries incident to the several ages of Man. Sect. III.
THe Prophet Jeremy cries out, Iere. 20.18
How is it that I came forth of the womb, to see labor and sorrow, that my
days should be consumed with shame! How much more cause have we, 1. Cor. 15.19
(miserable creatures) to cry out of our Romans 3.16
calamities, who were Psalm. 51.5
conceived and borne in sin, seeing Jeremy complains so much, being Iere. 1.5
sanctified in his mothers womb? Oh Psalm. 62.10
vain, miserable, and unhappy Men! Before we sin, we are strait Romans 5.12
fastened to sin, and before we can offend, we are fast bound with offense.
Ezech. 18.2
Did not our Fathers eat the sower grape, and are not the teeth of the
children set on edge therewith? Consider, O Man, from whence thou came, blush
whither thou go, and fear where thou live; we are begotten in Psalm. 51.5
uncleanness, brought forth with Genesis 3.16
throbs and throws, and nourished in Ephesians. 6.12
darkness: we began our tragedy with Wisd. 7.3
nakedness and weeping; we continue our parts, with Syra. 40.1
pain and vexation, and with sorrow and misery we must take our farewell;
our beginning is Genesis 3.16
lamentable, our continuance Eccl. 9.3
wretched, and our departure grievous. The whole life of man, is beset and
encountered with three capital enemies, Job 14.1
Pain, Romans 7.24
Care and cor. 10.12
Sorrow; pain Heb. 12.11
pincheth us, care Syra. 30.22
consumes us, and sorrow 2 Cor. 7.10 Miseries of Infancy.
shortneth our days. There is no age of Man free from affliction and misery.
Ioh. 16.20
In his Birth; Intolerable is the Mothers pains, and infinite are the Infants
miseries; who comes into the world, crying and weeping, poor, naked, weak
and miserable, without speech, knowledge or strength to go: no sooner is the
babe borne, but strait he is bound hand and foot, and cast into a cradle as
into a prison, prefiguring the servitude that he is to suffer. Then enters he
into Childhood, Miseries of Childhood.
and begins to war with the lack of reason, and to fight against his own
folly; not knowing what he is, where he is, whence, nor for what he came. Now
must he be kept under the fear of the rod, and learn some liberal science,
or some mechanical art, whereby to maintain his life hereafter. Then comes
Youth, rash, Miseries of Youth.
headlong, venterous, voluptuous, foolish, prodigal, passionate; In this age
he comes into great dangers, fighting against the desires of the flesh,
against fond affections, and vain imaginations, which cause the mind to waver,
to be unconstant, and to be carried away with sundry fantasies; In this age
he becomes a drunkard, a gamster, a quarreller, and oftentimes to be cast
into prison, to be hanged, to loose his goods, and to cause his Parents to
end their days in sorrow. Then has he to encounter with Manhood; Miseries
of Manhood.
to this age is incident the charge of wife and children, the maintenance of
family and care of posterity. Sometimes he is besieged with desire and
covetousness, sometimes with fear to loose his goods, and other infinite such
vanities and afflictions. Then lastly comes Old Age stealing on, Miseries of
Old age.
unperceived, wherein Man receives many incurable wounds, as baldness,
bleared eyes, deaf ears, wrinkled brows, stinking breath, trembling hands,
faint spirits, lean cheeks, corruption of stomach, gowty legs, with many
more miseries innumerable, which never leave to vanquish the body, to disquiet
the mind, and to wound the conscience. And thus are we tossed all the days
of our life with grief, compassed with cares, and ouer-whelmed with calamity.
Our Infancy is but a dream; our Childhoode but folly; our Youth madness;
our Manhood a combat; our Age a sickness; our Life misery; and our Death
horror: we lament in the first minute, and rue to the last moment. Which way
can we cast our eyes, but that we shall find cause of lamentation and
heaviness? If we behold the heavens, from thence, for our sins, we were
justly banished; If we look upon the earth, there we are imprisoned; on the
right hand, we have the Saints, whose steps we have not followed; on the left
hand, the wicked, whose race we have pursued: before us, we have our death
ready to arrest us; behind us, our wicked life ready to accuse us; above us,
Gods justice ready to condemn us; and under us, hell fire ready to devour us.

Of the miseries of all Estates. Sect. IIII.
AS Man in respect of his age is Psalm. 62.10
vain and 1. Cor. 15.19
miserable, so also is he, and that much more (if it were possible) in respect
of the quality and condition of his life and calling. For there is no estate,
calling or degree exempt and free from vanity and misery; all are Wisd. 13.1
vain, all are Ioh. 16.33
vexed, all are Job 14.1
tormented with worldly tempests, all do Eccl. 9.3
suffer the doleful blasts of calamity. Begin with the stowtest Champion,
the mightiest Monarch, the greatest Emperor or Prince that ever lived on the
earth, and come down to the poorest wretch, and meanest miser in the world,
and you shall find that all, of all sorts, Poor and Rich, Servant and
Master, Married and Singleman, Subject and Prince; to conclude, the Bad and
the Good, tormented with temptations, tossed with tempests, disquieted with
adversity, and therefore most frail, most miserable, yea nothing but misery.
Miseries of the Poor.
The Poor man, he is pressed with famine and thirst, suppressed with sorrow and
heaviness, and oppressed with cold and needinesse. He is in great disdain, he
is despised and contemned, buffeted and scorned; he lies groueling at the Rich
men's feet, and dying at their heels, as they go in the streets, and yet
unregarded. He is shunned of his brethren, loathed of his friends, and hated
of his neighbors. To ask for Gods sake, he is oftentimes ashamed, if he will
not ask, he is pined, and therefore mere necessity constrayneth him to
beg. He accuses God of unrighteousness and parcialitie, because he divided
not the goods of this world equally: He blames his neighbor of
unmercifulness and cruelty, because he releeueth not his necessity; he
fretteth and fumeth, he murmureth and curses: whereupon it was said, Syra
40.28 Miseries of the Rich.
It is better to die than to beg. The Rich man, he is overthrown in his
abundance, he is puffed up with vaineglory, he puts his trust and
confidence in his goods and wealth, whereupon he braggeth and boasts: He
swells with pride and disdain; and yet labor in getting, fear in
possessing, and sorrow in loosing, does ever trouble and disquiet his mind. For
Matthew. 6.21 Miseries of Servants.
where the treasure is, there will the heart be also. The Servant, or Bondsman
is laden with labor, wearied with watchings, and worn with slavery: He is
beaten with stripes, spoiled of his substance, and burdened with sorrow. The
Masters offense is the Servants pain, and the Servants fault is the Masters
prey: If he have wealth, he must spend it at his Masters pleasure, if he
have naught, then must his labor make a painful purchase. O most miserable
and irksome condition of servitude! Syrac. 13.20
As the wild Ass is the Lions prey in the wilderness, so are the poor men the
meat of the rich. The Master, Miseries of Masters.
he ever lives in fear lest the treachery of his servants shorten his days.
If he be gentle, then is he contemned, if severe, then is he hated; for
Courtesy brings contempt, and cruelty breeds hatred. The Singleman,
Miseries of Single-men.
he fights against fond desires, and fleshly lust, for that unquiet Iebusite
will hardly be restrained. Matthew. 19.11
All men cannot receive the gift of continency, save they to whom it is given.
Satan kindles the fire of Nature in them with the blast of frail suggestion,
whereby the feeble and weak mind is secretly sawced with amorous desires,
Miseries of Married men.
and the body made prone to perdition. The Married man, he is at his wits end,
as they say, ever burning in jealousy: fear of loosing his goods does vex
him; loss of riches makes him tremble; and the charge of household does divide
him diversely. He labors to discharge his wife, to provide for his children, and
to pay his servants hire: And therefore the burden of wedlock is grievous and
miserable. Miseries of Subjects.
The Subject, he depends upon his Prince, he must be careful to obey; if
his Sovereign frown, he must stoop and crowch; he must employ his goods and
his life also, in defense of his King, yea he must become a martial man, and
live in a miserable mood, making his only felicity, of other men's misery.
The King, Miseries of Kings and Princes.
he lives in continual fear of the treachery of traitors; he is set upon
a hill as it were a mark; a small warte deformeth a Princes face, and in a
King an error is desperate; he eats the bread of affliction, and his drink
is care and sorrow. Whereupon an heathen Historiographer makes mention of a
King, to whom the Scepter and Crown were offered, who before he wore it,
took the Crown in his hand, and beholding it a while, cried out saying; Oh
thou golden Diadem, if man knew the miseries and griefs which thou bring,
there is none that would stoop to take thee up from the ground! showing
thereby, that the life of Kings is less happy, than that of the Subject and
Private manne. The Badde, they live in misery; Miseries of the Wicked.
Esaias 48.22
There is no peace says the Lord unto the wicked. The Esaias 66.24 mar.
9.44.46 and 48. deuteronomy. 26.65
worm of conscience shall never die, and the light of Reason shall never be
darkened. As they have Esaias 1.2, 3 iere. 2.5
forsaken God, so has God Ose. 4.6
forsaken them, and Romans 1.24 1 Thessalonians. 2.11
delivered them up into a reprobate sense, that they might do such things as
be not convenient; for whom the Iud. verse 13 Miseries of Good men.
blackenesse of darkness is reserved for ever. The Good, they are, as it
were, in a continual furnace, by reason of persecution and crosses, they
sustain Heb. 11.37, 38
mockes and stripes, fetters and imprisonments, some were stoned, some cut in
pieces, some tempted, some slain with the sword, etc. Look Heb. 11. 2. Cor.
11.29
Who is weak and they are not weak? Who is offended and they burn not? To
conclude then, Syrac. 40.1
Great travel is created for all men, and an heavy yoke upon the sons of
Adam, from the day that they go out from their mothers womb til the day
that they return to the mother of all things. Behold the misery of mortal
men! behold their vanity! thought consumes them, heaviness harmeth them,
pensiveness does possess them, terror does turmoile them, fear puts them
out of comfort, horror does afflict them, affliction does trouble them, and
trouble makes them sad and heavy. Job 10.14, 15.
If I have sinned (says Job) then thou will straightly look unto me, and wilt
not hold me guiltless of mine iniquity: if I have done wickedly, woe unto me:
if I have done righteously, I will not life up my head being full of cenfusion,
because I see my affliction.

Of man's three cruel Enemies which further and increase his misery. Sect. V
MAn, besides that he is exiled from Paradise, miserable by nature, and Ephesians.
2.1
unable to stir either hand or foot, to get out of his misery, have three
cruel enemies, savage and bloody Tyrants, that continually labor to
captiuate him in his wretchedness, yea, to bring him from temporal into
eternal thraldom: These are the Flesh, The three principal enemies of Man.
the World and the Devil; the Flesh earthly and voluptuous, the world vain
and curious, and the devil evil and malicious. These three enemies assail
and tempt us, sometimes covertly, sometimes openly, but alvvaies maliciously.
The devil being the principal Captain of this cursed crew, trusts much
upon the help of the Flesh, because a domestical enemy is apter to hurt: The
Flesh also has entered league with the World, being her greatest friend; and
both have shaken hands with the Devil: and so do all three jointly conspire
our subversion. The Flesh being Psalm 51.5
borne and nourished in sin, The Flesh.
defiled from her beginning, but much more corrupted by evil custom: she
eagerly Romans 7.21
coueteth against the spirit, she daily murmureth against subjection, she
suggesteth wickedness, disobeyeth reason, and is not restrained with fear. A
grievous combat and great danger it is to wrestle against our familiar foe,
especially we being 1. Chro. 29.15
Strangers, and she a Citizen; for she dwells in her own country, whereas
we are but pilgrims and exiled persons. The World, The World.
while with Syrac. 19.5
pleasures without it delights us, inwardly it deceives us; it kills our
souls while it flattereth our fantasy: for when it moves us to settle our
affections in these inferior things, what does it but persuade us, with a
golden hook to fish in a filthy puddle, where nothing can be gotten but
venomous vermin? and with Sirens sweet notes woo us into the salt sea of
perdition? All the favors and friendly countenances which the world does
yield, are but the kisses of an enemy, that under a deceitful sweetness it
may shroud most bitter poison. The Devil that crooked Genes. 3.1
serpent, The Devil.
the arch-enemie of mankind, unto the flesh and the world joins his force;
them he helps, them he furthereth, them he uses, having no other desire,
business, or study, but to entrap and to destroy our souls. This is he that
speaks suttlely, that temptes guilefully, and deceiues maliciously; he
insinuates evil motions, suggesteth venomous cogitations, and procures lusts;
he stirs up broils, fostereth hatreds, and moves desires of Revenge; he
beats us with our own staff, binds us with our own girdle, laboring that
our flesh, which was given us for a help, might be the cause of our fall and
ruin. Great is the hazard in sustaining the continual incounters against the
devils deceitful guiles; whom not only his subtle nature, but also the long
practice and exercise of his malice has made crafty. How little cause then
have we to joy in this life, in which we have to struggle hourly, with so
mighty, perverse, and malicious Ephesians. 6.12
enemes, which can never be so overcome, but that after a little respite, they
return, and bid us a new battle, and that with such variety and change of
forcible temptations, that they put us in contiuall anguish of mind?

Why God would have our life to be so miserable as it is. Sect. VI
THe causes of these calamities are many, and of many sorts; but the maine
cause is Sin: Lam. 3.39 lam. 1.5
Man suffers for his sin. Sin the cause of misery.
Yet the same causes of affliction are not always found to be in the Servants
of God, as are in the wicked. To speak nothing in this place of the ungodly
sort; God corrects his children in this world, and 1. Pet. 1.7 1. pet. 4.12
proves their faith by many and sundry troubles, crosses, afflictions and
miseries; partly, that knowing the calamity and misery of this present life,
they might be 1. Pet. 5.6 psalm. 30.7, 8
provoked, the rather speedily to flee to his mercy for succor; and partly,
that thereby they might Coloss. 1.24
become like unto their Master and Head Christ Jesus, and die to sin, and
rise up to newness of life, that hereafter they may Romans 8.17 2. tim. 1.8
live and reign with him eternally. Mothers and Nurces, when they would weane
their suckling babes, use to annoint their breasts with bitter mustard; even so
does God power mustard, that is, misery, upon the breasts of this life, unto
which we are so much addicted, to weane us from it; that knowing the misery
thereof, as by experience we are daily taught; and considering the same, as of
duty we ought, we should withdraw our Job 31.24, 25
trust from temporalities, and contemn transitory trifles, raising up our
hearts to contemplate things more Phil. 3.20
divine and heavenly. Mariners, when they sail peaceably, the wind being
prosperous, the weather seasonable, and the air quiet and temperate, do give
themselves to banqueting and fables, and being careless, void of fear and
danger, do pass the time, sometimes by music and play, sometimes by resting
and sleeping: But when a sudden tempest does arise, then at last, do they
call for help from heaven, and incessantly they cry unto God for their
delivery and saftie. Even so we, rocked in the cradle of Prosperity, do give
our selves to idleness and pleasure, but being stricken with adversity, we
are warned of our duty: which may be proved by the examples of 2. Sam. 11.4 2.
sam. 24 10
David and 2. Kin. 21.3 2. chron. 33.12
Manasses, who in prosperity offended God grievously, but in adversity lived
very godly and uprightly. And this is the reason why God would have us in this
vale of Psalm. 23.4
misery, to be so Esaias 51.21
miserable, so 1. Tim. 6.7
needy, so Apoc. 3.17
poor, so Job 1.21
beggarly, so Romans 8.37
weak, so Psalm 38.3
sickly, and of no Job 14.2
continuance; to withdraw and alienate our hearts and minds, from the
inordinate affections, desire and love, of this so loathsome a life, that we
should sigh for the kingdom of heaven, as being 1. Chro. 29.15
soiourners on earth, and no Citizens, wayfairing men, and in continual Job
7.1
warfare: yet notwithstanding there are not a few that be unwilling to leave
this life, and to forsake the world, lusting still like hogs to wallow in
mire. But what would these do if all our whole life were sweet and pleasant?
would they then, trow you, exchange it for heaven? would they contemn it for
Gods sake? or would they say with Paul: Romans 7.24
O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death? I
desire Phil. 1.23
to be loosed and to be with Christ. No, no, they had rather whine after the
Exodus 16.3 number. 11.14
flesh-pottes of Egypt, then pass through the desert into the Exodus 3.8
land that flows with milk and honnie. Oh thrice happy is that man who
viewing these worldly miseries lifts up himself above himself! And indeed,
what comfort can a man reap in that place, that is Io. 12.31.
governed by the Prince of darkness, and (for the most part) Luke 16.25
peopled with his rebellious and contentious children? Where vice is
advanced, virtue scorned, the bad rewarded, and the good oppressed? What
quietness or contentment can be enioyde where the 1. John 5.1^
pains be infinite, common, and intolerable; the John 16.33
pleasures few, rare, and damnable? where 2. Chro. 20.37
familiarity breeds vexation to the mind, enmity to the body, and danger
to the soul? where want is miserable, plenty full of peril, and a man on
every side assaulted with unplacable enemies?

Chap. II. Of Death.
What Death is: and of the necessity thereof. Sect. I
Death, what it is.
DEath is the separation of the Luke 23.46. acts 7.59
soul from the body, with the dissolution of the Genesis 3.19
body until the Esaias 26.19
resurrection, as a Romans 6.23
punishment ordained of God, and imposed on Man, for his sin. For when God
had settled Adam in Paradise, a place of pleasure, giving him such liberty as
these words do import, Genesis 2.16
Thou shall eat freely of every tree of the Garden: Yet lest he should
presumptuously equal himself with his Creator, he gave him this bridle to
champe on; Genesis 2.17
But of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, thou shall not eat of it, for
in that day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall DIE THE DEATH. Adam had soon
forgotten this saying, thou shall die, and harkned unto that lying speech,
Genesis 3.4
ye shall not die. The Genesis 3.6
Man gave ear to the woman, the woman to the serpent: they eat of the
excepted tree, The fall of Adam
so Luke 6.39
the blind led the blind, and they both fell into the ditch. Here lies the
matter a bleeding, this is the old sore bred in the bone, that will never out
of the flesh. O Adam, what have thou done? Have thou tasted of that fruit
whereof God said unto thee, Genesis 3.17 The miserable estate of Adam
Thou shall not eat of it? Oh how were thou bewitched? Thou wast once in the
state of grace, but now thou art in disgrace: thou were once the child of God,
but now in danger, for ought thou know, to be the child of the Serpent. God
did once care altogether for thee, thou wast warm without apparel, naked
without shame, satisfied without labor, thy meat was put into thy mouth: but
now thou must be pinched with cold, and scorched with heat, thou must travel
hard, and in the Genesis 3.19
sweat of thy brows, thou must eat thy bread. Whilst thou keptst thy self
within thy compass, thou wast an happy Adam: oh thank God for that! now
being in misery, thou art accursed and unhappy; thank thy self, thy
self-will sin for that! could not blessings allure thee, nor threatenings
compel thee to obedience? O thanklesse Adam! sweet meat must have sower
sauce. Thou art sick Adam, thou art sick unto death, thou have provoked the
wrath of God, and caused him to open his cup of curses; thy disease is
desperate, and therefore Genesis 3.17
Thou shall die the death, that double death, the due reward of thy sin: for
thou art become the Romans 6.16
sworn servant of sin and bondslaue of Satan. He is Gods friend John 14.15
that fulfilleth his commandment; but thou Adam, have broken the
commandment; therefore thou art Gods enemy. 1. John 3.8
He that commits sin is of the devil; Thou Adam have committed sin;
therefore thou art not of God. He that sins, is the servant of sin: Thou
have sinned Adam; Therefore thou art out of Gods service. He that is the
servant of sin, must be paid with the sins wages: but thou art the servant
of sin Adam; therefore thou shall die the death; for Romans 6.23
the wages of sin is death. O lamentable fall! The posterities are guilty of
Adams sin.
O pitiful case! the wrath of God ouerrunneth the whole Romans 5.12
world for thy disobedience, thy treason has attainted al thy children, thy
whole blood is corrupted, thy fall redoundeth unto us that come of thee. Alas!
How shall we do? Adam is dust, hated of God, and ashamed of himself; he is
cursed, he is sick for sin, he is dead, twice dead, subject to mortality,
and subject to eternal damnation: his Children be in the same case. But woe
unto us, we are so benu^med of our senses, that we feel not the sting of Death
fixed in our flesh; the impostume of sin lies so hidden in our hearts, that
we think our selves whole and sound, as though we should never die. Thy
incredulous and rebellious brood, O Adam, will not acknowledge their corruption
and mortality; such, and so great is their self-love, and pride of heart!
Thou art our Father, we be thy Children, the Children cannot but believe
their Father speaking the truth of his own knowledge and experience. Cry out
then, O father Adam, teach thy children to know themselves, blow thy trumpet,
command silence, tell us, in what case thou stand, and what Inheritance thou
have purchased for us. Thus says your Father, O ye children of Men, consider
his sayings, listen, give ear; Matthew. 13.9
He that has ears to hear let him hear. I Adam the Father of all Nations,
was once a freeman, a blessed man, the child of GOD; the mercy of God embraced
me on every side; in the earth there were blessings for me, ingraued as it
were, in the herbs, flowers, and frites; yea, in the heavens and waters I saw
innumerable tokens of Gods love toward me: But alas! wretch that I am, when I
was in Psalm 49.20
honor, I forgot my self, I denied God my service, yea, I obeyed his enemy;
and therefore now am I accursed, and debarred of all my former blessings, I am
become a bondman, a cursed creature, the servant of sin and satan. I have
sinned, I have sinned, my sins are infinite; the first, The branches of Adams
sin.
Idolatry, second, Pride, third, Incredulity, fourth, Contempt of God, fifth,
the profanation of Gods name, sixth, Murder, seventh, Avarice, eight, Theft,
ninth, evil concupiscence, tenth, Ambition, etc. Alas! I sincke in sin, I am
ashamed of my nakedness, I tremble at Gods voice. O Death, O Grave, yours is
the victory! I and my wife are become a cursed couple; yea, not only we, but
all our posterities; we be the root, they are the branches, if the root be
bitter, the branches must be so also: we be the fountain, they are the spring,
if the fountain be filthy, so must the spring be: Adams legacies to his
children.
Sin and Corruption be the riches that we bequeath unto our children: Rebellion
is the inheritance that we have purchased for them. Such as the father is, such
be the children, for we are all of the same nature, and have eaten the same
Ezech. 18.2
sower grape. Romans 5.12
By one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, and so death went
over all men, in whom all men have sinned. There are two kinds of Death,
bodily, and spiritual. Bodily death (which is called the first, because in
respect of time it goes before the second) is the separation of the soul from
the body. Hebr. 9.27
It is appointed unto men that they shall once die: hereupon the Prophet David
calls death 1. King 2.2
the way of the whole earth; Psalm 89.48
what man lives and shall not see death? Eccl. 9.5
the living know that they shall die, says Solomon. Spiritual Death, which is
termed Apoc. 2.11 apoc. 20.14 apoc. 21.8 Difference between the first and
second death
the Second, is the separation of the whole man, body and soul, from the
fellowship of God. The first is an entrance to death, the second is the
accomplishment of it: the first is temporary, the second is eternal: the
first is of the body only, the second is of both body and soul: the first is
common unto all men, the second is proper to the reprobates.

Of the uncertainty of the hour of Death. Sect. II.
DEath which is most 2. Sam. 14.14 psalm. 45.10
certain, is most uncertain, in respect of the time, of the place, and of the
kind of death; for no man knows, when, where, or how he shall die. Eccl. 9.12
Man knows not his time, but as the fishes which are taken in an evil net,
and as the birds that are caught in the snare, so are the children of men
snared in the evil time, when it falls upon them suddenly. James 4.13
Go to now, ye that say, to day or to morrow we will go into such a city,
and continue there a year, and buy, and sell, and get gain. James 4.14
And yet ye cannot tell what shall be to morrow: for what is your life? it is
even a vapor, that appears for a little time, and afterward vanishes
aware: James 5.9
Behold the Judge stands before the door. Well may we be compared unto men
scaling the walls of a Beseeged city, at whom the citizens discharging
their pieces, encounter their assault with darts, stones, and other munitions,
the better to defend themselves, and to offend the enemy; who as they be
wounded, fall down, some from the top, some from the midst, and some at the
bottom of the wall; some being wounded with gunshot, some with darts, and
some with stones. Even so fares it with the men of this world, who while they
labor to clime up unto the high state of Honor and Wealth, Death tumbleth
them down, some from the highest degree of honor and riches, some from a
middle or mean estate, and some very poor; some in their old age, some in
their youth, What makes death terrible.
and some in their infancy. Nothing makes death terrible and tedious, but want
of consideration of it; the old man has it right before him, the young man hard
behind him, and all men daily over them, and yet we forget it. If a man were
tied to a stake, at whom a most cunning Archer did shoot, wounding many about
him and near him; some above him, some right against him, some under him, and
the miserable wretch himself so fast bound that it were not possible for him to
escape; would it not be deemed madness in him, if in the mean while forgeting
his miserable estate, he should fall to bib and quaffe, to laugh and to be
merry, as though he could not be touched? Who would not judge such a man
quite out of his wits, that did not bethink himself how to escape, or if
that were impossible, that did not prepare himself unto death? And are not we
to be accounted stark mad, who know that the most expert Archer that ever was,
or can be, even God himself Psalm 7.12
has bent his bow and made it ready. Yea he has sent his darts of death
already, unto them that are above us, that is, unto our ancestors and elders;
and now one while he shoots at them that be right against us, that is, our
Equals in age; another while he hitteth very near us, when he takes away our
Fathers, Mothers, or Brethren; on the right hand he wounds our friends, on
the left hand our ennemies, and under us such as be younger then we: If among so
many arrows of death, we lead in the mean time a wicked life, as though we
should ever escape, who would not say, that we were Lunatique and Madmen? like
one that would go into a Tavern, and call for wine in great quantity, and
there quaffe and carowse, having never a penny in his purse to pay the
reckoning? Oh then, let us remember that we are fast bound unto the stake of
mortality, that it is not possible for us to escape the darts of death: but
that one time or other, we shall be deadly wounded, though we escape for a
short time! God would have the hour of our death hid from us, that being
uncertain when to depart this life, we might at all times be found ready to
die. Therefore a good christian ought always to acknowledge the goodness of
God, to turn from his sins, and not to defer his conversion until the
hour of death, Mat. 24.42 mark 13.35 luke 12, 40
Watch therefore (says our Savior) for ye know not what hour your Master
will come. Is there any that knows better, what we have to do, then he that
is the John 5.22 mat. 16.27
Judge of our cause? Weigh his reason, because you know not the hour when your
Master will come, therefore watch every hour; because you know not the day,
watch every day; because you know not the week, watch every week; because you
know not the month, watch every monneth; because you know not the year, watch
every year: for though you do not certainly know when God will call for you,
yet be ye sure that he will do it sometimes. Kings and Captains do set
continual watch and ward, to guard their frontier towns and castles against
the inuasious and incursions of the enemies; for no other cause, but only for
that they do not know when their enemies will give the assault: and ought we to
be less careful for the castle of our souls, then they for their earthly
castles, considering that herein consists the salvation or damnation of our
souls for ever? Let us Luke 12.40
watch therefore continually (as Christ counsels us) to the end we be not
unprepared, Syrach 14.1^
Remember that Death tarrieth not, and that the covenant of the grave is not
showed unto thee.

That death is to be desired of the godly. Sect. III
WHat Sailer, having escaped the danger, of the tempestuous and boisterous
waves of the Sea, rejoices not when he comes to the desired haven where he
would be? What Traveler, having passed many dangerous ways, is not glad when
he draws near toward his own country? And we being wayfaring men, Genesis
47.9
pilgrims, and mere 1. Chro. 29.15 hebr. 11.13
strangers in this world (as is Cap. 1. Sect. 2
before declared) should rejoice and be merry drawing toward that joyful
eternal 1. These. 1.7 apoc. 14.13
rest prepared for us before all worlds. The Exodus 3.8 number. 13.27
children of Israel could not enjoy the promised land flowing with milk and
honny, till they had passed over the river Jordan; and we cannot come to our 1.
Pet. 1.4
inheritance, to our eterriall Hebr. 4.3.9
rest and Psalm 16.11
pleasure, until we pass the narrowes of Hebr. 9.27
death. What is death then, to a christian man, but the Hos. 13.14 1. cor.
15.54, 57
passage and way that leads from prison to liberty, from misery to
happiness, and from bondage to blessedness? Great are the profits, That death
brings unto the faithful great profit. First, Because it freeeth us from
pain
and infinite are the commodities, that death brings unto the faithful. 1. It
sets our souls at liberty and delivers them from infinite calamities,
from error, sorrows, griefs, troubles, anguishes, dreams, fears, passions,
suspicions; beside sin, ignorance, envy, hatred, distrust, ambition, and from
other the like tribulations and afflictions, that daily disquiet, torment, and
vex our souls, whiles they are weakened in the loathsome prison of our
sinful, mortal and corruptible bodies. It delivers also our bodies from
infinite and innumerable dangers, whereunto they are subject as well on sea as
land, as in any other place whersoeuer they converse; from all aches, pains
and diseases, as fevers, consumptions, etc. which do wear and consume us with
intolerable and fearful griefs, from the pain and necessity of traveling
and laboring; and finally, from that perplexity that we have to search and to
seek after the means how to be nourished, clad, lodged, and provided of all
those things that are needful to maintain this miserable life. Secondly,
Because it discharges us from offending God.
2. It discharges and puts us out of all danger of sinning any more, and of
being tempted of the devil, of the world, and of our own lust, concupiscence,
inborne-corruptions, and rebellions of the heart, which never cease to provoke
us to the doing of evil, which incessantly stir us up, to offend God, and so
to procure upon our selves the curses of he law. What a misery it is, to be in
subjection to sin on this manner, appears by earnestness and feruencie of
Paul, who with great zeal and vehemency, with deep sighs and groans, desired
of God, that he might be 2. Cor. 12.7, 8
delivered from that prick which wounded his flesh, which was the angel of
Satan that did buffet him. And after the long and lamentable Romans 7.14 to the 23
complaint that he made of the law that was in his members, striving against
the law of his spirit, and leading him captive unto the law of sin, he
bursteth into this patheticall exclamation, Romans 7.24
O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death! If
a man would invent a torment for such as fear God, and desire to walk in
newness of life, and to have part in the Revel. 20.5, 6
first Resurrection, he cannot devise a greater then this tryannie of sin to
be exercised, tormented, and tempted with this unhappy Iebusite, the rebellion
of his own flesh. O happy therefore and blessed death, that discharges us
from such a cumbersome, cruel, and yrkesom bondage! 3. Thirdly, Because it
separateth us from the company of the wicked.
It delivers us from the company of them that are 2. Tim. 3.2
lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, cursed speakers,
disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, without 3
natural affection, truce breakers, false accusers, intemperate, fierce, no
lovers at all of them that are good; 4
Traitors, headie, high minded, lovers of pleasure more then lovers of God: 5
having a show of godliness, but have denied the power thereof. Who can
express what a misery it is to be enclosed and environed with the professed
and sworn enemies of the Gospel of Christ Jesus, and of his church, which are
accursed goats, dogs, Woolues, Ravens, Kites and Cormorants, despising God
and his graces, curious persons, rash, outrageous, profane, blasphemers,
having neither faith nor fear, law nor conscience to repress and restrain
their malice? What a torture is it to a godly mind, to live in the midst of
such a froward and perverse generation, to be an eye witness of their
abominable impiety, to be an eare-witnes of the abominable blasphemies, they
belch and breath out against the majesty of God? Would not this sight and
sense make a man weary of his life? Would not he say with David, Psalm 120.5
Woe is me that I remain in Meshech, and dvvell in the tents of Kedar. 6
My soul has too long dwelled with him that hates peace. Elias seeing the
idolatrous practices of the Israelites, and the strange cruelties of Achab and
Iesabel against the prophets and servants of God, went apart into the 1. King.
19.4, 5 Fourthly, Because it preuenteth the miseries to come.
Wilderness and desired to die. 4. It preuenteth the miseries that are to
come. Esaias 57.1
The righteous perishes and no man considers in his heart, and merciful men
are taken away, and no man understands that the righteous is taken away
from the evil to come. Paul says, that some are 1. Corinthians. 11 30, 32
asleep that they might not be condemned with the world. So 2. Kin. 22.20
Josias was taken away that his eyes should not see all the evil that was to
come. 5. It gives an entrance to the soul, Fifthly, Because it is the gate that
lets the soul in into heaven.
that it may come into the presence of God, and see him 1. Cor. 13.12
face to face, and Jesus Christ in his glory, which sight so rauisheth the
Angels, and all the blessed spirits in heaven, that they desire nor can vvish
for any more joy or contentation but only in that. Psalm. 16.11
In thy presence (says the Prophet) is the fullness of joy, and at thy right
hand there are pleasures for evermore. If to hear and see king Solomon were
thought so great a matter, that the 1. King. 10.3
Queen of Saba having a trial of his vvisdome, and 1. Kings 10.5
noting the comely order, and great port of his house, being as it were
ravished and besides her self, brake out into these words: 1. Kings 10.8
Happy are thy men, happy are these thy servants, which stand ever before
thee and hear thy wisdom. What a thing shall it be to behold the glorious
Exodus 33.20
face of God, that everlasting Psalm 147.5
wisdom, that infinite Deuteronomy. 10.17
greatness, inestimable Psalm 45.2
beauty, and to enjoy the same for evermore? The consideration of this joy,
made Paul to say, Phil. 1.23
I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ. And thus it is manifest that
we ought not to fear death, but to desire it rather, to be thankful to God
when it shall please him to send it us, to embrace it willingly, and to
rejoice; considering on the one side, the miseries, griefs, and displeasures
of this life, from whence it delivers us; and on the other side, the
comfort, joy, and contentment of the everlasting life whereunto it leads us.
Whereupon Solomon says, Eccles. 7.3
the day of death is better then the day that one is born. And an heathen
Philosopher could say, O ignorant men of their own misery! why praise ye not
death, as the best invention of nature? which brings felicity, expels
misery, finisheth and ends the labors and toils of age, preuenteth the
perils of youth, to many is a remedy, to some a vvish, and to al an end: which
deserves better of none then of him to whom it comes before it be called
for.

Chap. III. The Causes why man does fear Death.
Death fearful unto the voluptuous worldling
HE which counts his happiness and felicity, in the fruition of worldly
things, greatly fears Death, as that which depriueth him of his pomp and
preferments, of his honors and high calling; robs him of his jewels and
treasures, of his riches and possessions; spoileth him of his pastimes and
pleasures, of his joy and merriments; exileth him from his country and
friends, from his wife and children; and utterly bereaueth him of all his
worldly wishes, and hearts delight. Which Syrach noting, said: O Death, Syrach
41.2
how bitter is the remembranee of thee, to a man that lives at rest in his
possessions, unto the man that has nothing to vex him, and that has
prosperity in all things! Death painful unto the healthful and
faint-hearted.
Many likewise do stand in fear of Death, when they call to mind and
consider, that they must suffer those most strange and intolerable pangues and
agonies in the flesh, commonly coming before, or at least accompanying death,
whenever it comes. Others also stand in aw of death, Death terrible unto
the doubtful and wavering man.
because they are destitute of firm hope, of true and steadfast faith. They
behold death in the mirror of the Law, where it shows it self under a most
terrible shape, like a Sargeant armed with the anger of God, and the curses of
the Law, coming to arrest and to cite them to appear before the tribunal
seat of God, to hear the doleful sentence of damnation, denounced against
the wicked transgressors of Gods Law. Which fearful apprehension of death,
surchargeth many, and presses them down into the bottomless gulf of
desperation. Death horrible unto the wicked and faithless.
And finally, death is dreadful and fearful unto many, by reason of their
guilty consciences: For as the Apostle says. Romans 2 9
Tribulation and anguish shall be upon the soul of every one that does evil,
Romans 2.15
their conscience bearing them witness. When the incorrupt Judge comes to
judge sinners, although any man would never so feign, hide and conceal his
sins and enormous deeds from men, yet can he never hide them from his own
conscience, accusing and crying out upon him, night and day, at home and
abroad, showing unto him the greatness of his offenses, and the grieuousnesse
of the punishment due unto the same. Hereunto also does concur the judgment
of God, and the fear of hellfire, which causes the remembrance of death to
be bitter unto worldly men. 2. Cor. 5.10 romans 14.10
We must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ (says Paul) that
every man may receive the things which are done in his body, according to that
he has done, whether it be good or evil. And Christ says. Mat. 12.36
Of every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give account thereof at
the day of judgment. John 5.29 dan. 12.^
And they shall come forth that have done good, unto the resurrection of life,
but they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of condemnation. Matthew.
25.41
And these shall go into everlasting pain, and the righteous into life
eternal. So then we see 4. causes why worldly men fear death. First, the
loss of their honors, riches, pleasures, and friends. Secondly, the painful
pangues which come before, or accompany death. Thirdly, want of faith and hope.
Finally, their guilty consciences, and fear of Gods judgments and punishments

Chap. IIII Of the first Cause that makes Death fearful to a worldly man,
which is the loss of honors, wealth, pleasure, etc. And the remedies against
the same.
How far we ought to be addicted unto the world. Sect. I
Man is a Creature endued with a reasonable soul, (a Soul of noble substance,
of exceeding beauty, inspired by the Genesis 2.7
Father, redeemed by the 1. Pet. 1.19
Son, sanctified by the 1. Cori. 6.11
holy Ghost, and beautified with the Genesis 1.26
image of the whole Trinity; a Soul created, to live with angels, to enjoy the
love and felloship of an eternal Spouse, to be a Citizen of heaven, to
inherit a kingdom, and everlastingly to triumph in royal dignity) to the
end, that having a celestial beginning and heavenly original, he should
despise and set light by these Matt. 6.19, 20
inferior and terrestrial things; and that his 1. John 5.20
mind being by nature lofty, should not be depressed with the weight and
burden of Coloss. 3.1
earthly and base drugges: but having his eyes shut, and his ears deaf,
against these worldly vanities, should (contemning, or rather forgetting all
humane toys) lift up his heart, and with his cogitations and affections be
Philip. 3.20
conversant in heaven. As for the world, that at the John 15.19
beginning, cheereth, enricheth, and honoreth his friend, and in the 1. Cor. 6.2
end leaves him, poor, miserable, and in a damnable estate, (much like a
Peacocke, that with the stately fan he makes of his own feathers, adorneth
his fore-parts, but leaves his hinderparts naked and unseemly) man is but a
Genesis 47.9
traveler therein, and no dweller. We are 1. Chr. 29.15 hebr. 11.13
strangers and wayfaring men, as it were in common tents or Innes: for our
whole life is nothing else then a Wisd. 5.13
way or course unto death: wherefore as travelers, if peradventure by the way,
or in their lodging, they meet with any profitable spoil, straightway they
refuse and reject it, as superfluous, and too heavy a burden for them to
bear: if they come to any place of pleasure or pastime, they set light by it,
and depart, their necessary affairs requiring haste in their journey: and on
the other side, if they light on an ill Inn, or lodging, where they are badly
entertained, they patiently forbear it, knowing they must depart the next day
after, where they shall be better used, in an other place. Even so ought we to
be Psalm 62.10 1. corint. 7.31
addicted to the love of these worldly honors, possessions and pleasures; and
to care for no more wealth and goods, then what is necessary, for our journey
and voyage; the rest we ought utterly to 1. Ioh. 2.15, 16 james 4.4
neglect as superfluous, and too heany a burden for us to bear, or rather we
ought to contribute them with our fellow-trauellers, who are in need and
misery amongst us: neither let us give ear to the enticing Phil. 3.8 syrach
19.5
pleasures of this world, lest they trouble us in our course; so shall we
travel peaceably, without care and trouble, and at last, arrive at that
honorable haven, where we tend unto.

A remedy against the temptation of worldly honors and preferments. Sect. II
THe world is couched in 1. John 5.19
wickedness, and drenched in sin, it 1. John 2.17
passes away and the lusts thereof: 1. John 2.15
if any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him; because James
4.4
the amity of the world, is the enimitie of God, whosoever therefore will be
a friend of the world, makes himself an enemy of God. But we John 15.19 They
that dote upon the world are the slaves of Satan.
are not of the world, to the end we should not be envvrapped and enfolded in
the same condemnation with the world. The Devil is the John 14.30 john 16.11
Prince of this world, therefore if we love the world, and the things that are
in it, we are subjects and slaves unto the Devil. We can not be the Servants
of Christ unless the Galat. 6.14
world be crucified unto us, and we unto the world. O then, let us with the
Apostle esteem of the world, and all the glory and honor of it, but as
Philip. 3.8
loss and dongue! Let us Coloss. 3.1.
seek those things. which are above, where Christ sits at the right hand of
God! Our Mat. 6.21
heart ought to be where our treasure is; and where is our treasure but in
heaven? Our Coloss. 3.3
life is hid with Christ in God; Coloss. 2.3
in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. O let us not sell
our birthright, for a mess of potage, as Genesis 25.34
Esau did! Let us esteem more of the holy Land, then of the Exodus 16.3 number.
11.14
fleshpots and onyons of Egypt. Is it not better to be John 4.10
nourished in the house of our Father with the bread of Angels, then with the
Luke 15.16
Prodigall-child, to live among swine, with shales and husks? Is it not better
to be saved with Genesis 19.16.
Lot, in running out of Sodom, then with Genesis 19.26
Lots wife, lusting and longing after infamous and filthy pleasures to perish?
Psalm. 94.8
Understand then ye unwise among the people; and ye fools, when will ye be
wise? How long will ye take Esaias 5.20
light for darkness, and darkness for light? sour for sweet, and sweet for
sour? good for evil, and evil for good? Luke 16.15
That which is highly esteemed among men, is abomination in the sight of God.
We must not therefore be sorrowful or agriened, to leave the honors and
promotions of this world, which cause us to provoke God, to disdame our
neighbors, and to forget our selves, yea, to worship and adore the devil, who
ever kisseth where he means to kill, giving his guests a draught of deadly
poison in a golden cup, and in a stately ship wafting his passengers upon the
rocks of eternal ruin. The pleasant savor of the cup inuiteth, but the
sweet taste of the poison choketh. The devil like an Eagle houereth in the
air, as though his only delight were to view the Sun, and to look toward
heaven; whereas in deed, he is a greedy kyte, bearing a ravening mind, that
has his eyes always fixed upon the earth, watching his time when he may best
seize upon his prey. He is much like a Thief, who when by open violence he can
not catch his booty, seeks by shrowding himself in the valleys, bushes, and
darkness of the night, to take the poor traveler unprovided, and so to
spoil him of his goods: so the devil when he sees, that by open pursuit, he
cannot overthrow us, he covertly coucheth himself, in the shadows and briars
of worldly honors, and other delightsome allurements, thereby to entrap us, ere
we epsy his trains. Worldly Honor is one of the principal snares whereby he
inueigleth our souls, which surely cannot be desired of Gods children, because
it is given unto the wicked for wicked causes: so Number. 24.11
Balac a wicked king, thought to promote Balaam a wicked Prophet, unto honor,
for his wicked cursing and falsehood. 2. Because it is not durable, being
founded upon the false foundation of inordinate love or lucre; so Hester 3.1
Magistratus virum indicat
Ahashuerosh honored Haman the Agagite; and 3. because it is damnable, causing
him that is so Psalm. 49.18, 20
honored, to be blinded, to be ungrateful, and to forget himself. Bucephalus
the horse of Alexander the great, so long as he was naked, would suffer any
man to back him; but if he were furnished with the royal saddle, bridle, and
other furniture, then grew he so proud, that no man might ride him but the
King: so many, who in their mean calling were modest, humble and virtuous, by
increase of honor, have changed their modesty into arrogancy, their humility
into pride, and their virtues into vices: so that worldly honor, may well be
termed; The Chair of Iniquity.

A remedy against the temptation of worldly riches and wealth. Sect III
WOrldly wealth, is not 2. Cor. 6.10
the true riches of Gods children, nor the 1. Pet. 1.4
inheritance that Jesus Christ has purchased for them: for his John 18.36
kingdom (which is the riches which we expect) is not of this world, but
spiritual and heavenly. Jesus Christ is Matthew. 27.11
King of this Kingdom; but what temporal goods has he purchased or
possessed, being in this world; whereas he had not so much, as the little
Matthew. 8.20
birds and foxes had? he had neither nest, nor hole to hide his head in. And
the Apostles, who are the Matthew. 19.28
Peers and Princes of this Kingdom, what revenues or possessions had they in
this world? Peter said unto the lame creeple, Acts 3.6
Silver and gold have I none. Paul also says, we are 1. Cor. 6.10
as poor, and yet make many rich, as having nothing, and yet possessing all
things. So then, Apoc. 21.7. etc
the glory, the power, the estate, the riches, the wealth, the pleasures, the
peace, and all the felicity wherewith God enricheth his children, are not John
18.36
earthly and corruptible, subject unto Matthew. 6.19
thieves and rust; but 1. Cor. 5.1
heavenly, spiritual, and durable, which God gives unto us Esaias 55.1
freely, without money, or any thing else. These are the goods which we are to
esteem, and to make much of; the Grace of God, our Adoption, Faith; the Word
of God, Hope, Love, Patience, Humility, and especially the Philip. 3.9
Righteousness of Jesus Christ, which is the Fountain, from whence all the rest
of Gods graces, favors and blessings, that he bestows upon us, do flow, and
are derived unto us: this is our wealth, our chief felicity, and 1. Cor. 1.30
end of our blessedness. As for worldly riches, Jesus Christ affirming that
they Matthew. 13.22
choke the good corn of Gods word, insinuates that they are like a wanton
strumpet, who by her beauty allureth men to lust after her, and depriueth such
as give themselves to enjoy her, of all virtue, honor, and honesty; and like
unto wine, which by the sweetness thereof enticeth man to excessive drinking,
yet withal, it takes the man from himself, that is, it bereaueth him of his
senses and reason. As those mountains that contain mines of gold and silver,
are otherwise barren and unfruitful: so they that have riches, and veins of
gold and silver, are barren and unprofitable to the service of God and man; for
riches do breed Luke 12.19
pride and arrogancy, pleasures and pomp, contempt of others, and
forgetfulness of God. They may be compared to wild beasts, whom a man can
hardly take, and when he has taken them, he must take great care how to keep
them from doing mischief. They are as pleasant wine to a drunkard, and as a
sword in a mad man's hand, to use rather to hurt, then to do good. Prou. 28.20
He that makes haste to be rich, shall not be innocent, says Solomon; for as
thorns are hardly gathered without pricking of the hands; so cannot riches
without wounding of the conscience. As he that trauaileth in the rain, shall
hardly escape wetting, or he that walks in the Sun eschew heat; so it is
almost impossible for a rich man to avoid vice and corruption by his riches:
whereupon Christ speaks, Mark 10.23
How hardly do they that have riches enter into the kingdom of God! and,
though he expounds this speech afterward, saying, Mark 10.24
Children, how hard is it for them that trust in riches, to enter into the
kingdom of God! Yet he adds Mark 10.25
It is easier for a cable-rope to go through the eye of a needle, then for a
rich man to enter into the kingdom of God: declaring how difficult it is for a
rich man to escape confidence in his riches, and consequently to enter into the
kingdom of God. Wherefore then should we be so loath to forsake those things,
which are so far from giving contentment, and making us happy, that
contrariwise they engender a thousand sorrows and cares, and so make us most
miserable and wretched? O let us take no more care, but for what will serve our
turn for 1. Tim. 6.8
food and raiment, having always in mind the parable of him that said Luke
12.19
Soul, thou have much goods laid up for many years, live at ease, eat,
drink, and take thy pastime: who for putting trust in his riches, is justly
condemned.

Another Remedy against the same Temptation. Sect. IIII.
Moreover, we must consider, that these Prou. 22.2. 1. Sam. 2.7
riches and worldly possessions, which we love so heartily, be not our own
proper goods, but lent us; over which we are Luke 16.2
Bayliffes and Stewards, and not Lords and Masters: which when the time of our
stewardship is expired, Psalm 109.8
others must dispose and rule. For God Genesis 1.1
created heaven and earth; Psalm 24.1
the earth is the Lords, and all that therein is, the world, and they that
dwell therein: Therefore God himself is the true and proper Genesis 14.22
owner of our riches and possessions, and we, the inhabitants of the earth,
are the Bayliffes and Tillers of the same. And lest men should suppose, that
the earth becomes fruitful by their manuring, and husbandry, it brings
forth nothing Psalm 147.8
without the dew of heaven and rain. Whereupon, to bring us to the
acknowledgement hereof, God Leuit. 23.10 deuteronomy. 26.10
required of the children of Israel, the first fruits of the land, which he
had given them; thereby signifying, that he himself was the proper Lord of
their wealth and possessions, and that they were the rulers and disposers of
the same under God. Now then, seeing these Job 1.21
riches are not our own proper goods, we must further acknowledge, that we
must be Luke 16.2
accountable for the least farthing which we have received of God; after what
manner we came by it, how and to what use we have bestowed and spent it? They
that have received most, must make the greatest account, and of those that have
received least, the account shall be less. This doctrine is plainly declared,
in the parable of the Luke 16.1
Richman, and the Steward; wherein is showed, that no man, of what state or
condition souer he be, is Lord of his own riches or substance, but the
steward and disposer of it, accountable unto God for all things: for at the day
of judgment, every man shall hear this voice speaking unto himself, Luke 16.2
Give account of thy stewardship. Wherefore it behooves men, so to possess
their riches, that their riches Psalm. 62.10
possess not them, and so to dispose of themselves, that they be as ready and
as willing, to 1. Cor. 7.30, 31
leave them, as to receive them; and to Job 1.21
bless the name of the Lord, as well in the one as in the other, as Job did.
Look lib. 2. chap. 5. Sect. 9.

Testimonies out of the word of God, against the vanities of worldly wealth.
Sect. V
Job, He has devoured substance, Job 2.15
and he shall vomit it, for God shall draw it out of his belly.

If I had made gold mine hope, Job 31.24
or have said to the wedge of gold, Thou art my confidence: If I rejoiced
because my substance was great, 25
or because mine hand had gotten much. This also had bin an iniquity to be
condemned, for I had denied the God above.

Naked came I out of my mothers womb, and naked shall I return thither. Job 1.21


When the rich man sleeps, Job 27.19
he shall not be gathered to his fathers.

David, Be not vain, Psalm 62.10
if riches increase, set not your heart thereon.

They trust in their goods, Psalm 49.6
and boast themselves in the multitude of their riches. Yet a man can by no
means redeem his brother, 7
he cannot give his ransom to God.

Solomon, The treasures of wickedness profit nothing. Prouer. 10.2
Riches avail not in the day of wrath. Prou. 11.4
He that trusts in his riches shall perish. 28


Better is a little with the fear of the Lord, Prou. 15.16
than great treasure, and trouble therewith.

An heretage is hastily gotten at the beginning, Prou. 20.21
but the end thereof shall not be blessed.

Better is the poor that walks in his uprightness, Prou. 28.6
than he that peruerteth his ways, Prou. 23.20
though he be rich: he that makes haste to be rich, shall not be innocent.

Vanity of vanities, Eccles. 1.2
all is vanity.

He that loves silver, Eccles. 5.9
shall not be satisfied with silver, and he that loves riches, shall be without
the fruit thereof: This also is vanity. 12
There is an evil sickness that I have seen under the Sun, to wit, riches
reserved to the owners thereof for their evil.

Ezechiel, They shall cast their silver in the streets, Ezech. 7.19
and their gold shall be cast far off: their silver and their gold cannot
deliver them in the day of the wrath of the Lord, they shall not satisfy their
souls, neither fill their bowels, for their ruin is for their iniquity.

Amos, They know not to do right, Amos 3.10
says the Lord, they store up violence and robbery in their palaces.

Woe to them that are at ease in Tsion, Amos 6.1
and trust in the mountains of Samaria.

Micah, Micah. 6.10
Are yet the treasures of wickedness in the house of the wicked? and the scant
of measure which is abominable?

Zephaniah, Neither their silver, Zeph. 1.18
nor their gold shall be able to deliver them from the day of the Lords
wrath.

Jesus Christ, Matthew. 6.19
Lay not up treasures for your selves upon the earth, where the moth and canker
corrupts, and where thieves dig through and steal. But lay up treasures
for your selves in heaven, where neither the moath, nor canker corrupts, and
where thieves, neither dig through nor steal.

You cannot serve God and Riches. 24


A rich man shall hardly enter into the kingdom of heaven. Matthew. 19.23
24
And again I say unto you: Mark 10.24, 25 luke 18.24, 25
It is easier for a cable rope to go through the eye of a needle, than for a
rich man to enter into the kingdom of God.

The cares of this world, Mark 4.19 matthew. 13.22 luke 8.14
and the deceitfulness of riches, and the lusts of other things enter in, and
choke the word, and it is unfruitful.

Woe be to you that are rich, Luke 6.24
for you have received your consolation.

Take heed and beware of covetousness; Luke 12.15
for though a man have abundance, yet his life stands not in his riches.
Read the parable following in the same place, and think on it.

Paul, 1. Cor. 7.29
And this I say, Brethren, because the time is short, hereafter that both they
which have wives, be as though they had none: And they that weep, as though
they wept not, 30
and they that rejoice, as though they rejoiced not: and they that buy, as
though they possessed not. And they that use this world, 31
as though they used it not: for the fashion of this world goes away.

We brought nothing into the world, 1. Tim. 6.7
and it is certain that we can carry nothing out. Therefore when we have food
and raiment, 8
let us therewith be content. For they that will be rich, fall into temptation
and snares, 9
and into many foolish and noisome lusts, which drown men in perdition and
destruction. For the desire of money is the root of all evil. 10


Charge them that are rich in the world, that they be not high-minded, 1. Tim.
6.17
and that they trust not in uncertain riches, but in the living God, which
gives us abundantly all things to enjoy. That they do good, 18
and be rich in good works, and ready to destribute and communicate: 19
laying up in store for themselves, a good foundation against the time to come,
that they may obtain eternal life.

James, James 5.1
Go to now ye rich men, weep and howl for your miseries that shall come upon
you: 2
your riches are corrupt, and your garments are moth-eaten: 3
your gold and silver is cankered, and the rust of them shall be a witness against
you, and shall eat your flesh as it were fire.

John, 1. John 2.15
Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world: if any man love
the world, the love of the Father is not in him: 16
For all that is in the world (as the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes,
and the pride of life) is not of the Father, but is of the world. 17
And the world passes away, and the lust thereof: but he that fulfilleth the
will of God, abides for ever.

A remedy against the temptation of worldly pleasures. Sect. VI
SOme Eccl. 1.2, 3, 4 etc.
seek after the pleasures and contentment of their flesh; some delight in
building of mansions and great houses; others take pleasure in fair gardens,
orchards, allies, and arbors; some proudly attire themselves, others delight in
adorning their houses; some take their felicity in eating and drinking; others
in pleasant company, where they may laugh and be merry; some love to dance
and to dally, other to transcend the bounds of honesty: Of these and such
other wanton worldlings Solomon says, Eccl. 11.9
Rejoice O yong-man in thy youth, and let thine heart cheer thee in the days
of thy youth, and walk in the way of thine heart, and in the sight of thine
eyes: But that after-clap, that doleful Item marres the market, but know, that
for all these things, God will bring thee to judgment. Then, who will not
shiuer in himself? who will not willingly forsake those plesures, whose end and
fruit is, Romans 6.21 The danger of worldly pleasures
shame and dishonor, penury and loss of goods, which bring infinite sicknesses
unto the body, and unto the spirit dullness and blockishnesse; which bring a
contempt of virtue and honesty, a hatred of true religion and of God himself;
which make men effeminate, wanton, disdainefull, yea, and so besotted that they
are like unto beasts? pleasure and sorrow are twins, for Pleasure is no sooner
hatched, hut Repeutance is at hand ready to supplant her; and therefore it is
like a smile which presently is turned into sorrow and tears; or like a
dream, the joy whereof at a man's waking vanishes away: so pleasure flies and
slideth away, leaving rather cause of repentance then occasion of remembrance.
It may be compared to a painted sepulcher, fair without and foul within; to
pills, outwardly fairly guilt, and rolled in sugar, but within full of
bitterness; yet pills do vent and purge the body, but pleasures corrupt and
poison both body and soul. They resemble the Sirens, beautiful above, but if
you look on the hinder part, they have the tail of a Scorpion, which gives
such a sore stroke, that it benummeth our bodies, and stingeth our souls to
death. They are like venom or strong poison, tempered with hypocras or sweet
milk. Pleasure is a gulf or fire that deuoureth a man's substance, defiles
his body, and kills his soul; It is a path to all wicked practices, and the
cause why the word of God does not Luke 18.14
fructify in our hearts; for Romans 8.8
they that are in the flesh cannot please God, Romans 6.16
know ye not, that to whomsoever ye give your selves as servants to obey, his
servants ye are to whom ye obey, whether it be of sin unto death, or of
obedience unto righteousness? Now let us enter into our own hearts and
consciences, let us examine our selves whether we take more delight in those
things wherewith the devil is most delighted, in lasciousnesse, in pride, in
quaffing, and other sins, then in honest behavior, in humility, in
sobriety and in godliness? If we find our selves subjects and slaves unto these
satanicall suggestions, then Romans 6.23
death and damnation is our due, then our lodging, our palace, and our
mansion house shall be in that place which burns with fire and brimstone,
where is Matthew. 25.30
howling and crying, weeping and gnashing of teeth, where the Esaias 30.33 luke
3.17
unquenchable fire of Gods fury contiunaly burns, where the Esaias 66.24
incurable worm of conscience ever stingeth, and where the Luke 16.23
intolerable torments of desperate minds always continue. Pleasure Esaias 1.4
provoke the anger of GOD, it Esaias 59.2
separateth his love from man, it Jeremy 5.29
hasteneth his justice, it Esaias 59.13
procures perpetual destruction. Pleasure was the Genesis 3.6
bane of Adam and his posterity, the destruction of the Genesis 7.17
old world, the overthrow of Genesis 19.24
Sodom, the ruin of the Genesis 34.27
Sichemites, and the perdition of the Judge. 20.35.
Beniamites: why then should we be so besotted with these worldly pleasures,
seeing by death we shall enjoy eternal and everlasting joys in heaven?

A remedy against the temptation of unwillingness to forsake wife, children
and friends. Sect. VII
Howsoever we be left and forsaken, or rather sequestered and separated from our
vviues and children; yet are we not forsaken of Esaias 41.9 esaias 54.10
God, and of his Son Jesus Christ our Savior, John 6.37
Him that comes unto me (says Christ) I cast not away. John 6.39
This is the Fathers will which has sent me, that of all which he hatth given
me, I should loose nothing, but should raise it up again at the last day.
John 10.28
And I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither shall
any pluck them out of mine hand. As Elkanah said unto Annah: 1. Sam. 1.8
Why weepest thou? am not I better unto thee then ten sons? So, why should we
be sorry to leave wife, children and friends? Is not Christ better unto us
then ten wives, so many children, so many friends? Yea, then ten thousand times
so many? Deuteronomy. 33.9
He that says unto his father and mother, I see you not, and to his brethren,
and to his own children, I know you not, he observes the word of the Lord
and keeps his covenant. Whereupon Christ says, Matthew. 10.37
He that loves father or mother more then me, is not worthy of me: and he
that loves son or daughter more then me is not worthy of me: Matthew. 10.38
and he that takes not up his cross and follows me, is not worthy of me:
Luke 14.26
if any man come unto me and hate not his father, and mother, and wife, and
children, and brethren, and sisters, yea, and his own life also, he cannot be
my Disciple. How we must hate our parents.
Howbeit we must remember that this hate is the hate of dissimulation, not of
persecution, the hate of avoiding, not of annoying, the hate of godliness, not
of cruelnesse; when we do not give ear unto them, or regard their Syren-like
persuasions, when they seem to withdraw us from the service of God, and from
doing of such things as he commands. Moreover, we must consider, that we, our
wives, our children, and friends, are al, as it were Genesis 47.9 heb. 11.13
trauelers going forth of this world, we take our voyage together, and if we
go a little before, they shall shortly follow after. Wherefore, as at the
beginning of our marriage or acquaintance, we Matthew. 19.5
left father and mother, and did cleave to our wives: so now it ought not to
grieve us to leave them, and to return unto God, who is better unto us then
father, mother, wife, children, friend, or any thing else.

That though a man die in debt, yet he should not fear death. Sect. VIII
Objection.

O But my debt is great; if I die now, then when I am dead, my creditors will
come and seize upon all that I have, so cruel they are, and so merciless, and
so shall my poor wife and children be undone for ever: Oh I would God I might
live to be out of debt, and leave my wife and children free, though I left them
little or nothing beside. Alas, how shall I do? Nay, how shall they do?
Little I have, and even that little shall be taken from them: my wife shall be
constrained to bestow her self against her own liking, and contrary to her
affection, even for very need: and my children shall either beg, or endure
some servile slavery, under some rigorous and cruel masters and mistresses.
This is it that tormenteth my heart, this pincheth me sore, and pearceth even
my very soul, when I think of it: and how can I but think upon my dear and
near ones both night and day?

Answer.

YOu cannot commit your wife and children into the hands of a more faithful
Guardian and Ouerseer then God is. He will take them into his Psalm. 146.9
deuteronomy. 10.18 psa. 9.9 ps. 10.17 psalm. 68.5. pro. 22 23. malac. 3.5
protection, he promises that he will have a particular care over them, he
will defend and maintain them against all oppressors, and will power out a
fearful vengeance upon the wrongs, outrages, and injuries that shall be done
unto them, he will never forsake them. O then be not discoraged, faint not,
Psalm. 55.22
Cast thy burden upon the Lord (says David) and he shall nourish thee, he will
not suffer the righteous to fall for ever. 1. Pet. 5.7
Cast your care upon him for he cares for you, says the Apostle. Job 39.3
psalm. 147.9 luke 12.24
He feeds the young ravens, Luke 12.27
he clotheth the lillies, how much more will he feed and clothe his children?
What can care profit you? What can thought avail you? Luke 12.25
Which of you by taking thought (says Christ) can add to his stature one
cubite? 26
If then he be not able to do the least thing why take you thought for
raiment? 29
Therefore ask not what shall ye eat, or what ye shall drink: 30
your father knows that ye have need of these things. Let this stay and
strengthen you, let this always comfort and cherish you, that God is Psalm
68.5 mat. 6.9 luke 11.2 galat. 4.6. deuteronomy. 32.6. esaias 63.16 2. Esdr. 12.29 1.
corint. 6.18 matthew. 23.9
your father, yea the father of your wife and children, that he knows your
case, and what you and yours have need of: therefore he will in due time
provide all necessaries for his children; for he is both willing and able to
do it, and his care shall effect that that yours never can. See the experience
hereof in the like case, and be comforted by it. One of the 2. Kings 4.1
sons of the Prophets, being in debt, not by reason of any unthriftiness, or
prodigality (for he was a man that feared the Lord) but by the hand of God:
died, leaving his poor wife and children to the cruelty of the Creditor, who
came fiercely to take away the children from their mother, to answer the debt
by bondage. This was a heavy cross to a man that feared the Lord, to live in
debt, and to die in debt; especially when debt to his poor wife and children
was so dangerous. Well, how did the poor widow and the orphans? How escaped
they this danger? Even the merciful providence of God, which is Psalm 37.25
ever good unto them that fear him, so increased that little 2. Kings 4.7
oil which she had in her pitcher, that it paid her Creditor, and yielded her
maintenance to maintain her self and her children: Now then think upon this
comfortable story, and know, that God is not the God of this man alone, nor of
this widow and orphans only, but he is your God, and the God and Father of all
the faithful. Wherefore grieve not to die, seeing God will have it so;
commit your wife, children and friends unto God, and he will protect them:
Psalm 23.1
they that have the Lord for their Shepherd, shall want nothing.

Testimonies of holy Scripture, touching the care that God has over widows
and fatherless children. Sect. IX
MOses, Exodus 22.22
Ye shall not trouble any widow, nor fatherless child.

The Lord does right unto the fatherless and widow. Deuteronomy. 10.18.


Thou shall not pervert the right of the stranger, Deuteronomy. 24.17
nor of the fatherless, nor take the widows raiment to pledge.

When thou cuttest down thine harvest in thy field, 19
and have forgotten a sheafe in thy field, thou shall not go to fetch it, but
it shall be for the stranger, for the fatherless, and for the widow, that the
Lord thy God may bless thee in all the works of thine hands. 20
When thou beatest thine Olive tree, thou shall not go over the boughs again,
but it shall be for the stranger, for the fatherless, and for the widow. When
thou gatherest thy vineyard, 21
thou shall not gather the grapes clean after thee, but they shall be for the
stranger, for the fatherless and for the widow.

Cursed be he that hinders the right of the stranger, Deuteronomy. 27.19
the fatherless and the widow. And all the people shall say, So be it.

Job, Job 24.3
They lead away the Ass (speaking of the wicked) of the fatherless, and take
the widows Ox to pledge.

If I restrained the poor of their desire, Job 31.16
or have caused the eyes of the widow to fail. 21
If I have lift up my hand against the fatherless, when I saw that I might
help him in the gate: 22
Let my arm fall from my shoulder, and mine arm be broken from the bone.

David, Psalm 9.9
The Lord will be a refuge for the poor, a refuge in due time, even in
affliction.

Lord thou have heard the desire of the poor, Psalm 10.17
thou preparest their heart, thou bendest thine ear to them.

To judge the fatherless and poor, 28
that earthly man cause to fear no more.

Behold, Psalm 33.18
the eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him, and upon them that trust in
his mercy: 19
To deliver their souls from death, and to preserve them in famine.

The poor man cried, Psalm 34.6
and the Lord heard him, and saved him out of all his troubles. 9
Nothing wants to them that fear him. They that seek the Lord, 10
shall want nothing that is good.

I have bin young, and am old: Psalm 37.25
yet I saw never the righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging hread.

Do right to the poor and fatherless, Psalm 82.3
do justice to the poor and needy. Deliver the poor and needy: 4
save them from the hand of the wicked.

The Lord keeps the strangers, Psalm 146.9
he relieueth the fatherless and widow: but he overthrows the way of the
wicked.

He is a Father of the fatherless, Psalm 68.5
and a Judge of the widows, even God in his holy habitation.

Solomon, Proverbs 23.10
Remove not the ancient bounds, and enter not into the field of the
fatherless: 11
for he that redeemeth them, is mighty, he will defend their cause against
thee.

The Lord will defend their cause, Proverbs 22.23
and spoil the soul of those that spoil them.

Isaiah, Esaias 1.17
Learn to do well, seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the
fatherless, and defend the widow.

Jeremiah, Jeremy 22.3
Thus says the Lord, execute ye judgment and righteousness, and deliver the
oppressed from the hand of the oppressor, and vex not the stranger, the
fatherless, nor the widow.

Leave thy fatherless children, and I will preserve them alive, Jeremy 49.11
and let thy widows trust in me.

Zechariah, Zechar. 7.10
Oppress not the widow nor the fatherless, the stranger nor the poor, and
let none of you imagine evil against his brother in your heart.

Malachi, Malach. 3.5
I will come near to you to judgment, and I will be a swift witness. against
those that vex the widow and fatherless, and oppress the stranger, and fear
not me, says the Lord of hosts.

Jesus Christ, I say unto you, Matthew. 6.25
be not careful for your life, what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink,
nor yet for your body, what ye shall put on. Is not the life more worth then
meat? and the body then raiment? 26
Behold the fowls of the heaven, for they sow not, neither reap, nor carry
into the barnes, yet your heavenly Father feeds them: Are ye not much better
then they? 28
And why care you for raiment? Learn how the lillies of the field do grow,
they are neither wearied, nor spinne. Yet I say unto you, 29
that even Solomon in all his glory, was not arrayed like one of these. 30
Wherefore, if God so clothe the grass of the field, which is to day, and to
morrow is cast into the oven, shall he not do much more unto you, O ye of
little faith? Therefore take no thought, 31
saying, What shall we eat? or what shall we drink? or wherewith shall we be
clothed? 32
(For after these things seek the Gentiles) for your heavenly Father knows
that you have need of all these things. 33
But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and al these
things shall be ministered unto you. John 14.18
I will not leave you fatherless, but I will come to you. See Matthew. 23.14.

Paul, Philip. 4.5
The Lord is at hand: be nothing careful, but in all things let your requests
be showed unto God, in prayer, and supplication, with giving of thanks.

Let your conversation be without covetousness, Hebr. 13.5 josh. 1.9
and be content with those things that you have, for he has said, I will not
fail thee, Hebr. 13.7 psalm. 118.6
neither forsake thee. So that we may boldly say; The Lord is my helper.

James, James 1.2^
Pure religion and undefiled before God even the Father is this, to visit the
fatherless and widows in their adversity, and to keep himself unspotted of
the world.

Chap. V. Of the second cause that makes death fearful to a worldly man,
which is the pains and sicknesses which come before or accompany Death. And
the remedies against the same.
Unmortified men, no fit inhabitants for the heavenly Jerusalem. Sect. I.
WHen a Condemned-man is returned to prison, all his mind runs upon death,
he detesteth his former life and conversation, he prays earnestly unto God,
and regards no worldly pleasure, soft bedding, delicate fare, or costly
apparel: Yea, if he be a man that fears God, all his Philip. 3.20
cogitatio^s are bent to life everlasting, greatly rejoicing that he is so
near the Matthew. 25.34
heavenly kingdom, that he may take possession of his 1. Pet. 1.4
inheritance. And is not the Hebr. 9.27
sentence of death passed upon us, the first day that we came into this
world? Be not our souls in our bodies, as in a prison? Do not we only expect
the time of our execution? How comes it to pass then, that we do not feel,
or show us ready, and provide our selves to die, as does the prisoner that has
received his sentence from an earthly Judge? Why do we fix our whole delight
on the world, why do we so much encumber our selves with earthly businesses,
and why do not we willingly embrace death, that by it we may take possession of
our inheritance? O let us not build where we cannot long continue, let us make
our provision that we may live where we shall remain for ever; let us not
forget heaven for earth, the soul for the body, and heavenly treasures for
earthly goods* for one month or day, for one hour or minute, let us not
deprive our selves of that Matthew. 25.21
everlasting joy that shall never be taken from us: let us endure stormy weather
for one month, that we may have a thousand milio^s of years of fair weather:
let us patiently bear the Acts 14.22
tribulation of one day, which will breed us exceeding great consolation for
ever: let not the pains of one moment of time fray us from taking Luke 12.32
possession of our kingdom, lest we shall be cast for ever into the Matthew. 25.30
kingdom of darkness. In a temporal building, the stones must be broken,
hewne, and squared, ere they be fit to make up the work. The Corn must be
threshed, winowed, and purified, before it be ready for good bread. 2. Kings
2.11
whirle wind must first blow ere Elias be rapt into heaven. And we must be
cut, hewn, and squared with a number of Acts 14.22 2. timot. 3.12 luke 9.23
mark 8.34
tribulations, sicknesses, and diseases, before we can be made fit and lively
stones for the heavenly Jerusalem. The very victuals which nourish and
maintain us come to very great loathsomeness, before they do work their
perfection in us. From life they are brought to the fire, and clean altered
from that they were when they were alive, from the fire to the trencher,
from the trencher to the mouth, from the mouth to the stomach, and there so
boiled and digested, before they norish, that whosoever savv the same, he
would loathe and abhor his own nutriment, before it come to full
perfection. And so must those children whom God delights in, be mangled and
defaced in this John. 16.33 1. john 3.13, 14
world, which is the kitchen and mill to boil and grind the flesh of Gods
children in, till they attain their perfection in the world to come: and as a
man looks for the nourishing of his meat, when it is full digested, and not
before: so must we look for our salvation, when the troublesome turmoiles of
this world are passed, and not before. Raw flesh is not meat wholesome for
man; and unmortified men be no creatures fit for God.

That sickness and tribulation is a token of Gods love. Sect. II
Affliction, what it is unto the godly.
THe holy Scriptures plainly testify, that the pains and pangs of Death, or
whatsoever dolorous sickenesses, or other grievous maladies we suffer either
before or with death, are no other thing in us christians, then the rod of our
most merciful and loving father; wherewith he corrects and chasteneth his
children, either to amend in us whatsoever offends his Majesty, lest we
perish; or else to try our faith and patience, that we may be found
unreprovable, laudable, and honorable before the tribunal seat of Jesus
Christ, the Judge of the world, at his second coming. Hebr. 12.5 prove. 3.11
My son (says he) despise not the chastening of the Lord, neither faint
when thou art rebuked of him. Hebr. 12.6
For whom the Lord loves, he chasteneth and he scourges every son whom he
receives. 7
If ye endure chastening, God offers himself unto you as unto sons; for
what son is it that the father chasteneth not? 8
If therefore ye be without correction whereof all are partakers, then are you
bastards and not sons. 9
Moreover, we have had the fathers of our bodies which corrected us, and we
gave them reverence: should not we much rather be in subjection unto the Father
of Spirits, that we might live? 10
For they verily for a few days chastened us after their own pleasure, but
he chasteneth us for our profit, that we might be partakers of his holiness. 11
Now no chastesing for the present seems to be joyous, but grievous; but
afterward it brings the quiet fruit of righteousness unto them which are
thereby exercised. 12
Wherefore lift up your hands which hang down, and weak knees: 13
And make straight steps unto your feet, lest that which is halting be turned
out of the way, but let it rather be healed. Hitherto out of the Scriptures.
An excellent comfort, and a sovereign salve for all them that are in such a
case, visited with the hand of God, and tempted with this temptation. The
Exodus 3.2
Bush which Moses saw in Mount Horeb, burned, and yet consumed not; so must
the faithful be tried in the fire of affliction, but not destroyed. They are
compared to Cantic. 2.2.
lillies growing among thorns, because they are placed in the midst of
tribulation: to Luke 22.31
wheat, because Satan will sift us as men sift wheat, and as wheat is flailed,
so the world afflicts us: and to John 15.5
vine branches, for as Vines being let out at large, in small time become Esaias
5.6
wild and fruitless, so we being given over of God, and left to run after
our own lust, are easily allured; but being pruned and dressed as their nature
requires, they bring forth greater and sweeter grapes; so we being kept in
awe, and obedience by the band of affliction and sicknesses, will bring forth
Psalm 23.4
fruit, both in quantity more abundant, and in quality more sweet and pleasant.
Thus then, that careful John 15.1
Husbandman even GOD our Father, pruneth his vines that they may bear much
fruit. Wheerevpon the Prophet David makes a solemn protestation, declaring
what good affliction wrought in him, Psalm 219.71
It is good for me (O Lord) that thou have corrected me, 67
for before I was afflicted, I went wong. And in another place, Psalm 23.4
thy rod and thy staff have comforted me.

That God has appointed his holy Angels to guard and preserve us in our
sicknesses and troubles. Sect. III
WHat a comfort is that unto us, that in all our tribulations and sicknesses,
yea, in the very sorrows and pangs of death, Almighty God has given his
holy Angels charge to direct our paths, and to Psalm 91.1^
keep us in all our ways, as he has promised in his word. Exodus 23 20
Behold I send an Angel before thee to keep thee in the way, and to bring
thee to the place which I have prepared. Psalm 34 7
The Angel of the Lord pitcheth round about them that fear him and delivers
them. Examples hereof, we have in the holy Scriptures plentiful: Genesis 19.15
Lot when Sodom and Gomorrha should be destroyed was by Angels conducted and
brought thence, and so, he and his Daughters escaped the danger. Genesis 16.7
The Angel of the Lord comforted Hagar Saras maid, flying from her Dame, into
the Wilderness, and preserved her from present peril. Genesis 32.1.2
Jacob in his journey toward Mesopotamia, when he was in danger by the way,
the Angels of God met him, which Jacob called Gods host. The Angels Exodus
14.19 and 23. and 32
conducted the children of Israel in the desert. Troops of Angels in the
likeness or horsemen and charets of fire, defended Elisha the Prophet, against
the king of Siria. And when his servant was afraid and said unto him; 2.
King. 6.15
Alas Master, what shall we do? 16
He answered, Fear not, for they that be with us are more then they that be
with them. An Angel preserved Dan. 3.25
Shadrach, Meihach and Abednago in the midst of the fiery furnace, so that
the fire had no power over their bodies; and Dan. 6.22
delivered Daniel from the Lions mouth. An Angel from heaven Luke 22.43
appeared to our Lord Jesus Christ, in his passion, comforting him. Luke 16.22
And Angels carried the soul of Lazarus into Abraham's bosom. There are other
infinite examples tending to this purpose, which for brevity sake I omit. Now
therefore, seeing we are thus graced by God, what remains but that we
patiently bear the Psalm. 23.4 heb. 12.5 proverb. 3.11
rod of our heavenly Father laid upon us, and like obedient Hebr. 12.7
children kiss and embrace the same, when it is offered us, that we may be
found ready to suffer all temptations and trialls, wherewith it shall please
the Lord to exercise us, having sure trust and confidence, that he which Matthew.
27.35 mar. 15.27. luke 23.33. ioh. 19.30
suffered and was Matthew. 4.1
tempted, is able to Hebr. 2.15
deliver them that suffer and are tempted out of trouble, danger, and
affliction.

Comforts taken from the consequents following Death. Sect. IIII.
COnsidering, that after sickness follows Death, and after death ensues
eternal life, and everlasting felicity: why should we be so faint and so
weak in sickness? Let us pluck up our hearts therefore, that are afflicted
with pains, and call to remembrance the life, and joys of heaven, that are
reserved for all them that patiently do suffer here with Christ. Let us
consider, that Christ himself suffered far greater and heavier torments then
we do, who says, Lam. 1.12
Have ye no regard, all ye that pass by this way? Behold and see, if there
be any sorrow like unto my sorrow. John 15 20 and 13.18 matthew 24.9. mar. 10.24.
The servant is not greater then his master. Oh, let us therefore take our
visitation in good part, and the Lord, when he shall see his good time, will
send us help and comfort; only let us submit, and commit our selves to his
heavenly protection and will. 1. Corin. 10.13
There is no tentation has taken you, says the Apostle, but such as
appertains to man, and God is faithful, which will not suffer you to be
tempted above that you be able, but will even give the issue with the
tentation, that ye may be able to bear it. 2. Pet. 2.9
The Lord knows to deliver the godly out of tentation. Apoc. 2.10
Fear none of those things which thou shall suffer; (says Christ) Behold, it
shall come to pass, that the devil shall cast some of you into prison, that
ye may be tried, and ye shall have tribulation ten days: Be thou faithful
unto the death, and I will give thee the crown of life. Furthermore, we must
call to mind, that the Lord never Psa. 33.18.19
leaves them that faithfully serve him, and commit themselves altogether into
his custody, but keeps them Zach 2.8
as the apple of his eye. Zach. 2.5
He will be as a fire round about them, that nothing do them hurt. Whereupon
David could say of his own experience, Psalm 23.4
Though I should walk through the valleie of the shadow of death, I will fear
no evil, for thou art with of death, I will fear no evil, for thou art with
me, thy rod and thy siaffe, they comfort me. And to the end that the Lord
might make us certain of his help and comfort, he earnestly exhorts us, to
call oftentimes unto him, and to sue for help, saying; Psalm 50.15
Call upon me, in the day of trouble, so I will deliver thee, and thou shall
glorify me. And again, Psalm 91.15
He shall call upon me, and I will hear him, I will be with him in trouble,
I will deliver him, and glorify him. So knowing assuredly, that the Lord will
help us at the last, in his good time, according unto our own desire, if we
patiently bear in the mean time, whatsoever his gracious goodness shall lay
upon us; It remains that we have an invincible courage against all
adversities, and sicknesses what soever, patiently expecting the reward of our
hope, Romans 8.18
For the afflictions of this present life, are not worthy of the glory which
shall be showed unto us.

Strangers that are evil entreated in a foreign land; where they soiourne,
having parents, friends, and great possessions in their native soil, being now
upon the point to return into their own country, are undoubtedly exceeding
glad; for even already they seem, in a manner to see their houses, lands, and
possessions, to talk with their parents, friends, and acquaintance; and to
enjoy their wealth already. Eue^ so also, if we call to mind, that here we are
2. Chro. 29.5.
soiourners and strangers, very John 16.33
hardly entreated by the worlds friends; having in heaven, our own country,
great riches of eternal treasures, a Matthew. 23.9
heavenly Father, that dearly loves us in his beloved Son, and many loving
friends, our eldest Romans 8.29
brother Jesus Christ, and all the holy Angels and Saints in glory, and an
undefiled 1. Pet. 1.4
inheritance holy and immortal: If we consider, that we are at the very point,
going thither, to take possession of our Luke 12.32
kingdom and royalty, we cannot choose but be exceeding glad thereof, even
ravished with a fervent desire to be lifted up thither, with Paul, Philip. 1.23
desiring to be loosed, and to be with Christ. For shall not the feeling of so
grievous, and so many bodily afflictions, whereto we are subject in this
strange land, and of the mortal wounds our souls do daily receive by offending
God, cause us earnestly to desire, and fervently to pray to be delivered from
the same? especially considering 2. Cor. 5.1
we know that if our earthly house of this tabernacle be destroyed, we have a
building given of God, that is, an house not made with hands, but eternal in
the heavens? Shall not the incomprehensible excellency of the glory and
dignity, which we shall Apoc. 22.5
enjoy in the kingdom of heaven, encourage us to enter in thither, though the
entrance be Matthew 7.13
narrow and straight? And shall not the certain and assured knowledge of the
renewing of our bodies being 1. Cor. 15.52
risen again immortal, like unto the gloricus body of Christ, and joined to
their sanctified souls; and then of the 1 Thessalonians. 4.17
translating of the same into the kingdom of God our father, above all
heavens, where we shall see the 1. Cor. 13.12
face of God, as the Sun in his brightness, and enjoy the effect of the
prayers of Christ Jesus our Redeemer, made in our behalf, when he said, John
17.24
Father, I will that they which thou have given me, be with me, even where I
am, that they may behold that my glory, which thou have given me; move and
stir us up to take possession of our Ephesians. 1.14
inheritance, being now offered unto us? When Jesus Christ has 1. Cor. 15.28
rendered up the kingdom to God his Father; then shall God the Father, the
Son, and the holy Ghost, be unto us all in all; we shall be replenished and
satisfied with such a John 17.13
fullness of life, glory, and joy, so as we shall not be able to desire or to
have any more: even as vessels cast into the sea, being so filled with water,
that they can desire or hold no more. We shall be Apoc. 21.7
inhabitants, and citizens of that holy City, which is of Apoc. 21.18
pure gold, Apoc. 21.2%
which has no need, neither of the Sun, nor of the Moon, to shine in it,
for the glory of God shall light it, and the Lamb is the light of it. And
finally, we shall be in the fellowship of Angels, shining as the Matthew. 13.43
Sun in his pride, and ravished with joy that shall John 16.22
never be taken from us.

Testimonies out of the holy Scriptures, that God is always ready to help and
assist them, that seek unto him, in the time of affliction and misery. Sect. V
Joshua, The Lord said unto Joshua, Joshua 1.1
saying: Arise, go over this Jordan, 2
thou and all this people, unto the land which I give to the children of
Israel: I will be with thee, 5
I will not leave thee, nor forsake thee; 6
Be strong, and of a good courage.

David, Psalm 33.18
Behold, the eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him, and upon them that
trust in his mercy: To deliver their souls from death, 19
and to preserve them from famine.

I sought the Lord and he heard me, Psalm 34.4
yea he delivered me out of all my fear. The poor man cried, 6
and the Lord heard him, and saved him out of all his troubles. The eyes of the
Lord are upon the righteous, 15
and his ears are open unto their cry. The righteous cry, 17
and the Lord hears them, and delivers them out of all their troubles. The
Lord is near unto them that are of a contrite heart, 18
and will save such as be afflicted in spirit. 19
Great are the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord delivers him out of
them all. 20
He keeps all his bones, not one of them is broken. Read the seven and
thirtieth Psalm throughout, and you shall find therein excellent comfort.

The Lord is near to all that call upon him, yea to all that call upon him in
truth: Psalm 145.1^
he will fulfill the desire of them that fear him: 19
he also will hear their cry, 20
and will save them. The Lord preserves all them that love him.

Isaiah, Behold, God is my salvation, Esaias 12.2
I will trust, and will not fear, for the Lord God is my strength and song:
and also is become my salvation.

Thou art my servant, Esaias 41.9
I have chosen thee, and not cast thee away. 10
Fear thou not, for I am with thee, be not afraid, for I am thy God, I will
strengthen thee and help thee. 13
I the Lord thy God will hold thy right hand, saying unto thee: 14
Fear not thou worm Jacob, and ye men of Israel; I will help thee, says the
Lord and thy redeemer, the holy one of Israel.

Fear not, Esaias 43.^
for I have redeemed thee, I have called thee by name, thou art mine: when thou
passest through water, 2
I will be with thee, and through the floods, that they do not ouerflow thee.
When thou walk^st through the very fire, thou shall not be burnt, neither shall
the flame kindle upon thee.

Tsion said, Esaias 46.14
the Lord has forsaken me, and my Lord has forsaken me. Can a woman forget
her child, 15
and not have compassion on the son of her womb? though they should forget,
yet will not I forget thee. 16
Behold, I have engraven thee upon the palm of mine hands.

Jeremiah, Jeremy 32.2
Thus says the Lord, They shall come weeping, 9
and with mercy will I bring them again. I will lead them by the rivers of
water, in a straight way, wherein they shall not stumble, for I am a father in
Israel.

Jesus Christ, John 16.33
In the world, you shall have affliction, be of good comfort, I have overcome
the world Fear none of those things which thou shall suffer. Apoc. 2.1^
Be faithful unto the death, and I will give thee the crown of life.

Paul, God is faithful, 1. Cor. 1.13
which will not suffer you to be tempted, above that you be able, but will even
give the issue with the tentation, that ye may be able to bear it. If we
suffer with Christ, 2. Tim. 2.12
we shall reign with him.

Peter, 2. Pet. 2.9
The Lord knows to deliver the godly out of tentation.

Chap. VI Of Patience.
An exhortation to Christian Patience after the example of Jesus Christ our
Savior. And how the wicked behave themselves in their afflictions. Sect. I
CHristian Patience, Patience what it is.
is a 1. Pet. 1.6 1 Thessalonians 1.4.
moderation and tolerance of our evils, expressing in outward actions, a spirit
of contentment and gladness, that strives so well and maisteseth in such
sort, the sense of nature, which Heb. 12.11
shunneth grief, that in the end, it works in us an Job 13.15
affection of piety and godliness joined with a free and cheerful mind,
under the yoke of obedience of the will of God, through a Heb. 3.6
certain expectation of things promised, and causes us to judge Hebr. 12.8
Impaciencie, to be contumacie and rebellion to this divine will; and sufficient
of it self, to make a man to be called, wretched. Of this sort was the Patience
of Job 2.10 james 5.11
Job, who seemed as it were, to take pleasure in his afflictions, as the
Salamander that delights to bathe his limbs in the burning flames. But
especially such was the Patience of Matthew. 11.29
Jesus Christ our Savior, the only example and true pattern of perfect
Patience, who Philip. 2.8
became obedient unto the death, even the death of the Cross: For behold,
hanging upon the same, he opens five fountains streaming out with his
guiltless blood, and shows us his whole body all goary with lashes, and
shall not this encourage us, patiently to endure all tribulation, and to war
against our desires and vain appetites, when they withdraw us from trial, to
delight and pleasure? When our foot is pricked (much more the head or heart)
all the whole body is so disquieted, that we wish rather for the Surgeon to
lance us, then for any pleasures to delight us. The true members must needs
have a fellow-feeling of the sufferings and aches of the Head.
and can we (if we be true members indeed) endure to see Christ our Head, so
cruelly pricked and crowned with thorns, but that we must needs be more
willing to sorrow with our Head, and to be lanced for his sake, then to lean
unto worldly solaces which he contemned? It is an indecent thing to have a
dainty member under a thornie head. Shall Christ our only Lord with the
Jonas 3.5
King of Niniuie, mourn in sackecloath and ashes? Shall he with 1. Sam. 14.4
Jonathan venture to climb most craggie and dangerous rocks, to fight alone
with a whole troop of Philistines: shall he climb up to mount Luke 23.33
Caluarie laden with a heavy Cross upon his wounded shoulders, to encounter
the devil and al his vassals? Shall he fall on the most rigorous sword of his
own justice for our sins? And shall we for whose sakes all this was done,
unnaturally and ungratefully refuse to follow his 2. Pet. 2.2^
example? and to suffer any thing for his sake, that has suffered so much for
us? Alas! we are they, that deserve to sit with Job 2.8
Job in the ashes, to mourn in Jonas 3.5
sack cloth with the Ninevites, with naked knees to creep up the 1. Sam, 14.4
craggy rock of affliction, to hazard our lives amongst a thousand John 18.3
blades and torments; finally to embrace the ruefull sword of Gods justice and
revenge, and to fall upon the same; such and so great are our enormous and
horrible sins! O senseless and benumbed hearts and souls of ours, if at the
consideration of so heavy and lamentable a sight, of so great and glorious
benefits, can not find any scope or field of sorrow and thankfulness! But
yet if any grace remains in us, let us be sorry for our want of sorrow, and
bewail our unthankfulness, let us patiently endure some affliction for Christ
his sake, that we may bear his 2. Corin. 11.23
marks in our flesh, lest we fall into a careless security, or into a
desperate madness, and be deprived of the infinite and endless blessings that
Christ has purchased for us. Far other effect took Christ's sufferings in
Paul, who being a perfect scholar in this doctrine, would have no other
University but Jerusalem, no School but Caluary, no Pulpit but the Cross, no
letters but Christ's wounds, no Commaes but his lashes, no Colons but his
thorns, no Periods but his nails, and no Lesson but 5. Goriach. 2.2
Christ Jesus and him crucified. In this School we may learn by Christ's John
19.23
nakedness, how to cloth us, by his Mark 15.17
thorny crown to adorn us, by his John 19.29
gall and vinegar to diet us, by his Luke 23.34
praying for his murderers to revenge us, by his John 19.18
hanging on the Cross to repose us, by his painful and bitter Mar. 15.37
death to esteem the pleasures of this life; briefly, by his life and death,
we may learn how to behave our selves in all troubles and afflictions. See lib.
2. Chap. 4. Sect. 4. Many gape for Christ's Mat. 19.16
kingdom, but hate his Mat. 19.22
Cross, breathing after prosperity, but abhorring adversity, and loath to
enter in at the Mat. 7.13
straight gate. Many would rejoice with Christ, but Mar. 10.35 mat. 26.56
none will sustain his afflictions. Every man would eat John 6.26
bread with him, but few will taste of his Luke 22.57
cup. Finally, many would love him while Mark 10.37
prosperity does last, and while they may receive any John 6.14, 15
comfort at his hands: But who is he that will follow and embrace the shame of
his Galat. 3.13
Cross? Many love to wallow in their own lusts, hating correction and
reformation of their lewd behavior, who when they feel the weight of the rod,
are ready to Genesis 4.13
renie and to open their sacrilegious mouths even against the Almighty, not
knowing in the mean time, or rather not believing, that the Holyghost
accompteth them happy and blessed, who suffer the trial of the Lord patiently:
James 1.12
Blessed is the man that indureth temptation, for when he is tried he shall
receive the crown of life, which the Lord has promised to them that love him.
But they that love the Lord Jesus unfeignedly, 1. Pet. 2.21
follow his steps, and lean to him, as well in a duersitie, sorrow, and
misery, as in the time of prospetitie: for this 1. Cor. 13.5
love seeks not her own things: and they who seek for pleasure, ease and
rest; who follow Christ in prosperity, but leave and fly from him in
adversity, may well be termed Heb. 12.8.
Bastards and Ioh. 10.12, 13
Hirelings, such as love themselves and their own filthy Ioh. 12.4.5
lucre, and beastly lusts better then they do Christ. These men when they
Matthew. 13.21 Iuke 8.13
feel any smart of affliction, do presently Genesis 4.13
cry out, that it had bin best if they had never bin borne, or else destroyed as
soon as they were borne a wicked saying, unworthy to be heard in a christian
man's mouth. No doubt but these impatient worldlings do 1. Ki. 21.27, 29
desire the help and favor of God, but it is only because of the extremity
which they suffer, they Acts 8.24.
desire Gods favor, because they would escape his rod, and therefore these be
their ordinary wishes; Oh that I were well again! oh that I were rid of this
pain! oh that I were eased of my sickness or sorrow! whereby it appears
plainly, that, so they might have their health, and live at their hearts ease,
they would set little by the help or favor of God. Yet some of them are so
far blinded in the pit of impatiency, that they stick not to offer violent
hands unto themselves, and to shorten their own lives, as did Judge. 9.54
Abimelech, 1. Samu. 31.4
Saul, 2. Sam. 31.23
Ahithophel, 1. Ki. 16.18
Zimri, and Matthew. 27.5
Judas Iscariot, rather then by living, they would be compelled to suffer any
longer, some small sickness or other calamity, or abide the tants of the open
world. I speak not this because I allow of that unsavory opinion of stoicall
Indolencie, or lack of grief; for there is no such cheerfulness required of
us, as should take away all sense and feeling of grief and bitterness: for
so there should be no Apoc. 13.10
patience in the Saints suffering of the Cross of Christ, unless they were
both inwardly and outwardly vexed ( Which folly seerefuted, lib. 2. Chap. 5.
Sect. 17.) but because the wicked, impatient of a little affliction do run
into such extremities.

How the godly behave themselves in their sicknesses and other calamities
whatsoever. Sect. II
When the godly and sincere worshippers of God do feel the sharpness of
poverty, the sting of infamy, the pain of diseases, or the horror of death;
their courage 2. Sam. 16.10 job 2.10
quaileth not, but rather Acts 116.25 ierem. 10.19
kick all desperation aside; because they understand that they must manfully
in faith Acts 3.41
bear al sorts of crosses and evils: they find such sweetness in the favor
and grace of God, that for the desire they have to the same, they are content,
not only to be Psalm. 119.71
deprived of al their vvorldly delights and earthly pleasures, but also to Heb.
3.6
suffer the rod of their heavenly father, and patiently to endure the weight
of the Cross laid on them. As the natural child loves his father entirely;
and though his father beat him, yet he does love him nevertheless; so the
children of God being 2. Pet. 1.4
of a good nature, do love God their father with Matthew. 22.37
all their heart, with al their strength; and if he beat and correct them,
yet they cease not to love him still, and in love they perform their obedience
unto him continually, saying with Job, Job 13.15
Though he slaie me yet will I trust in him. And therefore they arm themselves
with Patience and Hope. By Patience they Psalm 119.71
vanquish themselves and their affections, they overcome all calamities, and
stand steadfast with a quiet mind, and well disposed with a resolute heart to
bear, and forbear. Now their Hope vpholdeth christian Patience, which is Heb.
3.6 james 1.6, 7 The difference between Faith and Hope.
an assured expectation of those things which are truly and expressly
promised of God, and believed of us by faith. For there is a mutual relation
of Hope to Faith. Faith Romans 4.3
believes that God says truth, Hope Heb. 3.6
looks for those things which Faith has believed: Faith John 3.16
believes that eternal life is through Christ our Savior prepared for us, and
that 2. Tim. 2.12
if we suffer with him, we shall reign with him; Hope Romans 4.20.21
expects and patiently waits to receive in due time the thing that God has
promised unto us; howsoever in the mean time it be tossed with adversities:
Hope vanishes not away though it sees not what it hops for: Hope is of
things absent.
It quaileth not, although things fall out clean cross and contrary. Romans
4.20
Abraham hoped that God would keep his Genesis 12.7
promise with him, although he saw not the means. He hoped also he should
possess the promised land, although as yet he enjoyed Genesis 25
not one foot of it, but saw it inhabited of Deuteronomy. 7.1
mighty Nations. 1. Sam. 13, 14
David hoped he should be King of Israel, and yet he was continually in 1. Sam.
19.1 and 24.1, 2, 3
danger of his life, by reason of the tyranny of Saul. And the faithful in a
constant Hope of their delivery, lay all their sicknesses and troubles upon the
shoulder of Patience, and say with Jeremy, This Ieremi. 10.19
is my sorrow and I will bear it. They will not faint in adversity, for then
their Prouer. 24.10
strength were small; nor want comfort in trouble; for Prouer. 15.15
A good conscience is a continual feast. They will not break the Lords bonds,
for then they were like the Psalm 2.3
heathen, but wait for his leisure for Esaias 28.16
Faith makes no haste.

That extremity of pains should not cause us to be impatient. Sect. III
Objection.

Oh my sickness is grievous, and my pains extreme! I can take no rest
neither day nor night, such is the rage and violence of my disease.

Answer.

CHrist tells his Disciples, Matthew. 16.24 luke 9.23
If any man will follow me, let him forsake himself, and take up his cross,
and follow me. Consider here, how mercifully the Lord deals with us; He tells
us the worst first, he shows us what we should trust to. First then, we must
Matthew. 16.24
follow him, and then we shall Matthew. 20.21 mark 10.37
sit with him, at his table. The manner of Gods proceedings, is to send good
after evil, as he made Genesis 1.3
light after darkness; to turn Justice into Mercy, as he turned John 2.9
water into wine. See Li. 2. Cap. 3. Sect. 2 We must go through a Acts 14.22
sea of troubles, before we come to the haven of rest. As the beasts were first
killed and then sacrificed, so must we be first killed, and then sacrificed.
The affliction of the godly what it is.
Sickness and affliction is the knife of corection, to lop off the rotten
twigges, to prune and dress us. It is the cords to bind the ram unto the
Altar; the chariot to carry our thoughts into heaven; the hammer which squareth
the rough stones till they be plain, smoothe, and fit for the temple; the
messenger which is sent to compel them to the banquet, which will not come
being invited. As the rod makes the scholar apply his book; so under the
Cross we apply our selves unto wisdom. But (say you) the rod wherewith I am
beaten is sharp, and the pains intolerable. Surely, Hebr. 12.11
no chastising for the present seems to be joyous, but grievous; but afterward
it brings the quiet fruit of righteousness, unto them which are thereby
exercised. Behold 1. Pet. 2.21 heb 12.2
Christ suffered, leaving you an ensample that ye should follow his steps:
Hebr. 6.12
Others of Gods Saints also suffered great torments, troubles, temptations, and
grievous afflictions, who Hebr. 11.36
were tried by mockings and scourgings, by bonds and imprisonments: Ibid. 37
they were stoned, they were hevven asunder, they were tempted, they were
slain with the svvord, they vvandred up and down in sheep skins, etc being
destitute, afflicted, and tormented. And what is it that you suffer being
compared with their torments and trials? See lib. 2. chap. 5. Sect. 14. and 15
Be patient then, call into mind such as have endured greater and more grievous
pains then you, and so shall your grief seem less unto you. To be altogether
without sickness, trouble, or some cross, look Job 7.1
not for while you live in this vale. Look not for ease and quietness upon
the John 14.27 john 16.33
earth, nor among men, but in 1 Thessalonians. 5.23 philip. 4.7
God alone, for whose sake you must 1. Cor. 13.7
suffer al things, even Romans 8.35
tribulation, or anguish, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril,
or sword. Wherefore once again be strong, courage your self, and confirm
your imbecilitie with the sweet promises of the Lord, who 1. Cor. 10.13
is faithful and will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye shall be
able, but will even give the issue with the temptation, that ye may be able to
bear it. The Lord Reu. 3.11
will come shortly, and Reu. 2.10, 23 26. reu. 3.5
give you a great reward, and will Reu. 7.17. reu. 21.4. esaias 25.8
wipe away all tears from your eyes. See lib. 2. Chap. 5. Sect. 14.

That no man may assuage his grief by laying violent hands on himself. Sect.
IIII.
Objection.

OH, but it has tormented me thus long; and it is like to continue longer then
I can bear it. I am, as it were, a mark set up to shoot at; Well may I say
with the Prophet; Mine eye, Psalm 31.10
my soul, and my body are consumed with grief; my life is wasted with
heaviness, and my years with mourning, my strength fails for my pain, and my
bones are consumed. 11
I am a reproach among all mine enemies, but especially among my neighbors;
and a fear to mine acquaintance. O heavy and hard saying, Matthew. 16.24
Take up thy cross and follow me.

Answer.

YEa, but this is much heavier and harder; Matthew. 21.41
Depart from me ye cursed, into everlasting fire, which is prepared for the
devil and his angels. They which follow Christ in taking up their cross in
this world, have no cause to dread the sentence of eternal damnation in the
world to come: For 2. Tim. 2.12
If we suffer with him, we shall reign with him. Psalm. 112.6, 9
Surely he shall never be moved, but the righteous shall be had in everlasting
remembrance; his horn shall be exalted with glory. As it is pleasant and
praise-worthie unto men, to have their children resemble them; to have in their
offspring expressed the future image of their own favor; So does Christ
delight to see his divine prowess and generositie set forth in his childrens
acts and practices, especially to see in us the skarres, wennes and warts of
his vexation and pains; which the more they deface us in outward show, the
more they beautify us in soul; and the more ugly they make us in the
preposterous judgment and glorious they render us in the sight of God. As the
scarre of a wound in the childs face, which he has suffered in his fathers
quarrel, though it disfigure his favor, is a more edging whetstone of
fatherly affection in the Parent, then if it were absent, because it yields a
perpetual testimony of a dutiful and loving child; So God, more desirons to
have us affectionate, then fortunate children, delights more in our patient
sufferings, sicknesses, and afflictions for his sake, which are assurances of
our love toward him, then to see us swim in his temporal gifts. He
praises more the Jonas 4.11
Ninevites in sackecloth, and Job 2.8
Job in the ashes, then either of them in all their pomp, and glory of their
riches, wherefore then should we cry, 2. Kin. 4.40
Death is in the pot, seeing Christ Jesus our Prophet has seasoned it, not
with a little flower or meal, but with his own blood? He has broken the ice,
he has Galat. 3.13.14
fanctified our afflictions, he has sweetened all our pains with the excess
of his unspeakable love: He has given us such a president and I. Pet. 2.21
example, in suffering for us, as it must needs seem little, whatsoever we
suffer for him. Let us not be dismayed therefore with our cross and
affliction; let not the extremity of the pains, the sharpness of our
miseries, nor the continuance of our sickness daunt our courage: we are not
Matthew. 10.24
better then our Master, who suffered far more then we must, nor wiser then
God himself, by whose Prouer. 14.31
providence, this affliction fell into our share. Yet you say, your pain is
like to continue longer then you shall be able to bear it. But how can you
remove it from you? Of Selfe-murder
Will you offer violent hands unto your self? Will you cut asunder that which
God has joined, as did 2. Samu. 31.23
Achitophel, 1. Samu. 31.4
Saul, Acts 1.18
Judas and Pilate? Think you to get ease by shortening your own life? Nay, so
far shall you be from finding of any ease or rest, that by so doing, these
your temporal (or rather momentanie) afflictions, shall be turned into
everlasting torments, in the unquenchable flames of hell fire. Man was not
borne of his own pleasure, neither must he die at his own lust. It is written
Exodus 20.13
Thou shall not kill. If we may not kill an other, much less may we kill our
selves. God will Genesis 9.5
require our blood, yea at our own hands, if we be guilty of such an
unnatural murder. God has made Genesis 9.6
man after his own image, and we must not deface the image of God; which if
we presume to do, we are guilty of horrible murder. And to that you say, you
are forsaken of your friends; Christ Jesus will never forsake you: John 6.37.39
Him that comes unto me, (says he) lneuer cast away. John 10.28
No man shall pluck you out of his hands.

That our impatiencie does provoke God the more to punish us. Sect. V.
Objection.

GOd forbid I should make my self away, that was no part of my thought, but my
meaning is, that my afflictions and pains be so great, so extreme and so
intolerable, that I cannot bear them patiently.

NOt patiently? Alas, whom hurt you by your impatiencie, but your own soul?
Can your impatiencie alter the will of God, or change his purpose? No verily;
Yea, The hurt of impatiencie.
by your impatiencie, you make your own case worse; as well by the inward
grief, which vexes and tormenteth you, as also, because thereby you tempt and
provoke the Lord, and pull down his wrath upon you. As earthly Parents, when
they perceive their children to be brought in good order, subjection and
obedience, by their correction, do then cease from beating of them: So our
heavenly Father, when he sees us patient, and Number. 21.7
humble in our affliction, is moved to pity, so as he turns our troubles
into kindness and doing us good; whereas on the contrary side, by our
impatiencie and stubbornness, he is compelled to lay more grievous
punishments upon us. Also as Kings and Captains, do more gently entreat those
enemies, that have willingly yielded themselves into their grace and favor;
then such as be taken captives, by force of doubtful fight: Even so does God
deal more favorably with those, who patiently humble themselves under his
hand, and submit them unto his corrections, then with such, who being
ouer-mastered with sensuality and pride of heart, do continually provoke him,
and prepare themselves to hold out, and still to rebel and resist his holy
will. God would not have us perish with the wicked, and therefore he 1. Cor.
11.30 32
chastises in us, whatsoever he sees amiss, even in this world; so that his
rods and corrections are testimonies, that he accounts us his lawful
children, and not Hebr. 12
bastards. We see if two children strive together, and if a man coming by,
take one of them, and beat him, leaving the other, we will judge straightway,
that this man is the father of that child he corrected, and that the other
appertained not unto him. And this is it that the Apostle Peter means, when
he says, that 1. Pet. 4.17
Judgment begins at the house of God; showing that they are his children
and household servants, which are afflicted in this life. Wherefore, if
Carpenters strike with their hatchets upon pieces of Timber, to smooth and
plain them: if Masons polish the stones with the strokes of an hammer; we
gather, that they would employ them to some building: Even so, if God lift upon
us his hatchets and hammers of tribulation, let us assure our selves, that he
has chosen us, to put us in the building of his holy 1. Cor. 3.9
Temple; and so that we are his dear and well-beloved children. Let us suffer
our selves to be guided by him, that is infinitely Psalm 147.5
wiser then we, and John 3.16
loves us better then we love our selves. As in running a race, the agilitie
and goodness of the horse is known; the strength and courage of the man in the
combat, the savor and quality of many drugges in rubbing, bruising, or
casting them into the fire, as we do incense; the stars which appear not by
day, shine in the night; So the faith, the zeal, the constancy, the patience,
and other virtues which God communicates to his Elect, which are hid in
prosperity, do manifest themselves in afflictions. And therefore the Apostle
says, 2. Cor. 12.10
I take pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, in
persecutions, in anguish for Christ's sake, for when I am weak, them am I
strong. Now the Lord would make known your patience, your faith, and other
virtues; and will you, kicking against the prick, complain of your extreme
handling? Surely if you do so, you are 1. Cor. 15.9
unworthy the least of all Gods comforts yet has not God so dealt with you,
he gives you not what you have deserved; nay, he leaves you not without
comfort, he will not that his Ezech. 33.11
works should perish; wherefore you must think that he deals with you,
according to his infinite mercy, as a most gracious and loving father; who will
not that you should 1. Cor. 11.30 32
perish with the wicked, Hebr. 12.6
humbling you therefore, to make you a worthy Citizen of his heavenly kingdom.
To conclude, when you say the Lords prayer, you say, Matthew. 6.10
Thy will be done. Now the Lords will is done toward you, and will you show
your self rebellious and disobedient unto his will? So your heart denies
that, which your mouth utters, and says unto you, in your ear; Ah
Hypocrite, if thou might choose, thou had rather that thy will might be
done, then that the will of God should be done. 1. Pet. 5.6
Humble your self therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt
you in due time. 1. Cor. 10.13
There has no tentation taken you, but such as appertains to man, and God is
faithful, which will not suffer you to be tempted, above that you be able, but
will even give the issue with the tentation, that ye may be able to bear it.
Luke 21.19
By your patience possess your souls says Christ.

Testimonies out of the holy Scriptures exhorting unto Patience. Sect. VI
SOlomon, Proverbs 16.32
He that rules his own mind, is better then he that wins a city. Wait
upon the Lord, Prouer. 20.22
and he shall save thee.

Isaiah, Esaias 28.16
Thus says the Lord God, Behold I lay in Sion a stone, a tried stone, a
precious corner stone, a sure foundation. He that believes shall not make
haste. Yet therefore will the Lord wait, Esaias 30.18
that he may have mercy upon you, and therefore will he be exalted, that he may
have compassion upon you: for the Lord is God of Judgment; blessed are all
they that wait upon him.

Jeremiah, Lam. 3.26
It is good both to trust and to wait for the salvation of the Lord.

Jesus Christ, Resist not evil, Matthew. 5.39
but whosoever shall smite thee on thee right cheek, luke 6.29
turn to him the other also. Matthew. 5.40
And if any man will sue thee at the law, and take away thy coat, let him take
thy cloak also. And whosoever will compel thee to go with him a mile, go with
him twain. 41


But that which fell on good ground are they which with an honest and good
heart hear the word and keep it, Luke 8.15
and bring forth fruit with patience.

By your patience possess your souls. Luke 21.19


Paul, Romans 5.3
We rejoice in tribulations, knowing, that tribulation brings forth
patience: 4
and patience experience, and experience hope: 5
and hope makes not ashamed.

Rejoicing in hope, Romans 12.12
patient in tribulation, and continuing in prayer.

In all things we must approve our selves as the ministers of God, 2. Cor. 6.4
in much patience, in afflictions, in necessities, in distresses.

Let us not be weary of well doing, Galat. 6.9
for in due time we shall reap, if we faint not.

We our selves rejoice of you in the churches of God, 2 Thessalonians. 1.4
because of your patience, and faith in all your persecutions, and tribulations
that ye suffer: 5
which is a token of the righteous judgment of God, that ye may be counted
worthy of the kingdom of God for the which ye also suffer.

Ye have need of patience, Hebr. 10.36
that after ye have done the will of God, ye might receive the promise.

Cast away every thing that presses down, Hebr. 12.1
and the sin that hangs so fast on: let us run with patience the race that is
set before us, etc. Read out this 12. Chap.

James, James 1.3
Knowing that the trying of faith brings forth patience: James 57
Be patient therefore brethren unto the coming of our Lord. Be ye also patient
therefore, 8
and settle your hearts, for the coming of our Lord draws near.

Peter, 1. Pet. 1.13
Girde up the loins of your mind, be sober and trust perfectly on the grace,
that is brought unto you by the Revelation of Jesus Christ.

For hereunto are you called, for Christ also suffered for us, 1. Pet. 2.21
leaving us an example that we should follow his steps.

Humble your selves therefore under the mighty hand of God, 2. Pet. 5.6
that he may exalt you in due time.

And with knowledge, 2. Pet. 1.6
temperance, and with temperance patience, and with patience godliness: 8
for if these things be among you, and abound, they will make you that ye shall
neither be idle, nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.

John, 1. John 3.2
Dearly beloved, now are we sons of God, but yet it does not appear what we
shall be: and we know, that when he shall appear, we shall be like him, for we
shall see him as he is.

Here is the patience of the Saints, Apoc. 14.12
here are they that keep the commandments of God, and faith of Jesus.

Chap. VII. Of the third cause that makes a worldly man to fear Death, which
is the want of Faith and Hope. And the remedy against the same.
That Faith is grounded upon the faithful promise of Almighty God and of the
excellent effects of the same. Sect. I
VErelie verelie I say unto you (says Christ) that ye shall weep and lament,
and the world shall rejoice; and ye shall sorrow, a John 16.20
but your sorrow shall be turned to joy. Who would not hasten to joy, and who
would not wish to want sorrow? 22
I will see you again, and your hearts shall rejoice, and your joy shall no
man take from you. Wherefore seeing to see Christ, is to rejoice, and seeing we
can have no perfect joy until we see Christ; what blindness, and
blockishnesse, yea, what madness is it, to love affliction, and to be so much
addicted unto misery and worldly tears; and not rather to hasten to that joy
that shall never be taken from us? Yet this comes to pass, because we want
Faith and Hope, because we believe not those things to be true, which God
promises, thereby making God 1. Tim. 2
(who cannot lie) to be false and 1. John 5.10
a lier, like our selves. If a grave, laudable, and honest Man, should promise
us any thing, staitway we should believe him, neither would we think our
selves to be deceived by him, who we knew, would stand to his tackles, and
perform his promises. Now God speaks to us, and dare we (faithless
wretches) with an infidel-like and unconstant mind doubt of the performance and
truth of his promises? Romans 3.4.
God forbid, yea, let God be true, all men a liar. So then God promises us
(when we depart this life) immortality and eternity: and will we doubt of it?
This is to be altogether ignorant of God, this is to offend Christ the Lord and
Master of all believers, with the sin of incredulity, and this is, being in
the church, and in the house of faith, to forsake the church, and to deny the
Faith. Well was the Prophet affected, who says: Psalm 42.1
As the Heart braieth after the rivers of water, so pants my soul after thee,
O God: 2
My soul thirsts for God, even for the living God when shall I come and
appear before the presence of God? Psalm 73.25.
Whom have I in heaven but thee, and I have desired none in the earth with
thee? 26
My flesh fails, and mine heart also, but God is the strength of mine heart,
and my portion for ever. And therefore in a full assurance and persuasion of
the love of God toward him, and of the truth of his promises, he breaks out
in admiration, saying: Psalm 16.11
Thou will show me the path of life, in thy presence is the fullness of joy,
and at thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore. Psalm 17.15
I will behold thy face in righteousness, and when I awake I shall be
satisfied with thine image. How far are we from this holy affection, from this
christian confidence, and godly joy? And all because we have neither Faith nor
Hope. Ephesians. 2.8
By Faith we are saved. Hab. 24. romans
By Faith we are justified. Acts 15.9
By faith we are regenerated. Heb. 10.38, 39
By faith we save our souls. Romans 5.2
By faith we have access unto this grace wherein we stand. Ephesians. 3.12 hebr.
10.22
By faith we call God our Father. By faith we receive those blessings which
God bestows upon us in the Gospel. Ephesians. 3.17
By faith we receive Christ. By faith we make the merits of Christ to become
our own merits. Galat. 3.14
By faith we receive the promise of the holyghost. Coloss. 2.12
By faith we rise agam with Christ. By faith every man is assured of his own
election. Coloss 2.7
By faith we are united unto Christ. By faith we are the members of Christ.
Ephesians. 3.17
By faith Christ dwells in our hearts. By faith we eat the body of Christ,
and drink his blood. 1. Pet. 5.8, 9
By faith we resist the devil. Galat. 3.26.
By faith we are the sons of God. Hebr. 4.2
By faith the word of God is made profitable unto us. Ose 2.20
By faith God joins us unto himself. Romans 11.20 2. cor. 1.24
By faith we stand. 1. Tim. 3.13.
By faith we get our selves a good degree in professing the Gospel of Christ.
Philip. 1.25 acts 16.34
By faith we have joy. Hebr. 11.1
By faith we see invisible things. 1. Ioh. 5.4.5
By faith we overcome the world. Math. 8.10 matthew. 9.22 matthew. 15.18 dan. 6.24
By faith we obtain also corporal benefits. Luke 17.19
By faith are the gifts of God sanctified unto us. Hebr. 11
For their faith were our fathers the Patriarchs, etc, commended. Our faith
profits the posterities, as did the faith of Abraham, James 5.15
the faith of them that pray for the sanctification of infants that are
baptized, for the conversion of sinners, for help unto the sick and unto the
afflicted with any misery, shall not want his effect. Finally, Faith obtains
earthly blessings and benefits unto the wicked, as the faith of Elijah
obtained rain for wicked Achab and other infidells. How then can we want faith,
without which we are neither regenerated, justified, nor saved? Hebr. 11.6.
without Faith it is impossible to please God. Out of Faith issues Hope, Hope
what it is
, which is a present feeling of the thing we long for; and this nourishes and
preserves faith to withstand any resistance, and to reuince any oppositio^
that shall be against us. Hope cannot be separated from Faith, The affinity of
Hope with Faith.
yea, such as our Faith is, such is our Hope. If we have no Faith, we have no
Hope, and a wavering faith, makes a blind hope; if our faith be firm, so will
our hope be. Faith is an assurance of the love of God in Christ: hope is a
constant apprehension and feeling of the joy and glory, which by that love
shall be given unto us. If we be assured that God loves us, which proceeds
of faith, so are we also assured that god will save and glorify us, which
comes of hope. O then, let us hold fast Hebr. 3.6
the confidence and reioicing of our hope unto the end. Ia. 1.6
For he that wauereth is like a wave of the sea, tossed of the wind and carried
away. James 1.7
Neither let that man (says James) think that he shall receive any thing of
the Lord. Let us not, like hyrelings and prentises, score up our years looking
for freedom, as being weary to serve the Lord, in suffering any thing any
longer. Let us be wise-harted, and in the Hebr. 6.11
assurance of our hope trample death and damnation under our feet, let us still
cry. Apoc. 22.20
Even so, come Lord Jesus. It is reported of the swannes, that they die
singing: and we like swannes in the assurance and lively confidence of the
favor and mercies of God, should prepare our selves to die, rejoicing and
singing.

Remedies against the weakness of Faith. Sect. II
THe Lord like a most bountiful and magnificent King, will be angry if any man
will ask a small thing at his hands: because (such is his magnificence) he
had rather give things of great worth then of small value: his goodness is
infinite, he Wisd. 11.21
loves all the things that are, and hates none of them what he has made:
Wisd. 11.23
he loves the souls of men. Whereupon it comes to pass, that we can no
sooner wish for eternal life and true felicity, but he is as ready, (yea, and
much readier then a man can wish) to give and bestow the same upon us. Why
then should we mistrust our salvation, or doubt of the sweet promises of God in
Christ revealed in his holy word? That we might be happy, he created us of
nothing, and being lost, he restored us to life by the death of his best
Beloved, and only begotten Son: and being redeemed ( 1. Pet. 1.18
not with corruptible things as silver and gold, 19 1. Cori. 6.20.1. cor. 7.23.
heb. 9 14. 1. ioh. 1.7 revel. 1.5
but with the precious blood of Christ as of a lamb undefiled and without
spot:) he made us Tir. 3.5, 6, 7 gal. 4.7. to. 8.17
heirs, revel. 1.5 heirs, by the law of adoption of the kingdom of heaven;
yea, fellow-heires with Christ Jesus. And this so great a benefit, which now by
our hope we possess, if we Lnke 13.23.
strive manfully and 1. Tim. 6.12 2. tim. 4.7
fight a good fight, we shall shortly possess indeed, and receive a crown
of righteousness which the Lord will give us, for so he says, Reu. 2.10
Be thou faithful unto the death, and I will give theo the crown of life.
Furthermore, if Christ Jesus our Savior has sought for us with so great
study and endeavor, while as yet we were his Romans 5.10
enemies and fled from him; if he boght us for so great a price, to the end we
should not loose eternal life, when we were quite lost; how much more vvil
he now make us partakers of that felicity, which we desire for, and breathe
after so much? Let us call to mind his svveete and comfortable promises John
10.11
I am that good shepherd, 27
my sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me. 28
And I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither shall
any pluck them out of mine hand.

That though a man presently feels not the peace of conscience, nor has a
lively apprehension, that he is the child of God, yet he may have true Faith.
Sect. III
Objection.

Alas, I have no faith at all, I am not assured that I am the child of God; My
conscience has no rest, I feel no grace of the holy Ghost in me, nor any true
tokens of faith, I have a lively sense of the rebellion of my heart, and of my
lewd conversation. God cannot wincke at sinners, except he should be unjust;
and surely by this my incredulity, I wholly renounce and reject the grace of
God. How then shall I stand before the face of God? how shall I stand before
the tribunal seat of Christ Jesus? Oh unhappy death then, that leaves me in
this perplexity!

Answer.

GOD is not only a Psalm 68.4
Lord, and a just Psalm 26.1 The difference between unfaith fulness and
weakness of Faith.
Judge, but also a loving and most merciful Father. Your faith is only weak,
you are not unfaithful. And great is the difference, between unfaithfulness,
and weakness of faith. The unfaithful man Psalm 2.3
cares not for his salvation; he Romans 2.4
rejects the grace of God; or else rejecting the salvation which is in Jesus
Christ alone, seeks salvation Luke 18.11 romans 9.32
other where. But the faithful man, Psalm 42.1, 2
desires and longs for salvation; he acknowledges no other, but that which
is in Acts 4.12
Christ Jesus only: he seeks it in him, and would feign be assured thereof.
What though you feel not that peace and joy, in the holy Ghost, so manifestly,
as faith at last brings forth the same? Was not this the complaint of Psalm
22.1
David? Yea, of Christ himself; Matthew. 27.46
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Whereby it is manifest, that they
were without the apprehension and feeling of favor and joy. Content your self
with this then; If you desire to have the feeling of the assurance, that you
are the child of God; if you pray unto God, that you may attain the same; even
this Ge. 20.2. to 18 genesis 22.16.18. 2. sam. 11.15. 2. sam 12.9. 1. king.
21.10.19. romans 9.16. 2. cor. 3.5. philip. 1.6 philip. 2.13
desire and prayer, are undoubted testimonies, that the spirit of God is in
you, and that you have faith already, though it be but weak and feeble. For
this desire is not a fruit of the flesh, but of the Phil, 2.13
spirit, which 1. John 3.24
dwells in you. And this prayer also is the work of the holy Ghost, who
prays for us, and in us, with groans and Romans 8.26
sighs, which cannot be expressed. As a woman that feels the mouinges of a
child in her womb, though they be but small and weak, is assured that she is
with child: So if we have these good motions and desires, let us not doubt, but
that we have the Philip. 2.13 2. cor. 3.5
holy spirit of God, dwelling in us, (who is the 1. Cor. 12.3, 4
author of them) and so consequently, that we have also faith. Furthermore, if
you delight not in these infirmities, in your doubts, fears, mistrusts, to
nourish them, but are Luke 17.5
sorrowful for them, and resist the^ to your uttermost power: then is there a
Romans 7.23
battle within your members, between the spirit and the flesh, between faith
and mistrust. So that you may be assured, there is faith in you, but assailed
with doubts, and that the spirit fights against mistrust, and labors to
overcome it: And that these doubts, incredulities and mistrustings, are the
fiery Ephesians. 6.16
darts which Satan throws against your faith; which warding off the blows
as a buckler, will at last thrust them back, and quench them altogether.

That God does oftentimes suffer his children to be in a manner desperate, and
yet raises them up again. And how we may know if we have any Faith. Sect.
IIII.
Objection.

Oh, but there was never none of the children of God, in this case, even quite
destitute of the feeling of that sweet joy, the peace of conscience, passing
all understanding, wherein I am; If Gods purpose were not, to condemn me, I
persuade my self, he would never lay this cross upon me. What is this want of
feeling, this dullness of spirit, these terrors of the mind, but sure
arguments and signs of unfaithfulness, and incredulity, and even the very
beginnings, and certain flashings of hell fire?

Answer.

MAke not your state worse then it is, I pray God open your eyes, that you may
see, that they that are with you, are more, then they that be against you, as 2.
King. 6.17
Elisha prayed for his servant. Was not David assaulted with great fears and
doubts, with mistrust, and dullness of spirit? What else means he, by the
sore and grievous complaint that he makes, where he says; Psalm 77.7
Will the Lord absent himself for ever? and will he show no more favor? 8
Is his mercy clean gone for ever? does his promise fail for evermore? 9
Has God forgotten to be merciful? has he shut up his tender mercy in
displeasure? Whereupon, he (as a desperate man) said; 10
This is my death. Now then, where was in David the apprehension and feeling of
his faith? and yet for all this, he had not lost it; yea, there was no mirror
of faith better then in him. So all these complaints, were but the
representation of fear and despair assailing his faith, and fighting against
it. Also, how weak and small was the faith of the Apostles, when they did
Matthew. 17.23 luke 9.45.
not understand that Christ must die and rise again? And when they were Matthew.
26.31 mar. 14.27
offended at Christ, and John 16.32. mark 14.50
forsoooke him, so that Peter himself also Matthew. 26.70 mark 14.68
renounced and denied him? yet they were not altogether without faith, howbeit
then, it were very small. For Christ had reprehended them before, for the
weakness of their faith, when he called them, not infidels, but Matthew. 8.26
mar. 4.40. luke 8.25
fearful, and men of little faith, showing, that they had some faith, though
but a little. Wherefore, if you faith be as weak as a bruised reed; and if it
does but smoke only, yet have a recourse unto Christ, cast your self upon
him, and he will save you. Esaias 42.3 matthew. 12.20
A bruised reed shall he not break, and the smoking flax shall he not
quench. as Esaias says: There are degrees in faith, for Paul says; By the
Gospel, Romans 1.17
the righteousness of God is revealed from faith to faith: that is, from the
weaker faith, to the stronger faith. Many of Gods children are like unto the
blind man, whose eyes Christ opened, Mark 8.23
and asked him if he saw aught: 24
and he looked up, and said, I see men, for I see them walking like trees. And
when Christ 25
made him look again; he was restored to his sight, and saw every man a far
off clearly. To conclude, as true and natural fire is known by the flame and
heat, which are the effects and operations of it, for where these are, there
must needs be fire; And, if the flame become weak, yet the heat shall suffice
to assure us, that it is natural, and not a painted or counterfeit fire. So,
The will of any man is counted by God for the deed it self, as appears,
Genes. 20.1 to 18. Genesis 22.16.18. 2. Sa. 11.15. 2. Sam. 12 9. 1. Ki. 21.10. 19
if this fruit of your faith be weak, to feel peace in your conscience, yet
if you feel the other effect of faith, which is, a desire to the works of the
spirit, to walk in the obedience of God; this fruit of your faith, is to you,
a sure and certain testimony, that it is in you; though it be but weak and
feeble.

That the least measure of Faith, that is, or can be, is effectual to
salvation. Sect. V.
Objection.

But what assurance and comfort of salvation, ean such a faith, so weak, so
feeble, and so small, give me? The temptations wherewith I am assaulted, are
strong and manifold, but my faith is weak and little. Alas, how can a little
and weak faith resist such great and strong temptations? how can it quench
these fiery darts of Satan? wherewith I am pierced and sore wounded? What
comfort may I look for by such a faith?

Answer.

EVen this comfort, the assurance of your adoption. For, so you have but Matthew.
17.20
one spark of true faith, and the least measure of grace, that is, or can be,
even that is effectual to salvation. And you must consider, that to speak
properly, it is not faith, but 1. Tim. 1.15 matthew. 9.13 mark 2.17
Jesus Christ, which saves us, saving, in as much as Ephesians. 3.17. galat. 3.14.
col. 2 7. romans 5.2. hebr. 2.4. romans 1.17. galat. 2.20. ephesians. 3.12. hebr. 10.22
faith is the instrument, whereby we apprehend, and, as it were, the hand,
whereby we take hold on Christ. As by the apple of our eye, though it be but
little, we see a great mountain; So by our faith, though little, we take and
receive whole Christ. A man that is in a close room, if he see the light of
the Sun shine through a little hole, yet he may assure himself that it shines
on the whole house: So, if we see but a little beam of the Sun of
righteousness shine upon us, we may assure our selves, that the Son of life
shines upon us in his brightness, which manifestly declares, that we are the
children of God. Now then, as this ought greatly to comfort you, in the
weakness of your faith; so ought it to be a sharp spur, to enforce you to
grow in faith, and daily and hourly to pray with the Apostles, Luke 17.5
Lord increase our faith: that so at length, you may feel so much the more
clearly, and lively, the peace and joy of your conscience, by the assurance,
that you are the child of God, you may the more strongly resist all
temptations, and glorify God.

Testimonies out of the word of God, concerning life everlasting, unto the
which the faithful do come by death. Sect. VI
David, How great is thy goodness, Psalm 31.19
which thou have laid up for them that fear thee! and done to them that trust
in thee!

They shall be satisfied with the fatness of thine house, Psalm 36.8
and thou shall give them drink out of the river of thy pleasures. 9
For with thee is the well of life, and in thy light shall we see light.

Blessed are they that dwell in thine house, Psalm 84.4
they will ever praise thee.

The voice of joy and deliverance shall be in the tabernacles of the righteous,
Psalm 118.15
saying, the right hand of the Lord has done valiantly.

Isaiah, Esaias 35.10 esaias 51.11
The redeemed of the Lord shall return, and come to Tsion with praise: and
everlasting joy shall be upon their heads; they shall obtain joy and
gladness, and sorrow and mourning shall fly away.

They shall not be hungry, neither shall they be thirsty, Esaias 49.10
neither shall the heat smite them, nor the sun; for he that has compassion
on them, shall lead them, even to the spring of waters shall he drive them.

Joy and gladness shall be found in Tsion, praise, Esaias 51.3
and the voice of singing.

Violence shall no more be heard in thy land, Esaias 60.18
neither desolation, nor destruction within thy borders: but thou shall call
salvation thy walls, and praise thy gates. Read further unto the end of this
Chapter.

Thus says the Lord: Esaias 65.8 18
I will create Jerusalem as a rejoicing, and her people as a joy. And I will
rejoice in Jerusalem, 19
and joy in my people, and the voice of weeping, shall be no more heard in her,
nor the voice of crying. Read the Chapter throughout.

As one whom his mother comfort, Esaias 66.13
so will I comfort you, and ye shall be comforted in Jerusalem.

And when ye see this, 14
your heart shall rejoice, and your bones shall flourish like an herb.

Ezechiel, Thus says the Lord God, Ezech. 34.11
behold, I will search my sheep, and seek them out. 12
As a shepherd searches out his flock when he has bin among his sheep that
are scattered, so will I seek out my sheep and will deliver them out of all
places, where they have been scattered in the clowdy and dark day. And I will
bring them out from the people, 13
and gather them from the countries, and will bring them to their own land,
and feed them upon the mountains of Israel, by the rivers, and in all the
inhabited places of the country. 14
I will feed them in a good Pasture, and upon the high mountains of Israel
shall their fold be, there shall they lie in a good fold, and in fat
pastures shall they feed upon the mountains of Israel.

Jesus Christ, Matthew. 25.31
When the Son of man comes in his glory, and all the holy Angels with him,
then shall he sit on the throne of his glory: 32
And before him shall be gathered all nations, and he shall separate them one
from another, as a shepherd seperateth the sheep from the goats. 33
And he shall set the sheep on his right hand, and the goats on the left: 34
Then shall the king say to them on his right hand, Come ye blessed of my
Father, take the inheritance of the Kingdom prepared for you from the
foundation of the world.

In my fathers house are many dwelling Ioh. 16.2
places, if it were not so I would have told you: I go to prepare a place for
you. 3
And if I go to prepare a place for you, I will come and receive you unto my
self; that where I am, there ye may be also.

Verily verily I say you, John 16.20
that ye shall weep and lament, and the world shall rejoice; and ye shall sorrow,
but your sorrow shall be turned into joy. 21
A woman when she trauelleth, has sorrow, because her hour is come: but as
soon as she is delivered of the child, she reme^breth no more her anguish, for
joy that a man is borne into the world. And ye now therefore are in sorrow; 22
but I will see you again, and your hearts shall rejoice, and your joy shall no
man take from you.

Paul, 1, Cor. 2.9
The things which eye has not seen, neither ear has heard, neither came
into man's heart, are which God has prepared for them that love him.

Peter, 2. Pet. 3.13
We look for a new heaven and a new earth, according to his promise, wherein
dwells righteousness.

John, Apoc. 21.4
And God will wipe away all tears from their eyes, and there shall be no more
death, neither sorrow, neither crying, neither shall there be any more pain,
for the first things are passed: And he that sat upon the throne said; 5
behold, I make all things new.

Chap. VIII Of the 4. cause that makes Death fearful to a worldly man; which
is his guilty conscience, and fear of Gods judgments and punishments: And
the remedies against the same.
That God is ready to forgive our sins; and to receive a repentant Sinner
into grace and favor. Sect. I
AGainst this, and the like temptation, there is no better remedy, nor more
effectual, then an a upright, godly and religious life, which consists in
the observing and doing of Gods will. Romans 2.13
Not the hearers, but the doers of the law shall be justified. Ioh. 8.51
If any man keep my word (says Christ) he shall not see death. But because
1. Kin. 8.46 2. chron. 6.36 eccles. 7.22
there is no man that sins not; for Prouer. 20.9.
who can say, I have made my heart clean; I am clean from sin: 1. Ioh. 1.8
if we say, that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and there is no
truth in us. Therefore now it remains, that you repent, and be sorry for
your sins, whereby you have transgressed the law of the Lord, offended his
Majesty, and provoked his wrath; that now at last you forsake your old ways,
and purpose to lead a godly life hereafter, if it shall please the Lord to
raise you up again; and lastly, that you lift up your heart, and boldly
approach unto the heavenly throane, humbly confessing your offenses, and with a
sure and firm confidence, in the merits and passion of Jesus Christ, crave
pardon for the same. For God is ready to receive again into grace and favor,
any penitent sinner: Yea, with fair words he allureth us to come unto him, and
with sweet promises he provoke us to repentance. Ezech. 33.10
As I live, says the Lord God, I desire not the death of the wicked, but that
the wicked turn from his way, and live. 1. John 1.9
If we acknowledge our sins, he is faithful and just, to forgive us our
sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. The beginning of
salvation, is the acknowledging of our sins, and to require pardon of him,
who freely forgiueth all sins, Matt. 11.28
Come unto me, all ye that are weary and laden, and I will ease you. Christ
being not requested, Luke 19.5
lodged at the house of 2
Zacheus the publican, who 3
desired only to see him, as he passed by; affirming, that that same day 9
salvation was come into his house; To show that Christ is more willing and
ready to receive us, then we are to ask it at his hands: 10 matthew. 18.11
For the Son of man is come to seek and to save that which was lost. This
then being true; And seeing in a thousand places of the Math. 9.12.13 luke
1.74. psalm 119.12, etc.
holy Scriptures, it is witnessed, that to the penitent Christian, all his
sins and debts are forgiven, by the mere mercy and grace of God; that they
are covered and forgotten; that they are pardoned and remitted; that they are
not imputed, but cast afar off and hidden: it follows, there is no more the
anger of God toward you, (if you be penitent.) Why then should you fear his
judgments, and the torments of hell fire? There is no death, where there is no
sin; for Romans 5.12
by sin death entered into the world; and Romans 6.23
the wages of sin is death. As righteousness is the seed of life, and the
cause why God justifies us; So sin is the seed of death, and the cause why
God condemns us. Now every seed brings forth fruit according to his own
quality and kind, as wheat brings forth wheat, and so of all the rest.
But where there is no seed sown, what fruit is there to be hoped for? So we,
having no sin, ought not to fear and stand in dread of the fruit thereof,
eternal damnation, and so consequently, why should we fear the anger and
judgments of God?

That the faithful ought not to fear damnation, for so much as they be the
children of God. Sect. II
AS it is vain and foolish, to fear sicknesses, when we are most healthful;
and most ridiculous to fear poverty, when we have plenty and abundance of
all things: Even so is it mere folly to fear the judgments of God, when we
be not in danger to fall into them at all. There is no cause then why we
should be afraid to die, perseuering constantly in the faith of Jesus Christ:
For the nature of faith, as soon as it is received into the heart, is properly
to encourage, animate, and quicken the same. Hab. 2.4 romans 1.17
The just shall live by his faith, says the Prophet Habacuk. This faith caused
the Prophet David to say; Psalm
Albeit I walk in the midst of the shadow of death, yet will I not be
afraid, for thou Lord art with me. Yea the Lord by the Prophet Hoseas
declares, that the faithful shall have God allied and joined to them. Hos.
2.19
I will marry thee unto me for ever, yea I will marry thee unto me in
righteousness, and in judgment, and in mercy, and in compassion: 20
I vvil marry thee unto me in faithfulness. John 14.23
He that loves me (says Christ) keeps my word, and I and my Father will
come and dwell with him: Hereupon we are called, 1. Cor. 3.16, 17 1. cor. 6.19
2. cor. 6.16
the Temples of the Holighost. Now then seeing Romans 8.31
God is with us, who can be against us? Furthermore, God adopteth and reputeth
us for his own children: Gal. 3.26
You are the children of God by faith. john 1.12
Christ has given power to all them which receive him, and believe in his
name, to be the sons of God. So, being the Romans 8.17 galat. 4.7
children of God, we are also heirs and felow-heires with Jesus Christ; being
children, we are set free from sin, death, condemnation, bondage, the rigor
of the law, and all the forces of the devil: being children, we are Christ's
brethren, and the household of God, and in Gods house death dwells not, but in
the house of satan. And to conclude, being the children of God, God is our
father: But can a father hate his own children? that were against nature.
Wherefore God loves us with a true and fatherly love. The Apostle says Romans
5.8
God sets out his love toward us, seeing that while we were yet sinners,
Christ died for us: 9
Much more then being now justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath
through him. 10
For if when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his
son: much more being reconciled we shall be saved by his life. What man is he
then, that considering these reasons, assures not himself of the favor of
God, and remoueth not all fear, which he has of Gods judgments, and
consequently of death?

That the members of Christ ought not to fear death and damnation, because
Christ their head, has vanquished and overcome them already. Sect. III
WE are the 1. Cor. 6.16.
members of Christ, flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bones, yea one with
him. Christ overcame death, and should we fear the same? He overcame it not
only for himself, but for us also: He which has overcome death for us,
shall overcome it also in us; why then should we fear his sting? Christ
spoiled and vanquished satan, that old serpent, the Prince and Lord of Death;
and why should we fear his power? Christ accomplished and fulfilled the law;
why then should we fear the judgments of God? Christ by his perfect
obedience, fulfilled his fathers will, appeased his wrath, satisfied his
iustce, and abolished the curse of the law, which is death, according as it is
said, 1. Cor. 15
O death I will be thy death. He died, that we might live: he rose again, that
we might be justified. So then he is our Pastor, we need not fear to be taken
out of his hands. He is our Advocate, we need not dread damnation. He is our
Mediator, we need not fear the wrath of God. He is our Light, we need not
fear darkness. He is our Shadow, we need not fear the heat of hell fire.
He is our Iugde, we need not fear that sentence shall be denounced against us.
Wherefore let us cast off all fear, and horror, of death, hell, and
damnation, which not having any power over the head, cannot have any over the
members.

That the Forgiveness of sins is not a common benefit, as the secure and
careless Christian imagines. Sect. IIII
Objection.

Me thinks it were needelesse for you to trouble your self so much about this
point, for I fear not the judgments of God, especially considering that my
sins are forgiven me; For where there is no sin, there can be no condemnation
(as you noted very well before:) And that my sins are pardoned, I know right
well, considering it is but a common benefit, and therefore easily obtained.

Answer.

TRue it is indeed, if our sins be pardoned, we shall not come into
judgment, Psalm 32.1.2
for he is blessed, that is eased of that burden. But such is the security
and presumption of men in these days (who never knew what sin meant) that
they esteem little or nothing of the forgiveness of their sins, imagining
it indeed, (as you say) a common benefit, and easily obtained: whereas, if
they were pricked but a little, with the feeling of the smart of their sins,
they would esteem of the pardon of them, as of the greatest treasure that can
be; they would sell all they have to buy it, and choose it before ten
thousand worlds. How miserable Man is, without remission of his sins.
For without this blessing, man is more miserable, and more wretched, then the
vilest creature that ever was, or can be. For when the brute beasts die,
there is an end of their misery: but when men die, without the remission of
their sins, there is the beginning of their woe, of their endless torments
in that lake, which burns with fire and brimstone, with Satan and his Angels;
first in the soul only, until the day of judgment, and then, both in body
and soul, for ever and ever. Oh (says one) if a sinner damned in hell, did
know, that he had to suffer those torments there, no more thousand of years,
then there be sands in the Sea, and grasse-pilles on the ground: or no more
thousand millions of ages, then there be creatures in heaven and in earth, he
would greatly rejoice thereof; for he would comfort himself at the least, with
this cogitation, that once yet the matter would have an end. But now, this word
NEVER, breaks his heart, when he thinks on it; and that after a hundred
thousand millions of worlds there suffered, he has as far to his end, as he
had the first day of his entrance into those torments. Now then, if these
things were well considered, and weighed in the balance of reason, then should
the drouzie Christian find his state fearful, and then would he acknowledge
what, and how great a blessing is the Remission of sins.

What we must do for the obtaining of the remission of our sins. Sect. V
Objection.

Alas, now I know my state is fearful indeed, I feel the sting of sin
wounding my conscience, and piercing my very soul. The law does accuse and
condemn me, the just and severe wrath of God is ready to take vengeance of me.
Oh by what means, and how shall I procure pardon of my sins at Gods hands?

Answer.

THe Lord Psalm 103.10
deals not with us after our sins, neither does he reward us according to
our iniquities. 11
For as high as the heaven is above the earth, so great is his mercy toward
them that fear him. 12
c As far as the East is from the West, so far has he removed our sins
from us. The only means to procure the pardon of sins at the hands of God,
is the death and passion of Christ: for Romans 4.25
Christ died for our sins. 1. John 1.7
The blood of Jesus Christ his Son, cleanses us from all sin. 1. Pet. 1.18
We were redeemed with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb undefiled
and without spot. So then, as 1. Ki. 20.32
Benhadad the king of Syria, when he was discomfited and overcome by the king
of Israel, by the counsel and persuasion of his servants; who told him, that
the kings of Israel were merciful men; sent men clothed in sackcloth, with
ropes about their necks, to entreat for peace and favor: and when the king
of Israel saw their submission, he made covenant of peace with him. So, seeing
we, by our sins do justly deserve death, hell, and condemnation, it stands
us upon to come into the presence of God, and to humble our selves before him,
continually craving and entreating for the pardon of our sins, through the
merits of Jesus Christ, and no doubt the Lord will grant our request, and be
at peace with us; for the Lord our God is a most merciful father. Psalm. 32.5
Confess and acknowledge your sins unto the Lord, and he will forgive you.
Yea Esaias 1.18
though your sins were as crimson, they shall be made white as snow, though
they were red like skarlet, they shall be as wool. Romans 8.^
There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. And that we should
be sure of the pardon of our sins, whereof God gives us a dislike and true
abhorring, the Lord would have it an Article of our faith, so that we should
not be sound christians, if we believed it not. See li. 2. cha. 2. sect. 4.
and. 5

Testimonies out of the word of God, concerning the forgiveness of sins,
promised to all such as cleaving fast to the merits of Christ only, are truly
penitent. Sect. VI
MOses, I am the Lord thy God, Exodus 2.2, 5 6
showing mercy unto thousands, to them that love me and keep my commandments.

The Lord, the Lord strong, Exodus 34.6
merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and abundant in goodness, and truth. 7
Reserving mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, and transgression, and sin:
9
Pardon our iniquity and sin, and take us for thine inheritance.

David, Psalm 25.10
All the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth unto such as keep his
covenant and his testimonies.

He that trusts in the Lord, Psalm 32.10
mercy shall compass him.

I will sing the mercies of the Lord for ever: Psalm 89.1
with my mouth will I declare thy truth, from generation to generation. For I
said, 2
Mercy shall be set up for ever, thy truth shall thou stablish in the very
heavens. 3
I have made a covenant with my chosen, I have sworn to David my servant. Thy
seed will I stablish for ever, 4
and set up thy throne from generation to generation. 30
But if his children forsake my law, and walk not in my judgments: if they
break my statutes, 31
and keep not my commandments: 32
Then will I visit their transgression with the rod, and their iniquity with
strokes. 33
Yet my loving kindness will I not take from him, neither will I falsify my
truth. 34
My covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips.

As a father has compassion on his children, Psalm 103.13
so has the Lord compassion on them that fear him.

With the Lord is mercy, Psalm 130.7
and with him is great redemption.

The Lord is gracious and merciful, Psalm 145.8
slow to anger, and of great mercy. The Lord is good to all, 9
and his mercies are over all his works. 14
The Lord vpholdeth all that fall, and lifts up all that are ready to fall.

He heals those that are broken in heart, and binds up their sores. Psalm
147.3
The Lord delights in them that fear him, 11
and attend upon his mercy.

Isaiah, Though your sins were as crimsin, Esaias 1.18
they shall be as white as snow: though they were as red as skarlet, they
shall be as wool.

Therefore will the Lord wait, Esaias 30.18
that he may have mercy on you, and therefore will he be exalted, that he may
have compassion upon you; for the Lord is the God of judgment. Blessed are all
they that wait for him.

I, Esaias 43 25
even I am he that puts away thine iniquities for mine own seek, and will
not remember thy sins.

Thou art my servant, Esaias 44.21
o Israel, forget me not: 22
I have put away thy transgressions like a cloud, and thy sins as a mist,
turn unto me, for I have redeemed thee.

There is none other God beside me, Esaias 45.21
a just God, and a Savior, there is none beside me. Look unto me, and ye
shall be saved: 22
all the ends of the earth shall be saved.

Read the 53, Chap. of the sufferings of Christ, for your singular comfort.

This is unto me as the waters of Noah, for as I have sworn, Esaias 54.9
that the waters of Noah should no more go over the earth, so have I sworn,
that I will not be angry to thee, nor rebuke thee: 10
For the mountains shall remove, and the hills shall fall down, but my mercy
shall not depart from thee, neither shall the covenant of my peace fall away,
says the Lord, that has compassion on thee.

Let the wicked forsake his ways, Esaias 55.7
and the unrighteous his own imaginations and return unto the Lord: and he
will have mercy upon him, and to our God, for he is very ready to forgive. 8
For my thoughts are not as your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways,
says the Lord. 9
For as the heavens are higher then the earth, so are my ways higher then your
ways, and my thoughts above your thoughts.

Jeremiah, Jeremy 3.8
Turn thee again unto me, says the Lord: And I will not let my wrath fall
upon you, for I am merciful, 12
says the Lord, and will not always keep mine anger. O ye disobedient
Children, 22
return, and I will heal your rebellions.

If this Nation, Jeremy 18.8
against whom I have pronounced, turn from their wickedness, I will repent
of the plague that I thought to bring upon them.

I know the thoughts that I have thought toward you, Jeremy 29.11
says the Lord, even the thoughts of peace, and not of trouble, to give you
an end, and your hope: 12
Then shall you cry unto me, and ye shall go and pray unto me, and I will hear
you.

Behold, Jeremy 31.31
the day is come, says the Lord, that I will make a new covenant with the
house of Israel, and with the house of Judah. I will put my Law in their inward
parts, 33
and write it in their hearts; and will be their God, and they shall be my
people. 34
And they shall teach no more, every man his neighbor, and every man his
brother, saying Know the Lord: For they shall all know me, from the least of
them unto the greatest of them, says the Lord: For I will forgive their
iniquity, and will remember their sins no more.

Ezechiel, Ezech. 18.21
If the wicked return from his sins that he has committed, and keep all
my statutes, and do that which is lawful and right, he shall surely live and
not die. 22
All his transgressions that he has committed, they shall not be mentioned
unto him, but in his righteousness that he has done, he shall live. 23
Have I any desire that the wicked shall die, says the Lord God? Or shall he
not live if he return from his ways? 27
When the wicked comes away from his wickedness that he has committed, and
does that which is lawful and right, he shall save his soul alive. Because he
considers, 28
and turns away from his transgressions that he has committed, he shall
surely live and shall not die. Return therefore, and cause others to turn away
from all your transgression, 30
so inquitie shall not be your destruction. Cast away from you all your
transgressions, 31
whereby you have transgressed, and make you a new heart, and a new spirit, for
why will ye die, O house of Israel? For I desire not the death of him that
dies, 32
says the Lord God, cause therefore one another to return, and live ye.

You shall know that I am the Lord when I have respect unto you for my names
sake, Ezech. 20.44
and not after your wicked ways, nor according to your corrupt works: O ye
house of Israel, says the Lord God.

As I live, Ezech. 33.11
says the Lord God. I desire not the death of the wicked, but that the wicked
turn from his way, and live: Turn, turn, from your evil ways; for why will
ye die, O ye house of Israel?

Hosea, Ose. 6.6
I desire mercy and not sacrifice. I will not execute the fierceness of my
wrath; Ose. 11.9
I will not return to destroy Ephraim; for I am God, and not Man.

Joel. Joel 2.12
Now the Lord says, turn you to me with all your heart, and with fasting, and
with weeping, 13
and with mourning. And rent your heart and not your clothes, and turn unto
the Lord your God, for he is gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of
great kindness, and repents him of the evil.

Jonah, Jonah 4.2
I know that thou art a gracious God and merciful, slow to anger, and of great
kindness, and repentest thee of the evil.

Micah, Who is a God like unto thee that takes away iniquity, Micah 7.18
and passes by the transgression of the remnant of his heritage! he retains
not his wrath for ever, because mercy pleases him. He will turn again and have
compassion upon us, 19
he will subdue our iniquities, and cast off all their sins into the bottom
of the sea.

Zechariah, Zechar. 1.3
Thus says the Lord of hosts, Turn unto me says the Lord of hosts, and I
will turn unto you says the Lord of hosts.

As I thought to punish you when your fathers provoked me unto wrath, Zechar.
8.14
says the Lord of hosts, and repented not: 15
So again I have determined in these days to do well unto Jerusalem, and to
the house of Judah; fear ye not.

Malachi, Mala. 3.7
From the days of your fathers, ye are gone away from mine ordinances, and
have not kept them: return unto me, and I will return unto you, says the
Lord of hosts.

Hezechiah, 2. Chro. 30.9
The Lord your God is gracious, and merciful, and will not turn away his
face from you, if ye convert unto him.

Jesus Christ, John 6.37
All that the Father gives me, shall come to me: and him that comes to me, 38
I cast not away. For I came from heaven, not to do mine own will, but his will
which has sent me.

And this is the fathers will which has sent me, 39
that of al which he has given me, I should loose nothing, but should raise it
up at the last day.

I am the resurrection and the life: John 11.25
he that believes in me though he were dead, yet shall he live. And whosoever
lives and believes in me shall never die. 26


Peter, Acts 10.12
To him give all the Prophets witness, that through his name all that believe
in him, shall receive remission of sins.

The Lord is patient toward us, 2. Pet. 3.9
and would have no man to perish, but would all men to come to repentance.

Paul, Romans 10.12
There is no difference between the Jew and the Grecian: for he that is Lord
over all, is rich unto all that call on him. 13
For whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord, shall be saved.

This is a true saying, 1. Tim. 1.19
and by all means worthy to be received, that Christ Jesus came into world to
save sinners. 1. Tim. 2.4
Who will that all men shall be saved, and come unto the knowledge of the
truth. 6
Who gave him self a ransom for all men.

John, If we acknowledge our sins, 1. John. 1.9
he is faithful and just to forgive our sins, and to cleanse us from all
unrighteousness.

If any man sin, 1. Ioh. 2.1
we have an Advocate with the Father Jesus Christ the just: And he is the
reconciliation for our sins, 2
and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world.

The end of the first Book.
THE SECOND Book, of the Resolved Christian.
Chap. I A Remedy for unpenitent and obstinate Malefactors, that by the
Magistrate are adjudged to die.
That there is a God. Sect. I
TO go about to prove, that there is a God, would be deemed a labor worthy
of laughter, being a thing known of it self, and perceived of every man by
common sense, as if a man should take upon him to enlighten the Sun with a
candle; or to prove that the fire is hot: were it not that our miserable and
thrice-wretched age has hatched those 2. Pet. 3.3 Contra negantem principiae
non est dispucandum.
Mockers who in denying a thing so certain, do show themselves unworthy of
all conference, as conte^ders against their own knowledge and conscience. The
sole representation of so hideous a blasphemy, might suffice to pierce our
souls, and to cause us to sweat even Luke 22.44
water and blood, for anguish that the world could afford any so abominable
monsters, as should deny that there is a God: or call in question the 2. Tim.
3.16
Great mystery of godliness, which is God manifested in the flesh, justified in
the spirit, seen of angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the
world and received up in glory. This is a fearful and just judgment which
God executes upon those, whose hearts and minds are so deeply plunged in
fleshly pleasures, that they never think upon God, as if there were Psalm
10.15
no God at all; upon those, who, to the intent they might practice all
abominations, uncleanness, and wickedness, with less remorse, have maliciously
striued to choke up these remainders of the image of God in them, That there
is a God, that he is just, and that the soul is immortal: and upon those that
contemn the treasure of the Gospel, that trample under foot the Hebr. 10.29
most precious blood of Jesus Christ, that scorn the simplicity and constancy
of the faithful, in refraining from evil, upon their confidence and assured
hope in God, and for fear of his name, whole judgment shall be more horrible
then that of Matthew. 10.15
Sodom and Gomorrha. To the end therefore to arm the Elect against such
diuilish temtation, and to make those inexcusable that suffer them selves to be
deluded by this pernicious Paradoxe, we will produce against them sundry
witnesses out of the large volume of Gods Acts 4.17 romans 1.20
creatures, which manifestly testify that there is a God, against whom no
exceptions can be taken. What man is he that comes into a wilderness or desert
place, The first argument that there is a God, taken from the creatures.
and there sees a house gallantly built, finding there no living creature,
besides birds and beasts, will not presently conceive that there either are, or
have bin some men that builded the same, imagining it to be impossible, that
either birds or beasts should rear such a building: Even so when we behold
the wonderful Romans 1.20
frame of the whole world, the heavens beautified with the Sun, the Moon and
the stars; the earth garnished with herbs, plants, and other creatures; the
sea with fish; Man endued with understanding and reason, brought into this
world as into a palace, abounding with all goodness which may bring delight
and contentment; and here enjoying so many creatures, in such numbers and
diverse sorts: who will not presently confess that the creatures that be in
it, could never make it, and that it could not make it self, and therefore
that the Maker of it must needs be God? Thus then the universal world in every
part thereof exclaimeth against the Atheists, that there is a God, the Maker and
Governor of it. If this will not suffice to prove there is a God; The 2.
Argument from the general consent of al people and nations.
we will further produce for witnesses, all people and nations of the world,
even from the creation until this day, who with one assent acknowledge that
there is a God; notwithstanding that they conceived it diversely, according to
the diversity of their own imaginations; which diversity also manifestly
euinceth, that it is not a doctrine only traditionally delivered from people
to people, but also bred and brought up with every of them in their own
selves. Within these two hundred years, there have bin discovered many
unknown nations, among whom some have bin found to live without law, without
King or Ruler, without house, going stark naked, yet none without some kind of
religion, and an assured persuasion that there is a God; Religion natural but
not true religion.
to show unto us, that it is not so natural unto a man, to be sociable, to
clothe himself, and to live ciuilly, as to know that there is a God the author
of his life. Whereupon an heathen Philosopher said, 1 Cic. lib. 2. De Not.
Deorum
It is a matter borne with man, and graven in his soul, to believe that there
is a God. And be not these Atheists men, and therefore endued with this
natural knowledge that there is a God? What shall we say more? The very devils
Iam 2.19.
believe that there is a God, The third Argument from the confession of devils.
and tremble, says James. Hereof we have many testimonies, among the writings
of the heathen; Apollo the great God, or rather devil of the Ethniques, being
urged to tell what he was, and whether there is a God, being as it were, upon
the Rack, makes this answer Proclus in Timaeum. Lactant. lib. 1. cap. 7
; The Devils which haunte,
Both Sea and Land;
Are tamed with
Gods scourge and band.


Therefore the Atheists, are more incredulous then the Devils; and lest they
should tremble with the Devils, they labor to choke up all remembrance of
God; howbeit when God does extraordinarily manifest himself by the effects of
his power, in thunders, lightnings, or earthquakes, experience teaches, that
these monsters are the very first that with trembling and terror do cry out,
confessing that there is a God. There be many other arguments to prove that
there is a God, which for brevity sake I omit, adding only one more, to wit,
The fourth argument from the authority of the holy scripture.
the Authority of the word of God, which contains infinite, most evident and
clear testimonies of sundry sorts, to prove that there is a God; which are
able to satisfy any man whatsoever, if he be not wilfully blinded, as indeed
all Atheists be. But here they take exception, for they deny that the scripture
proceeded from. God, That the scriptures proceeded from God.
affirming, that there is no truth in it, which monstrous blasphemy, if they
still avouch, must needs be maintained, even against their own consciences,
if they will consider but these reasons following. First, In other Books, there
are counsels, The first reason.
exhortations, and reasons to persuade; In the Scriptures we have absolute and
express commandments; which prescribe a law, not only to the body, as other
books do, but also unto the mind, to the cogitations and affections of the
soul: they labor wholly to exalt God, and to humble man, showing him the
multitude of his sins, and the punishments due unto the same, and yet teach an
assured remedy how to escape the danger: so that man finding himself worthy
of al misery, does nevertheless find himself joyful in the midst of all his
afflictions, expecting a crown of glory: such effects no other book can work:
therefore the Scriptures must needs be of God, who being a Superior, has
authority to command; who only has dominion over the Soul, and knows the
affections and passions of the heart. Secondly, The second reason.
in the scriptures there are prophecies of things which man's understanding
could never foresee, the fulfilling of which is many times noted, sometimes a
hundred years, a thousand, yea three thousand before they came to pass: they
entreat of the history from the beginning of the world, with the doctrine
which ever continued in the church, yet there is no contradictio^, either in
the history or doctrine; where other books beginning their history much later,
contain infinite contradictions and other vanities: also the style of the holy
scriptures is simple, without affectation, and yet it 1. Cor. 2.4, 5
pierces the heart and conscience, which no other writing, no not of the best
Otors in the world can do; and therefore the Scriptures must of necessity be
of God, who foreseeth and knows all things, who is ever constant, and who
guides the heart and conscience. Lastly, The third reason.
of al other books the devil has most endeavored, to falsify, to corrupt,
and to abolish the most holy Scriptures, yet have the same bin most
miraculously preserved in their integrity, by his providence, who is the
Author of the same, for the confession and maintenance of the doctrine whereof
infinite numbers of men, Princes, Magistrates, Artificers, Husbandmen, learned
and unlearned have forsaken all; yea life it self and suffered such torments,
as were intolerable to any that were not sustained by the divine Power: Behold,
so many millions of Martires witnessing with one assent, that the holy
Scriptures proceed from God. To conclude therefore, let us abhor such wicked
cogitations, let us believe that there is a God, a Creator, a Redeemer, and a
Sanctifier, who by his Prou. 15.3
providence guides the whole world, who will punish all Atheists, and other
infidels with Matthew. 25.41
unspeakable and incomprehensible torments to continue for ever, and who will
give unto his elect and faithful children a Apoc. 2.10
crown of life.

That the soul of man is immortal. Sect. II.
Having confessed that there is a God: it follows consequently, that we
confess him to be just, Hebr. 11.6.
a rewarder of every man according to his deserts. Now the Atheists have a
second shift, to confirm themselves in their wickedness, and that is, to deny
the immortality of the soul; affirming that it is all one with the body, and
that it dies with the same: which assertion, or rather blasphemy, is most
false and absurd. For if the soul were the body, That the soul is no part of
the body.
or any part thereof, it should grow with the same, as the other parts of it
do; and the greater that the body were, the greater also should the soul be.
But experience teaches the contrary; for when the body is at a certain
stay, and increases no more, then does the soul most grow, and they that are
strongest of mind, are commonly weakest of body; and the soul is seen to be
very lively in a languishing body, and to grow the more in force, by the
decaying of the body, that is, to increase the more in power and virtue.
Therefore the soul grows not with the body, and is not the same nor any part
thereof. Again, if the soul were the body, then should she loose her
soundness with the body, so as the maimed in body should feel a maime in
his soul, the sick should be sick in his reason, the blind should have a
blind soul, and the lame a lame soul. But experience teaches the contrary,
wherefore the soul and the body be not all one, That the soul is a substance.
neither is the soul a quality which has his being in another thing; but a
substance or life which causes another thing to be, a forming substance, and a
substantial form, which perfecteth the bodily substance, which outwardly
seems to have so many perfections; yea a spiritual and not a bodily
substance, which comprehends heaven and earth, time past, present, and to
come, and is present in diverse places at once, which a body cannot do,
because it has certain dimensions; it cannot comprehend any thing which is
not proportioned according to the greatness and capacity thereof: and
therefore it is manifest also, that the soul is not any material thing,
because matter receives not any form or shape, but according to his own
quantity, and but only one form at once, whereas the soul receives all
forms without quantity, come there never so many at once, or so great, yea
though they be contrary forms. These things considered, why should we think,
that the thing which becomes the stronger by the weakness of the body, and
which is advanced by the decay of the body, should return to dust and die
with the body? yea what is it that can kill the soul? Not contrariety, for
she allodgeth all contraries equally in her self, yea in whom contraries
abandon their contrariety: Not want of food, for she feeds on the whole
world; yea take the world from her, and she feeds at greatest ease most
agreeable to her own nature: Not violence, for the soul cannot be pushed at
neither inwardly nor outwardly: Nor Death it self, for she seeks life by
Death. There is nothing then, that has power against the soul of Man; and
therefore it is immortal. Moreover, who is that Man that desires not
immortality? How could he desire it if he understood not what it is? None of
us coueteth to be beginning-lesse, for we cannot comprehend what it is, yea
when we think upon eternity without beginning, we are at our wits end;
because none of us is so, nor can be: Whence comes this, but that our souls
having had a beginning, cannot conceive an eternity without beginning, can yet
being created immortal, they do well conceive an euerlastingnes without end?
If there be any that still persist in their Atheism, it cannot be but that they
do it against their own conscience, for it is even against the law of nature,
against the consent of all people and nations in the world, who ever believed
the immortality of the soul, yea and against the voice of God himself, who
in his holy word expressly testifies, that his soul is immortal. Christ
reasoning against the Saduces, makes this argument Matthew. 22.32
I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, God is not
the God of the dead, but of the living. Ergo, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob do
live; wherefore the soul must needs be immortal. The testimonies of holy
scripture which confirm this point are infinite, which (for brevity sake) I
omit; Besides which testimonies, the immortality of the soul is also proved
most manifestly in many examples, Exodus 3.15, 16
namely in Genesis 5 24.
Henoch, in Genesis 25.8
Abraham, in Genesis 35.29
Isaac, in Genesis 49.29
Jacob, in Exodus 3.15, 16
the apparition of God unto Moses, by which Mat. 22.31
Christ proved the resurrection, and that the godly being dead, do live in
God; in Number. 16.32
Korah and his accomplices, in 1. Sam. 28.11
Saul, for if he had thought that Samuel touching his soul had been dead, he
would not have had him raised up; In 2. Sam, 12.23
David, in the Kings, who are said to have slept with their fathers, to wit, 1.
King. 14.31
Rehoboam, 1. Ki. 22.50
Iehoshaphat, 2. Kin. 8.24
Ioram, 2. King. 10.35
Iehu, 2. King 14.29
Jeroboam, 2. King 15.22.
Manahem, 2. King 15.38
Iotham, 2. King. 16.20
Ahaz, 2 King. 20.21
Hezechiah, 2. King. 21.18.
Manasseh, 1. King. 15.8
Abia, 2. Chro. 26.23
Vzziah. Also in them that were raised up from the dead, by 1. King. 17.22
Elijah, by 2. King. 4.35
Elisha, by John 11.43
Christ, by Acts 9.40
Peter, by Acts 20.10
Paul; And in 2. king. 2.11
Elijah, in John 19.27.
Job, ing Nabuchadonozor, in Matthew. 27.50
Christ, in Lu. 16.22, 23
Lazarus and the rich glutton, in the Luke 16.9
unjust Steward, in the Lu. 23.42, 43
Thief hanging at Christ's right hand, and in Acts 7.59
Stephen. If as yet there be any doting heads which do doubt of, or deny the
immortality of the soul, they are unworthy to bear the name of Men, being
very beasts, and plagues of a Christian Commonwealth, worthy to loose their
lives; For it cannot be but that they who deny this Truth, do lack all
honesty and shame, and are ready to practice any mischief or villainy
whatsoever.

The wrath of God against the Transgressors of his commandments. Sect. III.
THe Lord himself divided his laws into to two principal heads or tables;
whereof the first teaches us the love of God, containing all duties of piety
and religion in the four first commandments, and the latter, the love of our
neighbors, containing all duties of justice and honest dealing in the six
last commandments. Now God is Deuteronomy. 4.24 hebr. 12.29 exodus 20.5
a consuming fire and a jealous God; Deu. 10.17
A great God, mighty and terrible, a Hebr. 10.30
God of revenge, Esaias 30.27, 28
whose presence is so hot, that no man is able to abide it, whose lips are
full of indignation and wrath; whose breath is a vehement flood, 2. Esdr. 8.23
whose look dries up the depths; whose wrath makes the mountains to melt
away. 2. Esdr. 8.21.
Before whom the host of the Angels stand with trembling. Job 26.11
The pillars of heaven tremble and quake at his reproof. Such a Deuteronomy. 10.17.
mighty God is he, that with a whirling wind and outstretched arm, he will
Malac. 3.5
come in person and confound all the devises of the ungodly: Such a Deur. 4.24.
jealous God, that whosoever sins, he will strike him with terrible plagues:
and such a Deuteronomy. 32.4.
just God, that he will not suffer the wicked to live. Psalm 5.4
He is not a God that loves wickedness, neither shall any evil dwell with
him, and therefore there is nothing more odious unto him, and more contrary
unto his nature then sin. Sin how odious it is in the sight of God.
It is a dangerous and dreadful darkness that no light can illuminate, and
an extreme cold that no heat can abate; So must it needs be an odious thing
that an infinite love hates, a filthy thing that an infinite goodness
detesteth, and a vile thing indeed, that Omnipotency cannot do; Such a thing
is sin. If there were any goodness in it, then should God in some respect,
love it, approve it, and be the author of it, but this is it that God does
loath and abhor, as that which is most detestable and loathsome. Wherefore will
we suffer this ugly deformity to fester in us? why do we delight so much in
loathsomenesse, even in that which makes us loathsome and hateful unto God?
The Devil in his nature, is more amiable then Man, being of a nobler
substance, of higher excellency, and endued with greater prerogatives then
we; yet who knovveth not, that GOD hates him, The Devil hated only for
sin.
for no other cause, but only for sin? When we make a comparison of a thing
that is evil in the highest degree, we can find nothing to liken it unto,
vvoorse then the devil, and having named him, we think to have reckoned the
last and greatest evil that is or can be imagined: yet as bad, odious, and
detestable as he is; Sin is more odious than the Devil.
more odious and detestable is sin, which is the only cause of his
odiousness; of which if he were rid, he were a more excellent, glorious,
and lovely creature than any mortal man. Moreover, so much does God detest
sin, that to satisfy his infinite justice and unplacable wrath, conceived
against sinners, for the punishment of sin, he ordained, The wages of sin.
not only all miseries, calamities, hazards, encumbrances, and afflictions
which are any way incident unto this life, being so many in number, so
grievous in quality, and so common in experience, but also eternal torments
and tortures in hell; in respect whereof, all the miseries of this life, are
but small resemblances semblances and fore-running signs. Yea in this world
for the trausgressions of one or a fevv, he oftentimes plagueth a great number.
Gen 3.17, 18
For the sin of Adam death conquered the whole world. For sin Genesis 7.4, 12
the old world was ouerflovvne, and all drowned, eight persons only
excepted. And for sin Genesis 19.24.
Sodom and Gomorrha, and the cities adioining were destroyed by fire and
brimstone. For the Genesis 34.27.
rape of Dinah, the whole race of the Sichemites were utterly spoiled: and
for the Judge. 20.35
abusing of the Levites wife, the whole crew of the Bemamites, to the number
of five and twenty thousand and a hundred men were destroled. The Exo.
14.27, 18
Egyptians for persecuting of the children of Israel, were ouervvhelined with
the red sea. For the offense of Number. 16.30, etc.
Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, their houses, vviues, children, goods, and cattle;
yea all that ever they had were svvallovved up of the earth. For the Josh.
7.25, 26.
sacrilege of Achan, his Sons, his Daughters, his Oxen, his Asses, his
Sheep, his Tent, and all that he had, by the Israelites were burnt with
fire, and himself stoned to death. For Exodus 32.4
worshipping of the golden calfe, there were slain of the children of Israel
about Exodus 32.28
three thousand men. All the Number. 13.4
Searchers of the land of Canaan, which Nu. 18.29.32
caused the people to Number. 14.1.2
murmr (except Number. 14.38
Caleb and Joshua) were Number 14.45
slain before their enemies. The Number. 21.6
Israelites were destroyed by fiery serpents, for murmuring against the Lord.
And because Number. 25 2.3.
Israel sacrificed unto Baal-peor, the Lord commanded Moses to take all the
heads of the people, and to Number. 25.4.
hang them up before the Lord against the Sun; for their Idolatry and Number.
25.1.
whoredom committed with the daughters of Moab, there Number. 25.9.
died of the Children of Israel four and twenty thousand of the plague: and
for the pride of 2. Sa. 24.13.15.
David in numbering of his men, there died in three days seventy thousand men.

Transgressors of every one of the ten Commandments, and their punishments.
Sect. IIII
THE first Commandment is, Exodus 20.3. Deuteronomy. 5.7
Thou shall have none other gods before me; the which, when the people of
Israel transgressed, judge. 2.12.13
following other gods, serving Baal and Ashtaroth, Judge. 2.14.
the wrath of the Lord was hot against Israel, and he delivered them into the
hands of Spoilers that spoiled them. The second Commandment is, Exodus 20.4
Deuteronomy. 5.8
thou shall make thee no graven image, etc. which when the wicked hipocrite
Jeroboam had broken, in making 1. king. 12.28
two golden calves, the one in 29
Bethel, and the other in Dan, and 32
causing the people to worship them, it was said unto him, 1. king. 14.10
Behold I will bring evil upon the house of Jeroboam, and will cut off from
Jeroboam him that pisseth against the wall, etc. And Baasha smote all the house
of Jeroboam, he left none alive to Jeroboam, until he had destroide him
according to the word of the Lord, which he spoke by his servant Ab^iah the
Shilonite. The third Commandment is, Exodus 20.7 Deuteronomy. 5.11.
thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain; Leuit. 24.16
He that blasphemeth the name of the Lord, shall be put to death; wherefore
they stoned the Leuit. 24.23
Blasphemer in Leuiticus 24. Sanecherib King of the Assirians, for his
blasphemy, described in 2. King. 18.30. was 2. king. 19.37
killed by his own sons Adramelech and Sharezer: and the Angel of the Lord
smote of his men, a 2. king. 19.35
hundred fourscore and five thousand. The fourth Commandment is, Exodus 20 8
Deuteronomy. 5.12
Remember the Sabbath day, to keep it holy: which when a Number. 15.32
man brake, in gathering sticks in the wilderness: 36
All the congregation brought him without the host, and stoned him with
stones, and he died, as the Lord had commanded Moses. The fifth Commandment
is, Ezod. 20.12 Deuteronomy. 5.16
Honor thy Father and thy Mother, which 2. Sa. 15.10
Absalom transgressing, in rising in arms against David the king his own
father, was u hanged, 2 Sa. 18.15
slain, 2. Sa. 18.9
and 17
cast into a pit. The sixth Commandment is, Exodus 20.13 Deuteronomy. 5, 17
Thou shall not kill; which when Genesis 4, 8
Cain had violated, in murdering his brother Habel, God said unto him, 10
What have thou done? the voice of thy brothers blood cries unto me from the
earth; 11
now therefore art thou accursed from the earth, which has opened her mouth to
receive thy brothers blood from thine hand: and at last he was killed also by
Genesis 4.24
Lamech his nephew. The seventh Commandment is, Exodus 20.14 deuteronomy. 5.18
Thou shall not commit adultery: Number. 25.9
Four and twenty thousand of the children of Israel perished, Number. 25.11
because they committed whoredom with the daughters of Moab. The eight
Commandment is, Exodus 20.15 deuteronomy. 5.19
Thou shall not steal: Josh. 7.21
Achan when he had stolen a Babilonish garment, and two hundred sheckles of
silver, and a wedge of gold of fifty sheckles weight, he, and his 24
sons, and his daughters, and all his substance were 25
burnt and stoned. The ninth Commandment is, Exodus 20.16 deuteronomy. 5.20
Thou shall not bear false witness against thy Neighbor: Hest. 3.8
Haman the Agagite when he had by false accusation, obtained a 12
decree of king Ahashuerosh, that all the Jews should be put to death, Hest.
7.10
was hanged upon the same gallows which he had prepared for Mordecai. Also Dan.
6.4
The rulers and gouerners Dan. 6.24
which had accused Daniel, were brought and were cast into the den of the
lions, they, their children, and their wives, and the lions had the maisterie
of them, and brake all their bones in pieces ere ever they came at the ground
of the den. The tenth Commandment is, Exodus 20.17 deuteronomy. 5.21
Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house: t Ahab transgressed this when he
commanded Naboth the Izreelite to be put to death, and tyrannically u possessed
his vineyard, 16
which he refused to 1. King. 21.3
sell unto him, and himself was afterward 1 king. 22.34
flaine in battle fighting against the 1. king. 20.1
king of Siria.

God his punishments upon sinners at the day of judgment: with an exhortation
to Repentance. Sect. V
NOw, you see what it is, to break the Commandments of allmighty God, the
breach of the least whereof, is recompensed with Romans 6.2.3
death; and that not of the principal party only, but also oftentimes, of
all his Children and family; with the utter subversion and destruction of al
his goods and substance, that so his memory might be quite razed out. How is
it then, that you are so secure in your greatest danger, that you take no
thought for your own soul; making no conscience of these weighty matters,
that so nearly concern your salvation? Did you know, what a monstrous thing
sin is in it self, and how horrible unto the sinner, surely you would not,
with so small remorce, solace and delight your self therein. You shall
understand then, that the Lord Deuteronomy. 3 ^4
most just, to satisfy his infinite and unplacable wrath conceived against
sin, has ordained for sinners, not only temporal death of the body, but
eternal torments both of body and soul, in that Apoc. 21.8
unquenchable lake, prepared for the Devil and his Angels. 2. cor. 5.10
We must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that every man may
receive the things which he has done, whether it be good or evil. Romans 2.11
God is no accepter of persons, who if he 2. Pet. 2.4
spared not the Angels that sinned, but cast them down into hell, and
delivered them into chains of darkness to be kept unto damnation: 5
Neither has spared the old world, but saved Noah the eight person, a preacher
of righteousness, and brought in the flood upon the world of the ungodly: 6
And turned the cities of Sodom and Gomorrha into ashes, condemning them, and
made them an example unto them that afterward should live ungodly. have not we
just cause, if we persevere in our sins, being thus forewarned, that we shall
not escape his severe judgments? Romans 15, 4
Whatsoever things are written before time, are written for our learning;
persuade your self therefore, that he is the same God still, and that he hates
sin as much as ever he did. Ezech. 18.4.20. Deuteronomy. 24, 16 2 King. 14.6 2.
Chro. 25.4 Ier. 31.29.30
The Soul that sins shall dies the lord says so, who cannot lie, in whose
lips there was never guile, Romans 2.3.
Think thou that thou shall escape the judgment of God? (says the Apostle)
4
Or despisest thou the riches of his bountifulness, and patience, and long
sufferance, not knowing that the bountifulness of God leads thee to
repentance? 5
But thou after thine hardness and heart that cannot repent, heapest unto thy
self wrath, against the day of wrath, and of the declaration of the just
judgment of God; 6
who will reward every man according to his works: 7
that is, to them which seek eternal life, glory, honor, and immortality
of well doing: 7
but unto them that are contentious, and disobey the truth, and obey
unrighteousness, shall be indignation and wrath: 9
Tribulation and anguish shall be upon the soul of every man that does evil.
Thus you hear what reward your impenitencie and wilfulness shall purchase
for you; even the wrath of God, anguish, and death it self; Hebr. 10.27
a fearful looking for of judgment and violent fire, which shall devour the
adversaries, wherein sinners shall be in that perplexity (being swallowed up of
torments on every side) that they shall never have any spark of hope of their
releasement: for they shall suffer an end without end, a death without death, a
decay without decay; because their end ever begins, their death always
lives, and their decay never cease: But they are always healed to be new
wounded, always repaired to be new devoured: they are a perpetual prey never
consumed, eternally broyling and never burnt up, ever dying and never dead.
Repent therefore in time, that you may escape these horrible torments, humble
your self in the presence of Gods majesty, crave pardon for your sins,
accept this time of repentance, which the Lord now vouchsafes you, take the
opportunity while it is offered, confess your fault, and no doubt, but the
Lord will show you mercy, according to his promise. Ezech, 33.11
As I live says the Lord I desire not the death of the wicked, but that the
wicked turn from his way and live. Ezech. 18.32
u For I desire not the death of him that dies says the Lord God. In this
life, God gives mercy to them that ask it in faith. 1. Tim. 2.4
Who will that all men shall be saved, and come to the acknowledging of the
truth. Step therefore Hebr. 4.16
boldly unto the throne of grace, that you may receive mercy, and find grace
to help in time of need. In the world to come, there is no place of
repentance, for there God appears in judgment, requiring an account of all
men's doings, yea, Math. 12.36
of every idle word that they have spoken in this world. Ioh. 5.29 Dan. 12.2
And they shall come forth that have done good, unto the resurrection of life,
but they that have done evil unto the resurrection of condemnation. Therefore
Esaias. 55.6
seek the Lord while he may be found, call ye upon him while he is near. 7
Let the wicked forsake his ways, and the unrighteous his own imaginations,
and return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him; and to our God,
for he is very ready to forgive.

Cap. II Comforts for the broken-harted and penitent Malefactors, that by the
Magistrate are adjudged to die.
That Judgment comes from God. Sect. I
Misery comes not forth of the dust, Job. 5.6.
neither does affliction spring out of the earth. (says Eliphaz) wherefore you
must think that this deserved Cross now laid upon you, comes from God: for
Pro. 29 26
Every man's judgment comes from the Lord Job 5.17
Behold, blessed is the man whom God corrects; therefore refuse not thou the
chastising of the Almighty. 18
For he makes the wound, and binds it up; he smites, and his hands make
whole. The Love, wherewith God loves us, Cant. 8.6.
is strong as Death, so that it appears unto the world, as though the Love
of God were misery, death, and destruction, whereas unto us it seems mercy,
life, and blessedness. For 1. Cor. 11.32
when we are judged we are chastened of the Lord, because we should not be
condemned with the world. So then, under punishment, you may behold mercy,
under correction, peace, and under death, life; whereby it will come to pass,
that you shall not judge hardly of your state, it shall not seem miserable and
fearful unto you, but that you may be able to vnder-go your cross, and
patiently to suffer it. Seeing Job. 14.5
man's days are determined, and the number of his months certain, and that he
has his bounds appointed him, which he cannot pass: Consider that your glass
is run out, that your pilgrimage is at an end, and that your appointed time
is now come, be not agrieued therefore to die, be content to render up your
life again unto him that gave it you. As you were not borne at your own
pleasure, so shall you not live at your own lust: Conform your will
therefore unto the will of God, and say Lu^. 22.42
Father, thy will be done, and not mine. For seeing it is the will of God that
you should drink of his Cup, which he has filled for you, pray that you may
sup it up with patience, and continuance in the faith of Christ unto the end,
that so you may pass through it to everlasting life: where your tears shall be
turned into triumph, and your disgrace into glory; where your comfort shall be
without cross, and your repose without trouble. Who would not rejoice
therefore, quietly and patiently to die, seeing Death is the passage from this
world to the next, from the earth to heaven, and from all the present
aggreeuances, to all comfortable happiness? Well may the bruit beast fear to
die, whose end of life is their conclusion of being. Well may the Epicure
tremble, who with his life looks to loose his felicity. Yea, well may the
faithless and unrepentant sinners quake, whose death is the beginning of their
damnation. But seeing the Lord has vouchsafed you a penitent and believing
heart, go on boldly and receive your portion in the land of the living, where
you shall live ever.

Particular directions for the distressed party. Sect. II.
SEeing it is the good pleasure and will of God to lay this cross upon you,
that for a while you should bear the same, do not excuse your self, nor make
your fault light to the world, dissemble it not as though you were guiltless
and innocent, as though you had not deserved this punishment laid upon you.
Cast away these Genesis 3
fig-leaues, they will not cover your shame. And Josh. 7.19
give glory unto the Lord God of Israel, make confession unto him, and show us
now what thou have done, hide it not from the people. Say with Achan, 20
Indeed I have sinned against the Lord God of Israel, and thus and thus have I
done. He gave God the glory, and so departed (no doubt) in Gods mercy: so
also shall you do, if you will follow his godly steps: lay open your heart this
day, search your thoughts, and give God the glory. Conceal not the truth,
dissemble not with Malefactors, do not extenuate the heinousness of your
crime, the Lord is a searcher of the heart and reins. Seeing God has brought
your Offense to light; Seeing he has ordained the Magistrate, who is Romans 13.4
the Minister of God, to take vengeance on him that does evil, to punish you,
give praise and thanks unto God; think it better to be shamed here, then
hereafter before all the world, and before all the host of heaven; far better
it is, to be punished here, with a temporary punishment, than in the world to
come to be tormented in hell, with everlasting and endless tortures. Also, if
you have at any time confessed any thing to charge the innocent, for the
clearing of your self, thereby to escape and be at liberty, or for hatred
and malice, burden not your self therewith, give glory to God and confess
the truth. If you have hindered any man, by taking away of his good name,
restore it him again to your power. If you have hurt any man in his goods,
restore it unto him again, as much as you are able, and be truly sorry in
your heart, for that you are not able to make restitution of the whole. If you
know any Malefactors, Thieves, Murderers, Traitors, etc. be not partaker of
their sins, but certify the Magistrate of them. And so pray to God for
mercy, that he will give you true and faithful repentance, that he will not
suffer your heart to be bent to any ungodly way; committing your self wholly
unto his mercy.

How the place of Peter is to be understood, where he says, Let none of you
suffer as a Murderer, or as a Thief, etc. And that God sometimes does call men
by this means. Sect. III.
Objection.

The Apostle says, Let none of you suffer as a murderer, or as a thief, 1
Pet. 4.15
or as an evil doer, or as a busie-bodie in other men's matters: Thereby
indeed, condemning all such as die so. Now, alas! I die as a murderer, Traitor,
Thief, etc. an evil doer, I am in this number here condemned.

Answer.

THe Apostle condemns not such; Only he gives the Christians a Caveat, that
none of them suffer as a Malefactor, for then could they not Galat. 6.14
glory in their sufferings, For (as the same Apostle says) This is
thanke-worthie, if a man for conscience toward God endure grief, 1. Pet. 2.19
suffering wrongfully. For what praise is it, if when ye be buffeted for your
faults? because 1, Pet. 2.20
they should have deservedly incurred the punishment laid upon them; they
should not suffer for the name of Christ, but for their own deserts; which yet
is so far from condemning a man, if he take his punishment patiently, that it
is a means of his reclaiming into the sheepfold. Luc. 23.40.41
You have for example the good Thief, who had lived very wickedly, and
committed many heinous facts, for which he was judged to die by the magistrate.
Yet this punishment unto him was the means to bring him to Christ, and to
know. God, whereby he received spiritual comfort, that the innocent lamb
which suffered with him Christ Jesus, would 43
pity his misery, forgive him his sins, and bring him into Paradise his
heavenly kingdom: whereas otherwise he should never have forsaken his wicked
life, but continued his course and run on the high way to perdition. And so
peradventure had it been with you; you would have run on the race of
wickedness, and gone forward in your sins, and still continued in that ungodly
course, without all repentance or godly knowledge, under the fearful wrath of
God. But now, by this means, he recalled you again, he made you know your
self, he brought you to repentance, and to the knowledge of his Son Jesus
Christ our Sauionr, wherein if you Apoc. 2.10
continue unto the end, you shall receive the crown of life. Consider therefore,
how loving a Father the Lord is unto you, and what a mighty God is he that can
bring Esa. 42.16
light out of darkness, that can make bad things good, and that will to his,
turn all worst things to the Romans S. 28.
best. By this means God has hindered Satan of his purpose, who now made
full account to have kept you in his kingdom for ever; for he has made you of
the bondslaue of Satan, a lively member of Jesus Christ; of the child of
darkness, the child of light and everlasting bliss.

That the multitude of our sins should not make us faint-hearted. Sect. IIII.
Objection.

Yet (me thinks) I am a rebellious wretch, abounding with a whole sea of
iniquities. I feel my self laden with a huge company of horrible sins,
whereof eue^ the very least, is sufficient in judgment, to throw me down to
the ever burning lake. My own conscience does bear witness against me, of my
manifold and innumerable transgressions, of my security and senseless
blindness, committing sin after sin, both notorious to the world, and
horrible before God. The thoughts of my heart rise up in judgment against me:
The vanity of my life condemns me: The wickedness and heinousness of my
horrible deeds rejects me from the Lords eyes: All my wicked thoughts,
words, and deeds, with the inward corruption of my nature, do lie heavy upon
me, and with their intolerable weight, do even press my soul down to hell.

Answer.

Fear not for all this, for Romans 5.20
where sin abounds, there grace abounds much more. Where there is the
knowledge and feeling of sins, there is the remission and pardon of them:
Lament. 3.29 The goodness of God toward sinners.
The Lord is good unto them, that trust in him, and to the soul that seeks
him. This infinite goodness of God, is manifestly declared in the Scriptures,
that we should ever think on the ^ame, and have Hope, Math. 19.17 Luc. 18.19
Mar. 10.18.
there is none good but one, ^uen God, who is Psalm. 73.1
good to Israel, yea Psalm. 119.68
good and gracious: Nahum. 1.7
The Lord is good, and a strong hold in ^he day of trouble, and he knows them
that trust in him. So then, God being good in nature and essence, and that
only good, he is ready to communicate his goodness with the humble and
penitent soul, that groneth and sigheth under the burden of iniquity, whose
heart and hands be bathed in the bottom of repentance; ^f in faith, with a sure
confidence in Christ's merits he require the same. 1. Ioh. 1.9
If we acknowledge our sin God is faithful to forgive us. Next his goodness
follows his Love, which is so great ^owardes us, that King David being rapt
with admiration of the same, The love of God toward sinners.
says; Psalm. 8.4
What is man say I, that thou art mindful of him, and the son of man that
thou visitest him? Psalm. 103.13
As a father has compassion on his children, so has the Lord compassion on
them that fear him. In the Prophecy of Esaias, this love of God toward us is
compared to the love of a mother, that most tenderly embraces her own child,
which love is the heartiest of all other. Esa. 49.15
Can a woman (says he) forget her child? and not have compassion on the son
of her womb? (as who say, No;) though they should forget, yet will I not
forget thee says the Lord of Hosts: thereby declaring that God does love us
more tenderly then does the natural mother love the fruit of her own womb.
And this declares the feruencie of Gods love toward us, in that Rom, 8.32.
he spared not his own son, but gave him for us all to death. Ioh. 3.11
For so God loved the world, that he has given his only begotten son, that
whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life. 1.
Ioh. 4.10
Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son
to be a reconciliation for our sins. So Ephesians. 2.4
God which is rich in mercy, through his great love wherewith he loved us. 5
The mercy of God toward sinners.
Even when we were dead by sins, has quickened us together in Christ, by
whose grace ye are saved. Out of this goodness and love of God springs his
infinite and marvelous great mercy toward us. Lamen. 3.22
It is the Lords mercies that we are not consumed, because his compassions
fail not. Psalm. 130.7
Let Israel wait on the Lord, for with the Lord is mercy, and with him is
great redemption; 8
And he shall redeem Israel from all his iniquities. How many, or how great our
sins be (so they be not sins against the holy ghost) it makes no matter, for
sin cannot so abound, but that the goodness, love, and mercy of God,
purchased for us by the obedience and righteousness of Jesus Christ, does much
more abound. Christ is stronger then the devil, and his works are more
effectual and forcible to save us, then are the works of his enemy the
Devil to destroy and overthrow us: his holiness and righteousness has more
power to justify us, then has Sin to condemn us; and his integrity to wash
us, then the foul spirit to defile us. This is he that is the Luc. 11.22
stronger man which binds and overcomes the strong man: he takes his armor
from him wherein he trusted, to wit, Sin, Death, and the Law: So that now the
devil has no more power to hurt us, neither by sin, 1. Ioh. 1.8
for Christ has u washed us in his blood, and cleansed us from all sin; not
by death, for Christ when he was dying, has 1. Cor. 15.4
swallowed it up into victory; nor by the law, for Christ has fully Math. 51.4
satisfied it, in fulfilling the same, and in submitting him self unto that
curse that was ordained for us.

That late Repentance is good if it be true Repentance: and how a man may
judge whether his repentance be unfeigned or not Sect. V.
Objection.

Late Repentance, is seldom or never true Repentance: Alas, hitherto I
wallowed in wickedness all the days of my life, and now I cannot sin as in
former time, by reason that my liberty is restrained, or that I am not mine
own man. I left not sin before sin left me: I fear lest when I die, this my
late repentance dies with me. For it is very just, that he that contemned God
in his life, should be contemned of God in his death. It is the just judgment
of God on the wicked, that dying, they should forget themselves, who living, did
forget God.

Answer.

INdeed your case is no less dangerous then common: For the men of this our
iron age do offer the flower of their youth to the devil, and bring the lame
and rotten sacrifice of their old age to God. In a word, when they cannot serve
the devil, they will be content to serve God. These frame a kind of
repentance unto themselves which may justly be suspected. Yet notwithstanding
enter you into your own heart, and see whether you be truly sorry that you
have misspent your time, whether you hate those sins you have committed with a
perfect hatred, for that thereby you have Ephe. 4.30
grieved the holy spirit of God, and provoked him to anger, and not so much for
fear of his revenge and wrath to be powered upon you. Whether if you were
your own man again, you would commit the like. Whether you are not willing to
be reconciled to your adversaries, to make restitution and recompense of such
goods as you have wrongfully gotten and detained. Or, if you be not able to
restore, whether you do not acknowledge the fault; Whether it does not grieve
and vex your very soul, to see and to hear the horrible sins and
outrageous blasphemies that men commonly commit and belch out against the
Majesty of God, who has bin so loving and so good a Father unto them: and
therefore, whether you will not use any lawful means to refrain and punish
these notorious sinners and Malefactors (whether it be by confession, just
accusation or detection, or any other good and godly means) for the glory of
God, and the peace of the Church. If you find your self thus affected, the^
doubt not but that your repentance is unfeigned and true, howbeit it be late:
Better late than never, the Proverb is. Consider that the Promise of remission
of sins in Christ, is made without any term of time: And therefore late
repentance may be true repentance. Ezcch. 18.21
If the wicked will return from all his sins that he has committed, and
keep all my Statutes, and do that which is lawful and right, he shall
surely live, and shall not die. 22
All his transgressions that he has committed, they shall not be mentioned
unto him, but in his righteousness that he has done, he shall live. 23
Have I any desire that the wicked should die, says the Lord God: Or shall he
not live, if he return from his ways? If Satan stand before you, and accuse
you of your vanities, and lay before you, the days of your looseness,
despair not. Have you spent thirty years in vanity? nay, have you spent
forty or threescore, yea threescore and ten, or fourscore? despair not:
Reserve the rest of your days, yea, if you have not days, reserve the rest of
your hours, of your half hours, of moments, for Jesus Christ, and he will
make much of them: they are the Zach. 3.2
brand taken out of the fire, and the Apoc. 3.
remnant which is left. Though there be no light in your candle, yet if it
does but smoke, Jesus Christ will not put it out; he will not quench the
sparckles that are left in your Esa. 42.3
flax. Is your strong man become a reed, yet Christ will not break that, such
is his mercy. Oh, have you a remnant left, even a little remnant: and is that
ready to die? Apoc, 3.2
yet be awake, and strengthen the things which remain, that are ready to
die, and Christ will save you. It came no sooner into the Luc 15.17
Prodigal childs heart, to go and see his father; he had no sooner directed
his 20
feet toward home, but his father ran to meet him, embraced him, and
received him with 22
great joy. Even so does Christ, we are no readier to leave and forsake our
sins, and to sue unto Christ for mercy, but he is as ready to pardon and
forgive us, and to grant mercy Math. 11.21
Come unto me all ye that are weary and laden, and I will ease you. Here you
may cast anchor, in this port you may rest your self: now let the Math. 7.25
waves beat, let the winds blow, let Satan assault you, yet are you
harmless, your rock is unconquerable. Rom 8.31
Christ is on your side, what can prevail against you? not sands nor rocks,
not storms nor tempests, not winds nor waves, not fire nor water, not all the
powers of Satan, nor the Math. 16.18
gates of hell.

Chap. III. Comforts for such condemned persons, who fear and dread the rigor
of the punishment they are enjoined to suffer.
What a man must do to be eased of the painful apprehension of death. Sect.
I.
AS God in this life does punish the transgressions of his servants with
temporal punishments, lest they should be 1. Cor. 11.32
condemned with the world: So now on your part, seeing you have broken his
laws, and that the Magistrate has found you out in your sins, the Lord
will no longer forbear the punishment due unto your desert; which certainly
is very necessary for the salvation of your soul, for so much as God turns
all things to the Romans 8.28
best for them that love him, although your corrupt judgment and frail flesh
may peradventure judge otherwise. Now then learn to be wise, and take counsel
what is best to be done. The worst that your sins can do unto you, is to
lay upon you, the just Romans 6.23
reward of death. The remedy is, of necessity to make a virtue, and to bear
that wisely which you must needs abide. If you will have the heart that shall
contemn the force of death, prepare your self, not in your own wisdom,
which you have found to be foolishnes already, for it has deceived you, but
in the wisdom of the Lord, that your hope may be sure. Above all things,
strive to attain unto true repentance, the first part whereof must be an 2.
Sa. 24.10 Josh. 17.20 Acknowledgement of sin, the first part of true
repentance.
humble confession of whatsoever things your conscience can utter, more then
is revealed. Wherefore speak openly the truth, conceal nothing, and so shall
you shun the devil, who ever is an enemy unto truth. Prove. 28 13
He that hides his sin (says Solomon) shall not prosper, but he that confesses
and forsakes them shall have mercy. If we will find forgiveness of our sins,
let us cast off the cloakes of shame, and confess before heaven and earth,
that we have sinned, and what we have done. God will once Apoc. 20, 12
reveal the secrets of all hearts, but if we speak the truth now, and
shrink not, then shall we rejoice that there is nothing of ours hid. Better
ten thousand times to receive the reproach of flesh, and glory of the Lord,
than to turn away for one hour, and afterward receive everlasting confusion.
John Baptist preached to such as Math. 3.6
confessed their sins. When the lost Son called Luke. 15.21.
heaven and earth to witness his great iniquity, then he found hope of
pardon. When the good Thief that was hanged with Christ, had confessed in the
hearing of all the Jews; Luke 23.41.
We are rightly punished, and receive things worthy of that we have done;
then entered he into Paradise. It was the practice of old Adam to Genesis 3.8
hide his sin, but you are borne anew; this was the Genesis 4.14.
sin of Caine, but you are of a better stock. And therefore if you have been
partaker of any counsel, disclose the conspiracies of the wicked, unburden
your own conscience, make your heart glad, cast off the burden of your secret
sins, purge the eyes of your mind, that you may see Christ; let true and
unfeigned repentance break forth in holy confession, shame the Lords enemies,
and make the Church of God rejoice: and lo, your death will be comfortable
unto you, the holy spirit of God will strengthen you and hold you up, you shall
not be dismaide, your 1. Cor. 10.13
temptations shall be no greater then you shall be able to bear, and to overcome
them: and then shall you be blessed, then shall the closing of your eyes, be
the beginning of your light, and then shall death be your entrance into life.

How God ordinarily behaueth himself toward the Elect in this life. Sect. II.
Physicians are wont to give bitter potions and sharp medicines to their
curable patients; But unto him that is incurable, they give what potion the
Patient himself affects and likes best: 1. Cor. 11.32.
Even so God does chasten and correct his elect children, and does judge them
here, that they be not condemned with the world; whereas he lets the
reprobate run on in his own lust, whither his fancy will lead him, that his
judgment and condemnation may be the greater. Psalm. 89 30
If his children (meaning David's) forsake my law and walk not in my
judgments. 31
If they break my statutes and keep my commandments. 32
Then will I visit their transgression with the rod, and their iniquity with
strokes* And again, Revel. 3.19 Pro. 3.11 Heb. 12.5
as many as I love, I rebuke and chasten. And for the Reprobate he says, Psalm.
81.12
I gave them up unto the hardness of their heart, and they have walked in
their own counsels: Which is a certain and vnsallible token of their
condemnation. Wherefore humble your self under Gods rod, and submit your neck
under his yoke, knowing that he deals mercifully with you, as a kind and
loving Father. Though the assault of death be strong, violent, and bitter, to
the trial of your faith, yet call to mind that Christ has overcome death and
hell, he has broken the strength of this battle, he has confounded the
captain of this host, and set up the songs of triumph unto all believers,
that we may have the fullness of joy, and say with gladness; 1. Cor. 15, 55
O death, where is thy sting?

That the continuance of torments should not make us afraid, or unwilling to
die. Sect. III.
Objection.

Alas, the torments which I am enioined to suffer, are intolerable, I shall die
of a lingering death, how shall I be able to endure it? If I should die
quickly, it would not grieve me so much.

Answer.

YOur lingering from Resolution does aggrauate the greatness of your deferued
punishment, whereas if you were prepared and resolute, your pains would not
seem half so grievous unto you. Wherefore for your comfort, and that you may
attain unto this resolution, I will insist upon one example, and apply the
same unto you particularly, if you will give ear and mark it well. David the
King 2. Sa. 24.2
sent Ioab to number all the people of Israel and Judah, from Dan even to
Beer-sheba; 3
Ioab would dissuade him from his purpose: 4
Notwithstaending the Kings word prevailed against Ioab and against the
Captains of the host, so says the Text. Well, the people were 9
numbered, and God was 11
therefore offended. Now to you: When you were first tempted to commit such an
heinous offense and foul deed as you have done: Doubtless the spirit would
have dissuaded you from your evil intent, and your conscience did prick you,
and show you the grieuousnesse of the fact, notwithstanding you gave no ear to
Ioab, to the spirit, and to your own conscience: but wilfully, having no
regard of your honesty, and credit, neither weying the anger of God,
committed your self to the danger, and perpetrated the fact, wherefore God is
justly offended with you. Then follows the intent. What was David's intent
when he caused the people to be numbered? Surely he meant no harm, but of
Policy to number them, 2. Sa. 24.2
to know the number of the people, that he might know his power. But what was
your intent? The betraying of your country; the destruction of your Prince; The
murdering of your Brother; the robbing of your neighbor; or such like? You
cannot deny it: So then, if God was justly angry with David, how much more
might he justly condemn and utterly forsake you? your fact being far more
horrible and wicked, then was the offense of David. Now to David again; When
2. Sa. 24.9.
Ioab delivered the number and sum of the people unto the king, all was well,
thought David. But alas, good man, it was not long ere God had awakened out of
his sleep, and began to bestirre himself. How then fared it with David? then
David's heart smote him, says the text. Thus we see when sinners promise most
ease and rest, most quietness and plenty of Peace unto themselves, even then
begins the tragedy, when it is least looked for. His heart was smitten: Oh
in what a case was he then! his heart aked, his spirit groaned, his soul
bled, for sorrow that he had so grievously offended the Majesty of God; his
conscience cried out against him, Who can declare what things he felt within?
yet was not his sin so grievous as yours. But what did he in this agony? did
he despair? No, he humbled himself before the face of god, and acknowledged
his offense, saying, 2. Sa. 24.10
I have sinned exceedingly in that I have done, Therefore I beseech thee now
Lord, take away the trespass of thy servant, for I have done very foolishly.
You hear how he stepped unto the heavenly throane, humbly confessing his
trespass, and desiring forgiveness and mercy, and therefore obtained mercy.
But I pray you, when you had committed the deed, did you not think that all
was well, that it should never have been known? Ah, but sweet meat must have
sower sauce. Well, when GOD had awakened, when you were taken, what remorse of
conscience did you suffer? were you disquieted in spirit, and sorry you
offended God, as David was? If you were not, you ought to be, the Lord give
you grace to do so. It remains then, that you prostrate your self before the
face of almighie God, acknowledging your offenses, and crave mercy and pardon
for the same by the merits of Christ, and doubtless you shall have mercy as
David had. But how had David mercy? The Lord condemned him not (as he might
justly have done) neither did he utterly forsake him, yet he punished him, and
that most grievously, with temporal punishment, by an offer that was made. For
2. Sa. 24.11.
The word of the Lord (says the text) came unto the Prophet Gad David's
seer, saying, 12
Go and say unto David: thus says the Lord, I will offer thee three things,
choose thee which of them I shall do unto thee. 13
so Gad came unto David and showed him, and said unto him, will thou that seven
years famine shall come upon thee in thy land, or vvilt thou flee three months
before thine enemies, they follovving thee, or that there be three days
pestilence in thy land? Now advise thee, and see, what answer shall I give
to him that sent me? 14
And David said unto Gad, I am in a vvonderfull strait. Let us fall now into
the hand of the Lord (for his mercies are great) and let me not fall into the
hand of man. Thus we see how David, when he heard the definitive sentence of
punishment denounced against him, when he was in a hard straight, did not fret
and fume, stamp, and stare, and cry out against the Lords justice, neither
did he show any token of impatiencie, but wholly recommended himself unto the
Lord, with a firm faith, and a lively hope, ( 2. Sa. 24.14
for his mercies are great, says he) Blessed David therefore. Even so, it is
not for you to bid the Lord battle (as it were) by your impaciencie, by your
wailings and weepings, by your mutterings and murmurings, or by any other your
discontentments, but after the example of David, commend your self into the
Lords hands, and trust in his mercies, for his mercies are Great. Now to the
punishment. 2. Sa. 24.15
So the Lord sent a pestilence in Israel, from the morning even to the time
appointed, and there died of the people from Dan even to Beer-sheba, seventy
thousand men. A grievous certainly and bitter punishment, Yet your punishment
is less, although your offense were greater. Wherefore you are to thank God,
and greatly to praise his holy name, for that he has showed you more and
greater mercy, then he has showed to his own servant David.

That God oftentimes deals more mercifully with us, then we do perceive he
does. Sect. IIII.
Objection

Yea, But David himself died not, the plague did not touch him, and therefore
my punishment is greater, and far more grienous, then was his.

Answer.

Certainly the punishment due unto your transgression and offense, is, or
should be greater, then that which was due unto David's, if the Lord in his
justice should deal with you; yet have not you so grievous a punishment
enjoined you to suffer, as David had; the Lord therein dealing more mercifully
with you. Touching that you say, David himself died not; true it is indeed,
and yet was his punishment never the less, for so much as David was a King;
and unto Kings the lives of their Subjects are as precious and dear, as their
own lives, yea and more too; for the King often times, puts himself and
his Kingdom in danger, in the defense of his Subjects. Yea, the holy ghost
says, that 2. Sa. 24.17
David spoke unto the Lord (when he saw the Angel, that smote the people,) and
said; Behold, I have sinned, yea, I have done wickedly: But these poor
Sheep, what have they done. Let thine hand, I pray thee, be against me, and
against my fathers house. Thereby declaring the care, that he had, for the
preservation of his innocent Subjects, yelding himself to suffer the
punishment due unto his offense. So then, by this example, you see how God
punishes the breakers of his ordinances and laws in this world, with
temporary punishment, to the 1. Cor. 11.32
end he may find nothing in them worthy of blame or revenge, in the world to
come. Wherefore you must not judge harder of your case, then you have cause: you
are but one step from the heavenly Jerusalem, and that is, to die willingly and
well: speak forth the secrets of your heart, and give Josh. 7.19
God glory: commit your self wholly unto his will whom you have offended, even
God, and ask forgiveness and pardon, through the merits of Jesus Christ our
Savior, and you shall find comfort in your sufferings, and afterward,
everlasting happiness; 2. Sa. 24.14
for his mercies are great.

Chap. IIII Comforts for persons wrongfully condemned to Death.
That because we have deserved Death by our manifold sins, we ought to die
willingly, though otherwise we be innocently condemned. Sect. I
Whosoever shall consider what man is in himself, cannot judge otherwise, but
that, if he endure all the miseries of this life, and eternal torments in the
world to come; he suffers no more then he has deserved, being as it were the
sworn enemy of God, at utter defiance with him, What Man is in himself.
ever contradicting and repugning his holy will: for our senses are swords to
fight against him, our words blows, and our works wounds; yea our body, that
should be the temple of the holy Ghost, is a sink of al uncleanness; our
soul a most riotous and rebellious enemy unto God; our understanding, quick
to represent unto the Will, instruments of sin; our will a common Curtesan,
coveting and lusting after every offer that she likes; our memory, a register
of wickedness, for our sinful thoughts and fantasies to feed upon: finally,
what part of our body, what power of our soul, whereof God has given us the
use, but we daily abuse to his dishonor? warring against him, with his own
weapons, and employing our life, motion, and being, to the continual provoking
of him in whom we Act. 17.28
live, move, and have our being? howbeit indeed we do but throw dust at the
sun, which lights in our own eyes, and kick against the prick. You must
not therefore complain of your rough handling, no not though you were worse
dealt with, for so much as you have deserved, not only temporal death of the
body, but also eternal damnation, both of body and soul, by your grievous
sins, whereby you have offended the Majesty of God, and provoked him to
anger: let us not say I am innocent, I am righteous, I have not done any thing
worthy of death. O let us not play the Pharasies! The wages of sin is Death,
if we die, Romans 6.23
then have we but our desert, for we cannot deny but that we have sinned.
There is no righteousness in Man. This was the fooles-paradise into which the
Galat. 3.1
Galathians were brought, who sought their perfection in the flesh. Take heed
then, Paul counts thee a fool that go this way to work. This is a stolen
feather, it belongs to a better Bird: it is the arms royal of our grand
Captain Jesus Christ, it is the ensign wherewith he triumphed over his
enemies: Ioh. 8.46
Which of you can rebuke me of sin? Oh let us not rob Christ of his honor!
let us not make gods of our selves; for Mar. 10.18 Luke. 18.19
who is good but God! let us not forget whose children we be! O earth, earth,
that thou should think so well of thy self! Prou. 20.9
who can say, I have made my heart clean, I am clean from sin? The more we
seek to cloak our sins, the more they do appear. Wherefore, so judge you of
this your punishment, as of the rod of our heavenly Father chastising your
sins, which you ought to bear patiently, magnifying the Lords goodness and
mercies toward you, for that he corrects you but with a temporal punishment,
1. Cor. 11.31
if we would judge our selves (says Paul) we should not be judged: 32
But when we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, because we should not be
condemned with the world. Yet notwithstanding concerning this fact which is
falsely imputed unto you, for which also you are innocently adjudged to die;
happy are you and blessed, and blessed shall be your portion, if you suffer
this your judgment willingly and patiently; Math. 5.10
Blessed are they which suffer persecution for righteousness sake, for theirs
is the kingdom of heaven: He has spoken it that will never change. Take it
patiently then, for 1. Pet. 2.20.
this is acceptable unto the Lord: Murmr not, howbeit you be ignorant of the
cause of your punishment; know that you are punished justly by this, in that
you are judged by him, whose judgments can never be unjust.

That we must not revenge our wrongs. Sect. II.
THough others be guilty of this your judgment, suffering and death, as
being the principal Actors, Procurers, or Favorers of the same; yet you must
willingly forgive them, and in any case beware that you do not breathe after
Reuengement: Hebr. 10.30 Deuteronomy. 32.35 Romans 12, 19
Vengeance belongs unto me, I will recompense, says the Lord. It is Gods
office, we must not intrude our selves, we may not vsurp Gods office. Hebr.
10.30
The Lord shall judge his people. We must not be our own caruers, we must not
revenge, but leave it unto God and to his ministers, whom he has appointed to
execute judgment and justice; Syrac. 28.1
He that seeks vengeance shall find vengeance of the Lord, and he will
surely keep his sins. 2
Forgive therefore thy Neighbor the hurt that he has done to thee, so shall
thy sins be forgiven thee also when thou praiest; says Syrach, according to
that of our Savior Christ, Math. 6.14
If ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive
you. 15
But if you do not forgive men their trespasses, no more will your father
forgive you your trespasses. So far should we be from revenge, that we
ought to pray for our enemies. Moses, when the Children of Israel had evil
entreated him, and murmured against him; when they were plagued therefore, he
prayed unto the Lord, saying, Exodus 32.32
If thou will not pardon their sin, I pray thee raze me out of thy book which
thou have written. Christ also, when his enemies persecuted and crucified him,
cried to his Father, saying, Luke. 23.34
Father forgive them, for they know not what they do. Thus did Christ, and
thus he commanded us to do, Math. 5.44
Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you,
and pray for them which hurt and persecute you. Stephen that holy Martyr, when
he was stoned to death, Act. 7.60.
he kneeled down and (as a faithful servant of Jesus Christ) cried with a
loud voice, Lord, lay not this sime to their charge. Thus you see that you
must not hate them, that apprehended and accused you, albeit falsely, nor them
that judged and condemned you, though wrongfully, neither yet your
executioners; but you must love them, and pray for them: Leuit. 19.18. Deuteronomy.
22.1
So God commanded, so Math. 5.44 Luc. 6.27
Christ prescribed, so Luc. 23.34
Christ himself did, so did Exodus 32.32
Moses, so did Act. 7.60
Stephen, so did 1. Cor. 4.13
Paul and others. Wherefore should not you follow their precepts and examples?
If you be a Disciple, you must follow your master; If you are a Servant, you
must obey your Lord: and if you be the Child of God, you must do like Gods
Children, you must follow their steps: not forgetting how dangerous it is to
avenge our selves, for Mat. 7.2
with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured unto you again; as
appears in the Prophecy of Ezechiel? Ezec. 25.12
Thus says the Lord God, Because Edom has done evil, by taking vengeance
upon the house of Judah, and has committed great offense, and revenged himself
upon them: 13
Therefore thus says the Lord God, I will also stretch out mine hand upon
Edom, and destroy Man and Beast out of it, and I will make it desolate, 14
etc. u and they shall know my vengeance, etc. Read out this Chapter.

Comforts taken from the examples of them that have been innocentlie adjudged
to die. Sect. III.
Objection.

Alas, I have great wrong, and am very hardly dealt withal; I am falsely
accused, violently apprehended, wrongfully imprisoned, and innocently condemned
to die the death. Ah hard and heavy case!

Answer.

TRue it is: I grant your case is hard and heavy, but yet not so hard, nor so
heavy as you take it: you say you have great wrong, and are very hardly dealt
with; admit this, so were all the Prophets, and Apostles, and generally, all
Gods children before you: you are falsely accused, so were 1. King. 21.10
Naboth, Dan. 6.13
Daniel and others: you are violently apprehended, so were they also, so was
Genesis 39.17
Joseph before them, and infinite others: you are wrongfully imprisoned, so
were they likewise, so was Math. 14.3.
John Baptist: lastly, you are innocently adjudged to die, so were all these,
Noah, Daniel, John Baptist, and Act. 7.57
Stephen, yea all the Prophets and Apostles. Wherefore your case is not so
lamentable as you take it, for it is a common thing in the scriptures, among
the children of God, to see the just oppressed by the unjust, to see Hab. 1.13
the wicked devour the man that is more righteous then he, and to see the
innocent and holy man put to death by the enemies of God, and of the Cross of
Christ. Now it remains that you do like one that has his house a fire,
burning all in a flame, so that it is impossible to be extinguished or
quenched; who will throw out and fetch from thence al his treasure and jewels,
that so he may with them build another house. So must you do, let your old
ruinous house burn, let it perish, seeing it may not be otherwise, only
think and bestirre your self how you may save your treasure and your jewels;
I mean your soul, by a true and constant faith in Jesus Christ our Redeemer,
that so at the resurrection of the just, you may come unto a new house, that
cannot perish, but remains immortal for ever; for then you shall have an
incorruptible and a glorious body, which shall not be subject to grief, pain,
sorrow, need, and trouble, but shall enjoy everlasting peace and blessedness.

Comforts taken from the example of our Savior Christ's innocent suffering:
With a brief declaration of the same. Sect. IIII.
Objection.

Yet me thinks I can hardly brook these wrongs, for they are intolerable. Who
can bear so many injuries? so many reproaches? yea the shame of the world and
death it self, having committed nothing worthy these injurious dealings? if I
were a Malefactor, it would not grieve me to be used thus.

Answer.

YEa then should it most of all grieve you, for you could not have so much
comfort, and Gal. 6.14.
joy in your sufferings, having deserved the same: whereas now being innocently
condemned, you may rejoice in your afflictions, 1. Pet. 4.13
in as much as you are partaker of Christ's sufferings. Look upon him and
follow his steps: Who was more honorable or mighty then he? who was very Mat.
1.23
God, even the Psalm 2.7 john 3.16
Son of God, Phil. 2.9
who being in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God.
Who was more innocent then he? ( Esaias 53.9 1. pet. 2.22 1. john 3.5
He did no sin, neither was there guile found in his mouth) even by the
confession of the Judge himself who condemned him, Pilate I mean, who Mat.
27.24
took water and washed his hands before the multitude saying, I am innocent of
the blood of this JUST MAN: look you to it. His whole life was nothing but a
perpetual suffering, wherein he was Ioh. 4.6
wearied, Mar. 21.18
hungered, and Ioh. 19.28
thirsted; he was Ioh. 2.13
banished, Mat. 11.18
slandred, and Mat. 22.46 luke 3.29
persecuted; he was Luke 4.1
tempted, he Mat. 5.2
fasted and Mat. 26.40
watched; he Mar. 6.3
labored, Luke 4.31
preached, and Luke 22.44
prayed; he Matt. 26.38
sorowed, Mar. 14.33
grieved, and Luke 22.44
sweat water and blood; yea, he that is Hebr. 7.26
holy, harmless, seperat from sinners, and made higher then the heavens, was
Mat. 20.49
betraide by Judas, Mar. 14.50
forsaken by his Apostles, Mat 26 57
apprehended by the Soldiers, without cause Mat. 27.40
exclaimed against, wrongfully Mat. 26.60
accused, and unjustly Mat. 27.24
condemned to die; being haled from Mat. 27.19
seat to seat, as if he had been some notorious Malefactor, and from Mat. 26
56
Judge to Judge, yet suffered he all things Mat. 27.2
patiently. He suffered many 1. Pet. 2.23
taunts and checkes, he was Luke 23 29
stripped, Mat. 27.28
buffeted, and Mat. 27.30
spit upon he was Luke 23.64
blindfolded, Luke 23.29
mocked, and disdainfully Luke 23.29
crowned with thorns: Mat. 27.30
He was Mat. 27.35.
he became Mat. 27.29
tormented, and Ioh. 18.25
wounded; he became Gal. 3.13.
accursed of God, Mat. 27.46
sustained his wrath at last, being the 1. Pet. 1.19.
innocent Lamb of God, being the Ioh. 1.4.
Lord and giver of life, and being the Acts 10.42
Judge of the quick and the dead, he Phil. 2.8
died a most shameful death, having Mat. 27.24
sentence thereunto at the hands of a most false Judge, a painted wall, one
that had more respect to the common applause of the malignant, than unto
justice. What christian heart can think much to suffer, being moved by this
example of him that suffered so much for his Col. 1.21
enemies? He has given us such a 1. Pet. 2.21
president, in suffering for us, as it must needs seem little whatsoever we
suffer for him. There is no greater entisement unto soue, It is a hard heart
that cannot requite love with love.
then to prevent the lover; and too hard is that heart, that if it would not
request love, is not content at the least to require it: where was ever any
that either sought so much, or bough so dear, the love of any creature, as
Ioh. 15.13 galat. 2.20. ephesians. 5.2.
Christ did ours? What has a man more then riches, honor, and life? All this
did Christ spend in winning of us; as for his riches, he that Ioh. 1.3.
created all things, was borne and died naked; concerning his honor, he that
Phil. 2.9.
thought it no robbery to be equal with God, was sorted and executed with
thieves; touching his life, he that is John 1.4
Lord of life, was bereaved thereof by a most vilde, dispitefull, and shameful
death. Shall the love of a mortal Friend, not only move us, but enforce us to
love him again? shall his perils for us make us eager of perils for him?
because thereby, both our love to him is best witnessed, and his love to us
most confirmed? and shall not this love of an immortal Lover, who tendereth us
more then our selves, and in all respects deserves to have his love
counteruailed; shall it not, I say, be able to inflame us, with desire to suffer
with him, and for him; to testify our affection, with continuing the same in
the midst of our afflictions whatsoever? Let not therefore the cross
adventures that betide you, dismay you; let not the cruelty of your enemies,
the sharpness of your miseries, the continuance of your afflictions, daunt
your courage. Follow the example of your grand Captain, who 1. Pet. 2.23
when he was reviled, reviled not again; when he suffered he threatened not,
but committed it to him that judges righteously. Why should you complain of
your bad usage, seeing your Lord and Master was thus cruelly handled? Is the
Mat. 10.24 luke 6.40. ioh. 13.16 ioh. 15.20
Disciple above his Master? or the Servant greater then his Lord? If they have
done thus to the Luke 23.31
green tree, what shall be done to the dry? If Christ having deserved
nothing, did suffer so horrible, so bitter, and so grievous torments, why
should we his servants, who have so often by our enormous sins, and wicked
deeds, offended God, and provoked his wrath against us, and so often deserved
hell; why should we, I say, repine, frown and grudge to suffer some small
punishment, seeing it be the Lords will we should do so? Yea, why do we not
suffer any temporal affliction willingly, cheerfully, and patiently?

Chap. V Comforts for such as suffer Persecution or Death for the testimony of
a good conscience in matters of Religion or Justice.
Whereof it comes that the wicked do persecute the godly. Sect. I
AS the Ship, while it roueth upon the maine sea, much like a castle, or a
commonwealth standing by it self, having all the sails hoised up, swollen
with the wind, and the banners displayed; with a very pompous and magnificent
show, daunceth and skippeth upon the waves, alluring every passenger senger to
behold, and admire her pride: but when she is come to the haven, the sails
being gathered, the banners taken in, and the ankers cast, she lies quietly in
the rode, the searchers ransake her, and force her to pay custom; then is she
little regarded or set by: Even so fares it with the children of God, when
they roued in riot, and sailed upon the swelling surges of worldly vanities,
following the tide of a consciencelesse course, ranged at their pleasure
without controllment, and had the favorable gale of authority to waft them
forwards, and the seemly sail of Honors and Pomp to make them dance and
skippe; then were they admired of the people, and esteemed as excellent
personages, honest men, and good fellows; but now yielding at length unto the
calling of God, having retired themselves into the port of a religious
Profession, of a holy and innocent conversation in the fear of God, they are
straightly searched and sacked, their sails gathered, their wind be come
boisterous and tempestuous, their glory disgraced, and themselves exposed to
infinite and innumerable calamities, and little or nothing esteemed. The Ioh.
9.6, 18.
blind-man, so long as he continued in his blindness, was never molested nor
called in question: but so soon as his eyes were opened, then both he and his
parents were presently conuented. The Ioh. 55
lame cripple that was diseased eight and thirty years, had layn long at the
Poole Bethesda, and all that while no man rebuked him; but so soon as Christ
had 8
cured him, as he did execute his commandment, the Jews 10
reprehended and rebuked him for carrying his bed on the Sabbath day. So the
devil seeks to blast our Religion and profession in the bud, The devil
envious of our weldoing.
before it grow either to flower or fruit, and therefore does he continually
persecute us, which notwithstanding is a very good sign, that we are delivered
out of his power, otherwise he would never pursue us so hotly. So then, seeing
we are in the right way, let us run on, and constantly continue our course
unto the end: they that will take the start of profession, are like wild
coltes that are frighted with shadows, seeing they fear tribulation in this
world, which indeed is but a shadow, in respect of that in the world to come.
It is not for him that will be a christian, to regard the standers and scornings
of men, or to abandon his holy profession for their sakes, seeing it is but a
slender excuse, to allege the fear of words of a subject, as a just
impediment, of not performing our duty to our sovereign. It were a great folly
of the blind, to deride and scorn others, because they see; or for the criple,
to contemn those that are sound of limbs, because they limp not: but much
more sottishness were it for a man that sees, to go blindfold, or to put out
his eyes for the blind wretches scoffing; or for the sound man to halt or
maime himself for criples sayings. He that leads an holy life, and walks
uprightly in the fear of God, is despised and scorned of him that follows
after vanity, and treads infamous paths: but Psalm 2.4
he that dwells in heaven shall laugh them to scorn, the Lord shall have them
in derision. When we give our names unto Christ, and become his Disciples,
then do we enter into a rough profession, (like a grape to the vine-presse)
that is bound to be at continual defiance and enmity, with the vanities,
pleasures, and praises of this world; and therefore, what can we look for at
the hands of the worlds friends, but hatred and persecution? The more the
waves and billows beat against the rock, the more are they broken, and turn
into a vain some or froath, and yet the rock never the weaker. So let the
malice of our Adversaries rage against us, our rock is unconquerable, if we
cleave unto it; hurt them selves they may, but cannot harm us; the Jews Acts
7.54
their hearts brast for anger, and they gnashed their teeth at Stephen, and yet
was he nothing moved or terrified at their furious spite: we must make no more
account of the obloquies and reproaches of our enemies, then this holy Martyr
did of the malice and madness of the Jews.

That we must patiently suffer persecution and affliction for Religion or
Justice sake, and why? Sect. II.
COunterfeit gold fears the touchstone; If we fear trial, it is because we
are counterfeits, full of incredulity and unbelief. If we had builded upon
the 1. Cor. 3.11
foundation Christ Jesus, 12
gold silver and precious stones, we should not be afraid that our works should
be made manifest in the day of the Lord: but being persuaded in our
conscience, that we build with hay, Ibid.
straw and stubble, we cannot choose but be timorous and fearful to come
near the fire, lest there should be any trial made of our works, or that
our faith should melt away in temptation, as wax against the Sun, and
thereby make it manifest, that it was a false and counterfeit belief. The house
that is builded on a Rock, will not fear the fall of rain and hail, or the
blasts of wind, or the beating of the waves: The medowe or field which has
sufficient moisture, will not fear the drought and heat of summer; Neither
will the tree that is planted by the water side, fear lest his leaf wither:
nor we fear the brunt and heat of persecution, if our faith be strong and
lively, especially considering how prositable and necessary they are unto us.
Affliction is Christ's liuerie.
Affliction is not only the liuerie and cognizance sance of Christ, but the
very principal and royal garment which himself was clad with in this life: A
soldier reioiceth to put on his Captains harness; and a Disciple cannot
mislike to be like his master: In vain does he claim the name of a
Christian, that will not imitate Christ. If we be christians, Afflictions must
be our coat, and Persecution our liuerie. He is an undutiful and ungracious
child that is ashamed of his Father; he is a malapert servant, that refuses
to wear his Masters liuerie: and he of all others, a most ungrateful
creature, that does not willingly and joyfully accept the liuerie of God his
master. Vriah the Hittite, when David bade him 2. Sam. 11.3
go into his house, and wash his feet, and so to take his ease, he like a
true Israelite answered, 1^
The Arc, and Israel, and Judah dwell in tents: and my Lord Ioab, and the
servants of my Lord abide in the open fields: shall I then go into mine house
to cate and drink, and lie with my wife? By thy life, and by the life of thy
soul, I will not do this thing. He thought it an odious thing, to have
better lodging than the Ark of the Lord, the Captain of the host, and his
fellow-souldiours, and therefore he lay not on a soft bed, but on the ground, 9
at the door of the kings palace: So our Arc, even our Captain Jesus Christ,
and our fellowesouldiors the Martirs, lay on the bare ground, and suffered
great afflictions and persecution; and will we look to lie and to fare better
than they did? Shall Christ lie in the manger, and we ruffle it out in our
palaces? shall he mourn in sackcloth, and we bathe in pleasure? Shall he
fighting in our defense, be wounded and crucified among thieves; and shall we
disport and so lace ourselves with fond and vain delights? Shall he be
pierced through with the sword of Gods justice for our sins, and shall we
be unwilling to suffer any thing for our selves? Oh unnatural Children that
we are! that having before our eyes the most bloody slaughter of our Savior,
we being by his blood like Pelicans younglings, revived and raised to life from
death, will not yet learn the greatness of Gods love, nor consider how
greatly we are bound unto him, and how much we ought to suffer for his sake,
that regarded not his own life, to save us. See li. 2. ca. 4. Sect 4
Whatsoever we suffer for him, it is much less then he suffered for us, so
that it is impossible for us ever to come out of his debt. Note.
We owe our selves wholly for our first making, and what can we add more for
our redeeming, especially seeing we were not soreasily redeemed, as we were
made? In our Creation Christ gave us our selves, in our Redemption he gave us
himself, thereby restoring us to our selves: Therefore thus given at the
first, and restored again when we had lost our selves, we owe our selves for
our selves; and we owe our selves twice. But now what shall we repay unto our
Lord for himself? though we could repay our selves ten thousand times, what
are we in comparison of Christ the Son of God? So then, though we had as many
lives to spend as drops of blood to shed, we could not recompense his love:
and how willing then should we be to say with Peter, Math. 26.35 mar. 14.31
Though I should die with thee, I will in no case deny thee: and with Ioh.
11.16
Thomas, Let us also go, that we may die with him. The servant for forty
shillings will hazard himself in his Masters perils, and fight his quarrels;
and the dog, an unreasonable creature, by the instinct of nature, for a bone
or a crust of bread, will run upon the sword in his Masters defense, though
the danger be never so desperate. And shall we be more unthankful than a
hireling? and more unnatural than a bruit beast? and that toward him that
has been so bountiful unto us?

That it is a blessed thing to suffer persecution for Religion or Justice sake.
Sect. III.
THe long and continual experience of Gods children subscribeth unto this
truth of the holy scriptures, Acts 14.22
that we must through many afflictions enter into the kingdom of God. This is
the Lot of the faithful. So the Hebr. 12.2
author and finisher of our faith, Christ Jesus himself was Mat. 5.48
made perfect. Into his Romans 8.29
similitude we are likewise predestinate, that we should first 2. Tim. 2.12
die with him, and then reign with him, for 2. Tim. 3.12
all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution. Let us not
refuse therefore that condition of life, in which we have the fellowship of all
the Saints of God; but let us remember, that our Master Christ has straightly
charged us, Luke 9.23 mar. 8.34
if we will be his Disciples, there is no remedy, we must needs take up his
Cross daily, and follow him. Mat. 5.10
Blessed are they (says our Savior Christ) which suffer persecution for
righteousness sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven: 11
Blessed shall ye be when menreuile you, and persecute you, and say all manner
of evil against you for my sake falsely. 22
Rejoice and be glad, for great is your reward in heaven, for so persecuted
they the Prophets which were before you. Luke 6.22
Blessed are ye when men hate you, and when they separate you and revile you,
and put out your name as evil, for the son of man's sake. 23
Rejoice ye in that day, and be glad, for behold, your reward is great in
heaven. So says Christ, who is the truth it self, and cannot lie. And so say
the Apostles after him: James 1.12
Blessed is the man that endures temtation (that is, affliction or persecution
whereby the Lord tries him) for when he is tried, he shall receive the crown
of life, which the Lord has promised to them that love him. James 5.11.
Behold we count them blessed which endure. 1. Pet. 3.14.
Blessed are ye if ye suffer for righteousness sake. 1. Pet. 4.14.
If ye be railed upon for the name of Christ, blessed are ye, for the Spirit
of God rests upon you. Wherefore, if it be a blessed thing to suffer
persecution, for the name of Christ, and for righteosnesse sake, as no doubt it
is, and that a great blessing, yea the greatest of all, to wit, everlasting
unspeakable joy and felicity in the kingdom of heaven, where we shall see God
even face to face in his glory: why then should you faint under the Cross
which God has laid on you? Why do ye not rather rejoice (as the Apostles did)
for that you are Acts 5.41
counted worthy to suffer for Christ's sake. You are brought into the stage of
Martyrdom, to fight for the crown of eternal life. Fight manfully for the
crown of salvation, take courage and patience; it is better to die a thousand
deaths, then to be separated from the Lord; if you Math. 7.32
confess Christ boldly before men in earth, Christ will confess you before
his Father which is in heaven; where Christ shall say unto you, as the man
said unto his good and faithful servant: Matthew. 25.21
Thou have been good and faithful in little, I will make thee ruler over
much: enter into thy Masters joy.

Of the benefits that the Cross or affliction brings unto us. Sect. IIII.
WHerefore should we be dismaide? and why should we fear the brunt of
persecution, or the weight of the Cross; seeing we are so many ways
comforted and eased by the same? There is Acts 14.22 gal. 6.14. luke 24.26
no way, nor path unto life, but by the cross. Oh how glorious is that Cross,
which brings the bearer of it to so glorious a end! The Cross does make
for the Romans 8.28 psalm 119.71 reuelat. 3.10
good and salvation of the Elect: it makes us happy and Matthew. 5, 10.11 iam.
5.11. 1. pet. 3.14. 1. pet. 4.14
blessed. And what greater happiness can there be, than to be at conformity
with Christ, which the Cross 1. Pet. 4.13
does work in us. The Cross brings Romans 5.3. iam. 1.2, 3.
patience, it 1. Pet. 1.7
tries our faith, it Romans 5.4.
confirms our hope, it causes us to Number. 21.7 nehem. 9.27. psalm 119.71
Esaias 26.16. Hose 6.1
acknowledge our sins, and to fly unto God for help and comfort. It makes
us to feel and to know our own imperfections, frailty, and misery, and
thereby the necessity of Gods help, protection, and succor, to supply our
wants. The Cross to Gods children is a most sure Prou. 3.11.12 hebt. 12.6 1.
pet. 2.19, 20
testimony of the love of God: and he that bears the Cross, shall have Luke
6.21 math. 5.4.
joy and comfort at the last; yea he that patiently endures the cross, shall
receive Iam. 1.12. 2. tim. 2.11. matthew. 5.12. revel 2.10
the crown which the Lord has promised to them that love him, for upon him
the 1. Pet. 4.14
spirit of God rests. He that bears the Cross, 1. Cor. 11.32
shall not be condemned with the world. By the Cross we Psalm. 119.67
learn what obedience we owe unto God. The Cross does beget in us, Psalm.
119.71
hatred and contempt of the vanities of this present life: It Acts 14.22
inuiteth and stirs us up to the meditation of the life to come: It makes
us to know our enemies, and to perceive the pestilent venom of Satan's malice
against our good and happy state: It causes us to look better to our paths,
and to Esaias 26.9
amend our lives. The Cross is the Zach. 13.9
furnace, in which God fineth and purifieth his gold: It is the mould into
which God casts his children, to frame them and to make them like the Romans
8.29
Image of his Son Jesus Christ. The Cross is the suite and liuerie that Gods
children are clothed withal, in this vale of woe and misery. And lastly, the
Cross is the earnest and beginning of all consolation and glory. How is it
then, that we fear and fly from the Cross, that is so many ways profitable
unto us? Let us be constant and firm, and fear not the blasts of persecution,
nor the storms of affliction; Let us be like unto that Matthew. 7.24
wise man, that builded his house upon the rock, which the 25
rain and wind could not beat down, because the foundation thereof was
laid sure upon a rock. Let not the winds of trial blow down our building
and faith in Christ Jesus, that firm 1 Cor. 3.11
foundation and sure Mat. 21.40
cornerstone; neither shall it (be ye sure of that) if we have builded well
and rightly as we should.

That our afflictions are foreseen and appointed by God; and therefore to be
taken in good part. Sect. V
IF you would consider three things, you would not marvel so much at your
cross and persecution: first, what you be: not counterfeits, not hypocrites,
not worldlings, not the children of satan: but Gods elect, a chosen generation,
and the children of the most high. Secondly, where you be. Not in heaven but
upon earth, not at home, but in a strange country Thirdly, amongst whom you
are. Even in the midst among your enemies, as Mat. 10.16 luke 10.3
sheep among the wolves, being assaulted on every side, on 2. Cor. 6.7
the right hand, and on the left. And now, is it marvel, that Gods children,
being in a strange cuntrie, and amongst their enemies, shall be persecuted? No
surely, it is not: neither does this your affliction come by hap hazard (as
they say) but by the good providence of God, as Christ, and his Apostles by the
same spirit foretold, saying Mat. 10.17
Beware of men (says Christ) for they will deliver you up to the counsels,
and will scourge you in their sinagogues. 18
And ye shall be brought to Governors and Kings for my sake, in witness to
them, and to the Gentiles. 21
And the brother shall betray the brother to death, and the Father the son,
and the children shall rise against their parents, and shall cause them to die.
22
And ye shall be hated of al men for my name, but he that endures to the end,
he shall be saved. Mat. 16.24
If any man will follow me, let him forsake himself, and take up his cross,
and follow me. 25
For whosoever will save his life, shall loose it, and whosoever shall loose his
life for my sake shall find it. Ioh. 16.20
Ye shall weep and lament, but the world shall rejoice, but your sorrow shall
be turned unto joy. It were infinite to cite all places of holy Scripture which
might be aleaged for confirmation hereof. I will aleage one place more out of the
Revelation, which is this. Revel. 2.10
Fear none of those things which thou shall suffer, behold, it shall come to
pass, that the devil shall cast some of you into prison, that ye may be tried,
and ye shall have tribulation ten days be thou faithful unto the death, and I
will give thee the crown of life. Here Hebr. 12.2
the author and finisher of our faith Christ Jesus, even Revel. 2.8
he that is first and last, which was dead, and is alive, exhorts and
stirs up his soldiers to be of good courage, and to prepare themselves unto
the spiritual battle: For he says, Fear not, not only by persuasions (as
earthly captains do) but by giving strength, so that let all the devils in
hell come, when he says, Fear not, we are safe enough Romans 8.31
If God be on our side, who can be against us? What an excellent consolation is
this, even to forewarne us of d^ungers to come, and to bid us shake off all
fear? The devil shall cast some of you into prison, says he, thereby showing
who is the principal author and factor of persecution, the devil: to the end
we may know, that we have not to deal with Ephesians. 6.12.
flesh and blood, but with the prince of Darkness, wherefore our weapons must
be spiritual and not carnal; for although the Magistates do seem to do it,
yet are they but the devils instruments: he sets them a work, he inflameth
their hearts, he is the bellows to blow up their wrath against the poor
members of Christ; and therefore, seeing we combat with such a captain, we
must take the Ephesians. 6.16.
shield of Faith; and the 17
sword of Gods spirit, or else we cannot fight long without some grievous
wound. But does the Lord give us up altogether into the hands and power of
the devil for our overthrow and destruction? No; that ye may be tried says
he. Oh sweet comfort! We must suffer affliction, not for any harm to us, but
for our great good and singular commodity. James 1.2
My brethren, count it exceeding joy, when ye fall into diverse temptations,
says James. Why so, a man might say? Peter answers, 1. Pet. 1.7
that the trial of your faith, being much more precious then g^lde that
perishes (though it be tried with fire) might be found unto your praise, and
honor, and golrie, at the appearing of Jesus Christ. So then we must be cast
into the furnace of afflictions, to have the dross and mixture burnt out, to
be fined, and to be made more pure, clear, and bright. Is not this a good
comfort! Who will not rejoice in that which is for his great good? yet howbeit,
we see, and feel by experience, that afflictions do us good, our frail
nature will hardly endure them Hebr. 12.11.
long, we wax soon weary, and are ready to faint, if we think them like to
continue long. How long then shall we abide in the fiery furnace of
afflictions? must we remain there a thousand or a hundred years? even this
time, being compared with eternity, seems but a moment, and indeed is but
very short. But must we continue there so long? No; we shall be afflicted for
the space of ten, not years, nor months, nor weeks, but days, You shall
have tribulation ten days (says the Lord.) Sweeter and sweeter! For ten days
(says he) thereby denotating some short continuance of time. Oh good God! will thou that the wicked be punished in hell fire for ever and ever, and that not
for trial, but for torments; and that thy children suffer, not to torment
them, but to try them; not in hell, but in this world; not the pains of hell,
but a little affliction, for such a short time; no longer than ten days? Job
1.21
Blessed be the name of the Lord. Oh, how much are we beholden unto thy
gracious and merciful goodness therefore! The Lord make us thankful for these
comforts. Now seeing the time of our trial is so short, what follows? shall
we be restored again to our former estate, liberty, and health of body? No,
What then? The Lord says, Be thou faithful unto the death, and I will give
thee the crown of life. Sweetest of all! Psalm 8.4
What is man (Lord) that thou art mindful of him, and the son of man, that
thou visitest him? Shall we be crowned kings to reign with Christ for ever
after such trial? O Blessed shall that trial be, whose end is such a blessing!
yet note, that this promise is not absolute, but depends upon a condition. If
thou continue faithful unto the death. If we fight valiantly under Christ's
banner for a while, and then faint, and be overcome, what shall it profit us?
If we put our hand to the plough and look back, what shall it avail us? Luke
9.
Such a one is not fit for the kingdom of heaven. But if we will be
conquerours, we must persevere unto the death. We must continue still, Math.
24
He that continues unto the end, he shall be saved, says Christ. If we
yield unto the enemy, if we stoop to sin, if we consent to the world, and
give place to the devil, we are not worthy to be crowned with the crown of
life.

That we ought not be dismayed at persecution, for so much as our cause is good.
Sect. VI.
THe equity of the quarrel honors the combat, and the goodness of our
cause assures us of final victory. A circumspect and wise ship-master, when
he goes to the sea, and launcheth out from the shore, laying aside the
remembrance of his wife and children, of his house and family, employeth his
body and mind, strength and wit, only to the due performance of his office, in
resisting the storms, in avoiding the dangers, and in directing his ship to
the intended haven. When we are lanched out of the port of earthly prosperity,
we must set aside all worldely cares, and display the sail of our souls
upon the maste of the cross and afflictions; we must betake us to the
tackling of constant profession of the Gospel of Christ, and keep our hand
upon the stern of godly and religious conversation; and being separated from
the world, we must lift up our eyes to heaven, and direct our course by the
motions of the stars and Planets, I mean by the examples of Christ, and
other the children of God: so having Christ for our Pilot, and the inspirations
of the holy Ghost for our gale, we may safely sail through the storms of
persecution, pass the rocks of alluring occasions, avoid the shipwreck of a
good conscience, ouercom the surges of worldly pleasure; and finally, arrive at
the haven of life, The might and malice of our enemies ought not to daunt our
courage.
and port of perfect felicity. Our enemies are mighty, their force very
great, their vantage not unknown, their malice experienced, their torments to
flesh and blood intolerable; yet our Captain has always conquered, our cause
was ever advanced, and our predecessors with the loss of their lives
confounded their adversaries. Wherefore should we have less hope of victory,
than they had? We gather our flowers of thorns, and of briers we reap our
fruit; If the staulke wound, the flower heals; if the reaping be
troublesome, the fruit will be the more delight some. We must not think that
the sea is not deep, because the shores be shallow, nor deny heaven to be
clear, because it is sometimes ouercast with clouds, nor the earth to be
fertile, because it is in some places unfruitful: so we must not think that
the harvest of a good conscience is lost, though it be interrupted with some
sorrowful showers. We are Christians, a chosen generation; we fight against
the world and Prince of darkness, a strong adversary; our quarrel is the
defense of Christ's Gospel, an honorable cause; our Captain is Christ Jesus,
a victorious champion; our banner is the Cross, a heavy burden; our armor is
patience, an unconquerable shield; our battle persecution, a sharp skirmish;
our victory death, a bitter potation; and our triumph martyrdom, a
comfortable affliction.

That their estate is very dangerous that never suffer affliction. Sect. VII.
AS it is a blessed thing to suffer persecution or affliction (as is Sect. 3
before declared) and a sure token and sign of Gods favor and love, according
to that, Hebr. 12.6
Whom the Lord loves, he chasteneth: So is it a most ruefull scourge of God,
and a token of a reprobate soul, to be suffered to enjoy continually all sorts
of delights, and to have no cross to trauerse our comforts, according to that
saying, No greater temptation than never to be tempted: Esaias 5.6
I will lay my Vineyard waste, it shall not be cut nor dug, and so shall it
wax wild, fruitless, and full of weeds. The Oxen that are designed to the
slaughter, are suffered to run and range at their will in pleasant pastures;
but those that are appointed to live, are sent to the plough, yoked, and daily
tired: Even so are the wicked given up to their own hearts desires, and
permitted to walk in their own counselles. Psalm. 81.12
They are not in trouble as other men, neither are they plagued with other men.
Therefore Psalm. 73.5
Pride is as a chain unto them, and Cruelty covers them as a garment: 6
Their eyes stand out for fainesse: 7
They have more than heart can wish. But the faithful are laden with labor,
wearied with watchings, being daily afflicted and persecuted. The Thieves live
in delights, and of other men's spoil; they wallow in wealth and pleasure, till
they be brought before the Judge: so do the wicked, till the time of their
account come: but then shall they be thrown into floods of fire: for there
shall come a judgment that shall make the wicked to wither, and the faithful
to flourish. Better it is to be chasticed with Gods children, than to be spared
and pampered with the vassailes of Satan; better to be cut and pruned with the
fruitful vines, than to be laid waste with that which is wild, and in the
end, to be quite cut down, to make fuel for the fire. When sinners be
most miserable.
Then are sinners most miserable, when they are left in their sins, without
correction. The Oak is of a stately growth, full of fair leaves, casting a
pleasant shadow; yet the fruit thereof serves but for swine. The Temples of
the Egyptians are very stately and sumptuous buildings, garnished with
variety of marbles, pleasant portraitures, and curious works, and all the
rowmes adorned and decked with gorgeous furniture, and great majesty: But if a
man go into their secret chapels, and view the god for whose honor all this
is used, he shall find some ugly viper or crocodile, or some other venomous
serpent: So is it with the men of this world, their houses are costly and
glorious; their garments and attires, fair and precious; their bodies
personable and comely: but enter into their inmost room, and consider what is
harbored therein, and you shall find within all this pomp and bravery, a
monstrous ugly creature, a sinful soul in the state of damnation, drowned in
security, and in all vice and wickedness. The fish will merrily floate, and turn
to and fro, and leap at the bait, and rejoice if he catch it; when will the
fisher pull his line, and the hook will fasten in the fishes guils, so that
the poor fish is taken: Eccl. 9.12
So are the children of men snared in the evil time, when it falls upon the
sodaeinelie: then for liberty shall they reap restraint, and for their dainty
bits, eternal torments. Wherefore God chasteneth his children in this life: and
if they cannot be won with easier remedies; medies; when he sees them run
astray, he holds them back with the hard bit of adversity, and hedgeth them
in with the thorns of tribulation. The vanities of this world cast us into
such a delightsome frenzy, and lull us so dangerously asleep, that many in a
frantike fit of licentiousness, run headlong to perdition, and while they
rejoice, they rave; and many in a careless and secure kind of life, sleep
themselves to death, like wounded wretches sleeping in their graves; and
therefore God scourges his children with the rod of tribulation, to temper and
stay the raging moodes of the frantike, and to rowse the dead sleepers out of
their lethargy* See lib. 1. Chap. 5. Sect. 2.

That whosoever will be ashamed of Christ, Christ will be ashamed of him. Sect.
VIII.
SVch was the excessive love of Christ, thirsting for the salvation of mankind,
that he has showed us his feet nailed, to attend our coming; his side open,
to give us entrance; his arms stretched out, ready to embrace us; his head
inclined, to afford us the kiss of peace; his eyes shut, to all our offenses;
his ears unstopped, to hear our petitions; his hands open, to enrich us with
gifts; and a multitude of bleeding wounds, to show us how entirely he loved,
and how dearly he bought us. But many, like the stiff-necked Jews, nothing
moved with this his excessive love, contemn all his muiting, being, not only
dull and deaf at his calling, but with sauadge and barbarous cruelty with
their spears of sin, they wound and Hebr. 6.6
crucify again to themselves the son of God, as much as in them lies. Many
are ashamed to confess Christ and his Gospel in the presence of his enemies,
and before them that have authority and bear the sway in this world; little
regarding, or rather contemning the threatenings of Christ. Matthew. 7.32
Whosoever shall confess me before men, him will I confess also before my
Father which is in heaven. 33 mark 8 28 luke 9.26 luke 12.8
But whoseuer shall deny me before men, him will I also deny before my father
which is in heaven: and that of the Apostles 2. Tim. 2.12
if we deny him, he will deny us. O let us consider this, and be not afraid
to confess Christ boldly, though it be with the danger of our liberty, or
life it self. For Christ will render vengeance to them that hated his Gospel,
they shall know whose word and truth it was, which they have so dispitefully
reproched and denied. Psalm 11.^
Upon the wicked shall he rain snares, fire, and brimstone, and stormy
tempest, this is the portion of their cup. But you that can find in your hearts
to suffer persecution for the testifying of Christ and his truth; it is a 2 Thessalonians. 1.5
sure token of the righteous judgment of God, that you may be counted worthy
of the kingdom of God, for the which ye also suffer. 6
For it is a righteous thing with God, to recompense tribulation to them that
trouble you: 7
and to you which are troubled, rest with us, when the Lord Jesus shall show
himself from heaven with his mighty Angel^: 8
In flaming fire rendering vengeance to them that do not know God, and which
obey not unto the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, 9
which shall be punished with everlasting perdition, from the presence of the
Lord, and from the glory of his power. Heaven is like unto a 2 Esdr. 7.6
city builded and set upon a broad field, full of all good things. 7
The entrance thereof is narrow, and in a dangerous place to fall, and there
is fire at the right hand, and a deep water at the left. 8
And there is but one path betwixt them, even betwixt the fire and the water,
so that there could but one man go there. 9
If this city were given unto a man for an inheritance, if he never went
thorough the peril before it, how could he receive his inheritance? Wherefore,
seeing the way is Matthew. 7.14
narrow and strait, that is, full of troubles and affliction, that leads into
heaven, that most joyful and pleasant city of everlasting life: let us not
stagger or look back, but go forwards through thick and thin, yea, even
through death it self; for it is he that leads us to our iourneyes end, it
is Death that brings us to the gate of everlasting life. Let us not be afraid
then to die; blessed is that death that leads to so joyful a end.

That worldly pleasure, wealth, etc. should not withdraw us from the
confession of the truth. Sect. IX.
Objection.

Alas! am I so foolish as to forgo so many goodly manors, such fair livings,
such costly treasures, upon a conceit only, or an opinion touching Religion!
How can I away with the loss of these pleasures which I may enjoy for a long
time, even at my hearts ease? What? Shall I cast my self wilfully away? I
obtained of late an honorable Office, and enjoyed the same for a short time:
hitherto I have got little or nothing by it; now the profit comes in, and
shall I leave that so soon which I have gotten so hardly? Oh precious jewels
and rich pearls! have I enjoyed you but for such a short time, and now must I
leave you, and know not who shall possess you! No, no, I cannot do it, I may
not, I mean not.

Answer.

SAtan suggesteth these worldly toys into your mind, to the end you should
consent unto him (who enuieth your happy estate, and would feign have you
wrapped in the same condemnation with himself) and fall down and worship not
the Lord, but the Revel. 12.3
dragon, the old serpent the devil, that great Revel. 13.1
beast and his image, and so commit fornication with the Revel. 17.3
whore of Babylon, together with the kings of the earth, with the Revel. 9.3
Locusts and other false Prophets, that you should rejoice and be pleasant with
her, and be drunken with the wine of her fornication. Shall worldly Eccl. 1.2
vanity cause you to forgo your everlasting habitation? Mar. 8.36
What shall it profit a man though he should win the whole world, and loose
his soul? Remember that 1. John 2.17
this world passes away, and the lust thereof: and that Eccl. 2.1
to take pleasure in pleasant things is vanity. In the Ocean sea, of four
ships not one does miscarrie; and in the sea of this world, of many foures not
one is saved. This world is the John 14.30 john 16.11
kingdom of Satan, what servant of god ca^ have any pleasure and delight to
live in Satan's kingdom? It is a place of banishment; can any be so unnatural
and so senseless, as not willingly to forsake banishment? Is it better to hang
always in hazard, then once to fall for felicity? We are promised, that here
we shall be persecuted and Matthew. 10.22
hated of the world; that we shall John 16.20.
weep and live in 33
sorrow, that we shall be despised, contemned, and scorned; that we shall be
vexed in body and soul: But in the next life, we are assured that our reward
is great, our joy without sorrow, and our comfort without Cross: But if we
sow in sin, what can we look to reap but misery? If vanities will be our
traffic, grief will be our gain; If we will have our life to be
delectable, our decease will be damnable: whereas on the contrary side, the
children of God sow in tears, and therefore shall they reap in joy; in earth
they have pain, and in heaven payment; their life is miserable, and their
Psalm 116 15
death precious in the sight of the Lord. They look on the world, and see it
like a sea, where many trusting to the waves, are drowned, some are beaten with
the billows against the stony rocks; others laboring to attain to the
shores, some by the help of a seely planke, some by some fragment of a broken
ship, many forced to save themselves by their only hands; and many overcome
with the surges, have yielded up the ghost; and a multitude of dead carcasses
left to the waters rage: Amongst others, they see themselves tired out, not
with the smalest storms, and their hold to be very fickle: and therefore what
greater comfort can there befall them, then to be quickly landed in a safe
port, where beholding under them, the perils escaped, they may the more rejoice
at their attained security! They look on the poor, and their life is lead in
such agony, contempt, and needines, that it makes every one to loathe it.
They behold the rich, their felicity is folly, and their joy vanity. They
consider the Potentates of the world, and they are poor in their riches,
abject in their honors, and discontented in their delights; and therefore they
h^sten to their repose, and swiftly run over the cares of this life.
Wherefore God b^st^weth temporal blessings upon us.
Again, you must understand, that God bestowed your riches, dignity, and
office (which you imagine to be such a precious thing) yea and your life also,
upon you, as loue-tokens; to give you a taste of his Love toward you, and to
win your love toward him again. Now does God try your love, whether you set
more by his tokens, or by himself. If for your tokens, that is, your livings,
dignities, and life's sake, you will forsake the Lord, and follow the world and
Satan; then will God cast you off, and give you your inheritance with Satan,
among the children of unbelief. For what is your love but a whorish love?
whereas on the contrary side, if you go on manfully, and fear not to
confess Christ, (which is not a vain conceit or opinion touching Religion;
but a full and assured persuasion of the truth of Christ's Gospel, that he is
the Son of God who came to save sinners) then for these earthly and corruptible
dross, you shall receive heavenly and incorruptible treasures: for gold you
shall have glory, for earthly manors, heavenly mansions, for silver that
perishes, solace without end; for rusty riches royal robes, mirth without me
sure: pleasure without pain, and endless joy which shall never be taken from
you. See lib. 1 Cap 4. Sect. 3.4. and 5.

Conscience in religion must not be dissembled. Sect. X.
Objection.

I will keep my conscience, faith, and religion close unto my self; I will
inwardly and privately worship God in spirit and truth: and outwardly I will
be no open medler, nor transgressour of common order; so shall I be suffered
to live peaceably: At least I will do so for awhile, until these storms of
persecution cease and be ouerpast: Now the way is foul, I cannot travel.
These storms shall have an end, weeping may abide at evening, Psalm 30.5
but joy comes in the morning; and then I will show my self, and be zealous
and forward in my profession.

Answer.

O abominable devise! O palpable blindness! you are called in question for
your conscience, Conscience in religion not to be dissembled.
to render a 1. Pet. 3.15
reason of your faith, and to confess Christ; and how can you be a keeper and
an obseruer of the common order? Peradventure you will say, I will deny Christ
with my tongue, and confess him with my heart. But that will not serve the
turn: If Dan. 3.18
Shadrach, Meshac, and Abednego had done so, and followed your wicked devise,
Nabuchad-nezzar had not 28
confessed the power of God. A man must not 1. King. 18.21
halt between God and Baal; for God abhors two men in one. Christ will not
part the spoil with his mortal enemy the Devil, either he will have all,
or loose all. He will not permit you to serve the Devil with your body, and
he stand contented with your heart and soul: But he will be glorified both
in your bodies and in your souls. Our bodies 1. Cor. 6.13 15, 20
are for the Lord, and we must Matthew. 22.37
love him with all our heart, with all our soul, and with all our mind. God
created, not only the soul of man, but also the body, and requires the
service and obedience of both: he will not only look upon the soul, but
will also behold the qualities and the actions of the body. He made all, he
has bought all, he has 1 Pet 1.19
dearly paid for all; and therefore good reason it is, that he 1. Cor. 6.20
require all. He will have both heart and hand, mind and tongue, body and
soul: therefore stand to it stoutly, and fear not, the victory is yours
already, if you faint not. And for that the storms are great, and the way
foul, let not that move you. For all the Prophets, Apostles, and Martyrs, had
as stormy a weather and as foul a way as you have. Yea Christ himself had no
better, but much more rough and fouler. I hope you will look for no better
then they had. Wherefore go after your Master Christ, not sticking at the
foul way and stormy weather. Eccl. 11.4
He that observes the wind, shall not sovv (says Solomon) and he that
regards the clouds shall not reap. Surely Satan suggesteth unto you, that
you should stay till the storms be ouer-past, not for your good, not that you
should not be wet to the skin, but that the time might ouerslip you, to your
destruction; for then the night will approach, that you cannot travel, or the
gates will be shut up and locked before you come, that so you might lodge
without, in a wretched and loathsome lodging; take heed you yield not unto
these deuillish motions, beware of Satan's subtilties, and give no ear to his
entiseme^ts. Hanibal when he had obtained the victory at Cannas; If he had gone
strait to Rome, by all men's judgments he had taken the city. But for so much
as he did defer it until the next day, the Romans having recovered their
force again, he was shut out and deserved to hear this opprobrie. Vincere scis
Hanibal, vti victoria nescis. In matters of faith there must be no delays.
* O Hanibal, thou know how to get the victory, but yet thou have not
learned how to use the same. If delays be thus dangerous in civil affairs,
then how much more dangerous are they in matters that concern our salvation?
We must not dally with repentance; we must not contemn the callings of God:
We must not despise the voice of Wisdom, lest when we Proverbs 1.28
call upon her she shall not answer, and seek her early, Hebr. 12.17
we can not find her. Esau shall seek Repentance, yea, even with tears, but
shall not find Repentance, no not though his heart break: Judas shall repent his
treachery, Matthew. 27.3
but shall not find the comfortable face of Repentance, no not though he Matthew.
27.5 acts 1.18
hang himself: and therefore it is not good to procrastinate and prolong the
time, lest we Ephesians. 4 30
grieve the holy spirit of Jesus, but let us boldly con^esse his name: Psalm
95.78
To day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your heart.

Against the offense taken from the yielding of timeseruers, though they be
better learned and wiser then we be. Sect. XI.
Objection.

You see many good and learned men, far better learned then I am: they recant
and yield unto the time, and they know well enough what they do; if it were
such a dangerous thing to turn, I persuade my self, they would never do it:
what need I be more scrupulous then they? Especially seeing I am not
comparable to them, either for knowledge, or experience.

Answer.

NOw indeed, while the wind of persecution is stirring, the Winower comes
with his fan in his hand, to see who is blown away like light chafe, and
who resists the blast, like massy and good wheat. That which lies hid in
the green blade of corn, is displayed in the ripe ear; that which is
concealed in the flower is uttered in the fruit. Many believers are deemed
equal, whom persecution proves of unequal faith, The constancy of the
faithful is tried by persecution.
trial shows what was hid in the blade, and what concealed in the flower:
Matthew. 7.20 matthew. 12.33
by their fruit you shall know them, says our Savior. Many flowers promise
abundance of fruit, but when they are put to their proof by storms of wind,
very few persevere to their full growth; so many seem faithful in the calm
of the Church, but when the blasts of trial do bluster against them, few are
found to bring forth fruit.

The skill of the Pilote is not known until the tempest arises, neither the
Captains courage till the war begins, nor the true profestors of the
Gospel till the persecuter rages. Persecution is the shovel which purges the
Lords floor, fanning the confused heap of Believers and Infidels, and
seuering the corn of the faithful professors, from the chafe of faithles
deniers. This is the water, at which our heavenly Judge. 7.5
Gideon tries, who are fit soldiers to discomfit the host of Midian, and he
seuereth those which shall bow down their knees, for greedines and thirst of
worldly vanities, from such as reach with their hand, so much only as their
necessity requires; of whom 7
the Lord said, By these three hundred men that lapped will I save you. Those
learned men (whom you speak of) are these greedy guts, and those Judge. 7.3
Knowledge without Faith and Constancy in practice, how vain it is.
timorous soldiers, whose hearts fainted, they are blinded by the malice of
Satan, destitute of the spirit of God, and true knowledge. The knowledge they
boast of, is ignorance, the learning they pretend themselves to have, is
madness, and the Religion whereof they seemed to make so much profession, was
but hypocrisy; and therefore their wisdom is like 2. Sam. 11.14
Vriahs letters which he carried against himself: for it leaves them without
excuse, and witnesses against rheir own souls, because they knew their Luke
12.47
Masters will, and did it not. Follow you not their steps, and tread not in
their paths, lest you be overtaken and beaten with many stripes. You are one
of them (though unlearned, if you will be constant) of whom Christ rejoiced,
thanking his Father, saying, Matthew. 11.25
Father, Lord of heaven and earth, I thank thee that thou have hid these
things from the wise, and men of understanding, and have revealed them to
babes; even so Father, because it pleased thee. Look not what this man or that
man does, but look still, and behold the mark you shoot at, or else you
loose your game. He which runs at the gleue, looks not on the standers by,
he goes not this way or that way, but keeping his straight course, beholds
the gleue, and looks on them that run after him, that they overtake him
not, and hasteneth to ouerrake them which be before him. So must we do, we must
leave looking on them that will not run with us, the race to heavenly bliss,
by the path of persecution; but we must march on forwards, and hasten after our
fellow-souldiours, still looking on the gieue, that is, Hebr. 12.2
Jesus Christ, the author and finisher of our faith, who for the joy that was
set before him, endured the Cross and despised the shame, and is set at the
right hand of the throne of God. Care not for the fury of the persecutors,
despise the rage of the persecuting Priests, the Ministers of the Devil; and
call to mind, that it is the part of christians to be persecuted, but to
persecute the Christians, it is the very office of Pilate and Caiphas.

That though the world condemn us for fools and too nice, yet we must not
take the start of profession. Sect. XII.
Objection.

The ignorant do condemn us, they think it folly to stand so much upon
points and terms, and to make so great account of gall: many muse at our
madness, that most willingly feed on Samsons honny-comb, when it is taken out of
the Lions mouth; they wonder at our niceness, and precize scrupulositie, that
we refuse to do like other men, whom they say to be as good as we.

Answer.

WE must not regard the Sardoicall laughters, or rauing scoffs of the wicked;
a sensual man Romans 8.5
understands not the things that be of God. One that knows not the virtue
of herbs, when he walks in the fields or valleys, without any regard,
treads underfoot whatsoever grows in his way, making no more account of
one herb then of an other. But if he come into a Physicians house, where he
sees many, not only wholesome herbs. but to his thinking, strong and
unsavory weeds, he nevertheless conceiueth that there is some secret virtue
in them, to cure diseases: and if he see the experience of their operation,
much more accounts he of them; so that whereas before he trampled with
contempt upon them, now he would be as careful to gather them: So one that
knows not the virtue, joy, and honor of the cross, of chains and prisons
for the testimony of a good conscience, despises and abhors them as
contemptible and dishonorable things, and laugheth at such as embrace them:
But if he come once to the school of our heavenly Physician, Psalm 34.8
and taste how sweet the Lord is, and there see and view the strange operation
of these things, (which now so much he contemns) not only in Christ
himself, but in John Baptist, in Paul, and others; then can he not choose but
have them in great estimation, and be ready, if occasion serve, to try the
force of them in his own self, if need require, howsoever the ignorant judge
of them as unprofitable and unsavory weeds, and badges of disgrace. We know,
or may know, that the flower of Iesse gave forth his most pleasant sent, and
came to his full growth in this world upon the Cross. We know that the fruit
of life was not gathered without thorns, and we know that gall was given in
extremity to the most experienced and perfect taster, and that the honnycombe
was not eaten till after his resurrection, when it was in a manner, fetched out
of the Lions mouth, whom he had by his death victoriously foiled. If two keys
were offered us, the one of gold set with Diamonds, rubies, and pearl,
curiously wrought, and hanged by a chain of great price; the other of old
rustie Iron, unhandsome, and shapelesse to behold, tied in a rotten coard; and
yet this the true keie to infinite treasure, and the other to a sink of
despair; which of these two keys were in reason to be desired? This rustie
keie is affliction and persecution: the golden keye is worldely prosperity: by
the key Acts 14.22
of trouble and affliction we enter into heaven: and this other key, is the
Reuelat. 9.1
key of the bottomless pit: for many have gold and silver in abundance, and
yet are reprobates and wicked cast-awaies. Christ allotted to his children, the
cross, to the repentant thief, Paradise; to the sinner, heliwe are the
children of God; let us embrace the cross; let us acknowledge our profession,
and not be ashamed of our inheritance, which Christ has allotted unto us. We
must say with Paul, Galat. 6.14
The world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world. See Sect. I.

That imprisonment for the testimony of a good conscience, is not thraldom or
bondage, but rather liberty and freedom. Sect. XIII.
Objection

Oh, but the Prison is fulsome and loathsome, liberty is sweet and pleasant.
Who can abide to be pestered with such close air? Who can endure to sit in
the stocks both day and night in a dark dungeon all alone, without ease or
rest? eating the bread of affliction, and drinking the cup of care and sorrow?
to sit still moping al day long without either light or fire?

Answer.

THe birds being used and naturally delighted with the full scope of the air,
though they be never so well fed in the cage, yet are they always poring at
every creuise or crannie, to see whether they can get forth and escape; for
they understand not, that in the cage, they are safer from the kite, hawke, and
fowler, then abroad: neither mark they the benefit of their assured repair
from hard weather and worse food. So many, bearing the liuerie of Christ's
name, do affect dangerous liberty, making no account of the benefit of a
prison in a good cause; they consider not how many perils of their souls are
cut off by imprisonment; nor perceive how highly their spiritual welfare is
advanced. Let us not be like senseless birds, but let us rather immitate them
in another property, which is, that in the cage, they not only sing their
narural note, both sweetlier and oftener then abroad, but learn also diverse
other far more pleasant and delightsome. So must we both keep and oftener
practice our accustomed exercises of Religion, and besides, learn other more,
both for our own comfort, and the example of others. When may we better give
our selves to prayer and meditation, then when we are sequestered from the
distractions of vain company; when the Exodus 16.3. number. 11.14
onyons, garlike, and fleshpots of Egypt, are farthest out of our sent and
sight; When our eyes be not troubled with impious and wicked sights; when our
ears are not annoyed with the bloody outcries and horrible blasphemies of
profane men; when we are quit from many scandals, and severed from occasions
of diverse temptations? If the Prison restrain us of temporal comforts, we
shall obtain eternal: if our body be chastised, our soul is cherished; the
pining of the one, (in this case) is the pampering of the other. The world a
more dangerous and loathsome bondage unto the children of God, than the prison.
If we compare the world with this prison, we shall find rather that we are
delivered out, then committed into prison. The darkness of the world blinds
and inueagleth the very hearts of men; this does blind but our eyes only:
The chains and shackles of the world do fetter and entangle our souls;
these, our bodies only, they set our souls at liberty. Worldly stocks and
snares do captiuate the conscience; these our body only. The odor and
stench that the world breaths, is ribaldrie, carnalitie, blasphemy, and all
kind of brutish behavior, which infecteth and poisoneth the mind: this our
body only. The world has infinite multitudes of prisoners and guilty
persons, which shall be 2. Cor. 5.10 romans 14.10
judged before the tribunal seat of Christ Jesus, and receive the sentence of
condemnation: but we are translated from that prison into a place of
preservation, which if it be cumbred with darkness, we have Christ the true
light to enlighten us: and if here we be affrighted with expectation of
Judges, our selves hereafter shall 1. Cor. 6.2
judge the Nations. Let them complain of the difficulties of the prison, that
have fastened their affections upon worldly vanities: Let them complain of
darkness, whose light is the world; and let them complain of bondage, whose
death it is to be restrained from worldly pleasure. But the Galat. 6.14
world is crucified unto us, and we unto the world; Our darkness is cleerer
than the light of the world, and brighter than the sun it self; and we are
at liberty in the spirit, to serve our Redeemer in truth and righteousness.
Kings courts must yield to the glory of a prison: For as the Princes presence
honors the basest cottage, and makes it more esteemed and resorted unto,
than the most stately buildings: So the presence of Gods prisoners in the most
infamous dungeo^, makes it a stately Court, a resort of Angels, and a Paradise
where God himself delights to walk (who takes pleasure in the patience and
constancy of his afflicted servants:) and they by those fetters and chains
are more richly adorned, than they could be with any princely or imperial
robes. It was a singular favor to be an Apostle, an Evangelist, it was a great
prerogative to be rapt into the third heaven, to hear such things as are
unlawful for man to speak, and it was a rare privilege to speak with
strange tongues, and to heal al manner of diseases: yet not like unto these:
He was whipped with many stripes, cast into prison, and stoned for the
testimony of Christ: Insomuch, that the apostle, for the former prerogatives,
had the 2. Cor. 12.7.
Angel of Satan sent to buffet him, lest he should wax proud with the
multitude of revelations: But for those excellent privileges he breaks out
in exceeding joy, saying Galat. 6.14
God forbid that I should rejoice but in the Cross of Jesus Christ, whereby
the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world: as did the other
Apostles, who Acts 5.41
reioiced that they were counted worthy to suffer rebuke fot Christ's name.
Great Princes and Noblemen, when from inserior dignities they are enhaunced to
more honorable titles, they always in their letters, omitting the other, set
down their principal style, proper to their new achieved preferment: Even
so did the Apostle Paul, for he writing unto Philemon, omitteth his usual
style of Romans 1.1 1. cor. 1.1 2. cor. 1.1. etc.
Paul the Apostle (or servant) of Jesus Christ, and begins his Epistle with
Philem. verse 1.
Paul a prisoner of Jesus Christ, as being a more glorious title, and a more
excellent style. Wherefore, let us not be dismayed, but comforted in our present
estate. If we be despised by the bad, we are honored by the good; if men
disgrace us, the Lord will praise us. Now let the worldely gallants flatter
themselves with the vain conceit of liberty, let them triumph in their
chains of gold, in their jewels of pearl and precious stones, in their
stately robes and costly attires. Let them boast of their freedom, when every
thread and ornament about them is a manifest sign of their captivity, when
their tongues are thral to potentates ears, their actions and behavior framed
to the liking of great personages eyes, and their sense, bodies, and minds,
servile to their own sensuality. As for us, a thousand times hapie are we,
whose prisons are proofs, whose chains are pledges of immortality. Let us
remember the gole, and we shall comfortably run over the race. Let us not
regard so much where we are, as where we shall be; nor think so much of the
comforts we want, as of the comforts we shall have. Let us not grieve at the
company from which we are barred, but rejoice in that whereunto we are
prepared.

That increase of torments should not fear us, but rather comfort us the more.
Sect. XIIII.
Objection.

Oh my affliction daily increases, I was roughly dealt withal heretofore, and
hardly entreated: But now my sorrows increase, my adversaries rage the more,
my Keepers do me all the spite and injury they can: food is kept from me,
save only what I am permitted to have, to keep breath in me, for my greater
torment: I am kept in a close dungeon, laden with more iron then I can bear.

Answer.

IF a thou be faint in the day of adversity, thy strength is small, says
Solomon. As long as the lion has his prey in his paws, he can dally and play
with it, but if he see any offer of escaping from him, then forthwith he fixes
his claws in the flesh: So the devil little cares, to bite or bark at
those, that be his household servants, until such time as they begin to wax
strangers unto him, and the more he sees them to rebel against him, the more
endeavors he to overthrow them; for such he little cares to molest, of whom
he finds himself in quiet possession. Exodus 14.9
Pharao never persecuted the Israelites so fiercely, as when they were going
out of Egypt. Genesis 31.23
Laban never pursued Jacob, till he departed from him Holofornes said unto
Judith, Judith 11.1
I never hurt any that would serve Nabuchodonozor the king of all the earth.
The Pirates, while they know the ship to be empty, they let it quietly pass,
but when it is furnished with rich merchandise, then they assault it with all
violence: so, while men run by an irreligious and ungodly path the highway to
destruction, the devil lets not their course; but when they are enriched
with grace, and lead an holy and harmless life, he straight gives the onset
with tribulation. The Thief comes not into sties and kennells to seek his
prey, for he knows there is nothing to be found but mire and filth: but his
haunt is to the rich chests and coffers of jewels and plate. They that have
nothing in them but sin and wickedness, lie open always unto Satan, and he
knows they have nothing in them worth the robbing: But those that cleanse
their souls from sin, and fill their coffers with the jewels of godliness
and virtue, are a prey that he longs to get. He well knows that such as are
out of Gods favor, may be won without strokes, and that he is able with
every push to lay them groueling in what sin himself lists: But when he
finds one, endowed with grace, and armed with godliness against his
encounters, upon him he comes with sad blows, and by all sleights and
violence endeavors to overcome him. A paper-w^ll he breaks with one knock,
but when he finds a strong rampire or bulwark, there he planteth his
battery, and uses all possible engines to overthrow it: But alas his force is
but feeble, his engines too weak, and his policy very shallow, to batter down
the Adamant rock of Faith, and therefore he does but spurn against a thorn.
Only let us be faithful and of a good courage, for our Captain is faithful,
(he 1. Cor. 10.13
will not suffer us to be tempted above that we be able to bear it) and
courageous, he has conquered death, hell, and satan for us already: if we
will not faint nor turn back, he will also conquer them in us. Let not the
violence or multitude of torments affright us, we have but one life, and we can
loose but one. 1. Sam. 17.49.
Goliath was as much hurt by David's little stone, as Judge 16.30
Samson by the weight of a whole house: 1. Sam. 4.18
Eli had as much harm by falling backward, as 2. King. 9.33
Iesabel by being thrown out of a high window; and they that stoned Acts
7.59.60.
Stephen to death, took no more from him, then an ordinary sickness did from
John 11.14
Lazarus, and does daily from us all. One death is no more death then another,
and as well the easiest as the hardest takes our life from us. And indeed our
torments (how great and grievous soever) can not be so great, nor so grievous
as those which the Saints of God in former ages suffered. Of the fathers of
the old Testament the Apostle says, that some Hebr. 11.35
were racked; 36
and others tried by mockings and scornings, by bonds and imprisonm^nt: 37
They were stoned, hewne a sunder, tempted, slain with the sword; they wandered
up and down in sheep skins and goatskinnes, being destitute, afflicted, and
tormented. 38
Whom the world was not worthy of: they wandered in Wildernesses and
mountains, and dens, and e^ues of the earth. And in the time of the Primitive
Church the godly were thrust out of their houses, spoiled of their patrimony,
The affl ctions and persecution of the Christians in the Primitive church.
loaded with yrons, and locked in prisons, devoured by wild beasts, slain with
the sword, and burned with fire. There can hardely be invented any cruelty, or
new torments, which these holy Martyrs have not endured. They were beheaded,
burned, hanged, pressed to death, roasted on spits, broiled upon gridyrons,
boiled in hot oil and in scalding lead, thrown down from high mountains
upon sharp stakes, torn with wild horses, rent a sunder with the violence of
bowed trees, thrown to the beasts, condemned to toil in the mettall-mines,
thrust through with spears, brained, racked, pricked with pen-kniues, their
eyes boared out, their tongues cut, their arms, hands, their legs and
feet, and al their members disfigured with variety of punishments, their
bowels dismembered, and themselves famished to death. Yet they feared no death,
they were dismaide at no cruelty; The Patience and Constan^ie of the
Christians.
the tormented stood stronger then the tormentors, and their beaten and torn
members, overcame the beating and tearing hooks: and what is it that we
suffer, if it be compared with their sufferings? Even nothing, or very little.
And why should we fear man, that are feared of the Angels, for we shall judge
the very Angels, that are feared of the devils; for over the devils we have
received authority, yea that are feared of the whole world, for we shall judge
the world? Let us therefore, with our whole might, arm us unto this cumbate:
the Persecutors when they wound us most, are deepliest wounded; and when they
think most of al to be conquerors, then are they most conquered; for we shall
walk upon the Basiliske and adder, and stamp underfoot the lion and the
dragon. See lib. 2. Chap. 3 Sect. 3.

That God loves us never the less though he suffer us to taste of his cup;
but rather that he does the more love us. Sect. XV.
Objection.

The Lord permits others to live at ease in prosperity, they have the world
at will, they want not the comforts of this life, and yet it is certain that
God loves them as his own children, (being so indeed) and that with no less
affection, than he does them whom he scourges with adversity: alas! I would,
if it had pleased the Lord, so that he would spare me for this time; specially
considering how unfit every way I am for the trial.

Answer.

We are ever prone to pry into the state and condition of other men, (such is
the perverseness of our nature, and the weakness of our faith) that we
wholly forget or neglect our own. We judge every man's case ever better than
ours, and suppose that all others have the world at will (as they say) saving
our selves: Whereas indeed, there is no child of God, that is always without
his cross (either inward or outward) for how else could that saying of Christ
be verified, John 16.20.
In the world you shall have sorrovv: howbeit the temptation of one is greater
and heavier than of another? As it can of no reasonable man be construed but in
good part, to bind and keep in awe, yea to whip and beat the madman, when
he falls into his rage, likewise to pinch, nip, and wring, yea with hot
irons to burn the sick of the lethargy, when he enters into his deep
sleep: So it cannot be thought, but that God does the part of a merciful
father, when with the scourges and hot irons of affliction, he either
corrects our former, or preuenteth our future infirmities. Not every one that
spares, is our friend, nor every one that strikes, is our foe. Proverbs 27.6
The wounds of a lover are faithful. He that binds the Frantic, or
wakeneth the sick of the lethargy, though to both troublesome, yet to both is
he very friendly. As a mother desirous to affectionate her child to her self
above al other, makes all of her household to use it currishly in show, that
finding no good entreatie of any but of her, it may the willinger repair unto
her: So God suffers us of the world, the flesh, and the devil, to be
molested, that we may only acknowledge him, and come unto him, as our chief
refuge and succor. The devil kisseth where he means to hurt, he tempereth
poison in a golden bole, and in a sumptuous ship, wafteth his passengers upon
the rocks of destruction. But God takes a contrary course; for as the
husbandman does lop the vine, lest all the force should unprofitably be spent
in leaves, and the root be thereby weakened, the fruit be, neither so much,
nor so pleasant, as otherwise it would so God like a careful keeper of our
souls, lest our whole mind should be employed in vain superfluous pleasures,
he cutteth them from us, that our wits which should in them without profit be
defused, being kept within compass by troubles, may be fitter to work and
bring forth fruits of faith to the working of our eternal salvation. Where
God purposes to heal, he spares not to lance, he ministers bitter sittops
to purge corrupt humors; and sends embassies of death and revenge where he
means to bestow eternal life and perfect felicity. Genesis 42.9
Joseph accused his brothers as spies, when he meant them least harm, and
restrained little Gen 44.15
Benjamin as guilty of theft, whom he knew full well to be a guiltless
innocent. He that had seen Genesis 39.20
Joseph in prison. Hester 5.14
Mordecai with his gibbet before his eyes, and Dan. 6.16
Daniel in the lions den, would have lamented their case and feared their
further misfortune: But had he known that Joseph's prison should end in a Genesis
41.40.
princedome, Mordecai his peril in Hester 6.10
royal preferment; and Daniels danger in Dan. 6.26
great credit, he would rather have thought them much beholding to God for
their ensuing felicity, then greatly to be pitied for their present
distress. The Lord oftentimes besetteth his sweet fruit with rugged leaves,
with sharp and pricking thorns, that the hardness to attain them, may make
them the more prized, and the remembrance of former adversity, may make the
comforts following more delightsome. The benefit of a calm weather is most
desired, and best welcome after a boisterous tempest; health is never so much
esteemed as after a great sickness; and al pleasure is most pleasant to those
that have bin least acquainted with it, and most troubled with the contrary.
Proverbs 27.7
Unto the hungry soul every bitter thing is sweet, says Solomon. Grieve
not at your persecution then, and say not, I am unfit for the trial: for if
the Potter tempereth his furnace agreeable to his vessel, that he minds to
frame: If the Goldsmiths uses great care, not to have his fire too great or
too little, for the quantity of his metal. If the Carrier have a regard not
to load his beast with more then it is able to bear: How much more wary is
God, in not suffering us to be tempted above our strength? But if our
temptations increase, he is faithful, and 1. Cor. 10.13
will not suffer us to be tempted above that we be able, but will even give the
issue with the temptation, that we may be able to bear it.

That burning alive is not so extreme a torment as commonly it is thought to
be. Sect. XVI.
Objection.

The bitterness of the punishments, that I am enioined to suffer, does so
terrifyme, that I know not scarce what to do, I shall be burned quick. Oh,
how sh^^l I be tormented, in that dolorous kind of death! Think you that I may
patiently bear the rage of the fire? I am persuaded that my pains shall be
so grievous, that I cannot either keep my mind quiet and patient, or remember
and think on Christ, so that in that anguish and agome, I shall quite forget
my Savior: And what shall become of me then? How can I resist the temptations
of Satan? who then (no doubt) will be very busy about me.

Answer.

CIcero, an heathen Philosopher, says, that in India, when any man was dead,
and his carcass ready to be burned; his wines (for there they had many
wives) contended among themselves, who should be burned with him. And she
whom he loved best, having vanquished the rest, was cast quick into the fire
with the body of her dead husband, and burnt; the other being full of sorrow,
for that they were overcome, departed with great moan and lamentation, wishing
rather to have been burnt, then to live. And shall we be afraid of burning,
seeing we are certain of that which they hoped for? Die once you must, whether
you will or no, (how soon, God knows) seeing then you must die, will you not
die willingly for Gods sake, especially considering that they are thrice
happy, whom God vouchsafes such an honorable death? Shall not we for Gods
sake suffer that which diverse Pagans suffered for their countries sake? Curtius
feared not to die for the city of Rome, Mencotheus for Thebes, nor Codrus for
Athens. These heathnish examples might make Christians ashamed, if they be so
cowardly as to fear death. Burning is not such a grievous punishment as you
imagine, for God is 1. Cor. 10.13
faithful, he will lay upon us no more than we can bear. Esaias 43.1
Fear not (says the Lord by Esaias the Prophet) for I have redeemed thee, I
have called thee by thy name, thou art mine: 2
when thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee; and through the
floods, that they do not ouerflow thee. When thou walk through the very
fire, thou shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee (for
thy destruction) 3
I am the Lord thy God. And for the better confirmation hereof, many examples
both ancient and late might be alleged, only I will content my self with
one or two, which happened in these latter years, in the time of king Henry
the eight, and Queen Marie. M. James Bainham, holy Martyr, Acts and Mon. part
2. page 939 of the last edition. Col. 2
having sentence to be burned, for the constant confession of Christ Jesus and
his Gospel, as he was at the stake (in the year of our Lord, 1532) in the
midst of the flaming fire, his arms and legs being half consumed, spoke these
words: O ye Papists, behold, ye look for miracles, and here now ye may see a
miracle, for in this fire I feel no more pain, than if I were in a bed of
dowlne; but it is to me a bed of roses. In like manner, in the time of Queen
Marie, M. Thomas Hawks, Acts and Mon. page 1446. Col, 26
a faithful servant of Christ and holy Martyr also, having judgment to be
burned for the same cause: At what time he should be burnt, some of his
familiar friends, being terrified and feared with the sharpness of the
punishment that he was going to, privily desired, that in the midst of the
flame, he would show them some token (if he could) whereby they might be
more certain, whether the pain of such burning were so great, that a man might
not therein keep his mind quiet and patient: which thing he promised them to
do, and so secretly it was agreed, that if the rage of the pain were
tolerable, and might be suffered, then he should lift up his hands above his
head toward heaven, before he gave up the ghost. Now then, when he was at the
stake, and the fire set unto him; In which when he continued long, and when
his speech was taken away by violence of the flame, his skin also drawn
together, and his fingers consumed with the fire, so that now al men thought
certainly he had been gone, suddenly, and contrary to all expectation, the
blessed servant of God, A token given in the fire, that burning is not so
intolerable a pain as men commonly think.
being mindful of his promise before made, reached up his hands burning on a
light fire (which was marvelous to behold) over his head to the living God,
and with great rejoicing (as seemed) struck or clapped them three times
together. At the sight whereof there followed such applause and outcrie of the
people, and especially of them which understood the matter, as the like has
not commonly been heard. And so the blessed Martyr of Christ straightway
sinking into the fire, gave up his spirit, in the year 1555. June. 10 By these
examples, among a thousand which might be alleged, you see that burning is
not such extreme pain, as you took it, and so must we think of all other
worldly torments whatsoever.

That the patience of the Saints in not Stoicall Indo^encie. Sect. XVII.
Objection.

Me thinks by your allowance of the former of these two examples you alleged,
that you allow of stoical indolencie; for you seem unto me to require ^uch
cheerfulness of us, as should take away all sense and feeling of grief and
bitterness: I do not think indeed, that any of the Stoikes themselves, (no
not the seuerest Censurer among them) were so deuoyde of affections, as they
would have other men to be.

Answer.

WHat the Stoikes held, or how they were affected, it skilleth not us to know.
I alleged the example of M. James Bainham, to this end, to set forth the love,
mercy, and faithfulness of God toward his children; for one while he
delivers them out of trouble, an otherwhile he lets them taste of Christ's
cup, yet he stands at their elbow (as it were) to comfort them, and to Jude
verse 9
rebuke satan; who now especially, tooth and nail, seeks by all means
possible, to devour the poor innocent Members of Christ, who through many
afflictions, do labor very earnestly, to enter into the kingdom of heaven.
But whether they do suffer or not, the Lord is ever 1. Cor. 10.13
faithful toward them that love him, and turns all things to the Romans 8.28
best unto them. I utterly dislike and condemn that blockish conceit, that
would have men to be without all affection; howbeit of late it has been newly
furbished, by certain vpstarte Stoikes. Affection does rule all our actions.
For Pleasure and Grief do rule our actions, and there is no man, but either
affects or eschueth things for the one or the other. In the sea, if the winds
blow not, the ships are constrained to lie still, being not able to stir
from the place where they are: So our nature, if all affections cease, cannot,
nor shall not be able to turn either to the right hand, or to the left, no
more than if we were in a palsy, which takes away the use of our whole body.
Wherefore Plato in Philebo.
Plato called them the sinews and strings of the mind: giving us to
understand, that as the body is moved and guided by the sense, so is the mind
moved and ruled by affection: and Plut in Tract. de virt. moral.
Plutarch says, they are the handles of Philosophy, for men would never love
it, if they had not some sparks (as it were) of some shame, desire,
reputation, ambition, pleasure, or sorrow, which stir them up thereunto. I
know they object that these affections are the causes why we fall into diverse
vices; Objection.
If there were no love, there would be no lovers. But these men do as they
did, who maintained, Answer.
that we never ought to ride post, for that some have catched falls thereby;
or that we must not sing, because sometime we fall into discord. Must we cut
off the leg, because it halteth? so, must we take away all affections of
nature, because they allure us unto vice? Nay, rather if we feel our
affections ouer-strong and forcible, we must keep them under, that they
trouble us not, tempering them with reason, and not clearly extinguishing the
same. But to come nearer to the matter, and our purpose: To bear the cross
patiently, is not to be altogether senseless, What it is patiently to bear
the cross.
and utterly bereft of all kind of feeling; seeing our Savior himself, not in
words only, but with his own example also, utterly condemned this Stoicall
indolencie. For he John 11.33
groaned and 35
wept, both at his own, and other men's calamities, and taught his Disciples to
do the like, John 16.20.
Verily, verily, I say unto you, that you shall weep and lament. And lest any
man should blame them for weeping, he pronounces them happy; Matthew. 4
Blessed are they that mourn, and Luke 6.22
weep. And no marvel, for if tears be misliked, what shall we think of the
Lord himself, who oftentimes wept? If al fear proceeds of unbelief, what
shall we judge of that horror wherewith Christ himself was stricken? If we
mislike all sorrow and sadness, how can we like of that, where the Lord
confesses that his Matthew. 26.38
soul is heavy to the death? Thus I speak, to the intent I might revoke
godly minds from desperation, lest they cease to seek after patience, because
they cannot utterly shake off the natural motions of heaviness and sorrow;
which must needs happen to them, which of patience do make a kind of
senselessenesse, and of a valiant and constant man, a senseless block, or
stone, without passions. The scripture does praise the Saints for their
patience, while they are so afflicted with the sharpness of persecution, as
that thereby their courage is not utterly quailed, nor themselves faint and
comfortles, but filled with spiritual joy. We must labor to tame and bring
under, all the ill motions of our minds to the ordinance of the Lords holy will,
and not utterly to quench and shake them off.

That we must not be dismaide though friends forsake us: And how we must not
yield to their ungodly suggestions. Sect. XVIII.
Objection.

My familiar acquaintance have quite forsaken me, and they who heretofore
delighted in my company, have now conueighed themselves from me. My friends
are very earnest with me, both day and night to relent, and to revoke my former
confession: I am very loath to displease them in any thing, rather I will
indaunger my self, than anger the^. And surely if I should persist and hold
out (no doubt) I should bring my Fathers hoare head with sorrow to the grave,
and that before his time, he would take the matter so grievously.

Answer.

IT is the property of the devil and his instruments, to feed like storkes
upon the venomous and evil affections of men: they only take pleasure to see
us in sin; but if we amend and betake our selves to some better course, then
they rejoice at our calamities. As ravens and vultures, straight smell out a
dead carrion, when it is corrupted, and draw unto it, by the unsavory stench,
wherein their delight is, but the sound bodies, they neither sent nor seek
out: so the wicked are ready to flock about us, so long as we are in the
stench of sin, and corrupted with vice, because they themselves delight
therein. But if we be sound and whole, and have cast from us that carrion
whereof they are so eager, they neither smell us, nor seek unto us, but rather
avoid and hate us. The savor of godliness strikes them dead; and though in
the winter when the vine is bare they could lie under it, yet in the spring
when it begins to flower, they like serpents are stricken dead with the sent
thereof, and therefore what marvel is it if they mortally hate it? As for your
friends, who (you say) labor to have you revoke your former confession:
answer them as Christ answered Peter in the like case. Matthew. 16.23
Get thee behind me Satan: Thou art an offense unto me, because thou
understand not the things that are of God, but the things that are of men:
for herein they are your foes. Now the Lord has opened your eyes, and
enlightened your heart, that you might know the truth: and will you against your
own conscience deny the known truth? Ah, do it not, lest thereby you
displease God, and fall into his hands, which is horrible to Hypocrites. Matthew.
10.33 luke 12.9
Whosoever (says Christ) shall deny me before men, him will I also deny
before my father which is in heaven. Mar. 8.38. luke* 9.26.
Whosoever shall be ashamed of me and of my words, among this adulterous and
sinful generation, of him shall the son of man be ashamed also, when he
comes in the glory of his father with the holy Angels. Forget not these
things, but consider of them. If your friends will be displeased and angry at
your constancy in the truth, remember that Christ said, Matthew. 10.34 luke
12.51
think not that I am come to send peace into the earth, I came not to send
peace, but the sword; Matthew. 10.35 luke 12.53
For I am come to set a man at variance against his father, and the daughter
against her mother, and the daughter in law against her mother in law:
wherefore it is no marvel if you be at odds with your friends and kinsfolks.
You say, you may not displease your father, you love him so well. But Christ
says, Matthew. 10.3^
He that loves father or mother better then me, is not worthy of me. Luke
14.26
If any man come unto me and hate not his own father and mother, etc. he
cannot be my Disciple. We must not for the love of Parents or friends deny or
dissemble the truth of Christ's Gospel: for Hebr. 6.4
it is impossible that they which were once enlightened, and have tasted of the
heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the holy Ghost: 5
and have tasted of the good word of God, and of the powers of the world to
come: 6
If they fall away should be renewed again by repentance, seeing they crucify
Christ again to themselves, and make a mock of him. Hebr. 10.26
For if we fall willingly after that we have once received and acknowledged
that truth, there remains no sacrifice for sins; 27
But a fearful looking for judgment, and violent fire which shall devour
the adversaries. 2. Pet. 2.21
It had bin better for them (says Peter) not to have acknowledged the way of
righteousness, then after they have acknowldged it, to turn from the holy
Commandment given unto them. Wherefore in any case think upon your self,
and stick not boldly to confess Christ, at al times, and in all places; for 2.
Tim. 2.12
If we deny him, he will deny us.

That the pretense of nourishing wife and children, (though they have no other
means to live) is no cause why we should deny or dissemble the known truth.
Sect. XIX.
Objection.

Alas! I grant all these things to be true: yet it is commonly said,
Necessity has no law, my state and affairs are such, that I must either undo
my self and mine, or else I must needs strain, yea and do quite against my
knowledge and conscience. For you shall understand that I have many children at
home, small God wot, suckling infants, a lame, impotent, aged and sickely wife
beside. We are a great number, very poor and beggarly, having no manner of
thing wherewith to preserve our lives, but only what I get and win by my daily
labor. Now if I leave them they must needs starve for lack of food, they
cannot go to beg (if that were lawful) nor stir from the house, such is
their infirmute and weakness. Alas sir, what shall I do in this case? For God
and Nature committed the charge and care of them into my hands.

Answer.

YOur estate is lamentable, and grievous I must needs confess, yet no other
then very often happens to a godly man, the child of God. Of you and such
like spoke our Savior Christ in the Gospel, when he prophesied (among other
things) of the destruction of Jerusalem, and of the end of the world, calling
you great bellied and traveling women, and women that give suck to young
infants, saying (lamenting and not cursing) Luke 21.23 mat. 24.19. mar. 13.17
We be to them that be with child, and to them that give suck in those
days: thereby meaning all persons, (men and women) that (their necessary
affairs so letting and hindering them) cannot confess Christ boldly if need
require; nor fly from the infection, of the poisoned and pestiferous plague of
Antichrists abominations. Yet step under the veil of Gods word, there you
shall find comfort, and be resolved what to do in this case. There you shall
find, that if you look for the life to come, and the blessed resurrection, you
must in any case freely and boldly confess Christ and his Gospel, whatsoever
shall betide you. But what shall I do to my wife and children (say you?) These
and all other your cares you must commit to God, and trust in him, 1. Pet. 5.7
Cast all your care upon him (says the Apostle) for he cares for you. The
good c shepherds, 1 Luke 2.8
as soon as the Angels told them, that Christ was born at Bethleem, strait
being filled with spiritual joy, 16
went to see and visit him. They demanded not, who shall keep the wolf from
the sheep in the mean while? they reasoned not of it, but committed their
sheep and al other things unto his gracious tuition, whose commandment and
will they obeyed. Do you so likewise, take example of these good shepherds;
ask not, what shall become of my wife and children? commit them, and al other
things unto Gods merciful protection, and he will care for them; and provide
for them in the time of dearth. It is commonly seen, that when all humane and
worldly comfortfaileth, in the greatest extremity, when the danger is at the
highest, then unto his children, after his accustomed mercy puts he to his
helping hand, and delivers the party from danger. Innumerable examples
hereof have we in the holy scriptures. In what extremities were the Genesis 31.
and 32
Patriarchs very often? and especially Genesis 39.20
Joseph? and how often were they Genesis 31. and 32. genesis 41.40
delivered? in what danger was Exo. 2.14.15.
Moses when he was feign to fly away for his life? and yet how he was Exodus
3.10
restored again, in what straites were the Exodus 14.9
people of Israel, being compassed on every side, on the one side with the
maine host of their enemies, and on the other side with the maine sea, so that
they had nothing to look for, but present death, either by drowning, or else
by the sword of Pharao? and yet in this extremity, they were Exodus 14.30
delivered. And afterward, when they were in great Judge. 2.14
misery, how wonderfully did God deliver them, by the hands of the Judges?
Judge. 3.9.
Othniel, Judge. 3.15.
Ehud, Judge. 3.31
Shamgar, Judge. 4.4
Deborah, Judge. 6.14
Gideon, Judge. 11.6
Iphtah, Judge. 16.30.
Samson and others? What shall I speak of the delivery of 1. Sam. 18.11 1.
sam. 19.11
David in his extreme persecutions? And of the Prophets, 2. King. 1.9.11
Elijah, Ierem. 37.17 ierem. 38.10, 11, 12, 13.
Jeremy, Dan 6.16 dan. 14.29, 31
Daniel, 1. King. 22.27
Micaiah, Iona. 2.10
Jonah, and others, whom the Lord mightily delivered from extreme miseries? O
but (you will say) these were of the old Testament. What? is not God the same
God still? is he a changeling? is not he as good unto the people of the new
Testament also? Read the Acts of the Apostles, and you shall see that he is
as good, and the same God still. Who delivered the Acts 5.19
Apostles out of prison, but he? Who delivered Acts 12.8
Peter the same night (miraculously by the ministry of an Angel) that Herod
had appointed to slay him? Who turned the hearts of the Act. 16.35, 39
Magistrates, when they came to Paul and Silas, requesting them to depart in
peace, after they had scourged them, and laid them in the inner prison fast by
the heels in the stocks? Who delivered Acts 23.24
Paul from the hands of the Jews, when they had sworn that they would neither
eat nor drink, until they had slain him? Verily God, and none else; It
follows then that you put your whole trust and confidence in his mercy, and
he will deliver you.

That the Lord will not fail his children in these days, no more then he did
in times past, in the old Testament, and in the time of the primitive Church.
Sect. XX.
Objection.

Verily I believe these things, and acknowledge them to be true. Yet they are
special miracles, which god wrought for the delivery of those ancient Fathers
and Apostles in the beginning and infancy of the Church, whenas the Gentiles
and Nations were to be converted unto the Christian Religion, which miracls are
now ceased; So that my case remains the same it was before.

Answer.

SVrely this is not true that you say, for even since the Apostles time, God
showed his power in the delivery of his servants from the hands of their
enemies, as may be seen in the Tripartite and Ecclesiastical Histories of
Eusebius, Zozomenus, Socrates, and others. And touching our times, there is no
doubt but that God works and fails not his servants at any time, when need
requires, for so much as the Prophet David says, Psalm. 102.25.
Thou (Lord) have aforetime laid the foundation of the earth, and the heavens
are the works of thine hands. 26
They shall perish, but thou shall endure: even they all shall wax old as
does a garment, as a vesture shall thou change them, and they shall be
changed. 27
But thou art the same, and thy years shall not fail. Wherefore, what the
reason is, that we see not in these days so many miracles, I know not; whether
it be, that our sight is not so clear, or that we have not such faith as they
had, whom God delivered in times past: or that (as you said) after the time
that God published his doctrine, so many miracles do not appear, or whether
there be any other reason, god knows: yet you know that the Lord wants no
power to deliver his people, no more at this present, then he did in times
past: and you know also, that all things come to pass by the providence and
fore-appointment of God; and that God turns al things to the Romans 8.28
best for his elect. Wherefore repose your whole trust in God, and cast all your
cares upon him, as the 1. Pet. 5.7
Scripture bids you, and he will not fail, neither you nor yours in the time
of need, only confess him boldly, serve him only, and love him heartily.

That we should not be afraid at the faces, behauior, and majesty of mortal
men. Sect. XXI
Objection.

But alas sir, Our adversaries bear such a majesty in their manners, and such
gravity in their words; they are so terrible and cruel in their dealings,
with such stern countenances, and big looks: they use such reproachful,
scornful, and slanderous words, that they face me down quite, as though my
cause were not good, or I guilty of some heinous crime. And further, I am
afraid I shall not be able to answer them in such points as they will
examine me, not that I mistrust the goodness or truth of my quarrel, but
because, I fear me, they shall dash me altogether out of countenance.

Answer:

THe red-hote iron being put into the water, makes a great noise, and seems
to do the water great harm, whereas in the end we find the fire thereof
quenched, the force of burning lost, the heat abated, and the water little or
nothing worse. Like this bubling is our adversaries triumph over us; for
though they face us down, though they insult against us, yea though they
imbrue their bloody fists in our bleeding wounds, and make, to the eye, a
great show of victory, yet when it comes to the proof, God will show by a
ruefull experience, that all the noise that they make, is but a sound of their
own quenching, fall and ruin: and our estate not hurt, but bettered by their
severity. Math. 10.28 luke 12.4
Fear not them which kill the body (says Christ) but are not able kill the
soul, but rather fear him, which is able to destroy both body and soul in
hell. So then let Satan fume, let hell roar, let the world rage, and all
worldlings fret never so much, yet, be ye sure, no man can take us out of our
heavenly Fathers hands, for he is greater than al: John 16.33
In the world you shall have affliction (says our Savior) be of good
comfort, I have overcome the world. When the persecutors imprison our bodies,
they serour souls at liberty with God; when they throw us down headlong, they
lift us up; when they persecute us, we flourish; when they tread us down, we
grow up; when they despise us, we profit; when they hurt us, we overcome; when
they seem to conquer us, then are we most constant; and when they kill us, the^
they bring us into everlasting life, from earth into heaven, from labor to
rest, from temptations to quietness, from torments to delights, from worldly
laughters to a crown of glory. The nature of true religion is to increase by
persecution.
Here may we behold the force and nature of the Christian religion, which
beyond all natural course, and above all the reach of man's understanding,
increases by that means, by which all other things are suppressed, we have no
other way to root out sin and wickedness, Violence of Torments the only
means to suppres impiety and wickedness.
and all kind of impiety, no means to abolish lewd behauior and disorder
amongst men, but only violence of torments and cruel punishments: for the
fear of severe chastisement makes men to bridle their untamed affections, and
if any be executed for great enormities, his sin dies with him, and seldom
leaves he any posterity, that by his death is not rather dismaide nor
encouraged to follow his evil example. But in this quarrel of our faith it
happens quite contrary: for as a good slip being grafted in a sower tree,
brings forth nevertheless sweet fruit agreeable to his own kind; and
the sap of the same root, which in the crab is sower and bitter, in the apple
of the slip is most pleasant and delightsome, and though it be loathsome in the
one, it allureth in the other: The contrary effects of Punishment in the Godly
and Wicked.
So happens it to Gods Saints, being put in the Persecutours hands. For
their odious and intolerable cruelty, when it is practiced upon malefactors,
breeds terror, and fear, and horror for the wicked fruits, for which they
are punished: Yet in the faithful and Religious, the same bitter torments
being practiced upon them, are the means working in them by a true faith in
Christ, to work the pleasant and goodly fruits of their salvation; not only
most acceptable unto God, but able to allure men's hearts to taste of the same.
Concerning that you say, you are affraide you shall not be able to answer
your adversaries: Fear not, only set God always before your eyes, and let
your whole care and study be how to please him, for he shall give you such Luke
21.15.
wisdom, that the enemies shall wonder at, and even be ashamed and confounded.
Consider how Moses behaved himself before Pharao king of Egypt, in his
glorious majesty and power; he, having the Lord always before the eyes of his
faith, spoke boldly through the might of Gods spirit working in him, to the
great terror and astonishment of the terrihle and cruel enemies. Wherefore
study not what you shall answer, but speak boldly that that God shall put into
your mind. Consider what Christ says; Matthew. 10.18
ye shall be brought to the governors and kings for my sake, in witness to
them and to the Gentiles. 19 luke 22.11
But when they deliver you up, take no thought how, or what ye shall speak:
for it shall be given you in that hour what you shall say. Matthew. 10.20 mark
13.11
For it is not ye which speak, but the spirit of your father which is in you.
Luke 21.15
I will give you a mouth and wisdoms, vvhere-against all your adversaries
shall not be able to speak or resist. Rest upon this promise of the son of
God, he is faithful, and will not break promise.

Comforts against the dullness of spirit, and unfitness to suffer. Sect. XXII.
Objection.

Yet I would very fain that it might please God to deliver me, by some good
means or other, out of my Persecutors hands: For me thinks, I am out of
heart, and do not feel the comfort of the spirit as I was wont heretofore. I
am even as it were a block, and if I were enforced at this instant to suffer
trial, (as surely my time is very short) I think I should be very unwilling to
endure it, as a bear to go to the stake. Alas! how shall I suffer the rage of
the fiery flames, and the terrors of death, being thus lumpish, and heavy,
and quite destitute of all spiritual comfort!

Answer.

Certainly God loves you never the less, though you presently suffer for
Christ's cause, than if he should deliver you. In all ages God uses his elect
after the manner, which seemed best unto his secret and unsearchable wisdom:
Some he delivered, others he suffered to taste of Christ's cup; who
notwithstanding were as dear unto him, as they whom he delivered: Yea verily,
it seems that he better loves, and does more for them that suffer, then for
the rest; for he stands by them being tormented, he strengthens them in
faith, and makes them perfect; when as he does but give unto such as he
delivers some longer respite, and leaves them in danger to fall in the like
peril again. But you say, you feel not the comfort of the spirit as you did
heretofore. Let not this terrify you, nor make you afraid, for commonly it
happens thus unto Gods children. Certainly David was in a grievous case, when
he cried, Psalm. 119.81
My soul faints for thy salvation: 82
Mine eyes fail for thy promise: when vvilt thou comfort me? 83
for I am like a bottle in the smoke; and when he cried so often, Psalm. 119.25,
107.154
Quicken me according to thy word: 88.159
Quicken me according to thy loving kindness: 149
Quicken me according to thy judgment. And David (you know) was the child of
God, and received comfort again. This also may be notably seen in the late
example of Acts and Mon. page 1555. Col. 2. of the last edition
M. Robert Glouer Martyr, in the time of Queen Marie, who after he was
condemned by the Bishop, and was now at a point to be delivered out of this
world, it so happened that two or three days before, his heart being lumpish
and desolate of all spiritual consolation, felt in himself no aptness nor
willingness, but rather a heaviness and dullness of spirit, full of much
discomfort, to bear the bitter cross of Martyrdom ready now to to be laid
upon him. Whereupon the fearing in himself lest the Lord had utterly
withdrawn his wonted favor from him, made his moan to some friend of his,
signifying unto him how earnestly he had prayed day and night unto the Lord,
and yet could receive no motion or sense of any comfort from him. Then his said
friend comforted him with Gods promises, The Lord for a time may withdraw his
comfort, but at length he visits again his servants.
assuring him in the truth thereof that he should receive comfort, when the
Lord saw his due time: and therefore desired him, whenever any such feeling
of Gods heavenly mercies, should begin to touch his heart, that then he would
show some signification thereof, whereby he might witness with him the same;
and so departed from him. Now the next day, when the time came of his
Martyrdom, as he was going to the place, and was now come to the sight of the
stake, although all the night before praying for strength and courage, he could
feel none, so de^ly he was so mightily replenished with gods holy comfort and
heavenly joys, that he cried out clapping his hands to his said frind, and
saying in these words; He is come, he is come, etc. and that with such joy and
alacrity, as one seeming rather to be risen from some deadly danger, to
liberty of life, then as one passing out of the world by any pains of death.
So he died, being burnt for the testimony of Jesus Christ, in the year 1555.
September. 20. And this example most excellently declares, how shrewdly a child
of God may be humbled and shaken, but never finally forsaken. For John 13.1
whom the Lord loves, he loves unto the end. John 6.37
Him that comes unto me (says Christ) I cast not away. Wherefore be patient,
and comfort your self, for the Psalm 23
Lord will not absent himself for ever. Psalm. 27.14
Hope in the Lord, be strong, and he shall comfort thine heart, and trust in
the Lord; says David. No doubt, David could tell what the children of God
must do in this case, himself being so often plunged in this pit. The sun
does not always shine unto us, for it is often covered with mistie and dark
clouds, yea and every day it sets, and does (as it were) take his leave
from us as though it came no more. Yet we see those clouds vanish away in
time, and the cheerful rising of the sun follows his heavy setting. The
sap of the tree does not always ascend to make it green and flourishing; but
sometimes it descends, yet it is not quite gone, but hides it self in the
root for a time, and afterward it returns again. So fares it with us, we
do not always feel the comfort of Gods Spirit, which brings the sweet
sap of spiritual joys unto our souls, but sometimes it withdraws it self
from us for a time; then do the blustering storms of temptation shake off our
leaves; yet nevertheless, the foundation of our hope stands fast, our
salvation is rooted in Christ, the Spirit is not quite gone (though it leaves
us to our selves for a time) but will return again, and make us green and
flourishing. The Mother after she has felt her child once to move, does
always hope the best, though ever it move not, and when weakly it stirs,
she hops that it shall have greater strength in due time. So must we, if
we have once felt and tasted of the sweet joys of the Spirit; let us ever
hope the best, and if we earnestly desire the same again in more abundance;
let us be sure the spirit stirs in us, and that in due time it will show it
self in his full strength, even to the salvation of our souls.

Wherefore the children of God be sometimes dull.
You shall understand also, that if the children of God did never fall, if we
had a lively apprehension of spiritual comfortes always, then would we not
make such account, and esteem so much of the sweet power of the spirit, as now
we do; yea peradventure we would imagine that it were naturally ingrafted in
us, which is powered by mere grace; neither would we be so much thankful for
it unto God, as now we be. Wherefore the Lord for a while withdraws his
spirit from us, that it may be the better welcome, and sweeter when it
comes. Therefore stick to it constantly, for it cannot be but that the Lord
will at the last satisfy your desire, with plenty of consolation, seeing your
cause is so just and true. Phil. 1.6
And I am persuaded of this same thing, that he that has begun this good
work in you, will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ. Romans 11.29
For the gifts and calling of God are without repentance. After winter comes
summer: after a foul day comes a fair. Psalm. 30.5
VVeping may abide at evening, but joy comes in the morning.

What a great dignity Martyrdom is: and how we should not think our selves
unworthy to suffer for Christ's sake. Sect. XXIII.
Objection.

The Lords name be blessed for all his comforts; Now I am fully resolved
willingly to suffer the extreamitie of such torments, as my persecutors shall
impose upon me, be they never so cruel and bloody. Yet me thinks, I am not
worthy to suffer for Christ, and the verity of his Gospel, to lay down my
life in so good a quarrel; considering mine own wickedness, how I have been
a great offender of Gods Majesty, a wicked transgresser of his most holy and
just laws. Yea there is never a branch of his commandments, but I have most
wilfully violated, and daily infringed. Alas! I tremble to think of my former
life, which before man was unjust, and in the sight of God ungodly. This is it
that now troubles my conscience. I can hardly be persuaded that the Lord will
vouchsafe such notorious sinners as I am, so great dignity, as to suffer for
his name; considering that the Apostles (which were holy and harmeles men)
greatly rejoiced for this honor, for that they were counted worthy to suffer
any thing for Christ. Acts 5.41
And shall I think my self worthy of the pre-eminence which was given unto
them?

Answer.

SVrely there is no greater pre-eminence in Gods Church, then to be a Martyr,
nor more renowned dignity, than to die for the profession of true Religion. It
is the noblest act of magnanimity, seeing death is the hardest thing that
nature ca^ overcome; The principallest act of obedience, seeing it is so highly
commended in Christ, who Phil. 2.8
became obedient to the death, even the death of the Cross. And the
profitablest act (of all that may be wrought by our means) unto the Church of
God, whose glorious course is fitly expressed in the Silke-worme, The Martyrs
compared to the Silke-worme.
which first eating it self out of a little seed, grows to be a small worm,
afterward when by feeding a certain time, upon fresh and green herbs,
being waxed of a greater size, it eats it self out of the other coat again
into a case of silk: which when it has once finished, in the end casting the
seed, for many young to breed of, and leaving the silk for man's ornament,
dies all white and winged in shape of a flying thing. So the Martyrs first
break out of the dead sleep of original sin, by repentance and faith in
Christ; by feeding on the Sacraments and leaves of Gods word, they grow to more
ripeness, casting off the coat of worldly vanities and earthly cares, and are
clothed with the silk of religion and sincerity of life, in which work,
perseuering to the end, even then when persecution is greatest, they finally
(if need require) shed their blood, as seed for new offspring to arise of,
and leave the silk of their godly and virtuous examples, as an ornament and
mirror for the Church, and so depart Revel. 7.14.
out of great tribulation, having made their long robes white in the blood of
the lamb, being winged with the innocence of their hands, cleanness of
their hearts; by a lively faith in Christ, they fly and Psalm 15.1 Sanguine
fundata est Ecclesia, sanguine creuit.
ascend into the Lords tabernacle, where they rest upon his holy mountain.
Wherefore, though the ripe fruit of the Church be gathered, yet their blood
engendereth new supply, for it increases the more, when the destruction and
rooting out thereof is violently procured. It is like the bush that burned, and
was not consumed. It is found by experience, that whosoever suffer (though he
suffer for his offense) is pitied, and unnatural misery (though deserved)
cannot but breed remorse and tenderness in the beholders. But now, when such
me^ as be innocent in their conversation, virtuous in their lives, learned and
grave personages, (or sober and godly youths, virtuous and honest Matrons)
shall with comfort offer themselves to extremity, rejoice when they are
tormented, go to death as they would go to a banquet, have compassion upon
their persecutors and executioners, and sing Psalms in very flames; when such
as neither want dignities to withdraw them, nor friends and family to pull them
back; nor cruel enemies to afffright them; shall be ready to change their
dignity with disgrace, to forsake their friends, and give themselves into the
hands of their mortal enemies, only for the testimony of a good conscience
in the defense of the truth; men must needs think: The Sufferings of the
Saints breed Remorse and work conversion in the Beholders.
This is a thing worthy to be known, and some virtue that deserves deep
consideration, for which a man is content to suffer death. They want no means
to search out the truth, having both read and heard what can be said on either
side: They want not wit and judgment, to discern the good from the bad, being
persons known to be of deep insight and discretion: They cleave to the word
of God only, and embrace the same, making it the only touchstone of truth, and
the rule of their conscience: They have no pleasure in pains, nor any
temporal allurement to move them to undergo so great misery. Yea, they have
many delights, honors, and promotions, to withdraw them from it. Surely,
therefore it is that they find it necessary to do this, and that their
salvation lies upon it, or else flesh and blood could never digest these so
heavy calamities; for otherwise for altering opinion, or speaking a word, they
might easily avoid it. So then, this is the comfort of them that suffer; That
their death is the means to raise many from death; The virtue and efficacy of
Martyrdom.
and their patience makes every one inquisitiue of their religion, and
desirous to know what quarrel they maintain, and upon what grounds; then when
they know the truth, by and by they embrace it, though it be with the loss of
their lands, liberty, and lives. No man ought to think himself unworthy to
suffer for Christ's sake.
Now to come nearer to your temptation; no doubt (being a grievous sinner) you
are unworthy, yea far unworthy to yield your life in such an honorable
cause. What then? you are required to yield a reason of your faith; will you
play the Hypocrite and dissemble the same? or the Apostata and deny it? so
should you add sin to sin: For what greater sin is it then to deny
Christ Jesus and the truth of his Gospel? The Lord keep his children from such
impiety. What were they (yea, even the Apostles themselves) whom God had chosen
in the beginning to be the witnesses of his truth, and to carry his name
before the world; but men subject to sin and imperfections as we likewise be?
God chose them first, yea, when they were his enemies: and so likewise of his
singular goodness and infinite love, he has chosen you to be one of his
witnesses also; For he that is Lord over all, is rich unto all that call on
him: Romans 10.12.
Rich unto al, he excepteth none, God is no accepter of persons.
nor accepts persons, but receives al, even all that with unfeigned repentance
turn from their sins, and by a lively faith embrace his mercies in Christ.
Wherefore meditate not so much on your sins, as you do on the salve of sin,
Jesus Christ our Redeemer and Savior; magnify the mercies of God and praise
his holy name, for that in the merits of his Son, he has chosen you, and
accounted you worthy, not only to believe, but also to suffer for Christ's sake.

What the enemies of the truth procure unto themselves, by persecuting and
murdering of Gods children. Sect. XXIIII.
Objection.

Now for my own part, being satisfied of all scruples and doubts, touching
this point (be it spoken with due acknowledgement of praise unto God;) seeing
we reap such excellent fruit and so many benefits by Martyrdom; and that our
Persecutors are the means of our sufferings, might they not come upon us, and
say unto us, in this, or such like speech? Why then complain you of your
persecution, if it be so glorious and so beneficial unto you? you should love
those by whom you are so much benefited. If we pleasure you, thank us, if we
profit you, we cannot do but well in continuing our course. I pray you
resolve me of this one point, and then an end. How may we answer such as will so
object?

Answer.

WE may answer them briefly, in our Saviors own words, Matthew. 26.24. mark
14.21 luke 22.22
Surely the Son of Man goes his way, as it is written of him: But we be to
that man by whom the son of m^n is betraide; it had bin good for that man, if
he had never bin borne. Being soldiers by profession, we are glad we have such
occasion to fight in defense of the truth, and yet we are heartily sorry to
see them bid us battle, by impugning and persecuting the same. Howsoever it
goes with us, we are sure of the victory: If we have the upper hand we have
conquered satan, and chased him out of his haunt, to the confusion of all
superstition and idolatry; If we be oppressed and murdered for our faith, then
do we also overcome by our true faith in Christ, who will receive us unto
himself, and give us the crown of life; so also we confirm our religion to
our posterity, and seal it with our blood. The Danger that Persecutors do in
curre by Persecution.
Wherefore, small is the hurt that they do us, yea, it is an unspeakable
benefit, but unknown is the misery that they work unto themselves, though
they see it not, or will not see it: For they pluck up the sweet flowers, and
leave the stinking weeds; they cut off the fruitful branches, and let let
those that be rotten and withered alone; they burn the corn, and spare the
stubble; they put Noah into the arc, and drown them selves, whose being
amongst them kept them from the deluge; they thrust Lot out of Sodom that kept
the city from burning; they oppress Moses, who should wrestle with Gods
anger, and keep it from them: And therefore putting the true Christian
Professors to death, they dig their own graves, and cut off the shot of the
anchors that should save them from shipwreck. It were great folly for a King
that desired peace, to abuse, disgrace, and torment the ambassadors and
servants of a Monarch mightier then himself, and then to send them home, thus
cruelly entreated, to utter their wrongs. Yet this is the folly and
sottishness of all Persecutors, The folly of Persecutors.
who think it necessary for their peace, to impouerish, spoil, and torment,
the Ambassadors of Jesus Christ and servants of God, and then by barbarous and
sauadge martyring of the^, to send them to heaven, there to be continual
sollicitors with God for revenge against their murders; still crying, Revel. 6.9
under the altar, with a loud voice, saying. 10
How long Lord, which art holy and true: do not thou judge and avenge our
blood on them that dwell on the earth?

The Conclusion.

THus, (good Christian Reader) now at length, upon the earnest entreaty of
such Friends, as have most interest in my Labors, have I published this small
Treatise, being first penned for their private behoof only; whereunto I was
the more willing to condescend, because I fear, or rather, foresee that the
fiery Trial, whereof Peter speaks, approaches, which the faithful are very
like shortly to endure, for Judgment begins at the house of God. Now then,
as these Discourses are published for thy good, to teach thee with joy and
comfort, to acquit thy self like a valiant Captain of Christ Jesus in the day
of battle; So I hope that thou also wilt judge charitably of my
Christian-care to profit the Church of God, unto whose service I have wholly
addicted my self, (if thou undertake the person of a Censurer, and not
rather of a Scholar) and take this my Mite, with as cheerful mind as it is
meante thee: Which, if Courtesy can not compel thee to do, yet will
Christianity force thee; for so much as the Apostle says, that the Members of
Christ be wise and of a good Nature. Finally, this only I am to certify thee
of, that when I penned the fifth Chapter of the second Book; there came unto my
hands a paper-booke, written (as it seems) many years agone, without either
name or title unto it; which partly treated of the same argument I handled
there: a few reasons whereof, being penned in defense of Superstition, I have
(justly) challenged for true Religion. And so, (good Reader) if thou shall
reap any comfort by this Treatise (as no doubt thou shall, if thou will read
it, not with preiudicate affections, but with a meek and humble, that is, with
a Christian Spirit; remembering, that God gives grace unto the Humble) give
glory to HIM alone, who is the Auctor and Fountain of all Goodness, even GOD,
blessed for ever. LONDON. Apr. 25. A.D. 1600.

Amen; Praise, and Glory, and Wisdom, and Thanks, and Honor, and Power, and
Might, be unto our God for euer-more, Amen. Revel. 7.12.

FINIS.

