THE True Copy of an Edict, made by the King of Spain, concerning the new
Christians Dwelling in Portugal, and of their departure out of his said
Realms and Dominions, freely without molestation, or loss of their goods,
and also of free liberty to them granted, for their return again into his
Realms and Dominions: whenever they shall think good.

()

Translated out of the Portugal language, into English. 1602.

printer's or publisher's device

At LONDON, Printed by R. B. for Thomas Pauier.

A True Copy of the King of Spaines late Edict, touching the Christians etc.
Lord PHILLIP,
by the grace of God, I give to understand unto all those to whom this my
Letter, or Edict shall come, to be seen or read, that George Rochiges Soles,
and Rodrigo Dandrades, Atturneys, or Solicitors, of these new Christians,
which are dwelling or inhabiting within any of my Realms, Lordeships and
Dominions, did earnestly Request of me, that I should grant them so much
favor, as to Chardge and Command that al such Laws, Statutes, and
Ordinances, which were established and made by the King my Lord and Father,
which is in Glory, and by other Lords and Kings his predecessors, touching
the new Christians inhabiting and dwelling within the Realm of Portugal,
might be quite revoked and made frustrate: by which said Laws, Statutes and
Ordinances, the said persons were prohibited and forbidden that they should
not depart out of the said Realms, Dominions and Lordeships, without
express Leave and License: and for to sell their goods and Lands: whereupon
the said Atturneyes or Solicitors for these new Christians have as aforesaid
most ernestly requested and desired, that from that time forwards it might be
lawful to and for any of the said new Christians, to depart and go their
ways freely out of the said Kingdoms Dominions and Lordeships, and also for
to return back again at all times whenever it shall please them, with
their families and goods, without any offense unto any person: and not to be
bound at any time hereafter, to ask or demand any Leave or License at all,
and likewise that I should give them free leave and license to sell their
goods and Lands at all times when they shall think meet and convenient for
their own benefit and good. And that from henceforth, nor at any time
hereafter, there shall be any Laws, Statutes, or Ordinances whatsoever, made
or ordained in contradiction of this Edict. And that it would please us of our
gracious favor and goodness, to pardon all those persons whatsoever, which have
heretofore at any time or times, departed out of any of our Kingdoms,
Dominions and Lordships, and have sold and put away their goods and Lands
contrary to the said former Laws, Statutes and Ordinances, and also that we
should Chardge and Command that all such pretentions, accusations, or
molestation of them, or any of them, from this time forward shall cease. And
forasmuch as they do partly know the great want which my Treasury does
sustain, and the decreasing of my goods, and by reason of the loyal love and
good will which they bear unto me, as my true and loyal Subjects: they have
bestowed upon me 17050. duccats toward the Cost and chardges thereof. And
that as touching this Decree, there might an Edict be made, which may remain
in force, and be established for a Law, with a Contract irrevocable, and to
that intent and purpose, that I should grant them their request and petition
aforesaid, they aledged before me, certain Reasons and Causes to move me to do
the same: The which I commanded to be seen and perused, and also thoroughly
examined by my laws and Satutes, before the Lords of my Royal Council, and
by other wise, discreet, and wise personages, thoroughly and well to examine the
said case, and to cause good proofs to be made thereof, and of such
Informations as are needful and requisite. Whereupon, now it does appear by
those Laws and accusations, that the said new Christians have received great
Troubles, and overmuch punnishment. And in consideration of this heavy burden,
which they have carried and sustained. We therefore find it very convenient
and needful, and also requisite for us to Release them out of this bondage
and thralldome, and that it were requisite it should be so done and kept for
the good government and public Weal of these my Kingdoms and Lordshipps, and
immagining that they will esteem well of this my Gracious ^^uour to them in
this behalf extended, and also acknowledge them selves greatly beholding unto
us, and that by reason of their loyal Love and Obedience, and many other kind
of Favors by them showed and done: I do hold it for good and convenient, to
Revoke and utterly make frustrat all those Laws, Statutes and Ordinances
whatsoever, wherein it is prohibited that the said new Christians should not
depart out of my said Realms, Dominions and Lordeships, nor forth of them,
nor to sell their goods nor inheritances, without my special License. And
therefore I do Command and will that from henceforth they may depart and
go out of my said Realms with their families and moueables, or without them,
and that they may return back again at all times, without any molesting or
apprehending of them, and that none shall accuse them for departing out of my
said Realms without leave or license: And that likewise they may sell their
said goods at all times whenever they shall think convenient, freely
without asking any leave or license at all, and I do further ordain and hold
it for good, that from hence forwards, thief my said Laws, Statutes and
Ordinances, shall never be Revoked, but to stand and abide irreuocable for
ever: insomuch, that I think it necessary, for diverse and sundry causes me
thereunto moving: as first, for the service of God, Secondly, for mine Estate
and Honor, and thirdly for the great benefit and commodity that may arise and
come, unto my said Realms, Dominions and Lordships. And I do likewise hold
it for good, and it is my will and pleasure freely, to pardon and forgive all
those which heretofore have departed and gone away at any time, before the
publication of this my Letter of Edict, out of my said Realms, Dominions and
Lordships, and have sold their said goods and inheritances without leave or
license.

Moreover, I do strictly command and charge, that this Edict nor any part
thereof be frustrated, nor to proceed in any thing, directly, or indirectly,
against the same, by reason of the Demaundes, Causes and prete^cions before
mentioned, which has bin done and executed against all such as have bin
accused, and Condemned, and have bin tried by order of law, and past in
judgment, shall for ever hereafter, cease, and not proceade any further. All
which I do Command to be performed, done and kept, by virtue of thief my
Letters Patents by me now confirmed, Signed, and Sealed with my Royal Saale
depending thereunto: The which shall stand, abide, remain, continue and be,
with all the force, effect, and Vigor of the law, and also that the Contractes
and agreements herein mentioned and expressed for ever hereafter, to be
irrevocable: and that all the same wholly, shall be accomplished, performed and
kept, in every degree, according to the true meaning and Contents thereof,
without any Trouble, Let, Hindrance, or Imperagement thereof at all.

And further I do desire and entreat, all those Kings and Princes, (my
Successors) which hereafter shall succeed me, for to accomplish, maintain and
keep this Edict, and also to command and cause the same to be fulfilled and
kept, as firmly, and in as lardge and ample manner, as by thief my Letters
Pattents in all points do contain, and according to the whole Contents
thereof. And the said 17050 Duccats which is paid by the said new
Christians, in that form and manner before mentioned in a Scedule of mine,
which as concerning this Case, I did send, and Commanded it to pass, and so
to be Registered.

Given at Madrill, the Fowerth of April, 1602. Anthony Fernandis d' Sorses,
did do it in the year of our Lord, 1601. and Anthony Aluares de Senedo, did
cause this to be Written.



FINIS.

