THE REFVTATION OF AN EPISTLE, WRITTEN BY A CERTAIN DOCTOR OF the Augustins
Order within the City of Liege: TOGETHER WITH THE ARGVMENTS, which he has
borrowed from Robert Bellarmine, to prove the invocation of Saints.

By JOHN POLYANDER, Minister unto the French Church in Dort: And now translated
by HENRY HEXHAM, out of French into English.

1. PETER 4. 11. If any man speak, let him talk as the words of God.

AT LONDON Imprinted by F. K. for Thomas Man. 1610.

TO THE HONORABLE AND RIGHT WORTHY, SIR HORACE VERE, Knight, Lord Governor of
his Majesty's Cautionarie Town of Briel in Holland; and chief Commander under
his Excellency of all the English Forces, in the service of the Lords the
States of the united Provinces.
RIght Honorable, and my best Lord; it shall not offend any that know your
Lordship, how God has honored you with the eminent marks of Honor in your
noble Birth, great Exploits, true virtues, and unfeigned godliness, (so much
the greater, by how much the rarer dignities) that I style you, right
Honorable: and I trust it will not offend you, that I call you my best Lord,
whom I have long followed, and next under God do depend upon. If ought need
excuse, it is then this boldness, that I presume upon your favor so much, as
to dedicate this Treatise unto your name, and that without your Lordships
priuitie.

The Treatise (right worthy) being considered in it self, is not unworthy a
noble Patron, being written of a notable argument, and by a notable Minister,
and in my opinion so much the more agreeable unto you, by how much you declare
your self a zealous lover of that Truth which this author maintains, and have
with loss of blood and hazard of life, defended with your sword, what this man
by his pen.

As touching my part therein, which is the least, and the translation; though
it be not so well worthy of you: yet because it is due to you, being done by
one of your Lordships Company, and in the town of your Garrison, where it was
also penned, and by me that have devoted my self unto your service in any
duty I can perform: I hope your Lordship will not only pardon my boldness,
but accept my dutiful affections in this, which in my prayers to God for you
shall ever show themselves to be such as becomes me.

Your Lordships Soldier ever to be commanded, Henry Hexham.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
THe extreme liberty, which this scribbling age takes of writing, and
publishing idle and unprofitable pamphlets, and the double diligence of Popish
Writers in painting the old and withered face of their Iezabel; not only may,
but ought to provoke those that can dee it, to set forth wholesome things as
counter-poysons or preservatives against the foresaid poisons of manners and
doctrine.

Hereupon I confess to have encouraged the translator of this present Treatise
to publish the same in our language, into which he had (and so far as I can
indge both faithfully and fitly) turned it out of French, that our contrymen
might see, how the Ministers of other Churches are assaulted, and do make their
just defense with the same weapons with which our own.

Touching the author of this book, I may not conceal that he is a man of
singular note, for his learning, gravity, piety, and conversation, and has so
stood in the service of the French Church at Dort in Holland, for the space of
eighteen years to the praise of God.

Concerning the work, I will not so much ouervalew my self, or vndervalew it,
as to recommend it upon my word unto the Churches of God: for who am I? but
signify that the several impressions of it in French, the translating thereof
into the Dutch tongue, and the good respect thereof in the French and Dutch
Churches, do more then sufficiently commend it unto all men: wherefore (good
Reader) I leave it thus commended unto thee, and pray God to make it profitable
to thee, as it has bin to many others.

Thine in the Lord John Burges, Preacher to the English at the Hag^^e in
Holland.

TO THE FRENCH CHVRCH ASSEMBLED together at Dort.
THere is no exercise (most dear and worthy Brethren in the Lord) more
needful, nor more convenient for a Christian man, then to call upon his
Creator and Savior. For since that he receives from his hand all manner of
blessings, as well for this present life, as for that which is to come, he is
therefore bound continually to invoke and call upon him for aid, James 1. 17.
who is the Father of lights, from whom comes down every good giving, and
every perfect gift. Beside, it is also that mark by which the children of
light are discerned from the children of this world, who, as it is written in
the 14 Psalm, have no care to call upon the Lord. Moreover, it is one of the
parts of that Christian acknowledgement, whereby we make profession to believe
that God is, and that he is a rewarder of them that seek him, Heb. 11. 6.
as the Apostle witnesses in the 11. Chapter to the Hebrews, and sixth verse.
It is a sweet communication and a familiar discourse with God, whereby we
freely declare to him our necessities, and beseech him to return an answer to
our petitions in due time. It may also be called an embassage, or a trusty
Post, which swiftly mounting up to heaven, knocks at the gate of Gods palace,
there to present before him all our requests. Finally, it is the very soul of
our souls, and like as our bodies cannot live, nor subsist without our souls;
so likewise cannot our souls persevere in the faith and hope of the grace of
God, which is the fountain of life, without the exercise of prayer. Which
point the Fathers of the old Testament considering, ere they betook themselves
to any of their affairs, began them evermore by calling upon the name of God,
Psalm. 124. 8.
saying, Our help is in the name of the Lord which has made heaven and earth.
Which also the Jews from the godliness of their forefathers hold yet unto
this day, and observe it so carefully, that they address their prayers to
none, but to that sole Creator of all things. Wherein these ignorant people,
which neither know the Son, nor the Father, show themselves far more wise
and religious, then the Papists, which call themselves Christians and
Catholics, and yet notwithstanding are so blockish and superstitious, that in
stead of addressing themselves to the only God Almighty and immortal, they
implore the aid of the dead, and their Idols, not considering what the Lord
speaks by his Prophet Esaias in the 42. chap. and 8. verse, Esaias. 42. 8.
that his glory he will not give to another, neither his praise to graven
Images. But what? the devil (sworn enemy against the honor of God, and man's
salvation) has with such an efficacy breathed this impiety into the hearts of
those lying Doctors, that albeit they are convicted by an infinite number of
sentences of holy Scripture, by which God expressly forbids us not to
worship any but himself, yet they obstinately maintain the contrary, and
that often times against the feeling of their own consciences, withholding the
truth in unrighteousness, and shutting their eyes and ears against this
admonition of the Apostle S. Paul in his second Epistle to the Corinthians, 2.
Cor. 13. 8.
chap. 13. verse. 8. That we cannot do any thing against the truth, but for
the truth. Which (Truth) although that in these latter days, it is represented
unto us more cleerer then ever it was; yet notwithstanding of many it is
unknown and abandoned, which follow on apace the foolish devotion of their
blind leaders, and who to please and obey them, rather then our Sovereign
Doctor and Master Jesus Christ, will not vouchsafe to take so much pains, as
to inform themselves of this truth, by reading of the holy Scripture, but like
better to depend wholly upon the Traditions of their Teachers, despising
through their voluntary ignorance the exhortation which the Apostle. S John
gives unto al Christians in his first epistle, 4. verse. 1. Dearly beloved, 1.
Epist. chap. 4. verse. 1.
believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether they are of God: for
many false Prophets are gone out into the world. Now, the more furiously the
Truth is assaulted by Satan and his slaves, so much the more courageously ought
it to be maintained and defended by the zealous lovers of pure religion; but
especially by the Ministers and Pastors of the holy Gospel, who according to
that rule which the Apostle S. Paul prescribes them in his Epistle to Titus,
1. 9, ought to employ themselves diligently to exhort with wholesome doctrine
those which are willing to be instructed, and to improoue the gainsaiers. I
then being called by God into the labor of his holy Ministry, have employed
my self amidst you (according to that talent which it has pleased him to
bestow upon me) for the space of sixteen years on these two parts of my
vocation; and having respect to the multitude, and sufficiency of my
predecessors, who have taken pen in hand to instruct the ignorant, and to
refute false Teachers by their writings, I have contented my self hitherto to
follow their traces in my public Sermons and private Conferences, with such
as were desirous to profit with me in knowledge of the fundamental points of
our Christian faith, according to the occasions which were presented. But of
late having seen an Epistle written by a certain Doctor of the Augustins
Order, touching the invocation of Saints, sent unto one of my Auditors to
seduce thereby the sheep which our Sovereign Shepherd Jesus Christ has
recommended to me; I held it my duty to return it back again to Liege with
my answer, to satisfy the desire of one of his disciples; by who^ the said
Doctor having received my answer, promised him that shortly after he would
write back unto me again, and that effectually. But seeing there are almost
two years past since he held my refutation, and that in all y^ time he could
not make some small Treatise to fulfill and accomplish his promise, his silence
makes me to think, that he having considered well, examined and weighed the
arguments of my reply, has repented himself for his foolish boasting, and
that (if his conscience be not ^eared) he feels himself already checked by
the truth that shines in my Refutation; which in the mean time I have
amplified, and now published with his Epistle, following the counsel of some
excellent learned personages, with hope that I shall see it bring forth some
fruit, if not in the abouesaid Doctor, or in some of his obstinate scholars,
yet at least in such as are teachable, and especially in you my most dear and
worthy brethren, of whom I have conceived this hope, that whereas heretofore
ye have willingly heard me to entreat of this subject as well in my Sermons, as
in my familiar discourses with you, so ye will now take no less delight in
hearing me to discourse of it in this small book, which here I present you as
appertaining unto you by a double right. For first of all being consecrated to
your service from the beginning of my ministry, the propriety of every
instruction (which through Gods grace I propound unto men) is wholly yours.
Besides, seeing that the intention of my dispute is, to show the difference
between a true, and a false adoration, and to persuade every man by all
possible means to stand fast in the true, and to reject the false; to whom
could I better appropriate it then to you, to whom above all things I am bound
to teach the first point and fruit of our faith, which is, to worship God the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ in spirit and truth, and to call upon none but
him in our necessities? Whereunto, as I seek to give you some help by this
present Treatise, so do I give thanks to the Lord, for that already ye are
so well grounded and instructed in this principle of true religion, assuring my
self that he which has sown this good seed in your souls, will make it
abundantly to grow up, and to fructify in such a sort, that thereby his name
shall be glorified, your neighbor edified, and your hearts fortified against
all manner of tentations. Finally, if I perceive that this small Treatise,
which I publish under your names, be acceptable and pleasing unto you, your
courtesy will serve as a spur to prick me more cheerfully forward in my
commenced Career, and one day hereafter to entreat more at large upon this
subject, through the grace of our blessed God and heavenly Father: to whom I
recommend you, beseeching him with all my heart, that it will please him (most
dear and worthy Brethren) to maintain you even to the end in the profession
of his truth, and to replenish you with his temporal and eternal blessings,
for the advancement of his glory, and the salvation of your souls. From my
Study this 4. of August, 1607.

Your no less affectionated then serviceable Pastor and brother in the Lord,
John Polyander.

A small Table of the principal points contained in this Treatise.
FIrst, Papists themselves acknowledge and confess, that the invocation of
Saints cannot be proved by Scripture. page 18 Praying to Saints cannot be
proved by Scripture, but absolutely disproued. 19 We must call upon God only,
not the Saints. 19. 20. 21. 22 Christ is our only Mediator, the Saints are no
Mediators. page 22. 23 Christ is our only Mediator as well of intercession as
redemption. 23 Saints are no Mediators of redemption. 25 Papists reject
Christ, placing the Saints in his place. 26 Papists exalt the Virgin Mary into
the place of Christ. page 29. 30. 31 Papists place the Virgin Mary above
Christ. 32. 33 The Papists place Franciscus and Dominicus in Christ's room. 34.
35. 36 Priests and Prophets may err. 38 The Church may err. 38. 39 Councels
have erred. 39. 40. 41. 42. 43. 44. 45 Variance and contradiction among the
ancient Councels. 46 The holy Scripture is the touchstone of doctrine. 47 The
Fathers have erred. 49. 50 The Fathers inuocated the name of God only. 52. 53.
54. 55. 56. 57. 58. 59 The Fathers prayed not to the Saints. 61. 62. 63. 64 The
Fathers called upon God alone. 65. 66. 67. 68. etc. The Fathers condemned the
worshippers of angels. 57. 58. 59. 60 The ancient Fathers condemned the Adorers
of Marie. 61. 62. 63. 64 The ancient Doctors condemned the worshippers of
creatures. 52. 53. 54. etc. 59. etc. Books of the Fathers falsely fathered on
them. 81. 82. 83 An answer to his testimony taken out of the writings of
Irenaeus 85 An answer upon his testimony taken from Athanasius and Basil. 85.
86 An answer to his testimony of Damascenus. 88 Answer to his allegation of
Hierome. 88. 89 90 An answer to his allegation out of Anselmus and Bernard.
91. 92 A particular answer upon S. Bernards testimony. 94. 95 An answer upon
his citations out of Origin. 96. 97 Books perverted and altered by the
Jesuits. 98. 99. 100. 101 We ought to follow that form of prayer which Christ
has taught us. 102 False Prophets have done miracles. 103. 104 Sorcerers have
done miracles. 105 The Saints departed cannot hear our prayers. 105 The
invocation of Saints has no ground nor foundation in the holy Scripture. 107.
108 Touching his example of Abraham. 111. 112. 113 What is to be understood by
Abraham's bosom. 112. 113 There are but two ways. 112 Of Lazarus and the rich
Glutton. 111. 112. 113. 14. 15 The departed do not busy nor trouble
themselves with our affairs. 119. 120 The Saints deceased cannot hear us. 122
AN EPISTLE WRITTEN BY A CERTAIN DOCTOR OF THE AVGVSTINS ORDER WITHIN THE
CITY OF LIEGE, AND sent to a Leigois Merchant at DORT.
AFter my most humble salutations: this present may serve (according to my
small power) for to make clear unto you, some certain doubt which I
understood you have, to wit, The sum of the demand.
Whether it is true, or, how it is possible that the Saints, which are above in
heaven, can hear our Prayers, which we make to them here beneath on earth?

For the better clearing then of your demand, The answer thereof divided into
two parts.
we will here handle two points as briefly as we can, beseeching you at your
leisure you will be pleased to read them over attentively. The first will show
that it can be no otherwise then very good to pray and recommend us to the
Saints. The second will declare the manner how they may hear our prayers and
supplications. For the first, you must know, that this has always been the
doctrine of the Catholic Church, to say and teach, that this was a thing more
then reasonable, yea and most profitable for man to invoke the Saints, which
the Church has taught for the space of 1605 years, even unto this day. But
you must know this also, that certain heretics which are sprung up within
this forty or fifty years, have meant to teach and preach the clean
contrarir, to wit, the Lutherans and Caluinists, (who within a few years,
seeking to overthrow so ancient a doctrine) say that we must not pray unto the
Saints, but unto God only. Now let us see whether these novel Doctors have
been cleerer sighted, wiser, or better replenished with the spirit of God then
all the Ancients. The reason and most ordinary argument which they bring
against this doctrine, is this; It is ( say they) to do wrong and injury unto
God, to address our selves to any other then to him. Lo this is that great
piece of Canon wherewith they thunder against the walls of the town and city
of God, which is his Church. For proof whereof, they allege Saint Paul in his
first Epistle to Timotheus, the second Chapter, and fifth verse, saying, that
he calls Jesus Christ our one and only Mediator, our Intercessor, and our
Bishop. Let us cite the words of the Apostle: For, There is (says he) one God,
and one Mediator between God and man, which is the man Christ Jesus. These
words of Saint Paul will say, that there is one sovereign Mediator, which is
Jesus Christ, in that he is man: but that hinders not but there may be more
which are subordinate, and not sovereign, though that Jesus Christ be truly
our only Mediator, sole Advocate, and only Redeemer. My masters, the Ministers
and Preachers will reply and answer us; But how can these things agree
together, that Jesus Christ should be the only Mediator, and sole Intercessor
for us; and yet nevertheless we should have some others, namely the Saints?
If he be alone, how has he so many companions? To answer this objection, we
evermore confessse, that Jesus Christ is our true Mediator, and Intercessor
unto God for us: but we say also on the other side, that the Saints may be
likewise Mediators and Intercessors for us. Although that Christ be our only
mediator, yet the Saints are called mediators for three reasons.
And if you ask me again; If the Saints may also be called Mediators, (and be
so indeed) how is it then, that we call Jesus Christ the only Mediator? I
answer thereunto, that it is for certain causes and reasons, which my masters
the Ministers are either ignorant of, or malitiouslie hide and conceal them
from the people. They are three in number.

The first cause why our Lord Jesus Christ is called the Paul would have said
in the place alleged. For after he had said, that we have one Mediator
between God and man, which is the man Christ, he (explaning himself)
presently adds these words, Qui dedit redemptionem semetipsum pro omnibus:
that is to say, Who gave himself a ransom for all men.

The second cause wherefore our Lord Jesus Christ is called Austin in his 9.
book of the City of God, and 17. Chapter, S. Cyril in his 12. book, S.
Fulgence in hi^ 2. book ad Petrum, chap. 2. and S. Theodoret upon that very
place of S. Paul with many others.

Thirdly, Jesus Christ is called the only Mediator, because But Jesus Christ,
says S. Paul, of himself without the interposition of any man, approaches
unto God, to make intercession for us. This reason has beeen noted by S.
Austin, that great Doctor of the Church, when he speaks thus; The Christians
(says he) pray for one another, but he for whom no man makes intercession,
and who makes intercession for all men, is the only and true Mediator, We
then which are Catholics do confess, that according to these abouesaid
significations, Jesus Christ is truly the sole and true Mediator, only
Advocate and Intercessor. But we say also again, and that with all truth
against these heretics, that that hinders not, but the Saints living or
departed, may be so also after their manner. For truth whereof, I will refer my
self to the holy scripture. For in the fifth Chapter of Deuteronomie, Moses
calls himself a Mediator, saying thus; In French Sequestre.
I have been an vmperer, and a Mediator, between God and you: that is,
speaking of the Hebrews. Unto which words, S. Paul making an allusion in the
9. Chapter of the Hebrews, calls Jesus Christ, Mediator of the new
Testament; to make a difference between him and Moses, which had been so of
the old. And S. Gregory Nazianzenus calls the Martyrs, Mediators between God
and us: and Saint Cyril says the same of the Apostles and Prophets. For more
ample confirmation thereof, is it not certain that we have but one Savior of
the world, which is the same Jesus Christ? Verily, there is nothing more sure.
And nevertheless the scripture (which cannot lie) gives the same title of
honor to others, (though it be not for the same reason) without doing wrong or
dishonor to Jesus Christ; as namely to Othoniel in the third chapter of the
book of Judges: and Nehemiah also in the 9. Chapter of his book confirms
the same. King Pharaoh likewise (as appears in the 41. Chapter of the book
of Genesis) calls Joseph in the Egyptian tongue, not only Savior, but
Savior of the world. Therefore by these three small reasons, it is easy to be
understood, how the Saints may also be Mediators and Intercessors unto God for
us. And if they are so, we may and ought to call upon them in our necessities
and humane miseries. Neither will follow from thence, that we do reject the
Son of God, seeing we always give unto him the first rank of being the true
and only Mediator, according to the fashion above said, and the Saints in their
sort and manner. So then it can be no otherwise then exceeding good to call upon
them, as evermore they have done in our Catholic Church, which we will show
you by the authority of general Councels, and by the holy Fathers and
Doctors, which have all approved the invocation of Saints. Let us come to the
Councels.

First in the Epistle sent to all the Bishops of Europe, Other proofs taken
from the authority of Councels.
which is annexed to the Council of Chalcedonie, and solemnized under the
Emperor Leo; you snall there find these words; We put the most holy Father
Proterius into the rank of the Martyrs, craving the mercy of God. Secondly, in
the eleventh Action of that Council, the holy Fathers being there assembled
and treating upon Flauian the Martyr, say all with one consent as follows:
Flauian Martyr, which live after thy death, pray for us. Thirdly, in that
general Council, cap. 7. it is thus said; The Christian having adored one
only God, let him pray unto the Saints, that they might vouchsafe to make
intercercession for him to the divine Majesty. Furthermore, in the seventh
general Council the holy Fathers speak in this manner: Let us do all things
with a convenient fear, craving the intercessions of the most pure mother of
God, of the holy Angels, and of the Saints. Behold, therefore we say the
Letanies, which are certain prayers, addressing our selves to the Saints:
first to the most holy Trinity, to the glorious Virgin Mary, to the Apostles,
to the Martyrs, to the Confessors, and to the Virgins. And these above said
Letanies, have been commanded by many general Councels, as by that of Gerund,
by the fifth and sixth of Toledo in Spain, by the eleventh of Brachara in
Portugal, by the first of Orleans in France, and finally, by that of Magence
in Germany, which was solemnized under Charles the Great. All which Councels
(being graced with a number of excellent and learned personages) commanded for
the good and utility of the Christians, to say these above said Letanies three
days before our Lords ascension, and also at other times appointed. Which
commandment and ordinance is for us that are Catholics, a clear, evident,
and a general testimony of the invocation of Saints, as a thing which for a
long time has been believed, received, approved, and practiced in the Church
of God. For as much as these above said Councels have all of them been
solemnized almost a thousand years ago.

Let us now show, that the holy Fathers and Doctors of the Church, have all of
them with one consent taught the same. Saint Denis, the disciple of S. Paul,
cap. 7. Eccle. Hierarc. says thus; He which requires the intercession of
Saints, and will not imitate their holy works, is like unto the man that
puts out his eyes, and yet would be partaker of the beams of the Sun. The
same doctrine S. Irenaeus teaches in his 5. book against Haeres. cap. 19.
treating of the virgin Mary and Eve. S. Athanasius, in his most deuote sermon
de a^nunt. of the most glorious Virgin, prays thus unto her; Mary incline
thine ear to our prayers, and forget not thy people. And presently after he
says; We cry unto thee: Remember us most holy Virgin. And a little lower he
adds; Make intercession for us, our Mistress, our Lady, our Queen, Mother of
God. Saint Basil in his sermon of the Martyrs, says; If any man be in
tribulation, let him have his recourse to these Saints. He which is in joy, let
him call upon them also; the one to be delivered from his evil, the other to
be confirmed in his good. And S. John Chrysostom in his 66. Hom. ad Populum;
The Emperor (says he) which is clothed in scarlet, comes for to embrace the
sepulchers, and laying aside all pomp, stands up to entreat the Saints to
make intercession for him; and he which marches crowned with a diadem,
prays unto a tent-maker, and a fisherman, as protectors of the diadem,
Saint John Damascenus, lib. 4. des fide, cap. 16. treating of the profit and
benefit that comes unto us through the invocation of Saints, says; By the
Saints, the devils are chased away, the sick healed, the blind see, the
leprous cleansed, tentations and vexations overcome; and by them, every good
thing comes from the Father of lights, in favor of those that crave it with
a steadfast faith. Furthermore, S. Ambrose says in his book Deviduis, that, It
behooves us to invoke the Angels, which are given us for our sauegards; and
to pray to the Martyrs also, whose favor we pretend through the alliance of
the same nature, that they make intercession for our sins, having by their
own blood washed off those which themselves might have. These the Martyrs of
God are our Prelates, and beholders of our lives and actions. Let us not then be
afraid to take as Intercessors, those which in the midst of their victories
knew their own infirmity. Saint Hierom in his Epitaph to Paula, inuocating
this holy Lady Paula, said; Farewell O Paula, help by thy prayers the later
age of thy devoted servant: thy faith and thy works associat thee with Jesus
Christ, and being there present, thou may more easily obtain thy request.
And the most learned and most devout Doctor S. Austin in his Mediations, cap.
40. calling upon the Virgin, says; Holy and immaculate Virgin, mother of God,
Mary the mother of our Lord Jesus Christ, deigne to make intercession for me
unto him, of whom thou have been made the holy temple through thy virtues and
merits. And afterward, having inuocated all the Saints in order, he concludes;
I am become so bold to beseech thee, that it may please thee to pray for me; to
the end that I may merit to be plucked out of Satan's throat, and from eternal
death. I let slip many other excellent speeches which this Doctor has written
in his 18. sermon made of Saints. I will not here recite S. Leo and S. Gregory
(which were) Popes, neither S. Gregory of Tours, S. Anfelmus, S. Bernard, and
many more, which teach the same in this matter, for the confirmation of our
faith; of whom the half were more then too sufficient, to make all Lutherans
and Caluinists to blush, if they had any blood in their hearts. I will let
pass in silence the many miracles done through the invocation of Saints, which
the holy Father S. Austin (of whom my masters the Ministers so willingly do
help themselves, but would to God it were to a good end) sets down before
us in his 22. book of the City of God, cap. 8. I cite the book because they
might read them, and to the intent they would cease from calling us Idolaters,
seeing we do it after the example of all these holy and wise Doctors, with
whom these new Doctors deserve not to be compared. In the year two hundred and
twenty, when Doctor Origin prayed unto the holy Prophet Job, was he an
Idolater? In the year three hundred and sixty, when S. Gregory Nazaanze^us
prayed unto S. Basil in the Oration which he made for him, was he an Idolater?
At that time as S. Basil cried to the 40. Martyrs, when S. Hierome recommended
himself to the prayers of the holy Lady Paula, and likewise S. Austin to those
of the Virgin Mary's, were all these excellent and learned men Idolaters? I
believe no. Why then should these new Reformers, or rather deformers of the
Church call us Idolaters, seeing we do the same after all these holy Doctors?

But there is one thing (you will tell me) which troubles much these
Heretics, that is, that they cannot understand, nor imagine that the Saints
can hear us, affirming it is impossible, that a man which is praying upon the
earth can be heard of them into Heaven. Behold this is the second point which
in the beginning of this Epistle we have propounded: let us now come to examine
it. Know then, that the Ministers and Preachers, among some of their arguments
which in them I have noted, and in their writings this, of all other, they
esteem the most strongest, and that which they most set by. Their Captain
Calvin in the third book of his Institutions, Chap. 20. sect. 24. thinking to
allege some rare and newfound thing against us, sets down one thing which
is most ridiculous, and unmeet, I say not of a Doctor in Divinity, but even
for a simple Scholar, discoursing in this manner: Who has reueiled to us
(says he) that they have ears so long as to reach down unto our words, and
eyes so sharp that they can consider of our necessities? By these words he
would say, that the Saints to understand our prayers ought not only to have
both eyes and ears as they had upon the earth, but besides that, they must
have long ears, and great eyes, which should penetrate down unto the earth.
Wherein this good Doctor shows, that he has failed as well in Philosophy as
in Divinity; and that he himself never had either eyes or ears in his soul
to know the truth. It was pity that he had not spoke this in some of the
ancient Philosophers School; how had he been mocked! For what a folly, or what
an ignorance is it, to think that Souls being separated from their bodies,
cannot understand without the instruments of the body? Men never yet found
Philosophy, which acknowledges not even by natural light only, that the
soul being freed from the body, knows more, yea better, and much more
easily, then when it was within the body. Therefore, to account that one
should have long ears to hear the better, it is to bring Asses ears into
great request. And if so be that all Asses could speak, as well as that Ass
which was the false Prophet Balaams, I believe they would confess, that the
length of their ears makes them never a whit the quicker of hearing; but would
say that such as think it so, are greater Asses then themselves. So then this
great Doctor Master Calvin has abused himself in his doctrine. And since his
time, his and Luthers scholars, to show themselves wiser then their Masters,
have begun to require of the Catholics some express texts and examples taken
out of the holy Bible, whereby it might appear that the Saints which are above
in Paradise can understand and hear our prayers. But he that will answer them
well, should demand also of them (because they refer the deciding of every
question to the Scripture) some certain places and texts, by which the
contrary might appear, to wit, that the Saints cannot hear our prayers: and
were not this enough? would they not be confounded and overthrown? yes
undoubtedly, for they could never be able to produce so much as one only text
either out of the old or new Testament, let them read over the Bible as often as
they list; and this were an excellent way to convict them, by answering them in
this manner. But to the end they should not think that we would use shifts (as
they do in this point, and in all other occurrences) rather then by giving a
good answer, we will show them, that the Scripture fails us not in this
point, and that it makes for us, seeing they will have it so. Note then how
this is one express text of Scripture, that the Angels in heaven understand
our prayers, considering they are the reporters of them to the Divine Majesty.
Now this is also another express text of Scripture, that the Saints in heaven
shall be like to the Angels according to the saying of the Son of God in the
holy Gospel. We must then conclude, that the Saints hear our prayers, seeing
the Angels (unto whom they are likened) hear them.

Me thinks I hear already my Masters the Ministers to answer and say, that
this similitude of the Angels and Saints of which our Lord speaks in the
Gospel, consists but only in their felicity and blessedness, and not in
their nature or office, that is, our Lord would say that the Angels and the
Saints should be equal, and like to each other in heaven, because both of them
should be blessed, enjoying one selfsame glory and felicity. But let us
suppose that the case were so, let us grant and admit that the answer of these
my Masters be true; yet notwithstanding even by the same we can ensnare and
entrap them. For, seeing the estate, and happiness of future life, hinders not
the Angels from hearing the prayers of mortal men, wherefore, or how can it
be, but the Saints, being in the selfsame felicity as the Angels are, may not
also hear our prayers as well as they? this text then of Scripture shows,
that the Saints hear our prayers: they hear us, they see us, neither are
ignorant of that which is done upon the earth, which once more I will show you
out of the Scripture. For, the holy Patriarch Abraham being dead and in Limbo,
knew many things, which were done among the children of Israel, as you may see
in the sixteenth Chapter of S. Luke. First, he knew that the people had the
books of Moses and the Prophets, of whom the auncientest was Moses, who had
written more then four hundred years after the death of Abraham. Secondly, he
knew the life that the rich Glutton had led upon the earth, and the misery
which poor Lazarus had there endured. Thirdly, he saw and knew the estate and
condition of that unhappy wretch, and heard his prayer (though he was not
heard) when he cried, Father Abraham have mercy on me, and send Lazarus etc.
And yet nevertheless there was a great distance between the one and the
other, as Abraham plainly told him. Finally, the rich Glutton, though he was
damned, saw he not Abraham? heard he not his answer? gave he not his replies?
for all there was the distance of a great Gulf between them? Now (I hope)
there is no man that dares deny all this, for it is written in the holy
Gospel, and is a history pronounced by the mouth of him which cannot lie, but
is the truth himself, even Jesus Christ. If this thing and story be true (as
it is) I then charge all the Caluinian, and Lutherian Ministers, and say unto
them in this manner: If Abraham (my masters) shut up in Limbo, not enjoying at
that time the sight of God, and being not yet blessed but through hope,
notwithstanding knew the things of this world, An Argument from the least to
the greatest.
knew the state and misery of that rich Glutton, and heard him make his prayer
and request, will you think then that the Saints in Paradise beholding God and
enjoying his most bright sight, are less privileged then Abraham? therefore
the father S. Austine says excellent well, Quid non vident qui videntem omnia
vident? that is, What is it (says he) that the Saints above in heaven see not,
seeing they see him that sees all things, which is God? And that which seems
more, If the damned themselves hear those speak which are afar off from
them, as the rich man heard Abraham, and by those words showed himself
mindful and careful of his brethren which were yet in the world, being afraid
lest they should come into the same place of torment wherein he was, as you may
see what he spoke unto Abraham in the Gospel; shall we imagine that the Saints
and all those which are in the kingdom of heaven see and know not that which
we do upon the earth? And if the Saints, and all the blessed ones that are
departed this life, know the things of this world, what ought they to hear or
know more then the prayers which are made unto them? And if they understand and
can hear the voice of the damned, is it possible in your opinion that they
should not understand the prayers and requests of those which desire to be
saved? If the damned themselves (as appears by the story of the rich Glutton)
would procure that no harm might happen to their brethren and friends, will
those which are saved be less charitable? will not they advance, and help
forward (as much as in them lies) the salvation of their friends and Christian
brethren? and that so much the more, if they see and hear that one requires
them thereunto.

Sir, now you may demand of me and say, If so be I should conesse that the
Saints hear our prayers, yet feign would I know, how and in what manner they
hear us? To say the truth, this is a very hard thing to be understood, and
nevertheless it is true. The father S. Austine acknowledging the hardness of
this question, and through humility the small capacity of his spirit (though
it was very great) in his book which he has made and entitled, De cura pro
mortuis agenda, c. 16. says, that In truth this question surpasses the force
of my understanding, being not able to conceive after what a fashion the
Martyrs help those which we know to be entirely helped by them.

By these words S. Austin acknowledges well, that it is hard for him to
understand how they know the things of this world; nevertheless, he believes
that they know them, and that indeed and certainly (as he says) we are
succored by them. Wherein it may please you to note one difference among the
rest, that there is between our Catholicall Doctors, and the Heretical
Doctors, that is, Ours if they cannot attain to the total and perfect
knowledge of that matter or question which they handle, they will not dispute
it so far, as to deny the question and thing because they find it hard and
surpassing their understandings; but admitting of the thing with humility they
acknowledge only the smalnes of their capacity, as with very great modesty
the most learned father S. Austin has done in this point. But these new
heretical Doctors which are come up with and after Luther and Calvin, though
the thing or question disputed be true, and grounded upon good reason, because
they cannot comprehend nor compass it within their understandings, flatly
deny and reject the thing, as we see them daily do in many other points and
articles of religion, seeking always to reduce them within the capacity of
their spirits (which very often is but small) and ruinating the nature of
faith, which consists in believing things that surpass the reason and
understanding of man. And the like they do even in this subject whereof we now
entreat. And therefore because they cannot conceive how the blessed ones do
hear us, they say and preach they cannot hear us. They must also then deny,
that God of nothing has created this world; for it is impossible to comprehend
how God was able to create of nothing so huge a frame as this whole world is;
and yet notwithstanding both they and we steadfastly believe that God even of
nothing was able to create it, though our understandings cannot conceive a jot
of it. Let them then also deny the general resurrection of the dead, if one
must deny all things which they cannot understand; or let them show me how God
is able to restore again unto man his own flesh, his own bones, and the rest
of the parts of his body (and not another) after it has been eaten up of
worms so many thousand years before, and yet neither we nor they make doubt
thereof, though we understand it not. The like could I say unto them of the
mystery of the holy Trinity, and many other things contained in the holy
Scripture, that albeit they are hard to be believed, yet they cease not to be
true. Therefore it were much better for my masters the Ministers to confess
with humility their weakness with the good father Saint Austine, and with him
and us to believe that the Saints can hear and assist us. But what? Heresy is
too proud, and the Heretics will never be overcome, they may be convinced (as
Saint Bernard says) but not overcome, because they are too passionate in
maintaining their errors. One may confound them rather then make them confess
their fault, and as the proverb says, Rather break then bend.

Now to the end the Caluinists and Lutherans (because we say with our father S.
Austine, that this is a very hard demand to be understood) should not think
that we seek an escape through the boggs, and that the truth makes not for
us, we will let down before them the doctrine of that same Doctor S. Austine
in his abouesaid book De cura pro mortuis agenda. For S. Austine minding
particularly to declare how Abraham knew that the rich glutton had taken his
pleasure in his life time, and that Lazarus had suffered so much, gives us
three manner of ways whereby the souls departed may know and understand that
which is done in this world. Three reasons whereby the dead understand.
First, by the arrival of those which depart out of this life, and go from
hence unto them, who (to wit) may advertise them of the things which happen
upon the earth, and especially of that which most of all concerns them. The
second, by the report of the Angels, which on a sudden mount up into heaven,
and on a sudden again even in a trice are about us. The third, by the
revelation of Gods spirit, which may bear it self toward the blessed
departed into heaven, even in like manner as heretofore it bore it self toward
the Prophets upon the earth, revealing secret things to them, and such as
should be done a long time after them, as the Scripture witnesses, so that God
who sees and knows all things whatsoever we do, say, and think, may reveal
unto them our prayers. S. Gregory (lib. 12. Mor. c. 13.) gives us beside these
another sort or manner, saying, that the Saints beholding the face of God, see
all that which in any sort and manner appertains unto them, and consequently,
that they also hear our prayers. So then by the doctrine of these holy Fathers
we may somewhat gather how the blessed Saints hear us when we call unto them.
I will make one more small argument against all these Heretics, and therewith I
will conclude the whole. All the holy Fathers and Doctors of the Church have
inuocated and prayed unto the Saints; they hear then our prayers. The
Antecedent has been already proved, when we cited a great number of those
which have called upon them. The Consequence is clear: for seeing that so
godly and learned personages prayed unto them, it is a sign and follows
necessarily, how they believed with the Church that the Saints could well hear
our prayers, otherwise they would not have been so simple as to have prayed
unto them. To say (as sometimes the Ministers say against us) that they were
men, and as men might have erred, that were too absurd to answer us. For could
it be possible that among so great a number of admirable, virtuous, and wise
Doctors all of them should fail, and that not one of them should have thought
whether the Saints could hear them or no? Could it be possible that the whole
Church should be in error for a thousand and so many years, and that in so
many ages the Church should have been ignorant of that which the Lutherans and
Caluinists pretend to know since so small a time? Could it be possible that all
the ancient Fathers, and such excellent personages, as S. Denis, S.
Athanasius, S. Basil, S. John Chrysostom, S. John Damascenus, S. Ambrose, S.
Hierome, S. Gregory, S. Austin, and many other lights of the Church, have
presented so many prayers and petitions to those which neither had ears to
hear them, nor eyes to behold their necessities, and so consequently have
cast their prayers into the wind, into the air, and at random? Shall we
believe that of them? Shall we believe that all have erred, and that our
Ministers only say well? That all have ben^ blind, and that our Ministers
only are clear sighted? That all of them have been simple Scholars and
disciples, and our Ministers their Doctors and Controllers? No, we will never
believe any such thing. We had rather hear the voice of our ancient, godly,
and wise Doctors, then the voice of new and unlearned, which for this cause
deserve not the name of Pastors and Shephards, but Mercenaires only,
suffering their sheep to be devoured up, yea themselves through their
pernicious doctrine casting them into the throat of that infernal wolf; from
whom (Sir) I pray God through his infinite mercy to preserve you: beseeching
you to take in good part this which in haste I send you, though unknown unto
you: protesting before God, who knows the hearts of all men, that all this
which here I have spoken is only for his glory, and your souls health.

Farewell, from Liege, this fifth of August. 1605.
AN ANSWER TO THE ABOVESAID DOCTORS EPISTLE of the Augustins order, Upon the
subject of the invocation of Saints.
Having of late seen and read your Letter, touching that controversy which is
between you and us, Whether it is true, or how it is possible that the Saints
which are above in heaven, can hear the Prayers that you make unto them, from
here beneath on earth; I held it my duty to answer thereunto, and chiefly to
these two points, whereof the first is, That it can be no otherwise then very
good to pray and recommend us to the Saints: the second signifies, How and in
what manner they may hear your Prayers and Supplications. For to build the
first point, you lay down two Articles and principles most false: The one,
That this has always been the doctrine of the Christian Church, to say and
teach that this was a thing more then reasonable, and most profitable to man,
to invoke the Saints, yea, that the Church has taught the same for the space
of 1605 year unto this day. The other, How certain Heretics which are sprung
up within this forty or fifty years, have meant to preach and teach the
clean contrary; to wit, those whom you call Lutherans and Caluinists; who,
but a few years ago, endeavoring to ^uerthrow so ancient a doctrine (according
to your opinion) have said and say still, that we must not call upon any of the
Saints, but upon God only. I say that your first foundation is false, because
(as Eckius one of your principal Doctors plainly confesses in his book of
the worshipping of Saints) that it is impossible for you to allege one only
text either out of the old or new Testament, whereby you can prove that either
Christ, his Evangelists or Apostles have commanded us to adore the Saints, or
have recommended this service to us, as very profitable or reasonable. Also
Petrus a Scoto confesses, that the invocation of Saints, is not taught in the
books of the Prophets and Apostles, but is there insinuated. And likewise some
of the Jesuits say, that it is not manifestly represented in them, but
obscurely and mystically, or by certain consequences which are pretended, and
not well grounded. And for this cause the Council of Trent recommending it
unto the Christians, makes no mention of the authority of the holy Scripture,
but of the ancient custom only, of the consent of fathers, and of the decre^s
of holy Councels. From whence follows, that this commandment of inuocating
the Saints, has not been given to the Christians (as you write) a thousand
six hundred and five years ago or thereabouts, but has been a long time
after forged (as I will prove in due place) by your Predecessors, who have
made no conscience to teach for doctrine of salvation their own traditions,
and human inventions* Which having showed, your second foundation will tumble
down of it self, that is, how this rule of worshipping God alone has been
invented by those whom wrongfully you term Lutherans and Caluinists: for we
acknowledge none for our sovereign Doctor and Master, but our Lord Jesus
Christ, the only perfect wisdom, and essential word of his Father; who has
spoken heretofore to our Fathers by the ancient Prophets, and since being
manifested in our flesh, We are not of Paul, nor Apollo, but of Christ.
has spoken himself by his sacred mouth to his Disciples, and after his
Ascension by his Apostles, who as faithful Secretaries, and dispensators of the
secrets of God, have left us in writing the fundamental points of pure
Religion, and touching this point have taught us, that God only (and no other)
ought to be called upon by us in our necessities. And although this is as
clear, as the Sun shine in a bright day at noone, yet because you are blind,
and leaders of the blind, as your predecessors the Scribes and Pharisees were
in the time of Jesus Christ, we will allege against you some certain proofs
for that which is abouesaid, to the end they may serve as a clear light to
those which wink not with their eyes, that they might not see in seeing, but
open them with a holy desire to behold this light. When God says in the first
Commandment of his law, given by Moses to our Fathers, Exodus 20. 3. A
particular refutatio^ from the authority of holy Scripture.
*Thou shall have none* other Gods before me: what does he signify by this
prohibition, but only that we ought not to acknowledge any other God and
Savior but him, nor to attribute to any one, that honor which is proper to
him? that is, to call upon him only in our anguishes, according to that
express command which he gives us in Deuteronom. Deuteronomy. 6. 13.
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and serve him. And by the Prophet Asaph
in the 50 Psalm, Psalm. 50. 14. 15.
verses 14. 15. Offer unto God praise, and pay thy vows unto the most high,
and call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will deliver thee, and thou shall
glorify me. And to stir us up the more thereunto, he denounces by the
Prophet Esaias, Isaiah 42. 8.
chap. 42. and 8 verse, I am the Lord, this is my name, and my glory will I
not give to another, neither my praise to graven Images. And in the 45 chap.
and 21 verse, Isaiah 45. 21.
Have not I the Lord? and there is none other God beside me, a just God and a
Savior; there is none beside me. And in the 22 verse: Look unto me and ye
shall be saved: all the ends of the earth shall be saved: for I am God, and
there is none other. If hereupon you object against me, that God commands not
by these places that we should only worship him, and none other beside him:
Anticipation*
The answer is clear, to wit, that this commandment of God was so
interpreted by the Prophet Samuel, and in the fullness of time by our
Sovereign Doctor Jesus Christ himself. For therefore you may see how the
Prophet warns all the house of Israel in the 7 chapter of his book and third
verse, where he says: If ye be come again unto the Lord with all your heart,
put away the strange gods from among you, and Ashtoroth, and direct your hearts
unto the Lord, and serve him only, and he shall deliver you out of the hand of
the Philistims. By which you may see, that the Prophet Samuel shows unto the
children of Israel, that the means and way to convert and direct themselves
unto the Lord with all their hearts, is to serve him only, and to take away
from before his eyes the Idols of the Heathen, which he calls the gods of
the strangers. Even so also our Lord Jesus Christ, being tempted in the
wilderness by the wicked spirit, which had transported him upon a high
mountain, and showed him all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of
them, with promise, that he would give them all unto him if so be he would fall
down and worship him, he alleges against Satan that which is written in the
sixth chapter of the book of Moses called Deuteronomie, expounding the intention
of his father, as he which is his Counselor (witness the Prophet Isaiah in
his ninth chapter and fifth verse) he adds thereto this word ( only) when he
answers Satan, that in that place it is written, Matthew. 4. 10.
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve: as though
he would have said, That the service which is due unto God only, is to worship
him, and to prostrate our selves before him. And to this end and purpose the
sons of Korah, who composed the 44 Psalm, teach us, in the 20 and 21 verses,
that to call upon any other besides God, is to forget and deny him. Psalm. 44.
20. 21.
If (say they) we have forgotten the name of our God, and holden up our hands
to a strange god, shall not God search this out? for he knows the secrets of
the heart. And when the Apostle S. Paul makes this demand in his Epistle to
the Romans, Rom, 10. 14.
How shall they call on him in whom they have not believed? he shows thereby,
that as man is forbidden to believe in any other but in God only, Invocation
ought to have the same object, as faith.
so is he not permitted to pray unto any other then to the Creator of heaven
and earth, seeing that invocation is the companion of faith. And therefore King
David in his Psalms addresseth his prayers to none but only unto God, with a
full assurance of faith, oftentimes calling him, his buckler, his shield, his
retreat, his foundation, his deliverer, his tower, his fortress, his defender,
and the horn of his salvation. According to which the Prophet Asaph (in the 73
Psalm, Psalm. 73. 25.
and 25 verse) signifies, That God only is his refuge in his distresses: For
(says he) whom have I in heaven but thee? and I have desired none in the
earth with thee. Also it is written in the 2. of the Chron. 20. 9. that King
Iehoshaphat, being afraid of the Moabites and Ammonites which were come to
assail him, disposed himself to pray unto the Lord, and in the prayer which
he made in the temple in the name of his people, says: 2. Chron. 20. 9.
If evil come upon us, as the sword of judgment, or pestilence, or famine, we
will stand before this house and in thy presence (for thy name is in this
house) and will cry unto thee in our tribulation, and thou will hear and
help. But to come now unto your Argument, which scornfully you call The great
piece of Canon, wherewith we thunder against the walls of the town and city
of God which is his Church; this it is, That whosoever addresseth himself to
any other but to God, does wrong to God. For proof whereof you add that which
we allege out of the first Epistle of S. Paul to Timotheus, the second
chapter and fifth verse: 1. Tim. 2.^.
That as there is (but) one God, so there is (but) one Mediator between God
and men, to wit, the man Christ Jesus. You shuffle together, either through
ignorance, Transition for the examination and true understanding of our
Arguments.
or malice, the Questions that are distinct, and severally handled by our
Divines. The first is, Who is it that we ought to call upon? whereunto we
answer, God only. The second, In whose name? whereunto we answer, In the name
of Jesus Christ, who is our only Advocate and Intercessor. For confirmation
not of the first, (as you presuppose) but of the second answer, we allege
the abouesaid text out of the first Epistle to Timotheus, in the second chapter
and fifth verse: which I pray you against an other time to note, and to take
better advice and consideration upon our Arguments, that you may propound them
more sincerely. Touching your exception, though the Apostle S. Paul teaches us
in that very text which I have named, that there is but one Mediator, yet (you
say) that That hinders not but there may be some which are subordinate and not
sovereign. The distinction of Mediators subordinate and not sovereign,
refuted as vain,
It shows from what a spirit it comes forth, even from the spirit of lying
and contradiction. Of lying, because you add thereto, that which is not found,
nor can be gathered from that abouesaid text of the Apostle, to wit, that
Jesus Christ is the sovereign. Mediator only in regard of others which are
inferior. Of contradiction, because you your self say thus: Though that Jesus
Christ be truly our only Mediator, sole Advocate, and only Redeemer, that that
hinders not but there may be more which are subordinate and not sovereign,
For, to be only Mediator, and to have some others besides, as subordinate, are
things contradictorie. And if you will, that we should admit of such a gloss,
you must then grant to us, that out of this very text will follow, that when
the Apostle says, There is but one God, he means one sovereign God; and
albeit that verily he is only God, yet notwithstanding there be others
subordinate, which one can neither speak nor think without blasphemy.
Hereupon you allege two replies of our Ministers: The first, How can these
things agree together, The examination of the Sophists first reason.
that Christ is our only Mediator, and sole Intercessor for us, and
nevertheless there are some others besides him, to wit, the Saints? The
second, If the Saints may also be called Mediators (and are so indeed) how
then is it that Jesus Christ is called the only Mediator? To speak properly,
these two replies are but one: now let us see your answer upon the latter, and
the answer which you allege therein with share reproach, that our Ministers
are either ignorant of them, or maliciously hide and conceal them from the
people. Now what are they? The first, is Although that Christ only has
redeemed us with his precious blood, it follows not from thence, that he is
only the Mediator of redemption,
that Jesus Christ is called the only Mediator, because that he alone has
tro^de upon the grapes in the wine press, and through the price of his blood
has paid our ransom, and has reconciled us unto God his eternal father, not
only in praying, but also in paying that which we did owe: which the Saints
have not done, nor cannot do. All this is true, but that which you add is
false, that Jesus Christ is the only Mediator, that is to say, only of
Ransom and Redemption, and this is that which S. Paul means in the place
alleged: for after he says, We have one Mediator between God and men, which
is the man Christ Jesus, in explaining himself he presently adds these
words: Quit dedit redemptionem semetips^m pro omnibus, that is, who gave
himself a ransom for all men. For although the Apostle makes no mention in
this place, but of the first effect: of the mediation of our Lord Jesus Christ;
it follows not from thence, that his intent was to exclude the second, which
he sets down elsewhere expressly, and namely in his Epistle to the
Romans, and 8. chapter, verse. 34. where he joins together those two fruits
of the mediation of our Redeemer: for when he first demaudeth this, Romans 8. 34.
Who shall condemn us? and answers himself; It is Christ which is dead,
yea, or rather which is risen again, to wit, for to deliver us from
condemnation, in those words he sets down the first effect and going
forward in answering, A forcible reason to show that Christ is our only
Mediator, as well of intercession as of Redemption.
who is also at the right hand of God, and makes request also for us, he
likewise sets down the second, and gives us sufficiently to understand,
that Jesus Christ is our Mediator and Advocate toward God, not only in so
much as he has redeemed us, but also in so much that he makes intercession
unto God his father for us, and presents to him our supplications. And albeit
that the Apostle in the abouesaid text to Tim. chap. 2. speaks nothing of the
intercession of Jesus Christ, yet nevertheless S. Austin having respect to
that which the Apostle admonishes us of in the verses going before, that is,
to make requests unto God for all men, and that in the name of his son Jesus
Christ, he expounded it, as though the Apostle had there made an express
mention of our Saviors intercession, as you may perceive by those words of his
second book contra Parm. cap. 8. The mutual prayers (says he) of all the
members which yet labor upon the earth, ought to ascend up to the Head, which
is gone before into Heaven in whom we have the remission of our sins. For if
S. Paul were a Mediator, the other Apostles would be so also, and so there
would be many mediators, which would not agree with that, which elsewhere he
says, That there is one mediator between God and men.

The second cause, The examination of the Sophist second reason by concession.
why you confess that Jesus Christ is called the only Mediator, is because he
is not only so, by reason of that office whereby he mediates for us and
reconceleth us unto God, but by reason also of his nature, for he is in the
midst between God and man, being both God and man together, which the Saints
are not. And for this cause he is called the only Intercessour, like as the
good and holy Fathers in time past have taught us, to wit, S. Austin in the
ninth book of the City of God, and 17. chapter, S. Cyril in his 12. book, S.
Fulgence in his second book ad Petrum, chap. 2. and S. Theodoret upon that
very place of S. Paul, with many others. We grant you this second reason, and
besides we say that it makes wholly for us. And Tertullian, or as some think,
Nouatianus, which in those days was Priest to the Roman Church, proposes us
this reason incommunicable to the Saints in the book of the Trinity, chap 13.
16. to show us that if Christ were only Man, as the Saints are, he could not be
out Mediator, not hear and succor us unto God his father through his
intercession. If (says he) Christ were man only, how is he present every where
being called upon, seeing it is not the nature of man, but of God, that he can
be present in all places? And if Christ were man only, why is a man inuocated
in our prayers for a Mediator, seeing the invocation of a man is judged to be
forcelesse to perform salvation! If Christ also be only man, why is confidence
put in him, seeing that the hope which is placed in man is accursed? Wherefore
he which is declared to be made Medtatour between God and men, is found to
have united in himself both God and Man.

The third reason which you allege that Jesus Christ is called the only
Mediator is, because that he is mediator in such a sort for all men, that he
has no need of any mediator either for himself or for others. Now the
Saints as well in this world as in the other, though they are Mediators and
Intercessours for us, in reconciling us to God through their prayer, have
nevertheless needs of Jesus Christ themselves to be reconciled (...) God
through his intercession, and in his name they (...) all that which they do
obtain for us. The examination of the third reason.
But Jesus Christ (says S. Paul) without the interposition of any other goes
unto God of himself to make intercession for us. This reason has been noted
by Saint Austin that great doctor of the Church, Partly by concession, and
partly by Negation.
when he says thus: The Christians pray one for another, but be for whom no
man makes intercession, and who makes intercession for all, is the true and
only Mediator. We also admit of this third reason, that Jesus Christ is the
only Mediator, because that he has no need of any other Mediator, either for
himself or for others. But we deny that which you affirm without any proof
out of the holy Scripture, to wit, that the Saints as well in this world as in
the other, Anticipation.
are our mediators and Intercessors. For albeit, the Scripture commands the
Saints living in this world to pray the one for the other; yet you can in no
wise from thence conclude that they are our mediators and intercessors, but
that they are our companions and fellow-helpers, who to assist us, join their
prayers with ours, to move (as much as in them lies) our heavenly father to
mercy, as being fellow-brethren, and members with us of one selfsame
spiritual body, whereof Christ is the head. And this is that which S. Austin
understood in saying, That all the members pray the one for the other, but the
head is Mediator for all. Now touching the Saints departed, I am astonished
that you dare maintain they are our mediators; seeing the holy Scripture
expresses nothing thereof; but concontrariwise, S. John (including himself in
the rank of all the other faithful members dispersed in this world, for whom
Jesus Christ was made a Propitiation, and for whom he makes intercession to
God his father) teaches us in his first epistle, second chapter and first
verse: that If any man sin we have an Aduocat with the father, 1. John 2. 1.
to wit, Jesus Christ the just. And our Lord Jesus Christ calling himself, The
way, The truth and the life, says expressly that No man comes unto the Father
but by him: in the Gospel written according to S. John, c. 14. and 6. v.
Whereunto the Apostle S. Paul conformablie says: Ephesians. 3. 12.
that by the faith which we have in Christ, we have boldness and entrance to
the Father with confidence. Ephesians. 3. 12. to the end that we may receive
mercy, Heb. 4. 16.
and find grace to help in time of need. And that by the blood of Jesus, we
may be bold to enter into the holy place, by the new and living may, which he
has prepared for us, through the veil, Heb. 10. 19. 10.
that is, his flesh. Heb. 10. 19. 20. In fine, that his priesthood is
everlasting. Wherefore he is able also perfectly to save them that come unto
God by him, seeing he euerlineth, to make intercession for them. Heb. 7. 24.
25. Re^u^at^ on of the Sophists conclusion against us.
Heb. 7. 24. 25. But to come to your conclusion: we which are Catholics ( say
you) confess well, that according to those significations abouesaid, that
Jesus Christ is truly the Sole Mediator, only Advocate and Intercessour: but
we also say, and that in all truth, against these heretics, that that
hinders not, but the Saints living or departed, may be so also in their
fashion. But now what will you say if I should show you by the Formulary of your
prayers, that according to those significations abouesaid, you do not hold
Jesus Christ for your only Mediator and Intercessor? Here is showed how our
adversaries cut the throat of their own cause, with their own knives.
Say you not, Precibus and meritis beat semperque virginis Mariae, and amnium
sanctorum, perducat nos dominus ad regna caelorum? That is to say: By the
prayers and merits of the most blessed and always virgin Mary, and of all the
Saints, the Lord bring us into the kingdom of heaven. What is that I pray you
but to attribute to the virgin Mary, and the rest of all the Saints departed,
not only that they should pray for us, but also that they have merited for us?
and so consequently that they are our Mediators, not only of Intercession, but
also of ransom and redemption. Do you not teach in your Catechism made by
the authority of the Council of Trent, That men ought to inuocat the Saints,
inasmuch as God through their merit and grace does us good? Approve you not
that which Barnardine de Busto writes in his Marial of the virgin Mary, That
first of all she is Mediatrix of our salvation: 2. Mediatrix of our conjunction
and union: 3. Mediatrix of our justification: 4. Mediatrix of our
reconciliation: 5. Mediatrix of our intercession: and 6. Mediatrix of our
communication? Sing ye not, O pia puerpera, nostra pians scelera, iure matris
impera Redemptori: that is, O godly Child-bearer, thou which purgest us from
our sins, command our Redeemer by the authority of a mother? Allow you not
also the sentence of Lombard, who says in the 4 book of his Sentences, Did
45. That the Saints make intercession for us, both by their merits, in that
they supply the defect of ours, and by their affection, in that they join
themselves to our prayers? and therefore (says he) ^e pray unto them, that
they might make intercession for us, to wit, that their merits may be allowed
us, and that they might wish our good, because that they wishing it, Godwils it
also. See now how your own words, and those of your Doctors, convince you of
contradiction and manifest falsehood. As for the other part of your Conclusion,
it is weakly grounded, and even by your own reasons is easy to be
overthrown; that is, seeing with us you confess, that Jesus Christ only has
redeemed us, through the merit of his death and passion, and that he is only
true God and true man, that he alone has no need of any other Mediator,
either for himself or for others: you cannot maintain against us with truth,
that the Saints living or dead, are in any fashion our Mediators and
Intercessors: yet you seek nevertheless to prove it by some texts out of the
Bible. For truth whereof (say you) I refer my self to the holy Scripture;
for in the fifth Chapter of De^terenomie, Moses calls himself a Mediator,
Sequestre.
saying, I have been an Vmperer, and a Mediator between God and you, speaking
to the Hebrews. Unto which words S. Paul making an allusion in the 9. Chapter
and 15. verse to the Hebrews, calls Jesus Christ the Mediator of the new
Testament, to put a difference between him and Moses which had been of the old.
Howbeit this example of Moses will not serve your turn as a proof, The
Popists do wrong unto the word of Mediator, either through ignorance or malice.
but to the first part of your Affirmation, to wit, that the living are
Mediators and Advocates for others. I tell you moreover, that in this lense,
Moses never calls himself a Mediator between God and men: but, as himself
has well interpreted it, he bore messages between both the parties, that is,
between God and the children of Israel. For in the Hebrew tongue you shall
there find these very words of Moses, Deuteronomy. 5. 5.
saying: At that time I stood between the Lord and you, to declare unto you
the word of the Lord. If you reply hereupon, that Moses is called (...) (that
is, a Mediator) in the Epistle to the Galathians, the third chapter and
nineteenth verse: I answer, that sometimes this Greek word signifies an
Interpretour, which goes and comes to and fro between two parties, and that in
this signification it is said by the Apostle to the Galathians, that the Law
was ordained by Angels in the hand of a Mediator, to wit, Moses who twice went
up to the mountain, and came down again with the two Tables of the law of
God, to read and expound them to the Israelites. In which sense we grant you,
that he, the high Priests, and the ancient Prophets, who have interpreted the
will of God, and have offered up unto him in the name of our Fathers, may be
called Mediators, and the Apostles also: but not in that sense in which
heretofore we have declared, that the Apostle S. Paul calls Jesus Christ the
only Mediator, in the first epistle to Timothy, the second chapter and fifth
verse, where the Apostle takes this word of Mediator for a Reconciler, as
himself expounds it, saying, That he gave himself a ransom for us: in
which sense this title beseems none properly, but Jesus Christ only, neither
can it be attributed (without blasphemy) to the members of his Church.

But let us examine a little your proof that follows: Is it not true (you
demand me) that we have but one Savior of the world, which is Jesus Christ?
Whereunto you answer, that there is nothing more true. And nevertheless the
scripture which cannot lie gives the same title of honor to others, without
doing wrong, or dishonor to Jesus Christ: as to Othoniel in the third chapter
of the book of Judges, and ninth verse. And Nehemiah in the ninth chapter of
his book confirms the same, King Pharaoh also, as appears in the 41.
chapter of Genesis, calls Joseph in the Egyptian tongue, not only Savior,
but Savior of the world. From whence (with a long circumlocution of words) you
conclude, that by these three small reasons it is easy to be understood how
the Saints may also be mediators and intercessors unto God for v^ and if they
are so, It is (...) from the (...) of a Savior, given to some as types of the
Savior himself.
then we may and ought to call upon (...) our human necessities; and that it
will not follow from thence^ that you should reject the son of God; for as
much as you always give to him the first rank of being the true and only
mediator, according to the fashion as you have said, and the Saints is their
sort an^^man^r. So then it will be exceeding well done to invoke them, as
they always have done in your catholic church.

It goes well with you, when you your self term your reasons small, and
confess beside, that the holy scripture gives this title of honor to others
then to our Lord Jesus Christ, though it be nevertheless for some other
reason. And indeed those which you have named in the old Testament are called
saviors or deliuerors; yet was it in regard that God had ordained them as
instruments of deliverance for his people, and for types and figures of the
Savior which was to come. But the holy scripture in no manner calls the
deceased Saints mediators: neither does it teach us, that they are established
by God for instruments of mediation between God and us; so that this argument
of yours drawn from the name of savior, makes nothing for your cause. As
touching your Anticipation and excuse: that although you pray unto the Saints
yet nevertheless you do not reject the son of God, In vain do the papists
boast of giving lesus Christ the first rank of innocation.
because you always give unto him the first rank of being the true and only
mediator, according to that fashion which formerly you have spoken of: it is
easy to answer and prove the contrary by the manner and custom of you^
catholic church, whereupon you ground your superstitions. So it is then, that
in the hours and Rosarie appointed for the virgin Mary, you equal her with our
redeemer, in calling hit Reparatrix and Sal^atrix of mankind: The queen of
mercy, the valiant woman, which has broken the serpents head, and she alone
that has rooted out all the heresi^s in the world. Cardinal B^nauenture makes
no conscience to appropriate to hit all that David in his psalms has
attributed to God the father, the son, and the holy Ghost. Blessed^ is that
man (says he) which lives Mary, which gives praise unto (...) name, which
puts his trust in her, Execrable blasp^^mies of the Romish church.
which hops in hit. Come unto her all ye that are weary, and she will give
rest unto your souls. The heavens declare thy glory: The earth and her
fullness is thine, thou raignest eternally with God: blessed are those which
make much of thee, because in thy mercies thou will wash their sins: have
mercy on me, mother of mercy, and according to the bowels of thy mercies wash
me from all mine iniquities. Wicked serpent whereof bostest thou thy self? put
thy neck under Mary, o Lady bruise him by the virtue of thy foot: cast him
down by thy force into the bottomless pu. Save me in thy name, and deliver me
from mine unrighteousness: take pity on me, for my heart is ready to receive
thy will. Lord for our sins thou have repulsed us, and because of the virgin
Marie have taken pity on us. Let Marie arise, and all her enemies shall be
destroyed. Lord give thy judgment to thy son, and thy mercy to the queen
his mother. God is the God of vengance: Lady, salvation and life consists in
thy hand. O how good is God unto them that worship his mother! Come and let us
adore the Lady, let us give praise unto the virgin that has saved us. Let us
worship her, and confess unto her our sins. The Lord reigns, Mary fitteth
upon the Cherubins at his right hand; wh^ dwells under her wing is under a
safe protection: have remembrance o Lady of David, and of all those which call
upon thy name. The Lord said to my Lady, sit my mother at my right hand: thou
have taken pleasure in goodness and holiness; and therefore shall thou reign
with me. Praise the Lord because he is good, for his mercy is given by Mary.
You transfer in like manner to the Virgin, that which in all humility of
heart, she sung to the honor of her Creator and Savior. And in stead of that
which she sung (as the Evangelist S. Luke witnesses in the first chapter, and
45. verse) My soul magnifieth the Lord, and my spirit rejoices in God my
Savior, etc. Because he that is mighty, has done for me great things, etc.
you say, My soul magnifieth my Lady, and my heart rejoices in my Lady:
because he that is mighty, has done for me great things through Mary his
mother. What should I say more? You celebrate in your Canticles the Virgin
Mary, as Lady of the Angels, espouse and Mother of the eternal king; Promise
of the Patriarchs; Verity of the Prophets; Teacher of the Apostles; Mistr^s
of the Evangelists, Lady of the Word, and Queen of Heaven. And hereupon you
beseech her that she would save her people. Likewise you crave of her in
express terms, all that which God himself will or can give unto us, by his
only son Jesus Christ: Impetra nobis veniam, applica nobis grattam, prapar^
nobis gloriam: that is to say, Obtain pardon for us, apply grace unto us,
prepare glory for us. You have corrupted Simeons song, and in stead of that
which the Evangelist Saint Luke recites in the second chapter, and 29 verse,
how this good Father holding the Savior of the world in his arms, blesses
God and says, Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in peace according to
thy word: for mine eyes have seen thy salvation, which thou have prepared
before the face of all people: you misturne these his words to the handmaide of
the Virgin Mary, Deprauation of an express text of Scripture, by those in
popedom.
saying: Lord now let thou depart in peace the handmaid of the Virgin Mary:
for mine eyes have seen the salvation of Mary, which thou have prepared before
the face of all people, a light to inlighten the Gentiles, etc. You hold her
for the true salvation, the true felicity, the greatness of charity, the
largeness of piety, unto whom the Angels obey: as by one of your Letanies
appears. Which is worse, your Cardinals and Bishops assembled in the Council
of Constance, in which they condemned to death John Hus, and Jerome of Prague,
both of them Bohemians, constant in the true faith, to add unto the heap of
their cruelty against these Martyrs some token of their impiety, and hatred
against the holy Ghost, which had endowed these two witnesses with his truth,
and with such a mouth and wisdom against which these good fathers were not
able to resist: they thought good to apply unto the Virgin Mary, that prayer
which is made to the honor of the holy Ghost, and in stead of saying, as
before, Veni sancte Spiritus, etc. to have made them sing: Veni maier gratiae,
fons misericordiae, miseris remedium, veni lux Ecclesiae, tristibus laetiti^,
^^ne infund^ radium, Simonis nanicula, fi^y tunicula, (...) scindatur prohibe*
quae Deu^ hominibus, and (...) inngis o puerpera! Hereses interime,
schismataque reprime, firm^ pacis f^^era. That is to say: Come mother of grace,
fountains of mercy, remedy of the wretched, c^^e light of the Church, shed
upon these heavy souls, the beam of joy. the small ship of Simon surnamed
Peter: suffer not the little coat^ of thy son to be torn in pieces, o mother
in childbed, which co^ioynest God with men, and the inferior creatures with
the celestial: ab^lish Heresies, repress Schisms, and establish the
covenants of peace. I am astonished at the blasphemies of Barnardine de Busto,
and Anthonine Archbishop of Florence, who set the Virgin Mary above the only
son of God: for see what Barnardin^ says of her in his Mariall: Men may say
of the Virgin Mary, that she is the light of the Gen^les and the glory of her
people Israel. For God at her nativity said unto her, I have given thee as a
light to the Gentiles, to the end thou may be our salvation to the ends of
the earth, a light to lighten the Gentiles. All graces (says he) come down
upon us from the Father and the Son by the Virgin Mary, mediatrix between God
and men: no grace comes from heaven but by her hands. All graces enter into
her, and come forth from her: They are in Christ ^s in the head from whence
they flow they are in Mary as in the neck which distributeth them. These whole
pages show, how the pretended Ca^holikes, which differ much from the words of
lesus Christ, do indeed bereave him of his most sweet flowers of honor, to
adorn the Virgin with them.
Moreover, If any man feel himself grieved at Gods justice, he may appeal
to the Virgin Mary: which has been signified in the book of Ester, chap. 5.
where it is said that King Abashueros^ being in anger and wroth against the
Jews, Queen Ester came to appease him, and found such favor with the King,
that he said unto her, What is thy request? it shall be given thee, even to
the half of the kingdom. This Empress (says he) figured the Empress of
heaven, to whom God has given the half of his kingdom: for God having his
justice and his mercy, has reserueah is justice to exercise it in this world,
and has left mercis to his Mother. Therefore if any one feel himself grieved
as the Court of Gods justice, let him appeal to the Court of the mercy of his
Mother, etc. Whereunto is also conformable that which Anthonine the Archbishop
writes in his sum, par. 3. tit. 12. chap. 8. and par. 4. tit. 15. chap. 14.
and 44. That as it is impossible, that they from whom the Virgin Mary ^^rneth
the eyes of her mercy, should be saved; so is it necessary, that those upon
whom she turns them, praying for them, should be justified and glorified:
because Christ is not only an Advocate, but also a Judge, who will examine all
things in rigor, and will leave nothing unpunished. So the good God has
provided us such an Aduocatesse, in whom there is nothing but benignity and
gentleness. Hereupon abusing impudentlie the exhortation of the Apostle in his
Epistle to the H^brewes, in the 4. chapter and 16 verse, he admonishes us to
go boldly unto the throne of God, which is (says he) the Virgin Mary, in whom
he has placed it: let us go (concludes he) unto her with assurance, as the
Apostle says to the Hebrews, to the end we may obtain mercy, and find
grace in time of need. Whereunto to bring the ignorant, he likewise is not
ashamed to tell this fable, that the blessed Seraphins and angels would have
withheld the Virgin Mary, as she ascended up into heaven, to have enjoyed her
company, and to have placed her in the highest degree of their order, as she
which surpassed and excelled them both in glory, and in the flame of charity.
But what said she to them? I take pleasure in your order, and congratulate you
most affectionately for your divine f^r^encie. But the Scripture must be
accomplished, saying, It is not good that man should be alone, let us make him
a help like to himself; so then it is not good that my Son should be alone,
but that I must assist him, seeing I am his mother, and have been given him for
an aid; in redemption through compassion, in glorification through
intercession for mankind, to the intent that if God should threaten to drown
the earth, and to punish the sins of man by the flood of his scourges, I may
appear before him as the Rainbow, that he may call to mind his coue^^t and
may reconcile himself with them, and not destroy the world. You speak not so
audaciously of the other Saints departed: howbeit Viues the Spaniard confesses
plainly in his discourse on S. Austins 8. book of the City of God, that he
cannot perceive, that there is any difference between the opinion you hold of
your Saints, and that which the Pagans held of their goods, considering you do
unto them, the same honors as unto God himself, and to his Son Jesus
Christ. And indeed your Master of Sentences, and his disciples, makes no bones,
to call the Saints the Mediators of our salvation, and to teach how they
through their works of supererogation have purchased so great credit in heaven,
that they have not only merited eternal glory and happiness for themselves,
but by those works also may succor those which yet walk in this vale of
misery, and to help their necessities. The praeyers of the Saints (says
Bonauenture in the 4. book of his Sentences, did. 45. qu. 2) may obtain us
many good things (as the Master, to wit of Scholasticall sentences, says) by
their affection, and through their former merits, by which readily and promptly
they hau^ served God. On the other side: Our duty is (says Alexander of Ales
in his fourth sentence, and 92 question) to pray unto the Saints for three
reasons: Because of our necessity, the glory of the Saints, and the reverence
to God. I say, because of the want and defect of our own merits, to the end
that when we have not sufficient and enough of our own, the merits of others
may help and defend us. I would willingly come forth of that bottomless pit
of your execrable blatphemies, but my conscience will not suffer me to
dissemble those great praises which you attribute unto S. Francis, (who was
condemned of impiety by Pope John the 22.) and to S. Domini^^s, as it were in
despite of God and of his Son Jesus Christ: nevertheless, because I will not
be too redious, I will not here cite all that is found written of them in the
books allowed by your Church: only I will draw forth some drafts and
principal points: whereof the first is, that it is written in the book of
Conformities, Blasphematory praises attributed by Papists, to two wicked
fellows, Saint Francis and S. Dominic.
How the Virgin Marie, and the rest of the Saints in heaven, go in procession
euer^e one in their order: but as for Saint Francis he is harbored in Christ's
side, and comes forth through his wound is Ensig^e bearer, to conduct them
with the banner of his Cross in his hand. And in the Prose of S. Francis, that
he is The figurative Savior, the way, the life, and a singular one crucified,
who having received in a vision the same wounds as Christ had, (according to
the Devils attestation, which herein is your Doctor) purges you from your
sins. Wherefore in good (...) he may say that which is sung in the Gospel upon
his feast day: All things are given to me of my father, for as much as through
his merits he has been made the son of God, and has received a billet
from heaven, wherein was written: This man is the grace of God. So that now
through the merits of his works, which are so holy, that if an Angel had done
them, they could not have bin more admirable: He is the model of all
perfection, in whom we may jointly see all the virtues of the Saints as well of
the old as of the new Testament: for he has observed the Gospel to a letter,
and has accomplished all the commandments of God. In such sort that according
to the prophecy of Jeremy in the 50 Chap. verse. 20. Men shall seek for his
sin, but they shall not find it. And of him the Psalmist has spoken; Thou
have crowned him with glory and honor, and have set him ever all the works of
thine hands. For according to your belief, he is in the glory of the Father,
as it is written, Phil. 2. he is deified, and in the glory of God. But which
is more, he makes one selfsame spirit with God, he sits above in heaven as
Advocate of all the Church militant: he is most nearly knit unto God, and
bears rule over every creature. By one Mass he has appeased God toward all
the world. And to allege your own words, Christus ^rauit, Franciscus exorauit:
that is to say, Christ has prayed, Francis has obtained. Let us now come to
S. Dominicus, who has been like unto the Lord (as Authonine the Archbishop
writes) and consequently has been Dominicus in name and in deed; being that
in possession, which Christ is in authority. Which Anthonme shows by many
comparisons between Christ and Dominicus: alleging first, that as Christ
said, I am the light of the world, even so the Church sings of Dominicus,
Thou art the light of the world. Secondly, like as Jesus Christ praying unto
God his father was always heard when he would: so likewise Dominicus never
demanded any thing of God, but ^e obtained it entirely according to his desire.
This nevertheless is not to be omitted, that herein he prefers his
Dominicus before Jesus Christ, that he has demanded no thing of God, as Jesus
Christ did in the garden, according to sensuali^^^, that is to say, according
to the infirmity of the flesh, but all things according to reason, and for
this respect his prayer was always heard, as Dominicus (a witness not worthy
of belief in his own cause) recounted it himself to one of his familiar
friends. To proceed unto the comparisons of this Adorator of Dominicus: As
Christ before his departure out of this world bad his Disciples farewell,
promised them the great Comforter, the Spirit of truth, and showed them that it
was expedient he should depart: even so, says this brauing fellow, Dominicus
answered his well-beloved friends; Weep not my well-beloved, and let not my bodily
departure (these are his very words) trouble you: where I go, I shall be more
profitable to you, then I have been here, and after my death you shall have me
for the best Advocate, you can have in this life.

These fine fables have been verified by your Friars, and authorized by your
Popes, who have canonized these holy Fathers, and ranked them with those which
have merited to be adored. Is it not then with false shows, and against your
conscience, that thus you do boast your selves, that praying to the Saints you
do no wrong nor dishonor to Jesus Christ, who^ ignominiously you cast out of
his place, setting him beneath the Virgin Mary, and these two seducers of the
people which I have named? And yet this is not all; for the Evangelists make
mention, that the soldiers of Pontius Pilate, to expose our Savior to open
reproach and scorn before all the world, nailed him on the Cross between two
thieves, as captain of the malefactors: but you, as though it were a virtue in
you to do worse, place him in heaven amidst many seditious fellows and
murderers, canonized by your Popes, and too well known by your Iacobins and
Jesuits. What would Bonauenture say at this, who at last corrected his own
excessive praises as well to the Virgin Mary, as to the other Saints departed,
confessing in his 3. sentence, did. 3. quest. 2. Since that Jesus Christ is the
Savior and universal Redeemer of all mankind, who has opened the gates of
heaven, he only dying for all, therefore one ought not to shut out of this
generallitie, (that is to say, from the company of all those which Christ has
saved) the blessed virgin Mary, nor to amplify the excellency of the Mother,
to diminish the glory of the Son, because that in so doing, we should
provoke her to wrath, as she, who being but a creature, and he a Creator, had
rather that her Son should be exalted then her self? Would he not say the
same which John Wicliffe did, (whom God shortly after raised up to awaken the
world, buried in the dreams of your vain Traditions) that it was a great
folly, yea and a detestable impiety, to make a scurram (that is to say, a
bouffon or a base fellow) his Mediator?

And as for the authority of the Catholic Church, An excellent comparison,
between the Prelates of these days, and the Priests of old time.
of general Councels, of holy Fathers, and Doctors, whereby you think to
dazzle our eyes and to amaze us: First of all I answer, that you are of the
same humor, as the high Priests and inhabitants of Jerusalem were, extremely
rebellious to the doctrine of the Prophet Jeremy, who in time past did say the
same as you do at this day, and maintained also obstinately as you do, that
they could not err: The law (said they) shall not perish from the Priest,
Ierem. 18. 18.
nor counsel from the wise, nor the word from the Prophet: Come, and let us
smite Jeremy with the tongue, and let us not give heed to any of his words,
according to the complaint which the Prophet Jeremy makes thereof in the 18.
chap. and 18. verse. But what did the Lord answer them by the mouth of his
Prophet? Trust not in lying words, Ierem. 7. 4.
saying, The temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord, Verse 11.
this is the temple of the Lord. Is this house become a den of thieves,
whereupon my name is called before your eyes? behold, even I see it, says the
Lord. But go ye now unto my place which was in Shilo, Verse 18.
where I set my name at the beginning, and behold what I did to it for the
wickedness of my people Israel. Verse 14.
Therefore will I do unto this house, whereupon my name is called, wherein
also ye trust, even unto the place that I gave to you and to your fathers, as
I have done unto Shilo. Verse 15.
And I will cast you out of my sight, as I have cast out all your brethren,
even the whole seed of Ephraim. The Priests said not, Ierem. 2. 8.
where is the Lord? and they that should minister the law knew me not: and the
Pastors also offended against me, and the Prophets prophesied in Baal, and
went after things that did not profit. Iere. 8. 10.
Moreover, From the least even unto the greatest every one is given to
covetousness, and from the Prophet even unto the Priest every one deals
falsely. Likewise by the Prophet Ezek^el, chap. 22. verse. 26. 28. Her Priests
have broken my law, Ezekiel. 22. 26. 28.
and have defiled mine holy things, they have put no difference between the
holy and profane. And her Prophets have seen vanities, and diumed (...) unto
them, saying, Thus says the Lord God, when the Lord has not spoken. In like
manner the Prophet Azariah. 2. Chron. 15. verse. 2. 3. The Lord is with you
while ye be with him: 2. Chron. 15. 2 General Councels, Fathers, and great
Doctors, have no authority, if they do not conform themselves unto the word
of God.
and if ye seek him he will be found of you: but if ye forsake him, he will
forsake you. Now for a long season Israel has been without the true God, and
without Priest to teach, and without law. Where we are to note, that God
promised to the conductors of Israel, that thee would remain with them, not
simply, but with this condition, if they would abide with him, and follow his
holy Commandments. And he adds evermore this condition to the promises of
his Covenant with the children of Israel: If ye will hear my voice indeed,
(says the Lord by Moses in the 19. Exodus 19. 5. 6.
chapter of Exodus 5. 6. verses) and keep my covenant, then ye shall be my
chief treasure above all people, though all the earth be mine: Ye shall be
unto me also a kingdom of Priests, and a holy Nation. Which words God
commands Moses and his Prophets continually to repeat unto the children of
Israel. So our Lord Jesus Christ also, making large promises to his Apostles,
and in their names to all Christians, to abide with them, through the
communication of the wholesome gifts of his holy spirit even to the end of the
world, puts them oftentimes in mind of this condition; If ye love me, if
ye keep my words, if ye abide in me, if my words abide in you, if ye shall
keep my commandments, my Father will love you, ye shall be my friends, and my
Father and I will come unto you for to make our abiding with you, in the
Gospel according to S. John, chap. 14. verse. 14. All these conditional
promises, signify unto us evidently, that those which are acknowledged for the
members of the visible Church may fall, either into some fault against the
second table, as it chanced to David, The example of the Saints ought to be
reformed to the law, and not the law to their examples.
who committed adultery with Bathsheba the wife of Vriah, and sent him to the
camp with letters of command to Ioab to expose him to the enemies, that he
might be slain, 2. Sam. 11: or in some error against the first table, as
happened unto Aaron the high Priest, who formed a golden Calfe for the
Israelites to worship: Exodus 32. 4. and after that to many Judges and Kings; as
to Gedeon, Judge. chap. 8. verse. 27. and to Solomon, 1. King. 11: or into some
revolt from the Christian faith, or into some other abuse, as appears by the
fall of S. Peter, who trusting too much to himself, denied his Master thrice,
and after his repentance and confirmation into his Apostleship, was reproved by
the Apostle S. Paul in the city of Antioch: because that in constraining the
Gentiles to become Ierish, (as the Apostle speaks thereof in the second
chapter and 14. Gal. ^. 14.
verse) he went not with a right foot to the truth of the Gospel. And if
those which are in the visible Church cannot fall, why does the Apostle then
reprove the Galathians, first chapter, 6. verse, Gal. 1. 6.
that in forsaking him which had called them by grace, that is to say, Christ,
they had transported themselves to another Gospel? And in the third chapter
and third verse, Gal. 3. 3.
that having begun in the spirit, they would make an end by the flesh?
Wherefore having pourtraied before the eyes of the Corinthians sundry faults
and transgressions, which the Israelites had committed against the Lord in the
wilderness, he adds, 1. Cor. 10. verse. 6. 11, 12.
that these have been examples for them, to the end to admonish them, to stand
upon their gards, and that he which thinks he stands, take heed lest he
fall. Surely, if the Apostolical Church could not have failed, the Apostle S.
Paul had had no reason to have feared so much, 1. Cor. 1. 2.
lest the Corinthians, which he called the members of God and sanctified in
Christ's Jesus, and Saints by calling, should be corrupted in their thoughts,
turning themselves aside, from the simplicity that is in Christ, 2. Cor. 11.
3. It is a foolish reason that Papists hold that general Councels cannot err.
as the Serpent beguiled Eve through his subtlety: 2. Cor. 11. 3. Secondly I
answer, that you presuppose that which we never will grant you, to wit, that
the Clergy and general Council, which represents the Church, cannot err,
and that whatsoever at any time has been determined and decreed by the
Councels, is certain, and ought to be received without contradiction. To begin
then with the Council of the 4. hundred Prophets of King Ahab, I require of
you, if the assembly of these Doctors of lies, who flattered the said King,
and counseled him all with with one consent to make war against the Syrians,
have not erred? The Historiographer shows us that all of them were possessed
with the spirit of error, 1. King. 22.
and that only Michaiah resisted them courageously: and although he was
condemned, smitten, and cast into prison, that the King notwithstanding would
experiment it, and that even with the peril of his life, he was deceived by
the lying spirit of his four hundred Prophets. You Catholics will also grant
me, that the Council of the chief Priests, the Scribes and the Elders of the
people, assembled in the hall of the high Priest called Caiphas, erred greatly
when they held a Council, and consulted together how they might take Jesus by
subtlety and kill him, according as the Evangelist S. Matthew teciteth it in
the 26. chapter of his Gospel, the third and fourth verses. If you suppose
that the successors of S. Peter and the other Apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ
have received the privilege that they could not err, you abuse your selves.
For the Apostle S. Paul aduertiseth all Christians, in his second Epistle to
the Thessalonians, of an Apostasy and general revolt, which should come to
pass in the Church of the New Testament; and declares to them, that this
mystery of iniquity began to work in his time, and should be revealed by the
coming of the son of perdition, which exalts himself against God, even to
be set as God in the Temple of God, bearing himself as if he were God. As
humane infirmity is perpetual, so men at al times have been and will be in
danger of error.
Now as this seducement of sin glided by little and little into the Primitive
Church, through the craft and malice of Satan: so has it by many degrees
discovered it self more and more, and one day has added error to another,
because in the beginning there was no heed taken to the Councels and
assemblies of the ancient Bishops, who have not always followed the true
pattern of the wholesome words, which (...) received from the Apostles, and
from their purer predecessors, but giving ear to the lying and ambitious
spirits of their companions, which pleased them in their inventions, are gone
astray from the truth. Even so the Fathers assembled in the Councels of
Neocesarea and Laodicea have there concluded, that by the doctrine of the
Apostle S. Paul, it was permitted to the Christians to take in marriage a second
wife: but according to reason and the rule of truth, it is a kind of
whoredom: and for this cause they forbad the Priests not to be present at the
feast of any second wedlock, and enjoined those which were married to their
second match, to do penance for the same. Whereupon you must needs grant me
one of these two things, either that the Apostle S. Paul has erred in that he
has not only permitted a second marriage in the first Epistle to the
Corinthians, 1. Cor. 7. 27. 28.
chap. 7. verses 27. 28. where he shows to him that is loosed from a wife,
that he sins not in marrying himself again, but gives counsel also to
the widows in his first Epistle to Timoth. 1. Tim. 5. 14.
chap. 5. verse. 19. saying, I will therefore that the younger women marry, and
bear children, and govern the house, etc. Or that the Bishops of the
aforesaid Councels have erred, Councels are subject to the doctrine of the
Prophets and Apostles, and to no doctrine contrary to them.
in that they held the covenant of second wedlock for an unlawful thing and
fornication, forbidden by God in the seventh commandment of his law. I
presuppose that you will grant me rather that there was no error in the
instruction of the Apostle S. Paul, which was divinely inspired into him, but
in the Bishops assembled in the Councels above said. In confidence whereof, I
will come unto the Council of Nice, which imposed three years penance upon
the Christians, who having abandoned their Arms, afterward returned to the
wars again: which rigor is condemned by S. John Baptist, who did not
command soldiers to forsake their Arms, but exhorts them to content
themselves with their pays, and to demand nothing beside that which was
ordained for them. The Fathers assembled in the Arelatan Council, have
prohibited the admitting of a married man into the vocation of the holy
Ministry, by an article clean contrary to the (...) the Apostle S. Paul, 1.
Tim. 3. 2. That which is happened to one, or many Councils, may happen to us; if
we do not hold our selves to the rules of holy Scripture.
who says in the first Epistle to Tim. chap. 3. that a Bishop must be the
husband of one wife. The second Council of Nice allowed the adoration and
service of Images; a fault which you will not correct, to obey the second
commandment of the Lord, who says in Exodus, chapter 20. verses 4. 5. Thou
shall make thee no graven Images, neither any similitude of things that are in
heaven above, neither that are in the earth beneath, nor that are in the waters
under the earth: thou shall not bow down to them, neither serve them. In the
Lateran Council which was held under Pope Innocentius the third, it was
decreed that men should believe, that the bread and wine was changed into the
substance of the body and blood of Jesus Christ, by the virtue of these five
words, Hoc est enim corpus meum. Which is a false opinion and easy to be
overthrown by many places of holy scripture, Note.
and especially by the 11. chapter of Saint Paul's first Epistle to the Corinth.
where after he had recited the institution of the Lords Supper, and treated of
the consecration of the bread and wine, by these very words of our Lord Jesus
Christ, This is my body, etc. he retains those same words of bread and wine.
For (he says) as often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye
show the Lords death till he come. Again, Whosoever shall eat this bread:
finally, let a man therefore examine himself, and so let him eat of this
bread, and drink of this cup. By which manner of speech he teaches us, that
there is no transubstantiation in the holy Supper, but that the bread remains
bread, and the wine keeps it own natural property. They also which were
present in the Council of Toledo, have they not judged that he which in stead
of being espoused to any honest woman, kept a concubine; ought nevertheless
not to be cast out of the communion of the Lords Supper? Does not this
sentence overthrow the institution of holy Matrimony, which by the Apostle S.
Paul is called an undefiled bed, and honorable among all men? Heb. 13. 4. Does
it not also favor whoremongers, which possess the vessels of their body in
dishonor, and are condemned by God as well in the seventh Commandment of his
law, as by many holy remonstrances of the Prophets and Apostles? Moreover, the
72 Canon of the 6. general Council, approved by Pope Adrian; does it not say
that men ought to break the promises of Marriage, which the Catholics have
made with heretics, and to hold them for naught, as though they never had been
made? Is not this too too dangerous a Canon, forged by the spirit of
disloyalty and dissension? For the spirit of truth, which guided the pen of
the Apostle S. Paul, does it not signify to us in the first Epistle to the
Corinthians, the 7. chapter and 15. verse, that God has called the married in
peace, and that to entertain and keep it? 1. Cor. 7. 12.
If any brother have a wife that believes not, if she be content to dwell with
him, he ought not to forsake her: and if any woman has an husband that
believes not, verse 13.
if he be content to dwell with her, she ought not to forsake him neither.
Whereunto the Apostle adds this reason as most worthy of consideration,
namely, the unbelieving husband is sanctified by the wife, verse 14.
and the unbelieving wife is sanctified by the husband, and that through this
conjunction their children are holy, which else would be unclean. The Council
of Worms abusing that admonition of the Apostle S. Paul, (in the 1. Epistle to
the Cor. chap. 11. 28, where he says: Let a man therefore examine himself,
and so let him eat of this bread, and drink of this cup) thought it a matter
of no moment to admit thieves and other scandalous persons unto the Lords holy
table, upon the trial and testimony of their own consciences. These are the
Councels very words: It oftentimes happens, that the Monks in their
Cloisters do commit some crime of theft: behold we therefore judge, that
these brethren being accused of such a fact, ought to clear themselves
thereof, and ordain to this effect, that the Abbat, or some one among them of
their brethren, celebrate the Mass, and that all trying and proving themselves
do participate the same. And in another Canon: If any one has charged the
Bishop or Priest, with some mischievous deed, he ought to celebrate the Mass,
and to show thereby, that he knows himself innocent and guiltless of that
crime which is laid unto his charge. All these examples of abominable errors,
show how necessary it is to try the spirits.
This canon has not only been approved, but also put in practice by Pope
Gregory the seventh, named before his popedom Hildebrand, who being advertised
by letters, that he was accused of sorcerie and simonicall heresy, answered,
that to satisfy every man, according to that good canon of the Council of
Worms, and to take away that scandalous report of him out of ye Catholic
Church, he would receive the body of our Lord in token of his innocence. True
it is that afterward (as Bellarmine writes) the Bishops thought good to
abolish that pernicious canon, whereby their predecessors had prostituted the
communion of the body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ to all sorts of leaud
persons, to be unworthily trampled under their feet and profaned. But
Bellarmine notwithstanding is driven to confess so much, that it was received
and allowed for some time in your Church.

To come now unto the errors of some other Councels. The Councels of Carthage
and of Florence have enrolled for canonical books, The Papisticall Doctors
agree not among themselves, and nevertheless they hold unity and consent for
the mark of their Church.
and as divinely inspired, to serve all men in the points of religion, for a
rule and as a law for their discourses, the books of Tobit, Judith, Wisdom,
Ecclesiasticus and the Maccabees: which nevertheless, according to Cardinal
Caietans own confession, are accounted by S. Jerome, among the Apocrypha, and
not receiueable for to ground upon them any article of faith and to the end the
Reader may not be troubled in that the abouesaid Councels, and the Popes
Innocentius and Gelasius have reckoned these books among the Canonical, the
said Cardinal gives him this counsel in his observations upon the tenth
chapter of Ester, to reduce them to the rule and correction of A grave and a
religious judgment of Charles the great touching ye Counc^ll of Nice.
S. Jerome. Charles the Great speaking of the two Councels of Constantinople
and of Nice, in a book made at the Council of Franckford, touching the
adoration of Images, blames the Council of Nice of impiety and idolatry
forbidden by God in his holy word; when he complains, that not only the Kings
of the Eastern provinces, but also the Priests and Prelates (rejecting that
which is said by the Apostle, that if any one preach otherwise, then that which
has been preached, though he were an Angel from heaven, let him be accursed)
have sought to bring into the Church through Councels, fond and infamous,
things one knows not what, which neither the Savior, nor any of his Apostles
have ever brought in, that is, as he himself expounds them, Novelties of
words, and the foolish invention of the worshipping of Images; and afterward
he rebukes the temeritie and boldness of Irene. mother unto Constantine the
Emperor, in that she had borne the chief sway in that Council of Nice,
saying, The Empress did there all in all; a woman, unto whom it was forbidden
to teach in the Church, has taught and ordained; she there intruded her self
with the Bishops and all Ecclesiastical Orders, teaching things unprofitable.
Thirdly, he accuses that Council in that they admitted thereunto Tharasius
Patriarch of Constantinople, and gave too much credit unto him, who (as he
speaks) was at a iumpe come from the vulgar conversation, into the dignity
of Priesthood, from the life of a Soldier, to a religious life, from the noise
of the market, to the preaching and distributing of holy mysteries, and that in
sum, he was of an ill judgment, and spoke not well concerning the holy
Ghost. Whereunto he adds beside, that for the rest of all this Council they
were ignorant, barbarous, insufficient, fond and unapt both in their sense and
in their words, and nevertheless proud beyond all pride: which durst command
that which never the Apostles, nor their successors ordained, and in one part
of the Church, to condemn and accurse all the Churches in the world; which he
proves in that they made it to be called a universal Council held for the
worshipping of Images; without the consent of many other faithful and
Catholic Churches of God, and were so audacious even rashly to accurse so many
and so great Churches, which are the body of Jesus Christ, and to attempt to
establish the worship and service of insensible things against the institution
of divine scripture. Now like as Charles the Great, who was present in the
aforesaid Council of Franckford assaulted the Council of Nice; so likewise S.
Austin, with many other of the ancient Fathers, have reproved oftentimes the
writings of their companions in the work of the Lord, and the ordinance of
their Councels, in calling them back to be tried by the holy Scripture, and
admonishing them, that through many of their false conclusions they were gone
astray from the same: which S. Austin testifies (in his second book and third
chapter of Baptism) against the Donatists. The Epistles (says he) of the
particular Bishops, are corrected by the Provincial Councels, and the
Provincial Councels by the universal, and the first universal Councels by
the latter: when by experience that which was locked is opened, and that which
was hid is brought into light. Councels refuted by other Councels.
This is the cause wherefore one Council has oftentimes retracted and
repealed, that which a former had decreed. As for example, the general
Council of Nice permitted the Priests to marry, which afterward the Councels
of Neccesarea, of Magence, and the second of Carthage forbad them to do. The
Council of Carthage, in which S. Cyprian was present, decreed that such as
were baptized by Heretics should be rebaptized; which was shortly after broken
and disanulled by another Council of Carthage. The second general Council of
Ephesus approved the error of Euryches, who acknowledged but one only nature
in Christ, to wit, the divine; but the general Council of Chalcedon refuted and
condemned that heresy. You are not ignorant also how the Bracharean Council
condemned and accursed those which abstain themselves from eating of flesh,
and how the third Council of Toledo having confirmed that decree; the clean
contrary was ordained by the Council of Rome, forbidding the use of flesh
upon certain days i the year. The Council of Constantinople decreed that
they should throw and break down all the Images which were put up in
Churches; but this ordinance and decree was over thrown again by the second
Council of Nice, assembled by Irene mother unto Constantine the Emperor; in
which was commanded to reestablish and set up those Images again. These
examples may suffice to show that Councels may err, and that oftentimes there
has been great dissension between Councels, and contrariety in the articles
of the ancient Synods, and that many things have been proposed, received, and
maintained in them, without and beside the holy scripture: which, as S. Truth
is one, and that which is one cannot be contradicted.
Tertullian says in his Treatise against Praxeas, is not in danger of saying
things contrary, but always is consonant and agrees in it self, as
appears by the mutual correspondencie of the texts as well of the old as of
the new Testament; which is alone without error, and exempt from lying, as
Cardinal Baronius also himself teaches you in his Annals, tom. 2. This
war, and manifest contradiction of the ancient Councels, does it not
advertise us as it were of it self that we ought not to equal the canons of
Councels with the rules of holy Scripture? and yet nevertheless your ancestors
have done it, who have equalled the decretall epistles of their Popes with the
epistles of the Apostle S. Paul, and the decrees of the four Councels, of
Nice, Constantinople, Ephesus and Chalcedon, with the books of the four
Evangelists. Now in this great diversity of Councels, to which, I pray you,
shall we have our recourse to assure our consciences, but to the word of God
which is the touchstone and balance whereby we must prove and weigh all the
traditions of men? As S. Austin did in his dispute against Maximine Bishop of
the Arrians, lib. 3. cap. 3. I ought not to allege (says he) the Council of
Nice, We are bound to hearken to the Church in the things wherein she gives
ear unto her Master.
thereby to prejudice thee, nor thou against me that of Rimini: I am not bound
nor tied unto the authority of that Council, ner thou unto the other. It is by
the authority of the Scriptures, which are not part^all to either of us, but
are common witnesses as well to the one as to the other; and that by them we
ought to dispute in alleging cause against cause, and reason against reason.
According to which rule S. Bernard in his 9^. Epistle signified to the Bishops,
which in his time were assembled to handle ecclesiastical affairs, that he
was very desirous to be present in their Council, and in their assemblies,
where the traditions of men were not obstmatel^ maintained, nor superstitiously
observed: but where the good and persit will of God was sought after in all
humility and diligence, there am I (says he) ravished with all my affection,
there will I attend with my devotion. There through love do I take all my
delight, and thereunto will I hold my self by consent. Now although this zeal
of S. Austin and S. Bernard has been followed and observed badly by their
successors, who since their time gave too much credit to their own Councels
and humane fantasies; yet Gerson neuerthelesle sought to remedy this abuse
through his wholesome aduertisements. For in his book of the spiritual life
of the soul, he shows that the sayings of the Apostles and their disciples
were of another kind of authority, namely in things which purely concern our
faith, then the instructions of their successors; and consequently that the
authority of the Primitive Church is far greater then that which is at this
day, and that there is neither Pope nor Council that can abate any thing of
that which was given us by the Evangelists and S. Paul; or which has the like
authority, to make that any thing should be of faith, All the doctrine of men
^ath no authority, but in that which is borrowed from the Scripture.
as some men dream. And in another place upon this question, if in points of
faith one might be called before the Pope: No particular man (says he) not the
Pope himself, neither the Bishops can make a proposition which is heretical
to be catholicall, or which is catholicall to be heretical. And again, in the
trial of doctrines, Consider. 5. Tom. 1. That in case of doctrine more credit
is to be given to one simple lay man, excellently skillful in the Scripture,
then to the Popes declaration; insomuch as it is certain that one ought to
believe the Gospel rather then the Pope. Also that such a learned man ought to
oppose himself against a whole Council, if he be there present, and sees the
greater party to be inclined either through malice or ignorance to that which
is contrary to the Gospel, according to the example of S. Hilary. Whereunto
does agree that which the Abbat Panorma wrote in his chapter, entitled,
Significat extra de Elect. to wit, that in things which concern faith, the
saying of a private person, ought to be preferred before the saying of the
Pope, if so be it is fortified with better reasons out of the old and new
Testament.

Franciscus Picus de Mirandula says, If in a whole Council, the greater
party would ordain some things, which are ^ontrarie to the holy Scriptures,
and against things that are not lawful to be violated: the other which are of
the lesser number, opposing themselves against the greater, we must rather
cleave unto the lesser number, as it happened in the Councels of Rimini, and
the second of Ephesus. Yea even a simple countriman, a child, or an old woman,
are more worthy to be believed, then the Pope and a thousand Bishops, if they
should speak against the Gospel. Now that which we have spoken of the
authority of Councels, ought to be appropriated to the censure of our fathers
and pastors of the ancient Church, to wit, that we ought not to receive their
writings, with such a reverence and obedience of faith as we receive the
doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, but to judge and examine them by the
Scriptures, according to that good counsel and example of some faithful
Doctors of the Primitive Church: Our faith is not of eloquence, or humane
persuasion.
We ought not (says S. Jerome inter. cap. 9 on the 98. Psalm) to follow the
errors of our Fathers; but the Scriptures authority, and the commandments of
God, which ^nctruct us. Every other thing which shall be spoken after the
Apostles time ought to be cut off; let it have no authority then, though the
author thereof be holy or eloquent. Read me those things (says S. Austin in
his book of the Church, chap. 6.) in the Law, in the Prophets, in the Psalms,
or in the Epistles read them there, and we will believe them. All others
(says he) how holy, or learned soever they be, I may read them, not to
believe what they say is true, because they say it; but in so much as they
prove it by those canonical authors, or by probable reason. And in his epistle
to Fortunatus; We ought not (says he) to esteem of all disputes, though they
proceed from praise worthy, and catholic men, as the canonical Scripture;
but that in such a sort, as is lawful (with the honor due unto such men) to
gainsay them, or to reject some things in their writings; if per adventure we
find they judged otherwise then stands with the truth found out through the
help of God, either by others or by our selves. For I am such a one in the
writings of other men, We must try the spirits.
as I would they should be in mine. Do not stand (says he in his preface of
the third book of the Trinity) upon my words and writings as upon the
canonical Scripture. What soever in them thou shall find, believe it without
doubting; but in my writings that which thou hold not for very certain, or
if thou understand it not; hold it not as firm. The like says he of S.
Cyprians books in his second book against Crescon chap. 32. I hold not S.
Cyprians books for canonical: that which agrees with the authority of holy
Scripture I receive it with his praise; but that which agrees not with them, I
reject by his good leave: and we do him no wrong, to make a distinction
between his writings and the canonical. For this wholesome canon of the
Church was not without cause established, whereunto were brought certain books
of the Prophets and Apostles, which we dare not at all judge, and according
unto which we freely judge of all other books either of believers or Infidels.
The like says he also of S. Ieroms books, of S. Ambroses, and of the rest of
the Fathers, which have written since the Apostles time, in his epistle 112,
and 11, book against Faustus Manichean. cap. 5. I would not bring in the
opinions of those great personages, lest thou should think, that it
behooves me to follow the judgment of any man, as the authority of the
Scripture. In all their books, the reader or hearer has a free judgment to
approve or reject them, without the necessity of believing them, but with
freedom to judge thereof. From thence it comes that he exhorts Vincent
his friend in his 48. epistle, that he should take heed of gathering against
so many holy, clear and undoubted testimonies, some cauils out of the writings
of the Bishops, whether (says he) of our own, or of Hilaries, Cyprians or
Agrippines: for such writings ought to be distinguished from the authority of
the canon, for men read them not so, is it were to draw any testimony from
them, contrary to which it should not be lawful to deem, if peradventure
their opinion were otherwise then the truth requires. Wherewith the sentences
of our Fathers agree! Godly and excellent texts out of the Fathers.
We have no commandment fr^o Christ (says Iustine the Martyr in Triph. page
207) to believe in humane doctrines; but in those which his Apostles have
preached and himself has taught. Therefore every man must have his recourse
to the Scriptures, that he may find assurance in all things. We have (faith
Irenaeus in his third book, chap. 1.) known the disposition of our salvation
by no others, but by those by whom the Gospel is come unto us, which in their
time they also preached, and afterward through the will of God have given it to
us in the Scriptures, to the intent it might be the pillar and foundation of
our faith. Again, Iustine the Martyr says in his exposition of true faith,
that among the children of the Church, divine things ought not to be
comprehended within humane reasons and discourses; but that divine words ought
to be expounded, according to the will, instruction, and doctrine of the holy
Ghost. S. Tertullian in like manner in his dispute, touching the flesh of Jesus
Christ, says, I receive not this which thou bring of thine own beside the
Scripture; if thou art Apostolical, then follow the Apostles doctrine.
Likewise S. Jerome in his Annot. upon the fifth chapter of Saint Paul's Epistle
to the Galathians, says plainly: Nulli kne verbo dei esse credendum, that is,
We must not give belief to any one without the word of God. Also S. Cyril,
which was Bishop of Jerusalem, Cath. 4. says, That it is not necessary to
teach any thing rashly touching the secrets of faith without the holy
Scripture. If then I should teach thee these things simply, and without any
proof, believe me not unless thou receiuest some demonstration thereof by the
Scripture: for the salvation of our faith proceeds not from a well composed
discourse, but from the demonstration of divine Scripture.

By these sentences our Fathers reduced themselves to the holy Scripture, We
ought not to be ashamed to subject our selves unto that which the Apostles and
the Angels are subject unto.
commanding us seriously to examine their sayings and writings by them, and if
we found them not agreeable and correspondent to that universal rule of all
sorts of Ecclesiastical doctrines, to hold them in suspicion, and without any
difficulty to reject them: wherein we cannot be too rigorous, seeing that S.
Paul, with his companions and the Angels make themselves subject to that
balance, saying in his epistle to the Galathians, the first chapter and 8.
verse, Galath. 1. 8.
Though that we, or an Angel from heaven preach unto you otherwise, then that
which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed. Whereupon the Abbat
Vincent Lirinensis made an excellent observation in his Treatise of the holy
Scriptures Canon, chap. 22. That the Apostle S. Paul would spare no man, no not
himself, nor Peter, nor Andrew, nor John nor all the rest of the Apostles, but
has denounced, that all those which would publish beyond that which the
Apostles have published, (these are the Abbats very words) should be accursed,
thereby to maintain the first faith steadfastly and strictly. Wherein,
according to the very judgment of your own Doctor Canus, we do no wrong to
our Fathers. For he confesses freely in the Centur. 3. that all the Saints,
except those which have written the canonical books, have spoken by a humane
spirit, and at sometimes have erred both in word and in writing, even in the
points of faith, The Papists are condemned by those which they cite against us
as adversaries.
what learning or innocence soever we might conceive in them. Behold
therefore some of your Doctors make no bones to reprove our Fathers, whenever
they are of an opinion, that they are gone never so little astray from the
natural sense of the holy Scripture. Without going any further; Robert
Bellarmine rejects the opinion of S. Austin, expounding that which S. Luke
writes of the fruit of the vine, and says therein he has not well observed
the Evangelist text. Also he accuses Durand and Rupert of error, as appears
by the 13. and 15. chapters of his third book de Eucharistia. Whereunto I will
add some of the ancient Fathers directly contrary to yours, whereby they
wholly reject the invocation of Saints as superstitious, and having no ground
in the holy Scripture. To begin then with Ignatius, the disciple of S. John, he
gives this exhortation to virgins in his sixth epistle to the Philadelphians:
A gra^e exhortation of Ignatius, to pray only unto God.
Virgins set before your eyes in your prayers one only Jesus Christ, and his
Father, being illuminated through his holy spirit. And in his third epistle to
the Magnesians: Assemble together to pray in one place; let your prayer be
common, one spirit, one hope in charity and faith without spot in Christ:
run together as it were one man, to the temple of Christ, the high priest of
God. Also Eusebius recites in his history, lib. 4. cap. 14. that the other
disciple of S. John, named Polycarpus, being bound to a stake there to be
burned for the name of Jesus Christ, he calls not to mind his master in
Christ S. John, A testimony given by Polycarpus, who would not add^efle
himself to any but God.
nor any of the Martyrs or holy men, which had been before him, to pray them to
make intercession for him, but he prayed unto God alone, through Christ the
only Mediator and high Priest between the justice of God and the sins of
his people, saying, Father of Jesus Christ thy Son, by whom we have had
knowledge of thee, God of Angels and Powers, God of every creature and of all
the righteous, and of all sorts of races, which live before thy face: I give
thanks that thou have vouchsafed to grant unto me this happy day, and this
blessed hour wherein I shall be in the number of the Martyrs, and made
partaker of the cup and passion of thy Christ unto the resurrection of eternal
life, both in soul and body through the immortal virtue of thy holy spirit;
An excellent prayer.
among which Martyrs I pray thee that I may be received before thy face, as a
fat and pleasant offering. And for all these things, I praise thee, I bless
thee, and I glorify thee through Jesus Christ thy most dear Son, and high
priest, through whom unto thee, with him, and with thy holy spirit, be glory
now and for evermore. Also this same Historian shows us in his 4. book and
14. chapter, that the Jews and Gentiles came to pray the Governor Nicetes,
not to deliver the body of Polycarpus to the Christians, lest in forsaking
their Christ crucified, they should religiously begin to honor him: Whereunto
the author answers, that these silly superstitious men had therein through
their ignorance deceived themselves, and considered not that true Christians
can never forsake Jesus Christ, who suffered for the salvation of the world,
neither will they honor religiously any other as God; because they know the
true God, and him which alone (as he adds) ought to be served religiously.
The piety of Clement.
Likewise Clement (according to your opinion) successor unto the Apostle S.
Peter, teaches us in his recognitions and Apostolical institutions, that it
is not lawful for the Christians to pray unto the departed, as the Heathen
did, but that all our meditations and prayers ought to be addressed only unto
God, and that no man is permitted to come unto him but through his Son and
our Advocate Jesus Christ.

Also Irenaeus testifies in his second book, A testimony of Ireuaeus.
and 57. chapter, that in his days the Church was exercised in works of
piety and charity, and not by the invocation of Angels and Saints departed,
nor in enchantments, or any other wicked curiosity, but addressing purely and
manifestly their prayers to the Lord, who made all things, and in the name of
Jesus Christ, according to the necessity of every one. Clement Alexandrine
treating upon this subject, was sore grieved at the Christians, which
worshipped the spirits of the deceased, A reproach of Clement Alexandrine.
saying in his 7. book, that it is a great brutishnes to crave any thing of
those which were not Gods. And hereupon having respect unto the true rule of
invocation, the which he follows with the rest of all the Christians, after
the imitation of the Angels, he adds, That whereas there is but one only
good, that is God, both we and the Angels pray unto him either to give us or
to let us have such blessings, as he knows to be healthful for us. And in
his first book of Pedagogie, chap. 7. Jesus Christ (says he) is our
schoolmaster, who as children has led us unto everlasting life, and has
taken care of us. And if we suffer our selves to be instructed, by this
schoolmaster and conductor, we shall obtain all things of God, which we can
justly demand of him. Tertullians testimony.
The Church also with S. Tertullian has followed this rule, who speaking of
his fashion, and of all the Christian Church in his Apology, chap. 3. We pray
(says he) for the welfare of Emperors, unto the eternal God, the true God,
the living God, and lift up our hands to heaven for them, beseeching God that
it would please him to give unto them a long life, and empire without fear, a
safe Court, a strong army, a faithful Magistrate, a loyal people, and a
peaceable world. These things can I demand of none in my prayers, but of him
from whom I know I can obtain them, because he only has made them, and I am
his servant which looks up to him alone, and unto whom he will grant them.
Testimony from Origin.
The like also says Origin against Celsus, lib. 8. We present (says he) the
first fruits only unto him, to, whom we address our prayers, to wit, unto
God, having an high Priest which is entered the heavens even Jesus Christ the
Son of God, and we shall hold constantly the profession of this faith, so
long as through the blessedness of God, and of his Son who has manifested
himself amongst us, we do remain alive: And although we know that not the
devils, but the Angels over see the abundance of fruits, and the
multiplication of cattle, yet never thelesse we must not give unto them that
honor which is due only unto God: for God will not have it so, nor they unto
whom such charges are committed; but they love us, because we offer no
sacrifices unto them, nor have they any need of his odours; and we are but to
pray unto one only God and to appease him, who is the Lord of all things, and
to seek only his favor through piety and other virtues. In that prayer which
S. Cyprian has composed, An example of S. Cyprians.
and repeated so many times in memory of the benefit of the death and passion
of our Lord Jesus, he betaketh himself to none but to God the Father, the
Son, and the holy Ghost, without making any mention therein either of Angels
or of Saints. I should be too long and troublesome to recite it at length, only
we will content our selves to propound briefly the conclusion thereof to the
Reader, to the intent he may censure thereof: Through thy name Lord Jesus
(says this good Father in the end of his prayer) deliver me from the power of
the adversary, thou that are a mighty deliverer, and the advocate of our
prayers for the requests of our souls, solicit night and day for my sins,
present my prayer to thy Father; and thou Lord O holy Father deigne to behold
and look upon my prayers, as upon the offerings of Abel. Vouchsafe to deliver
me from fire and eternal pain, and from all torments that thou have prepared
for the wicked, through our blessed Savior Jesus Christ, through whom be all
praise, glory and honor to thee for ever and ever. An example of S. Hilaries.
In that most excellent prayer which S. Hilarie made unto God, to beseech him
to give him his grace to expound well the great mystery of the holy Trinity,
he addresseth himself to none but unto God, building upon his promise, that to
him which asks he shall receive, to him which seeks he shall find, and
to him which knocks it shall be opened. Also Eusebius in his books of
preparation, shows that in his days the Christians worshipped only God in
spirit and truth. For what writes he thereof in his 4. book of Preparation?
We are taught (says he) to serve religiously the only God of all creatures,
Forcible reasons of Eusebius to prove that we are to invoke none but God.
and for this cause we attribute to him alone, the worship that appertains
unto him, serving him only by way of religion. Afterward, treating in another
place of the intercession of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and the reasons
wherefore the Christians call upon God, in the name of his only Son, first he
rehearses that it is because he being become man, and taken our flesh upon
him, has suffered for our sakes all manner of wrongs and reproaches. Secondly,
because he prays unto his Father for us, and through his request which he
makes unto his Father for us, repulseth behind us all our enemies both visible
and invisible. Thirdly, because neither S. Paul, S. Peter, nor any of the other
Saints have been crucified for us, but our only Redeemer Jesus Christ: from
whence he concludes, that the intercession which he makes unto his Father is
proper to him, and incommunicable to the Saints, seeing he is the only high
Priest, who once has offered himself in a sacrifice to God his Father, both
for us, for himself, and for man which he had taken out of the earth, who is
ascended up into heaven, there to celebrate for us the spiritual sacrifices,
to wit, our supplications which he presents unto God his Father, praying him
with us, that for his sake he will be merciful and favorable unto us.
According to which he gives us this testimony of S. Denis Bishop of
Alexandria in his Ecclesiastical story, lib. 7. cap. 10. who being called
before Aemilian Governor of Egypt to render an account of his faith, and to
answer unto his demands, and among the rest unto this, unto what God he and
the other Christians address their prayers? He answers him freely, that
himself, nor the rest of the Christians did neither worship, or serve
religiously any other, but that God which only is he who has created of
nothing, the heavens, the sea, the earth and all things which are in them.
Moreover, he repeateth in this very history, lib. 10. cap. 4. that Paulin
Bishop of Tire, taught publicly both by mouth and writing, that Christ is our
only Advocate, the only author of life, the alone giver of light, our great
Physician, our King, our only Lord, and the Christ or anointed of God his
Father, who alone is capable to make intercession in heaven for us, as he who
has borne our corruptions and sorrows upon him, who only has established
poor sinners again, which were not only half dead, but already rotten in
their graves, and who heretofore and yet unto this present has of his own
gracious affection preserved us, contrary to our own hope and expectation.
Finally, that none of those which are in heaven had that power to reestablish
mankind, and to deliver him from the perdition whereinto he was fallen, but
this only Savior Jesus Christ. Therefore to this intent it is written of
Constantine the Emperor in the fourth book of his Ecclesiastical History,
chap. 21, that he was so zealous at his prayers, and calling upon the name of
God, that every day for certain hours he locked himself into some secret
place of his palace, falling down upon his knees and speaking unto God,
craving of him that which he had need of. Furthermore, A testimony given by
Constatine, not to address our prayers but to God only.
that he commanded his officers and soldiers daily to pray for him and the
prosperity of his kingdom, and to call only upon God, according to the rules
and instructions of holy Scripture, and in praying to say, Lord we acknowledge
no God but thee, thou art our King, we call upon thee for our succor, through
thee we have obtained victories, from thee we expect felicity both present
and to come.

Moreover, because the Christians should not only invoke God the Father, but
also his son Jesus Christ, S. Athanasius disputing against the Arrians, to
prove the Godhead of our Lord Jesus Christ, groundeth principally his argument
upon this holy and commendable custom of the ancient Church: Never any (says
he, ser. 4.) has prayed to receive any thing of God and of the Angels, A
necessary doctrine to refute the service of Angels.
or of some other creature: and never any man has conceived such a form of
words, as, God and the Angels grant it thee, but contrariwise from the Father
and the Son, because of the union, and uniform reason of giving. And as
touching that that Jacob, blessed Ephrai^ and Masasseh, Genesis 48. 15. 16.
saying, The God which has fod me all my life long unto this day. The Angel
which has delivered me from all ouill, bless the children, etc. He has not
joined with God the Creator, andy of the created Angels, and which of their
own nature were Angels; he has not for saken God his nourisher to crave his
blessing of an Angel upon his little sons: but insomuch that he exprosly
spoke of that Angel which had delivered him from all evil, he has shown
sufficiently, that his meaning was not to speak of any one of the Angels
created, but of the Son of the Father, whom he joined as a companion with his
Father in his prayers, by whom God delivers such, as it pleases him; for he
had acknowledged him for the Angel of the great Counsel, and has not by his
words signified any other then he alone which blesses and delivers from
evil. For he meant not, that the blessing which be craved of God, should be
given to him and his little sons by an Angel, but by him only which elsewhere
he prays unto, saying, Genesis 32. 26.
I will never forsake thee except thou bless me. And he was God, as Jacobs
words make mention when he says, I have seen God face to face: and unto him
(say I) Jacob prayed for to bless his children. For Jacob called upon no other
then God, saying, Lord deliver me from the hands of my brother Esau, etc. Nor
David also called on no other for his deliverance, saying, Lord I have cried
unto thee in my tribulation, and thou have heard me; Lord deliver my soul from
lying lips, etc. Likewise the Apostle S. Paul: God in whom we have hoped, has
delivered me from evil, and will deliver me, etc. And thereby thou may
perceive that it appertains to none but unto God, to bless and deliver: for
no other could deliver Jacob but God, and Jacob called only upon him as his
deliverer. It appears then that this Patriarch did not couple with God any
one is his prayers, but the Word of God, (of whom S. John writes, to wit, that
in the beginning it was God and with God.) which Redeemer he calls an Angel,
because it is he alone which reuealeth and shows God unto us: and which thing
the Apoctl^ S. Paul does also oftentimes, when he says, Grace be with you, and
peace from God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ. And in his second
sermon it is written: Be my protector, O God, and a fortress for my refuge, to
the end thou may defend me. Item, The Lord is made the refuge of the poor,
and all the rest which is found semblable in the holy Scripture. But if our
adversaries maintain, that these words have been spoken of the Son, as it is
most likely, let them then know, that the Saints do not entreat of a
creature, that he should be their aid, and hereafter let them refer these
words (he has been made, he has made, he has created) to Christ's coming in
the flesh, when he has taken up to the cross our sins upon him and said, Come
unto me all ye which are laden, and I will ease you.

In like manner Arnobius in his dispute against the Pagans, A grave exhortation
of Arnobius.
who through the intercession made unto their little gods and mediators,
addressed themselves to the principals, signifies unto them in his third
book, that to serve the Godhead it suffices us to worship the chiefest God,
who is the sovereign Father, the supreme Lord, Creator and conductor of all
things, and that in him only we serve whatsoever is to be served religiously,
and worship whatsoever is to be worshipped. And in the end he concludes,
speaking to the Gentiles of the intercession of our only advocate Jesus Christ,
Ye must learn (says he, of us) that souls cannot receive the force of life
and salvation from any, but from him, which this great king has established in
this charge; because the almighty Emperor was willing that he should be the
way unto salvation, and, as I may say, the gate of life; through him there is
an entrance into light, for by no other way can we attain, or enter in by
force, all other be shut up, inaccessible, and fortified with an inumcible
fortress.

All these prayers and exhortations of the first successors of the Apostles are
as so many faithful witness, The invocation of one only God has remained
entire, after the nativity of Christ, notwithstanding the assaults of Satan.
which all with one consent do testify, that these ancient Fathers have
maintained carefully the adoration of one only God, to wit, of the Father, the
Son, and of the holy Ghost, more then for three hundred years after the
nativity of our Lord Jesus Christ. And although that shortly after some Monks
and disciples of the Gentiles, newly come forth of Egypt and Syria, with the
old leaven of their idolatries, sought to bring up the invocation of Angels and
Saints departed, into the Christian Church; yet was it not received of all, but
only of some particular persons, which were reproved and condemned therefore,
as well by the judgment and sentences of the Churches of Asia assembled in the
Council of Laodicea, as by many other excellent discourses of the principal
Bishops of the Greek and Latin Churches. The sentence of the general Council
of all the Churches of Asia is described unto us by S. Theodoret in his
Commentaries upon the Epistle to the Colossians, and the exposition of those
words of the Apostle contained in the second chapter, Coloss. 2. 18.
and 18 verse, to wit, Let no man at his pleasure bear rule over you by
humblenes of mind, and worshipping of Angels, A sentence of S. The^dorets.
etc. Those (says Theodoret) which forbad the law, seduced them to worship
Angels, alleging that the law had been given by them. Now this sin remained
for a long time in Phrygia and Pisilia, till that the Council assembled in
Laodicea, the capital city of Phrygia, forbad them by an express law not to
pray unto the Angels: so that yet unto this day is to be seen among their
neighbors the Oratories of S. Michael. Now because they counseled the
Christians under the cloak of humility to worship the Angels, S. Paul
commands them the contrary, that they should beautify all their sayings and
deeds with the remembrance of our Lord Jesus Christ. Giuo thanks (says he)
unto God the Father through him, and not by the Angels. And the Synod of
Laodicea following this law, as willing to cure this ancient malady, ordained
and provided by another law, that they should not pray unto the Angels, to the
end they should not forsake our Lord Jesus Christ.

Now it rests in us to see whether our Fathers have not taken great pains to
have plucked up the roots of this darnell and dangerous weed, Not to err in
points of Religion, we must not give ear but to the pure word of God.
which the devil (sworn enemy against the glory of God) had sown by night
among the good grain of the pure invocation of the Lords name. True it is that
in the beginning some have sown this wicked seed under the shadow of
devotion: others have received it to a good end and intention; and some others
not seeing to it before hand, giving it too long a time of growth, it sprouted
up higher and higher, and finally would have ouertopt the truth and have
stifled it; they suffered it to grow for a time with the good grain: but when
they perceived that this banefull weed began to over grow and choke that which
by the Apostles had been planted in the Church, and watered by their
successors, they then were constrained wholly to root it out, The doctrine of
Epiphanius, an ancient Doctor for the true invocation.
beginning this holy labor first in the East, and went forward with it toward
the West. For S. Epiphanius and diverse others of the servants of God in the
Eastern Churches, having understood that some superstitious women presented
certain cakes to the Virgin Mary, took occasion from thence to reprove this
abuse, and to admonish them thereof in general, that they should not honor
the Saints beyond measure, but to honor their Lord, and so consequently such as
had been seduced ought to renounce their errors, and to consider that Mary is
not God, nor has any celestial body: but that she is of the conception of
man and woman, who (as Epiphanius says in his Treatise of Heresit) steepeth in
honor, is dead in charity, and has received her crown in virginity: let
none then (concludes he) offer up in her name, for if he do, he loses his
soul. Moreover, he condemns these women of heresy by these words: In them
is accomplished that which was foretold, some shall revolt from the wholesome
doctrine, betaking themselves to fables and the doctrine of devils: for there
shall be some (says he) which shall give divine honors to the dead, as
heretofore they honored them in Israel. And the glory of the Saints in their
time in opposition to God, was an error for others which saw not the truth. And
this little have we considered and written to such as will learn the truth in
the Scripture, and not to brave it out through vain discourses, neither to arm
themselves with a blasphematorie tongue; so that if some will not suffer them,
nor receive these profitable things, but rather the contrary, we must say to
him, how little soever we are, that he which hears, let him understand, and
he which is disobedient, let him disobey, and let him trouble us nor the
Apostles no more. For we have spoken of the holy Virgin what we deemed to be
the most religious and the most profitable for the Church. Afterward, he
addresseth himself to these women, A grave censure of the feminine
superstition.
and rebukes them, in that they had decked a chariot or a four squared
chair, spreading a linen veil over it, and set it once a year before the
virgin Mary, and presented thereon to her certain loaves of bread for the
space of some days. He calls this superstition a heresy, and the root of
all idolatry, women's rage, a false opinion, Eues malady, who by the serpent
was deceived, the promise of error proceeding from that wicked beast, which
brings forth no goodness, neither accomplisheth the things promised, but
calls those which are not as though they were, the cause of death, the
mistress and guide unto disobedience, and revolt from the truth it self: Item,
a diabolical enterprise, a cursed affection to the forging of Idols inspired of
the devil, which under the cloak of righteousness ordinarily creeps into
the spirits of men, and through diverse cunning sleights deifieth a mortal
nature. Also he compares the idolatry of these women unto the adultery and
whoredom of common strumpets, which heat themselves in the superfluity of
many beds; and trample under their feet the chaste company of one legitimate
husband. The virgin Mary is sanctified, but not de fied, and ought to be
honored, but not worshipped.
Hereupon he confesses that which these superstitious women were able to
propound unto him, namely, that the body of the Virgin was holy: whereunto he
answers, that she was not therefore God; that she was a virgin worthy of all
honor, but not given us from God to be adored, but that even she herself has
worshipped him, who of her was borne according to the flesh, and who is
descended from heaven out of the bosom of his Father. Therefore ye may see
(says he) why the Gospel fortifieth us, None was able to know better then
Jesus Christ how much the virgin ought to be glorified.
reciting what the Lord himself said unto her, Woman, what have I to do with
thee? Mine hour is not yet come. To the intent that none should presume of
more then appertains unto this holy virgin, neither should attribute too much
excellency unto her, he calls her woman, as prophesying of the things which
should come to pass in the world, by reason of partialities and heresies, lest
that some in admiring her too much, should fall into the romings of this
heresy: for the whole discourse of this story is but trash, and, as I may
term it an old woman's tale. Moreover, to take away the occasion of all
excuses and replies, he cleanly cutteth it off, and says, that never any
Scripture has taught us this kind of adoration, nor that any of the Prophets
have ever commanded us to worship a man, much less a woman. Verily she is
(says Epiphanius) an excellent chosen vessel, The Saints are more to be
honored for having believed, then the virgin Mary, who bore the Son of God in
her belly, or as Simeon which bore him between his arms.
yet notwithstanding she is a woman, whose nature has not in any thing been
changed; but as she that in honor has been raised up, as the body of the
Saints; and if more may be said in her honor, like as Elias a virgin from the
belly of his mother, which always kept his virginity, was taken up into
heaven, and saw no death: or as John whom the Lord loved, and who leaned upon
his bosom, or as holy Thecla; but Mary is to be honored much more then these,
because of the dispensation of that secret whereof as worthy she was reputed.
But Elias, though he yet be living, ought not to be worshipped, nor John;
albeit that by his own prayer he made his death to be admired, or received
this grace from God rather, no nor Theela, nor any (...) Saint ought to be
adored: The reason is, because (says he) that the ancient error should not
domineere over us, that in forsaking the living God, we should not worship the
things which he has created. For they have worshipped and served the
creature, ha^ing forsaken the Creator, and are become fools. For if he will
not suffer us to adore the Angels, much less her that is borne of Anna, who to
Anna was given by Ioaechim, she that through prayers and all devotion was given
according to the promise made to her father and mother: and who in that respect
is borne no otherwise, then according to the nature of others, The end
wherefore Jesus Christ would take his flesh of woman, was not to the intent
that she should be worshipped, but that the world might believe that he had
taken out nature upon him.
but as all of the seed of man, and out of the womb of a woman. For although
the story of Mary and the traditions do report, that it was said to her
father Ioachim in the wilderness, Thywife has conceived, yet was it not said,
that it should be without copulation, or without the seed of man. But the
Angel which was sont, foretold that which was to come, to the intent we should
not enter into doubt, because of that which in truth has been done, as
already it had been ordained and promised to the rightous: and we see that the
Scripture in many places declares it to be so God then being descended out of
heaven has formed himself of the Virgin, as of earth, the Word having taken
his flesh of the Virgin Mary: nevertheless, not to that end that the Virgin
should be worshipped, neither to the intent that he would deifie her, nor with
meaning that we should offer up in her name. Hereupon returning to the first
original of the error of these women, he cries out, saying, From whence then
is come this crooked Dragons from whence are these crooked Counsels renewed?
let Mary be in honor, but let the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost be
worshipped; let none worship Mary, nor any other woman, no nor a man likewise,
for this mystery is due only but to God. The Angels themselves are not capable
of such an honor, therefore let the covetousness of the tree be taken away
from before your eyes: let the creature return unto his Creator, She which is
bound to worship, is not capable of being worshipped.
let Adam with Eve come again to reverence and serve God only, let her be no
more seduced by the Serpents voice; but let her abide in the commandment of
God, Thou shall not eat of the tree. This tree was not the error, but by the
tree came the disobedience of error: let none then eat of the error, which is
for the Virgin Mary's sake; for although the tree be fair, it is not therefore
good to be eaten. And though that Mary be exceeding fair, holy, and to be
honored, yet is she not to be worshipped. But these women renew a mixtion at
hab nab, and prepare a table not for God, but for the devil; let Jeremy stay
and withhold these peevish women, that they may not trouble the world, nor say
no more, We honor the Queen of Heaven. Honor beseems all the Saints, but
adoration belongs to God only.
Whereupon briefly concluding his discourse, he says, Let Mary be in honor,
and let the Lord be worshipped. For the righteous (says he) give no occasion
of error to any one, God is not tempted with evil, neither tempts any man,
nor likewise his servants to deceive us.

If this holy Father had such zeal and courage to cry out so loud against
these women in his time, which offered but a cake unto the Virgin Mary, and
that all the East trembled for it; what would he do at this day, if he heard
the prayers of your Jesuits, wherein they iovne ordinarily the Virgin Mary with
the holy Trinity, saying, To God one in Trinity, and to the mother of God,
Mary always virgin be glory and thanks giving vnte eternity? What would he
say of your prayer contained in the Psalter, approved by the Doctors of
Sotbon, and judged not only worthy, but also very profitable to be published,
in which you say to the Virgin Mary: My only succor, If the Virgin could
speak from heaven, she would rebuke these blasphen atory vo^ves and p^ayers
which they make unto her.
my lips are bound to publish no other praises then thine, I have put all my
hope in thee, to thee only I address my prayers, I will love no other then
thee; by thee the head of the Serpent has been bruised by thee the world is
repaired, thy power is boundless, unto thee I confess my sins, into thy
hands I remit my soul: Come unto Mary ye which have th^rst, pray unto her,
that with her water she will wash away the filthiness of your sins; promised
woman to bruise the Serpent pray for us; which sufferedst on the cross with
Christ, take pity on us. What would he judge of Iustus Lipsius, who putting
out his eyes wherewith he had seen the light of truth in Holland and who not
long ago has abused his pen to renew and disguise through the craft and
cunning of his tongue, the false rumors of the miracles of the Ladies of Hates
and of Montague? would he not liken this golden fable of Lipsius, and the
flourish of prayers which you make to the Virgin Mary, to the Cantarids and
green flies, which are of color very fair and shining like gold, and yet are
very dangerous and full of venom, which they spue up, and cast on every side
upon the trees and fruits of the earth? would he not cry out much more louder
and far more rougher against your superstitions, Our prayers one for another
be witnesses only of our obedience to God, and the cha^itie we beat unto our
neighbor, which cannot be (...) into the intercession of the Son of God.
then he did in times past for the presenting but of a cake to the Virgin Mary?
Had he not greater reason to call the praises and prayers which daily you offer
to the holy Virgin, the instruments of error, diabolical enterprises, a
spiritual adultery, a doctrine blasphematorie, and finally a forging Idol
heresy? Now as for Chrysostom, he teaches us in his sermons, and upon the
exposition of the formular of the prayer which Jesus Christ gave unto his
Disciples, that God requires not of us, that we should address our prayers
to any other, but only unto him, and to his Son Jesus Christ our sole
Mediator, to induce him to receive and hear our supplications. And albeit
that God in his word has commanded us to succor one another with our mutual
prayers, with promise to hear us, notwithstanding, he shows us, that to
purchase the favor of God, we have no need of any other help, then by
addressing our selves to our only Savior Jesus Christ, we have free access
unto his grace, and stand sure in the same. God (says he in his fifth sermon
upon the 8. chapter of S. Matthew) will not grant us so much of his grace, at
the request of them which pray for us, as when we our selves pray, to the end
we might use freedom in speaking to him, and that desiring to reconcile him
unto us, we may reform our selves. For so took he pity on the Canaanitish
woman, We have no need or any other Intercessors t^en we our selves; ^n that we
pray in the name of the Son of God.
so on the thief without either the intercession of advocate or mediator. And
will thou learn this, that we in praying for our selves do more good with God
then when others pray for us? The Canaanitish woman cried, and as the disciples
came unto him they besought Christ, saying, Send her away, for she cries after
us; and Christ Jesus answered, I am not sent but unto the lost sheep of the
house of Israel: but when she came her self and continued on her crying*
saying. Truth Lord, yet indeed the whelps eat of the crummes which fall from
their masters table, then he did her good, and said: Be it unto thee as thou
desire. Thou may see ho^ he put her off when others prayed for her, and
heard her when she her self prayed. In like manner, in his 16. sermon upon
certain texts of the Gospel, according to S. Matthew, he says, Is God far
from thee, that thou go to seek him in some place? He is not shut up in any
place, but always he is by thee. And he which no place can contain, faith
will contain him. For if thou will pray unto a man, thou inquire what he
does, and he to whom thou speak hears thee dreamingly, or has not the
leisure, or will not vouchsafe to answer thee. With God all this is needless,
but in what place soever thou art if thou call on him he is at hand: Thou
^ast no need of an usher, mediator, or servant, do but say, take pity on
me, and as soon as thou have spoken he is there; neither can thou have
finished thy speech, but he will say, here I am. Again, in his discourse upon
the Canaanitish woman, Tell me woman, how durst thou address thy self to
Jesus Christ, thou which art sinful and wicked? I knew well what I do,
answered she. Behold the wisdom of the woman, she prays not to James, she
addresseth not her self to Peter, she cares not for all the Apostles: she
seeks no Mediator, but in stead of all these, she takes repentance along
with her for her con^vanion, which was in place of a Mediator for her, and so
is gone unto the souraigne fountain. For (said she) therefore is he descended
from heaven, therefore took he flesh upon him, and made himself man, that I
might dare to speak to him; A contrite heart is that which can lead us unto
God.
above in heaven the Cherubims tremble before him, the Seraphi^s fear him, and
here beneath on earth a woman of a wicked life speaks unto him, and says,
have mercy on me: o admirable! above trembling, beneath boldness! have mercy
on me, I have no need of a Mediator. He repeateth this doctrine in his
treatise of Repentance. God only (says he) can cure the heart, who has made
the heart of every one, and who every day understands our affairs. He then
can enter into our consciences (which is not possible for the Angels and Saints
departed) to touch our spirits, and bow our souls. Knowing then these things,
let us have our recourse unto God, who will and can separate our vexations. For
when we have to do with men, to obtain any thing at their hands, we must
first meet with porters, then persuade flatterers, and oftentimes take a great
journey. With God there is no such thing, without either mediator or spokesman
he is inclined to hear thee, without either money or charge he yields to thy
prayer: It is a great folly in men to address themselves to their equals,
which often pase the^ with excuses, in stead of bringing them straight unto
God, who is ready to hold his arms open to receive the^.
It is sufficient if thou criest only to him with thy heart, or sheadest thy
tears, he is then quickly moved to mercy. He adds upon the fourth Psalm:
Thou can not say, I am afraid to come near and pray unto God, for thou have
no need of any vshers which should bring thee unto him, nor guards, nor
friends: but when thou art alone by thy self, then is the principal time in
which he will hear thee, for even so did he with the Canaanitish woman: when
Peter and James came unto him, he did not grant her request, but when she
persisted on, then he gave her that which she craved. From whence he draws
this conclusion, in his sermon of the profit and advancement of the Gospel:
Thou have no need of any advocates unto God, nor of any long discourse: but
although thou be alone, The faithful man is never better accompani^d, then
when he prays alone in his closet.
without an advocate, and praiest thy self unto God, thou shall obtain thy
desire.

Touching the intercession of the Saints departed, he determines nothing
thereof particularly: but writing to R^parius he admonishes us in general^,
that we ought not to worship, neither Relics, Angels, nor any other creature
whatsoever. And so often as he treats of prayer, he exhorts us not to have
our recourse to any creature, but unto God only: and to follow in our prayers
that form of prayer and instruction of our Lord Jesus Christ, which he
recommendeth unto us in his 14 Sermon upon S. Matthew, where he says, that
he which prays not as Christ has taught, None can do more with the Father
then the Son.
is none of Christ's disciples, and that the Father willingly hears the
prayer, which his Son has indicted, because the Father knows the intention
and words of his Son; neither receives any thing but what his wisdom has
expounded, rejecting all that men have invented and followed through custom
and usurpation. So is it then, that Jesus Christ the only Son of God has
taught us to call upon our heavenly Father, but in his name. And S. Chrysostom
expounding the fifth verse of the first Epistle to Timothy, Chap. 2. There is
one God, and one Mediator between God and man, which is the man Christ Jesus,
notes upon this place that Christ to be our Mediator, ought to be joined with
God and Man, and that if he were separated from the substance of the Father,
and had no natural communion therewith, he could in no wise be our Mediator.
And to the end* we should not think that God is pleased with doing us good,
and giving ^are to our requests, for the sake and merit of any other Saint, he
signifies to us, that all men (except our Redeemer Jesus Christ) have been
defiled here with some sin. God (says he, in his 40. Sermon on Genesis)
permitted that sometimes the righteous through their own will should fall into
sin, to the intent that he alone should be without sin. From hence it
chanced that Abraham has sinned through infidelity, and Moses through
ingratitude, not glorifying God, who gave him water out of the rock. And in his
45. Sermon upon S. Matthew, he makes mention of the Virgin Mary's ambition,
which moved her to importune our Lord Jesus Christ to do miracles. And upon
this sentence of the 14. Psalm and third verse, There is none that does good,
no not one, he cites again for confirmation hereof, the vices and
imperfections of the Virgin Mary, and of all the Disciples of our Lord Jesus
Christ, saying that when Christ was crucified, there was none that did good:
all his Disciples fled away, John stark naked, Peter denied him, and the s^ord
of doubt or di^fidence pierced the soul of the Virgin Mary.

Among other arguments, which your Doctors use to verify that which you have
proposed in the beginning of your Epistle, to wit, y^ the Church has taught
and approved the invocation of Saints for the space of 1605. years: behold one
of the principal says, namely, that the Gentiles (into which number Julian
the Apostate ranked himself) called the Christians Idolaters, as well for the
veneration of Saints, as for that of Angels. But to refute your proposition,
and to discover the falsehood thereof, I will here cite that answer which S
Cyril Patriarch of Alexandria gave expressly to Julian the Apostate, A lie
given to Julian the Apostate.
upon that false accusation and reproach: It is not so as thou think (replied
S. Cyril to Julian the Emperor) that we deifie a man, and that we should not
give the honor of adoration to him which by nature is God; but we say rather,
that the Word proceeded from the Father, by whom all things have bin created,
and who ordained to save mankind has taken flesh, and has bin made man. He
is not worshipped (as thou say, and would believe) in that he is man; for
why should we say so, but acknowledging that this man which appeared to us is
the Word of God? we go unto him in as much as he is also God, and who came
from God the immutable Father. As for the Martyrs, we reckon them not as Gods,
neither have we accustomed (note this word) to worship them: we only praise
them and honor them with great honors, because valiantly they have fought for
the truth, and in that they ^eld the purity of their faith, even to despise
their own lives. Besides, thy Plato says of such as have lived well and died
honorably, that they are made Demons, To deprive the Saints of unmeet
adoration, is not to frustrate them from their due reverence.
that is to say, Gods, and that after their death they ought to be served, and
their sepulchers worshipped. But as for us, we say not that the holy Martyrs
are made Gods, but have accustomed to honor them as much as may be, yielding
them every where in recompense of their noble virtues, a memory that never
perishes, Neither shall you ever prove, that we worship men, or should
attribute to them the glory of God. He shows the like in his books of the
Trinity, and in his Commentaries upon the Gospel of S. John: We come not unto
God (says he in his first book of the holy Trinity) otherwise then by
Christ. And in his third book: Our faith justifies, and makes us familiar
with God, and aduanceth us near unto him. This faith is not simply in the man,
but in the nature of God; and in as much as the Word was in the flesh. And in
his Treatise of true faith: Our faith, and hope is in God, when Christ then
said, believe in me, does he not manifestly show that he is God? And if in the
Spirit of the Son, we have confidence in calling upon the Father; how is not
Christ then god also, after that the Word was made flesh? Which he more amply
and clearly expounds in his discourse upon the exhortation, which Christ
made to his Disciples before his departure out of this world, to pray unto the
Father in his name, oftentimes promising to them, that they should obtain
whatsoever they demanded of his Father in his name. Seeing Christ commands us
to pray unto the Father in his name, he excludes all other names.
He adds, In my name, (says S. Cyril) to show that he is the Mediator, and
that the Father communicates his blessings to us, through the Son, by whom we
have access to the Father in the Spirit, as it is written. Therefore he
calls himself the gate, and the way; because (says he) no man comes unto
the Father but by me. For in as much as he is the Son and God, he gives us his
blessings with the Father. Which S. Paul minding to show us, said, Grace be
with you and peace from God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ, But in
so much that he is Mediator, High Priest and Advocate, he presents our
prayers to God, for he alone gives us liberty and boldness unto the Father.
We must then pray in the Saviors name, if we will be heard of the Father.
None can be made holy or sanctified by the rule of living well, but through the
help and intercession of Christ, The Father will never yield unto any, but
(...) in who^ he has taken his good pleasure.
nor joined also to the Father, but through his mediation. He permits us in
no wise to ask any thing from his Father, but in his name only, and promises
that his Father will readily grant it us. And in his fourth book upon the
Prophet Esaias: All prayers are directed by Christ, for by him we make our
demands to God his Father, and by him we make our prayers, confessing also
that God is in him. And in another place: To whom behooves it better, to grant
unto the Saints their desires, and to give them that which they require, then
to him which only is naturally and verily God? The Saints have received the
crowns of righteousness, but they cannot give them.
The Saints who have bin sanctified through the communication of God, which
sanctifies them, may well preserve this gift, if so be they keep his
commandments: but they cannot sanctify others. For no man sanctified through
the communication of the holy Ghost, has the power to communicate this grace
to others. There is none but the only fountain of holiness, which of it self
can give this holiness to all. The Saints then who have received this gift
through grace and through communication, cannot distribute it to others at
their pleasure: but the Son, who is the fountain of holiness, sanctifies
his Disciples, saying, Receive ye the holy Ghost. All which are arguments
worthy to be noted, whereby Saint Cyril rebukes the folly of such as forsake
the wellspring of living waters, to search broken cesternes which will
contain no water. S. Ambrose does no less upon this subject in his sermons
and discourses. For in his Commentaries upon the Epistle to the Romans, he
mocketh those greatly, who in stead of praying personally to God, and should
not speak to him but in the name of his well beloved Son, do betake
themselves to the Saints deported, as to his faithful vassals and familiar
friends to approach unto his divine Majesty, and to obtain his grace through
their entreaty and intercession. He compares them to the Heathen and
Idolaters of whom the Apostle S. Paul speaks in his first chapter of that
said Epistle, counting themselves wise (says he) they became fools; and when
they were ashamed that they had forsaken God, they accustomed to use a
miserable excuse for themselves, saying they had access unto God through them,
as in a Court by the Earls and Lords one has access unto the King. But I
pray you is there any man so foolish, Whosoever is called ought to come unto
God without waiting for any other name.
and so careless of his preservation, as to attribute to an Earl, the honor
of his King, since that in using him so, it is by right high treason? and will
not those men think themselves to be guilty, which attribute to the creature,
the honor due unto his Creator, and abandon their Lord, to adore their fellow
servants? For surely the reason why men come unto the King, by officers or
Earls, is, because the King is a man, and knows not whom to trust unto in
his Commonweal. But to procure* God to be favorable unto us, from whom
nothing is hid, and who knows what is in every one of us, there is no need of
any intercessor or spokesman, but of a devout spirit: for in what place soever
such a man will speak unto him he answers him. And in his third book of the
Holy Ghost, The sighs of the heart penetrate the heavens.
and 12. chapter, We must not adore any thing beside God; for it is written,
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. If then the
mystery of the incarnation is to be adored, as a work of the holy Ghost,
according as it is written, The holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power
of the most high shall ouershadow thee: therefore also that holy thing which
shall be borne of thee shall be called the Son of God; without all doubt the
holy Ghost also ought to be worshipped, seeing we worship him, who according
to the flesh was conceived by the holy Ghost. But let no man strain that unto
the Virgin Mary; We ought to wo^ship in the Temple, but not the Temple.
she was the temple of God, but not the God of the Temple: and therefore he
only ought to be adored, which wrought in that temple. And upon the first
chapter of the Epistle to the Colossians: The Apostle (says he) has declared
from the beginning, how exceeding great and infinite the omnipotence of Christ
is, to the intent to teach us, that it is he alone in whom we must put our
trust; because that through him all things are, and nothing can live without
him either in heaven or earth. The Father has exalted his Son above all
creatures, by that voice which speak f^o ^ heaven, Hear him.
So that if any one think he ought to affectate his devotion to some one of
the elements, to the Angels, or to the superior powers, let him know that he
erreth. Therefore Christ ought only to be heard, and only served by way of
religion, and none ought to be esteemed of in respect of him, because he which
is the head, has all others subject to him, for he which humbles himself
before his subjects erreth; because that in holding not on the head, he is a
stock, that is, he is like unto a twigge cut off from the tree, and which has
no root, in such sort, that such a man is without the head, whereof (says he)
depends the life of the rest of that body. Also upon his admonition of S.
Paul in his Epistle to the Colossians, chap. 2. verse. 8. Beware lest there be
any man that spoil you through Philosophy, and vain deceit, through the
traditions of men, according to the rudiments of the world, and not after
Christ. He declares that through vain deceit and traditions of men, we must
understand the superstition which serves the world for a Religion, and not
God, which is one, and which leads us not to Jesus Christ, in whom is the
perfection of the Godhead. Moreover, Saint Jerome in his disputes against
Vigilantius, speaking generally of the Christians in his time: We shorship not
(says he) nor serve by way of Religion, neither Angels, nor Archangels, nor
Ch^rubins, nor Seraphins, nor any name which is named, neither in this present
world, nor in the world to come, lest we should rather serve the creature,
then the Creator, which is blessed eternally. S. Cyprian proceeds further,
and says in his fifth Sermon of such as are fallen: Cursed is the man which
puts his hope in man. We must pray unto the Lord, and call upon God the
Father in the name of his Son Jesus Christ: as he himself expounds it, in
his excellent discourse upon the Lords Prayer: where he admonishes us, that
there is no prayer more certain, or more pleasing to the Father, then that
which by the mouth of his Son has been pronounced, who is the Truth, and
that to pray otherwise the^ he has taught us, is not only ignorance, The
sin of those which pray in another name then Jesus, participates not so much
of ignorance, as of scorn.
but an absurd fault, and like to that of the Jews, whom the Lord rebukes,
that they did reject the commandment of God, to establish their own
traditions. Let us pray then (says he) even as our Lord has taught us.
Prayer is acceptable to God, when as we pray with a prayer which is his own,
and that we send up into his ears the words of his Son. The Father knows the
language of his Son, when we make to him our prayer. Let him that dwells
in your hearts be in your voice, and upon your tongue. And seeing that the Son
is our Advocate, whenever we crave pardon for our faults, let us take our
Advocates words (...) our mouth: for since he says, that whatsoever we shall
ask of the Father in his name, it shall be granted us; when can our prayers
then take greater force, if not when we call upon him with that prayer which
himself has made?

According to which S. Cyril teaches us in his 16 book upon the 17 chapter of
S. John, God will never reject the requests which himself has commanded us to
address unto him.
That if we would be heard of the Father, we must pray in the name of our
Savior. And S. Lactantius says, That they which pray unto the dead, shall
bear the pain of their impiety and wickedness. Likewise S. Ambrose, That
those which forsake the living God, to seek after the dead, are accounted
among the dead. For, as he expounds it himself in his book of Isaac, and
of the blessed life, says, that, Jesus is our mouth, by which we speak unto
the Father, our eye, by which we behold the Father, and our right hand*
whereby we offer our selves unto the Father: without the which Mediator, these
is no approaching unto God, neither for us, nor for any of the Saints. And S.
Austin, who sometimes was an Auditour of S. Ambroses Sermons* says the like
thereof upon the 105. Psalm; to wit, that the prayer which is not made through
Christ; Christ not only cannot blot out the sin, but turns it also into
sin. Also on the 29. Psalm, If we consider (says he) what God thundreth
forth by S. John, as it were out of a cloud, saying, do the beginning was the
Word, and the Word was with God, and that Word was God. (...) was in the
beginning with God. All things were made by it, and without it was made nothing
that was made. In it was life, and the life was the light of men. It is the
humanity in our Mediator which prays for us, and his Godhead which
decreeeth upon our prayers.
And the light shined in the darkness; and the darkness comprehended it not.
Hitherto (says he) (...) find no prayer, nor cause* nor place of (...). But
because (...) immediately after he says, And the Word was made flesh, and d^^lt
among us; thou have a Godhead, to which thou addressest thy prayer, and a
humanity which prays for thee. This was spoken by the Apostle, even since
the resurrection of our Lord* which sits at the right hand of God and
soliciteth for us, because he has vouchsafed to be our Mediator. And what is
he but a Mediator between God and men? not between the Father and men, but
between God and men.

What is that God? Christ being true man, comes unto his equals, and through
his righteousness he reuniteth the^ with God.
The Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost. What are men? Sinners, contemners of
God and mortal. Between this same Trinity, and the infirmity and iniquity
of men, was made a Mediator a man not unjust, but nevertheless weak, to the
end that in as much as (...), he might join us to God, in that that he was
weak he might draw near to thee: and therefore to the intent he might be a
mediator between God and men, the Word was made flesh, that is to say, the
Word was made man. And upon this sentence our Lord Jesus Christ says, There is
no way to come unto God, but by the Son of God himself.
I am the way, the truth^ and the life* I am (says the Lord) the truth; and
the life* will thou (...) I am the way: will thou not be deceived? I am the
truth* will thou not die? I am the life. This thy Savior says, Thou have no
where to go but only to me; thou have none to go by, but by me. Go by Christ
man, and thou shall come unto God^ If thou go to him, thou must go by him:
seek not any way, by which thou may come unto him but by him; he was made
the way by which thou art to come. I say not to thee, seek the way; he which is
the way is come unto thee. Rise thou ^p and walk. Walk with manners and not
with feet. Whosoever runs out of this way, and not by him, the more he
runs, the more be stra^eth; because he withdraws himself the further out
of the way. Moreover, upon the 94. Psalm: If thou seek (says he) thy
Mediator to lead ^hee unto God, he is in heavens* and there prays for thee,
even as he d^ed for thee in earth, being entered into the sanctuary of heaven,
he only can present the prayers of the people, which have no near access unto
God. The same author notes the words of the Apostle S. John, 1. Epistle, chap.
2. verse. 1. If any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ
the just. Where this Apostle takes heed of making himself a companion with
our advocate Jesus Christ, Surely (says he) he was a just and a great man, who
drank out of the Lords bosom the secrets of his mysteries. Being
notwithstanding such a man, The Apostle says we have, and not you have, to
show that he himself has need of a Mediator.
he has not said, ye have an advocate with the Father, but, If any man has
sinned, we have an advocate. Neither did he say, ye have, nor did he not say,
ye have me, nor likewise ye have Christ: but he propounds Christ, and not
himself, and said, we have, and not, ye have. He chose rather to rank
himself in the number of sinners, to the end that Christ might be his
advocate, then to place himself an advocate in stead of Christ, to be
accounted among the damnable proud ones. Brethren (says he) we have an
advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the just, he is the propitiation for our
sins; who so holds that commits no heresy, nor has made any schism or
party. For from whence are divisions come? from hence that men say, we are
just, we sanctify the unclean, we justify the wicked, we pray, we obtain.
But what said John? If any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father,
Jesus Christ the just. Again, in his disputation against Parmenian, lib. 2.
cap. 2. If the Apostle S. John had said, He is the propitiation for your
sinner, it should have seemed that he would have separated himself from
sinners, as if he had had no need of that propitiation which by the Mediator
is made, who sits at the right hand of the Father, and makes request for
us. Which if he had said, he had said it not only proudly, but falsely. The
dignity of the Apostles has not exempted them from the necessity of falling
down at the feet of God.
Also if he had said, I have written to you, that ye might not sin: and if
any man sin, ye have me for a Mediator with the Father, and I obtain the
remission of your sins, as Parmenian, who in some place has made the Bishop
mediator between the people and God; what good and faithful Christians could
have borne it? who would have respected him as the Apostle of Christ, and not
rather as Antichrist? For Christian men (says he) recommend one another unto
God through their mutual prayers; but he which prays for all men, and for
whom none prays, is the true and only Mediator. And for that his figure was
represented to us, in the person of the High Priest of the old Testament, it is
not found that any should pray for the Priest. Likewise S. Paul recommendeth
himself to the prayers of the faithful, as one of the members of Christ, The
Apostle desired to be assisted with the prayer of the Saints, for as much as
they were addressed to him, who is the head of the Saints.
neither does he make himself any mediator between God and the people, but
he requires that all the members of the body of Christ pray for him; because
that the pray^rs which the members make, that yet are laboring on the earth,
mount up to the Head, which is gone before into heaven, in whom is the
propitiation for our sins. Moreover, speaking of the Martyrs and other Saints
departed, in his Treatise of true Religion, he expressly faith, that the
service of the dead ought not to be reckoned among Christians for religion, and
that we ought to honor them by way of imitation, and not to adore them by way
of religion. His words are: Honorandi sunt propter imitationem, non adorandi
propter religionem. And likewise of the Angels, We honor them (says he)
through charity, and not through service. And to the intent we might not think
that we do wrong to the Saints departed and Angels, It is to dishonor the
Saints, and to grieve them, ^o attribute to them, that which they know
appertains unto God.
or should offend them in addressing or prayers only to God; he proves by
certain places of holy Scripture, that neither the Angels nor the Saints
deceased, at any time heretofore or now would be worshipped of us; but that
they rather call us back to our Creator, desiring that we should worship with
them, the same and one only God, through whose contemplation they are blessed.
Hear (^aith Saint Austin on the 96. Psalm) the Angel of the Lord, and the
instructor of the Apostle S. John, who fell down before him to have worshipped
him* at it is written in the 19. Revel. 19. 10.
chapter, and 10. verse of the Revelation. This Angel which sought not, but the
glory of his Lord, said to him, Arise, what do thou? worship God, I am thy
fellow servant and one of thy brethren. What then, my brethren? let no man say
I am afraid that an Angel should be angry if I serve him not in stead of my
God: but he will be offended, when a^ thou would serve him, for he is good
and loves God. And as the Devils wax angry when they are not served, so
Angels grow angry when they are served by way of religion in stead of God. The
Angels and the faithful which know that God will not give his ^onor to another,
of which he is jealous, will never present themselves to have part thereof.
And in his Meditations upon the 96. Psalm: Let us behold (says he) the holy
men, which were like to the Angels: when thou have found out a holy man which
is the servant of God, and if thou would worship or serve him for God, he
will hinder thee from it, because he will not be to thee in stead of God, but
with thee under God. Even so did Paul and Barnabas for it, tearing their
clothes told them, Men and brethren what do you? we are men subject to
passion as ye are. Consider then these examples which show that godly men
hinder such as would serve them by way of religion for Gods: and had rather
that one only God be served, one only God worshipped, and that to him alone
oblation be made. And so all Saints and Angels seek not, but the glory of this
only God whom they love. They have no other study then to inflame us, and to
draw by force all those that they love to his service, to his contemplation,
and to the invocation of his holy name. The Angels declare this alone God, and
not themselves. For, for that cause are they called Angels, that is to say,
messengers of God, because they are his soldiers, they seek nothing but the
glory of their Captain: if they seek after their own glory they are as
tyrants condemned; and such the devils have been, who have filled the Temples
of the Heathen, and have seduced them to set up Images for them, and to offer
them sacrifices. And therefore he reproves the folly and rashness of such,
who seeking to return unto God, and were not of themselves able, had attempted
this way to come unto God through the mediation of Angels and Saints departed:
of whom he says in his tenth book of his Confessions, chapter 42. that they
were deceived through the craft of Satan, and through the just judgment of God
were fallen into the desire of curious visions. At which he taking an occasion,
describes to us in that same place and many others the personal union of two
natures, to wit, divine and humane, which is to be found but only in our
Redeemer Jesus Christ, and proves besides, that without this union Jesus
Christ himself* could not have been capable to accomplish the office of a
Mediator between God and men. If Jesus Christ were but simply men, he could
not be capable to bring us unto God.
It behooves (says he) that the true Mediator between God and men, had
something like unto God, and something like unto man* Lest that being in the
(...) and in the other like unto men, he should have bin too far from God,
and in the one and in the other like unto God; he should have been too far
from men, and so could have been no Mediator. By the veil of Christ's
humanity we enter into the Sanctuary.
This true Mediator (says he) which God has shown to the humble through
his secret mercy, has appeared between mortal sinners, and the immortal
just one being mortell with men and that forasmuch as the reward of justice is
life and peace; just with God, that through a justice joined with God, he might
abolish the death of sinners, which he would have in common with them. Behold
therefore (says he, addressing himself to God the Father) I have (in good
earnest) my strong hope in him which sits at thy right hand, and believe
that thou will heal all my griefs through him, who makes intercession for us
unto thee, without that I should despair, etc.

Likewise in his 28 epistle, which he wrote to S. Jerome: I know (says he)
there is not so much as one only soul in all mankind for the deliverance of
which the Mediator between God and men, which is the man Christ Jesus, was not
necessary. And in his second book of the visitation of the sick, he faith,
There is no salvation but in one only Jesus Christ, there is no other name
given unto men under heaven, by which man can be saved. We ought not to fly
from the means of him, who has suffered for our miseries.
Let us then familiarly turn our faces toward our Mediator, who knows how
to have compassion of our infirmities. I speak more joyfully, and more
assuredly to my Jesus, then to any of the holy celestial spirits; because God
has vouchsafed to be made that which I am. He has taken the seed of Abraham,
and not the Angels to be our High Priest, merciful and faithful in the things
toward God, to the end to make a reconciliation for our sins.

Now as S. Austin preached this doctrine to the Hipponians for the space of
forty years, to wit, from the year of our Lord Jesus Christ about 391, unto
the year 430; so would he confirm it by his writings which I have alleged,
and by many forms of prayer which he made to God only: which here I cannot
cite, except I should bring in some of his whole books, which is in no wise
necessary, seeing that by those pieces and parcels which I have already
produced out of them, every man may perceive what was the doctrine of S.
Augustine concerning this matter. Which was approved by the Councels in which
he was present, and namely by the third Council of Carthage, wherein was
ordained to all Christians by an express article, that they evermore should
address their prayers to God the Father, and to use no prayers composed by any
for his own use, As from ill manner good laws are proceeded, so are calumnies
against the truth of the constitutions of Councels and good Doctors.
if first they had not conferred them with some one of their best instructed
brethren. I will an^ex hereunto that which S. Austin himself testifies, in the
first book of the manners of the Catholic Church. How the true Christians and
Catholics have followed this rule in his time to stop the mouths of the
Manicheans, and Doctors of the Heathen, which vpbraided them that the
Christians did call upon the Saints: Cull me not out (says he) from the
professors of the Christian name, such as know not, neither do follow the
virtue of their profession, search not out (against me) the troops of the
ignorant, which are superstitious even in the true religion, and so much given
to their likings, that they have forgotten what they promised unto God: I know
there are many which adore the sepulchers, etc. And it is no marvel among so
many people. Leave off in time then, I pray you, from detracting the Catholic
Church, in blaming the fashions of such as it self does condemn, and daily
seek to correct them as unto ward children. And in his answer to the false
accusations of a certain Philosopher called Maximus: To answer thee briefly
(says he) because thou might pretend no ignorance, and that it should not
draw thee into a scandalizing s^criledge, know this that the Christian
Catholics (of whom even in your town there is a Church established) do not
serve religiously any of the dead, nor worship in stead of the Deity any thing
which by God has been made and created, but the only God who has made and
created all things. From whence appears, that the invocation of Saints bore
not any sway in those days, nor any degree or title of divine service in the
Christian Church, in the time of Saint Austine and his predecessors. True it is
he complains that in his days the Church began to lose her virginity, and
that they obscured not those most wholesome things which in the divine books
are commanded; but that there were instituted some other ceremonies beyond the
custom. He confesses also, that the Church being settled among much chafe and
tares, did bear with many things, which themselves durst not reprove nor
condemn, to avoid the scandals of some persons, whereof some were holy and
others seditious. But howbeit on the other side he declares, that neither he
nor the Church has allowed the things which were against the faith and a godly
life. There is a difference (says he, in his 119 epistle to Ianuarius)
between the things that we teach, What prudence cannot take away, patience
does bear withal.
and the things which we suffer, between the things that we are commanded to
teach, and between the things that we are commanded to amend, and constrained
to support them till we have reformed them. And yet notwithstanding ye would
make us believe, that S. Austin, S. Jerome, S. Ambrose, S. Chrysostom, S.
Basil, S. Athanasius, S. Origin* S. Irenaeus, and Denis the disciple of S.
Paul, have not only approved the superstition of those, which worshipped the
departed Saints, but that even themselves have recommended it to the people,
as well by their prayers addressed to the Virgin Mary, and some other Saints, as
by the recital of their virtues and merits. Whereunto first of all I answer,
that many sentences have been falsified, and many annexed to the writings of
the Fathers against their intention. Which was easy to be done, because in
their time the Art of Printing was not found out, Satan lets slip no
opportunity to sow his cockle.
but copies only in written hand. Secondly, where as many books have bin
falsely published under the names of the Apostles, which had been received, if
the Apostle S. John, who suruiued the others, (according to the testimony of S.
Tertullian and Jerome) had not foreseen it; so many Treatises have been
deceitfully attributed to their successors, as by their complaints appears.

To begin then with the writings of S. Clement Bishop of Rome, S. Jerome in his
Apology against Ruffinus, says of him, that he made some books entitled
Recognitions; among which, although there was a doctrine truly Apostolical,
exposed in many texts under the person of the Apostle S. Peter, yet they had
mixed among them the doctrine of the Heretic Eumonius. So that it seemed in
sundry places of them, there is none but he that speaks. Eusebius also says
in his third book and 35. chapter, that it cannot be clearly known that the
second Epistle, and the Commentaries which are attributed to him be his,
because the ancient Fathers made no use of this Epistle, and that these
Commentaries kept in no wise neither the style nor the form of the pure
doctrine of the Apostles, and contain in them the communication between Peter
and Appion, of which the ancients make no mention. S. Epiphanius adds, that
the Ebonians did use certain books entitled, The Peregrinations of S. Peter,
written by S. Clement, stuffed with falsehood, and that S. Clement himself
controlled the^ by his own epistles, written to the Enoclycians. Eusebius
speaking of the book entitled the Pastor, in his third book and third
chapter, says, That it is Apocrypha, and that they were deceived, who thought
that that Hermes, which the Apostle S. Paul greeteth in his 16. chapter of the
Epistle to the Romans, was the author thereof. Satan seeke^h evermore to
authorize his Ragins, to the prejudice of the truth.
So likewise Erasmus of Roterdam says, that many books badly patched
together, have bin annexed to S. Cyprians books, to wit, the Treatise of the
Revelation of S. John Baptists head; which is full of fables, and
superstitions, that recites sundry things happened a long while after S.
Cyprians time: The treatise of Sina and Sion against the Jews, which in no
wise represents, neither the knowledge, nor zeal of S. Cyprian. They have
also mingled among S. Austins books, the book entitled, The true and false
penance; which contains that fine fable, how S. Andrew seeing that the people
would have taken him away from the cross whereunto they had bound him; began
to make this prayer to God: Lord it is time that thou laiest my body in the
grave, suffer them not to take me down alive from this cross: It is time that
my body should be interred, etc. In like manner, Jews Viues Valentine (one of
your best Catholics) complains in his annotations upon the books of the
City of God; that many sentences are annexed to them, which are not S.
Austins. They have put into the books of S. Jerome, the Commentaries of some of
the Epistles of the New Testament, which, as S. Austin testifies, was composed
by a Monk and a here^ike called Pelagus* Robert Bellarmine also maintains in
his disputations, that the book written to Orosus and attributed to be Saint
Austins, is not his. And many other books base and illegitimate, and which
even your selves confess to have been falsely fathered on our Fathers, and in
no wise receiueable.

But to answer more particularly to your allegations: You deceive your selves
in that you think (your) S. Denis Areopagite was the disciple of the Apostle
S. Paul. The time wherein S. Denis Areopagite lived.
For in the book of Celestial Hierarchies, which you attribute to him, he
speaks of his predecessors Clement and Ignatius, which lived and suffered
martyrdom under Traian the third persecutor of the Christians after Nero, and
the 14. Emperor, which began to reign about the year of Christ 100, and the
thirtieth year after the decease of the Apostle S. Paul; according to the
calculation of your Bishop Treculphus. This book we have also in suspicion,
because we find in it no mark of the true disciple of the Apostle S. Paul,
neither in his language, nor in his doctrine. For there is no mention made
therein for the abolishing of the ancient ceremonies, of which the Apostle S.
Paul very often disputes in his Epistles; neither does he say in any place
thereof, that that which he wrote, he did it by his masters authority. Therein
he does but sport himself with deliberate discourses, to teach the doctrine
of the holy Gospel, by obscure subtilties, vain speculations, and very
intricate. He there treats of Popes, Prelates, Priests, Monks, and of many
other Orders, which in the Apostles time were not in the Church, nor a long
while after. Likewise to show that he did dissent from the Apostles, he
applaudeth therein the Order of Monks as the highest and most excellent of all
others. Causes wherefore Laurence Valla one of your chiefest Doctors flouts at
such as thought this S. Denis to be the disciple of S. Paul, and the author of
this book. As Erasmus of Roterdam notes in his Annotations upon the 17
chapter of the Acts of the Apostles. Now as for that which you cite out of the
7. chapter of his said book, he himself expounds it, and exhorts the
faithful to seek after (not the Saints departed, but) the Saints conversant
in this world, to make request for them. I judge (says he) with the divine
Scriptures, that the prayers of the Saints in this life are very profitable,
and in this manner, to wit, The celebration of the virtues of some is
charitable, but it is impiety to pray unto the^.
if any man desire divine gifts, and acknowledging his simplicity and
infirmity, let him go find out some holy personage, and pray him to assist
and succor him through his prayers. I grant you, that he recounteth in the
third chapter of the same book, that they made mention of the Saints departed,
when they celebrated the Sacrament of the union of Jesus Christ with his
members; because they are one part of the Catholic Church, and of the company
of those which are elected to eternal life. But there is a great difference
between the recital of the virtues of the Saints deceased this world, and the
invocation of them. And you will not show us that S. Denis propounding to us
the end wherefore mention is made of their good lives, does there speak of the
invocation of Saints, but of the imitation of their godliness, and
perseverance in the Christian faith, saying, that they prayed those which
holily and religiously had lived in this world; to the end that their suruiuers
might by their examples learn to live, and die well in God, and might be
admonished that they which die in him live out of this world in a better life,
and that God has them in his memory, according as it is written, That God
knows such as are his, and that the death of the Saints is precious before
him. Secondly, you produce the comparison which S. Irenaeus makes between Eve
and the Virgin Mary in his 5. book and 16. chapter. I wonder why you represent
not here unto us S. Irenaeus words, which according to Bellarmines judgment,
do clearly show, that S. Irenaeus believed and taught that the Virgin Mary
ought to be adored by us as an Aduocatesse of our first Mother Eve toward God.
Therefore to encounter you with your own weapons, I will here make S. Irenaeus
to speak. As Eve (says he) was seduced by the words of the wicked angel, The
con^ere^nce of these words of S. Irenaeus with that which the Jesuit imposes,
discovers more plainly his impudency.
to fly from God in transgressing his word: so the Virgin Mary received the
good tidings by the word of an angel, to bear God in being obedient to his
word: and as this (Eve) was seduced to fly from God, so was this (Mary)
persuaded to obey him, to the intent that the Virgin Mary might be made an
Aduocatesse of the Virgin Eve. What man is it that perceives not, that by this
comparison S. Irenaeus opposes the male diction come upon all mankind through
Eu^s transgression, to the blessing which afterward is come to them by the
faith and obedience of the Virgin Mary? Touching this word Aduocatesse, from
whence Bellarmine draws his argument against us, ye know well that it
comes not from Irenaeus who wrote in Greek, but from the translator of his
book. And albeit ye may take here this name for a Mediatrix, yet you are not
ignorant that this Greek word paracletos, signifies sometimes also a
Comforter, and is so interpreted by S. Tertullian, and many others of the
Fathers by the name of an advocate in the same signification, as appears by
the translation of those which have translated the promise of our Lord Jesus
Christ, described by S. John in his 14. chapter, and 16. verse: I will pray the
Father, and he will give you another Advocate, that is to say, another
Comforter. So, whosoever will take heed unto the meaning of Irenaeus and his
translator, and to the proper signification of this name Advocate, in this
place shall perceive that the author meant to say no other thing, but that the
Virgin Mary was chosen by God, to bear the Redeemer of the world, and brought
forth the Consolation to Eve, according to the promise which God made to her
in paradise, that the seed of the woman should break the head of the Serpent,
who had seduced her. Thirdly, you are not ashamed to utter the Sermon of the
Virgin Mother of God, imprinted under the name of Saint Athanasius, calling the
Virgin Mary. Lady, Mother, Regeneratrix and Mistress, saying besides, Incline
thine ear to our prayers, and forget not thy people; we cry unto thee, have
remembrance of us, etc. An evident sign, either that you have not read the
first volume of his writings, wherein he shows by many examples and
testimonies of the Bible, that none ought to have his refuge neither to the
Angels, nor any humane creature, but only to God, through the address of his
Son Jesus Christ; or if you have read them, that you make less account of
his first volume, which was approved and received by the ancient Church, then
of the third which contains, as you confess, this prayer made to the Virgin
Mary. In which volume to convict you by your own Doctors, Petrus Nannius
Professor in the University of Louain, has annexed a preface; whereby he
aduertiseth the reader, that he has put into this second tome the books
suspected of falsehood, and which according to his judgment were not composed
by S. Athanasius. Fourthly, you cite the prayer which S. Basil made to the
forty Martyrs, and you annex to it false Glosses and interpretations. For S.
Basil commands not there the Christians (as you affirm) to have there
recourse unto these holy Martyrs, nor to call upon them, but declares in
commendations of those Martyrs what they did in his time. He which is (says
he) in affliction goes to those forty Martyrs; he which is in joy runs to
them. Impudency discovered.
O what audaciousnesse is it to belie a History, and to make of a simple
declaration of the custom of the vulgar people an express exhortation! and
what an impudency is it, to dare to impose that upon this holy Father, which
never he thought to say! His intention was not so, as to stir up the hearts
of his auditorie, to invoke these Martyrs; but admonishes them contrariwise,
to move one another through the remembrance of the Saints to imitate their
zeal, and to worship and implore God in the assembli^ of many, to appease him,
and to render him thanks for his benefits, and to edify each other by sermons
of exhortation. You allege more faithfully the words of the 16. Homily, made
by S. Chrysostom to the people of Antioch, where S. Chrysostom speaking of
the manner of the common people, to celebrate the memory of the Martyrs, and
to make their prayers unto God near unto their graves; The Emperor (says he)
We ought not to allege that which is done, for that which ought to be done.
which is arrai^d in purple goes to the sepulchr^^, (that is, of the Martyrs)
and laying aside all pomp and magnificence, presents himself to supplicate
the Saints, to make intercession unto God for him, and he which bears a
diade^^ prays to a Text-maker, and a Fisherman. These words you attribute to
S. Chrysostom. Nevertheless, sundry of your Writers have attributed them
unto S. Austine, and some others to a certain man called Theodore Daphnopath;
Leasings would feign cover themselves.
in such sort that you are not of one accord with your fellows, nor of one and
the same opinion touching the author of these words, from which you cannot
conclude that S. Chrysostom was of that mind, to recommend to the people the
invocation of Saints, as a service approved by God. For he speaks not in this
discourse of that which ought to be done, according to the rule and
instruction of the holy Scriptures, but of what was done by the people through
their indiscreet zeal after the imitation of the Grecians, which yearly made
an assembly about the graves of those which were slain in the battle of
Marathon, to celebrate their Feasts, and to recount their praises, as S. Cyril
notes in his sixth book against Julian the Apostate. And albeit that S.
Chrysostom did bear with this custom of the vulgar people, as many other
corruptions and abuses of the like nature, which he could not remedy, without
hurting the weak: notwithstanding he oftentimes made his complaints thereof:
See (says he in his 12. Homily on the first to the Corinthians) how the
judgments of the common people are corrupted, unprofitable, and ridiculous,
partly by foolish men, and partly by children that do suck. The Martyrs (says
he in his 45. Homily upon S. Matthew) take no delight to be honored with
money, for which the poor ^rie out for: to wit, because you employ it not for
their nourishment rather. And in his 48. sermon upon S. John's Gospel: When
thou hear that the Lord is risen naked from death, cease I pray thee from
the foolish expense of funerals. For to what end is it good, seeing it brings
but less to such as do is, and no profit to the dead, but rather damage?
Finally, he is extremely grieved at the superstitious ceremonies which they
made about sepulchers, tearming them in his (...). Homily upon the first to the
Corinthians, foolish devotions, and diabolical observations. John Dam^soenus.
Now follows the sentence of a certain Monk called John Dam^soenus, who for
his writings began to flourish in Dam^s^us, the principal city of Syria, about
the year of Christ 730. Among other books which are attributed to him, we
have four touching the tradition of the Christian faith, which have been
translated out of Greek into French, by a certain Philosopher named Iacobus
Faber Stapulensis. You affirm that in the 16 chapter of his last book
concerning the Christian faith, he says, That through the Saints, the devils
are chased away, the sick are healed, the blind see, the leprous are cleansed,
tentations and vexations are vanquished, and that every good thing comes by
them in favor of those which crave them with a steadfast faith. Although that
superstition is chiefly come forth of the heads of the Monks, yet there is
great likelihood, that this sentence was juggled in amongst his writings. For
though he lived in those days, when superstition had her full sway and vigor,
yet notwithstanding the Grecians were not so soon corrupted, as the Latins.
And Emericus one of your writers, who lived a long while after him, reproves
the Grecians for this opinion, that men ought not to invoke the saints, nor
the Virgin Mary likewise, but one only Mediator, which is Christ, and that to
offer gifts to them, was to present sacrifices to the Devils.

Let us now come to the book de Viduis, composed by S. Ambrose: When Peter's
mother in law (says he) had a fever, Andrew and Peter prayed unto the Lord for
her: And thou widow, have so many near friends which pray for thee (to wit)
the Apostles and Martyrs, if thou come to them in unity of devotion. It
behooves then to pray unto them, etc. For they can pray for our sins, since
they have washed away their own with their own blood. S. Ambrose and S.
Jerome, etc. have passed their limits, and we ought to note, but not to imitate
that which they have said.
Without searching any further, Sixtus Senensis one of your writers confesses,
that S. Jerome, and some others of the Fathers, have suffered themselves to be
transported in such a sort, through the heat and vehemency of their Orations,
that sometimes they made Hyperboles, that is to say, and speak more clearly,
they surpassed the bonds of truth. Erasmus of Roterdam in his preface upon this
book entitled, de Viduis, says, that in this fertile matter so pleasing to
the ears of the vulgar people, he has let loose the bridle of his tongue, and
painted his discourse with the colors of Rhetorike, in such a ^ort that the
ignorant people could not well judge thereof, but the learned only. In fine,
that he thought he labored to set forth his language by some artificial
drafts, to make a show and flourish of the ornaments of his eloquence.
Howsoever, if he were the author of this book, he has wandered out of the
way, and has not well remembered his own lesson, That Christ^s our mouth, by
which we speak to the Father; our eye, by which we behold the Father; our
right hand, whereby we offer to the Father, and that without this Mediator,
there is no coming unto God neither for us, nor any of the Saints. As the
ancie^ts did often bring in the Saints speaking, so spoke they sometimes to
them, as if they had been present.
You allege also for the establishing of your superstition, Saint Ieroms
letter dedicated to Paula, to whom ye appropriate that title which ordinarily
your companions do attribute to the Virgin Mary, that is, calling her holy
Lady. But if we examine this epistle of S. Ieroms, he speaks to Paula who was
absent and in heaven, as if she had been present, and that by a figure, and
certain manner of speech called in Shooles Apostrophe, whereby he not only
prays unto Paula, to supplicate God for Blesilla, but for himself also in
his extreme age. Likewise he saluteth Paula, and says vale to her, that is,
farewell, or God keep thee in good health. If then you will take these words to
the very letter, to conclude from thence that he has called upon Paula with a
full assurance that she heard him, and could persuade the divine Majesty to
hear her request, you must likewise grant me, that he discoursed with her
mouth to mouth, and that in praying to God to preserve her in health, he
believed that she, and all the Saints in Paradise, desire that after their
departure, we should recommend them to God in our prayers. But as ye will deny
me the last point, so I deny you the first, and that for these three reasons:
The first is, that in the Epitaph he made for his friend Nepotian departed this
world, The adversary is driven into absurdity, by good and strong reasons.
he calls him blessed, because he neither heard nor saw the miseries of this
world, nor the barbarian rage against the Christians. Whereunto he adds,
that those words were as one would say dumb and pronounced in vain, because
th^^ Nepotian heard him not: and that he with the other Christians in his time
was assured that Nepotian was in heaven with Jesus Christ, and joined to the
company of Saints. Now this that Jerome has plainly spoken of Nepotian, that
he heard him not, he also undoubtedly has believed, and understood of Paula
and the other Saints departed, who are established in their blessed estate, and
received into paradise to enjoy there the same rest with him. The second reason
is, that he manifestly declares to us in his Commentaries upon the prophecy
of Ezekiel, that the Saints living in this world cannot succor us, nor
consequently the departed through their prayers and intercessions* For in his
exposition of this admonition of the Prophet Ezekiel, chap. 14. verse. 14.
though these three men, Noah, Daniel, and Job were in the midst of Jerusalem,
etc. they could neither deliver them, nor their own daughters. What shall we
say (says Jerome) of those which think that by the merit and virtues of their
fathers, their perverse children may be delivered from hell fire? The soul of
him which shall have sinned, shall be that which shall die.
Every one shall die through his own sin, and and shall be saved through his
own righteousness. In vain the Jews say, Abraham is our father, having not
his works; b^t if there be confidence in any, let us put our trust only in the
Lord. The third reason, for that he testifies of these two Christian women,
who had bin instructed by him, to wit, Paula and Blesilla, is, how they upon
the point of their death, did not recommend themselves to the Virgin Mary, nor
any of the saints in paradise, but to their only Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
When (says he) the fever burned Blesilla, and that her bed was bes^t with her
dearest friends, behold her last words were, Pray ye to the Lord Jesus Christ
that he forgive me* Likewise, who will give me wings (says Paula) as a dove,
that I may fly from hence and rest me? My soul thirsts after thee, my flesh
oftentimes wishes for thee. Notwithstanding this, we cannot wholly excuse him.
Wise words of two women in great extremity.
For himself requiring Paula by his prayers to succor him in his old age,
followed not y^ rule which he himself had given to Paula and Blesilla, to call
only upon God, neither the example of their confidence in the only Savior
Jesus Christ, and since that herein he has failed, as by his own instructions
we have proved, his authority binds not us to follow his error. Now rests
that supplication which according to your opinion S. Austin made to the Virgin
Mary, and to all the saints. For proof whereof you cite the 40 chapter of his
Meditations, where he says, Holy and immaculate Virgin, mother of God, mother
of our Lord Jesus Christ, vouchsafe to make intercession for me unto him, of
whom through thy virtues and merits thou wast made the holy Temple. You allege
with a bad conscience this book of Meditations: for you know that Erasmus and
some other Doctors durst not affirm it to be S. Austins. The Papistical
Doctors make no conscience to discover the shame of their fathers, seeing they
attribute to them such shameful matters.
Also you are not ignorant that the Canon Garet attributes this supplication
to Fulbert Bishop of Chartres. And indeed, whosoever shall confer this prayer
printed under S. Austins name, with his sentences, which I have already
alleged against you, whereby he absolutely condemns the invocation of
Saints, will judge with these learned men, who had a better conscience then
you, that none can attribute unto him this prayer, without doing him shame and
accusing him of manifest contradiction in his writings, and of faining in that
which he says of Jesus Christ, that he only can present unto God his Father
the prayers of his people, because there is no salvation but only in him: and
of himself that he speaks more safely to Jesus Christ then to all other
saints in paradise. After this as in a passage you propose against us the
authority of S. Leo, and S. Gregory Popes, S. Gregory of Tours, S. Anselmus,
and S. Bernard. And you could name many other protectors of your cause, if you
were not of an opinion that the half of them which you have already named,
were not more then too sufficient to make the Caluinists and Lutherans to
blush, if they had any blood in their hearts. I confess that the invocation of
Saints, and namely of the Virgin Mary, was finally authorized by the latter of
these Popes, if that be true as is reported, and brought up by all force into
the service of the Church about the year of Christ 600: because that in those
days there was no more Athanases, We avouch that superstition got the upper
hand, but we deny that we ought to cleave unto it.
nor Chrysostoms, nor Cyprians, nor Austins, to stop the breach, and repulse it
from gaining the heart of the vulgar people. I confess also, that Anselmus and
Bernard living in that miserable age, wherein superstition was the Mistress of
the field, struck their sails and halted on both sides, to accommodate
themselves to the custom of their time, through fear and carnal wisdom:
but I add hereunto, that if you had ever a vein in your heart of shame, you
would then blush in your soul, and would be ashamed to rank Anselmus and
Bernard with these, who through their writings have confirmed your tradition,
touching the adoration of Saints. For it was impossible for them to confirm
you and your predecessors in your opinion, seeing themselves were never firm
therein, but very inconstant and variable. For at sometimes they counseled the
Christians to come unto God by the Virgin Mary, calling her the Mediatrix and
Sauiouresse of mankind; at other times they admonished them of the clean
contrary, and to address themselves to God only, through the intercession of
his only Son, and not to put their hope, but in the mercy of the Father, and
in the full satisfaction which his Son has made to him for our sins.
Howsoever it be, we find in Anselmus Meditations the formal of prayer, which
he made unto God, and published to the intent al Christians might use it with
him for their instruction and consolation. Lord my God (says he) I pray unto
thee, A formular of Anselmus his prayers.
because thou art near unto all those which ^all upon thee; and those which
call on thee in truth, for thou art the Truth. I beseech thee. let thy truth
then teach me, that I may invoke thy clemency, for I cannot pray as I ought;
but most blessed truth I beseech thee to instruct me. To be wise without thee,
is to become foolish; but to know thee is perfect knowledge. O divine wisdom
instruct me, and learn me thy law: for I believe that he is blessed whom thou
shall instruct, and he to whom thou shall teach thy law. I desire to invoke
thee, and entreat thee that it may be in truth. What is it to call on the
truth in truth, but to invoke the Father by the Son? for what is there more
sweet then to pray the Father by his only Son, and to move the Father unto
compassion by the remembrance of his own Son? So have wicked livers been
taken out of prison and bonds; A similitude.
so those which are condemned to lose their heads, recovered not only their
lives, but an extraordinary favor, when they show to the angry fathers the
love of their children: Even so almighty Father, through the love thou bear
to thy almighty Son, I beseech thee draw my soul out of prison, to the end
it may confess thy name, deliver me from the bands of sin, through the
intercession of this thy precious Son which sits at thy right hand. For
surely I know not what other intercessor I could address toward thee for me,
but only he which is the propitiation for our sins who sits at thy right
hand, who through the glory which is common to him with thee, soliciteth thy
goodness for us. Behold O God and Father my Advocate with thee, behold my
High Priest which has no need of being cleansed through the blood of any one,
because he shines being sprinkled with his own blood. I have addressed thy
well-beloved Son for my Advocate, I have made him a Mediator between thee and
me, an Intercessor through whom I am sure to obtain pardon: behold he is my
hope, l^e in him is all my confidence. If thou rereiect me for mine iniquity,
as I have deserved, regard me yet at the least in thy Son, Our demerits are
forgiven through the merit of the Son of God.
that propitiation which thou have prepared by one, that served thee. Remember
what thy Son has suffered, and forget that which a wicked wretch has done.
In like manner we find in his Epistles another form made for the instruction
and consolation of the sick which prepare themselves to die, in form of a
discourse, wherein the Pastor demands, and the sick person answers. Art
thou glad in thy self (says the Pastor to the sick) that thou die in thy
Christian faith? Yea, answered the sick. P. Do thou confess to have lived
so ill as thou have merited eternal punishment? S. Yea. P. Beleeuest thou that
our Lord Jesus Christ died for thee? S. Yea. P. Do thou give him thanks
therefore? Another form of Anselmus, to comfort the sick.
S. Yea. P. Beleeuest thou that thou can not be saved but by his death? S.
Yea. P. Got to then, whilst yet thy soul is in thee, set all thy salvation
only in his death. Have confidence in no other thing, trust and commit thy
self wholly to this death, cover thy self only therewith, and with it wrap
thy self round about. And if the Lord would judge thee, say, Lord I oppose the
death of Jesus Christ our Lord, between me and thy judgment; otherwise I
could not debate with thee. And if he say unto thee, that thou art a sinner,
say, Lord I put the death of Jesus Christ our Lord between thee and my sins.
And if he should say once more unto thee, thou have merited damnation; say,
Lord I put the death of our Lord Jesus between thee and my damnation; I offer
unto thee his merit in stead of that which ought to be in me, in whom there is
none. And if he should say yet unto thee, that he is angry against thee: say,
Lord I put the death of our Lord Jesus between me and thy anger. This being
accomplished, let the sick say three times, Lord I recommend my spirit into
thy hands. Thus Saint Bernard has oftentimes exhorted the people in his
sermons, not to stand upon the Apostles, nor any other Saint which is but a
man, neither to any Angel, but to go straight forward unto the Father of
lights, who is the only judge and witness of our thoughts, and to his Son
Jesus Christ, the only Savior and Bridegroom of the Church. For in his 23.
Sermon expounding this sentence of our Lord Jesus Christ, S. Bernard sends us
to Christ.
I am the way, the truth, and the life. Who will (says he, making Christ
himself speak) come, let come after me, let him come by me, let him come to
me. After me, says the Lord, for I am the truth; by me, for I am the way; to
me, for I am the life. And in his 15. Sermon on the 91. Psalm: The Church
(says he) is excellent well described in the Canticle of Canticles, that
having found the watchmen, (or rather being found by them, for she sought them
not) she staieth not with those watchmen, neither contenteth her self in their
company, but having enquired after her well-beloved, flies right toward him;
for her heart had no trust in those watchmen but in her Lord: and it may be she
would have said to those which should have counseled her otherwise, I have my
confidence in the Lord; which the Corinthians did not well observe, when they
met with those watchmen, but stayed with them, and passed no further: I am
(said they) of Cephas, As we are of Christ and not of another, so ought we to
stay with Christ.
and I of Paul, and I of Apollo: but what have these sober and well advised
watchmen done? For they would not take to them the Bride, they which were
ielous about her, even with a godly jealousy, who had vowed to render her as a
chaste virgin to her husband. And, if I deceive not my self, they pushed her
forward, to the end she might pass further to find out her well-beloved. And it
is to be considered with what arrows the Apostle S. Paul wounds those which
some to stay with the watchmen: Paul, has he been crucified for you, or have
ye been baptized in the name of Paul? And immediately after: I will deliver him
(says the Lord in the 91 Psalm) because he hops in me: not (says he) in
the watchmen, not in man, not in Angel, but in me. Expect no good from any but
from me, and not by them: for every good gift is from above, coming down from
the Father of lights, for through me the watchmen are profitable. The Virgin
Mary seeks not to disrobe her son, or to be clothed with his robes.
But for the rest, the watch of the secret intention, which is in the bottom
of the heart, must not only be of me, but also is made by me, because the eye
of man cannot penetrate so deep, nor likewise the eye of an Angel. Also in his
174 epistle he admonishes the Monks of his time, that the Vrgin Mary would be
honored with judgment; because she has no need of false honors, being
adorned above in heaven with true honors. She takes no delight (says he) in a
proud novelty the mother of rushnesse and sister of lightness: to honor her
in such a sort is not to honor her, but to take away honor from her. The
wel-spring of our merits is in the grace of God, and not in the righteousness
of me^.
Moreover, manifesting his faith to be only in God, in his 61 Sermon upon the
Canticle of Canticles: My merit (says he) is the mercy of the Lord: for I
have no want of merit, so long as he has no want of mercy. I boldly take from
the bowels of the Lord what I want, because they are full of mercy. Besides,
he died in this belief, saying, I confess that I am not worthy of the
inheritance of the kingdom of heaven, and the which through ^ine own merits I
cannot obtain: but my Lord which holds it by a double right, that is, both
by the inheritance of his Father, and through the merit of his own passion;
content with one he gives me the other. And if I attribute it to my self by
virtue of the gift which he has given me, I am not confounded.

It is not yet five hundred years since S. Bernard, who was Abbat of the
Cloister of Claitual, The time and place when S. Bernard flourished.
lived in Burgundy, one of the principal Provinces of France, and was there
in greater reputation then all the other Monks of his Order. His books do
plainly witness, that he was more inclined to the invocation of our only God
and celestial Father, then to the adoration of Saints, and that he believed
that no man could have sure access unto his throne of grace, but by the merit
of the death of our only Savior Jesus Christ. Your Fathers have brought in and
received his books in their Church without any contradiction; and even unto
this present you have them in your Cloisters, and handle them daily. And yet
for all this you love rather to affirm against your own consciences that S.
Bernard constantly maintained the invocation of Saints, then roundly to
confess that he spoke thereof with some scruple of conscience, and very
doubtfully, as appears by his writings. In the repetition of the prayers,
which our Fathers have addressed to the departed Saints, you nominate that
prayer of Origens, and ask me whether Origin that Doctor praying to the
Prophet Job (about the year of Christ 220) Was an Idolater? But since that
Origin was before S. Ieromes time, S. Chrysostomes, S. Cyprians, S. Austins, S.
John Damascenus, and many other Doctors of the Primitive Church, according to
S. Ieromes testimony, who says that in the year of Christ 203, Origin was
then of the age of seventeen years; it is marvel why you have not done him
that honor, A double dishonor done to Origin.
to place him in his rank, and to cite his prayers as well as others. Moreover,
it is a wonder that you do this wrong to Origin, to attribute this prayer to
him; O S. Job pray for us miserable wretches, that the mercy of God may
deliver us. True it is that Origin had many strange and dangerous opinions, in
such sort that S. Jerome says of him, that he commended his spirit, but not
his faith, that he set greatly by his translations, but not by his doctrines
and expositions; which he terms venomous and far from the sense of holy
Scriptures, and doing them violence: but howbeit, as we have already proved
by his disputations against Celsus the Philosopher, that he spoke well of the
invocation of Gods name, Albeit that Origin was an impure writer in some other
points, yet he has showed himself pure in the article of invocation.
and maintained that religious adoration appertains only to God, and the
presentation of out prayers to our only Mediator and Intercessor Jesus Christ.
If Celsus reproched Origin, that he and the other Christians worshipped our
Lord Jesus Christ, and from thence sought to conclude that the Christians
worshipped after the fashion of the Gentiles some other then God; would not he
( Celsus) also have replied that he and his followers called upon the Prophet
Job, and that they believed they offended not God in serving religiously his
servant? would he not likewife in good earnest have flouted at this
distinction of Origens, that the Christians worshipped no other but God, in
calling on the name of Jesus Christ: forasmuch as Christ was not a simple man,
as the Prophets and other departed Saints were; nor likewise a simple creature,
as the Angels, but forasmuch as he was also one God with the Father, and Lord
of all things? And what likelihood is there that he besought Job to pray for
him, when he himself prescribed this rule to all Christians to offer their
prayers only to God, through his only Son, and protests in his eighth book
against Celsus, to have followed it with the other Christians? His rule is,
There is no likelihood that Origin, who sent us unto God only, should address
himself to me^.
That we must adore the only sovereign God, and present our prayers to the
only Son of God, who is his Word, and the first borne of all creatures, that
as a high priest he might offer them up to his God and to our God, to his
Father, and according to his word the father of all living. The practice
agreeable to this rule is expressed in these words: We worship as much as we
can through supplications and services one only God, and his only Son, his
word and his image, offering our prayers to God the Lord of all things by his
only Son, The words of Origin are very express against the invocation of
Saints.
to whom first we do address them, beseeching him that being propitiatour far
our sins, he would vouchsafe as high priest to offer unto God our prayers,
sacrifices and intercessions: and therefore our faith lies in God through his
Son who has confirmed it in us. It is not credible then that Origin has
inuocated Job, not the other departed Saints, not the Virgin Mary likewise,
since that he himself in his sermons comprehends them all together in the
number of sinners, which are not entered into heaven through their own merits,
but by the only faith in Jesus Christ. Shall we think (says he in his 27.
Sermon and 2. tome) that all the Apostles were offended in our Lord, and that
his mother was exempted? If she has suffered no scandal in the passion of the
Lord, then Jesus died not for her sins. But if all have sinned, and have all
need of the glory of God, to be justified and redeemed through his grace; What
might have been the offense of the Vrgin Mary.
surely Mary was offended in that very hour. And this is it which Simeon
prophesied, saying: And thy soul also (which know thou have conceived
without a man, and who have heard by Gabriel, that the holy Ghost should come
upon thee, and the power of the most High should ouershadow thee) even thine
shall a sword pearce through, and thou shall be smitten with the blade of
doubtfulnesse, and thy thoughts shall distract thee, when thou shall see him to
be crucified and put to death, whom thou have heard called the Son of God, and
knew to be begotten without the seed of man. But what will you say, if I
should show you that your own men have not held these Commentaries upon Job,
nor Origens Lamentations (wherein he prays the Saints to prostrate
themselves for him to the mercies of God) for authentical books? For, as Pope
Gelasius has rejected the book of Lamentations attributed to Origin and
judged to be Apocrypha; so Sixtus Senensis shows in his fourth book, that
the Treatise upon Job, The Papists imposture appears not only in that they
a^de and diminish to the word of God, but in that they make the Doctors of the
Church to say what i^ pleases them.
and some such like books, were not composed by him, but by some other author,
which certain of our Fathers suspected of heresy. For in his second book, he
compares these three divine persons, to wit, the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost, to three horns of the Devil, and terms the doctrine of the
holy Trinity a sect, and a heresy of three Gods. All men of reason and
discretion, taking heed to the falsehood of these allegations; will they not
have in abomination your audaciousnesse and impudency, to prove the anciencie
of the adoration of Saints by witnesses of no credit, and by depraved books
cast off a long while ago by your predecessors? Moreover, as the Arrians,
Montanists and sundry other heretics, have mixed their poison among the sound
doctrine contained in the books of the ancient Fathers: The Papists take
delight in troubling the ^ountaine of living waters.
and like as diverse superstitious persons have annexed to the wholesome
instructions of those Doctors (touching the invocation of one only God, and the
intercession of one only Mediator Jesus Christ) the leaven of the invocation
of Saints to corrupt the pure serui^e instituted by our Lord Jesus Christ in
the Apostolical Church: even so the successors of these enemies of the ancient
purity, perceiving that the zealous followers thereof, made use of the good
books of the ancient Fathers to encounter their superstitions, have continued
in falsifying more and more their books. And to make up the measure of their
Fathers, being assembled in the Council of Trent, they enjoined some to
change, cut off, and condemn, whatsoever they should find, and judge
offensive, and contrary to their errors. Upon which, the Jesuits are
diligently employed, following therein the example of the idolatrous Gentiles,
who perceiving (as A^nebius complains thereof in his third book) that they
might be convicted of falsehood by Ciceroes books (touching the nature of the
Gods) formerly published, corrupted them, and maliciously concealed them, that
no more mention might be made of them. For the Jesuits have made two
Registers, The mystery of Satan appea^eth notably in the lesuits Index
ex^urgatory.
imprinted at Naples, Madril and Antwerp, wherein they have not only put
sundry words and sentences of the Fathers, which expressly they commanded to
change and deface out of their books; but also added certain annotations to
their writings by some great personages to help and ease the memory of the
Reader, yea without sparing their own Teachers, who have labored as much to
impart unto us the true exposition of the Fathers doctrine, as they to bereave
and rob us of it. Now to cosen the world they have entitled these fi^e books,
Indices expurgatorij, that is to say, Purgative Indices, or Registers; which
more aptly may be termed Putrefactiues. For so far off is it, that these
scullions have labored to purge the book of the ancient Fathers, and their
expositors from stains and filth; that contrariwise they have defiled them,
wheresoever they laid their clutches on them, full of stench and putrefaction.
I am ashamed to discover their villainies: but seeing I have begun, I must
proceed at once in manifesting it to them. In their Index of Spain they have
ordained to deface these words of S. Hillaries, whereby he declares the reason
why the wise virgins answered the foolish, that they could not guie the^ of
their oil, to wit, because none ought to be succored with the works and merits
of another. Shreds of the abouesaid Index, whereby one may have knowledge of
the whole piece.
In that very Index they command to race out of S. Anselmus book of the manner
of visiting the sick these words of great consolation: Beleeuest thou, that
thou can attain unto glory, not through thine own merits, but by the
virtue and merit of Jesus Christ? Beleeuest thou y^ he died for our salvation,
and that none can be saved through his own merits, nor no otherwise then by his
death and passion? They judge also in that Index, that these words (annexed to
S. Chrysostoms Register of his books) ought to be defaced, to wit, that faith
only justifies, and faith only saves, grounded on certain^ sentences of S.
Chrysostoms, noted in y^ said Register. It admonishes the Reader also to
reject this gloss, that There are no more works in the world to come, nor any
calling to repentance etc. Which was received from the discourse of Epiphanius
in his treatise of Heresy, 59. As Rau^ns turn aside from the sound parts of a
carkesse, and fall upon the rotten; so the I^su^ts reject that which is most
holy in the writings of the Fathers, and stand upon the impure.
Likewise, it ordains that this proposition be raced out, that Prayer be made
for the living, but not for the dead. Which was taken from S. Ieromes
admonition, upon the third chapter of the Epistle to the Galathians: whereupon
he notes this sentence of the Apostle, that every one shall bear his own
burden: Whilst we are in this present world we may succor each other, either
by prayers or counsels: but when we shall appear before the judicial thron^
of Christ, neither Job, David, nor Noah can pray for us, etc. What else? have
not the Jesuits commanded in the two Indices of Spain and the Low Countries,
to cut out of the Register added to S. Chrysostoms books, these words, That
all the Prophets have bin married: whereby the Reader is sent to that which S.
Chrysostom speaks thereof in his 56. Sermon upon S. Matthew, where he
proves by the examples of Moses, Esaias, and Ezechiel, that all the Prophets had
wives and houses. In the Low-Countrie Index they condemn the sentences of one
of their principal writers called Faber Stapulensis, whereby he maintains
that S. Jerome and Chrysostom have taught that invocation appertains to none
but unto God only. Also they would have one to purge the writings of George
Cassander, touching the natural exposition of the word merit, and of
whatsoever he alleges in his books concerning the custom of the Apostles
first successors, to wit, that they have communicated in the Lords Supper for
more then a thousand years under the two signs of bread and wine. They have
also commanded to race out the annotations of Erasmus of Rotterdam upon the
third chapter of the first Epist. It is an easy matter for the Jesuits to
fight with the bones of the dead, which cannot speak.
to Timothy, and in like manner those of S. Chrysostoms, That a Bishop must be
the husband of one only wife. Finally, as many lines, so many corruptions and
as many infallable marks of their ungodliness, and ill consciences. For
albeit they seek to cover their impiety under that false mask the title of
purgation; yet so it is y^ they do most manife^tly discover it, by the
sovereign authority which they take to themselves, in censuring and condemning
as Judges the instructions of their ancestors, conformable to the word, which
God himself has inspired into his Prophets and Apostles. And if they had made
no doubt of the testimony of truth, which shined in the books of those first
lights of the Church, they would not have enforced themselves to quench then so
much, but might thereby have been armed to have defended and preserved
themselves. Those which are proved falsi^iers, ought to be no more reputed as
worthy of credit and belief.
On the other part, if they had been faithful keepers of their writings, which
were put into their hands, they would have altered nothing neither concerning
the matter, nor the form thereof, but would have been careful to have
preserved them in their original purity. But knowing now that these falsaries
have not kept the treasure committed to their charge, but have mixed among them
their lead; with the pure gold which they received from their ancestors: what
man is it among us, which will dare to assure himself of the sincerity of
those authors and sentences, which they allege against us; and of the
integrity of the interpretations, which they reco^mend unto us, and of the
truth of those examples which they propound unto us? And since I have quoted so
many excellent sentences of the Fathers, manifestly contrary to those which
you have produced in your epistle under the name and authority of the same
Doctors; what should we do in so great a contradiction of those sundry rules
of prayers, cited as well in the one part as on the other? as already we have
understood, that there is nothing more sure, when any point of doctrine is to
be disputed, or of the true sense of some texts in the Bible, Mariners in the*
obscurity of a tempest, have their recourse to their compass and needle, and
Christians to the law.
then to hold our selves to Gods law, which is a faithful witness, according
to the counsel of the Prophet Esaias, chap 8. verse 20. to give the exposition
of the law of God in expounding it by the Scripture it self, imitating the
example of Esdras, and some other Doctors of the old Testament, which is
represented by Nehemiah before our eyes, in the 8. chapter, and 2. verse. Even
so when a question is of the true rule and manner of prayer, there is nothing
more expedient then to follow in all our prayers, that only form of prayer
which our Lord Jesus Christ taught his Apostles, as S. Tertullian and S.
Cyprian show us by their excellent discourses touching the excellency and
perfection of this prayer. And S. Austin in his epistle which he wrote to a
Christian widow called Proba: We say no other thing (says he) then that which
is contained in the Lords Prayer, if we pray rightly and conveniently. And
whosoever should say any thing which is not agreeable with this Evangelical
prayer, though he prays not unlawfully, yet he prays carnally: and I know
no reason why, but that one may say he prays unlawfully, A saying of S.
Austins very worthy to be noted.
since that such as are regenerated by the holy Ghost, ought to pray
spiritually. By which admonition S. Austin signifies to all Christians, that
all prayers which have not their foundation in the prayer of our Lord Jesus
Christ (as are such which be addressed to the Saints departed) are carnal and
unlawful.

But to return to your objections, where you say that you ^et slip in silence
the miracles done through the invocation of Saints, and yet you send us to the
22 book of the City of God: and we send you back again to that which we
have formerly noted, to wit, that Viues testifies that many sentences have
been annexed to that book of the City of God, and for that reason we ought to
give no belief thereunto. But rather as Origin witnesses upon Jeremiah, it
behooves us to call for witnesses the holy Scriptures: forasmuch as without
those witnesses our sense and discourses are of no credit, which S. Austin also
gives us to understand by this exhortation, that whatsoever we would have men
to believe, we must prove it by clear testimonies of holy Scripture, and use
them against the enemies of the Church. And if we should grant you, that many
miracles have been done by the invocation of Saints, yet you cannot with a good
conscience gather from thence, that this service was pleasing to God, seeing
that the false prophets and ministers of Satan, have sought to set up their
impieties through the luster of many miracles. Thereupon Moses aduertiseth the
people of his time (saying in Deuteronomy. ^3. 1.) Deuteronomy. 13. 1.
If there arise among you a Prophet or a dreamer of dreams (and give thee a
sign or wander, The reprobats themselves have done guilefull miracles.
and the sign and the wonder which he has told thee come to pass) saying,
Let us go after other gods, which thou have not known (...) let us serve them,
Thou shall not hearken unto the words of that prophet* or unto that dreamer of
dreams: for the Lord your God proves you, to know whether you love the Lord
your God with all your heart, and with all your soul. And Jesus Christ in the
24 of Matthew and 23 verse, says, If any shall say unto you, Matthew. 24. 23. 24.
lo here is Christ, or there believe it not: for there shall arise false
Christ's, and false Prophets, and shall show great signs and wonders, so that
if it were possible, they should deceive the very elect. 25.
Behold I have told you before (according to which Saint Paul writes in the ^.
of These. 2.) 2 Thessalonians. 2.
that the coming of the Son of perdition, who s^^ll sit as God in the temple
of God, and shall exalt himself against God, and shall be by the working of
Satan, with all power and signs and lying wonders, and in all (...) of
unrighteousness among them that (...) Whereupon S. Austin grounding himself,
says on the 9. Psalm, That Antichrist shall use force in his empire, and
deceit in his miracles. And in the treatise of Antichrist, which is added to
his books: Antichrist (says he) shall rise up against the elect by three
manner of ways: by terrors, by gifts, and by miracles. By how many means
Satan shall exalt himsel^e against the faithful.
And Chrysostom speaking of the false Doctors, on the seventh chapter of S.
Matthew: They cast forth devils (says he) in the name of Christ, having the
spirit of the enemy, or they rather do not cast them forth, but seem to
cast them forth, through the collusion which they have with the devils; and so
always they cast them forth, and never do heal. The devils evermore cry
before them as if they were chastized, and they never come forth of them as
though they were afraid. Behold therefore Theophylact teaches us in the
explication of the seventh chapter of S. Luke* and namely on the second verse,
that preaching is confirmed by miracles, and miracles by preaching: for
oftentimes diverse have done wonders by the devils, but their preaching was not
sound: therefore their miracles also were not of God. Which Anselmus
appropriating to the miracles of Antichrist in his Commentaries upon the second
Epistle to the Thessalonians, and second chapter: These signs and wonders
(says he) shall be lying, Why Antichrists signs are called lies.
either because they should deceive the mortal through magical visions, or
else, because that although they should be wonders and prodigious signs, yet
they should draw unto lies such as believe in them. Moreover, Meses recounteth
in the book of Exodus, that Pharaohs Magicians have imitated and counterfeited
many miracles, which he formerly had done in the country of Egypt. Also
Hippocrates recites in his book de Morbo Sacro, that some Sorcerers in his
time healed many of the falling sickness in making sacrifices and certain
prayers, because they would be reputed as holy personages. The like writes
Bodin of Appolonius Thyaneus and of some other Sorcerers which chased away
devils, and did many other wonders through fainednesse and collusion. This is
that also whereof the Emperor Charles the Great would advertise us by his
third and fourth books, made under his own name, and approved by Pope Adrians
Legates, and many other Bishops of France, Germany, and Italy, which were
present in the Council of Frankford in the year 794. There is great danger
(says he) in many miracles, A notable sentence of Charles the Great, touching
miracles
because there may be in them some craft of that crooked Serpent, which does
transfigure himself into an Angel of light: for many miracles are done by those
Angels revolted, by Powers, or rather by spiritual subtilties, which
communicate to diverse miserable wretches the gift of prophesying, and do many
strange things through their officers, of which sort those shall be which shall
say, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name? and have we not cast out
devils in thy name? and by thy name done many great works? To whom the Judge
will answer, I never knew you. To this end also, S. Gregory Bishop of Rome
says, Because often times miracles are done through the inspiration of the
devil, The pretended miracles of Popedom, are rather a presumption of a false
then of a true service.
my brethren love not those signs as are common with the reprobate. And S.
Austin says, The devils do miracles, like unto those which were done by the
servants of God, etc. Considering therefore that the wicked Spirit has often
times done miracles among the Jews and Gentiles, and that it was foretold that
Antichrist and his supporters shall in great number do them in the latter
days, to establish their errors, and seduce the elect of God, if it were
possible; it is a folly in you to conclude that the miracles done, through the
invocation of the departed Saints, is a service pure and approved by God. But
to reprove the course of your fine discourse, adorned with this figure of
prevention: The subject for which the Papists term us heretike^, declares
them to be imposters and heretics themselves.
There is one thing (will some man say) which troubles much these heretics,
and what is it? how they cannot understand nor imagine that the Saints do
hear us, affirming that it is impossible for a man praying beneath on earth to
be heard of the departed Saints into heaven. Which according to the scope of
your writing is the second point which we have yet to examine. It were to be
wished that in this examination you were more discreet and sincere. You
consider not that in tearming us heretics; because we will not believe that
the Saints deceased understand and hear the prayers of those which call upon
them, you also reprove Solomon the wise of heresy, who teaches us in the
first book of Kings, and 8. chapter, that there is none but God only who
knows the hearts of all men, and that that is one of the principal causes
wherefore we should call upon him; and to expect from him alone the
accomplishment of our desires. 1. Kings 8. 38.
Lord (says he) what prayer and supplication soever shall be made of any man,
or of all thy people Israel, when every one shall know the plague in his own
heart, and stretch forth his hand in this house: Hear thou then in heaven in
thy dwelling place, and be merciful, and do, and give every man, according to
all his ways, as thou know his heart (for thou only know the hearts of
all the children of men.) Moreover, in stead of speaking seriously, you at your
pleasure flout at Calvin, and our arguments. You say, that our strongest
arguments, and that which we most set by, is, that which we hold from our
Captain Calvin, who asks you in the third book of his Institutions, chap.
20. sect. 24. Who has revealed to you this secret, that the departed Saints
have so long ears to stretch them down unto your words? and so sharp eyes,
that they can behold your necessities? It is marvel that you, who so
diligently set forth your tongue with the colors of Rhetorique, Calvin
speaks to the foolish, according to their folly.
understand not, that he makes this demand of you by an Ironia, or manner of
mockage, and laugheth at your foolish imagination, that the Saints, which are
above in heaven, hear and see what is done here beneath on earth. For without
searching any further, Calvin confesses in that very section, that the souls
of the blessed, albeit they are separated from their bodies, and use no more
the instruments of eyes and ears, yet understand many things, which concern
the advancement of the glory of God, and his kingdom. Yea and that they seek
it with a settled and unmoved will; which may be proved by some texts out of
the Bible: but he condemns the boldness of your Sophists, If the Saints see
all things within the mirror of eternity, it would follow that they should
see the day of the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, which is false.
who without any testimony of holy Scripture, dare affirm that the
brightness of Gods face is so great, that in the contemplation thereof the
Saints may behold as in a mirror the things which in this world do happen. But
whilst you bark against this demand of Caluins, you dissemble our arguments,
and accuse your selves of falsehood and deliberate malice, seeing you vaunt
that you have read the writings of our Ministers, and have therein observed the
reasons which they propound against the second point of your doctrine. If it be
true that you have perused the principal reasons of our Pastors; why then do
you let pass in silence that which they have drawn out of the fountain of
the holy Scriptures, and namely in the 9. chapter of Ecclesiastes, verse. 6.
That the love and the hatred of the dead is now perished, Eccles. 9. 6.
and they have no more portion for ever in all that is done under the Sun.
Esaias 63. 16.
And in the 63. chapter of Esaias, and 16. verse, Lord thou art our Father,
though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel know us not. Whereupon this
argument of our Teachers is grounded. The holy Scripture manifestly instructs
us in those above said texts, y^ the Saints deceased this world have no more
portion in the things which are done under the cope of heaven, nor any
knowledge of our affairs. Therefore it is a folly in them, which yet walk in
this veil of misery, to call upon them.

But to proceed on with the course of your inuectiue, you say, that the
disciples of Calvin and Luther, to show themselves wiser then their Masters,
have begun since that, to demand of the Catholics some express texts and
examples taken out of the holy Scripture, whereby it might appear that the
Saints above in Paradise understand and hear our prayers. Whereunto I reply,
Luther and Calvin have not bound their adversaries, to prove the invocation of
Saints by the Scripture.
that Luther and Calvin have not required of you any express texts by the
which it might appear that the deceased Saints hear our Prayers; because they
knew exceeding well, that there could not be found for it so much as one only
word in the Word of God. For what says Calvin thereof in his 3. book and 20.
chapter, sect. 21? What angel or devil ever reueiled to any man any one
syllable of this intercession of Saints, which these men have forged? For in
the Scripture there is nothing said thereof. What reason had he then to seek
it there? And as for us, which are none of Luthers or Caluins disciples, but
Christ's; we require of you some proofs taken out of the marrow of the holy
Scripture, not for that we think it is possible for you; but because we
might have the greater occasion to confute you of leasing even by your own
consciences. The Papists are to make good that which they affirm, and not in
us which deny and disprove the invocation of Saints.
And when all is said, and when we come to that, ye fear the blows, and to
save your selves from them, you answer us reciprocally by a demand, whether
we can prove our negative by some text, to wit, that the Scripture teaches us
not, that the Saints which are in heaven can hear our prayers. In your
inuectiue against Calvin, you reproach him in that he wants Philosophy: but
herein I may rebuke you by an argument far more forcible, that you have not
learned the laws Dialecticae, (that is, of Logic) which teaches us, Quod
affirmanti incumbat probatio, to wit, that he which affirms any thing, is
bound to prove his affirmation. So it is then, that you affirm, that the holy
Scripture teaches us that the departed Saints hear our prayers, We neither
deny nor affirm any thing of our own sense, but from the authority of the
holy Scripture.
and we contrariwise deny it; then it is not in us to confirm our negation,
but in you to ratify your negation; which is impossible for you:
notwithstanding you are so imprudent, or rather so impudent as to say, that we
may read over the Bible as often as we list, yet we shall never produce thereout
one only text contrary to your opinion. If your conscience be not seared, it
has already convicted you of falsehood by the reading of those two places,
which already I have quoted out of the 9. chapter and 16. verse of Eccle.
Eccle. 9. 16.
and Esaias 63. verse. 16. where the holy Ghost guiding the pen of these two men
of God, Es^y 63. 16.
teaches us that they which are departed this life, have no portion in our
businesses which are done under the Sun, but that they are ignorant thereof.

Let us now come to your demonstration, that the Scripture fails you not in
this point: for to awaken our spirits, you first command us to note this
express text of Scripture, Two false principles and grounds of the Papisticall
Doctors.
that the Angels in heaven understand our prayers, seeing they are the
reporters of then to the divine Majesty, as appears by the same scripture.
Secondly, it is an express text of scripture, that the Saints shall be in
heaven as the Angels, according to the saying of the Son of God in the
Gospel. Whereunto you add your conclusion, that the Saints hear our prayers,
since the Angels (unto whom they are likened) hear them. If some one should
propound this your argument borrowed from Bellarmine, to Scholars which have
heard the rules of Logic, they would quickly smell out your deceit, and would
reply, that you do not aptly appropriate it to the Saints departed, because
to conclude from thence (according to the right form and rule of Logicians)
that the Saints departed understand our prayers, you must first have proved,
that Jesus Christ says in the 20. chapter of S. Luke, that the departed Saints
are Angels, and not as you make them, like unto Angels. They would likewise
reject your reason, and confirmation which you annex unto this sentence, The
Papists ca^ never prove, that the Angels are the reporters of the prayers of
the Saints before God.
that the Angels understand our prayers, because they are the reporters of them
to the divine Majesty, as appears by the holy Scripture. Mark you not here a
fine proof, to say it appears by the Scripture that the Angels report our
prayers to God, without quoting so much as one testimony? From hence it comes,
that having taken your principal pieces from Bellarmine, you durst not allege
that place of holy Scripture which is in the 12. chapter and 15. verse of Toby,
where the Angel Raphael says, That he is one of those seven holy Angels,
which presents before the Majesty of God the prayers of the Saints. If it be
in regard that you make conscience to confirm your proposition out of a book
which is Apocrypha, I commend you, and in that I prefer you before your
Master. Or if it be because you have not read, nor remembered well, that text
which he alleges in his book of the blessedness of the Saints, I pardon you
for it. Touching the rest, it seems at the first sight, that you make some
stop at falsifying the 36. verse of the 20 chapter of S. Luke, and of following
therein the example of Bellarmine and Richeome, who in stead of saying as
Christ did in answering the Sadduces, that the Saints shall be (to wit, in the
resurrection of the flesh) like the Angels: they turn this text as if Christ
had said, that they are like to the Angels. But in the repetition of your
argument trussed to your conclusion, you show your self to be of the same
humor as your Schoolmasters Our conformity with the Angels is not yet, but
when we shall be glorified.
above said are; seeing you change the future tense into the present; to
maintain with them that the Saints are like to the Angels: and that against
the intention of our Sovereign Lord and Master Jesus Christ, who disputing
against the Sadduces, which denied the resurrection of the body, and had
propounded this question to him, worthy to be laughed at, touching a woman
which had had seven husbands, whose wife she should be in the resurrection,
shows them upon this occasion, that the faithful shall then be glorified,
even in regard of their bodies which shall not be mortal, nor corruptible no
more, but as the spirits of the Angels are, and consequently shall not be
inclined to marriage, for the maintaining of their race and posterity, but
shall be like to the Angels which do not marry. Now foreseeing through the
agilitie of your spirit, what we might reply on that above said place, you
think that you hear us already answer, that this similitude of the Angels
and Saints, whereof our Lord speaks in the Gospel, consists only in their
felicity and blessedness, and not in their nature and office, that is to say
(as it has pleased you to expound it) that the Angels and the Saints shall be
in heaven equal and like each other, because both of them shall be blessed,
enjoying one selfsame glory and felicity. Now as you can find nothing
therein to chaw upon, you grant us this answer, and make it to serve your
turn, as a fowler with his net, to take and ensnare us. For behold the
argument which you ground upon our answer, is, that seeing the felicity and
state of future life, hinders not the Angels from hearing the prayers of the
mortal, why is it not possible that the Saints being in the same felicity
with the Angels and like unto them, may not hear likewise our prayers as well
as they? This text of scripture them shows that the Saints hear our prayers.
We deny the consequence of this argument. If the felicity of the Angels
hinders them not from hearing our prayers, that it follows from thence, that
the felicity of the departed Saints hinders not them also from the
understanding of our Supplications; From things or persons which are unlike, we
ought not to draw like conclusions.
the reason is, because the Angels (notwithstanding their present felicity)
have received from God this charge, to watch over us, and our safety, as it is
written in the 34. Psalm. For which cause the Apostle S. Paul calls them
administering spirits, sent for their sakes that are to receive the inheritance
of salvation, which the Scripture speaks in no place of the Saints departed.
You repeat afterward your affirmation, that the Saints deceased hear us, see
us, and are not ignorant of that which is done upon the earth. For confirmation
whereof you propound us the example of Abraham, who being dead and in Limbo,
knew many things which happened among the people of the children of Israel, as
one may perceive by the 16. chapter of S. Luke. For first of all he knew, that
the people had the books of Moses and the Prophets, the ancientest whereof was
Moses, which had been written more then four hundred years after the death of
Abraham. Secondly, he knew the life which the rich Glutton led upon the earth,
and what misery poor Lazarus had there endured. Thirdly, he saw and knew the
estate and condition of that wicked wretch, and heard his prayer, (although he
was not heard) when he cried, Father Abraham have mercy on me, and send
Lazarus, etc. Notwithstanding there was a great distance between the one and
the other, as Abraham answered him: finally, albeit that the rich Glutton was
damned, saw he not Abraham? heard he not his answer? gave he not his replies?
albeit there was a great gulf set between them? Now there is no man that
dares deny all this; because it is the Gospel* and a story pronounced by the
mouth of him which cannot lie, but is the very truth himself, even Jesus
Christ. An argument from the least to the greatest, which has more color then
strength.
And if this thing and story be true (as it is) I now charge all the Caluinian
and Lutherian Ministers, and say unto them, If Abrah^m (my Masters) being shut
up in Limbo, and not enjoying at that time the sight of God, nor being blessed
but through hope, knew notwithstanding the things of this world, the estate and
misery of the rich Glutton, and heard him make his prayer and demand; will
you think that the Saints in Paradise, beholding God, and his most bright
sight, are better privileged then Abraham? I will reduce your paradox and
superfluity of words into this summarie: If (say you) Abraham in Limbo, being
not yet blessed but through hope, knew the things of this world, (as appears
by the history thereof contained in the 16. chapter of S. Luke) the Saints in
paradise enjoying the most glorious countenance of God, are not less
privileged in that then Abraham. Now you presuppose that this is a sure
foundation, that Abraham after his death knew the affairs of this world, and
from thence you conclude, that the consequence which you draw from it is good
and true. I say that in your discourse you interlarde many things false and
uncertain. For first you presuppose that Abraham was in Limbo, and in the
place of such as are not blessed but through hope, when Christ spoke of him and
Lazarus to his disciples. It is impiety to say Abraham was in Limbo.
Whereof we can show you the contrary in the 8. chapter of S. Matthew, and
eleventh verse, where Christ says, Matthew. 8. 11.
that many shall come from the East and West, and shall sit down with Abraham,
and Isaac, and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven. In which text you may see, that
Jesus Christ promises all those which shall believe in his doctrine, that
their souls shall be transported into the kingdom of heaven, where were then
at that time the souls of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. From whence one may
easily gather, that Jesus Christ understood in S. Luke by the bosom of
Abraham, that which in S. Matthew he calls the kingdom of heaven. In
consideration whereof sundry of the ancient Fathers have expressed those words
of Abraham's bosom, by the name of Paradise. Likewise, there are some of them,
which have concluded from the abouesaid chapter of S. Luke, and some other
places of holy Scripture, that men at their departure out of this life, enter
(as touching their souls) either into eternal rest, or into eternal torment,
and so consequently there is neither Limbo, or Purgatory. Lactantius.
There are two ways (says Lactantius in his sixth book of Baptism) by which
it is necessary that humane life must pass: the one will carry and lift men
up into heaven; the other will cast them down headlong into hell. Origin.
And Origin says in his book of Works, that souls which depart this world,
are either distributed into hell, or into the bosom of Abraham. Epiphanius.
In like manner, S. Epiphanius in his Treatise of Heresy, says in his 19.
chapter, that after death there is no succor, no pity, no repentance. For
Lazarus comes not to the rich Glutton, nor the rich Glutton to Lazarus;
neither does Abraham let fall his robes from on high, to enrich that woeful
wretch; nor the rich Glutton obtains not also his request, though he
besought it of pitiful Abraham with many prayers: For the chambers are sealed
up, the time accomplished, the combat achieved, the lists made void, the
Crown given, and those which have fought do rest, and those which have not
gained before, are departed from thence, and those which have not fought,
cannot offer themselves any more for that purpose, and those which have lost it
in the lists, are put out, and all things are fully accomplished after our
departure out of this world. S. Jerome.
S. Jerome teaches us the like in his discourse upon the death of Paula: Let
it not grieve us (says he) for having lost her, or rather for having her
still, for all things live to God, and all they which return to the Lord, be
as in the number of his family; we account that we have lost her, but she is
lodged in heaven: For when Paula was in her body, she was absent from the
Lord, saying, I am a pilgrim, and a stranger here, as all my Fathers were, I
desire to be separated from this body, and to be with Christ. She now enjoys
the blessings which no eye has seen, no ear has heard, nor which ever could
enter into the heart of man. Whereof Iustine the Martyr also speaks very
clearly in his 60 and 75. A notable saying of Iustine the Martyr.
questions: In the story (says he) of Lazarus and the rich Glutton, there is
a declaration which contains this doctrine, that after the soul is issued
forth of the body, men cannot receive any further succor, by any care or
prudence. After the soul is dislodged from the body, there is presently a
distinction made between the righteous and the unrighteous: For the souls of
the righteous are carried by the Angels into the places of Paradise, whereof
they are worthy, where they have the conversation and view of Angels and
Archangels, yea even the sight of our Lord Jesus Christ, according to that
which is said; Being absent from the body, we are present with the Lord: But
the souls of the unrighteous go into the places of hell, as it is said of
Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon, Hell beneath is moved against thy coming: and
that which follows. And all souls are kept in these two places till the
hour of the resurrection. Whereunto S. Ambrose subscribeth, by the exhortation
which he made to Christians in his Treatise of the Good of Death, An excellent
doctrine of S. Ambroses.
chap. 12. When the day of our death shall come (says he) let us march straight
forward without fear into the company of the Saints: for we shall go to our
fathers, and to those which have taught us the faith, to the intent that if our
works do fail us, our faith may succor us, and our inheritance may defend
us. Also the soul flies from hence on high, she goes to dwell with that pure
good which is both perpetual and immortal etc. The souls rest is in the land
of the living, The doctrine of S. Austin touching the place of our retreat at
our departing this world
whereunto no sins can penetrate where lives the glory of virtues.
According to which saying, S. Austine gives us this remonstrance in his 80.
Epistle to Hesichius: In such a case (says he) as thy last day finds thee,
even such will the last day of this world take thee. Such as man dies in that
very day, such shall he be judged in the other. And in his 10. Sermon upon the
Apostles words, There are two homes, the one in eternal fire, the other in an
eternal kingdom. Likewise in his 232. Sermon. entitled De Tempore: Brethren
(says he) let no man deceive himself: for there are but two places, and no
third for any one. Whereunto his exposition serves, which in another place he
speaks of in disputing against the Pelagians. The Catholic faith (says he)
by divine authority believes, that the first place is the kingdom of heaven,
the second hell, where all apostates and reuolters from the faith in Christ,
shall feel everlasting torments. As touching a third we are wholly ignorant
of; Neither the holy Scripture, nor the Catholic Fathers give any third places
to souls after their decease.
and which is more, we find by the holy scripture that there is none.
Besides, in the 9. book of his Confessions, he maintains y^ one sees God in
Abraham's bosom, and thereby he shows, as a thing most certain, that the
soul of Abraham, and the faithful fathers departed this world, was in heaven,
and not in Limbo or Purgatory, where none can behold God, but in the alone
seat of the blessed, according to that sentence of our Savior, contained in
the fifth chapter of S. Matthew, and 8. verse, Blessed are the pure in heart,
for they shall see God. On the other side, the same Doctor says of the Fathers
of the old Testament, that they which believed in Christ, before he came in
the flesh, have been saved through their faith in Christ Jesus. I could here
allege a sentence of S. Gregory Nazianzen, (whereby he comforted himself at
his brothers death, saying, that he was ascended up into heaven, and rested in
the bosom of Abraham) and many others to the same effect: but because I will
not be too tedious, I will now examine the second point of your opinion, which
is, that that which Christ teaches of the rich Glutton and Lazarus, The
history of Lazarus is parabolicall.
is a history: which we deny; because there are sundry circumstances which
show also that it is partly a parable. For in that story we cannot take the
things literally which are recited in them, neither can it be possible in all
that which Christ heretofore did preach of the rich Glutton and poor Lazarus;
because Christ therein attributes, tongues, fingers, and eyes to the souls of
the departed, which he does by a manner of speech, which is called
historical, but is parabolicall; by which spiritual things are made clear by
the comparison and similitude of corporal. Though Abraham should have heard
the complaints of the rich Glutton, it follows not from thence that the
Saints hear our prayers.
Now although we shall approve that which we have denied, to wit, that
Abraham heard the complaints of the rich man, yet cannot you solidly conclude
from thence, that the departed Saints also do hear the prayers of such as
live upon the face of the earth. For Bellarmine your Doctor describes the
distance which is between Limbus and Hell in such a sort, as if he had bin
there himself to have measured the one and the other place, where he says,
there is betwixt them a great opening, neither more nor less then is between
two places separated only by the air, so that from the one part of this gulf,
one may see and hear what is done in the other. By this reckoning then the
distance is not so great between those places, as it is between heaven and
earth: seeing that these two places are shut up on all sides, and so far
separated from each other, that it is not possible that the Saints which are in
heaven and we which are here beneath on earth can hear or see each other.
Nevertheless, to give some color to your opinion, you bring in S. Austin upon
this point, speaking in this manner: Quid non vident qui videntem omnia vident?
What (says he) do not the Saints above in heaven see, in seeing him which
sees all things, to wit, God? But wherefore have you not marked that place? is
it not because you dare not openly gainsay those which attribute these words to
S. Gregory? But howsoever, if they were his, he forgot himself in pronouncing
these words: for albeit that God sees all things, yet it follows not from
thence that the Saints which behold God should see all things likewise. If you
should propound such an argument in Schools to Aristotle's disciples, they
would presently confute you by the like argument, which an ignorant person
might make you of the Sun, and of us which daily do behold it, to wit, since
that the Sun, which is the eye of the world (as Philosophers term it) sees
and discovers all things which are under the cope of heaven, that we
likewise in beholding the Sun, should see all things which are under the
Sun. The Trinity serves not as a mirror in heaven, to co^template all
things therein.
What man is it that perceives not this consequence to be bad? And if it were
good, yet yours would remain false and naughtily grounded; because we deny
that which you affirm, without any testimony of holy Scripture, that is, that
God, or the Trinity serve as a mirror to the souls of the departed, thereby
to behold all things, as the Sun and Moon which are as spectacles to our
bodily eyes, to perceive by them the things which are represented to our sight.
Besides this, it is an easy matter to stop your mouth, and to show by the
testimony of Christ and his Apostle in the sixth chapter of the Revelation,
that the Angels and the spirits of the departed, though they behold the face of
God, yet they see not, nor know the day and hour of the last coming of
Christ. Moreover, we can convince you thereof even by your predecessors, and
can prove by their own writings, how they taught that the souls of the
departed see not any thing which is done upon the earth: for you may see what
Albertus Bishop of Ratisbone writes thereof (who was Master to Thomas of
Aquin) in his book of our Conjunction with God, Albert Master unto Thomas of
Aquin, denies that which other of the Popish Doctors his successors do
affirm.
and 8. chapter: The departed Saints (says he) busy not themselves about the
affairs of this world, neither care for the estate thereof, neither of peace
nor war, neither of fair weather or rain, nor in sum for any man here
below: but are wholly devoted to one God, and all of them united and employed,
to apply and accommodate themselves to him. Finally, from the blessed you
descend to the damned, and as though you had heard their discourses, and
sounded their spirits, you reason without reason as well of their knowledge, as
of their charity toward God, and men suruiuing them: for thus you discourse:
If the damned do likewise hear those speak, which are so far distant from
them, as the rich man heard Abraham, and showed himself mindful and careful
for his brethren, which yet remain upon the earth, being afraid left they
should come into the same place of torment where he was, as you may see in the
Gospel by that which he spoke unto Abraham; should we think, that the Saints,
and those which are in the kingdom of heaven see not, or know not what we do
upon the earth? Charity is the mark of the children of God, and not of the
reprobate.
Poor Divine that thou art, which understands not yet, that which the holy
Scripture teaches us so clearly in many places, that the zeal and charity to
the glory of God, and the desire of our neighbors salvation, are virtues
proper in the fourth degree (as in schools they teach it) only to the elect
and children of God, and are never found in the damned after this life, which
are sworn enemies against God, and the children of his kingdom. If then the
reprobate are without charity, and are glad to see many companions of their
distresses, as some of your new Doctors confess: what a stupiditie is it then
in you, not to consider that Christ (as already we have touched) attributes
to the rich Glutton the care of his brethren by a parable or similitude, as
also the speech of a living man, using his tongue and other members of his
body, which nevertheless was separated by burial from the soul cast down
into h^ll? I am much more astonished, because that Saint Austin, whom (as it
seems by your writing) you have read, says expressly of the rich Glutton,
that albeit he prayed Abraham to send Lazarus unto his brethren, yet he knew
not what his brethren did, nor what did then happen to them. But to beat you
with your own rod, you present us a proof, that the Saints which are in
heaven see us, because they behold God, who sees all things. From whence I
argue by the contrary, The adversaries argument retorted.
that forasmuch as the damned, which are cast into utter darkness, see not the
brightness of the face of God, therefore they see not a jot, nor have any
knowledge of our affairs? Afterward you stir the pot about, and fall again
into your beginning, holding as an article worthy of belief, that which you
have not proved, nor ever can prove by holy Scripture, to wit, that the Saints
and all blessed souls departed this life, know the things of this world, and
thereupon you build your argument, which is called in Schools, From the less
to the greater: If the departed Saints know all things in this world, Upon bad
foundation: the^e can be made no good building.
must they not much more know and hear the prayers which men make unto them?
Again, If they can understand and hear the voice of the d^mned; is it
possible that they should not understand the prayers of such as are desirous to
be saved? Beside, if the damned themselves (as appears by the story of the
rich Glutton) would procure that there happen no evil to their brethren and
friends; will those which are saved be less charitable? will they not advance
as much as they can, the salvation of their friends and Christian brethren? and
that so much the more, because they see and hear that men do seek unto them
for it? To speak properly, your first argument is no argument, but a
troublesome repetition of the principij, that is to say, of the principal
question which needs a proof of better stuff then as yet you have offered
to satisfy us withal. The others depend on the former, and have been refuted
already. I will then go on with the course of your Treatise, and advertise
you, that neither he to whom you have written your Epistle, not they unto whom
he has communicated it to be read and examined, do give any belief to your
false affirmations, that the Christians are commanded to invoke the Saints
departed, or that they do hear their prayers. Hereupon you propound this
question how the Saints can hear us and you acknowledge, that to say the truth
this is a hard question to be resolved, but nevertheless that your doctrine is
true. To this point you produce that which S. Austin writes thereof in his
Treatise, De cura pro mortuis gerenda, cap. 16. In truth (says S. Austin) this
question surpasses the force of my understanding, being unable to comprehend
how and in what manner the Martyrs help those which we certainly know to be
helped by them. I will here briefly repeat that which heretofore I have
shown, to wit, how this sentence of S. Austins is contrary to those which I
have gathered out of his writings, into which some since his departure have
maliciously sown many tares and wicked seed, Places suspected of S. Austins.
which is the cause that we hold this passage in suspicion. And though it were
S. Austins, yet are we not bound to receive it, seeing it is contrary to the
holy Scripture. But to refute you by that very book which you attribute to S.
Austin; answers not he himself to this question, whether the Saints departed
intermeddle with our affairs, that he is of an opinion they do not? Does he
not reason in the same manner as we have reasoned before, to show that his
opinion is grounded in the holy Scriptures? I will here recite his own words,
to the end the moderate reader may judge of them: S. Austin does absolutely
deny that the Saints meddle with our affairs.
Let every man take (says Austin) as he will what I shall speak; If the
souls of the departed were present in the businesses of the living, and so
that we should see them, they would speak to us in dreams: to say nothing of
others, my good mother then would not leave me one night alone, who for to live
with me, has followed me by sea and land. But that which is sung in the Psalm
is true, My father and my mother have forsaken me, but the Lord has received
me. If then our fathers have left us, how can they meddle with our affairs?
and if our fathers and mothers be not present in them, what others of the dead
are there which know the things that we do, and that which we suffer? The
Prophet Esaias says, Thou art our father, for Abraham is ignorant of us, and
Israel has not known us. If these Patriarchs were ignorant of that which this
people did, A good argument from the greater to the lesser.
precreated from them; how can the dead busy themselves to succor the living
in their actions and affairs? and how could we say it were well with those
which are departed this world, before the evils which followed their death had
happened, if after their death they should likewise feel the things which come
to pass in the calamities of humane life; or else we should speak these
things erroneously? and should we hold those to be in rest which are in pain,
because of their suruiuers which have no repose in this life? What is that then
which God promised to holy King Josiah as a great blessing, that he would take
him to himself by death, that he might not see the evils which he threatened
the people. Behold (says the Lord) I will gather thee to thy Fathers,
Absurdities that follow, if we should grant that the Saints departed have to
do with our affairs.
and thou shall be put in thy grave in peace, and thine eyes shall not see all
the evil which I will bring upon this place, and upon the inhabitants of the
same. The spirits then of the deceased are in that place, where they see not
the things which are done, or which happen in the life of man. These are the
words of S. Austin, which purposely you have omitted to deceive the ignorant,
and to take an occasion from an imperfect allegation of his discourse, touching
the obscurity and difficulty of this matter of rising up furiously against
us, and falsely to impose upon us, by a great medley of vain words, that which
we cannot nor will not believe with S. Austin, to wit, that this surpasses the
capacity of our understanding. For as we believe the creation of the world,
the mystery of the holy Trinity, and the resurrection of the flesh, though we
cannot mete them by the measure of our understanding; and that because they are
plainly taught us in the holy Scripture: so when you shall prove unto us, by
express terms out of the writings of the Prophets, that the Saints hear us,
and ought to be adored, and called upon by us that are here beneath on earth,
then we will be obedient to your counsel, and will subscribe in all humility
and reverence to that article. But what? you would not that men should rebuke
you, nor likewise should think that you seek an escape through the bogges:
and besides, in stead of bringing in some authentical testimony of the Bible,
you begin again to allege to us three manner of ways, whereby S. Austin
(which might err, and by his retractations roundly confesses his errors)
thought that the departed Saints might hear our requests. The first is, By the
arrival of those which depart this life, Three pretended means of the
Papists, whereby the Saints might hear our prayers.
and go from hence to them, who may advertise them of the things which happen
on earth, and especially of that which concerns them most. The second: By the
report of the Angels, which sometimes mount up into heaven, and sometimes
again even in an instant are about us. The third: By the revelation of Gods
spirit, which may comport (I retain your fine speeches) or bear it self with
the souls of the blessed in heaven, neither more nor less then heretofore it
did comport it self with the Prophets on earth, revealing to them secret
things, and that which should be done a long while after them, as the Scripture
testifies it. Whereunto you add yet a fourth manner of speech invented by
Saint Gregory, which is this, That the Saints seeing the face of God, see
whatsoever appertains to them in any sort, and consequently hear also our
prayers. From whence you conclude, that by the doctrine of the Fathers we may
conceive somewhat how the blessed ones hear us when we call upon them. We now
come to refute this fourth mean forged out of men's brains, without any ground
of holy Scripture. First I will only advertise the reader, that it is not
likely this sentence (to wit, There is no likelihood that S. Gregory took
pleasure in co^tradicting himself.
that the departed Saints beholding the face of God do see all things) was
forged by S. Gregory, seeing in the same chapter that you have alleged in
your Epistle, he says the contrary, to wit, that as they which are living
know not the estate of souls departed; so likewise is unknown unto the dead
the manner of life, which those lead that remain after them in the flesh. For
the life (says he) of the spirit is far different from the life of the
flesh, and as things corporal and spiritual are differing in nature, so are
they likewise in knowledge. Now it rests that we should examine those three
former ways of the particular knowledge which you attribute to the Saints
departed. I answer then to the first, that nothing is written thereof by the
ancient Prophets, nor Apostles, and therefore we are not bound to believe it.
Moreover, it often happens that the citizens which dwell in one city know not
the affairs of one another; how can they then after their departure declare
them to the souls of the blessed which they find in heaven? The examination
of those three means abouesaid, of the understanding of our prayers.
Besides, there are many which in praying cast their eyes up toward heaven,
whilst none of their neighbors happen to decease; who is it then that should
do their message to the Saints departed? And notwithstanding if so be there
should be at that instant some one ready to die when one prays, and to carry
the news to heaven; what man among you can show me by divine scripture, that
God has enjoined to him that special charge? not one. Or if you would that
one should approve your first manner, you necessarily must grant me that there
is no Purgatory. For if that souls must pass through Purgatory, and stay
there for some time, according to the number of Masses, which are caused to be
said for their deliverance; how can it be possible for them to advertise in
time the departed Saints of the prayers which were made unto them so long
before?

Your second and third means are of no more certainty then the others,
because it is neither written in the old Testament nor in the new, that the
departed Saints know our necessities by the report of the Angels, neither that
God indueth ye Saints after their departure with the spirit of prophecy and
revelation, as at sometimes he did to his holy servants, according as the
necessity did require, to make them capable of their extraordinary calling
whereunto he had called them.

Now follows your last argument, which you your self calls least of all,
and that for a good reason. For you number up many of the Fathers, which have
inuocated the Saints departed, and afterward you close up your Epistle with
flouts against the Ministers of the reformed Churches. But whatsoever you heap
up against them is (...) wind and smoke, yea dung in respect of the purity
and excellency of the word of Jesus Christ and his Apostles, which we had
rather follow then that of men, for we have no certain testimony that their
doctrine was divinely inspired, as we have of the Prophets and Apostles, and
that these men of God were not led by a humane will, but were moved thereunto by
the spirit of our principal Pastor and Bishop Jesus Christ: in whose name I
admonish you no more to protest so lightly, before God his Father, that
whatsoever you have said, tends to his honor, and the salvation of him, to
whom you have sent your Epistle most prejudicial and contrary to the glory
of God, and the repose of the true members of Jesus Christ; unto whom I pray to
give me his grace constantly to maintain his pure truth, and to accompany
this mine answer with the virtue of his holy Spirit, to the end that thereby
he may move your heart to conceive your errors, and to renounce them, for the
advancement of his glory, the acquitting of your conscience, and the
augmentation of his kingdom.

FINIS.

