A GAGGE FOR THE POPE, AND THE IESVITS: OR THE ARRAIGNEMENT, AND EXECVTION OF
ANTICHRIST.

Shevving plainly, that Antichrist shall be discovered, and punished in this
World: to the amasement of all obstinate PAPISTS.

LONDON Printed by I. D. for Edward Blackmore, and are to be sold at his Shop,
at the Great South-dore of Paul's. 1624.

Lucan. lib. 7. Pharsal. Hoe placet, o superi, cum vobis vertere cu^cta
propositum, nostris erroribus addere crimen? TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE; WILLIAM:
EARL of PENBROOK, Lord Chamberlain to his Majesty's Household, and one of his
most honorable Council, etc.
RIGHT HONORABLE;
AS I intend nothing by this Discourse, but the glory of God, the good of my
Country, the observation of Princes, and the seasoning of humors: so do I
propose no man fitter to Patronise the same, then your self, sprung from so
illustrious a family, that our modern Stories rejoice again in the
illustration of the name and actions of Herbert: but above all, my motives
arise from your Noble disposition toward Englands glory, and pious zeal to
propagate the cause of Religion, which at this day is set upon by viperous
calumniation, as if either God meant not to perform his promise, concerning
the stripping the Strumpet naked, Apoc. 18. 3.
who has made drunk the Kings of the earth with the cup of abomination: or
policy determined, like Prometheus his Vulture, to feed upon the heart of
Religion, and eat out the bowels of sanctity, and truth But O thou God of
heaven, thou laughest the Psalm.
devises of men to scorn, and wilt maintain thy own cause in despite of
Apostasy: and O ^ee Princes of the earth, look ye Psalm. 2. 12.
kiss the son, least he be angry, and ye perish in the Way, when his wrath
shall suddenly burn.

Wherefore great Lord, made so much the greater by all the Concomitants of
Noble birth, and remarkable deserving, accept I pray you of this poor
Tractate, wherein though I come strangely toward you with a duty from an
unknown name, and unfortunate man, as we profanely abuse the Character, yet
with so good a heart, that in regard of the cause, which is Gods, and your
self, who have answered reputation with sufficiency, I am cheerfully animated
to wade out of this stream, by the supportation of so noble an arm, which can
keep me from sinking, though there were some whirlepoole to fall into.

As for aspersion of presumption, stepping out of my own Circle, meddling with
transcendent matters, tenuity of wit, or deficiency of knowledge, I wipe all
away with a Principle in Euripid^s. -- Nullus sibi similis in periculis
Iphigenia in Tauris.
homo, quoties ad audaciam ex metu venerit.

But indeed what should I be affrighted with the Popes fulmination, or curses,
Lucan answers; Tollite signaduces, fatorum impellite cursum, Lib. 5. Phars^l.
spem vestram prestate diis, fortunaque tantos det vobis animos, quantos
fugientibus hostem causa dabat.

The blastings of opinion, or windy censures.

Impia laetatur vulgatae nomine famae, -- Thessaliis. Luc. o^. Lib. 5.


The displeasure or contracted brow of a Prince? No, no.

Caesaris aduentu tuta gladiator arena, Lib. 6. de Pont^, Ovid.
exit, and auxilium non leave vultus habet.

The imputations of judicious men?

-- Simplex oration veritatis est;

Neque variarum habet vtrinque interpretationum, Eurip. Phaenissae.
habet enim ipsa congruentiam, sed iniquus sermo aegrotans in seipsum,
medicamimum habet opus sapientiam.

The desertion of friends? who be they?

Amicos in rebus aduersis conuenit amicis adesse, Eurip. Orestes.
Nam cum Deus faelicitatem dederit, Quid opus est amicis? Sufficit ipse Deus
prodesse volens.

In a word, so I have your favor and my own ends, I am startled at nothing,
but insufficiency in so great adventure, and unworthiness to put polluted hands
into the waters of life: which as I hope the God of heaven will pardon, because
of my honest desires to magnify his greatness: so your Honor will graciously
admit, because of my willing heart to exemplify your goodness.

THE ARRAIGNEMENT AND EXECVTION OF ANTICHRIST.
I Would feign act my own Scean, and with a modest zeal enter into a
Discourse, that shall show you the hand of God writing on the wall, more
fearful and terrible to hard-hearted Papists, then ever Belshazzers fatal
night to Daniel. 5.
himself and his people. I beseech you then, if you can discrectly avoid, or
charitably confute ignorant Papists, and penurious Newes-mongers, understand,
what I purpose in my following Treatise; merely to show you, that these
troubles of Europe, be but the beginnings of Romes desolation, and the Beast
with seven heads and ten horns must Apoc. 12
be discovered, as she walloweth in the den of abomination, and filthiness of
corruption; after which she shall be rowsed and hunted out of breath, taken and
lashed with stripes, bound and stripped of her pomp, and at last forsaken and
consumed with fire: which although it may have relation to the everlasting
horror of hell, yet in the judgment of learned Divines, must be explicated by
some effectual humiliation on earth. Wherein if repentance remorse, and
compunction of spirit, cannot frame the master piece of Conversion, the
Catastrophe shall be wrought by the violence of a stronger arm, and that from
a secular Prince. And if in this the Emperors of Germany, or other potent
Kings have failed, as too-too basely prostrating themselves to the power of
Antichrist, no question God will punish them for vnder-valuing his glory, or
dividing and participating that greatness, which he has given to every King
entire in his own Kingdom.

Now that the Pope has, under sanctified titles, both abused Religion, and
deceived the world, and that God is incensed against such pride, blasphemy, and
hypocrisy; yea, offended with such Princes, as still adore the Beast, is
apparent by many relations: Especially a large Letter written, and printed long
since in the Spanish tongue to King Philip the second, in the days of Queen
Mary, wherein is not only the Genealogy of Antichrist, but a delicate Picture
of the Pope, and his Cardinals, kneeling before the Devil, sitting in a chair
of State, who delivers him an Indenture, or Commission, with many seals,
allowing him to be Antichrist, and so to execute his authority: this was
composed by one Alonso de Penna Fuertes, an Italian, and out of this, with many
other Classick Authors, this Enchiridion is extracted, and I hope to make all I
project apparent, as far as man may conjecture, or falls to my poor
proportion of discovery.

The Method then, which I would observe, arises from the 1. Discovery, 2.
Arraignement, 3. and execution of Antichrist. In the discovery you shall have
some observations taken from, 1. effectual contingents, 2. and probable
conjectures. In the Arraignement the indi^ements are framed, 1. from
contradicting the word of God, 2. from dishonouring the truth with false
doctrines, 3. and from abusing the people with lying miracles. In the sentence
of condemnation, and execution, the Bonarges is delivered, 1. from the mouth of
God, 2. the predictions of Sybels, 3. the inuectiues of their own canonized
Fathers, 4. and revelations of blessed Women; of all which in order, or as
orderly as I can.

The discovery of Antichrist.
COncerning the discovery of Antichrist, how ever I need go no further then
Daniels weeks and times, or his four beasts, Ezekiels visions, the Epistles
of S. Paul, the Revelation of S. John, and those wonderful Expositions of
learned men concerning the subject in hand: yet you shall have other
observations, namely, that concerning the year 1666. a time wherein the glory
of Antichrist Alphabets amount to this number, and denotate the same, as if it
were a thing purposed from the beginning, and like a Prophetical
Hier^gliphicke, representing the name, and mark of the Beast in the Apocalypse:
for example, c. signifies a 100, d. 500. Alphab^ts n^merall letters*
i. one, l. 50. m. a 1000. v. five, and x. 10. all which summed together make a
1666. Others out of the name of Paulus vice Deus, borrowing a little liberty
to make the first v a double, collect the same number from l. v. v. i. c. d. v.
which Letters likewise amount to 666. Others take the name of the Beast out of
Papa Vicarius Dei generalis in terris, where there are six Unites, two v. which
make 10. l. 50. c. a 100. and d. 500. all which amount to 666. Others des^ant
upon the triple Crown of the Pope, and some other terms more significant, as
in all the learned Expositors of the Revelation is apparent. Last of all they
have played with the very Character of Papa, as if there were a mystery in the
Papa.
Letters, and that Papa did signify Poculum aurcum plenum^ abominationis, the
golden cup full of abomination: and such is the will of God, that as Ahabs
little Cloud increased to a great storm, so out of these triuiall
animaduersions, sufficient matter might be gathered for the discovery of
Antichristian Prelacy.

Effectual Contingents. Protestants.
NOw let us come forward to Effectual Contingents, which are apparent from the
progression of the Gospel in all the Countries of Europe, and discontentments
of Papists themselves in their own Papisticall Provinces.

First then concerning Religion, now called Reformed, Protestants.
who knows not, what England, Scotland, Denmark, Norway, Sweden, the low
Countries, and many great towns and Provinces, both in Germany and France have
done? and that with resolution never to return to the vomit again? Who sees
not the prosperity of Holland, Zealand, and the rest, who for Religions sake,
and to oppose that monstrous Hydra, the Inquisition, displayed by the Duke of
Al^a, have ever since maintained such Wars, that the world is at a gaze at
their Protector? Who confesses not, what France brings forth, such
Protestant Armies, such defensive towns, that their faith is as strong as
their walls, such glorious troops, worthy Congregations, zealous ministers,
and religious people, that for all the State allows them not public exercise
of Religion, yet such is their estate, that many thousands are resolved to
maintain the cause of the Gospel? Who understands not, how Switzerland is
divided, and for the most part affected to the Reformed Religion? Whose heart
does not leap for joy (especially if his name be written in the book of life)
to apprehend, how the spacious Germany has her several Protestant Provinces,
and reformed Cities, how-euer the Popes advocates mistearme them Lutherans, or
Heretics? O Geneua, Geneua, I bless thy name for blessing the God of all
blessing, who has washed thee clean from the filthiness of superstition, and
thou have kept thy white garments unspotted, yea by demonstration showed
plainly, that the wings of the Cherubines have ouer-shadowed thee. Shall I
bring into this number the Provinces of Austria, Stiri^, Carmola, Carinthia,
why the Emperor himself knows, they are most of them Protestants, and within
three mile of Vienna, Englishmen have seen fifty Carosses at a Protestant
Sermon, yea, they have told the Friars within the walls to their faces, that
they would do as the men of Berea did, examine their doctrine by the Word of
God. As for the terrible affrightings of hostility, whereby the countenances
of Bohemia, the Palatinate, and other Provinces are even sadded again, and
seem bloodles with impiety of soul, to think upon their ruins and
deuastation, although the Jesuits run up and down with the Popes fulmination
in their mouths, fire and sword in their hands, malice and revenge in their
hearts, death and destruction in their actions; and that the voice of Rachel is
every where heard mourning for her children, Iere^s.
yet are there thousands that have not bowed their knees to Baal, and are
humbled with Job to cry out, though King^. Job.
thou kill me, I will not forsake thee: and could all this be done without the
special providence of God, and his allsearching eye, that will at last
discover the pollution of this Antichristian den, and the deceit of the
Strumpet? answer a Gods name, you that must answer before the Judgment throne
of the Lamb, how comes this about, if the Papac^ shall not come to ruin? and
thus much for the Protestant.

Papists.
COncerning Papists, how many Statutes in France, England, Papists
and other places, have been enacted diverse hundred years since, against the
pride, aua^ice, and usurpation of the Sea of Rome? What pasquils and inuectiues
have been set up even in Rome it self? traducing the Popes and Cardinals for
their vicious lives, and abominable impi^tie? What outrages have been
committed to the sacking of Rome, and irreligious profanation of such things,
as were reputed sacred, and all this by Catholick^ Soldiers? What
discontentments began between Philip the 2. of Spain, and the Pope, not
long after the death of Charles the fifth, when the Duke of Alua in his Masters
behalf exprobrated the Conclaue of Cardinals, for proclaiming the King an
enemy to the Church, that a man would wonder how he was afterward diuerted to
bend his forces against them in the low Countries? How often have the Grandes
of Spain repined at the welath and ambition of the Clergy? With what
fearful out cries have the people murmured at the tyranny of the Inquisition?
Are not the Friars at this instant I mean the Dominicans and Franciscans at
variance about the original sin of the Virgin Mary? Did not Sauoy a while
ago protest against the tenths of the Church, and began to startle at some
peremptory proceedings of the Clergy? Was not Venice resolved to moderate the
bounty of men defunct, who enfeoffed the Church with extraordinary donatiues,
and attempted to deny the Popes secular jurisdiction, when they proclaimed
Friar Paul of the order of Serui Theologo disignato, and that by sound of
Trumpet in S. Marks Piazzo? Have I not heard my self the Women in the strectes
tell the Religious men and boys of their Monasteries, that they begged
Escmofina per comperare To buy Apples.
poma, and so denied them their accustomed relief? Have I not seen in some
places of Italy, their Columns and Pillars of Stone pasted all over with
inuectiues against Indulgences, and pardons to be bought out for so much money,
as if our Saviors words to the Jews were now verified, that if the people
did not cry Hosanna in the s^^^^^es, the very stones would declare themselves.
From whence came the opposition of Thomas of Canterbury against Henry the
second, and the many discontents of the Nobility, the Popes chiefest
Champions, against so dangerous a usurpation? What say you to the Statute of
Mortmaine: the stopping of Peter Pence, and the interdicting of diverse B^ls,
even when England lay in the Cimerian mountain of superstition, and was
drowsy in the darkesome cave of ^d^latry? Oh what a fear was the Pope in,
when King John threatened the clergy, destroyed the order of Cisteux, and
banished Stephen Langhton the kingdom. What think you of the bill put up in
Parliament the 11 of Henry 4. that if the king would take into his hands the
lands disordinately consumed by the Clergy, not intermedling with tithes, or
Bishops livings it would maintain 15. Earls, 1500. knights 6000. Esquiers, 40.
Almeshouses and bring 30000. pounds a year into the exchequer, so that you see
by this, and many more that the Papists themselves were not alwares pliant to
the Popes behests, but broken out into disordered raptures against the
ambition, couetuousnes, usurpation, and tyranny of Rome. And could all these
things be done without the finger of God to point at Romes wickedness, or the
resolution of heaven, that Babylon must fall? answer a Gods name, you that must
answer before the judgment throne of the Lamb; and thus of the Papists and
effectual contingents.

Probable Conjectures.
COncerning Probable conjectures, I raise them Probable conjectures.
from the description of Antichrist in the word of God; and the comparing of
the Popes doctrine, life, and actions to the same, as shall be made apparent in
the next section, when I come to arraigne this deli^quent against the Majesty
of God, the Prince of Christendom; the quietness of men's consciences, and the
glorious progression Isaiah.
of the Gospel. Does not Isaiah tell a story of Lucifer and his fall, and
Prophesies of the destruction of Babylon, Isaiah 46. Isaiah 47.
and her Idols? whereby I make no doubt, but the abominations of Rome are
personated, and all the wickedness of corrupt prelacy discovered: Nay? why
should I not apply, what Ezechiell speaks of Tirus, and compare, the Ezech. 26.
wealth, pride, and presumption of Rome to her ripening sins, and at last
rotten putrefaction: For wherein did ever any of the nations offend the most
high God, but Popes have exceeded, as by their own authors is most apparent:
but if you come to Daniels Prophecy, he will tell Daniel 7. 8.
you of a little horn amongst the ten horns; that had eyes like a man, and a
mouth speaking great things; yea in the 11. verse because of the voice of the
great words, which the horn spoke, the beast was slain, and his body
destroyed, and given to the burning flame: but the punishment belongs to a more
proper place. I now go forward to the description.

7. For the ministry of iniquity does already work, only he 2 Thessal. 2. 7
which now with holds shall let, till he be taken out of the way.

8. And then shall the wicked man be revealed, whom the Lord shall consume with
the spirit of his mouth, and shall abolish with the brightness of his coming.

9. Even him, whose coming is by working of Satan, with all power, and
signs, and lying wonders.

10. And in all deceiueablenes of unrighteousness amongst them that perish,
because they received not the love of truth, that they might be saved.

11. And therefore God shall send them strong illusions, that they shall
believe lies, etc.

And a little before:

He shall sit as God in the Temple of God.

And a little before:

He is called the man of sin.

And in another place:

There is the doctrine of Dinells forbidding meats, and 1 Timothy 4.
marriages, etc.

And in another place.

There is named, the Whore of Babylon, the Cup of abomination, Apoc.
the beast with 7. heads and 10. horns: Roma, septicollis.

And in many other places such effectual descriptions, that I may well cry out,
O God, What plainer words, what easier discovery, what would men desire to know
more concerning the Popes of Rome, the life of Rome, the doctrine of Rome, the
impieties of Rome? Oh then answer a gods name, you that must answer before
the judgment throne of the Lamb, how comes this about, how could all these
things be done without the finger of God to point at Rome, wickedness, or the
resolution of heaven, that Babylon must fall, and thus much of Antichrists
discovery: his arraignment follows with several inditements.

Section 2.
Antichrist Arraigned.
IN this second section, or part of my discourse; you shall have the
arraignment of Antichrist upon three several inditements. The inditing of
Popery.
The first for absolutely contradicting the word of God, whereby he may truly
be called the Antichrist. 2. The second for false doctrine, and foisting in
devices of his own, and trumperies of men's inventions. 3. The third for
abusing the world with lying miracles, which the tempo^^sers of this world, and
lukewarm Gospellers do mannerly call Piaefraudes, and orders of the Church.

The first indictment against Antichrist for contradicting Gods Word.
COncerning the first. Though the author to the Hebrews Contradicting the
Scriptures. Heb. 6. 1.
advise us to go more forward in our building of Christianity, then laying a
foundation of truth, yet he assures us, tht without a good foundation there is
neither building, nor means to avoid dirision: what shall we say then to the
despiser of both, whose Math. 7. 26.
impi^ty and presumption have not only cast corrupt hands on the sacred word
of truth, but inconsiderate Arms to tearein pieces the holy structures, yea
with violence to pull the infants from the sucking breasts of their sweet
mothers. To begin therefore with a strong position of, Cursed be he, that does
either add to my law, or Deuteronomy. 12. 3. and 4. 2. Josh. 1. 7. Prou. 30. 6. Reu.
11. 1^.
dimiuish from ir, etc. What hellish fury durst lay hold upon the second
Commandment, so that neither in their Ladies nor Jesus Psalter is it to be
found. And come to the reprehension of their Idolatry, or prophanatio^ of God
by pourtraitures, Idolatry.
Images, and pictures in private and public: in the Church and the streets:
in the house in the closet: in the garments and Vtensills: they are so far
from Apology distinction, or nicely, that the common people fly to their
books showing there is no mention of such a prohibition, nor do they any
other, then the mother Church commandes. O unheard of madness! O irreligious
Apostasy.

In the first to the Hebrews, the Original has it thus, Heb. 13.
and bearing up all things by his mighty word has by himself (or only)
Purged our sins. Now behold what dares not By himself put out.
Satan do? deride God in the 2 of Genes. and tempt God in the 4. of Math.
alleging Scripture in both to serve his turn, yea drawing the bow home of
sacred truth to hit the mark of his aim, but what dares not the Pope doc?
even more then the devil himself; dash away or quite extinguish such places
of Scripture, as may seem to contradict his fictions, and lay his filthiness to
ouerture, and the hissing of the passengers. For in this text he has quite
put out by himself, and presumed to put in merits, by-workes, both
satisfactory and supererogatiue, trentalls, Masses, Dirges, and other
trumperies full of Leprous steines and corruption, which I pass over because
they rather appertain to the second indictment.

In the 1 of Timothy 2. 5. The words are plain, neither 1 Timoth. 2. 5. one
Mediator.
patible of other construction, and I am sure insufferable of contradiction.
For there is one God, and one mediator between God and man, which is the man
Christ Jesus. But what dares not the Pope do? quite reject this, and with
conceited elegancy by way of comparison argue thus; that as the neck is
between the head, and the body, so the Virgin Mary is between Christ and his
Church, no graces or spiritual ^nfluences are granted from Christ, but they
pass by the hands of his mothers intercession, and thus there is an Aue mary
still to obtain present and future blessings: miracles are done indeed in the
Church, but by her means through Christ's power, they have afforded her
attributes of redemption, saving, protection, defense, ruling, commanding: for
which purpose Leoes vision is a fearful and prodigious Atheism, wherein such
as ascended the red ladder under Christ fell down from diverse steps but,
such as went up the white ladder under the Virgin entered heaven without
difficulty. If I should proceed with Romans 8. Rom 8. 34. Heb. 7. 25. Math. 11.
28.
34. Hebrews 7. 25. Math. 11. 28. in which places Christ is our only
Mediator, and makes intercession for us, I must needs impute arrogance, nay
blasphemy unheard of to the Papacy either to make ^er a Mediatrix, or pray to
Saints for their assistance: but harken to more impiety; they have devised her
to be such a boundles Ocean of goodness, that she many times entertaineth such
whom Christ refuses, yea they go further in the glorifying of Saints, and
crying to the Popes themselves to make intercession for them. O vnlimitable
audaciousnes, and ridiculous foppery! yet so manifest, and absurdly
entertained, that whole volumes are written in the defense, and as many about
the discovery of the falsehood.

In the 5 of John 39. It is plainly said: Search the Scriptures John 5. 39.
Reading the Scriptures. Act. 17. 11.
for in them you think to have eternal life, and they are they, which
testify of me, whereupon it is recorded. Act. 17. 11. that the noble men of
Thessalonia, and Berea received the word with all readiness, and searched the
scriptures daily; to which purpose the holy Ghost yields a reason, 2 Timothy 3.
2 Timothy 3. 16.
16. For the whole scripture is given by inspiration, and is profitable to
improve, to correct, and to instruct in righteousness. Now what Barbarous tyrany
is this of the Church of Rome worse then Turkish cruelty, not only to lock
up these precious treasures from the very eyes of ouer-looking, with a
supposition of pollution by ignorance, but to affright the people with death,
as by their bloody Inquisition is apparent, if any daring hand, or hungry soul
outreach at this heavenly Manna, and look with cheerfulnes toward mount Sion
for their salvation: so that no lay man may presume at all, nor others to read
the word of God in the vulgar tongue.

In the 1 Corinthians. 14. the inhibition is not barely set 1 Cor. 14. Against an
unknown language.
down for using an unknown language in the Church, or if you will in public
congregations, but illustrated with Similes, and excellent enforcements to
divert us from such absurdity, and irregular abuses in edifying. But alas how
are our souls entangled, how is an insupportable burden of traditions thrust
upon us, how are we inforcered with a tedious Catalogue of principles and
Canons of the mother Church? And although the Apostles justified the obeying of
God before men, yet now. Non cuiuis licitum est dicere Papae, cur hoc faecis,
Nay we must not ask a question for conscience sake, nor say a prayer in our
mother tongue for sear of Lutherano, diauoto, Heretico, and in the inquisition
to be clothed with the Sambenito, a punishment as vituperious as the carting of
Bawdes in England. Nay if a modest sinner should but reveal those diurnall
liftings up of the soul, which Saint Austin and other fathers call
ciaculationes, and that to be done in their native speech, it were sufficient
to bring them within the griping reaches of accusation, and unsatisfied
jealousy of alteration in religion, or repugnancy of the mother Church. O
intolerable mischief! and never heard of frency to run away with such
madness against God and his truth!

In the 20. of Matthew, ver. 20. the story of the mother Math. 20. 20. Against
ambition in the C^ergy.
of Zebedcus children with that sweet reprehension of ambitious tumors, is
recorded at large. But how, not as barely exhortatory by way of defense of
righteousness, humillitie, love, patience, and other spiritual graces, but with
forcible interdiction of, With you it shall not be so: although the Lords of
the Gentiles and other corrupt worldlings defiled with contaminating pride, and
^nsatiable affectings of authority, hunted after popular estimation and
eminency before others, yet would not Christ have so much as elation of heart
among his disciples, nor desire of superiority over their brethren for any
assumpted gift or grace whatsoever. Nay though it were true, that God had made
their faith the rock of foundation for his Church, and themselves the Pillars
and Lamps of his temple. But now behold the error of the Church of Rome, the
error said I, the intolerable pride, and Antichristian impiety, usurpation,
and insatiable supremacy; he must not only exalt himself above his brethren,
and make that Conclauc of Cardinals an undeniable Court of his greatness and
authority, but stand like a Colossus over the necks of Princes, and as their
own stories have enlarged, presumed to ouerturne the Crowns of Emperors with
his feet; nay more then so? the Pope is carried on men's shoulders, and has
reached at heaven it self, and as the commentaries report of Prometheus that
stole Jupiters fires, they have with a Luciferian pride arrogated the name of
God, and equalled their fictions and absurd miracles with the best of the
Prophets, and the mightiest word of truth.

In the 1. Tim. 4. 1. 2. etc. there are three fearful attributes 1 Timothy 4. 1.
2. Forbidding meats and marriages.
set down, appropriate to such as forbid marriages, and the eating of meat,
which God has sanctified, namely, 1. Doctrine of Devils: 2. speaking lies
through hypocrisy: 3. and have their Conscience burned with an hot iron; So
that reasonable souls are almost terrified with the Judgment, and cannot
think it possible to avoyde eternal flames, if they should once attempt to
cross the true meaning of the holy Ghost. Yet see, what man dare do? the Pope
has invented a law of Celebacy, a vow of chastity, a devise of sequestration
for Priests, and a manifest opposition to this verity, denying marriage, which
God honored with his presence, and branding it with the term of filthy
pollution, and defiling copulation, nay, though that Christ esteemed and named
it honorable: Yet have these Adversaries cast a defiance in the face of the
Scriptures. But withal what have they done by way of conniuency, permitted
Whoredom, and whereas they can say in some sort; Si non cast, tamen caute,
they have published a greater audaciousnesse in defending their contaminated
hearts, and adulterate eyes. For they have not spared to put to their hands and
seals to the pattents of Abbots, and other religious persons, wherein is this
Proviso: Licitum erit Domino nostro Abbatt semel in mense habere mulierem ad
purgandas renes. Nay, if I should search them further, I am affrayde of
pretended villainy to march arm in arm with their adulteries and fornication:
For by experience I allege it, that in the Orchards of their Frieries and
Nunneries, amongst other exornations and furnitures of comelines, they have
whole trees of Sauine, and to what use that serves, Physicians Sauine.
and Mid-wiues know too well, and how it may be abused, an honest mother cannot
relate without tears and wringing of hands.

As for meats they have not only limited us in their use, but made a
distinction of times, and set a seal upon days, as if it were high treason to
break open the enclosures of such institutions, yea, an unanswerable offense
to step aside from their authority and limitation. Nay, though God sa^^ all
that he made to be good, and blessed us in the fruition of his blessings,
though the Prophets have cursed the obseruers of days and times, new Moons,
and feasts: though Christ told his Apostles, that whatsoever went into the man
did not defile him: though Peter's vision cleared that scruple of uncleanness
in all meats, which God had sanctified: yet is it a Pontificean verdict of
damnation, to infringe the letter of their Lithurgie, and the people are made
to believe, that the eating of white meats in Lent, will open the jaws of Hell
so much the wider: O irrel^^ious Religion, and Satanicall invention!

In the twentieth of L^uiticus, God hedged in the Jews, Levit. 20. Marriage.
touching marriage, and enacted certain precepts of holiness, as binding
voices to all governments, kingdoms, and posterity: yet have we not
experience of the Popes repugnancie in this kind? And that many unlawful
marriages, as far as Incest, have been borne withal, and had Apostolical
benediction: yea, from their very Monasteries, both Friars and Nuns have
been taken out, to circle their heads with C^ronets, and fill their arms with
bedfellowes, even contrary to their first footing in Religion, and p^mordiall
contract with professed holiness.

How plain are those words, 2. These. 2. Matthew. 24. Apoc. 13. That that man of
sin should be revealed, whose coming is by the working of Satan, with all
power and signs, and lying wonders: Yet you see in despite of this, or
derision of the Predict^on, the Pope of Rome dare be called Vice-deus, as in
the Dictates of Gregory the seventh. And Miracles.
the Church of Italy produce so many Miracles, that diverse of their own
Divines have made a stop in their reading, but I refer you to its proper
place, that is, the third Indictment, which I frame in this accusation; only
by the way consider, how adverse this man is to the Scriptures, that dare
justify himself to be Antichrist in this one point, as it were in despite of
the holy Ghost.

In the tenth of John, Christ says; My sheep hear my John 10. Hearing the
Word.
voice: and in the twentie-one of John, the 15. verse. he bids Peter three
times to feed his sheep, the reason is, because it is apparent, that without
Preaching neither can faith be obtained, nor God himself so magnified, as he
ought: but how poorly the Church of Rome distributes this gift, and in what
broken Pipes the water runs from a sparing Spring, I might say corrupted
Fountain, if not infectious stream: let the impartial Travelers report, who
have visited the Congregations on both sides. For I dare be bold to say, that
except some special Cities, wherein Priests and Friars discourse of the
Legend of Saints, magnify the Popes supremacy, dilate of the orders of the
Church, manifest the necessity of Indulgences and pardons, and talk of
Purgatory and Charity to Monasteries, the Country villages know not what a
Sermon means, only M^sse and Ma^tens, with some voraginous delivery of
wonders, and when they iesture it in the best manner, not a place of Scripture
alleged, nor a point of Divinity discussed, but some moral Precepts against
notorious impreties, wherein yet the Philosophers and melancholy Stoickes went
beyond them.

In the 13. of John, and the 35. verse, Christ says plainly; John 13. 35.
Loving one another.
All men shall know, that you are my Disciples, if you love one another. But
how well this Precept is observed amongst the Romanists, I appeal to
themselves, and their own writings, what bitter inuectiues between Scotists
and Thomistes? What fearful raylings between Popes and Cardinals? What
Calumniations between Friars and Monks? What desperate quarrels between
Dominicans and Franciscans? What scandalls between Jesuits and Seculars?
before ever Watsons Book of Quodlibets and Quidlibets excited laughter in
some, despite in many, and dis^tastings in all.

I could name patience and meekness as a mark of the Church of God, but to
look upon the angry face of Rome, and the affrightings of Clergy
Commissioners, when their Religion is opposed, and fooleries derided, is more
tyrannous, then the ten Persecutions in the Primitive Church; and the
murdering the brethren in Turkey, is but a flea-biting to the burning and
torturing of Martyrs. In Portingall they brought one Gardner to death an
Englishman, with such unheard of cruelty, that the Clergy put a Deuills-coat
upon him, full of horrible shapes, gagd his mouth, hung him up in chains, and
made him live in torments, when death took pity upon him. How ridiculous was
the burning of Paulus Fagius and Bucers bones in the beginning of Queen Mary's
reign, after three years bur^all, and God knows whether their bones or no.
Such things are written of Bonners cruelty, besides the Stories in the Acts
and Monuments, that the inhumanitie exceeds all the extrauagancies of
Heathenish Tyrants. The other day when Friar Paul of Venice could not be
caught in person, they burnt him in Rome by pourtraiture, and sent twice to
murder him in private. Shall I name the mischiefs against Queen Katherine
Parre, in the latter end of Henry the eight, by the workings of the Bishops,
especially Gardener? Shall I recite the murders of the two Kings of France,
the Prince of Orange, and diverse others, who seemed to oppose their disor^ered
proceedings? It were a wonder to tell you, how Queen Elizabeth, the wonder of
all times, escaped their malice: but to end with the Powder plot, it must make
an end of this Controversy, that the Pope of Rome is a mere Tyrant in earth,
and the Doctrine of Rome most opposite to the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

Humility, last of all is such a mark of the true Church Humility.
of God, that in diverse places, you have the very garments of a Prophet named;
Elias vesture; Isaiahs nakedness; Ieremies du^geon; Amos frocke; Christ's
seameles coat; John Baptists Cammells hair, and such like. But the Pope must
be a God on earth, and the Cardinals take place of all Princes, that are not
absolute Monarkes. Their Carosses are so sumptirous and stately, that they have
four velvet chayres within, and six stately Moiles without, and how they ride
with public Curtezans to the Conclaue, is well known. Baptista Fulgosus
records, Pride of Rome.
that Peter Riarus, first a Friar Minorite, afterward Cardinal to Sixtus the
fourth, had Gowns of cloth of Gold, Couerings and Tikes of Beds suitable, and
all other Furniture of the best Silk. There was a Feast made at Rome by a
Cardinal to Elenor of Aragon, as she went to marry Hercules de Est, Duke of
Ferrara, which lasted seven hours, with all variety of Music, and delicate
Acates, which had also plays and dances. Another Cardinal had a Concubine,
called Tiresia, whose Chappinos were embroydred with Pearl and precious
Stones, to an inestimable value. But what need I go so far as Rome to
instance this Indictment of opposing the Word of God against them, when I can
name you such Prelates in England, that for pride, and wealth exceed any
Cardinals of Rome, and lived, as if they would tell us plainly, Antichrist
was discovered, and there was neither heaven nor hell to be thought upon, but
the present bravery of the world, and the magnificence of a Courtly and
maiesticke life.

In the time of William Rufus, you had an Otho, Bishop of Baieux, and Earl of
Kent. In the time of Henry the second, you had a Thomas of Canterbury, that
affrighted the King with Excommunication. In the time of Richard the first, you
had a Bishop of Durham, who gave ten thousand pound for an Earldom. In the
days of King John, Stephen Langhton opposed the Majesty of England. In the
time of Henry the fifth, the Bishop of Winchester lent the King twenty thousand
pound. In the time of Henry the sixth, Cardinal Beuford was infamed for pride,
and wealth. In the time of Henry the eight, Woolsey writ, Ego and rex meus, and
so exceeded in magnificence and greatness, that all Europe wondered at the
prosperity of our country, and yet repined, that such a Prince would endure
the ambition and impiety of a Prelate. To conclude, Cardinal Poole was cosen
to Queen Mary, and therefore endured for his magnificence and pomp: but yet
all these belonged to the Church, and should have been Preachers of the Word
of God, but they proved Wolves in Sheep clothing, and the humbled soul made
this Use of their lives, that Antichrist was discovered, and so beng the main
Adversary, must needs oppose the Word of God, and do contrary things to truth
and Christianity. And thus much of his first Indictment.

The second Indictment of Antichrist for teaching The second indictment.
men's traditions, and foisting into the doctrine of the Church, both Heresies,
errors, and absurdities.
BEfore I go any further, let me answer certain objections, which I should
have done in my former Indictment; namely what greater humillity can there be,
then for the Capuchines and Friars Mendicants to refuse and despise the
vanities of the world, and be contented with poverty, disgrace, scorns, and
neuer-heard of humiliation; insomuch that Princes have even pricked their proud
swelling hearts, and let out the corrupt blood, bringing them down to
prostitution and contentment in Unsavory poverty: as you saw, Duke Iogenx
became father Angelo: Faelix of Sauoy thrust himself into a Monastery:
Charles the fifth forsook the world, and left amongst all his ^ewells, as
principal, his whippe of small cords, wherewith he lashed his sides: and
many other Princes finished their days in Religious houses. I answer with the
Prophet, who required these things at your hands, and when it is the best
humiliation it is contaminated and defiled with wrong circumstances, and though
it tend to the worshipping of Angels, it is but devilish and Colos. 2. 23.
unprofitable.

Again, concerning outward garments, coules, weeds hair or hempen girdells,
penance, whipping, fasting, Kings.
and such like tormenting the flesh: is it any other, then the priests of Baall
cutting and lashing themselves? then ^dolatrous sacrifices, wherein the Heathen
practiced the shedding of blood, and continued with Monstrous murders, and
Devilish shapes to the people. Rent your Joel.
hearts, and not your garments, says the Prophet, and when you fast or mourn,
hang not down your heads like Bulrusshes, or do as Hipocrites do, says
Christ.

Last of all concerning good works and releeuing the poor, which they term
Charity; What profit can Math. 6.
such things do, where is presumption of merit? what good can they procure,
when they are full of corruption? why do you plead for poverty, when you grow
so rich your selves, and fill your treasuries with all manner of gifts from
living and dying men? what talk you of religion? When you mind nothing but
policies of State, and to trouble all Christendom with devises: as for the
outward form of good deeds I will be bold to say we have had amongst our
selves more Colleges builded, Almes-houses erected, Chapels edified, Churches
repaired, Poor relecued, Prisons visited, and Lands given to pious uses, and
that within these fifty years; then in two hundredth years before, let them
name what Country they please: and thus much for the Objections, now to my
purpose in hand.

To make you a Collection of all the devises and tr^^ peries in Popery, were
to make a rope of sand, and begin a work which could have no end: For this
wodden wheel has been so often turned, that the Coggs are worn asunder and
either they must erect a new frame, or invent a new superstition. For all the
old is discovered, and in a Book called the Bechine of the Romish Church, the
face of revelation, like your face in a glass, will reflect upon you. O that I
need bring you no further then that pulling hook to shake the walls of
Papistrie to rubbish, but because variety has a passage of pleasure among
Nouelists, I am contented to search further, and thus expose unto you, what I
find in other treasuries.

Nicholas the second, in a certain Sinod at Rome decreed Eucharist to be
handled with hand, and torn a pieces with teeth.

In the Conuenticle of Florence the doctrine of Purgatory, and the Popes
supremacy was ratefied by the Arminians was confirmed and so established, that
the Council of Trent agreed to the same, withal the other errors and
superstitions of Popery.

Irenaeus says, that the Apostles did first Preach the Gospel and afterward
delivered the same in Scriptures, Lib. 3. cap. 1.
that they might be a foundation and pillar of our faith; Lib. 4. de. verb.
cap. 4.
but Bellarmine says, they are neither necessary, nor sufficient without
traditions.

The Scotists and most Papists maintain, that the Virgin Mary was neither
conceived in sin, nor ever committed any; and yet the Apostle says, that by
one man Romans 5. Galath. 3.
sin entered into the world, and death by sin went over all, yea he shows,
that the Scripture has concluded all under sin.

It is well known and publicly printed both in the Jesuits doctrine of
Collen, the works of Thomas Aquinas, Bellarmine and others, that the Papists
maintain justifying by the Law, Merit by Works, no necessity of confession of
faith, when yet the Scripture says, Christ is made unto us justice, wisdom,
Sanctification, and 1 Cor. 1.
Redemption, and that Abraham believing, it was imputed to him for
righteousness, yea Isaiah has it thus Isayah 53.
in plain terms, we are healed by his stripes, the Apostle speaks in this
manner. It is manifest, that no Gal. 3. Romans 4.
man is justified by the Law before God, and that Abraham was not justified by
the works of the Law.

Nauarrus teaches, that lay men may not dispute of E^ch. cap. 11. The Chapter
ignorantia de ^u^^a trinit.
matters of faith under penalty of the Popes excommunication, and Linwood
holds it sufficient for lay men to believe the Articles of the Creed
implicitly without public confession, or other Christianlike yielding a
reason of their Salvation and good life.

Whereas our Savior says Math. 11. My yoke is easy, Math. 11.
and my burden light. Thomas Aquinas sets it down thus, that the Precepts of
the law, or the Gospel, are more Math. 11.
grievous and combersome then the law of Moses: and the censures of Collein
with Bellarmine himself say plainly, 2 quest. 107.
that we cannot be saved, unless in our own persons we fulfill the Law.

Matthew Paris in his collection from the year 1256. Jesus Christ, published
another new one by the name of Euangelium aeternum, as if the word of God
should continue but for a time; to which they added certain fooleries out of
the writings of Abbot Ioachim, and continued in such blasphemy, as if their
devises should out-last the Gospel of Salvation.

The Master of the Sentences determines, that the father and the holy Ghost
might have been made man, Lib. 3. did. 1.
and yet may, the maine Heresy of the Patripassians; who held that the father
suffered death for us: and the scoolemen mainetaine, that the Son of God,
might have assumed the nature of a woman, which derogateth from the Mystery of
Christ's incarnation. Besides, they affirm, that Christ was never troubled in
soul with any perturbation or affliction, contrary to the plain John 12.
Math. 26.
text of Scripture, Nam anima mea perturbata est, and Ambrose says, he has
taken our will and our sadness upon him.

The Master of the Sentences publishes, that all that Lib. 4. distin. 1.
died under the Law, and not Circumcised, were damned; and the Sinod of Trent
pronounces them Anathema or accursed, that say there are more or fewer
Sacraments, then seven, that is to say, 1. Baptism, 2. Confirmation, 3. the
Eucharist, 4. Penance, 5. Extreme Unction, 6. Order, and 7. Matrimony: and yet
the mystery of the great Apoc 17.
Whore is called Sacramentum mulieris, and Saint Austine never knew any more,
then two, Baptism and the Lords Supper, that is out of Christ's sides slowed
water and blood, to which agrees Tertullian, Dionisius, Are^pagita, Chrisostom,
Cyrill, Gregory, Cyprian, Rabanus, Pas^hasius: besides, it is absurd to
think, that Marriage, Pri^sthood, and Penance were of one nature under the
Law, and another under the Gospel.

Nauarrus in his Enchiridion, and Bellarmine in his Discourses Lib. 1. de
Sacr^. 14.
of the Sacraments, maintain, that the Sacraments of the new Law both contain
grace and confer grace, Ex opere operato, which also may appear by the
Canons of the seventh Session of Trent. But Lord, what absurdities must now
follow? First, to attribute as much to Matrimony, Confirmation, and extreme
Unction, as to Baptism, and the Lords Supper. Secondly, What contrariety is
this for Priests to forswear marriage, seeing it contains grace, and
works it. Thirdly, If grace be nothing else but Charity, or a habit not
distinct from it, how may Charity be contained in Oil, or the rites of
Matrimony, or external signs. Fourthly, Who can show, or dare maintain, that
such as receive their Popish Confirmation, orders, extreme Unction, or are
married, are more just, then they were before. Fifthly, Last of all God has
promised to work by his Sacraments, but we do not read, that ever he
promised Justification, or grace to married folk, or to such as are greased by
extreme Unction, or to any such, who with Bell^rmine and Canisius say, that
Sacraments are only external signs, whereby it must needs follow, that
Christ's body and blood in the Eucharist are no Sacrament, because they appear
not to the eyes nor are apprehended by other senses.

By the effects of holy water sprinkling, and washing, the Papists hope to be
cleansed from sins, but the Homerobaptists among the Jews were therefore
reputed Heretics, as Epiphanius affirms; and the Prophets tell us, that
neither Cal^mus, nor thousands of rivers of Oil, neither rivers, nor the whole
Ocean can purge or purify us from our transgressions.

In those days, the Dositheans were reputed Heretics, for affectation of
Virginity, and punishing their bodies. yet now the Papists are transported
with another Doctrine, yea, many others. For the Council of Constance
condemned John the 23. for denying the immortality of the soul; yet such is
the corruption of nature, and impiety of Popes, Epicurean Philosophers.
Rome, that Alexander the 6. Leo the 10. Clement the 7. and diverse other Popes
borrowed this Heresy from the Sadduces, or rather Epicurean Philos^phers, and
blasphemed God in their repugnancy: yea that beastly opinion of the Capernaites
concerning the eating of the flesh of Christ really, was maintained by Pope
Nicholas, in a certain Chapter beginning; Ego Berergarius, etc.

If Simon Magus was detested by the Apostle for (...) money to buy the graces
of the Spirit: What shall become of Papists in their Mart of Masses, Po^tsaile
of Indulgences, chaffring for Benefices, and selling all things for money, more
execrably, then ever Judas did Christ. As for that small account, or slighting
the sin of using common Women, hearken I pray you, what is recorded of Saint
Austen; Docebat detestandam turpitudinem indifferenter vtendi faminis.

If you read Ecclesiastical Histories, you shall find many Heretics
condemned for doing those things, wherein Heretics.
the Papists do now transgress, and inueigh against true Christians, for
reputing their Doctrine loathsome. The Basileans by Irenaus were esteemed
Heretics for Images, Enchantments, and diverse superstiticus exorcizations.
Carpocrates, and Marcellina one of his followers, adored the Images of Jesus,
Paul, Homer, and Pythagoras: and who does not know, what estimation George the
Dragon-killer, Saint Katherine, aed Papia have in Europe? And the Marcosians
were condemned for Baptizing in an unknown Language, and anointing with
Chrisme, etc. Witness all this, and much more Ireneus and Epiphanius, etc.

The Messalians were condemned for using much babbling, and multiplicitie of
prayers: What think you then of the Papists Rosary, and certain numbers of
Creedes, Ane^, and Pater-nosters. The Angelikes and Caians inuocated Angels,
which Heresy proceeded from Simon Magus, and is disallowed of by Epiphanius,
Tertullian, Austin, and others, and yet the Papists have still a Mass in the
honor of Angels. The Seuerians are traduced for forging of Miracles, and one
Philumena accused for drawing a loase of bread out of a narrow mouthed glass,
but what is this to the Papists Legend? And how can Bellarmine make miracles
Austin. c. 24. Haeres.
a mark of the Church, or other Jesuits maintain the notorious absurdities
of Popery.

Now if it be thus, that these things are proved against them, that infinite
thousands of errors, like so many Locusts in a filthy standing lake, increase
to an insufferable fulsomnesse in the Church of Rome, that diverse reformed
places have yet cleansed themselves from their pollution, and that the true
servants of God do daily rise, like the child Daniel, to examine the
hypocrisy and unsavory lust of the Judges. O let no i^dicious men for any
worldly respect whatsoever, come so near the Chariot wheels of this Strumpet,
as to be dashed with the filth and dirt, which it casts up: let the true
ser^an^^ of God come out of Babell. For questionles it will fall, and then
whosoever shall presume of her strength, glory, and mightiness, will be
pressed, and ouer-whelmed with her rubbish, if they tarry within: let all
regenerate souls come to the pure stream of the Scriptures to drink the
waters of life, and not seek the pudled filth and noisome lake of men's devises
and inventions, which must needs either choke with the mudde of superstition,
or poison with the venom and mixture of unequal impositions. As for policy,
temporizing, making leagues, civil honesty, and such like forbearances, with
so great an adversary to Christ. Why should not the Jews use the language of
Canaan? Why did Iosuah tell the people, he and his house would serve God? Why
did Job cry out, though thou kill me, I will not forsake thee? Why did Elias
and Micha prove Antagonists to four hundred false Prophets? Why did Amos
oppose Amasiah? Why did all the Prophets stand in the gappe against the
corruption of time, and the main current of the world? Why did Christ weep
for the hardness of men's hearts, and call the Priests, Pharisees, Scribes, and
Lawyers, hypocrites? Why did Paul confess, that after the way they called
Heresy, he served the God of his fathers? Answer a Gods name, you that must
answer before the judgment throne of the Lamb: How comes this about, if the
Papacy shall not come to ruin, and Rome it self at last be destroyed, after
the man of sin is consumed with the breath of Gods nostrills? But we will yet
go forward. For there are more mustred Armies ready to march upon them, and
come to the charge, to their utter ouer-throw and execution.

Shall I now name certain blasphemies, and nefarious actions committed by the
Popes themselves, and borne withal, or published in the Church of Rome; by
which you may see, how this Indictment is unanswerable, and there must needs
follow a Judgment of condemnation after the Arraignement.

Beno the Cardinal recites a story, that Gregory the 7. consulted Fearful
actions of Popes.
with his God in the Host, or the Eucharist; and because he could receive no
answe of it against the Emperor, he threw the Sacrament into the fire: and Pius
the fifth, cast an Agnus De^ into Tyber, and burnt another, as Hierome Catena
affirms. Clement the 6. would have men pray and cry to the Pope, Lord open thy
treasure the fountain of living Ch: Vnigenit. ext.
water. Horatius Tursellinus in an Epistle to Peter Adobrandini says, that God
made the Virgin Mary as much as could be the companion of his Matestie, And
Bernardine with Bonauenture, give her power over her son, Iure matris. Virgin
Mary.
In the Roman breu^ary, she is called Dulcis amica Dei: and in the Missall of
Sarum, the Savior of the world.

Bellarmine allows a saying of the Friars to the Crucifixe, thou have
redeemed us, thou have reconciled us to the Father.

The Turks and Saracens honor the books of the Old The Scriptures.
Testament, but the Papists profane the Scriptures. The Rhemists call it, a
killing letter. Stapleton endeavors to prove, that all Heresies proceed from the
Scriptures. Kellison says, that the Devil does wappe himself from top to
toe in Scriptures. Turrian writing against Sadeel, calls the Scriptures
Delphicum gladium, an Instrument to all purposes. Bellarmine accuses them as
imperfect and insufficient. Piggius and Eckius mis-termeth them a dead Letter.
Cardinal Poole, an Incky Gospel. Montanus, a nose of Wax. and many others, a
Ship mans-hose.

Steuchus in his Treatise for the defense of Constantines donation, calls the
Pope a God; and the Abbot Panormitanus Blasphemies.
expressly says, that Christ and the Pope have but one Consistory. Julius the
second, upon Easter day fought with the French at Rauenna. Gregory the 7.
mustred his Army against Henry the 4. on good Friday, and thought to murder
the Emperor in Saint Mary's Church, by throwing a stone upon him from a vault.
Sixtus the 4. even at the elevation of the Sacrament, endeavored to kill
Laurence and Julian Volater^^.
de medices.

Although Leo the 10. called the Gospel a Fable, and the wicked and monstrous
lives of the Popes were ever discovered: yet did the people fall down like
beasts before them, worshipping them as God: and Paulus Aemilius tells, Lib.
2.
how the Ambassadors of Sicily cried thus to the Pope; Thou that take away
the sins of the world have mercy upon us. To which purpose, Simon Begnius,
Bishop of Modrusa, calls Leo the 10. his Savior; and Stapleton writing to
Gregory the 13. terms him Supremum numen in terris, and these attributes
follow; The vicar of Christ, the Monarch of the Church, the head, the spouse,
the foundation of the Church: yea Thomas Waldenses flattereth Martin the 5.
with Salua nos Domine, perimus; and Cornelius, Bishop of Befo^^o in the
conuenticle of Trent, calls the Pope the light which came into the world.

But now if you would demand the reason of all these blasphemies, and filthy
wickedness, it is apparent by a simile of bitter streams from sower springs:
these things were Authors. Beno. Platina. Nauclecus. Theoderick.
devised and maintained by such men, as were branded in their lives for
notorious and infamous livers. Benet the 9. and Syluester the 2. gave
themselves to the Devil. Twenty two Popes practiced Magic. Gregory the
seventh was condemned for a Negromantick at a Council: and the Council of
Pise accused Gregory the 12. and Benet the 13. for wicked livers. Alexander the
6. was an Atheist, that is, believed there was no God. John the 22. in the
Council of Constance was convinced for making question of the Resurrection.
Leo the 10. and Clement the 7. were also reputed Atheists: Paul the 3.
consulted with the Devil, and Julius the 3. said, he would eat, (...) dispetto
di Dio: yea Boccace in his second Novel, brings in a Jew wondering how the
City of Rome ws kept from sincking to Hell, considering the sins and
abominations both of the Popes, the government, and the people.

Here might properly be brought in certain proofs and enlargements: 1. That
Popery is a sink of Heathenish Idolatry: 2. That their religion never came
from true Jerusalem: 3. That it was never taught by the Prophets, or Apostles:
4. That it was not known to ancient professed Emperors, and Christian
Kings: 5. That the ancient Britains were not converted to the now Popish
religion. 6. That Popish religion is falsely called Catholic: 7. That there
were never such doctrine, and principles in the Primiti^e Church: 8. That it is
repugnant to ancient Councels: 9. That it is contrary to the Fathers of the
Church: 10. That it was never testified by the blood of Christian Martyrs,
etc. But it would prove too great a mountain of amasement, and be extended to
a greater volume, then I propose, therefore I refer you to such sufficient
authors as are every where extant, for the good of all Christians.

The Mass by their own confession was framed at s^uerall Popery a humane
devise.
times, and by diverse authors. For how ever the law of God was given at an
instant, and the Gospel of Jesus Christ, with the doctrine of Christianity,
comprised in one volume, called the Testament, yet has this sabricke of Popery
been many hundred years a framing, and the materials come into millions of
hands, that had not time to this hour to dispatch the building, and cover the
structure. Thus Walafridus, Platina, Nauclerus, and others report: that
Caelestine made the introit, Iudica me Deus: Damasus added the confession:
Gregory the Antiphona and Kirie eleeson: Telesphorus, gloria in excelsis: and
Gelasius certain clauses of the Orisons: Thomas Aquinas devised the office on
Corpus Christi day: but who contrived the Masses for S. Francis, S. Dominicke,
and other late Saints, the Papists themselves cannot tell. The Psalter of our
Lady was invented by Bonauenture. You see the Priests offer Christ for the
sins of the quick and dead, for sick horses, and piggs, etc. I hope you all
think this a devise of man, and in no Scripture at all. Oh Jesus, did thou
spit, and salt, or light Candles in Baptism? Did thou use any mimicke
gestures when thou institutedst the Sacrament of thy Supper? Is it not a
strange devise, that no Priest may say Mass without water and fire? The
worship of the Sacrament and the custody thereof in a Pixe was invented by
Honorius. What think you of Canonical hours, and the relics of Martyrs,
who devised them I pray you? All their Letanies and Prayers to Saints and
Angels, yea, peradventure to such as are gone to the Devil, as the Heathen
canonized such for Gods, as were lecherous and incestuous persons, were framed
by sundry Popes and Friars. The Popes triple crown, kneeling to the Cross,
and a thousand of other trumper^es, were the excrements of hot brains, and
men, who knew no better, or at least would not, then to increase their honor,
and ambition, and wealth. The feast of Iubile was ordained by Boniface the 8.
Corpus Christ's by Clement the 5. Of our Ladies conception by Sixtus quartus, of
her assumption by another; and all the rest of the ceremonies and superstitious
rites by one wicked Pope or lying Priest or other. For because Paul said, the
rest I will set in order when I come, these men have assumed to themselves a
power to devise unheard of impieties, and yet as Physicians guild their bitter
pills with some flourishing golden virtue; they stop all men's mouths with
order, and ordinances of the Church: but the Saints of God can tell them, that
Ieroboams calves were erected by order. For the Text says, the King called a
council: and the Statutes of Omri, with all the abominations of the Priests,
and Kings of Israel were confirmed, and maintained by order; therefore order
disordred may turn to confusion, and desolation. And so I proceed.

Bernard of Luzenburg shows, how the Doctors of Popish devises agree with
Heathenish customs.
Collen auerred, that Aristotle was the forerunner of Christ in naturalibus, as
John Baptist in diuinis, and that they would prove the distinction of the three
persons in Trinity by Philosophy. Gratian talking of diverse orders, and
degrees in D^cretis did. 21.
the Roman Hierarchy, confesses, that this difference was deduced from the
Gentiles: Gregory the 1. writing to Melitus, permitted the English to build
boothes in the day of the dedication of their Churches, and to kill Oxen for
the Beda lib 1. cap. 30.
praise of God; and was not this the custom of the Pagans serving Idols.
Boniface the 4. consecrated the Church called Pantheon in Rome, where Cibele
and all the Heathen gods were adored, to our Lady and all Saints, as if he
would show, that the worship of Saints must succeed in the place of Idols, and
Heathen gods. Who knows not, that the Priests of the Gentiles did shave their
heads and beards, the Priests of Baal lance themselves, the Priests of
Cibele whippe themselves, and the Priests of Bell and the Dragon made the King
believe, the Idol did eat up his provision? and who sees not the Papists to
i^stifie the imitation, and yet as the Lapwig runs away with the shell on
her head, they carry it with zeal, devotion, and austeritie of penance.
Bellarmine, Thomas Aquinas, and others, prove the Popish Monarchy by the
Gentiles government: the seven Sacraments by Philosophical arguments, and
that one body may be in many places at once by sophisticate principles. Is not
the worship of Saints and Images a mere trick of the Gentiles, and are not
all the de^ises of adoration sprung from hellish ^dolatrie? The temple of
Romulus and Rhemus is now the Church of Saint Cosmas and Damianus, the temple
of Faunus is converted into the Church of S. Steven, The temple of Juno Cupra
into the Chapel of our Lady of Loretto, where the altar stood dedicated to
Apollo, is now one erected to Saint John, and the Image of Brass of Jupiter is
now Saint Peter's, as their antiquaries justify. There was one supreme God
among the Gentiles, and many inferiors under him, so the Papists acknowledge
one God in terms, but have an hundred inferiors for every action and disease:
the burning of incense comes from the Gentiles, and they assite Virgils
testimony with other prets, the washing of hands, their skippings and turnings,
their sacrifices with fire and water, their tunickes, Albes, and other pompous
ceremonies, their Purgatory and belief of good and bad Genius, their worship,
of trees, stones, and fountains with infinite other absurdities and
abominations, are all the devises of Gentiles, and customs of Pagans: which if
it be so, Answer a Gods name, you that must answer before the judgment throne
of the Lamb, how comes this about; if the Papacy shall not come to ruin, and
Rome it self at last be destroyed, after Antichrist is discovered, and the man
of sin consumed with the breath of Gods nostrills?

I must begin with a smile. For you cannot choose, Popery keeps Christians
in ignorance.
but laugh when you hear of the Colliers faith to believe, as the Church
believes, though it was not known, what that belief was, the obscuring of the
Scriptures, the inhibition of their reading, their praying in an unknown
tongue, their not suffering men to dispute, their preaching of stories and
tales without one word of edifing, their suppressing of religious books, and
infinite other palpable enormities, what are they any other, but instruments of
Satan to keep us in security, or Synens hands to rock the Cradle of our
frailty, till we fall a sleep yea snort again in the Cimerian cave of
darkness, ignorance, and superstition. Oh harken for Gods sake what
Historiographers write of ignorance, dulnes, and stupidity in spiritual
affairs. Alphonsus a Castro lib. 1. de haeresi. says that diverse Popes were
utterly unlearned. Lazierdus Author Pla^^^.
speaking of Gregory. 6. recites, that he caused another to be consecrated
with him for saying Mass, because he himself scarce knew a letter, but this
matters not, for Ielium approues, that the Pope cannot be deposed for want of
learning. Pope Zachary condemned Virgilius a Bishop of Germany as an heretic
for saying, there were Antipodes. Paul the second was so unlearned, that he
determined them to be Heretics, that named the word Academy. John Pecham in
the Provincial constitution supposes it ^uff^cient for Priests either by
themselves or substitutes, once a year, to tractate, or at the most every
quarter, of the ten Commandments, of the law, the twelve Articles, the two
commandments of the Gospel, the seven works of mercy, the seven deadly sins,
the seven virtues, and the seven sacraments without curiosity, or putting it
home to edifying and uses of the conscience. Durandus teaches, that the two
points of a Bishops Miter signifies the old and new Testament, but Lewis
marcilius an Augustine Friar said that the stropps of the Miter, which the
Bishop hangs at his back did foreshew, that they neither understood old nor
new Testament. Aluarus Pelagius complains, that the Bishops of Spain
committed thousands of souls to young nouices, that were fitter to play with
Apples and Pears; shall I name the Sermons of the Friar Menot, Maillard,
Bromyard, and their fellows, they were so full of ridiculous fables that the
people went to Church to sport themselves in the hearing. The Germans of late
complained to Adrian 6. that Bishops advanced unlearned idiots, unfit, vilde,
and ridiculous. It is well known, that many Priests and Friars could not say
Mass, nor distinguish of days, but by the great letters; and all your
Schoolmen and Inquisitors generally fill their studies with books of
Rhetorike, stories, legends Decretalls, Canons, Ciuell law and such trash. For
is not stubble trash compared to the come^ but neither Bible nor expositors of
Scriptures, scarce a father or divine author shall be found amongst them, for
in truth how ever now a days they swell with the tumor and accent of great
Schollership and learning, they are still for the most part illiterate, and
ignorant, and that reputation they have, proceeds either from their auditors
and disciples want of knowledge, or their Glosses, and tedious Cataloging of
uncertain authors, who handle curious questions, and at the best
school-diuinitie.

Nouation cannot stand without Christian policy, nor Popery repugnant to the
laws of nature and nations.
policy be maintained without observation and performance of oaths,
promises, compacts, leagues and treaties of trade and commerce: yet you shall
see, what either the scorn of Papist, negligence, presumption, equinocation,
or one trick or other has done.

Formosus being deposed for-swore his Bishopric, yet regarded not his oath,
but resumed the same. In the life of Henry 4. Emperor, Gregory 7. was invested
Pope contrary to his oath. Paschall the second, solemnly swore to the Emperor
being his prisoner, but at least subject to his danger, that he would keep
and religiously observe the Articles set down between them, bur he proved so
false and repugnant that after he had escaped, he rebelled and excommunicated
the Emperor. Charles the French Theodori^k:
King cha^geth Gregory 12. and Benedicke 13. of violation of their faith, and
Om^phrius alleges against Alexander 6. that he was a delinquent in more
then punicke perfidiousnes, Guicciardine speaking of Climent 7. says plainly
^ra di poca s^de, Julius, 2. Leo 10. and diverse others endeavored to prove, that
the Pope was not bound by any oath, but he might both infring the same and
incite others to dishonorable practices. Henry the 4. as Helmoldus complains
accuses the Pope for the rebellion of his subjects, and this by his
instigation the tumults of Germany were raised, and the people set all in
combustion upon the Popes warrant and pardon, In the Counsel of Constance the
Pope and his accomplices persuaded the Emperor to violate the safe conduct of
John Husse, whereupon that damnable position of fides non est consernanda cum
hereticis, was ratified, and concluded; which if it be so, what trust can be
secured of any contract or treaty, but still upon advantage the adversary will
break out, and imitate the Panther who shows not her tallents, till the
beasts be within her reach? Did they not of late days persuade the Emperor
Charles 5. to break with Luther* Paul the 3. in a Bull against Henry 8.
denounced them accursed, that would not infringe all oaths and allegiance
either couenanted with the King, or his subjects. Eugen^us 4. was the cause or
motive that Ladislaus of Poland infringed his oath with the Turk. Innocentius
the 3. blew up that wind of rebellion against King John. And Pius the first
cursed heaven and earth, that he could thrive no better against Queen
Elizabeth.

Gregoey 7. contrary to all the laws of honor and nations imprisoned the
Emperors Ambassadors, and another killed the Emperor Fredericks Ambassadors,
who brought good news of the success in Palestina. I will not name the
Marquis of Montigni and Earl of Bergnes sent into Hesmoldus author.
Spain, who were put to death by the Inquisitors. Paschall 2. and his
adherents armed the son against the father. Gregory 9. performed the like by
Henry the son against Frederick 2. witness Auentinus. Innocentius 3.
confounded whole kinreds with intestine war. Marius Belga affirms that
Gregory 4. was the radical cause of Ludouicus Pius wars, when his children
rebelled. But what say you to Alphousus Dias, that came post from Rome to have
his own brother murdered for embracing the true religion.

If I should go forward in the discovery of all the errors, Heresies, and
absurdities in Popish religion, I should loose my self in a labyrinth, wander
in a wilderness, and though I were a good swimmer, yet prove like a man
entangled in weeds ready to sincke without some charitable supportation:
therefore I will cast up no more earth upon this bank, but refer you to
other men's grounds, where you shall have minds of all manner of mettalls, and
so you may repair to those furnaces, that try gold from dross, and s^ew you
the purity of Scripture from the dirt and filth of Popery; only one word
concerning the authority and pretogatiue of Kings which the Popes have
endeavored to impair and by all means to disanull.

Innocentius the 3. compares the Pope to the Sun and Popery prei^d^ceth the
authority of Princes.
the Emperor to the Moon, Cap. de mayor, and obed: Clement the 5. in the
Chap. Romani princip. auou^heth, that the Emperors have submitted their ^eades
to the Bishop, and how they ought to take an oath of fealty and obedience to
the Pope. In the Chap. Pastoralis, the Pope determines that by right of the
papacy he has superiority over the Empire, and that in the Vacancy* he
himself is Emperor. Boniface the 8. writing to the French King gave him to
understand, that he was the Popes subject, Scire and Volumus etc. and
therefore he had two swords to inuest and depose Kings, as well as the Keys
to open and lock the doors of heaven. Josephus V stanus, lib. de osculat.
pedum Lib. 5. cap 6. de pontif Romans
Pontif. infers, that the Pope may depose the Emperor. In the Bull of Pius
the 5. against Queen Elizabeth, the Pope dares presumptuously affirm, that
he is made a Prince and set over all nations and kingdoms to dissipate and
spoil, to plant and to build etc. yea in the Jesuits new Bella^mine says,
that the Pope has power to change kingdoms, and to take from one to retribute
to another. Chincard a Jesuit was hanged in Paris for writing diverse seditious
positions concerning the Popes authority in disposing of the Crown of France
and transplanting it from the family of Burbon. William Rainold an English man
under the name of Rosse does in express terms defend the league against the
French King: and affirms, that the right of all kingdoms is laid upon the
Popes foundation, whereupon as in some sort you have heard before, Gregory the
7. raised the wars of Germany against Henry Emperor. Paschall 2. raised the
son to rebel against the father, whereby he was taken prisoner and so
resigned, but yet the Pope prosecuted the son with as great hatred, as the
father. Innocentius 2. went by force of arms to conquer Roger of Sicily, and
had surely done it, if the son had not succored and assisted his father.
Adrian 4. and Alexander 3. did so preuade against Frederick 1. that he held
the stirrup to the one, and was trod upon by the other. Celes^in the 3. cast
the crown from the head of Henry the 6. with his foot. Innocent the 3.
brought the Emperor ^hilip and Otho to destruction. Gregory the 9. and
Innocent the 4. furiously assaulted Frederike 2. with such soldiers, as had
made a vow to fight against the Saracens. John 22. Benet. 12. and Clement, 6.
with implacable hatred prosecuted Lewis of Bauaria, for no other reason, but
because he took upon him the Imperial diadem without the Popes consent. thus
was Harold overcome by the conqueror through the Popes curses, and King John
besides his other troubles lost all Normandy. How did Boniface 8. infest both
Italy and Spain, attempting to subi^gate Philip of France, and the house of
Colonia and Italy? I will come no further, for every man knows our modern
stories, and that the Majesty of England has written a discourse against this
Pontificeous vs^rpation; is it not high time then to bring this man to the bar
of Gods judgment seat, and indite him of high treason against the glory and
transcendent power of heaven, and for this intolerable pride against the
Princes of the earth, who are the chief and absolute substitutes of God in
their Kingdoms, and must answer in their stewardship for unfashionable
mixtures, and unjustifiable dividing their greatness, with one, that has
nothing to do with worldly encombrances, or distributing inheritances, but
rather should be an humbled minister of God, and a servant indeed to dispense
holy things to the people? therefore I wonder how the Papists in England seeing,
hearing, and knowing this Antichristian opposition to Gods truth and the
government of all Common welths can have their hearts more hardened then stone
(for the stones rent asunder at the Passion of Christ, when the jews laughed
their salvation to scorn) and their ears stopped worse then the adders with
her tail, and will not hearken to this Indictment, nor allow of these
unanswerable proofs, and undeniable inferences. Answer a Gods name, ye that
must answer before the judgment throne of the Lamb, how comes this
blockishnes and stupiditie, how, comes all this about, if the Papacy shall not
come to ruin, and Rome it self be destroyed after Antichrist is discovered,
and the man of sin revealed, whom God will consume with the breath of his
nostrels? and thus much for my second Indictment.

The third Indictment of Antichrist for abusing the people with lying miracles.
I am glad I have done with these tedious relations, and wonderful proofs
against the usurpation of Antichrist, because I would make you glad too, and
exh^lerate your sad hearts with a modest mirth, which must needs be raised
from these devises of men, and lying miracles. But be not too forward, nor
preiudicate against me in casting away the book, as vnderualewing the same, as
though you shall be acquainted with no other things then is in the Legenda
aurea, or Doctor Sheldons discovery of Popish miracles, or common Relations
whereby you may say I know the stories already, for I hope I shall not name one
of them, yet excite laughter by relating such particulars, as shall enforce
your meditation, how the Devil had no greater cunning, nor preuaileable ar^e
then to support the Romish religion by such palpable, gross, filthy, and idle
inventions; or ma^^o better judgment or if you will infused grace, then to be
seduced with absurdity, and impossibility, for what is there in this doctrine
of Papistry more then in the poetical fiction of the Gods, the tales of Homer,
Herodatus, Ovid, B^ocace and the rest, the cunning of crafty women, and false
Priests and Prophets, who made an Art of morning divination, prophesying, and
calculating natiuities, the deceites of lying tongues, the presumption and
bragging of inchanters, and the ceremonies of Augurers, Pithonists, and Arts
masters in incantations; against whom the Poets themselves had many inuectiues,
and condemned the Priests of that time, as we do the Friars of this age: for
which purpose I have cited some few extracts of sufficient authors.

Hei mihi Versipelles vt homines semper odi: Euripides Ion.


qui componentes tniusta deinde frauds adornant.

In another place.

Linguae enim nulla fides, quae externa quidem Eurip. Hippolitus Coronatus.


concilia hominum corrigere nouit.

A se ipsa vero plurima p^ssidet mala.

In another place.

Lingua enim affectans ca, quae iniusta, scit

probe obtegere. Nudet fraud agere. Enrip. medea.


In another place the wicked woman takes upon her to say. Metamorp.


Flectere sinequeam superos, A^heronta moucbo.

In another place.

Palluit attonitus sacris seralibus Aruns,

atque iram superum raptis quaesiuit in extis, Lncun. lib. 1. Phars.


terruit ipse color Vatem etc.

And in another place.

-- perstat rabies, nec cunctalocuta est,

quem non emisit super^st deus, illa^eroces

torquet adhuc oculos, totoque Vagantia Caelo

Lumina nunc Vultu pauido. Nunc torua minaci

stat nunquam facies, ^ubor igneus inficit ora Lucen lib. 5. Phars.


liuentesque genas, nec qui solet esse timenti

terribilis, sed pallor inest, necfessa qniescunt

Corda, sed vt tumidus Boreae post flamina pontus

rauca gemit, sic nulla leuant suspiria vatem.

And in many other places the self same things are objected against
imposturing men in what art soever, as now the true Christian imputes to
coosening Monks and Friars; let the carnal Gospeller and lukewarm professor
come out with piae frauds never so much.

But to the purpose in hand.

They begin with Nero, whose body they will have the Nero.
Devils to keep after he had killed himself, whereby great harm, besides
nocturnall terrors was done to the people; till by a Miracle of our Lord, the
body was taken away, found far of, and at last buried, whereby the firmament
was quieted, and the fiendes departed.

They follow with a tale concerning Vespasian: they will Vespasian.
have Waspes to breed in his nose, but as soon as he believed the history of
Christ, or at least made them believe his conversion, he was cured, and the
nest fell away like a core, or if you will a comb full of holes.

Traian was a great enemy to Christians, as by his persecutions Traian.
appeared: yet Saint Grego^y acquainted with many excellent things in his
government, prayed to our Lord to keep his soul out of Hell; but receiving no
absolute answer, more then a tempest, he left it disputable amongst the
Doctors, whether he be saved, or no, as it is of Sampson, Solomon, Origin, and
others, of whom the Church of Rome disputes Pro and Con, and as their passion
leads them, vnder-takes to deliver out of Hell it self.

They tell a strange tale of Fabianus, Bishop of Rome, Fabianus.
and a martyr, who was chosen by the descending of a white dove upon him, and
saying, thou shall be Pope: wherein there is some probability: For in the life
of Mahomet, it is recorded, that he made the people believe, that the holy
Ghost used to appear to him visibly, and acquaint him with the secrets of
heaven, to countenance which imposture, he had taught a dove indeed to come
and take pease out of his ear, which he many times performed in the sight of
the people.

They confess, that Marcelinus was Pope: yet he offered Marcelinus.
incense to Idols for fear of death: but at last he repented, and was a
martyr: notwithstanding, for his offense his body lay three days v^buried,
till by a vision of S. Peter and Marcelinus, it was allowed for sufficient
penance, so at last it had the ceremonies of a mortyr.

About the time that the Saxons entered into England, they have a miracle of the
seven sleepers, who were two hundred Seven sleepers.
years in a cave, and then came abroad with strange discoueries; the Story is
much enlarged by them with their several names, and we have the play: and why
may not this be true, considering Epimenides going to seek his Fathers sheep,
took up his resting place through the heat of the day in a cave, and there
slept fifty years without alteration of his body, either in constitution, or
complexion.

Leo Tuscus was a Confessor, Martyr, and Pope, in which Leo Tuscus.
time he was tempted by a woman, who would needs kiss him, but the holy man by
no means consented to such immodestie: yet with much struggling she kissed his
hand, whether he would or no, whereupon he commanded it to be cut off, because
no corrupt flesh should remain about him; which when the people perceived,
they earnestly intercessed our Lady for him, and she most mercifully restored
it again, as if a broken piece were to be cemented, and then he said Mass as
before, and acknowledged our Lady his Savior.

What you call the Stonendy on Salibury-plaine (being indeed Stonendy and
Merlin.
the monument of Aurclius Ambrose, from whom the town of Amsbury took
original, and denomination) they will have a devise of Merlins, who brought
them by miracle out of Ireland, from the hill Kian, called Giants Karrol, and
so placed with wonderment, as you see them. This Merlin lived in the time of
Vter Pendragon, and was as wonderful in his actions, as his birth: he was they
say the son of a Succubus, and Incubus, and performed strange things for the
King: especially in imitation of the story of Jupiter and Mercury, who in the
likeness of Amphitrio lay with Alcumena, and so begat Hercules: he transhapt
Vter the King into the Earls figure of Cornwall, and Vlfrie the chamberlain
into Iordane his man, whereby he came into the castle of Tintagill, and
accompanied the fair Igrena, and so the valiant Arthur was borne.

When S. Augustine preached at Rochester, the Saxons S. Austin.
and Panimes derided him, and cast ray tails upon him, with the garbish of
noisome fish: whereupon he prayed to God, that the children of Kent might be
borne with tails: and so to the terror of the Inhabitants, and yet conversion
of many, it came to pass, as they foolishly believe.

When Oswald King of Northumberland was slain by the Oswald.
Saxons, they cut off his head, which they buried in the Abbey of Berdnay,
whereupon he was consecrated a martyr, and our Lord for the confirmation of his
sanctity, caused many miracles to be done, both by him, and for him: which
wrought so effectually in the hearts of the people, that they were soon
converted to Christ; and believed in the holy Church.

Because Pasculus the Deacon Cardinal held against Simmachus, Pasculus.
with the faction of Laurentius to his death, therefore he was put to the
pains of Purgatory, and to keep the bathes. This story is from Gregory in
Dialogis, who adds, tht it was visibly manifested to the people, who were
thereby detayned in awe and obedience, and ever after feared to offend the
censure of the Church.

You shall read, that John the second Pope of Rome, had Pope John 2.
a great contention with Justinian the Emperor, about the two natures of
Christ, insomuch that the Emperor would needs enforce him to be of his
opinion: but the valiant Bishop, moved with zeal and piet^e answered thus; I
thought I had come to Justinian a Christian Emperor, but sure I have found
Dioclesian a persecuting tyrant: at which words the Emperor fell down on his
knees, as Saul from his horse in his journey to Damascus, acknowledging the
power of the Church, and confessing, it was a miracle, for he had seen a
strange vision.

Because Mauritius the Emperor in the latter end of his Mauritius.
reign contested with Saint Gregory, and would not acknowledge his holiness
for superior: there appeared a man of Rome unto him, clothed in a religious
habit, yet holding a naked sword in his hand, and thus menaced him; Thou shall
be destroyed: whereupon Phocas taking advantage of this Vision, or if you had
^ather of a great conspiracy and coniuration against him, opportunely made
himself head of the Faction, and so bere^t him both of life and Empire.

After Gregory the great, succeeded Samianus, who presumptuously Samianus.
traduced the said Gregory for pride, and vainglory, especially that his alms
and liberality tended to ostentation. Whereupon followed some distemperature,
and oppression of his best faculties, with a continual supposition, that
Gregory did still haunt him, and rebuke him: which ended not without a Vision,
in which he smote him on the head. This proved ominous, for upon the conceit he
presently sickned, and dyed; and so the Church made a story of it, that it was
long of the blow, which Gregory gave him.

You shall read, that the Emperor and other Princes Heraclius.
of Europe prospered in the recovery of Jerusalem, and so returned the holy
Cross thither again, which when Heraclius of Constantinople understood, he
would needs make a journey to Jerusalem, which must be performed with great
pride, pomp, and ostentation. But see the miracle; When he came to Jerusalem,
and thought to make his entrance into the City with glorious magnificence,
the gates shut themselves against him of their own accord, and the more
violent he was to enter, the more stronger and closer they kept themselves:
till he bethought himself of a contrary course, which was humiliation, and
acknowledging of mercy, then did they open again of themselves, and he was
lovingly received of the Bishops.

Deodans and Agatho were Popes, who healed Lepers with Healing of Lepers.
kissing them; and performed many Cures without Salve, or Medicine: For so you
read, that the Apostles did the like by imposition of hands, etc.

In the days of Martine the first Pope of Rome you shall Martine 1.
read, that his enemies conspired his death, for which purpose they sent one
Spartarius of Olympus to kill him, which in the time of his saying of Mass,
and sacring the Host was revealed: but see the miracle! As he approached near
him, he was struck blind, whereby the Pope avoided the danger, and the Church
increased in reputation.

The reverend Beda became blind for age, and was therefore Beda.
mocked and scoffed of the people, as the children called Elias bald pate: in
which time of his contempt, and despite, they brought him to preach to a
company of stones; he supposing they had been men, went forward in his
exhortation, and when he had finished, the stones spoke unto him, thanked him,
and said, Amen venerabilis Beda.

Carolus Martelius to supply his wants in the wars, Carolus Martellus.
bereaved many Churches of their Treasure, Chalices, and so impouerished the
Clergy, by reason of which intrusion and exaction, when he died, he was
visibly carried into Hell, as they feign: to prove the truth whereof, Eucharius
Bishop of Aurelian, as he was at his prayers saw him body and soul tormented
in a local place, which because many doubted of, and that an Angel could not
reveal such a vision, the Abbot of S. Denis would needs run to his Sepulcher,
and opening the chest found a huge Dragon in it, which leaped in his face, and
made him a little afraid.

They also write of Leo the fourth, a Pope of Rome, Leo 4. a Pope.
who going in Procession to Saint Peter's Church, was surprised by his enemies,
and in revenge they cut out both tongue and eyes: yet was our Lady so gracious
unto him, that though he wanted the instruments, he had the f^culties of seeing
and speaking.

The enmity was so great between Sergius and Formosus Sergius and ^o^mosus.
Popes of Rome, that Sergius cut off his head, and threw the body into Tiber,
which was yet taken up by certain Fishermen, and brought solemnly to
Christian burial. But see the wonder ^ no sooner came it into the Church, but
all the Images of the Saints bowed down, and made it reverence.

It is a position in Papistry, neither to discover any thing Benedict. 9.
which may tend to the diminution of the Pontifi^ian glory, nor to reveal any
thing confessed, nor practice what may prove schismatic against the Popes
holiness, nor in a word, neglect the superstitious care of their Church
ceremonies: yet here they themselves tell a story of Benedictus the ninth, that
he was damned for his vicious life, and visibly seen tormented in Hell: yea
such was the efficacy of the curse against him, that after death he appeared to
the terror of many in a most horrible shape and figure, his head and tail
like an Ass, and his body like a Lions.

All men agree to the history of Edward surnamed the Ed. Confessor,
that he was a religious Prince, and replenished with those excellent gifts of
wisdom, and piety; but few men can justify that this was observed in his
life. As he kneeled at Mass in the very instant of the elevation of Christ's
body, he saw Swain King of Denmark drowned in the sea with all his army, at
which he so smiled, that at last it tended to a laughter; whereat the company
wondered, and were bold to demand, what the matter meant: whereupon he discovered
the secret, and called certain Earls to participate of the vision, amongst
whom the Earl of Gloucester saw the Bread turn apparently into the likeness
of a young child. But to add more truth to this miracle, the hangings in the
Quier a^ West minster consist of this story, and there you may see the conceit
of the business. O the superstition of those days, and palpable grosnesse of
the Clergies collusion! This King gave also his Signet for the love of St. John
to a poor man, but see the wonderful care and respect of the Apostle, he
sent it him ba^^e again in the belly of a fish, for when a goodly fish was
presented to the King, as the Cook dressed the same, the Kings Seal was found
in the entrails: others tell the story in this manner, that Saint John took
it so kindly being now at Jerusalem, that he returned it back again by two
pilgrims, whom he posted into England in one night for the same purpose, so
the ring was delivered, and Saint John's commendation presented to the king.

Gregory the seventh was Cardinal, and Legate in France Gregory 7.
before he was Pope, where he so religiously proceeded against Simoniacks, that
he called diverse to account (as we say) in foro publico: amongst whom a
certain Bishop by bribing and corrupting his accusers thought to escape: but
Gregory knowing by revelation the deceit, prevented it in this manner; he
commanded him to say Gloria patri, if he had not abused the holy Ghost, which
by no means he could do, whereupon he was adjudged guilty, and deprived of
his Bishopric. But see the mischief: afterward he could say it well enough,
and made them all wonder at the alteration.

I believe though you have read many Chronicles, you William R^fus King.
yet have not read of this story concerning the death of William Rufus, that a
little before he was shot by Sir Walter Tirrell, he dreamed, he was let blood,
and in so great a quantity, that a stream of it leapt up on high toward
heaven, more than a hundred fathom, and the day was presently darkened as the
night. Again, a Monk of his house dreamed, that king William went into a
Church with a great company of people, and amongst them all he took the Image
of the Crucifix, and most shamefully rent it with his teeth, but the Crucifix
meekly suffered all, till like a mad man he pulled the arms off, threw it under
feet, and trampled upon it in despite, had not a great fire come out of the
Cruc^fix mouth, which prevented the king from committing further outrage, and
awaked the Monk. This dream was with much ado declared to the king, and his
own dream with more ado disputed upon, and both the dreams made a matter of
fearful prediction, so that the conclusion extended to caution and
premonition to his Majesty, that there was sure some misfortune imminent over
him.

Thomas Becket was one of the Popes champions, and Englands Thomas Becket.
traitors, of whose lies and miracles I am ashamed to wrice: for they will have
him turn a Capon into a Carpe, as he was at dinner in Rome on Saint Marks day,
and when he was martyred, to heal the sick, wounded, and lunaticke, with the
touch of his tomb and relickes: my author recounts two and twenty miracles
done for his sake.

When Saint Bernard was canonized a Saint, and Saint ern^rd.
consecrated in his shrine or chapel, his Abbot forbad him to do any more
miracles, because there came such a concourse of people, that he was notable to
entertain them nor willing to be so continually employed: the like or much
more is fathered upon Simon de Momford Earl of Leicester, Momford.
a notorious rebel against Henry the third, but because he went under the
vmbrela of a good Commonwealths man, and maintainer of the liberties of Church,
they invented many a lie for him, that he might preserve his reputation after
death, etc.

When Robert Bruise rebelled against Edward the first, he was proclaimed a
traitor, and after taken and beheaded, yet did they hang up his body in
chains: but there came so many devils by night to torment it with hooks, that
they were feign to watch it, guard it, and make fires about the place.

I cannot but enlage the story of Thomas the good Earl Sir Simond Frizell.
of Lancaster, one of the greatest subjects of the world, whom Edward the
second most unkindly put to death, and wherein they went along with his
worthiness, allow them the praises of their good report, but when they come to
devices and superstitious conceits, I leave them to their own fallacies, and
cannot choose but laugh at their fictions: for they not only repute him a
Martyr, but diuulge that many a miracle was shown by him, or done for him. A^
a The Earl of Lancaster.
Priest restored to his sight, who had been long blind, by wiping his eyes
with the Altar cloth. A child drowned and found dead the third day in a well,
was brought to his tomb, and not only recovered by touching the defunct, but
received life, which continued many years. Diverse mad men and distracted women
by leaning their heads only upon his tomb, were restored to a temperature in
their senses. A rich man of Gascoign: half dead and rotten on the one side, so
that you might see his liver, was blessed by his Tomb with unusual recovery:
and many such like miracles were performed by him, whereupon the Spencers both
prohibited the concourse of people, and access to his Chapel.

I could name the rest, but these as the rest are the durty waters from a
corrupt and puddled channel, and must both discover the impiety of such a
profession, and wickedness of such Priests that will hang gew gawes and gross
devices about the neck of religion, to make her seem more gaudy, and a very
puppet in the world: yet such was the pleasure of divine Justice to permit the
Devil to put on a cloak of sanctity to deceive whole multitudes who were
subject to vanity: such the coherence of Scripture, that Papistry should have
her Progress, as you have heard: and such was the deceit of men, that they
were detained in ignorance, because they delighted in ceremonies rather than
substance, in painted devices and outward ornaments, rather than inward or
spiritual worshipping of God, in fooleries to please the natural man, rather
than senseless kneeling in vain to the air (as they would excuse it) when
men see no pourtraiture nor resemblance, and yet the Scripture says, that
Moses saw no image. Thus was sin not only multiplied in the world, but men
for the hardness of their hearts detained in blindness of superstition: thus
these miseries fell upon them for denying and abusing that purity of
Christianity, which the Apostles established in the Primitive Church, and thus
God would be glorified in reserving still a Church to himself, and opening the
eyes of humbled souls, to see the paths of their salvation according to the
prayer of Christ, Father I thank thee that thou have revealed thy will to
babes and silly men, when the mighty, rich, and full were sent empty away, and
the proud boasters of learning and knowledge excluded. But if you would be
acquainted with a wonder indeed, and see a miracle, observe how this small
grain of mustard seed, this handful of Gods people, these despised creatures,
this poor Church, this derided profession did in the end prove a flourishing
tree, an Universal Congregation, a magnified people, a mighty Monarchy, a
glorified compan^, so that (as you have heard) the Kings of the earth have laid
down their crowns before simple Preachers, who have but come with the echo
of Christ's voice: the Angels in heaven therefore sing Hal^luiahs, and the God
of all has a stone ready in his hand to strike Babel to confusion. Answer then
a Gods name, you that must answer before the judgment Throne of the Lamb: how
comes this about, if the Papacy shall not come to ruin, and Rome it self be
destroyed, after Antichrist is discovered, and thus arraigned and indicted, and
the man of sin reucaled by these lying miracles, whom God will consume with
the breath of his nostrils.

But before I do in arenam descendere, and play my Masters prise indeed, that
is, strike all dead with the vengeance of Gods judgment against those that
will not return Isaiah 55.
to the pure waters of life, and hearken to the Prophet, who bids them come and
buy without money; I have a little more to say, and some remainder of the
former account to make up.

They talk of a great battle against the Turks, who Turks fled crying, that
a great army of Knights followed them, who seemed soldiers, but were indeed
Angels. And why might not this be done, as well as Elisha to show his servant
a multitude of chario^s, 2 Kings.
and horses, so that there was more with them, than against them.

They will have a stone in Anglesey of that property, Anglesey.
that how far soever a man carries it in the day, it will return of it self
at night into the Island: for trial whereof, Hugh of Shrewsbury in the time of
Henry the first, bound it to another huge stone with iron chains, and threw
them into a deep water, but in the morning the stone was found in Anglesey
again: afterward a Chu^le fastened it to his own leg, but his thigh rotted,
and the stone went away.

In the time of Theodosius the Emperor, V^gus king of The Picts and Sam. Andrew.
Picts in Scotland, infested a great part of Brittanic, till at last they were
beset with a formidable army, and thought verily to be destroyed: but Saint
Andrew taking pity upon him, comforted him, and assured the victory, if he
would give the third part of the land to the Church, which he solemnly
ratified: so a cross was advanced in honor of Saint Andrew, and the army
marching forward with the Standard, the Brittons were amazed at such an
unlooked for return and recovery of their enemies, and the Picts most
fortunatly prevailed.

I will not tell you, though my author does, that Ireland Saint Patr^^t and
Ireland.
had as many venomous creatures, and noisome snakes, as other countries, until
sanctus Patricius chased them away with his staff: nor of their witches, which
were turned into Hares, because they be common tales with sot^ish, ignorant,
and superstitious people, both in England, Thessaly, Norway, and other
countries: yea of mine own knowledge in the Islands of the Arches, the tale of
Lucius Appuleius, or the golden Ass, is believed, and reputed a truth. But
this I will be bold to say, that the life of Saint Patrike is well written in a
good Latin phrase, and dedicated to that ever memorable Earl and worthy
pattern of hospitality and honorable behavior, the Earl of Clenricard:
wherein are such strange things, and of that variety, that neither Moses nor
Christ came near him for active employment, if without piety we may belecue
that story. As for S. Patriks Purgatory, or the great lake of Vlster, as
incredible things are reported of them, as of Saint Patrike himself. The
story is thus enlarged: A woman drawing or taking water out of a well, and
hearing her child cry, run to it for haste, and forgot to cover the same,
which in the mean while swelled over so immeasurably, that it drowned all the
country, but the maine reason was, because the people were Sodomites, and God
thus sent his vengeance upon them.

In the sixth year of the reign of Henry the fourth, S^roope Arch^^shop of
Yo^ke.
Scroope Archbishop of York was executed for treason. He desired the hangman
to give him five strokes in remembrance of Christ's 5. wounds, which he
performed accordingly: whereupon at the same instant, the king sitting at
dinner had five strokes on the neck by a person invisible, after which he
proved a leper, for recovery whereof he determined a journey to Icrusalem, but
was prevented by sickness, though his treasure and furniture of his houses were
shipped, and so he died in the Abbey of Westminster in a chamber called
Jerusalem: many strange miracles were performed for this Bishop.

Anno 36. of Henry the eight, a Priest did pronounce at Paul's Cross, and
there confessed in public, that he himself saying Mass pricked his finger
and be-bloudied Alying Priest.
the Corporas with the Altar clothes, purposing to make the people believe,
that the host had bled miraculously, etc.

As it was in the time of Henry the 6. about Joan la puzil de dieu at Orleans,
who was afterward burnt for an imposturing whore, by the Duke of Bedford at
Roan: so fell it out with Elizabeth Barton a Nun, and holy Maid of Kent, whose
miraculous lies are rather fearful than ridiculous: Holy may of Kent.
for she not only deceived the Bishops, but brought her self with ten other
to a lamentable Catastrophe. Look Hall, Grafton, and diverse Chronicles.

I am almost weary with wearying you in the discourse of these fopperies, but
should weary you and torment my self altogether to relate the like of other
countries, not packed up (as I told you before) in the Legenda Aurea, or
Nauclerus, or Costerus, or other sufficient authors, who have for the same
purpose ^raduced these wonderful deceivers, and papisticall cousening Priests,
or if you will, incendiarie Jesuits, who still run at random to seduce simple
people, and confound weak and easy believing souls. Therefore I desist from
further disturbance, and only request thus much from a poor afflicted spirit,
and every way unfortunate man, (as we now in these times profanely abuse that
Character) to tender your own salvation by considering what a strange religion
this is, and above all other in the world, agreeing and concurring with the
revelation of Antichrist, especially in this point of signs, and wonders, and
lying miracles, so that if this fall to my share, that am the meanest of a
thousand, what can others do, that have Beniamins portion five times doubled:
both concerning Scripture, History, Fathers, Knowledge, Judgment, Eloquution,
and other faculties. As for such as are yet willing to be deceived, and having
heard of that great duty of perseverance in holy matters, pervert it to
obstinacy and pertinacitie in idolatrous superstition, I say no more, but
answer a Gods name you that must answer before the judgment throne of the
Lamb; How comes this about? if the Papacy shall not come to ruin, and Rome it
self be destroyed, seeing Antichrist is discovered and thus arraigned and
indicted, the man of sin revealed by these lying miracles, whom God will
consume with the breath of his nostrils. And thus much for his indictment: now
to his punishment and utter extirpation.

Section III. Or the execution of Antichrist according to the sentence of
condemnation.
I Might have begun this discourse with that which follows, but I hope it
comes now in order well enough. Note the Comparison.
Observe then I pray you the Simile. Politic states and well governed
Commonwealths, have either commonly secret intelligencers, or public
Ambassadors in foreign countries to acquaint them with all occurrences, and so
let nothing pass, no not triuiall accidents, which may concern the good of
their country, without revealing: so that if letters or certificat of credit
come, that there are Iurking amongst us certain traitors, that intend the
ruin of the kingdom, and endanger the life of the Prince, there is presently
search in every corner, and warrants sent out to apprehend them: afterward upon
happy discovery and honest attachment, they are imprisoned and kept secure,
till they may be further examined: then upon due and orderly proceedings they
are to be arraigned and indicted of high treason, as they are found and proved
delinquents in Crimino lase Maiestatis: Last of all, upon finding Billa vera
and justifiable conviction, the sentence of condemnation goes out, and they are
executed accordingly: so has the holy Ghost dealt with the Church of God
concerning the traitors of men's souls, and discovery of Antichrist, the
instrument of Satan to bring us to damnation: he has first made us acquainted
that there is such a Viper lurking amongst us.

Let no man deceive you by any means: For that day shall 2. T^ess. 2. 3.
not come, except there come a falling away first, and that man of sin be
revealed, the s^nne of perdition.

Who opposes and exalts himself above all, that is called God, or that is
worshipped: so that he as God sits in the temple of God, showing himself,
that he is God.

Remember ye not that when I was yet with you I told you ^.
these things?

I have not written unto you, because you know not the truth: 1. Epist. John 2.
21.
but because you know it, and that no lie is of the truth.

Who is a lier, but he that denies, that Jesus is the Christ: he is
Antichrist, that denies the Father, and the Son.

And every spirit that confesses not that Jesus Christ is Chap 4. 3.
come in the flesh, is not of God, and that is that spirit of Antichrist,
whereof you have heard, that it should come, and even now already is it in the
world.

Here you see what a noble intelligencer and friend from heaven we have had to
acquaint the Church of God, that the betraier of men's souls, and traiters to
the majesty of God are every where lurking amongst us, upon which certificate
I, though unworthy, and the meanest of Gods servants, have adventured to search
and find him out, and upon the search have not only discovered, and revealed
him, but arraigned and indicted him, so that I hope no man can mislike or
traduce this justifiable proceeding against him, which if they dare do, what
will they then say to the sentence of condemnation, which is now to be
denounced from God himself, and the Scriptures, the Sibylls, ancient Fathers,
and their women Saints: sure, sure, the Gentiles will fret and rage, imagining
vain Psalm. 2. Acts.
things: and I answer with Paul, after the way you call heresy, I serve the
God of my Fathers: and with Job, though thou kill me (O Lord) I will not
forsake thee. But to the purpose in hand.

Antichrists punishment from Scripture.
IF you search the Prophets, you shall find, that he that drowned the world,
burnt Sodom to sinders, and overwhelmed Pharao with whole mountains of
waters, confounded Egypt, destroyed Tirus, who was as proud and Isaiah 19. 23.
34 46 Ezech. 25. 1. Damel and the rest of the Pr^phets.
exalted as ever Rome in her first and second glory, revenged the cause of his
Church, overthrew the idols of Babylon, a mere figure of Antichristian
Prelacy: threatened and dissipated Ammon, Moab, Edom, the Philistines, and in a
word all the mighty Monarchies under the Sun, resembled to fierce and cruel
beasts, strange images and figures, Eagles, Rams, Goats and such like
Hierogliphicks. Why then should any question be made of the Popes
establishment, or Romes perpetuity? considering her sins cry to heaven for
vengeance, and her abominations are spread like a carpet, to the loathing of all
honest beholders, and godly Christian Spectators: but to put all out of doubt,
hark what the holy Ghost says in the Revelation, and that the Pope and city
of Rome in Italy, is personated by the prediction, I refer you to all the
ancient Fathers, and modern Writers, especially Tremelius, Innius, Napier, and
diverse others.

And the rest of the men which were not killed by these Apo^. 9. 20.
plagues, yet repented not of the works of their hands, that they should not
worship Devils, and idols of gold, and silver, and brass, and stone, and of
wood, which neither can see, nor hear, nor walk.

Neither repented they of their murders, nor of their sorceri^s, verse 21.
nor of their fornications, nor of their thefts.

And when they shall have finished their testimony, the Apoc. 11. 7.
Beast that ascends out of the bottomless pit shall make war against them,
and shall overcome them, and kill them.

And the great Dragon was cast out, that old Serpent called Apoc. 12. 9.
the Devil, and Satan, etc.

And there followed another Angel saying, Babylon is Apoc. 14. 8.
fallen, is fallen, that great city, because she made all nations drink of
the wine of the wrath of her fornication.

And the Angel t^rust in his sickle into the earth, and gathered Apoc. 14. 19.
the Vine of the earth, and cast it into the great wine press of the wrath of
God, etc.

The Beast that thou saw, was, and is not, and shall ascend Apoc. 17. 8.
out of the bottomlesse^pit, and go into perdition, and they that dwell on the
earth shall wonder (whose names were not written in the book of life from the
foundation of the world) when they behold the Beast, that was, and is not, and
yet is.

And he cried mightily with a strong voice, saying, Babylon Apoc. 18. 2. ^
read the whole Chapter.
the great is fallen, is fallen, and is become the habitation of Devils, and
the bold of every foul spirit, and a cage of every unclean and hateful bird.

The Merchants of these things, which were made rich verse 15.
by her, shall stand afar off for the fear of her torment, weeping and
wailing.

And saying, alas, alas, that great city, that was clothed Apoc. 18. 16.
in fine linen, and purple, and scarlet, and decked with gold, and precious
stones, and pearls.

For in one hour so great riches is come to naught, and verse 17.
every Ship-master, and all the company in ships, and Sailers, and as many as
trade by sea stood afar off.

And cried, when they saw the smoke of her burning, verse 18.
what city is like unto this great city, etc.

Come and gather your selves together unto the Supper Apoc. 19. 17.
of the great God.

That ^ee may eat the flesh of Kings, and the flesh of Captains, verse 18.
and the flesh of mighty men, etc.

Oh read more, read more, read all for Gods sake your selves, and remember,
that he that writ this prediction and Prophecy, did not live 500. years
after the Assirians Babylons destruction, and therefore it could not mean that
which was past, but must questionless have relation to something to come, so
that these several descriptions, and other fearful prophesies can aim at
nothing, but new Rome in Italy, the Antichristian supremacy of the Pope, and
the filthy abomination of such an absurd religion: so that a man would wonder
at their daring confidence to continue in such exorbitant courses of falsity,
and filthiness, when the end will be the trembling of Christian hearts at the
terror of the judgments to be denounced. In the mean while who can be so
infatuated to believe, that true Religion will suffer her self to be
bespotted, bedurtied, and deformed with the filthy corruptions of men's
inventions, and idle, foolish, and ridiculous trumperies of colluding popish
Prelates: and so I leave the honest Christian to that Spirit, which shall be
operative in them to work their conversion, or confirm their calling, seeing
they see one way a stranger war between Christ and Antichrist, than the
Gigantomachia, wherein Typhaeus and his brethren took up mountains in their
hands to throw against Jupiter, and another way have more cause of laughter,
than ever Democritus had at Epictetus deformation of the world, when he covered
it with a coxcombe, and set the globe on the table to be derided by the
Philosophers: as for the obstinate Papists, I say no more, but answer a Gods
name you that must answer before the judgment throne of the Lamb, what say
you to this fearful sentence of terror and punishments from Gods own mouth?
or what evasion can there be to avoid the condemnation, seeing the Apocalypse
was written of purpose to denotate the state of the Church from Christ to the
end of the world?

Antichrists punishment and Romes destruction from the Sibyls.
ALthough the Scriptures were sufficient according to You must ouerlooke the
whole b^stn^ie of the Sibyl^ both ^^ G^ecke and La^^ne.
the former texts in the Revelation, and many others in the Prophets, Apostles,
and books of God, to declare his will and denounce his judgments, and so
there were no more disputing on the authority and infallibility of the same:
yet because the natural man is transported with shows and ceremonies rather
than substance, and that affecting humors are seldom pacified without
variety, or novelty: I claspe once again the books of holy Mysteries, and
seal up the Prophecies of Scripture, lest some call for an interpreter, and
still cry out, the mother Church must be the interpreter of these mysteries;
and spread you a carpet of such Prophecies, that no man shall traduce their
credit and renown, nor the obstinate and refractarie Papist oppose their
valuation: for though he could with the profane Atheist and irreligious fool
deny there Psalm. 14.
were a God, yet shall he confess, that former times have been like vberant
springs to send forth flowing streams of truth into the world, so that now he
must needs be afrighted in drawing so near the time, wherein these predictions
are likely to be consummated, as personating Rome that city of Rome in Italy,
and hunting the Pope and his Cardinals with full cry into the desert of
desolation, and fatal confusion.

I will then begin with the Sibyls, but both my beginning and ending with them
and others shall be but a kind of Epitomising, referring you to the larger
volumes, with whom I only play, as the dogs with the water of N^lus, lap as
they run, and dare not tarry to drink for fear of the Crocadiles. In the
second book of the Oracles of the Sibyls Lib. 2 Oraculor^^n Sibyl.
you shall find it thus: H^minum cum denique saeclum, etc. In the tenth age of
the world, the imagerie of Rome raised on her seven hills shall extinguish the
love of true religion, for which her strength shall fail, and the people
tremble, when they shall see her power beaten down, and her riches taken away,
yea her city consumed with fire through the wrath of God.

In the fifth book it begins thus: De coelo v^niet sydus. Lib 5.
As a great star fell from heaven into the sea, and burnt up the third part
of the same with the creatures, so shall Babylon of Italy be destroyed, that
has murdered the Saints, and trodden the truth of Gods word under feet, that
has delighted in poisoning, whoredom, and adultery; that has nourished
buggerie against nature, that has been a town of ease and filthiness,
wicked, unjust, defamed amongst the Latins, and unworthy of the ti^le she
assumed, she shall therefore sit as a widow, mourning and desolate, as a viper
fell and venomous: and the flood Tiber shall weep for his spouse, because of
her destruction, that was so mad, when her heart burned for blood. She
misinterpreted Gods mind, and boasted that she was only of the earth to be
exalted. Therefore shall God ruin her, and there shall be no memory of her
exaltation, yea she shall be thrown down into hell, and consumed with
everlasting fire.

In another place of the said fifth book it begins Italia infoelix.
thus: Italia infoelix. O cursed and unhappy Italy! thou shall be made as
barren as a wilderness, and no man shall pity thy desolation: for thou have
been a murderer of mothers, and have hands and hearts polluted with
fllthinesse, buggering of boys, and lying with beasts, defiling of women, and
mingling incestuous blood: yea thou have made Kings and Emperors profane God
by taking an oath to destroy the Saints, with a great deal more. But O God!
that this should be so long told before hand, and yet all the world imitated
the jews in the Prophet Jeremy, though the king cut the roll which Baruch
Ierem.
writ, in pieces, and burnt it in the fire, yet no man trembled, nor rent his
clothes for fear, etc.

In the seventh book it begins thus: Roma ferox Lib. 7.
animi. Ambitious Rome shall after the Grecian manner stellifie her self to
heaven, but when she is in her greatest exaltation, God shall deiect her, and
cast her under his feet like rubbish: for there shall come a first and a second
destruction of this great city. The first you know is past by the Goths and
Vandals, the second is to come by them, whom God has appointed.

In the eight book the beginning is thus: Lib. 8.
Par tibi de coelo sublim^s vertice Roma.

And the meaning of the rest is thus: that as Rome has advanced it self above
the world to heaven: so shall it be dejected and ruined, burnt to cinders and
consumed to nothing, she shall be banished far off, and be bereaved of her
wealth, within her walls shall Wolves and Serpents remain, she shall lie
wasted, as though she had never been: her Oracles shall cease, and her golden
gods be put to silence; there shall be no more consultation with her idols, and
it shall profit her nothing, that she kept correspondency with the former
Senate about the multiplicitie of gods: for as they maintained the Oracles, and
Statuas of Saturn, Jupiter, Rhemus, Romulus, etc. So do they continue the
adoration and images of our Lady, Peter, John, and a thousand other Saints for
all actions, occasions, and infirmities.

In the same book follows immediately the explanation The Pope expounded.
of the Popes Character, and deciphering of his manners, and conditions tending
to this purpose, that after fifteen Emperors, of whom the last was Adrianus,
should arise a mighty Potentate with many crowns, whose name shall come near
unto Ponti: which although they interpret by the same Adrianus and Pontus,
quasi Adriaticus Pontus, now Golpho Venetiano: yet questionless the Sibyll
meant, as in other Authors imitating her is enlarged, that that Ponti had
reference to Pontifex, and the Pope should be that Summus Pontifex, whose
triple crown is called (...), and has mystery in the etymology. For thus the
Sibyll goes on and expresses her self; That he shall The Popes crow^e and
pride.
set his foot on the world, and the necks of Emperors and Kings: he shall
receive great gifts and bribes: he shall heap up treasures of gold, and gather
together exceeding wealth: he shall pardon sins discovered by confession: he
shall be skillful in Negromancy, and scoff at God in his bravery, which of
late Platina the Popes own Secretary relates, and many other Authors (as you
have read in the former Section, of discovery) recite as many strange and
blasphemous impieties of them: and he shall justify errors and impiety
against true Religion, and righteousness. But then, says our Sibyll,
approaches his downfall, then comes a time of mourning and heaviness,
lamenting and excruciation of soul: he shall hang himself for desperation.

Here the carnal Gospeller himself makes a stop at (...), as if it only had
relation to one man, or the last Pope of all, which shall make such a tragical
end, perceiving his people, seat, and town utterly rased and demolished, and
not to mean the chair of Peter or consistory of Cardinals: but I leave
further disceptation, and will tell you the words of the Prophecy. Alas, shall
the people say, we ever feared this desolation, and so both old and young
shall mourn for the dolorous destiny, yea sit upon the bank of Tybur sadly
lamenting the extremity of the misery. The Sibyll has not yet done, but goes
still forward. You shall vex and torment your selves to be disrobed of purple
weeds, and Imperial raiment, sitting sorrowful and dejected in sackcloth, and
ruminating a pitiful ditty to this purpose: O Rome! that wast the beauty of
Latium, exalted above Princes and Peers, thy pomp and pride shall beruined
and never recover, thou shall be trod down and never rise again. The Eagle
that marches before the armies, shall be vnplumed, and no country shall be
able to relieve thee: For they shall all cast off thy yoke, and be no more
affrighted with thy servitude: but if your read the rest, you shall find a
great deal more against Rome.

Then in the end she concludes thus: After this shall follow the dissolution
of the world, and God shall come to judge the inhabitants of the earth: But
first shall Rome feel the vengeance of his wrath, and a bloody time shall
happen to the rude people and tyrannous country: For she forgot, how poor and
bare she began, and therefore must needs return to the same pristinate
nakedness, but with sorer vengeance, and before a more dreadful Judge. And
thus much for the Sibylls.

Antichrists punishment and Romes destru ction, from certain Fathers.
NOw I appeal to the most obstinate Papist, if these things are so long ago
written, and authentically approved by many Classicke Authors, who have done
with the books of the Sibylls both in Greek and Latin, as Alexander did with
Homers Iliads, lay it every night under his pillow: What can they say but to
discredit^ the Authors, as if it were some invention of malice, when yet they
were diuulged long before Christ; or some trick of observation, as being
foisted in since religion was variated in the world? What can they conceive,
but there needs be some fire where there is so great a smoke? What can they
imagine, but that these Prophecies tend to this issue; Either shall the Gospel
of Jesus Christ thrive in Europe, as the reformation is begun; or Papist^ie
must needs be over thrown, the Pope discredited, or the city of Rome
destroyed, and then he may fly to Auignion in France, as he did once for 60.
years together. But because I will have some things unanswerable, I have
collected also some few predictions out of other Fathers, of whose sufficiency
I neither mean to dispute, nor draw forth their writings to the greatest
length, but tie my self to a sober belief of their verity, and modest
extraction of their principles: only I must advertise you that are readers thus
far, that they are Saints of the Popes own canonizing, or religious men
Catalogued for soundness of judgment, or sanctimonie of life, so that our
Papists may be quickly put off from their common speeches of, It is a device of
some Heretic, a conceit of some hot brain, an invention of discontented and
penurious men, or some foolish trick or other foisted in to diminish the
glory of the Church, with such like. And so to my business.

The Visions of S. Hermas Bishop of Philippi tend all to Saint Herma^.
this purpose, that the Catholic Church shall by degrees fall into diverse
deformities and corruptions, far from her primitive integrity and virginal
purity, for which she should undergo great vengeance and punishment, yea
suffer a pressure that shall crush her to pieces, and lie under a fury that
shall lash her sides, and throw fire into the walls of that city, which
needs purging, and was so ambitious, proud, and profane.

Amongst the predictions or prophecies of S. Methodius St. Methodius.
Bishop of Tirus, he foretells, that the Clergy shall in a manner burn up
and destroy the holy things of God, yea trample the sacred Scriptures under
feet, to advance and set up their own inventions, not leaving unnamed
ceremonies, customs, and traditions. Yea he threatens a neighbor King for
taking part with the whore of Babylon, which also a Francesian Friar Philippus
Boskierus alleges, and Bartholomeus de la Casas a Spanish Bishop remembers
to King 'Philip. Yet such is the corruption of time, and power of the
Inquisition, that these books must not be talked of: and to publish them for
Gods glory, and propagation of true Religion, is among them heresy, and a
matter of difficulty, or weakening of policy.

In the library of Saint Victor at Part some 600. years Saint Victor.
since there was a prediction beginning thus; Vae tibi ^iuitas Septicollis: and
proceeds thus, that the letter K. shall threaren the walls of Rome, and then
shall woe be to the city of blood, full of lying, falsehood, and violence. For
the fall and destruction of the mighty men is at hand, the voice of scourges,
wheels and wars shall make her to tremble, the color of the gold shall be
darkened, and changed, with diverse such passages of wonderment and observation.

If you look into the predictions, that were found in Palace of Wis^dome.
the palace of Wisdom at Rome it self, you shall find it thus: -- Caesar
regnabit vbique,
Sed quo tunc vani cessabit gloria cleri.


With a strange inuectiue, fearful, effectual, prodigious, and full of
matter, absolutely against the present government both of Church and
Commonwealth: so that a man would wonder, that some Herculean Pontifician arm
(as he did strangle the serpents in the cradle) did not at their first
discovery thrattle and suppress them, or overthrow their authority, when they
began to take up room against Rome in men's hearts and apprehensions: but such
is the will of God, and wonderfulnesse of his power and providence, that both
the Scriptures themselves, and other writings, savoring the sweetness of their
taste, have been preserved in despite of Tyrants, Jews, Turks, Infidels,
Fire, Sword, and the Devil himself, and prospered the more, when the attempts
of corrupted men would either discredit, or suppress the truth. For look as
in persecutions, sanguis martyrum proved semen Ecclesia, so in these
prohibitions, according to the Proverb, men did euez repute it a thing worthy
their endeavors, searches, and knowledge, when it was rare to be gotten, or
perilous to be disputed upon.

If you read the Prophecy of Saint Scuerus Archbishop Saint Scuerus.
of Rauenna, you shall find it thus: Woe unto thee thou city of the Gentiles,
thou city of riches, thou city of Philosophers. Woe unto thee Lombardie, for
thy towers of joy shall be broken down, etc.

Cataldus Fimus Bishop of Trent has a very rare Prophecy Cataldus Fimus
according to the letter. When Rome begins to hear the loud bellowing of
the fat Cow, Italy shall languish with dissension and civil wars: for there
shall be great emulation and hatred between the winged serpent or Dragon, and
the lilly bearing Lion, with much other such stuff. But then he follows:
Alas, Alas, weep thou unhappy Babylon, for the days of affliction shall come
upon thee, and like ripened corn thou must suffer a threshing for thine in
quitie. Kings from the four corners of the earth shall rise against thee, and
thou shall be brought down for presuming to sit so high, etc.

In a Prophecy of Saint Vincent a Dominican Friar, the Saint Vincent.
Church of God is compared to the four ages of the world, Gold, Silver,
Brass, and Iron, speaking of the Romish Church and Prelates full of Pride,
Vanity, Pomp, Simonie, Avarice, and Luxury, concluding with that monstrous
vice of Simonie, to which not long after the learned Monk Baptista Mantuanus
alluded in many inuectiues, especially this: -- Venalianobis Mantuan.

Templa, sacerdotes, altaria, sacra, coronae,
Ignis, thura, preces, calum est venale, Deusque.


You have likewise Prophecies of Telesphorus the Hermit, Telesphorus. Cataldus.
Amatus. Gamalio.
Saint Cataldus, Ioannes Amatus, and Gamalio, inserted in an Epistle to Pope
Boniface the ninth, and all concerning the wicked lives of the Priests, the
enormities of the Clergy, the destruction of Rome, and the overthrow of the
Papacy. But if you look into the exposition of the 17. of Jeremy by
Ioaehimus the Abbot, you shall find there that The Abbot Ioa^him.
the Empire of Germany shall depart from the obedience of the Church of Rome,
and that the said Church with the College of Cardinals should be destroyed:
yea this Ioaehim out of the Oracle of Sibyll Erithea foretells, that God will
stir up the haughty Germans against the Church, because the Roman Clergy
trusted more to the Ierem. 17. 5.
power of man, than of God, therefore shall the ship of Saint Peter be tossed
and troubled with hostile incursions and terrible assaults, etc.

If you ouer-looke the Prophecies of Ioannes Lichtenberg, Germany against Rome.
and Reynardus Lollerus, you shall find that the Germans shall make a league
with France, by virtue whereof the Church shall be brought to bear the Cross
with sorrow and tribulation upon her own back.

In the Oracle of Cassandra the Sibyll Tiburtina collected Sibyll Cassandra.
by Godfridus Viterbiensis, and Baptista Nazarus, you have a prediction, that
by the valor and power of certain German Princes, whose names should begin
with H. and P. Rome should be destroyed, and Johannes. Wolphius in his
sixteenth Centenary alleges, that Hydaspes an ancient Hydaspes.
King of the Medes did foretell the lamentable desolation of Rome, and
subversion both of their greatness, and superstition.

In the year 1593. Petrus Paulus an Abbot of Calabria, casting down an old
wall in his Monastery, found a Sepulcher of stone by digging deep to lay a new
foundation, wherein was a corpse almost consumed, holding in his hand a plate of
silver with this inscription; This is the body of the Abbot of Werde of
Hydrantum buried the 17. Abbot of Werde.
of October 1279. and saying thus, Cum sancta ciuitas fulgebit splendore none
stellae, Sol iter^m me videbit: and under the head was a little marble chest,
wherein a leaden box contained a parchment with this Prophecy: In those days
many famous cities shall peris^, fearful and terrible things shall come to
pass and in Italy, Rome, Naples, and Tuskany, with my country of Hydrantum
shall be shaken in notable manner, and so shall Florence be affrighted, as
expecting a revenge, because of her Apostate Duke, with a great deal more.

The formerly recited Saint Vincent in most of his writings makes as it were
an agreement with the predictions, which were sound in the Abbot of Clunies
Library Abbot of Cluny.
written some 500. years ago against certain Popes, that shall follow the
steps of Simon Magus, and so drink of the cup of the wrath of God, and whereas
there are many and large prophecies attributed to Abbot Ioachim, yet they all
tend to presage the reformation of the Church, or confusion of her obstacles
and enemies, that is, the Pope and his College of Cardinals, or the obsession
and demolition of Rome.

There is a Prophecy of Johannes de rupe Scissa a Francesian Diu^^^ pr^p^ecies.
Friar: another of Theodoricus Bishop of Croatia: another in a book entitled
Stimulus diuinae contemplationis: another out of the Bishops of Limoges Library
in France: another of Laurenti^^s Miniatensis, an Astrologian of Naples, and
many others from as many several Authors, and countries, and all tending to
this end and purpose, that Religion must be reformed, according to the Prophet
Zachary, where the filthy garments are to be taken Zachary 3.
away, and a crown of pure gold to be set upon the Priests head. That Satan
shall be rebuked, that is to say, the hindrances of this good work shall be
removed: that this strange exaltation of the Popes of Rome must be abated,
that their pomp and supremacy must be dissolved, and that the very city shall
be subject to fire, and the country to invasion of enemies, etc.

Shall tell you, how Hieronymus Sauanarola expounded Sauanarola.
the revelation of Saint John to the people of Florence? He assured them, that
religion must be reformed, that God would accuse the Churches that were
faulty, their trumperies must be abolished, their inventions annihilated, and
that God would bring a great scourge upon all Italy, especially Rome: nor
desisteth he so, but alleges the cause, and certain motives, why God was so
extraordinarily offended, namely, the pollution of the Sanctuary, the
corruption of the Clergy, the ill government of Prelates and Priests, the
abuses of Officers, and the pride of Bishops and Cardinals, who will neither
enter into heaven themselves (as Christ exprobrated the Pharisees) nor suffer
others: which sins must needs cry from the earth unto heaven for vengeance,
etc.

It is wonderful to relate that Panlus secundus Grebnerus Grebnerus.
the German Astrologian should so long ago for the general foretell the utter
destruction of the Pope of Rome, enlarging his inuectiues against idols,
temples, and Churches, defiled with men's inventions, authorized by humane
fancies, and adorned with gewgaw devices, as if they were afraid to break the
neck of policy by letting her look up to heaven, and therefore she should be
troubled no further, than the hangings, images, or painted walls of some
melancholy Chapel. For the particular, he prognosticated the destruction and
dissipation of the fleet in 88. the murder of Henry the third of France, the
troubles of the King of Navarre, Henry of Burbon, the prevailing of his armies,
and the winning of the strong town of Groyning in Free sland.

But amongst others, which I named before, you must Abbot Ioachim.
needs harken unto that famous and well reputed man Ioachimus the Italian Abbot
of Flore in Calabria, who foresheweth, that at last both Germans and the French
shall sorsake the Pope of Rome, and deny the supremacy, because of their
monstrous corruptions and iniquities. He also alleges, that as Solomon in his
age fell to idolatry, so should Rome be most contaminated, when she declined,
and extend the violence of her filthiness, as the last act of her tragedy
approached. He proceeds yet further, that all Christian Princes shall not
only forsake, but afflict her, yea a Prince smally reputed of shall correct
the Babylon of Rome. Harken I pray you to a little more: he resembles the Pope
to Pharo and Pilate, and makes a further comparison with her by the Babylonish
whore, and so concludeath, that they shall all be laid in a bed of affliction,
and scourged again and again with bleeding wounds for their wickedness and
abominations.

I could proceed with many others, but I did purpose only an ^nchiridion, and
therefore I will desist from raising it to a volume: yet I cannot ouerpasse
those bitter inuectiues, and terrible presages against Rome, by Robertus a
Dominican Friar, who in diverse sermons likens the Pope Friar Robert.
to an Idol for adoration: to an Hidropick for presumption: to a Bear for
cruelty: to a serpent which in a vision he saw in the palace of Laterane: to a
black, dry, and blasted body: to an head of wood, which was to be cut or
broken off, and many other resembiances tending all to this purpose, that in
the end according to the time, which God has kept secret in his own bosom,
Rome and the Popes of Rome shall not only be discovered to be that man of
sin, and Antichrist in the Scriptures, but receive the reward of adultery
even the divorce from Jesus Christ:

If it be so then, answer a Gods name you that must answer before the
judgment Throne of the Lamb, how comes this about, if the Papacy shall not
come to ruin, and Rome it self be destroyed, sceing Antichrist is thus
revealed, and that son of perdition manifested, whom God will consume with
the breath of his nostrils. If not so, show, wherein either I have gone beyond
limitation, or my Authors have failed in their computation, and I will answer
both for them and my self, what is befitting to satisfaction, if God have made
your hearts pliable to a modest and humble impression.

Antichrists punishment, and Romes destruction from holy women.
I Perceive, For as in Peter's vision the sheet was let down, and proposed unto
him full of clean and unclean beasts: so in the Church of God, the women as
well as the men have not only been admitted, but admired for their sanctity;
yea as ftom the examples of Scripture, the Idolatrous nations assumed a
pattern of imitation, falsifying Abraham's offering his son Isaac, to the
invention of slaughtering men to the Devil: out of Samsons story they have
justified the life of Hercules: from Moses and Aarons Priesthood, and Salomons
Temple, they have raised their superstitious adoration of idols, and Hecatombs
of beasts, with such like: so has the Church of Rome in resemblance of Miriam,
Debora, Hulda, Anna, and many others named Prophetesses, and holy women in
Scripture, canonized Saints, of Nuns, and other deuotresses, whom they have not
only reverenced for their lives, but adored for their virtues, doctrine, and
piety: amongst whom I will only name you five, eternized to memory by the
Papists themselves, who shall furnish this our present banquet of predictions
with the dainties and accates of the best taste to Gods true children, but of
dangerous receipt to the superstitious deuourer of nouelty, and new fangled
devices of men.

In the Prophetical visions of Saint Hildegard a Nun, St. Hildegard.
the second book of her Sciuias, there are diverse particulrs touching the
desolation of Rome, and destruction of the Pope, with intimation of the cause,
as not only for throwing the dirt and filth of men's inventions into the pure
waters of the rivers of Gods Church, but for continuing their lives in all
abominations of impiety, and rolling up together into some stupendous heap
the scattered snow of superstition, Relics, Altar clothes, Pardons,
Indulgences, and such like trumperies, which will vanish and melt away as the
snow, when the sunny splendour of Gods word shines hotly upon them: for the
Prophet tells us, their best hypocrisy is but like the morning dew, Hoshea 6.
which is not seen within an hour or so after the Suns rising.

There is another Prophecy of Mathilda, or as some St. Mathilda.
have it, Magdalena, a holy Saint, and religious woman, against Rome for her
apostasy, and the Cardinals for their assumpted greatness and dangerous
impiety: for which cause there shall be divisions in Germany, and the
Provinces shall never be accorded in religion, till either the destruction or
reformation of Rome be brought to pass. If you did read the Originals, and
would advise upon the congruent gradations of their writings, following as it
were the order of Ecclesiastical History, you would either wonder how such a
spirit was infused in them, or that the Church of Rome has not since
suppressed or abolished their inuectiues. But (as I said) God does work by
secret means and strange instruments, and when he has either a mercy or a
judgment to execute, Cyrus shall be his anointed, Nabuchadnezzar his servant,
and very wicked tyrants and infidels his hammer to bruise the stones in pieces.

S. Elizabeth was also a Nun and Prophetess, and S. Elizabeth.
has her Visions too: so that in the second book you shall find how she
expostulateth the matter with the corrupt Clergy, why they should preach
erroneous doctrine, pervert the sacred Scriptures, continue in abomination of
life, maintain the absurdities of Traditions, etc. Then she exprobrateth the
Bishops for their schismatic filthiness, charge the Church of Rome with
deadness and error, reproves the Popes of simonie and unheard of
vitiousnesse, and last of all she comes unto judgment, and threatens them
all with utter deuastation and ruin.

S. Bridget had also her revelations; she was a holy woman, S. Bridget.
religious widow, and princess of N^rice in Swethland: they are wonderful
both for the number and the large approbation of many learned and judicious
Papists, who all commend her sanctimonious life, and confirm he^ spiritual
raptures. In one place she challenges the Pope and corrupt Clergy of Rome, of
many enormities, denouncing Gods judgment against them. In another she would
have the Scriptures to be read in the mother tongue. In a third she curses the
selling of spiritual livings, and threatens a woe, if the custom be not
abrogated and abolished. In a fourth she is much exafperated against Rome for
many aberrations, especially ^weruing from her primitive excellency. In a fifth
she enlarging her self, makes a Catalogue of infinite number of vices and
errors to which Rome was subjected. In a sixth she inciteth the Princes of
Europe to the calling of a General Council, and bringing Rome into Foro
publico by accusation. In a seventh she inueigheth against the fornication of
Priests, protesting it were better to marry, nay warranting that the
prohibition of marriage was utterly unlawful. In another she thus presageth,
and ratifies it with a forcible oath, that the reformation of Rome must begin
with the sword, and so seven plagues shall fall upon her, as it was spoken unto
Israel. In a ninth she shows the difference between Christ's and the Popes
Church, or if you will, the Popes Court, enlarging the particulars by diverse
circumstances, and demonstratiue reasons. In a tenth she contesteth against
that impious opinion of men's merits in matter of salvation, as a very poison to
infect the heart of true religion, and open a gap to let in a world of
absurdities. In another she wonders how that Purgatory came into men's minds,
more than that it was a device of the devil to make a mint for the selling of
souls, or at the best to coin money to fill the Popes treasury. In the last
place she assures them that God will raise up better vine-dressers in his
vineyard, than were in her time, or else leave it desolate to the foxes, who
shall destroy it for ever. What would she say then if she lived in these days,
and were acquainted with the new sect of Jesuits, the Popes Ianisaries, and
the worlds Incendiaries; with the doctrine of equivocation and mental
reservation; with that atheistical position of Fidesnon est seruanda
haereticis and all those damnable dispensations with murders, depositions of
Princes, incests, whoredoms, and such like?

There is never a Papist in the world but honors Katherine of Sienna for a
Saint, and religious woman. S. Katherine.
Now, if he will but believe her writings, as he reuerenceth her person, and
exalts her memory, let him give ear to her Prophecies. She begins very
sanctimoniously with a prayer for the reformation of the Church of Rome: she
proceeds effectually to lay open the enormities of the same: she continues
most seriously in discovering the mischiefs they have done to the poor
afflicted souls of Christendom; and she concludes very perempto^ily, that
Rome shall incur tribulation, and be utterly destroyed for her abominable
life and imposturing deceit: That the Pope shall be disrobed, and lose his
triple Crown, yea be bereaved of all his pomp and glory, and that the
Cardinals shall cast off their scarlet gowns, and run to hide themselves, if
they knew where: but death and desolation shall follow them into their closets,
and their very Idols and Images shall make a fire to consume them, so that
their lovers and friends shall cry out, Heu cadit in quenquam tantum scelus,
tanta iniquitas! yea their very enemies shall clap their hands for joy to see
their filthiness laid open to the hissing of the passengers.

If this be thus, then answer a Gods name, you that must answer before the
judgment throne of the Lamb, how comes this about, if the Papacy shall not
come to ruin, and Rome it self be d^stroied, seeing Antichrist is revealed,
and that son of perdition manifested, whom God will consume with the breath
of his nostrils. If not so, show wherein I have gone beyond limitation, or my
Authors failed in their account, and I will answer both for them and my self,
what is befitting satisfaction, if God have made your hearts pliable to an
humble and modest impression. And thus much for Antichrists punishment.

Because I find the substance of all that has been said in one continued
discourse upon the eleventh Chap. of the fourth book of Esdras, I will enlarge
the same. For the Papists themselves allow the Apocrypha, as authentical, as
Canonical Scripture, we only maintain, that though it be not Canonical
Scripture, yet our learned Divines attribute to these Apocryphal writings the
next place to the Canonical Scripture: and so you shall not only have the
Original verbatim, but a true and strange Paraphrase, or illustration approved
by the best authority.

ESDRAS 2. Chap. 11. 1 THen saw I a dream, and behold there came up from the
sea an Eagle which had twelve feathered wings and three heads.

2 And I saw, and behold she spread her wings over all the earth, and all the
winds of the air blew on her, and were gathered together.

3 And I beheld, and out of her feathers there grew other contrary feathers,
and they became little feathers and small.

4 But her heads were at rest, the head in the midst was greater than the
other; yet rested it with the residue.

5 Moreover, I beheld, and lo, the Eagle flew with her feathers, and reigned
upon the earth, and over them that dwelt therein.

6 And I saw, that all things under Heaven were subject unto her, and no man
spoke against her, no not one creature upon earth.

7 And I beheld, and lo the Eagle rose upon her tallons, and spoke to her
feathers saying,

8 Watch not all at once, sleep every one in his own place, and watch by
course.

9 But let the heads be preserved for the last.

10 And I beheld, and lo the voice went not out of her heads, but from the
midst of her body.

11 And I numbered her contrary feathers, and behold, there were eight of them.

12 And I looked, and behold on the right side there arose one feather and
reigned over all the earth.

13 And so it was that when it reigned, the end of it came, and the place
thereof appeared no more, so the next following stood up, and reigned, and had
a great time.

14 And it happened that when it reigned, the end of it came also, like as the
first, so that it appeared no more.

15 Then came there a vcice unto it and said,

16 Hear thou that have borne rule over the earth so long, this I say unto
thee, before thou beginnest to appear no more.

17 There shall none after thee attain unto thy time, neither unto the half
thereof.

18 Then arose the third, and reigned as the others before, and appeared no
more also.

19 So went it with all the residue one after another, as that every one
reigned, and then appeared no more.

20 Then I beheld and lo in process of time the feathers, that followed,
stood up on the right side, that they might rule also, and some of them ruled,
but within a while they appeared no more.

21 For some of them were set up, but ruled not.

22 After this I looked, and behold the 12. feathers appeared no more, nor the
two little feathers.

23 And there was no more upon the Eagles body but three heads that rested and
six little wings.

24 Then saw I also, that two little feathers divided themselves from the six,
and remained under the head, that was upon the right side, for the four
continued in their place.

25 And I beheld and lo, the feathers, that were under the wing, thought to
set up themselves, and to have the rule.

26 And I beheld, and lo, there was one set up, and shortly it appeared no
more.

27 And the second was sooner away than the first.

28 And I beheld, and lo the two that remained thought also in themselves to
reign.

29 And when they so thought, behold there awaked one of the heads that were at
rest, namely it that was in the midst, for that was greater than the two other
heads.

30 And then I saw that the two other heads were joined with it,

31 And behold the head was turned with them, that were with it, and did eat up
the two feathers under the wing, that would have reigned.

32 But this head put the whole earth in fear, and bare rule in it over all
those that dwelt upon the earth, with much oppression, and it had the
governance of the world, more than all the wings that had been.

33 And after this I beheld, and lo, the head that was in the midst suddenly
appeared no more, like as the wings.

34 But there remained the two heads, which also in like sort ruled upon the
earth, and over those that dwelt therein.

35 And I beheld, and lo, the head upon the right side devoured it that was
upon the left side.

36 Then I heard a voice which said unto me, look before thee, and consider
the thing that thou see.

37 And I beheld, and lo as it were a roaring Lion chased out of the wood, and
I saw that he sent out a man's voice unto the Eagle and said,

38 Hear thou: I will talk with thee, and the highest shall say unto thee,

39 Art not thou it that remainest of the four beasts, whom I made to reign
in my world, that the end of their times might come through them?

40 And the fourth came, and overcame all the beasts that were past, and had
power over the world with great fearfulness, and over the whole compass of
the earth with much wicked oppression, and so long time dwelt he upon the earth
with deceit.

41 For the earth have thou not judged with truth.

42 For thou have afflicted the meek, thou have burt the peaceable, thou have
loved liers, and destroyed the dwellings of them that brought forth fruit, and
have cast down the walls of such as did thee no harm.

43 Therefore is thy wrongful dealing come up unto the highest, and thy pride
unto the mighty.

44 The highest also has looked upon the proud times, and behold they are
ended, and his abominations are fulfilled.

45 And therefere appear no more thou Eagle, nor thy horrible wings, nor thy
wicked feathers, nor thy malicious heads, nor thy hurtful claws, nor all thy
vain body.

46 That all the earth may be refreshed, and may return being deliuer^d from
thy violence, and that she may hope for the judgment and mercy of him that
made her.

If you read also the next chapter, you may find how Esdras expounded this
vision: but because I have promised a more plenary satisfaction, I apply my
self to the same purpose, and thus continue the discourse. In the days of
Darius king of Persia, some 400. years before lulins Caesar advanced the
standard of the Roman Empire, under the presentation of a sable Eagle displaied
in a golden field, as the first Emperor after Kings, Consuls and Dictators this
vision came to Esdras, and contains the beginning, continuance, and
dissolution of the Empire and supremacy of Rome, seen by the Prophet Daniel
some few years before: wherein twelve only Emperors are personated for their
extended power like wings over the world, and for their greatness and
celsitude of birth, like beasts with iron teeth and nails of brass, the
number as a full jury to include the rest, and their nobleness far exceeding
other inferiors, as descended from the families of I^lij, Seruij, Saluij,
Flauij, etc. Whereas all others were but composed of mean originalls, or
contrary nations, and no native Romans. By her three heads are meant three
kingdoms, which must behold the pride of Rome, when her wings and feathers
shall fail. By the winds are understood her prosperity, and large extension of
dominion, as limiting her territories from Ganges to Gades, and from the
Scythian sea to Cape bona esperanza. By the contrary feathers you must
understand certain Kings and Princes that opposed this transcendent
mightiness of Rome: but their purposes were frustrated, and for the time they
prevailed not, till at last one was mightier than the rest, yet all rested for
a time: for they were as embrions vnbroughtforth till this great city in her
unlimited pomp and pride, with her Armies and Legions might subiugate the
neighbor nations, and insult over the best of the earth. By the standing upon
her claws, etc. the Priests observed, that Rome in her transcendency did
nothing without counsel and good advice, whereby her Emperors kept the
sovereignty with great caution, and policy, and obtained a renoune beyond all
ciries and kings in the Universe. Now you must consider, that what Esdras
personateth by an Eagle, the Prophet Daniel designeth under the form of a
ten-horned beast, Daniel 7.
berokening diverse Emperors and Kings, whose irresistable ^orces should
affright the world with ambition, tyranny, and covetousness, and whereas he
proceeds with a race and succession of governors differing in shape and form
from their predecessors, but governing with blaspheming the most High, sitting
in the Temple, ^yrannizing over the third part of the world, and continuingin
greater rages and cruelty against the inhabitants of the Provinces, than the
rest; what is it any other than after the Emperors that and government, the
Popes shall challenge a supremacy and prerogative power over inferior kings,
and by wonderful subtilty, that is, the shadow of piety, religion, and
sanctimonious life, prevail in elation of heart, and power of sovereignty, and
therefore Daniel says, and he shall be unlike to the first: yet still must
Rome be called Triumphanta and Santa: so that when the Eagle saw her feathers
plucked, and that Senate us populusque Romanus could do no good, nor Imperium
Romanum prevail by forcible intrusion, she fearing some incurable disease to
grow upon her, and that she must needs saint in her weakness and distress,
set a new Loome on work of policy, lies, and devices, yea Magic, and
Witchcraft, and so under the sacred name of Ecclesia Dei Romae, once again
advanced her standard of honor and reputation, and became as predominant in
her spiritual government, as ever she was in the warlike dilacerations of her
Provinces.

But the story follows in the numbering the Eagles contrary Verse 11.
feathers, that is to say, that after Rome had ouerswaid the world, and her
glorious Emperors with Luciferian pride, advanced themselu^s as high as the
Sun: there should diverse attempts be made by foreign nations, and dangerous
Princes to dismantell her of her Imperial robes, and vnplume her of her
diversity of colors, and these were comprised under the m^mber of eight. 1.
The West Goths commanded by Alaricus. 2. the Huns by Attala. 3. the Vandals by
Genscricus. 4. the remainder of them by Odoacer. 5. the East Goths by
Thecdorick. 6. the rest by Totila. 7. The Lombards or Longobardi by Albonius.
8. and the last by an intestine sedition and domesticke conspiracy, which
infested as much or more, than all the rest: I could add as enemies, the
Radaguise, Alani or Almans, Burgonians under Gundibald, Hungars, Saracens, and
diverse other, but the former were those principal incendiaries, that set Rome
on fire indeed, and by manifest repugnancy pulled her walls to rubbish, which
lasted all the time of her ostentation with the term of Imperium crbis
terrae, but when it came to the counterchange of Matter Ecclesia, then did these
Princes likewise inuest her with new robes of state and magnificence, and were
content to take the golden cup from the Strumpets hands, and carowse the dregs
of abomination, and thus is the story of Rome epitomized even to this hour;
but because the Prophecy goes forward, I will follow in the strength I have,
and begin again.

One feather arose on the right side, and reigned, says the verse 12.
text. In those days the great ones repined at the government of Consuls, and
the inscription of Senatus populusque Romanus, whereupon diverse families
attempted the sole jurisdiction: as the Cor^ehj, Marius, Scilla, Cateline, all
as noble and as well borne as Iulins; but none rose on the right side but he,
and although it cost him his life in the enterprise, as betrayed by his dearest
friends, who ouerp^sing the liberty of their country before the ambition of an
intruder, taught him a new lesson, that in trust was treason, and there is no
confidence in worldly prosperity, but time will have her vicissitude: but for
all this, out of death sprung the life of imperiousness, for after Octauius,
Anthony, and Lepidus had revenged his death, and played the wanton Triumuiri
with the greatness and potency of government, Octauius shouldred away the
rest, and for his happy determination of business, and prosperous success in
all affairs, reigned forty four years alone as Augustus: then followed
Tiber^us, Caius, Caligula, Claudius, Nero, Galba, Otho, Vitellius, Vespasian,
Titus, Domitian, and these are the feathers and wings of the Eagle principally
named in this prophecy.

Now says the Text, there were other feathers, but they Verse. 20.
put not themselves forth with that strength, nor made so glorious a show as
the former: that is, there were other Emperors and Governors, but they were
neither so mighty in government nor so illustred in birth: such as Nerua,
Adrian, Anthonius, Marius, Comm^dus, Pertinax, Julian, Seuerus, Caracalla,
Macrinus, Heliogabalus, Alexander, Maximinus, with others to the 3.
Valentinian, and so by degrees as it is in Philosophy, corrupti^ vnius
generatio alterius, the Empire decaying, the papacy had room in Rome for a new
progression.

All this while you must consider, there were others which were opposi^es and
innouators, but no governors, and these, says the text, were set up, but not
ruled: such as Vindex, Piscenius niger, Albinus, Diadumenas, Maximus, Balbinus,
30. Tyranni, Firmus, Saturninus, Bonosus, Proculus, Aper, Eugenius, Quintillus,
Ruffinus, Constantinus, not surnamed Magnus, Heraclianus, and others, who all
served to no other end, but as instruments for the Almighty to hew down the
marble pillars of this Imperial Rome, and afterward to raise a new fabric of
stupendous admiration, by a far more unnatural government of Churchmen, I
call it unnatural, because the Popes of Rome, under the sanctified titles of
Peter's successor, Vcars to the Lamb, and fathers of the Church of God, not
only deceived the world, but excelled the proudest Emperors, when their sins
came to ouerflowing, in State, Majesty, Pomp, covetousness, tyranny, and all
other impieties discovered in Scripture.

But the Prophet goes forward with the Empires dissolution, that is to say,
with the whole narration of the story of the Nations that infested Italy,
beginning with Alaricus, who set himself up in the 19. year of Honorius,
conquering Latium, Campania, Apulia, Lucania, Cal^bria, proceeding with Attila,
who in the 27. of the 3. Valentinian destroi^d Aquileia, Verona, Mantu^,
Cremona, Brixia, Coneordia, with the new territory of Venice, and ending with
Genserick, Od^acer, Totila, the Lombards, and the intestine faction: and these
are the two heads and Verse. 23.
six wings: now you must consider, that in this fearful time, the proud
Attila did fell the city of Rome to Bishop Leo, as some report, and so was
contented to forsake Italy, by which occasion the Popes became Masters of this
great City, and in process of time wrought out their supremacy, not only over
Italy, but over Europe: For as these Tyrants vexed one another, and the
successors which followed were subject to extirpation, namely Valentinian,
Maximus, Anitus, Maiorianus, Seuerus, Anthemias, Olibrius, Glycerius, lxlius,
N^pos, Momil^us, otherwise Augustulus, the Popes raised their structures out of
their ruins, and the rubbish of the Empire served to advance the fabric of
the Papacy: Thus the Eagles displaid wings were spread in the time of Augustus
and broken and spoiled in the days of Augustulus, who was that Momil^us the
last named, and so the prophecy follows to the 29. verse, with the variety
of the wars, troubles, and government, of all the contrary feathers named
before, to the time of the intestine sedition, which had pretense of renewing
the style of Senatus populusque Romanus: but now the Bishop of Rome tampers for
his supremacy, and inuesteth Charles King of France, Emperor, and this is that
which Esdras means, by the awaking of one of the three heads, that were at
rest: for the Verse. 29. 801
three heads personate Germany, France, and Spain, who shall according to the
interpretation of this Vision, still by one means or other maintain the
dignity of the Popedom, though all the rest of the Kings and Princes of Europe
forsake it, till utter destruction come indeed, and they manifestly behold,
that God will c^st this strumpet in a bed of affliction, that is to say, that
although Papistry and the profession of the Romish Religion shall not be
utterly extinguished, till the Church be triumphant in heaven, yet shall the
glory of Rome, yea of the Pope and his Cardinals suffer diminution, if not
utter d^solation, as shall be manifested in due place, and orderly
demonstration.

But first you must note, how the Prophet proceeds: the verse 31.
middle head did eat up the wings, which is meant by the sword of Carclus
magnus, who at the Popes command came into Italy and took De^^derius prisoner,
leading him captive into France; after this Cono the Emperor falls out with
Gregory the second, and p^oiected to dislocate the Popes of Rome, as
intimating, that their pride and tyranny would grow vlcerous, and to a Gangren
in the body of Europes government: whereupon the people were not only incensed
against their Bishop, but attempted a new alteration, by Senators and Consuls,
had not the French laid a cooling card for this proceeding, and established the
Pope in his supreme eminency: yet all is not quiet; for some 150. years after
Alberick and Octauian his son contested anew with the ambitious Prelates, and
once again advanced another government in Rome: but see how the Pope thriues
according to the prophecy: Otho the great comes in his assistance, banisheth
the Consul, hangs the Tribunes, and mounteth the Praefectus Vrbis naked on
an Ass, and so he is crowned, and with great derision thrust into prison, and
^ormented to death: but within seven years new vproares began by the
tumul^uary incitation of Lancius, had not Otho the second at a supper in the
Vatican struck off all their heads. Last of all, Frederick the first, with
the blood and wounds of 2000. men established the Bishop of Rome in greater
glory, and ever since according to this Prophecy and discovery, they have
continued secure by the means of these heads in all impiety and abomination:
but the Prophecy leaves them not so, for after all this exemplification of
glory and greatness, with the manner of their rising, and insolent tumors, he
falls to their punishment and utter confusion.

This lasts from the 36, verse to the end, wherein you may observe, that the
breath of God like a Lion of the Forest shall tear this Eagle in pieces, and
as you have heard in the execution of Antichrist, whole armies of Prophecies,
and denunciations of vengeance shall be further mustred against Rome from so
supreme a judicature, that no humane potency shall reuerse the doom, or be
able to repeal the sentence.

Conclusion.
THe conclusion then of all these things may be thus, that if God out of his
palace of power and mightiness, or storehouse of providence and mercy, has
from time to time exposed his secrets openly, whereby his Saints and poor
afflicted children have not only been comforted in their distress, but
prepared against following mischiefs: If according to the wantonness of
times, and growth of impiety, he has gone about to stop the torrent and
raging inundation of wickedness, and by many predictions foretold the ruin of
the kingdom of Satan, and enlargement of the bounds of his Church: If he has
gone yet further to follow obstinate men and refractarie delinquents, even at
the he^les, with signs and wonders from heaven, either to divert the
outrageous from their immanitie, or support the lowly in their humiliation: Let
not us pass them over, as things vnremarkable, or be affrighted as terrors of
too great vengeance: and if it fall not within our reach to make clean every
corruption, yet as near as we can, to wipe away the filthiness, and wash off
the deformity of gross and fearful sins. Thus shall the confidence of the
joys to come season our present sorrows, and the acknowledging of Gods
attributes assure us, that he is faithful, which has promised, and so will
perform the oath he swear unto our father Abraham, and his s^ed for ever.

Again, if it has pleased the same God to terrify the world with the rumors
of war, and thundrings of hostility, ^o weaken and abate the power of
mighty monarchies, to strike Daniels image with a stone from heaven to pieces,
to put a hook in the nostrils of Leu^athan and B^h^moth, to turn about the
wheels of the chariot of greatness. O consider this ye that have forgot God,
l^st he tear you in pieces in his wrath: and remember this, ye that love God,
lest ye abuse his mercy ouer-presumptuously.

But of all, and exceeding all; I^ in this latter age of the world he has
revealed unto us the true history of his Church; That the Dragon shall watch
the woman in the wilde^nesse to devour her child; That in the Primitive
Church was the true pattern of wholesome words; That she ^ell from thi^ purity,
and was polluted with the filth of men's Traditions, whose daring hands out of
wantonness, case, gurrm^^dice, ambicion, avarice, p^l^^ie, and imposturing
deceit, threw dur^ into her clean stream, and in a manner dammed up the
spring of undeniable verity; That all this was done by Antichrist and his
adherents; That this Antichrist is now fully discovered, not to personate one
man, nor be a stranger in Gods house, but to sit in the Temple of God, and the
Church, and to be the Popes of Rome, the strumpet of Babylon in the Scriptures,
the beast with seven heads and ten horns in the Apocalypse, the man of sin in
Timothy, Lucifer in Isaiah, the spirit of error in the Thessalonians, with all
the rest, as you have heard; That notwithstanding this discovery, he has
usurped the authority of Princes, tyrannized over Kings, affrighted ignorant
souls, captiued c^^dulous persons, and enriched his purse, to the augmentation
of worldly glory; That therefore God has arraigned him, and by several
inditements condemned, and that his punishment and ex^cution followed, whereby
this defiled strumpet shall be divorced from her spouse, cast in a bed of
affliction, demo^^shed, and her structures pulled to pieces, set on fire, to
the wonder of the world, and the terror of all seduced people.

FINIS.

