FYVE Homiles of late, made by a right good and virtuous clerk, called master
Leonarde Pollarde, prebendary of the Cathedral Church of Woster, directed and
dedicated to the right reverend Father in God Rychard by the permissyon of God
bishop of Woster his special good Lord.

Vewed, examined, and allowed by the right reverend Father in God Edmonde
bishop of London, within whose diocese they are imprinted.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum, Anno. M.D.LVI,

TO THE RIGHT REVERENDE FATHER IN GOD AND his especial good Lord, Richard by
the grace of God bishop of VVorcetter, his humble orator and daily bedeman,
Leonarde Pollarde vvyssheth perpetual health both of soul and body.
Considering with my self (most reverend father) the bountiful goodness of
Almyghtly God, who did so thankefully receive the myte offered by the poor
wyddowe, as he did the precious gifts offered to him by the rich and welthy
persons, I have been there by encoraged to offer toward the buylding again of
his blessed Temple (the Church I mean) defaced and almost destroyde by
heretics, these simple and rude sermons, not because that I think them to be
of such force or learning that they can help much thereunto, or that the
great and precious treasures offryd by other might not suffyce, but rather (as
I said) to declare the promptnes and redynesse of my mind, which ought to be
in me and all men to do service unto his majesty according to our ability.
It is not unknown to your Lordeshyp the number of books and sermons that were
made to deface the church, and the number and the diligentnes of them that
would have destroyed the church, the which diligence of them or rather
continual ragynge if it should not be matched or with like diligence of our
part overcome and outmatched, it should be much to the reproach of us all. For
if we se (as we can not but se) them to have taken such peynes to suppress
and overthrow the truth (if it lay in them so to do) how justly shall our
conscience condemn us being negligent or retchlesse by Gods help to defend
the same. Let us not think but God (who has already plaged the church of this
realm for the rechlessenes of our fathers will) much more grievously punyshe us
being nothing amended but rather worse after this his chastisement and
correction. For this is the time to take heed and to be diligent and as it were
the time to harvest and of labor and not of reapynge and rest. If we repe
before our time our corn will be green. If we rest ear our busynes be done,
we shall be compelled to work when we should rest, and yet it shall not avail
us. We must therefore (as the proverb is) take the time while time is, for time
will away. Thus my most reverend Father and honorable Lord I being moved partly
as I have said with the bountiful magnyfycence of Almighty God, who did so
lovingly accept the offryng of the poor wyddowe, and partly with the
consideration of my duty after this miserable time of sisme and heresy, have
written certain sermons or Homiles the which I thought to offer to your
reverend Fatherhod and honorable Lordeshyp, as the gifts of a child to his
father both for the fatherly love that I do know you to bear toward us
your diocessans and children, and for your great affection and fervent zeal in
the defense and meintenaunce of Gods Cathotholyke faith and true religion, the
which your fatherly love and byshoplyke zeal being well known to all men,
shall cause these my sermons to be I trust the better accepted, both with God
and man. Wherefore I shall most heartily desire your honor to accept this my
small oblation or offering, and with your wisdom and discretion to use the
same accordyngely, as thereby the Catholyke faith may be meinteyned, and
almighty god best honored.

who have your good Lordeshyp in his blessed keeping now and ever Amen.

OF THE SACRAMENT OF THE AVLTER.
Like as the trade of marchaundies is profitable, and geyneth much, and the
fleshely man is much delyghted with sweet meats, and greatly desires them,
and yet is there both in marchaundies danger of loss, and in delicate fare
oftentimes griefs and deseases are to be feared, so is it likewise with
things that apperteyneth unto our sowles (most Chrystyan hearers) those
things that be most wholesome for our sowles, chances sometimes unto the
great damage and hurt thereof, as it is to be seen amongst all other things,
in the most blessed sacrament, wherein we eat the flesh of our sauyoure
Christ, and drink his blood, Johan. 6.
the profit whereof, is to make Christ abide in us, and us to abide in
Christ, the which how profitable it is, all true Chrystian men do well know,
and yet faint Paul says, 1. Cor. 11.
that he which eats unworthily this heavenly bread, which is Christ's
flesh, and drynketh unworthily of the cup, wherein his most blessed blood
is contained, eatethe and drynketh his own damnacion, because he pondereth not
with him self, that it is our Lords body, which he does there receive.
Wherefore good Chrystyan people, like as the merchant would give good ear to
him that should tell him how he might sail upon the sea without danger, and
the fleshely man would hear gladly, the physician telling him how he might
preserve his body from deseases and syckenesse: So should we that be Christen
men, most desire that knowledge in these blessed mysteries, Lu 12. Math. 6.
whereby our sowles may be kept safe, from the danger that saint Paul says
al the^ to be in that receaueth unworthily. For is not your soul better, then
either your goods, or your bodies? And shall ye not then be as desirous to
keep your soul safe, as either your bodies or your goods? To you than that
have a special regard unto your souls, I (to whom the cure of your souls is
committed) must say, that two things are to be marked and considered, if ye
will avoid danger in this matter being of so great weight. The redress of
the one apperteineth to you, and that is that ye come devoutly and well
prepared, for as it was not enough, Math. 22
for him that came to the marriage without a convenient and a comely garment, to
sytte with the other, and to eat of the same that other did eat who were at
the feast, so it is no small danger to you, to come to this feast without
your wedding garmente, but what wedding garmente trow you that I do mean?
the same verily that god gave unto you at your baptism, and was represented or
sygnyfyed by your Crysome. And if ye will know what that is, it was verily
innocence, and pureness, for what other thing does your depynge or washing in
the water sygnyfye, but that God does then presently purge and cleanse you from
your sins. Therefore saying that in celebracion of these mysteries, ye must
appear in our masters presence and sight, ye must be sure that ye do come
thither in his lyuerye: And thus to prepare you is your duty. The other thing
that is necessary unto the wholesome receauynge of these mysteries, is a true
faith, Hebre, 11.
without the which no man can please god, and ye know what danger it is, for
one with whom god is offended or angry, to apeere before him, but to teach
this faith unto you, that belongs unto my charge. For unto me it is said,
John. 21.
Pasce oues meas, feed my sheep, the which thing that I may the better do,
three things are necessaryly to be consydred both of you and me, that is,
first that ye will call unto your remembrance what manner of people you to
whom I shall speak, ought to be, secondely, what the things be that we must
entreat upon, thyrdely, from whence, and from whom we must come by the
knowledge of them. As concerning the first, it is not unknown unto you, that
Christen men are called and named to be faithful, which is as much as to say,
people that do believe, in so much that saint Paul commaundynge Timothe to
give good example of life unto all Christen men, 1. Tim. 4.
says, F^sto forma fidelium. That is, be an example to the faithful, whereby
we be monyshed, that the chiefest thing in a Christen man Que vide^tur
te^poracia su^t que non vide^tur (...) 1. Cor. 4.
which makes him to dyffer from all other me^, is his faith, but who is he
amongst you, that knows not that faith is only concerning those things
that are not to be seen, and which we know only by the report of other? In so
much that saint Gregory says, that fides non habet meritum, vbi humana ratio
prebet experimentum, that is to say, faith has no merit, where man's reason
gives thexperie^ce. And who knows not that Abraham was commended of god, for
nothing so much as he was for his faith. Gene. 14. Roma. 4. Gal. 3.
Does not the scripture say, Credidit Abraham deo, et imputatum est ei ad
iustitiam, that is, he believed Godde, and it was counted to him for
righteousness, but how believed he. Verily saint Paul says, he did not
consider his own body, which was now more fytter for death, then to be get
children, he being an hundredth years of age, nor yet he did consider the barren
womb of Sarai his wife, who was then four score and ten years of age, he did
not reason with God, how he and his wife being in their youth, not able to
beget children, should now in their age, when natural hope of children was
paste, have children, he did not (I say) reason with God of these matters, as
our new brethrene do, in the great mysteries of our faith. He hard God
speak, and believed, but these must have him say sensybly, to their reason, this
is a figure of my body, or else they can not understand him for their
iustyfyinge faith, or rather as it is to be called, damnable infidelity, can
not understand that god is able to make his body to be really present in
heaven, and hear to, both at one time. But unto you good Christen people,
that be the children of Abraham, and do believe. I trust that there is nothing,
wherein ye can so please god, as in beleuynge his omnipotency and truth. To you
I say that the chief cause which moved our savior to praise the Centurion
so much as he did, Math. 8.
was the Centurions faith, for the Centurion thought that it was as possible
for Christ to heal his servant, though he were absent, as it was for him
self in his absence, by commandment of his servants to have things done
as he would? for the same cause did our savior praise also the woman of
Cananye, saying, woman thy faith is great. Such then be you and so do believe,
Math. 15.
unto whom now at this time I purpose by gods grace, to speak of a sacrament,
otherwise called in Greek a mystery, and in English it may be named secret
or hid priuitie of our faith and religion. In the consideracion and
understanding of the which mysteryes, your mind and knowledge must be
removed, and drawn away from the pryestes that ministers (for they be but as
instruments, as for example, the axe is to the wryght, the pen is to the
writer, the knyfe is to him that cutteth) and they most be bent and stayed of
Christ, who did first ordeyne them, and that does now use the tongue, and other
members of the priests, to accomplish and work the same. In so much, that
saint John speaking of the true baptism, says, Math. 3.
that it is Christ that baptyseth, and Christ says himself, that it is not
the minister that speaks, but the spryte of the Father, Sed spiritus patris
qui loquitur. Luke. 12.
that speaks in him. Also Chrysostom, and E^missen says, that it is not the
visible priest that works the consecration of the blessed Sacrament, but the
invisible priest, which is our savior Christ. But who sees not then (if
this be true, as it is most true) that not faith, but infidelity has caused
our late preachers to have asked the question, how can the priest make
Christ's body? As though there were nothing done in the administracion of the
sacrament, but what that the priest does. Does not this question presuppose
the priest only, to be not the instrument, but the workman? Does not this
question take that, that is gods work from God, and give unto man? But ye
shall understand good people, that these be therefore called mysteries, because
that in them one thing does outwardely appear to our senses, and an other is
certeynely known to our belief and under standing. Outwardely we se the
priest, outwardely we hear this sentence, Take, eat, this is my body, Augu.
ad infantes.
etc. pronounced by the priest, outwardely we se the forms of bread and wine,
and these are as perceptible and easy to be perceived of the Turks and other
Infydels, as of us Christen men, that is, they se and hear as much, and the
very same, touching these outward things, that we do: But then is there the
inuysible priest, who bad the visible priest do this, and that speaks and
works by him, as by his instrument, and the effect and operacion of these
words, take, eat, this is my body, which is to change those visible creatures
into the substance (as Emysen, Chrysostom, Chrisost. de p^^dicione I^de
saint Ambrose, and such like autours do witness) of Christ's blessed body
and blood, where is further to be consydred that the very natural body and
blood of our savior Jesus Christ to be contained under, and signyfyed by those
forms of bread and wine. Christ him self is a most true witness, and best
to be believed herein; who also says, that it to be the same body that was
broken for us, and the same blood that was shed for us. And these things
good people that is the invisible speaker and worker, the effect or workynge
of these words, and the most precious body and blood of our savior Jesus
Christ, these things I say are the priuities and secrets the which are not to
be seen of Infidels and Turks, and yet believed of Christen men and conceived
by faith only: For who being an Infidel, would think that God were in his
priest, speaking or saying to us, take, and eat, this is my body? Or who
being void of faith, would think that there were any thing done, by the
virtue of these words, take, eat, this is my body, more then is done by
these: Christ is the son of God, and such like, the which do not work any
thing, that is, do not make Christ to be the son of God, but teaches that
he is the son of god: Who I say being an infidel, would not think an
operacion and effect, to be of both these, that is, to teach, and not to
work any thing? And then because that it is most certain, that bread is
not his body, must they say either that Christ said not true, or else must
they expound it, to be a figure of his body. Thus I say, an Iufidell or a
faythlesse man, can have no other understanding of these words, which does
both work and teach (for that is the nature of the words that apperteyneth
to a sacrament, to teach and work both) then he has of other words, whose
office is only to teach. Now judge you then, whether our new gospellers, be
men void of faith or not. They say the same effect to be of these words, this
is my body, and of these, I am a vine so that as Christ was not a vine, but
figured by the vine, so does not these words this is my body, change the
substance of the bread and wine, into Christ's body and blood, but teachethe
that they be fygures of his body and blood, the which thing once granted, se
I pray you what follows, then must ye confess also that the like
understanding, must be of these words of baptism, I baptize thee in the
name of the father and of the son and of the holy ghost and then it must
follow, that as these words do importe that to be Christ's body, which is but
the figure of his body, so does the priest say in baptism, that he baptiseth
you, when in deed he gives to you but the figure of your baptism, and so ye
neither eat Christ's flesh, nor yet be Chrystened in deed: Are not these
cunninge workmen in divinity trow ye, that says like as these words, I am
the vine, are to be understand, the vine is a figure of me, so this is my
body, must be expounded, this is a figure of my body, and so must the priest
say, I do not baptize the, but do give the a figure of the baptism, and then
saying that all the scriptures that be contrary to reason, must be so expounded,
to make the^ agree with reason, so must this saying of the Father, this is my
well-beloved son, be understand that this is a figure of my son because it
is ageynste reason, that a man should be gods son, and so will they make our
savior Christ not to be the son of god. Judge you good people, whether this
be a pretty divinity or not: Secondely if ye will say that to be bread, which
Christ says to be his body, or that to be a figure of baptism, which Christ
says to be baptism it self. What have ye I pray you to prove either that ye
do eat it, or that ye be baptized, ye feyne a spiritual eating, where have
ye that in scripture, and take the effect of these words away but to let
this. Thyrdely how I pray you be the bread and wine (which do signify in
eating) figures of Christ's body and blood, if his body be not in deed eaten?
But as I said, an Infidel can not know, that as the holy ghost, was under
the form of a dove, so is hear the body of oursauioure under the form of
bread: An Infidel lokynge upon the visible form of bread, knows that
there is a thing to be eaten: but only a Chrystian man knows what it is that
is eaten, for he is taught of Christ that it is his blessed body. Thus I say,
ought we that be beleuers, to consider and judge them as mysteries of our
faith, and they be therefore mysteries, because one thing does appear in them
outwardely, and they be inwardely another, as saint Austyne writes to the
infantes, that to the judgment of their senses, there is bread and wine, but
to the knowledge of our faith, they be Christ's most precious body and blood.
Now these having as I say, two parts, the one known to our senses, the
other to our faith, it is now then to be considered whereupon and by what
ground our faith must be stayed, and that all men knows to be Gods word:
for that says our savior is so sewer, Math. 5.
that though heaven and earth pass away, yet shall that continue. Will ye se
then what this word says? Gene. 3. John. 6.
The word says, that Adam was poisoned with eating of an apple, and Christ
says, that his flesh is so necessary a triakle to drive out this poison, that
except we eat his flesh, and drink his blood, we shall not have life, the
which thing once granted, what ayleth us that we can not see to ley the
plaster to our sore? That is like as both our bodies and sowles were poisoned
with the apple, so must both our bodies and sowles be restored by Christ's
flesh eaten of us, and as not a figure of an apple, but a very apple was
eaten, so not a figure of Christ's body, but his very body is to be eaten, for
to restore again our nature. Moreover Gods word says, that as we have the
substance of our bodies from Adam, so have we our corruption and sinfulness
with the same. And our second Adam says, that except we come into him, and be
made one with him by eating of his flesh, 1. Cor. 15. Roma. 5. John. 6.
that we shall not escape death, for he that eats his flesh, and drynketh
his blood, abides in Christ, and has Christ abiding in him, whereby we be
taught that as we have not in us a figure of Adam, but the very substance of
Adam, and not his substance only, but his substance and his sin, so must
we have in us like wise, not the figure, nor the ryghteousnes only of Christ's
body, but his very and natural body in deed. Furthermore the Jews had Manna,
Exodus 16. Exodus 12.
and their Pascall lamb, the which were figures of Christ, of the which
Manna did signify Christ's incarnacion, in that as Manna was created in the
pure air, or as it is called in the scripture heaven, by Gods omnipotent
power, and not by the order of nature, so was Christ's body in the pure and
heavenly womb of the virgin, be yonde or above nature, created by the holy
ghost, and as Manna fell down and lay upon the ground, so was his precious
body slain and laid in grave: and as Manna was gathered up and eaten, so did
it sygnyfie that the same body of our savior should also be eaten. The Pascall
lamb also did signify the humanity of Christ, that as the lamb was without
spotte, so was Christ conceived without sin, and as the lamb was slain, so
was also Christ, and as the same lambs flesh was eaten, so did it signify
that Christ's flesh should be eaten: And thereupon says saint. Bid and saint
Jerome, In common tarus super. Luke et super Math.
that Christ went from the figure, to the truth, when after the Pascall lamb
being eaten, he consecrate this blessed sacrament. And se hear I pray you
good people, how that our new professoures of our late spronge faith, does
make by their doctrine, the scriptures to be false: for these figures that I
have resited, does so well teach the eating of Christ's flesh, as either his
incarnacion, or death, and therefore if the promise that was made by the
figure, be performed in the two first points, not figuratyuely, but really,
and does so well signify the third, that is the real eating of his flesh,
shall not the^ they be compelled either to say that the Jews did not eat
Manna, nor the Pascal la^be in deed, but figures of them, or else to say that
the promises of Christ's incarnacion and passion, were true and be performed,
and that the third, which is of his flesh to be eaten, was either false, or
that it is yet to be performed, but then ye will say, that we eat his flesh
spiritually, and did not they the same I pray you, when they eat Manna, and
the flesh of the Lamb? And how then is there any promise made to them which
is performed to us, saying we have no more then they had? ye do you mark and
if they make not us to be in worse case then the Jews were. For they had
Manna, and a Lamb, and we have common bread and wine, the which who knows
not to be much less worth, then were Manna and the Lamb: for as I said they
did remember Christ's death, and were parteners of the fruits there of, for
their time and portion, so well as we be. And thus do they make the new
testamente and the sacraments thereof, to be worse then the old. It shall not
be needful for me to resite unto you the sayings of our savior Christ in all
the four Euangelystes, and in saint Paul. For ye know in them all Christ
says, either that his flesh is very meat, and therefore verily to be eaten,
or else, take, eat, this is my body which is given for you: In no place names
he it either to signify or to be a figure of his body: ye do also bear in
mind, Exodus 24.
that as Moses took the cup whrein the blood of sacryfyce was, and said that
it was the blood of the Testament: Luke. 22.
so did Christ take the Challes wherein was the blessed blood, being the blood
of our sacryfyce, and said that it was the cup of the new testament, that is
like as we be certain there to be the blood of him that dyed for the
performaunce of the new testamente, so might we be suer, that all that was
said, or spoken upon in the testament, should be performed. Cold this be done
think you, so conuenie^tly with a cup of wine? But now to here what the
holy fathers have believed in this matter, I pray you mark. De cena.
Saint Ciprian the glorious martyr, and an aunciente father being nere
thyrtene hundredth years agone, does not he say that the bread which Christ
gave to his disciples kept still the same shape that it had, and yet by the
omnipotencye of Gods word, it was changed in nature and was made Christ's
flesh. Eusebits Emisen an ancient father almost twelve hundredth years old,
says, that the invisible priest turns the visible creatures into the
substance of Christ's body and blood. Saint Ambrose more then.xi. hundredth
year old, says, that before the words of consecration the Chalesse is full of
wine and of water, but after the words, there is the blood that redeemed the
people. Saint Augustine being of the same time says, that in his time they
did not judge the same of the things in the sacrament before the consecration
and after, for before they did acknowledge the^ to be bread and wine, the
which nature had made, but after they professed the^ to be the body and blood
of our savior, which grace had consecrated, and the same saint Austen does
also say, that as the person of our savior did stand of his visible manhod,
and his invisible godhed, so says he does the sacrafyce of the Church stand
pon the visible forms of bread and wine, and of the invisible flesh of our
savior Jesus Christ. To these might be added Chrysostom, saint Jerome,
Damasene, Theophilacte and many other, ye al Chrystendome do witness the same:
wherefore you being faithful men and women, that do in these mysteries of our
belief remove your understanding from the things that ye perceive by your
senses, as from the priest or the sound of the words, the visible forms of
bread and wine, unto God the autour of them, the workyng of the holy ghost by
the words, and the body and blood of our savior: Graffe these things deeply
in your heart, and practyse them in your iyuynge, adherynge to the faith and
religion of his catholyke Church, surely and stedfastely beleuyng, that under
these forms of of bread and wine here in the sacrament of the altar there
are contained really the blessed body and blood of our savior Christ. And if
ye thus do, ye shall please and serve God, profit your self and your
neighbor, with the hole congregation, and living well according to Christ's
commandments, shall have for your reward the blisful kyngedome of heaven:
which grant unto you the father, the son, and the holy ghost, three persons
and one God, to whom be all honor, praise, and glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

Of the Sacryfice of the Mass.
THere be three things (good people) wherwithal men be moved to seek lernyng
and knowledge, that is the truth which is naturally desired of all men, the
profit that men get by knowledge, and the price or goodness of the thing
that we desire to know, by the which causes, as men be moved to desire
knowledge, so are these causes no where more forceable and weightely to be
considered then they be in the sacryfyce of the mass, the which is daily used
in the Church. For first it is not unknown to you, what strife there has been
about it, and how that learned men of both parts have spent their lives in the
controversy thereof. Secondely ye se that because it is proved or improued by
the name of a sacryfyce, it must needs be a thing that apperteyneth so to us
all that it deuydeth one part of such as strive about it utterly from God.
For if the mass be a sacryfyce to god in deed, then it makes those that be
meinteyners and the users of it to be better beloved with god then other. For a
sacryfyce is as much to say, as an holy work, and therefore seeing that god
loves the workers of holy things, so must he love them that serves him at or
by the sacryfyce, and then also are such as strive against it, the most enemies
that god has. For they labor to keep that work undone wherein he is best
pleased. And if contrarywyse it be no sacryfyce, then be they wrong
worshyppers of god that use the sacryfice, which is as much to say, as that
they be supersticious Idolaters. And for the excellency of the thing, what I
pray you can be compared in excellency with this sacryfyce? which is as much to
say as the most sacred or holy work that can be. For in offeringe of the
sacryfice we be most heavenly or like unto the blessed company of heaven, which
are continually occupied in worshyppynge and honorynge of God. These causes
most dear brethrene and systren has caused me that has the cure upon your
souls (saying ye be by reason of these diversities of doctrine brought into
such danger) to teach you what is meant die this word sacryfyce, and that ye
may know the better how we do differ from the Jews to speak of the diversity
of the sacryfyces, and to speak also how the mass is in deed a sacryfyce.
And verily (good people) the same causes that moves me to teach you, ought to
move you to learn, for ye may of this that I have said se what danger ye be
in, if ye be ignorant in this so great a matter. The which thing that ye may
the better understand, I first note unto you that there be, and always have
been three principal parts of religion joined together, and one following upon
another. That is the testamentes or couenantes that God makes with man, the
priesthod or office of such as god has made mynisters of his testamentes, and
the sacryfyce or work wherein the people do recognyse and most faithfully
acknowledge the same couenauntes according whereunto says saint Paul that
Omnis pontifex ex hominibus assumptus, pro hominibus constituitur in iis quae
sunt ad deum vt offer at dona et sacrificia pro peccatis. That is, every bishop
taken forth from amongste men, is appointed for men to be occupied in those
things that do apperteine unto god, that he may offer gifts and sacryfyces
for sin. In which words are to be seen the three things that I spoke of
before, that is, first the testament by the which the bishop must be chosen
(for no man says saint Paul may usurp honor to himself) second the bishop
who^ saint Paul says to be a minister of those things that be betwixt man
and god, and the third is the sacryfice, which also he so names. Thus (good
people) was there a testament or a covenant made betwyxte God and the people
of Israel and Aron, as ye know was chosen to be a mynister of the same
testament, and as ye know his mynystery was also in offering of sacryfyce.
Christ also was a minister of the new testament, and did also offer sacryfyce
as ye know, Hebre. 10.
and now good people if the same testament that was begone by Christ does still
continue, and shall unto the worlds end, than like as Arons sacryfyce,
testamente, and priestehod begone together and continued together unto
Christ's coming, and were all abrogated together at one time by Christ. Even
so most dear brethren, if we will that Christ's testament shall continue
amongst us, so must we also have his priesthod and sacryfyce. Hear then may we
se the malious wickedness of the devil, in all our miserable heretics that
deny both the priestehod and the sacryfyce of the new testament the which
thing if he or they cold bring to pass, then might we say that there is no
testament neither. For it was never seen nor hard before, that ever there was
a testament without these. Secondely it is contrary to the order of the
scripture, the which as ye se joins the testament, the priesthod, and the
sacryfyce together. Thyrdely it is contrary to saint Paul, who says that the
testament was to be changed, and not to be taken away by Christ, but what
other is it to change it, but to put a better in the stead thereof? Hedre. 7.
Wherefore as the old testament was by Christ changed into a better, so must
it follow that he did not take away the priesthod and sacrifice, but changed
them into a better and a more perfect priesthod and sacryfyce. And what
priesthod from ye and sacryfyce did he change them into? Verily into the
priesthod and sacryfyce foreshewed long before by the priesthod and sacryfyce
of Melchisedech according Been. 14 Hebre. 7.
as the prophet Dauyd had spoken of Christ before, saying, Psalm. 109.
Tu es sacerdos in eternum secundum ordinem Melchisedech. Thou art a priest
for ever according unto the order of Melchisedech But what was the order of
Melchisedech? Certeynely says saint Paul he was a figure of Christ, what I
pray you was his sacryfyce? Verily says the scripture bread and wine, the
which were likewise figures of Christ's blessed body and blood, that is now
daily offered under the forms of bread and wine, in the time of this
testamente, for as Melchisedechs priestehod was a figure of Christ's, so was
his sacryfyce a figure of Christ's sacryfyce. Witnesses have I for me in this
matter saint Augustine in diverse places, and namely in his book intyteled De
Ciuitate dei, August. de Ciuitate dei. lib. 16 Capi. 22.
there he says that when Melchisedeth did bless Abram then did first apeare
the sacryfyce the which Christen men do offer through the whole world, and the
thing is now fulfilled that was spoken upon Christ so long before. Mark ye
good people how he speaks, he says, not that it the^ was, but that it did
then apeare. Ye know that there is a great diversity betwyxt the being of a
thing, and the appearing of it, for the thing may appear by his figure, as
by the material bread that Melchisedech did offer appeared the heavenly
bread, that is Christ's own blessed body, which he did in deed offer at his
supper, and is daily offered in the Church, as saint Augustine before resited,
does most plainly testyfye. The same figure of Melchisedech and his sacryfyce
is thus applied by saint Jerome, saint Bid, and other diverse holy fathers,
whose doctrine (most dear fre^des) it shall be much more sure and wholesome to
follow then the doctrine of our married priests, Iero^. ad marcel Ambro li. 5
de sacra. ci
who makes all this business against the blessed sacrament and sacryfyce,
because that these being made nothing worth, they might without reprofe live
fleshely. But to return again unto our purpose: The things being as I have
told you, and it so plainly taught to us by the scryptures it is to wit that
these three, the testament, the priesthod, and the sacryfyce be always so
jointly together, that the one of them is never found without the other, that
is, neither the testament without the priesthod and the sacryfyce, nor they
without the testament. It requires in order that we do say briefly what these
be, and how they do agree together. And concerning the first, that is the
testamente, ye shall understand (good people) though we call the books
wherein the law of God is contained the testamentes, yet in deed they be but
as it were tables or scrolles wherein the explication or the plain declaration
of the testamentes be contained, for what man is so fond that thinks the
old testamente to have begone at Moses, who was in deed but the writer of the
old testament? Or is there any so ignorante of our religion that thinks the
new testamente to have begone at the Evangelists, and not at Christ, whom
we do well know to have made perfect his testament or ever any of the
Evangelists did write. Mary ye shall understand that the same that we call
the testamente, Ge. 9.17. Ieremi. 31
does God almighty call Pactum, that is his couenauntes or agrementes with us,
and ours with him. The couenauntes and ye list to know when they were made,
and with what words they were uttered, ye shall understand that the first and
elder testament was made betwyxt God almighty and Adam our first father in
paradyce, Gene. 3.
which was that Adam being a man now cast forth of Gods favor, and by his
deseruynge most justly adjudged unto death, should be reconcyled to gods
favor and restored to life again by the appointed sede of the woman which was
our savior Jesus Christ, by whom the serpents head (by which is understand
the power and right that the fiende had over man) should be broken, so that
Adam and those that should come of Adam, would faithfully wait for the
coming of our savior, and in the mean season labor to do god service, so
nere as man's frayltie would suffer them. Now wot ye well good people, that this
agreement was very pleasant and joyful unto Adam, and all those that were
faithful were very glad that they should be restored ageine unto their first
dignity, the which they had lost by disobedience. And herein as it were to
beat witness betwyxt god and man of this agreement, there were chosen
priests, the which at the beginning whiles the law of nature did reign were
chosen of the chiefest and heads of the people, and so was Noe for his
household, and Abraham for his household, and Melchisedeth king of Salym a
priest for his whole kyngedome. Gene. 8. Gene. 12. Gene. 14. Gene. 22. Job. 1.
Afterward when the people began to forget gods couenantes, and the chief of
the people began to mind the word more then god, then God caused Moses to
publyshe his testamente in writing, and did then chose out the stock of Leuy
to be his priests until that testament that was made to Adam in Paradyce
should be changed. Mark. 2. Mark. 17
And to the intent that they should the better mind God, and set the less by
the world, he appointed them to live by the sacryfyces which were offered
unto him. Ibi. 18.
These then (that is) both the priests that were under the law of nature,
and under the law of Moses, did offer the sacryfice of the people unto god,
that is, they in their office doing, were witnesses betwyxt god and the
people, that he was the god that had made the promise, and that these were the
people that did faithfully trust and look for the same to be performed. Leuiti.
9.
The which that it might be the better perceived and more faithfully borne in
their remembrance, Leui. 19.
he took some lively thing and slew it in their sight, that they saying the
thing that had not deserved so to be ordered, to be burnte and consumed in
their sight, might the better consider how they the^ selves had deserved thus
to be ordered, that is, to be burned, slain and consumed, but yet that
almighty god had translated the death from them, and laid it upon our savior
Christ, who having no cause of death in him self, no more then the innocente
lambs had, Esei. 53.
yet should be slain for them. Now se I pray you and if they had not the most
innocent death of our savior, even as it were expressed and set before their
eyes, when they did thus presently behold the slaughter of those beasts. Do
not you think the sight and beholdynge of those sacryfices though they were
but figures did better cause them to remember Christ's death, then if they
should have hard of it in the words or teaching of priests? Now then yese
what the testament, the priesthod, and the sacryfyce be, it is also now
necessary that ye know how many testame^tes there be, and how they do
dyffer. First for the number of the^, ye know that they be two, the one made
of God unto man in Paradyce, Gene. 3. Math. 3.
the other made of god unto man at the baptysynge of our savior Christ. In the
one, god promised that the sede of the woman should break the serpents head:
In the other he said, this is my well beloved son in whom I am well pleased,
hear him, the which is as much as if he had said, this is the sede that
breaks the serpents head, I that was angrye with you before, am now fully
reconsyled unto you, now I require no more of you, but that ye will become his
diligent and saythfull scholars. These two testamentes as ye se do dyffer in
these points: First, that the first did teach a promise, this teaches a
performaunce. The first had his perferte end at Christ's death and passion,
the second had his absolute and perfect beginnynge at the same, and therefore
calls the scripture out savior Christ the corner stone, as one should say a
stone in whom the two walls, that is the two testamentes were cowpled
together. Psalm. 117 Math. 21. Ephesians. 2.
For Christ in his death, was both a priest according to the order of Aron
because he was offered with bloodsheding which was the manner of sacryfysynge
in the order or priestehod of Aron, August. deciuitat^. liber. 20. La. 20.
and he was also in the same passion a priest of the new testament, in so much
as that he did offer him self, for that by the doctrine of saint Augustine is
proper to the sacryfyce of the Church. For Christ says, that being both the
priest that offered, and the sacryfyce that was offered, taught his Church
both to offer and to be offered at once, his words be these. Per hoc et
sacerdos est ipse, offerens ipse, et oblatio cuius rei sacramentum quotidianum
voluit esse ecclesiae sacrificiu^ quae cum ipsius capitis corpus sit seipsam
per ipsum discit offerre. That is: In such sort was Christ a priest, that he
both offered the sacryfyce, and was the sacryfyce, of the which his doing, he
wylleth the sacryfyce that is daily used in the Church, to be a Sacrament, the
which Church being his body, and he the head of the Church, the Church has
now learned to offer her self by him, by the which he means, that as
Christ in his passion did both offer, and was offered, so does the devout
people at the mass in a certain respect both offer the body of Christ unto
God, and when they offer it, they do offer up the^ selves. For like as the
headde and the body makes but one thing, so the body of our savior Christ,
wherewith the Church is daily fed, being head of the Church, and the Church
that eats the same body being so made one with Christ, that it is his body,
so when the Church does offer his body in the sacrament, the Church does offer
her self, for she offers her head. For (most Chrystian hearers) ye shall
understand that as the thing that is eaten, Cirill. super Ioha^nes. ca. 17
libro. 11. C. 26.
and the thing that eats, are by eating made one, so by eating Christ's
blessed body we be made (as says Ciryll) really and corporally one with him,
not that we digest him, but that he disgesteth us, and thereupon are we called
members of Christ, Locus inspectione dignissimus.
and he in deed is our head, and by the same reason, when we offer^ up him, we
offer our selves, this thing good Chrystian people is hard to be
understood, and specially where faith wants, and the virtue of the blessed
sacrament is unknown. But to return unto our purpose, this may be added to
the diversities of the sacryfyces of the old and new testament, that the old
were ordained by men that were mynysters, this by Christ, either in him self,
or in his members to be done. Furthermore concerning the new testament, ye
know it to be the agreement made betwyxt Godde and us, Ecce annuncio vobis
gaudium magnu^. etc Luke. 2.
and therefore is the doctrine thereof called Euan gelium, as one should say
good tidings. For it was a joyful thing to hear that man is reconcyled to
Gods favor again. Also concerning the ministers of this testament, there is
no dout but that the Apostles, the Disciples, and such as be chosen in the
Church for that purpose, be ministers of this testamente. Mary now all the
controversy that is amongst us at this present, is whether they be to be
called priests or not, and that is also for because that certain evil
disposed persons, says that we have no sacryfice: How be it, as I said these
go so together, priestood, sacryfyce, and testament, that if ye take away the
sacryfyce, ye must also deny the priesthod, and so consequently the
testamente also. Wherefore to teach that there is a priesthod, we must first
prove that we have a sacryfyce, the which is easy to be done if ye will but
call unto your remembrance that the sacryfyce is nothing else but a deed or a
work which expresses the covenant that god has made unto man, and that we
that be the doers either in act or in consent, be such as acknowledges the
testament or covenant to be made unto us. Now then mark I pray you but what
the covenant of god is to us, wherein it is accomplyshed and fulfilled, and what
deed or work does most perfectly represente or show it to the congregation
of the faithful. For the testament, was it not that we should hear Christ
his son, and that then he would be pleased and at one again with us? For the
time when this agremente was fully accomplyshed and made, who doubts but that
it was then, when our savior suffered his most hytter passion for us upon the
cross? Collo. 1.
For as saint Paul says, the blood of Christ's cross made a general peace
betwyxt God and al his creatures that be either in heaven or in earth. Also for
to represent this agreement, both how it was made, and when it was made, what I
pray you can better represent or show it, then the consecration of the
blessed sacrament in the remembrance of his most precious death and passion?
When the priest appointed to consecrate those blessed mysteries, calling unto
him the assystaunce of the holy ghost (as saint Denyce says) and resytynge
the same words that Christ our savior spoke and wylled to be continually
spoken in the celebration of these most blessed mysteries. Dionisius
cherarchia ecclesiastica.
And when by the virtue of the same words, and the holy ghost workynge by
them, the bread is turned into Christ's most sacred body, and the wine into
his most precious blood, is not then the couenaunte of God, the death of
Christ, and the manner of his death expressed unto you? when by your resortinge
to hear mass ye cause the priest to consecrets this blessed sacrament, and he
according to his office, first consecrateth the host, and after shows you
the body and blood of our sauyoure covered with the forms of bread and wine,
(because these miste ries ought not to be seen but of you that be faithful)
when I say you do now as it were with your eyes se him there, of who^ it was
said, here him and I am pleased, Eum vides cum tanges Chrisosto^ ad po. ho. 60.
and when ye se the same body that was slain, covered there under the form
of bread, and the blood that was shed to be there under the form of wine, do
not you then protest that ye be the people to who^ these couenauntes were made,
and that Christ dyed for your re de^ption, and that his death was not by
hanging, drownyng, or strangelyng, where the blood is conteyued within the body
being dead, but that his death was by sheedynge, or deuydynge of his blessed
flesh and blood in sunder? Thus have ye by the celebration of this blessed
sacrament these three things even as it were set before your eyes to be
considered, first that Christ dyed for you, the cause why he dyed for you, and
the manner how he dyed for you, and think you not this work then (good
people) to be most worthy to be called a sacrifice that expresses so plainly
to us these necessary points of our salvation? Or do ye think that any work
of man may be compared with this, not only for that it was institute and
ordained of god, but for that god who made the testament, and we to who^ the
testament is made, do here at the celebracio^ of these blessed mysteries mete
together, he to perform and make good his promise, and we to ask the
benefit of the same, the blessed body of our sauitour being as it were a
pledge or took* betwyxte God and us, that is, that he made the promise, and
that we do now ryghtfully crave it. Chrisost. de euche to. 3. homile ad
monitoria
According whereunto says Chrysostom, good Lord the table is prepared with
the mysteries, and the lamb of God is offered for the, and the priest
prayethe for thee, and the spiritual blood is there flowynge upon the holy
table, and the Seraphins stand round about shadowynge his face with their
wings, and all the incorporal powers prays then with the prist for thee, and
as follows a little after, art not thou then says he ashamed? art thou not
afraid? yea art not thou utterly confounded, August. de tempore ho. 251.
that having this opportunity wylt not labor to get Gods mercy and favor?
Also in like manner does saint Augustine charge his dioceners with coming to
service, and especially upon the sondayes unto mass, and there he says, that
men ought of duty to come unto the Church upon the sondayes and other holy
days to all the service, and if any man be let by necessary business,
that he can not come to the Church, yet he ought to pray at home, but he says
that without any excuse he ought upon the holy day devoutly to here mass, and
blames certain very sharply that do not so. For he says. Adhuc quod detesta
bilius est, quidam ad eccle siam venientes, non intrant, non intendunt
precibus, non expectant cum silencio sanctarum missarum celebrationem. That is,
yea this is much more detestable, certain when they come unto the Church,
either they will not go in, or they will not give them selves unto prayer, or
they will not with scylence abide until the masses be celebrated and ended.
Thus may ye se good people, what these holy fathers did judge upon the mass,
the which our new brethrene has taught you to reuyle and dispyse. But then ye
will ask me what scriptures teaches the mass to be a sacryfyce. And verily
amongst many more then the time will suffer me to resyte, these do teach it.
First the sacryfyce of the Pascal lamb the which our savior did change at his
supper, and placed instead thereof this sacryfyce of his blessed body and
blood, and that the Pascall lamb was a sacrifice the scripture is plain For
say the not the scripture plainly, that all the Israelites should offer up the
Pascall lamb at the even tide? and says not saint Paul that Christ was
offered up a passover. Exodus 11. 1. Cor. 5.
The which words declares that the Pascall lamb was a sacryfyce. Wherefore as
the new testament coming in place of the old, is by right called a
testament, so this coming instead of the sacryfyce, is justly named a
sacryfyce. For as their passover put them in remembrance how they were
delivered forth of Egypt, so does this put us to remember our delyueraunce out
of hell: wherefore it is most plainly to be seen, that this is the sacryfyce
of the Church. For this is a good reason that it should be a sacryfyce,
because it comes in place of a sacryfyce. Gene. 14. Psalm. 109. Hebre. 7.
Secondely the scripture that says Melchisedech to have been a figure in his
priestehod, of our savior Christ's priesthod, teaches this to be a sacryfyce.
For only in the institucion of these blessed mysteries did Christ fulfill the
thing that was figured by Melchisedech, that is, as Melchisedech offered up
material bread, so did Christ offer this heavenly bread that is his own
blessed body under the form of bread. Thyrdely the prophesy of Malachy
teaches it, Malla. 1.
where he says that the gentyles shall offer unto god a new and a most clean
sacryfyce. But why should not this be called a sacryfyce being the sacryfyce
of the new testament, and what thing in cleanenesse can be compared with the
precious body and blood of our savior Christ? Fourthly the words of our
saviors Christ, saying do this in my remembrance, teaches that it is a
sacryfyce, Luke. 22. 1. Cor. 11.
for as those works and things were called sacryfyces, that did sygnyfye his
death to come, so by the same reason should this be a sacryfyce, that
declares it to be past. 1. Cor. 10.
Fyftly saint Paul when he to drive away Christen men from the sacryfyces
done unto the Idols, names the cup of our lord, what other does he, but say
that this is the sacryfyce that Christen men only have? And so comparynge our
sacryfyce and theyrs together, says, that they could not drink of the cup
of our Lord, and of the cup of deuyls. But then ye will say, how can this
be a sacryfyce, saying that it is commonly called a sacrramente. Verily (good
people) it is called a sacrament or a priuitie, for that it appear the to the
Infydels to be one thing, and is known of us to be another as to them it
apereth to be nothing but bread, but we know that it is Christ's body in the
form of bread, and of this secret or pryuie being hear, it is called a
sacrament. It is also called a sacryfyce for that the priest does consecrate
them to represente the death and passion of our savior Christ, so that there
be two uses (good people) of these mysteryes, the one to be eaten, whereof
Christ speaks saying. Take, eat, this is my body, the other is to put us in
mind of his death, whereof he says, do this in remembrance of me. In the
first use it is a sacrament, in the second a sacryfyce. But then ye will
say again that the celebracion of these mysteries commonly called the
sacrynge, is but one part of the mass, truth it is, that the sacryfyce which
Christ left to be offered in his Church, is in deed but that part which we
commonly call the sacrynge, and as for the other parts, they be either prayers
or ceremonies wherewith the sacryfyce is bewtyfyed and commended, even as a man's
body is bewtyfied with comely apparel. But yet as the clothes be one, that
makes the body comely, and the body that is made comely with them, is
another, and the body is better then the apparel, so be the ceremonies and
the sacryfyce diverse in the mass, though we call them both by one name. And
as the kings person is but one, whether he be in his dublet and hose, or in
his cote, or in his gown, or in his robes, so is the celebracyon of these
blessed mesteryes the offering of a sacryfyce, with what kind of ceremonies
so ever they be mynystred, so that there be nothing left out that Christ did
ordeyne. Platiu^ de viris ponti.
And thus do we read that saint Peter said mass at Antyoche, and used no mo
cerymonyes nor prayers at his mass, but the Pater noster. Mary no man may
change or leave forth the ceremonies, because that obedyence is to be showed,
and an vnyformytie is to be observed, and slander is to be avoided. Thus then
have I showed you what a sacryfyce is, Hie criam diuersitas misatu^ videlicet
chri. Basil et ceterorum non in sacrificio sed sacrificii cerimoniis.
and how it is always joined with the testamente, and priesthod, what
dyuersities there be of testaments, and sacryfyces, and how the mass is a
sacryfyce representynge the death of our savior, and the body and blood of our
savior being presented unto God by us, is called an oblacyon, because the
priest whom we cause there to consecrate or say mass, sets them as pledges
betwyxte God and us, to witness that he by them is made our God, and we by
them are made his people, the which sacryfyce if we do faithfully believe and
duly mynyster, shall evermore preserve, continue, and increase the love and
amytie that is made by Christ our savior, betwixt almighty God and us, to whom
be honor and praise, now and ever. Amen.

Of faith and knowledge of God.
VAni sunt omnes homines in quibus non subest selentia dei (that is) All the
men be but vain that want the knowledge of god, these words of the wise man
(good people) how true they be, it shall be easily seen, if we do consider the
great and deep wits of the Philosophers, to what vanity they were brought,
for that they wanted the true knowledge of god. This I say their confusion
does well apere to those that reads their works, and search with what vain
questions and disputacio^s their brains and heads were occupied: yea it shall
appear plainly to al those that do but read the first chapter of saint Paul to
the Romans. Great kings and noble men for want of this knowledge, Roma. 1.
have sodeinly come unto confusion and shame, the which thing is to be seen
not only in the^ of whom we read in the scriptures, and other books of
histories, but the erperie^ce also that we have of certain ungodly persons in
this our time does most plainly set it before our eyes. Do ye not se that not
only Golias: but that al ungodly persons how strong so ever they be, be most
sone confounded by his or their strengthes? Where or when have ye seen but that
the stout me^, the strongest, or as they be called masters of fe^ce, have bin
more shamefully confounded then the weaker or febler me^, yea how seldom do
ye se that such lack wounded or maimes? and how few of the^ dies peaceably
in their beds, who knows not that the rich man is al his life troubled in the
getting, keeping, and bestowynge of his richesse and yet is not only rebbed of
the^, but ofttymes slain for his richesse: To be brief, al states of me^ are
known to be vain being void of this knowledge. For as the earth and the
world should be altogether out of frame, if they were not diligently dight and
ordered by the bodily labor of man, and as ma^s body could do nothing but lie
still as a block, corrupt and stynke, if it be destitute or forsaken of the
soul: so (...) soul of man being divided from God, and igno^^^^ or not
knowing God, can do nothing but hurt (...) self, and bring both the body
whereunto she is as^^^^te or joined, and all the things that the body med
(...) with, out of order, whereof comes all the confu^^^^ and misery that is
in this world. Wherefore good ^^^^le, if ye would be rydde out of this vanity,
if ye ^^^^de live welthely, if ye would live as men agreeable (...) nature of
man: then can there be nothing so plesaunt to you, as the knowledge of God, so
much desired or wyshed of you as the knowledge of god. This ^^^th all the
richesse, dignities, or wysedomes in the ^^^lde, no riches, no principality,
no cunning or learning can be compared to this. For what other science where
that teaches such things as this does, that is (...) say, which teaches
what god is, what the Angels be, that the soul of man is, yea that teaches
heaven and he joys thereof, hell and the pains thereof, the world and the
right ordering or use thereof. And what scolers are more happy the^ they that
do learn these things and what other science can make the scolers and learners
her of most rychely and euerlastyngely to live in heaven but this: if men were
perfectly instruct and traded in this, then should men stand lessenede of al
other senses, and yet should things much better floryshe and prosper with us
then they do. For how little would the use of subtle and craftye arts avail,
if all men through this knowledge were adicte, bent, and given unto
simplicity? How little need should men have of physic if death did rather
please the^ then life, sickness and health, like pleasant and grievous? The
regard of law should be small if men were persuaded rather to suffer, the^ to
do wrong. To be short, if this faculty and science were truly planted in men's
hearts, all miseries should cease, and all plenty of happynes should be
increased. But alas in this our miserable time, through our prating and
disputing of this knowledge: what heaps of errors and heresies are spronge in
or about this faculty or knowledge: this out knowledge, which is faith, is
utterly decade amongst us, for as saint Paul says, Qui vult accedere ad
deu^, Hebre. 11.
primo oportet credere deu^ esse that is, that he which will come to God, must
come by faith. Augustine super.
And saint Augustine says Non currendo, sed crede^do peruenimus ad deu^. that
is, we must come unto god not by running but by belief, this faith or
knowledge good people, being so necessary, and yet amongst us so piteously
decayed, I shall exhort you as ye do tender the health both of your bodies and
sowles, that you prepare your selves most earnestly to learn it, for without it
both you and all that you have are but vain: And as this is of al sciences the
chiefest, so it requires scolers that shall be most laborious and diligent, to
the intent the^ that this heavenly knowledge may be the better opened unto you, I
will show you first what faith is, then how faith must be used, and then
how it must be defended, that we do not err or be deceived therein. First
then concerning the definition of faith: ye shall understand that saint Paul
defines it to be an argument of the things that we hope for, and the
substance of those things that do not apeare: that is to say, Hebre. 11.
faith is the cause why we trustinge in the promyses of God, are content to
bear all adversity, to do all duties, hoping thereby to be rewarded of God.
And also faith is the stay or assuredness which we have of, and concerning
the things that can not be comprehended by our senses. As for example, the
knowledge which we have of God, his Angels, and of heaven: Also of the devil,
hell, and the pains that be there, likewise of our sowles, and their
immortalnes, and to use few words, either of the beginnynge, the rewle,
governance, or ending of the world. Faith, I say is the very ground and
foundation whereupon all man's knowledge is builded, in the contemplacion of
all these so great and weyghty matters, so that no man being of him self
able to know these things, must learn them of some other that does not
vnperfectely know these things, and that is just, honest, and true that man
may safely and with out danger believe and credyte, the party teaching these
things to him, the which matter (that is) the report of things unknown,
that it may be the better perceived, I shall desire you to mark three
things, which be these. First who is the reporter, what be the things that
are reported and what they must be to whom this report is made. For the first,
it is most certain that God is only the reporter, or some such as are
purposely sent of him, to make the report according as we read god to have
reported to Adam and Eve in Paradise, the great misery that they should be in,
Gent. 3. I. bide^.
if they should eat of the apple. And after their faule, he reported both their
redemption and the deuyls confusion, which was after wrought by our sauyoure
Christ. Also he reported to Cain that Abels blood cried unto God for
vengeance. Gene. 4. Gene. 5.
Unto Noyhe reported that Gods justice was provoked to punyshe the world for
sin, and that he yet and his household should be saved in an Arc, to Abraham
he made report why the cities were to be destroyed, Gene. 18. Gene. 22. Math.
4. Math. 3. Math. 10.
and how that all people should be blessed in his seed, and because I would
not be long, did not our savior being God preach the gospel? and did not
the father report that Christ was his derely beloved so, did not our savior
say, 2. Cor. 5.
that it should not be his Apostles that should speak, but the spirit of our
father that should speak in the^, does not saint Paul say Legatione dei
fungimur apud vos, that is, we be gods ambassadors, unto you do not all the
prophets say Hec dicet dominus, thus says our Lord, of the which al and many
mo textes that might be gathered, it does most evidently apeare that god is the
reporter, or such as be sent from him, of all those things that Christen men
ought to believe: and here is to be noted good people, first the merciful
goodness of god, who does so vouchesafe to teach such sorry and wretched
creatures. Secondely, how happy be we that have such a master. Thyrdly, how
safe and wholesome are those lesson which we learn of him, the which thing if
we did pythely consider: O how they would make our stonye hearts to melte: O
how myndefull should we be about these lessons: O how little would we
regard then all the other things that be, or might be taught unto us, either
by the world, the flesh, or the devil, touching the things which he
teaches, they be still manifest, and are always in a readiness to be seen,
and learned in his word and therefore does his word remain, because that the
things that he reports might be always in a readiness, John. 5.
when men should or would learn and know them: of the which words and
things some were spoken and reported before the time of our redemption, and
some about the time of our redemption. Before the time was the creacion of man,
the fall of man, promyses of man, reparinge, and ordinances to prepare and
ieade man toward his redemption, the which all had been most incredible if
any other should have reported them but God. How be it, now when we se the
things so to have common to pass as it was reported that they should, now is
it euidente how true he is that made the report, touching the things that
were taught at the time or about the time of our redemption, they were so
joyful that the reportynge of them was called the gospel, as one should say,
glad tidings. As the Angel said, lo I show to you great joy that you have a
savior borne: for wot you well good people, Luke. 2.
that this was a joyful tidings to all the faithful that knew how they had
been long divided from God, and had been thrall and captyue to the devil,
Luke. 10.
to hear that now they should be delivered from the claws of the foul
fiende, and brought in the favor of their first and true master owner and
maker. Again this I say my dear brethren (considered) I mean the thraldom
that they were in, and the joyful liberty that they should be restored unto,
made the faithful hearts to rejoice, concerning the things that be reported
in the gospel, Luke. 2 John. 8.
some prepares us toward god, as penance, other be of such sort, that by
them God takes us to him, and gives his grace to us, the which things
because they be special tokens of his favor toward us, and our
obedientnesse to him, therefore they be called sacraments, as one should say
pryuie tokens of his fatherly love toward us, for there be no lovers, but
they will have some things so privy to themselves, that other shall not know
them, and these in Greek be called mysteries, in Latin sometime Arcana, and
sometime Sacramenta, in English, secrets or priuities. Thus we be in the
water of baptism, but washed in our body, to the sight of the unfaithful, but
in that knowledge and sight that we have, we know that we be so washed in our
soul that we be made new creatures. Also in confirmation we be but vncted
with the holy oil, and to the sight of the faythlesse be but vncted: for the
faythlesse do term it smurrynge, in the reproach of the blessed sacrament, but
we know that then we receive the grace of the holy ghost, which soupleth our
sowles to resist the devil, and to obey gods commandments, as oil causes
our bodies to be soupple and nimble, both to avoid the things that be evil,
and to do things that be good. In the most blessed sacrament of the altar
the faythlesse thinks that we do eat bread: but we know that it is the
precious body of our savior which was given for us, and the same is to be
considered in the residue of the sacraments. There be other things that be
reported to us when we thus (as I have said) are received and admytted unto
God, of the which, some do belong to our duties to be done, and some be
promyses or things promised to us for doing of our duties, as the
resurrection of our bodies, and increase of our joys in heaven. These things
(good people) when I do consider, I am constrained to cry out, and alas that
ever our hearts should be so bewitched to regard gold and silver, yea meat,
drink, and apparel so much, and these so little: alas what comparacion is
there betwixt those, and these? but again now to the scholars, who seith not
how obedient they should be to such a master: O how ought we to obey him
with all the power of our sowles, with all the senses and parts of our bodies,
with all our goods and worldely substance. Thus our father Abram did obey
when he left his country, his acquaintance, and richesse, and sought them
again there where god had appointed. Also thus did he subdue his reason and
senses (which said that he and his wife being old, should have no child) unto
God reportynge that he should have one. Also the Centurion whose faith was so
commended of our sauyoure, that the like was not to be found in all Israel.
Gene. 13.
How I say did he subdue both his sense and reason, to the will and pleasure
of God, when sense and reason said that Christ must of necessity come into
his house, or else his child could not be healed, and yet he answered that it
was sufficient for Christ to speak the word, and in his absence to heal
the child. Math. 8. Math. 16.
In like manner did saint Peter subdue his reason and senses to the report of
God the father, saying by our savior, this is my well-beloved son. etc. Or
else if he should have been taught by flesh and blood as the Jews were, he
should have known Christ only to have be the son of our Lady and Joseph, as
the Jews did. Furthermore at the time when Christ said unto his disciples,
and to the Jews, that his blessed flesh was to be eaten, John. 6.
then did the Jews prefer reason before the report of our sauyoure, and asked
of their reason and senses, how that might be true: and because reason and
senses teach no truth thereof, therefore did they depart and go their way, but
the blessed Apostles who gave more to Christ then to their senses, and subdued
their reason and senses unto the saying of our savior, and did say, Verba vi
ta eterna habes, that is to say, thou have the words of everlasting life, as
one should say, though we by our senses and reason, do not know how thy
flesh must be eaten (for then the institution of the blessed sacrament was to
them unknown) yet be we most sure that thy word can not be but true. Also
saint Paul says, Cord creditur ad iustitiam ore aute^ confessio sit ad sa
lutem. Roma. 10.
And therefore we may not examine what reason and senses says in those matters
that be taught to us of God, but we must with an obedient heart believe the^, and
how folyshe so ever they apere to our reason and senses, yet we must not be
ashamed openly to confess them. 1. Cor. 1.
Here we may consider now how hard a thing it is to be a true student or
scholar of faith. For like as our youth is loath to leave their sensual pleasure
and to obey the instructions of their elders, that they might learn cunning
and knowledge: so hard is it for us that be fleshely, to forsake our reason
and senses, and to embrace with all humility and obedience, 1. Cor. 2.
the saying and lesson of almighty God. Again here is to be seen what
reverence they that be faithful do give unto god, that so offer them selves
unto god, that they will suffer them selves not to be taught any further by
their reason, or any other creature, then they se them to agree with god, and of
him they do and will learn, though he teach things, the which apere to the
judgment of all other to be most untrue. We also may se here how al
faithless people, and especially heretics do blaspheme god, which gives
more credyt to their reason, senses, and other experience, then they do unto
god: I mean that he speaking of the blessed sacrament, says it to be his
body, and reason, sense, and experience, that it is bread. These I say that
rather follow the judgment of these creatures, then the report of god, do make
that they be more honest, just, and true, then god, the which how blasphemous
it is, judge you. Now the^ to come unto the second part of our purpose (that
is to teach the use of our faith) that is very well declared in the first
article of our Creed, where we say that we believe in god the father, and so
forth: the which is as saint Augustine says, through faith so to cleave unto
god, that we know him to be so necessary a helper, that without him we can do
nothing that good is. John. 15.
For as the branch is dead and frutelesse, except it remain in the vine: so
be we void of al fruteful virtues except his grace do work in us. In so much
that as saint Paul says, 1. Cor. 12.
no man can say Jesus to be our Lord, but by the holy ghost, this is our
wekenesse, and the only help of god is in deed a remedy to the same, the
which was so well known to the prophet Dauyd, that he let not to say unto
God, Psalm. 72.
thou (says he) have holden me by the right hand, and in thy good will haste
thou led me. According to the same says saint Paul, that he could not
think one good thought of him self: 2. Cor. 3.
but al his sufficiency was of God. Saint Peter in like manner consideringe
how needful it was thus through faith to be joined unto god, 1 Petri. 2.
byddeth that we should be as children that were new borne, desyryng that is
reasonable, and that is void of craft and deceyte, in the which exhortacion of
saint Peter (most dear brethrene) calling us by the name of chryldren that be
lately borne, is most plainly declared and set before our eyes what it is to
believe in god, which is says he, to behave our self toward god, as suckynge
babyes do behave them selves toward their parents, in the which it is not
only to be seen, that as the parents be necessary for the children, whiles
they be yet infantes: so is god to us, but it expressethe three especial
properties that should be in us, as be in the infa^tes, which be these. First so
to believe his parents, that the infant knows nothing, neither can he call
any thing by any other name then his parents do teach him, in so much that
if the parents would teach their infantes that a sheep were to be called an
ox, and a horse a sheep and so forth, change the name of the things, and not
suffer the child to here them called by any other names, the child I say
would call all the things by the same names that he hereth his parents call
them by: The like simplicity (good Christen people) was in all good men, and
should be in us that be faithful. For this we se to have been in saint Paul,
2. Cor. 5.
in so much that he knew nothing, after or according to the flesh, which
was as much as if he had said that he had changed his knowledge, from the
teaching of his senses, unto the teaching of our heavenly father almighty
God, where unto he moves us, in that he bids us to be renewed in the sense
of our understanding. Ephe. 4.
This simplicity (dear brethrene) if it were in us, would we reason and
dispute of gods mysteries as we do? if we had our senses taught of, or by god,
would we be so proud and presumptuous, so subtle and so crafty? No no, wot
you well we would not: We say we believe in god, but have we this first point
which is chyldyshe simplicity, and much less then have we the residue. The
second is, that as children uses in their infancy neither to bye or crave for
the thing that they lack or want of their parents, and at their hands do
receive the same things: so should we do that be Christen men. For we should
say with the prophet Dauyd, Psalm. 21.
Tu es qui extraxisti me de ve^tre matris me, spes mea ab vberibus matris me,
in te periect us sum ex vtero, that is. Thou art he that takes me forth of the
womb, and even from my mother pappes has my trust bin in thee, and from the
womb was I cast unto thee, and for the like purpose (that is, that we should
crave upon him as children do at or of their parents) he says, John. 16.
verily I say unto you, what so ever thing ye shall ask of my father in my
name, he will give it to you, also ask and ye shall receive, seek and ye shall
find. etc. Further to encorage us the rather to ask as children, Math. 7.
of our heavenly father, he shows how ready he is to hear, and to give the
things to us that we ask, saying, which of you being demanded of his
child to give bread to his child, will give a stone? and so according that our
heavenly father will much sooner then any carnal father, give the things to us
that be necessary for us. Here then may we learn good brethren, first our
dignity, which is, that we wretches be admytted by prayer not only to speak
with god, but also that he will grant our suits and requests. O how blessed
an estate is this? O the comfort that is thus in prayer to be sought and found?
A poor beggar that can not be suffered to speak with a temporal prince shall be
so easily admytted to speak with him that is the prince of all princes: and by
promyses after a certain manner hired so to do. Is not our coldenes in prayer
worthy to be condemned? and we that will not crave are we not worthy to fast.
Secondely, here is to be seen how careless and quiet we might be saying that
we may have all things for the asking. How happily might we be following
the council of the prophet Dauyd, Psalm. 54.
to cast all our care upon God, that he may norishe us, then what should need
our solicitude and carfulness? what should then need our craft and
dissimulation, and such like. The third is, how wholesome some might these
things be trow you that are given to us of this wise and loving father? And
contrarywyse how dangerous and perylous be the things that be given to us by
the devil of covetousness, by the devil of flattery, or of ambition or such
like? from thence (derely beloved) comes our robbryes, our murders, our
treasons and such like, that our riches, and our promotions are not given to us
of our father, but of the fiende, and therefore as the fiende did kill the
soul of him to whom he gave them: so is it his pastime and pleasure to kill
and murder other mo by taking the same away again. Let us then ask of our
father, and refuse to take ought at the devil. The third thing that is in
children, and that must be in us that believe in God, is loving obedience,
that is, as good children to obey their parents rather for love, then for
fear: so should we obey god. John. 14.
Whereunto our savior seems to move us, when he says, if ye love me keep my
commandments. Se here the louyngenes of our heavenly father, who moves not
for fear of punysheme^t, but for natural love and pity due unto such a
father, moves us to our duty, and yet though he do chiefly move us to
observe and keep his commandments through love: yet because he sees us to
be slack to consider it, he adds also some tokens of love. Also of fear,
saying if I be your father, where is my honor and reverence: if I be your
master, where is my fear: Mala. 1.
thus he exhorts the willing and obediente for love, and the stubberne for
fear of punyshement. But woo unto us at this time, whom another love nor yet
fear can cause to be obedient. Whatsore plages has God cast upon this realm?
and how has he taken away sometime our corn, our grass: and yet will we
rather that our sheep and bease should dye for hunger, then we will diminishe
the pryses of them. Sometime he destroys our corn and cattle both: and yet
rather then we will relent and obey him, we will make that one stryke of corn
shall be better then ten, and oneshepe or beast shall be worth fystene. Is this my
brethrene to believe? is this to believe in god? is this the token of one that
will be reformed by god? or is it not rather the token of one that would fight
with god: but consider, O consider you that do fight ageynste him, that you can
not (I say) prevail against him. Remember the dredful day of judgment, when
ye rebellious children must apere before him. Here then may you se that to
believe in god is first: that as simple children do know no person but him and
all things by him. The second is, that as the child hangs altogether upon
the prouysion of his parents, and shows his needs to them: the like must we
do to him in whom we do believe. The third, as the child is ruled by his
parents chiefly of love, and where that wants, for fear of punyshement: in
like manner must they do that believe in God. The third thing that is to be
observed in our faith, is that we take heed and beware that the devil our
enemy do not deceive us, as he did our mother Eve in paradyce, Gene. 3.
and as he deceived all the people whom he caused in the time of nature, and
of the law, to commyt Idolatry, and as he after in the time of grace has
caused no small number of such as has borne the name of Christen men, to be
heretics, And therefore byddeth saint Paul, 2. Cor. 2.
the Corinthians to take heed that they be not deceived by the devil, whose
mischeuous thoughts and imaginacions was not unknown, neither to the blessed
Apostles, nor yet to the Corinthians. And Christ our savior in sundry places
byddeth us to beware of him, and of his malycyous messengers, And saint Peter
tells us before, that as there were false prophets in the time of the law:
2. Pe. 2.
that so there should be teachers of false and damnable sects in the time of
the Gospel. And we know by experience that there has been thousands sense he
gave us warning to take heed of them, and to eschew them, the which wholesome
monicion given unto us by our savior, and by his blessed Apostles, and we
saying that such as did not regard their monition, have most damnably fallen
into heresy and blasphemous vanities. O how ear nestly and effectuously should
they cause us to be afraid and to beware what spirit it is that we give
credyte unto. Is there any body so desperate in his bodily health, that when
he hears his physytion say, drink not of this for it is poison, and that
seith before his eyes men that did drink thereof to be poisoned, that will yet
without all respects to be had, other to his physician that monysshe the him,
or to the man who he seethe dead with the poison, drunk thereof? And alack I
say, ought not our sowles to be more dear to us, then is the body of a man to
any man: but how then think you that we being but as babyes, and Gods
suckynge children, can be able to avoid such cruel danger of that
mischeuous beast the devil? Verily if ye list to know it: other ways is
there none, then to keep us within the house of our father, which is the
Catholic Church. For the keeper of this house is so strong, that it is
impossible that there should come any stronger that shall be able to overcome him,
Math. 12.
and to spoil his house. This house is builte upon the rock that all the
gates and power of hell can not prevail ageynste it. Math. 16.
They that remain in this house, 1. Ioh. 14. 1. Timo. 3.
are so suer not to be deceived with any damnable error, that they have the
spirit of all truth to their scholemaster, this house is fre from error and
heriticall blyndnes, that saint Paul calls it the pyller and the stay of
truth. The doctrine of this schole has been so liefe and dear to all the good
men that has been, and yet be, that every man says that he believes the
Catholyke Church, and that every man is bound in the peine of dampnation, to
reteyne and keep the Catholyke faith. etc. How be it the devil our enemy
ceasseth not to persuade men to think, that this house of god is only
frequented and occupied of and by them that be good. For God (as he would them
to think) will suffer no unthriftiness to be in his house, and so consequently he
would make us to forgette, and to be ignorant of this our fathers house,
because we do not know in what part of the world that such good men do
dwell. 2. Tim. 2.
But (good people) saint Paul teaches the contrary to this: saying that it
is a great house, and that there be in it vessels both of honor and
dishonor. And our savior says, Math. 13.
that it is like to a net that catches both good fyshes and bad, the which
shall be suffered to continue together until it shall be given in commandment to
the Angels at the end of the world, to deuyde the evil from the good: so
that this doubt above mentioned, is nothing else but a craft and a sleyght of
our gostly enemy the devil, used to the intent and purpose, that we might (as
I said) forget to know and deserne our fathers house. But that the devil
lyethe, and that it is known: Mark thou good Christen man and woman, that
Christ our master says it to be builded as a city upon a hill, that can not
be hyd, and he bids that for the redress of such matters as be betwyxt thy
neighbor and the, Math. 5.
that thou should apeale to the church, Math. 18.
and there thou must (in pain to be cast clean out of his favor) obey and
abide the determinacion of the Church, the which were altogether spoken in
vain if the Church could not be known. Wherefore by this that I have said,
ye may se most dearly beloved, first the danger that we be in, and how that
to avoid the same we must keep us in the house of our father, which is the
Church. Ye se how craftily the devil goes about with his false and
mischeuous flattery, to hyde the house from you, that you should not know it:
how be it, if the devil should set up a thousand houses, as he has set up
many already, to resemble so our fathers house, that we should not be able to
deserne it from the^: yet shall I show you how, and in what manner ye shall be
able at al times to deserne our fathers house and his insunder. First ye shall
understand that the house of our father was first built, and that the devils
buildinges be but counterfeite and forged to some similitude of our fathers
house: wherefore as the thing must be before the similitude of the thing, so
must the house of our father be of more antique, and ancient building, then
the deuyls house, or houses that be made to some simylitude, or shape of our
fathers houses, and therefore says Tertuliam against the heretics that be
the deuyls wryghtes to build his house. Tertulia^ de prescripti.
That must be the truth which was first, and that must be false which is
the latter. And thus did Dauyd say that he knew which was the faithful
people of God, and what religion did please God. Psalm. 77. Deu. 5.
For he has hard it with his ears and that his fathers told him. Also in
his book of the law, god bids us to ask of our fathers, and that they
shall tell us, and our auncytoures, and that they shall show to us gods true
religion. John. 10.
Also our savior in the gospel calling us by the name of sheep, says that
his sheep does know the voice of their pastor or shepard, and that they flee
and run away when they here a stranger, which is as much to say, that the
true Christen men must keep and reteyne such doctrine as they have been
accustomed unto, and that they must eschew the doctrine that is newely and
lately spronge. Ephe. 4.
Also saint Paul byddeth us that we do not as children that are led away with
every blast of doctrine. Augustine contra fu^damentu^ macheoru^ C. 5.
Moreover then this, saint Augustine says that he would not believe the gospel,
but that the authority of the Church did move him, and in very deed by good
reason. For how should we otherwise be able to say that this is saint John's
gospel, or that saint Lukes gospel should rather be received, then the
gospel of Nicodemus or of saint Thomas and other, but that we be so taught by
the Church. Also saying that the Church which is gods house has continued
this. 1556. years, and was never cast yet down: we may be sure it to be the
house that is buylt as Christ says upon the rock. The second argument or
token to know the Church by, is the greatness and largeness of the same.
For the houses of the fiende belyttle pretty feate houses, builded but in
corners of the world, as it might be in England, in Germany, and so forth:
but our fathers house is so ample and large, Psalm. 106 Psalm. 18.
that it reaches from the rysynge of the son to the going down of the
same. For as the holy prophet Dauyd did prophecy of it, before the voices of
his blessed Apostles, whose diligence he did use in buyldinge of his house,
Psalm. 22.
went through the whole world, and the same prophet says, that the earth, the
world, and all that is in them, belongs unto our Lord and master Christ,
when he sent forth his workmen to buyld his house, he did not send them into
England only, or into Germany only: Mark. 16
but bad them go into the whole world and preach the gospel. And saint Paul
does most sharply rebuke the Corinthians for that they suffered the devil to
begin his building with them, 1. Cor. 14.
and therefore he byddeth them consider if the word of god went no farther but
to them, and remained only with them, doing them to understand thereby, that
they should not suffer them selves to be divided from the residue of the
world, that had received and kept the gospel so well as they did, and
according thereunto unto says saint Augustine, as we know by Gods word
where Paradyce was planted: August. co^tra petil. liber. 2. Capi. 13.
so do we know by the same, where the Church is, that is amongst all nations,
having her beginning at Jerusalem, whereby we be monyshed of the strength of
our father, who has subdued the whole world to his obedience. For he says,
in every corner of the world some there be that be his. Also we may se the
wekenes of the devil, who in building of his heresies is so weke, that he
like a chief starteth up now in this corner of the world, and now in that,
or as it were a prince with his army of rebels, or apostatas that forsakes
their religion, does what he can to withstand the army of Christ, in some
part or portion of Christ's dominion. But as rebels be eftsoon brought to
their confusion, so has always his armies from time to time been confounded
and brought to naught. And yet further, as rebellions in their rebellyon,
pretend some title of reformation, myndinge in deed ruin and destruction: so
does his rebels pretend that they be moved by the gospel, which is the law
of the Church, but as it is in vain to alege the law against rebels: so it is
in vain to aleage the scripture and to dyspute with heretyckes, but as the
power of the realm must be bent ageynste rebels, so must the multitude of
the learned men, that have been and yet be defe^ders against the assaults of
heretics. The third thing that the house of god is known by, from the
house of the devil, is the consent, the agreement and unity of faith that is
in Gods house. For as the Prophet says, Psalm. 43.
In the house of Godde they walked with a consent or agreement: and in anther
place he says, Behold how pleasant a thing it is for brethrene to dwell
together, Act. 2.
and in the Acts of the Apostles we read, that they that were admitted first
to this house, were cousentynge altogether in the temple. And saint Paul
willing the Ephesyans to reteyne and keep the same unity of faith, Ephe. 4.
says to the Ephesynns, that as there is one Lord, and one baptism: so must
they have one faith. Also the same saint Paul bids the Romans to beware of
such as do sow discord and contencion amongst them. Roma. 16.
Also for this unity to be the better meynteyned in his house, which is the
Church, Roma. 12. 1. Cor. 12.
like as God has placed the members of the body in a most decent and necessary
order, and has appointed one member to be the chiefeste, or as it is called the
head: so has God appointed in his Church diverse degrees of mynisters, and one
head of them all, who for the time of the Apostles was saint Peter, and
afterward as it does well apere by the hystoryes from time to time, were his
successors the bishops and popes of Rome: But contrarywyse in the house of the
devil there be diversities of religions, sects, continual mutacion,
contencion, and to be brief: in deed nothing, but a babilonicall confusion.
To be short, now the Church, as I have said, is known by these marks,
first by antiquity, secondely by the largeness, or vniuersalnesse, and
thyrdely by consent and unity. But here peradventure some will say that if I
should measure the Church by vniuersalnes, or largenes, then shall the Turks
religion be the Church, for that is most universal. And if I say that the
Church shall be deserned by the consent of the doctoures, then it is certain
that the doctors do not in all things agree. To the first I answer, that
when I say that the church of Christ may be known by the vniuersalnes of her
place in the world, I do not say so to make thereby any difference betwyxte
the Turks religion and Christ, for that were altogether in vain, saying that
the Turks do not challenge any part or title of Christ to them, that men
should need to make notes to deserne the Turks and Christ's religion in
sunder: but I do say it that men might be able to deserne betwyxte the
herytycall Church, which chalengeth to it the title of Christ, and is not of
him. And the Catholyke Church which has the title, and is in deed Christ's.
And touching the disagreinge or error of the doctors. First I say that
their disagreinge is not such as makes parts, sects, fashyons, and divisions
from the whole body, head, and members, nor yet for any necessary article of
our faith, all which may be seen to be amongste the heretics. For where the
catholyke powers sometimes discentynge amongst them selves in matter of no
great portion, do charitably without condempnynge either of other, or making
of parts, each sufferynge the other to have his or their opinion: the
heretyckes do plain the contrary, deuidynge them selves from the head and
members, and drawyng other to their parts, each of them condempnynge other.
Secondely I say that though the doctors of the Church have been deceived, or
erred, yet do I say that they were never so universally deceived: neither was
their error so universally received, but that one or other have espied it and
corrected it: and finally they have each others error so corrected, that look
whatsoever is universal and catholyke, that is most suer to be free from
error, so that though the doctors may be deceived every one of the^ in his
private judgment, yet that whereupon they all do agree must needs be most
true, for without the especial grace of the holy ghost (who is always there
where men be gethered together in Christ's name) it were impossible that so
many men of learning, and of such zeal toward the truth, should otherwise
agree then of a truth in deed. Thus then good people have I taught this faith
that is so necessary, that without it all that we have is nothing, what it is,
and who is the schole master and teacher of it, what the things be that we
must learn by it, and who be fit scholars for it. Also I have told you
how you must use it, that is, ye must in such sort believe in God the teacher
of it, that ye must be as children that knows nothing but him, and that
takes and learn the all things to be as he does teach you, and that does
not provide for your self, but ask and crave the things that ye want of
him, and that ye must obey him as most loving children. Thyrdly, I have
showed you how needful it is to beware, and to take heed of the ghostly enemy
the devil that he deceive not the simplicity of your faith, and how ye may
know to avoid the danger, the which thing that we may all do, god out
heavenly father grant, and give us grace, to who^ be honor and praise world
without end. Amen.

Of the primative and chief authority.
MIlitia est vita hominis super terram, Job. 7
Man's life (says Job) is a warfare upon the earth. A wonders thing good
people, to se what misery we be in whiles we be here, as it appears by the
testimonye of this holy father, for we be not borne (says he) to play and
pastyme, but we be borne to be warryers: And ageynste whom do we feyght trow
ye? Verily says saint Paul our feyght is not ageynste u^eshe and blood, Ephe.
6.
but ageynste the foul and mighty fiendes of hell, neither do we strive to be
delivered out of temporal bondage, which shall have an end, but out of the
bondage that is endelesse and continual. O how terrible is that place, 1.
Cor. 9.
where there is no comfort to be found? O how grievous are those torments,
where not one joint of our bodies or sowles shall be free? Totn^ corpus
prouciatur in gehe^nam. Math. 5.
Do ye know what pain it is to have but one sore finger? What is it then to
have all the body and soul enwrapped in the endelesse sorrow and woe. If we win
the field, our toy and triumph shall be such as no heart can think, nor tongue
(as the prophet says) can speak: Saying then that we being as babes must
fight against such a great gyaunt as the devil is, Esie. 64. 1. Cor. 2.
and for so great a price as heaven and hell be. Se I pray you how manfull we
ought to be, and what preparaunce and readiness is necessary for this field,
and how much we ought to procure out own saftie. Do ye not se what preparaunce
men use to make, Luke. 14.
when they will feyght against their temporal enemies? And shall not we do it
much more in this battle with our ghostly enemies? Is there not greater danger
in this, then in that. And what is the chiefeste defense that the souldyers
have against their enemies? Is it not the keeping of their array? is not then
the battle lost, when the array is broken? And does not saint Paul call upon
us to keep our array, when he says, 1. Cor. 7.
let every man abide in that vocation that he is called in, whether he be Jew
or Gentle: But how then can we keep our array if we have no capytayne? Do ye
not se that it is necessary in an army that he which is the chiefeteyne do
appoynte some liefetenaunt by whose authority the soldiers may be set in
their array, and that by him such may be punished as will needs break their
array. Even so good people, Roma. 12.
it is necessary in the Church of God to have heads and rulers, to keep us in
an order whiles we feyght against the devil, Nemo sibi presinnat hominem.
Hebre. 5. Quod sig nis non obedit. 2 Thessalonians. 3
that when so ever the devil shall labor either by vicious behauour to bring
us in a damnable condition of living, or by wrong understanding of the
scriptures into heresy and misbeliefe, men may be kept in their array, and not
every man suffered to do and say what him ^^steth, the lack of the which
governance, what it has done in this realm, and what confusyon we have bin
brought unto, all the whole realm to their great grief does feel. Prouer. 11
We se now how true it is that Solomon says, Vbi non est gubernator corruit
ciuitas, that is to say, where there is no governor the city decays, saying
therefore both the swarms of vice and of opinions, that has overwhelmed this
region, which was before such confusion) one of the welthyeste regions in
Chrystendome. 2. Tim. 2.
And saying that we know by the report of the scriptures, that we be spiritual
souldyers, and therefore must have a spiritual head, and saying we know now
by experience (at the lest such as have regard to god and to heaven) the
euyls that ensue upon our array or order being broken, and finally we herynge
Christ our king saying to our capitaines that who so receaueth them receaueth
him, Luke. 10.
and who so dispyseth them dispyseth him: we are compelled to think that it
must be much for our commodity and safety also. First to know whether there
be any such captain appointed of god or not. Secondely, when and how they
were appointed. And thyrdely, that we may the better obey them, and be ruled by
them, It is necessary to know who they be. The which things done, and
sufficiently persuaded by gods word, I doubt not but al true Christen men and
women will be ruled and ordered by them. Wherefore in this homyly or sermonde
(good people) shall be entreated these three things. First whether god does
apoynte any such authority or not. Secondely when and how he apoynteth them.
And thyrdely who they be that are so appointed. At our first entering or goinge
toward this great and weyghty matter, I shall desire you and charge you also
in gods behalf, that ye put from you the vain opinion, or rather the error
of fortune, that is, that ye think not any thing to be done by fortune, as
who should say, he is rich, he is poor, he is a man of honor, he is a
sernaunte, he is hanged, or drowned, because it was his ward or fortune. For
there is no such fortune or ward in deed, but all things are ruled and
disposed by god, in so much that Christ our savior says, Math. 10.
that not one sparrowe falls into the fowlers net but by Gods appointment,
much more then be the diversities of man's calling of God. Luke. 13.
Again when the tower of Silo fell and slew certain persons, it might have
bin thought of some that the tower fell by chance, and that it was those men's
desteny there to be at the fall. But Christ says plainly that it was done
purposely of God, to give occasion to other sinners to beware, lest god by one
mean or other might destroy them also, like as he did those by the fall of the
tower. Further where some do attribute the luck that men have, to the stars
that men be borne under, god teaches the contrary by the prophesye of the holy
woman Anna, and says, 1. Regst. 2.
Dominus pauperum facit, et ditat, humiliat, et subleuat, de stercore erigens
paupetem vt solium gloriae teneat, that is, the Lord makes poor, and makes
rych, he humbles and exalts, raysyng the poor out of the mire, yt he might
have the seat of glory. Also in his prophet Jeremy he says, Iuxta vias
gentium nolite discere, Iere. 20.
et a signis cae li nolite metuere, quae timent gentes, quia leges populorum
vanae sunt, that is. Learn not ye to do after the fashyons of the gentyles,
neither stand ye in awe to the signs of the firmament as the Gentyles do, for
the laws of the and entyles be vain. Thus may ye then se (good people) how
that all our plasynge, be we rich or poor, master or servants, officers or
pryuate persons be of God. For neither is there sparrowe caught nor the fyshe
gathered into the net, neither the stones do fall, but by gods ordinance, yea
and concerning such as be placed in authority, though they be evil, yet be
they of God. Job. 34.
For the holy Patryarche Job says, Propter peccata populi facit regnarey
pocritam, that is, for the sins of the people, he has made the Ipocrite to
rule. And as ye know, there were never worse rulers then were the Scrybes and
the Phariseis that put our savior unto death, and yet did Christ command
that they should be obeyed, because they sat in Moses sete. Math. 23.
But what other I pray you was it to sit in Moses seat, but that the same
God that had first placed Moses for his time, placed the Pharyses for their
time, and therefore were they to be obeyed for their rowmes, though their
persons were very bad and wicked. And according to the same says saint
Paul, that all powers be of god, and that who so ever resists the power,
Roma. 13. 1. Petri. 3.
resists god. Yea saint Peter wylleth not only us to obey them, but that we
should suffer them, though they being evil, should do us wrong. But now
the^ saying that fortune nor chance has no place in deed, but were feigned of
such as know not god, and saying also that the scripture teachethe, that al
powers be of god: it follows that we consider what powers they be, and wherein
their authority consists, for as it is necessary to know such, because we
must in pain of gods displeasure and wrath obey them, so must we know
wherein their authority lies, lest that we obey them other wise then we
should or ought, for some time we do se that obedience is praised as Christ
commends it unto us, when he him self paid tribute, and badde that we
should give to Caesar, that which was Cesars, Math. 7. Math. 22 Acts. 4.
and to God, that that was Gods, and the Apostles were commended in the Acts
for disobeyinge the rulers, when they would have had them to deny Christ. Thus
it is necessary for all men to know where, how, who^, and when they should
obey, or not obey. The which thing that ye may the better perceive, call I
beseech you to your remembrance the first creation of man: how that the
scripture says, Gene. 1.
that god fashioned man upon the earth, by the which is understand that man's
body (the which man has common to him, with the beasts who be likewise made
of the earth, and feadeth upon the earth and earthly things as man does) yet
(says the scripture) god did inspyre into man the sprite of life, by the
which is meant that man's soul came from god him self, and is of substance
and nature like unto the Angels. Wherefore as these parts be of diverse natures
and conditions, and they both greatly needs to be well guyded and ordered, so
has almighty god appointed for that purpose both temporal and spiritual
rulers: temporal rulers, by whose governance our bodies and temporal goods
apperteyninge unto us, ought to be ordered, and we in all those things
obedient unto them, yea though it do appear to our loss and hynderaunce
according to the saying of saint Peter who does say, Obedite omni humanae
creature propter deum, 1. Petri. 2
sine regi quasi precellenti sine duci tanqua^ abeo misso. etc. That is says
saint Peter. Obey you to all humayne creature, for gods sake, whether it be a
king as a person preexcellente, or else to a captain, as sent from him. And
spiritual rulers by whose councelles and appointmentes we ought to be ordered
in matters that do touch our sowles health. And here upon says saint Paul,
Hebre. 13.
obey ye your rulers, and be ordered by them, for they do watch as men that
must give an account for your sowles. Here ye se that he named them spiritual
rulers, because they be charged with our sowles, and commands that we
should be also obedient. For how can they account for us, if we will not be
ordered by them? And the same saint Paul also shows how and in what sort
god does appoint them, saying, 1. Cor. 12. Roma. 12.
that as the body is one, and yet has diverse members appointed for diverse
uses, so has the mystycal body of Christ, which is the Church. Se here I pray
you good Christen people, how the blessed Apoitle of Christ commends to us
the holy sacrament of orders, he compares the Church to a body, in the
creation of which body, who knows not, that at the first there is no
distinction of members, as we se daily in a negge that is to be hatched into a
chycken. At the first there is no beck, there is no foot, there is no wynge,
no eye, nor tongue, neither is it possible for any, but for him that makes the
chicken to say, that this part of the egg shall be such a member, and this such,
but god takes one part of the egg, makes it an eye, and gives it power
only to se, an other a foot, and gives it ability to go and so forth, and
no diversity is there before that they be placed, and have received of gods
gifts agreeable unto their places. Even so good people, before the sacrament of
orders received, they that be to be ordered and the residue be as one. But
after the orders received, like as they have other places and romes the^ they
had before, so have they other virtues and gifts given to them by the holy
ghost, to work and to do those things that do apperteyne unto their duties.
For as Christ our sauyoure says, it is not the mynyster that speaks, but
the sprite of our father that speaks in the minister: In so much that Cayphas
being a wicked man, yet because he was a bishop, Math. 10. John. 11.
the holy ghost spoke in him, and he prophesied that Christ should dye for the
people. And Balaam though he was an evil man, Nu. 24.
yet because he was a prophet appointed of God, the holy ghost did not let to
speak in him. This thing good people, is not easily seen but of us that be
faithful, Nisi credideritis no^ intelligetis. Ese. 7 1. Cor. 12.
and does know that almighty God (who does in the creation of all things
deuyde the parts of the sede or matter whereof he would make any thing, in
sortinge and in disposynge them into diverse places, gives diverse gifts,
according as the place requires, gives me^ placed in diverse romes, virtues,
and power, that be requisite in such romes, the which thing, because it is
seen of us that do believe, and not of such as be faythlesse or Infidels,
therefore it is called a sacrament and a mystery. And therefore no marueyle
good people, though our new deuines and fleshely gospellers, Petuertatur
scripturas ad sua^ ipsoru^ peruicie^. 2. Petri. 3
can not understand the mystery of gods doing in this holy sacrament of
orders, for as they use the scripture with no less vnreuerent talk, gestyng,
yea with wreathyng of it according unto their fond brains and phansies then
they would or might do a tale of Robyn hood, or such like books of vanity, so
do they think no deal more to be done by god in this holy sacrament, then if
they in plays set out by the^ do to the persons who^ they apoynt players. And
for this cause amongste them do every man preach that list, every man minister
that lysteth. And if they do admytte any, they say no more to him but go, be a
preacher, or a minister, or such like, as who should say all these were offices
of policy, and not material to religion. But to let this pass: ye must
know that this word order sygnyfieth dystyncte plasynges, and degrees of men
in their rooms, of the which some be higher and some be lower, and some the
highest of al other. And se I pray you how this work of god agrees with all
his other works. First is it not certain that in heaven there be many orders
of Angels and each of them higher then other, and only almighty god the
hygheste and above all other? Do ye not se in the firmamente diverse bryghtnes
to be in the stars, Collo. 1.
and yet the son to be the bryghtest of them al? Are there not degrees
amongst the fowls: Collo. 1.
and yet the Eegle king of them all. Do not the beasts one excel another,
and are not they all under the Lion? What should I speak of the Cranes when
they fly, have they net their Captain and guide: Is there not alnongst the
bees one master be, unto whom all the residue be obedient? In the bodies both
of man and beasts, is there not one principal part commonly called the head?
And where have ye seen any common wealth well governed where there has not been
one head? Even so good Christen men and wouren has god done and still does
appoynte one to be head and gouernoure in his Church. As first to begin at
Aron, Exodus 28.
did not God appoint him alone for his time to be the head and chief of all
the Leuytes and priests? when he was departed was not Eleazer appointed the
chief bishop over the rest? Nume. 20
what should I need to speak much of this matter? Is it not evident even unto
the coming of our savior Christ, that the principality or high degree of
priest hodde did still continue, and that there was always one above the al
residue? When Christ came, did not he make like diversity of his disciples?
Luke. 10. Luke. 9.
Did not he choose out of the whole number that followed him. 72. that were
called disciples? and did he not use his twelve Apostles more familierly then
them. Math. 17
And did he not chose forth from amongste the Apostles, Peter, John and James,
to be more nere to him the^ the other were, for they only were suffered to se
his glorious transfiguration? Math. 10.
And may we not se that above them and all the residue Christ to have appointed
saint Peter? Mark. 3. Luke 6.
First consider how all the Evangelists when they number the Apostles. they
begin always with Peter, in so much that saint Luke being a disciple to saint
Paul, lets not so to do, and for what other cause should all they and in
every place begin with Peter, but because that they took him to be the chiefest
of the Apostles. Math. 20
But ye will say that Christ rebuked the Aposties for that they strove which of
them should be the greatest: Truth it is he blamed them in that they desired
superiority. But he denied not to give it to such as desired it not, for he
says, he that will be the greatest amongst you, must be servant to the
residue, by the which he shows both a superitorytie to be, and also teaches
what manner of one it should be, saying, that it should be a common service to
all the other. Math. 16.
Again when that Christ gave authority to lose and to bind to all the
Apostles, yet in that he names Peter, and not the residue, it is plain, that
as he gave the office to all, so did he in the office prefer Peter to them
all. Further when our sauyoure before his death taught to them the great
danger that they should be in at his death, saying, that the devil desyced
to syft them, even as wheat is syfted in the ryddle, yet he said to Peter,
that he had desired god his father that Peter's faith should not quayle, Luke.
22.
and therefore bad him that when he was converted, that he should confirm and
stay the residue, whereby does appear that Christ did prefer Peter first, in
that he had a speciciall promise that he should not shrynke, and faint for
fear, and then that he commyted all the residue to be confirmed by him. Again
when Christ was risen from death, did he not commyte the whole charge of his
Church more presently to Peter then to the other? Why else should he say rather
to Peter then to the other love thou me, John. 21.
yea and that thryse at every answer that Peter made affirminge that he loved
Christ, he commaundynge that he should feed. Now if that Christ did
specially charge Peter with feeding, yea both the sheep, and also me thinks
that Christ made Peter his especial and chief shepherde. Moreover in the
Acts when Christ called forth Peter first to Acts. 10.
preach the gospel to the gentyles, did it not apere that Peter was the
chiefest of the Apostles, and that it was done because the Apostles and
Disciples should with the better will receive the gentyles to the felowshyppe
of the gospel, saying him to be made a preacher and a teacher to the gentyles
that was chiefest amongst the^. Again when the apostles were altogether at the
receauynge of the holy ghost, and when the council of the Apostles was first
gethered together at Jerusalem, Acts. 15.
did not Peter only speak, and show the causes of their speaking with
diverse tounges, and of the Abrogacion of the Jews law amongst the gentyles.
Acts. 8.
For though James did afterward speak, yet he did it rather confirmyng that
that was propounded by saint Peter, then chalengynge any authority to him
self. For he rehearsed as a proof thereof the tale yt saint Peter told, which
was how god had wrought by him the conversion of the Gentyles. Acts. 8.
How be it some will say that Peter must needs therefore be not the thief,
because that saint Luke says him and John to have been sent into Samarie, that
by them the Samaritans might receive the holy ghost. But now say our new
men, in as much as they sent Peter, and he that is sent must be inferior to
him that sends him, so must Peter be inferior to the rest of the Apostles,
being sent by the^. But here they might se, if they list to mark, the use
that is and always has bin in the Church concerning the sacrament of
confirmation, which is in deed the geuynge of the holy ghost, that Peter must
therefore be chief, because he was sent to minister this scramente. For where
have ye seen good people, any priest inferior to a bishop to minister
confirmation unto your thyldren? Then as confirmation belongethe to the
thiefest of the priests, so in as much as they sent him and John to minister
it, it is euidente that among all the residue they were the chief. And
notwithstanding that the residue of the Apostles were present, when the sick
persons were led into places to be ouershadowed with their shadows, yet does
saint luke make mention of none by name but of Peter's shadow, the which
argues a pre-eminence to have bin in Peter above all the rest. Augustine
questi. 75. super nonum testamentum. Chrisost. homile. 55 super Mathewe. Iorome
contra Ioninian liber primo
And it apperteyneth plainly by saint Augustine in sundry places of his
works, and specially by his.75. question that he writes upon the new
testament. Also Chrysostom in the.55 homile upon Mathewe, that one fysher man
was made capytayne and ruler of the ship that should be sore tossed, but
never drowned, with the blastes of temptacion. Also saint Jerome in his first
book against Ioninian says. Supra Paetrum fundatur ecclesia, licet idipsum in
alio loco super omnes Aposto los fiat, et cuncti claues regni accipierunt et ex
eaquo super eos fortitudo solidatur, tamen propterea inter duodecim vnus
eligatur, vt in capite constituto scisinatis tollatur occasio. That is to say.
The Church is founded upon Peter, although the same thing is said to be
done in another place, upon all the Apostles and al they took the keys of the
kingdom, and strength is fastened indifferently upon all, yet therefore one
must be chosen amongst the.xii. that in the head appointed, the occasion of
discord may be taken away. To be brief, it is the opinion of all the ancient
fathers, that saint Peter was the chief of the Apostles. Wherefore as there was
before Christ's time, and in Christ's time, and also after him a chief and one
above all the residue, so has it continued unto this miserable time and because
that it is not now, so therefore are these miseries fallen upon us that be.
wherefore saying we ought to have a head, and stand as much need of a head
as ever did they, all good men must think it of necessity, that a head we
must have. Unto this then it is required to know where this head should be, and
who he is, that we may know him, and so consequently obey as it is wholesome for
us to do. without all doubt (good Christen people) his place is the sea of
Rome, and the bishop of that sea has always bin, and ought now by Gods word
to be the head of al bishops. For as he that succedeth the king by right,
ought of right to be king. So he that does ryghtuously succeed saint Peter
being the chief of all the Apostles, ought of right to be the chief of
bishops. Again god has not appointed either to Peter, or to any other like
authority as Peter had, not for his own commodity or profit, but for the
edifyenge of the Church: wherefore saying the Church remained after Peter, so
must the same authority that Peter had still remain in the Church, and it
must also be known to be in the Church. But such authority may only be known
to remain in the bishop of Rome being successor to saint Peter, or else it must
be uncertain if any other should have it, and so consequently unprofitable.
wherefore it must needs be that it remains in him. Again we say that against
the coming of our savior Christ, God had made Rome the head of the world
in all temporalties, Luke. 2.
undoubtedly as it is to be thought, because that by Christ it should be made a
head of spiritualties. In the region of Jury though there were many cities,
yet was there one especially chosen to God, and that was Jerusalem, to be their
chief city. And now when the Church was to be spredde through the world,
he has chosen Rome as it is to be thought to be above the residue, which
appears by two causes. The first is, that of all the great sees that be in the
world, it has always been most free and pure from heresy. God always have
defended the same, where all the residue, as Jerusalem, Antyoche, Ephesus, and
the other Apostolyke Churches are destroyed, and this only does still remain,
and is by God defended. The third cause may be added that all good Christen
men have evermore taken it to be the head, as it may apere by the decree of
Constantine, that most godly and Christian Emperor, Prefa. constantine Nice.
which is set before the council of Nyce, wherein he confesses the sea of
Rome to be the chiefest see, and Siluester to be the chiefest bishop. It
apereth also to have been observed afterward. In so much that in the time of
Constantius the Emperor it was laid to the charge of the Arryans (who had
made to them selves a council at Antioche) that they had broken the old
cannons and decrees of the Church, Tripti^ hist. lib. 4 Capi. 9.
which did forbydde that any council should be gathered, but by the aduyce of
the bishop of Rome. These decrees they said were then old which give this
authority to the sea of Rome, and it is sense this business was nereby. 1200.
years, must it not then be ancient now trow ye? Saint Augustine also in his.
162. epistle blamyng the dissimulation of one Secundus that had bin inconstant
in a matter that was before him, and pretedyng that he did it to meinteine
peace, says that there was no cause for him to fear the breach of peace in
that matter having the consent of the sea of Rome on his part, in the which
Church the chief of the Apostolyke see did floryshe. Saint Jerome also besides
that he says ad Damasum, that he will always follow that faith that is taught
in the sea of Rome, and rebukynge the Luciferaunce for their scysme does say
also that there must be a certain principality or chiefety amongst priests
or else there shall be as many scismes as there be priests. To these may we add
ye article of our faith, which is that we believe the holy Catholic and
Apostolyke Church, the meaning of the which article is. First in that we say
that we believe the catholic church, we say that we do believe the Church that
is universal and generally spredde through the world, whereby we refuse all
heresy and pryuate doctrine, and in that* that we do name it Apostolyke, we do
profess our selves to be confirmable to that see that the Apostle did rule and
bear office in. But now is there none that has Apostles bysshoppes saving
Rome, and when there were like as Peter was the chiefest of the Apostles, so
was that see above all the other sees, and therefore either we must co^fes it to
be chief, or else deny our belief. Thus then may ye se good people, how
necessary it is to have a head, by whom we may be set in array to fight against
the devil. Ye se also that all powers and romes be of Godde, and not of
fortune, ye se that as we have two parts, our bodies and our sowles, so God
has appointed to us two gouernoures, the one temporal, and the other
spiritual: ye se that as God does give diverse virtues and powers to every
member that he places in the felowshyppe of our bodies, so does he to those
who^ he promoteth by the sacrament of orders, ye know why it is called a
sacrament, ye se what order God does observe in all his works, and that they
have their end in one chief or ruler, ye se that it was appointed before
Christ to have one head, it was so ordained by Christ and so ye se that it
ought to continue. And in this we knowing our capitaynes, or romes, let us
all keep our array, and standing, and be obedient unto our princes appointed to
us by God, and when the great and joyful tryumphe shall be in heaven upon the
devil, and all his members, then shall we be rewarded for our faythfulnes of
God the father, of Christ our chief Captain, and of the holy ghost, to who^
be honor and praise now and ever. Amen

Of confession and purgation or clensynge from sin.
WAsshe your selves, and be ye clean, take away the euilnes of your thoughts
forth of my sight, Esa^^.
says almighty god in his prophet Esaias, by the which words (good people) we
be taught, that as such must be very comely and honest in their apparel, that
shall be much conuersaunt in the houses of noble men and princes, so ought we
Christen men to be most clean and pure in our sowles, that be daily
conuersaunte, not in the house, but openly in the sight of him that is the
prince of all princes, and lord of all Lords, neither is he alone when he
sees us, but is accompanied and waited upon with infinite numbers of blessed
sprytes, both of Angels and of men, yea he does so se us, that we be neither
night nor day in the Church, or at home, yea in the fyelde, or in the maket,
Quorum angeli videntur. Math. 18.
out of his sight. More over he comes so to us, that he dwells in us, Is it
not then necessary for us, to wasshe our selves and to make our selves honest,
that be thus continually waiting upon god, and that has also his blessed
angels waiting upon us? Is there any of the kings servants that will
apeare before him in a ragged lyuerie, or in a foul spotted and greacy cote?
will they not hyde their sores and botches of their bodies also, if they have
any that be evil favored, and that can not be healed: and with what diligence
then should we prepare our selves to apere before our master? But ye will say
this is the delicateness and nysenes of men, in god there is no such nyse
curtesy, nor curious nisenesse? yes verily. For why does he else wash us, when
he receaueth us first into his grace and famuly, but that he would have us to
continue clenly. Math. 5.
And why says he, Beati mundo cord quoniam ipsi deum videbunt. Blessed be
the clean in heart for they shall se God, but that they whose hearts be foul,
shall not be suffered to come to gods sight? And how grievous thynkeye, would
it be to one that had bin of the privy chamber, to be shut out of the kings
sight? And how would it grieve the child to be put forth of his fathers
presence? Therefore (good people) as he that is clenly will neure be without
water, neither will the courtyers want those ornaments that may commend them
in the kings sight, so should we that be Christen men have our hole studi and
labor to make our selves pleasant to Gods sight. But how then may we that be
altogether sinful, Iacobi. 4.
deck our selves to apere honest in the presence of god. Truly saint James
says, Emundate manus peccatores, et purificate corda duplices animo, that is.
Make clean your hands, O you sinners, and purge your minds ye that be double
hearted. So that by his council, if we do away the faults which we have
wrought, and make clean our hearts from fylth and unlawful thoughts, then
shall we be comely and honest. Now then to the intent that ye may the better
make your selves to apere honest and clean in the presence and sight of God,
three things are necessary to be considered, of the which the first is, to
consider what evil and mischief there is in sin, from the which we must
purge and dyght us, the second is, Perditio tua ex te Israel ta^tu^modo in me
aurilium tun^, Ose, 13.
to know who must purge and dyght us, for we that can fyle our selves when we
list, can not make our selves clean without help. The third is how we must
use and behave our selves toward him when he is about to purge and dyght us.
First then for the euylnesse of sin, it is to be known that sin does so
offend god, and make him angry is such sort with us, that he will neither
hear us, nor help us, when we cry unto self behym, in so much that the
prophet Dauyd says of him inge so dear to Godde as ye know that he was.
Psalm. 65.


Iniquitatem si afpexi in cord meo, non exaudiet deus It I se) says Dauyd) an
iniquity in my heart, then I know that god will not here: yea the Jews knew
and confessed also that god would not hear the prayer of a sinner. John. 9.
But what Christen heart thinks it not to be an evil above all euyles, a
plage above all plages, and above all things to be feared, that makes God,
whom we in our prayers do call father, to shut up his ears against our
prayers? Is there any child, though he be but of one day old, Inte proiectus
su^ ex vtero. Psalm. 21.
that standethe more need of his mother, then we do of God? How be it, if the
mother dye when her child is but one night old, yet her friends may
peradventure noryshe and bring up the child. But if we be divided from god by
our sins, then we leese not him alone, but we leese the love and frendshyp of
al his blessed saints our friends, yea our brethrene, if we were his children.
For they say all with the prophet Dauyd. Nonne qui oderunt te domine, oderam,
et super inimicos tuos tabescebam: Psalm. 138.
Perfecto odio oderam illos, et inimici facti sunt mihi. That is, O Lord have
I not hated those that thou hate? have not I waxed wanne with anger toward
thine enemies? With a deadly hate have I hated them, and they are also made
mine enemies. And not only god and his saints are then against us, but all the
creatures that ever god made, does that they can to punish and to destroy us,
for how could they otherwise do service to their master, if they should not
destroy, or at least according to their power vex and punyshe sinners. And
thereof it came that the red sea gave place to the Israelites to pass, that
were gods friends, and did destroy the Egipnans that were his enemies, Exodus 12.
the fire which is a comfortable elemente to all men, did it not contrary to
his own nature (which is always to ascend and to go upward and to burn) came
down and burned the Sodomites. And yet when Nabuchodonosar cast the children
into it, Gene. 19. Daniel. 3. 3. Reg. 13.
it did not once syndge or burn the hear of their heads. Did not a Lio^ sle
the Prophet of God that was sent unto the Israelites, because that he contrary
to gods commandment did eat and drink there? 1. Reg. 17
Did not bears destroy the children that mocked Elizeus? 1. Reg. 17
And yet Dauyd being a child slew both a bear and a Lion. But what should I
stand long in this matter, are not ravens and kytes fowls that do punyshe
us, and that do take our sustenaunce away from us, and yet did not they feed
Helias in the wilderness? To be short, the plages that come by the
tempestuousnes of the air, by the vnfrute fullness of the ground, by myse,
rattes and other vermin, are not all these tokens of gods wrath towarder man?
And therefore of it may apere to come that God has so plaged us English men
of late, Dum diin dicamur a domino corripimus vt no^ cum hoc mundo da^nemur. 1.
Cor. 11. 1. Ioh. 3. John 8.
because we have offended him in leaving of our catholyke and true faith, and
in steed thereof have eubrased presumptuous reasonynge upon his holy mysteries
and faythlesse heresy. Furthermore sin makes us servants to the devil,
for as saint John says. Qui peccat ex diabolo est. He that sins is of the
devil. Does not our savior say also, that he that commits sin, is the
servant of sin? And what bondage is to be compared to that bondage whereby a
man is made thral to the devil? Is the great Turk to be compared to the
devil? Or were it not better to be bound to the Turk then to the devil? And
why do we so much fear to be in bondage to the Turk or to any other tyranne,
Deu^ perfitentur sescire, ceteru^ factis negant cu^ suit abominabiles et dicro
no^ audientes et ad omne opus bona^ reprobi. Tit. 1. Sapieu. 1.
and so little to the devil. Truly very infide litie is the cause thereof. For
if we were as well persuaded in the deuyls, as we be in the Turks, we would
fear him a great deal more. But we have preached of faith, or rather prated
of it so much that a number of us are become very Infidels. For though we
profess God with our mouths, yet with our deeds we deny him. Furthermore
sin slays the soul of man. For as the wise man says. Os quod mentitur
occidit animam. The mouth that lies slays the soul. But alas, if the lyinge
mouth be a murderer of the soul, what murder and slaughter of sowles shall we
think to be now amongst us, that use nothing else almost but lying and
disceite? And this is also brought in, or at the least much increases by our
new fond gospel and fleshely relygion. Now you se that if a man's horse or
other beast be in danger to peryshe, there will be sterrynge and runnynge to
help. But if a man chance to be in the peril of drownynge, hanging, or
murderinge, there would be labor made of al hands to save his life, and well
to. And yet we that be so busye in preserving of goods, and in meinteynynge
of the bodily life, which will once have an end whether we will or not, be
every day occupied in murdering of sowles, and that that is worste of all
other, we be murderers of our own sowles, and suffer our children and
servants, yea we teach them to do the same. But se here (good people) what
is to be thought upon other vices? For if lyinge be such an heinous and
peryllous thing, what then is murder? what is oppression? what is theft? what
is whoredom, and all other kinds of vices? what wounds think you that they
make in man's soul? Wherefore the euylland mischief the which is in sin thus
considered, it follows now that we must learn unto who^ we may seek for
remedy, that is, who must cleanse us from it, and that says almighty god in his
prophet Esaias, Esai. 43.
is God him self, Ego sum, ego sum ipse qui deleo iniquitates tuas. It is I,
it is I my self (says god) that puts away thy sins. Psalm. 50.
And Dauyd also the most holy prophet desires none other but god to wash him
from his sins. 1. Ioh. 2.
And saint John in his Epistle says that Christ is only the propiciation
for our sins. Math. 9.
And the Jews could say also, that no man could forgive sins, save god
alone, and ye se how ready he is to do away our sins in so much that he
calls us unto him for that purpose saying. Math. 11.
Accedite ad me omnes qui laboratis, et one rati estis: et ego relie^am vos.
Come unto me all ye that labor, and be heavy laden, and I shall refreshe you.
Time. 1.
And saint Paul says, that Christ came into the world to save sinners. Is
not here then a wonderful clemencye of God that will not cease (though we be
so unkind to him) to do away our sins by him self, yea that he does offer
him self unto us? Is not this a wondrous physician that is both so able and
so willing? Shall not we worthily peryshe that will not seek remedy now
when we have it so freely offered unto us? Then ye will answer that ye would go
unto god to be ryd from your sins, but ye know not now where to find him,
especially saying now that the Turks, the Jews, the Artians, the Lutherans,
the Oecholampadians, the Anabaptists, the Libertines, and al other sects
says that god is only with them. How be it, if ye will know where god is:
Verily he is only in his kyngedome. And if ye be desirous to know where the
kyngedome of god is, he says him self that it is amongste you. Luke. 17.
And least peradventure ye might be deceived by such as do falsely challenge to
them selves the kyngedome of God, saying here or there is Christ, he and his
kyngedome being nothing less then amongste the^, Mat. 24.
he showed then to you who they be that has the kingedome of god remaining
amongst them, when he took the children unto him and said, Math. 18.
of such in deed is the kyngedome of God. Whereof it is to be seen, that god
does only remain main amongst the Catholykes, that is, amongst such as have
their faith general, for they be all so humble and meke, that they are al
afraid to reason upon gods mysteries. For they knowing their unableness to
search gods mysteries, had rather al to be scholars and learners, then
masters. And therefore because that amongst them every one mystrusteth him
self, and gives more credyte to an other then to him self; so comes it to
pass that they do agree amongst them selves no man being so bold as to teach
any thing the which he has not learned of another, so that these be the meke
as children amongst whom remains the kingedome of god, John. 16.
and unto whom also the holy ghost is promised to be their schole master. Si
quis si by videtur aliquid sci re nondu^ quicquam nouit que^: admodum oportet
scire. 1. Cor. 8.
Whereby it is to be seen that the kyngedome of God can not be amongst
heretyckes, for the original cause of heresy is the trust that man has in
his own wit, that is because he thinks that he knows gods word better,
or that he has a deeper sight in gods mysteries then other men have, therefore
thoseth he to him self a pryuate, and a new understanding of gods word, and
does either utterly refuse al authors, all general councels, and the common
belief of the whole world, or else syfteth them in such sort, that where the
heretyckes lists there they must serve, Vbi enim emulatio et conteutio ibi
inconstantia et omne opus pratium. Iaco. 3.
and where they list not to recraue the authors or councels, there they must
be refused. And this pride is also the cause why they can not agree or long
continue in one belief, for amongste them every man like the his own wit
best. Of this (good people) we have had to much experience of late, the more is
the pity. Wherefore the kyngedome of heaven is not amongst such, and so
consequently is not god to be sought amongst them, but in the Catholyke
Church, which is of meke and humble hearers, and not upon stout and
presumptuous preachers. Yea if ye will come into this Church to seek Christ
(for ye can not seek him there except ye come into it) you must make your
selves lowely and meke, Nolite plures fieri magistri, scientes quod maius
iudiciu^ su^pturi sumus.
for our sauyoure says, that except you do humble your selves as Children,
ye shall not enter into the kyngedome of heaven, ye must also leave your
desire to be teachers and resoners, and ye must become meke and lowly
scholars, ye may not take in hand to teach your fathers, but ye must be
content to be taught by them. Iaco. 3. Audi fili mi disciplina^ patris tui et
ne dumittas legem matris tue vt addatur gratia capiti tou, et torques collo
tuo. Prouer. 1. Actu. 17.
Saying then that ye have now learned where to find god who is the doer away
of your faults, it behooves you to se him, and to know him when ye do se him.
For if ye seek him and do not know him, it is little to purpose. But to know
him in his person by saint John it is plain that we can not, for he says,
that no man has seen god at any time, what then think ye is best to be done?
we must know God, and ye se that saint John says that no man has seen God,
how then may we know him whom we never saw. Mary that saint Paul teaches
you in the Acts of the Apostles, for there he says that God suffers no man
to be ignorant of him. But how does he teach him self to them, by sight
trow ye: No verily, but by the contemplacion of his works, for he says that
God has so made and appointed the diversities of times, as of winter, summer,
and such other like, and has so ordained men's habitacions and dwellynges,
that if they would but once grope for him, they might find him. Mark here
(good people) that he says the works of God to make him so known to us, that
if we would but once grope for him we might find him. And for the like purpose
did our savior Christ bid the Jews that they should look unto his works,
John. 5.
for they did teach and bear witness of him. And without doubt (good Christen
people) the knowledge that is gotten of Gods works, is much more certain and
sure then is the knowledge that comes by sight. Opera manuu^ cius annunciat
firmamentum. Psalm. 18.
For like as a man shall better know a judge when he sees him sit upon the
bench in judgment, then going in the street amongst other men, so are we
taught to know God better by his works, the^ if we should se him as an Angel,
or as a man amongst other Angels or me^, yea but then we must mark, how his
works does teach him, and what works does teach him, for certain it is
that not his miracles or strange works does teach him only, for then he should
be taught but at certain times. And beside that to, the devil will work
miracles. But chiefly he is made known unto us by his ordinary works, for
those can not the devil so sone counterfeite, as he may miracles, and they be
more general also, and can the better by that means teach him. And if ye
will learn what these be, and how they do teach, ask of the husband man,
and of the Princes, how and of whom the one gets his corn, the other the
victory of his enemies, and they will answer that they both has these, that
is their corn, and their victory of god. And likewise for the manner how god
does give them, Pri^^^ querite regunum. Math. 7.
the husband will say that god gives it by tyllage, the Prince will say that
by the help of his army. And for these purposes do they first begin their
busynes with prayer, that god would prosper them, and then they use gods
ordynary and appointed mean, because they will not tempt him, and yet do they
refer the success of their labor (if they prosper) to him, and not to them
selves. Even so dear brethrene has god appointed his ordynarye works in his
Church, whereby we that be faithful ought to know him, as for example. He
teaches, but yet he does it by the mean of the preacher, he wassheth, but he
does it by the sacrament of babtisme, he feeds you with his own blessed
body and blood, but he does it by the most blessed sacrament of the altar, and
so he does purge and dyght you from your sins, but likewise he does it by the
sacrament of penance, and mark I pray you, and ye shall not only se him in
this sacrament, but you shall here him say unto you, thy sins are forgeuen
thee. O what a comfort is this to a sinner to here god say unto him, thy sins
be forgeuen thee. How comfortable a voice is this voice to a troubled
conscience? how sure may we be that our sowles be healed from sin, when we
shall hear this great physytion of our sowles god almighty thus to speak unto
us? who being deseased in his soul will not make speed to hear this voice?
Nay, but ye will say, if we might hear god so say, John. 20.
it were much more comfortable then all this is, but who ever hard him so to
say in the sacrament? Mary even thou man that askeste this question, and every
faithful and true penitente person. For do not thou read in the.xx.
Chapter of saint John, that Christ says to his priests, that whose sins
the priest forgeueth, he does forgive them, and the sins that be not
forgyuen by the priests, are not forgyuen by him. Se now I pray you good
Christen men and women and ye do not here god saying to you that your sins
be forgyuen you, when ye hear the priest say that by the authority which God
has given unto him to absolute you, he does absolute you, ye here that god
does give to him authority, and ye hear him say that according to the
authority he does absolve or lose you from your sins. Do not you then here
God say unto you by him, that your sins be forgeuen you? Is not the priest
Gods messenger unto you: Do ye not read, or here read his commission, when ye
either read, or here read this text of Gods word, whose sins ye do forgive,
are forgyuen, and whose sins ye do not forgive, are not forgiven? Wherein then
can you doubt, but that your sins be forgyuen. Verily in nothing, except it
be in your selves, that is because you your selves be not sorry for them, or
will not confess them, or do feyne and pretend a penitentnesse, then in very
deed ye may well doubt, if ye thus do, not for want that is either of Gods
part, or of the priests. For if there be any doubt at all, it must be of your
selves, whether ye be worthy to receive the benefit of the sacrament of
penance or nay, be ye therefore sure of your selves, and then shall ye have no
cause to doubt, but that ye be restored to grace again hearing him thus to
say. Further when ye read in the old law, Leui. 5.
that the people when they had offended in breaking of Gods ordinance, came
to the priests and confessed their faults upon the heads of a sheep, or
such like, the which the priests did offer up for their sins, what other can
it signify, but that we should confess our selves to the priest, and ley our
hand (that is) stay our selves upon our lambs head, that is, the deity of
Christ gods lamb, whom under the fourmes of bread and wine, the priest does
offer for our sins. Johan. 1. Leuiti 14 Math. 8. Luke. 17.
When we read also that the Israelites were bydden to show the sores of their
bodies to the priest, and that our savior did bydde those that he had healed
of the leprosy, to go and show them selves to the priest, are ye not taught
thereby that we Christen men should open the sores of our sowles to the sight
and knowledge of the priest? And the priest is appointed of god to deserve the
sores of men's fowls, as the priests amongst the Jews did the sores of the
body? Do ye think that these figures had not the truth signified by them?
Math. 3.
The Pharyseyes when they came to be baptized of saint John, and did confess
their faults, having no such warrandes by god as our priests have, would not
they rather have come if they had in mo^ed thereto by promise as we be: be you
not worse (as god forbid you should be so evil) then these wicked Pharyses
were. Iaco. 5.
Saint James byddeth that we ^^ulde confess our fautes one to another, the
which saint (...), must be understand that we should confess our less
offenses to our brethren, and the greater to the priest. And se I pray you
how convenient it is thus to do, because the priest is of greater authority
to forgive sins then other men be. For he is first the minister of god
ordained for that purpose, and has the promise which other have not. Again
he is the commen magestrates or officer of the Church, by the virtue whereof,
like as his prayer is the prayer of the whole Church, so is his absolution or
pardon, the absolution of the whole Church, wherefore we being absolved by
him, are made to be at peace both with god, and with all good men, so that good
men will remytte offenses, when the parties with whom they were offended are
confessed. If I should resyte what the ancient fathers have taught concerning
our confession to a priest, it would be to long. Origene homile. 2. super
Leui Augustine de visitacione infirmorum Luke. 2. Capi. 4. Basil de regulis.
331. Chrisost de dignitate. lib. 3. Capi. 6.
Origene in his second homily upon Leuiticus says, that one of the griefs of
penance is that we must tell our fault to the priest. And it is.xiiii.
hundred years sense he witnessed this doctrine to be taught in the Church. Also
saint Augustine says to them that were sick, that in our sickness we must
fend for the priest, and declare all our whole mind and consciente unto him.
Basyll that wrote above a leven hundred years ago says, that as we show the
sores of our bodies to the surgen, so must we show our sins to the priest.
Chrysostom in his work which he wrytethe of the dignity of priesthod, says
that the priests of the new testament have authority both to deserve, and to
heal the leprosy of the mind where the pry^stes of the old testament,
Ambrose de peuite^tia. lib. 1. Capi. 2.
only deserved the leprosy of the body. For the same purpose I might resyte
both saint Jerome, saint Ambrose, and many other that teach it to have been
observed ever sense the Apostles times, that Christen men and women should
confess them selves to a priest. Thus you seeing the scripture so comfortably
to teach it, and that the holy Church has so long observed, judge ye now
whether it be more safe for you to follow the doctrine of these holy fathers
and glorious saints, or to be led with the vain flattering lies, of our
married friars and fleshly ministers. Furthermore towchynge the manner of your
confession to be made, ye ought first to consider, what danger ye be in
through sin, ye know that ye have lost gods favor, ye know that all the
creatures of god are than bente against you, you know that then ye be the
deuylles. And ye se that sinful folk has come always unto evil ends, and
how near your ends ye be, and what they shall be ye know not. Wherefore ye
seeing your danger to be so great. Alas what folly is in you that will not
haste and run unto confession, yea ye must, ye must I say, be in a manner
driven thereunto. Christ byddeth you awake, and will ye lie still and sleep? It
were for your safety to come every week to confession, and will ye think much
to come once or twyse in lent? Secondely I pray you call to your remembrance
who it is that ye make your confession unto: It is not in deed to the priest,
but to God. The priest is but his minister and deputy, and there appointed for
your causes (that is) because we be so dull to consider the things that we se
not, and our hearts and minds are so uncertain and wauerynge if they be not
stayed bysome gross and sencible thing, therefore to do us the better to
remember where about we go, and to make us the better to prepare our selves,
and the more discretely and aduysedly to make our confession, he has
ordained the priest visible to be seen, and senciblely to be hard, but it is
he that hears our confession. And therefore says the priest that he does not
absolve you by any virtue or authority that is in him, though the priest be
never so holy a man, but he says that he does it by the authority that is
given to him of god, Wherefore if ye will call unto your remembrance, how often
and how grievously ye have offended and displeased almighty god our lord and
master, unto whom now ye come to make your confession. How should it make
you to tremble and to quake? If one that had so grievously offended the king as
ye have offended god, should be a suter to the kings own person for his
pardon, would he not tremble trow ye? And if the king would deliver his great
seal unto the scollyan of his kytchen, and command him to make a pardon for
the traitor or offendoure, think you that the offendour would therefore
refuse the pardon, because it is delivered to him by the scollyan? No wot ye
well he would not. Humble you then your selves in like manner under the almighty
hand of God. And be ye content to receive your pardon according unto Gods
ordinance. Thyrdely I beseech you to remember that Godde unto whom ye make
your confession knows all your doings before that ye speak them, him ye can
not deceive. And does not he say unto you in his prophet Esai. Esai. 43.
Confess first thy fautes, that thou may be justified? Se here, he requires
of you that ye should confess your fautes. Wherefore dear brethrene, saying
that ye must tell to him your fautes, whom ye can not deceive, and saying for
the confessing of them he promyseth you pardon, be not trysters, be not
dessemblers in your confession, be not mockers of God, and despysers of his
holy sacrament. Let not the presence of the priest make you to be ashamed
to speak and confess that, that ye were not ashamed to do in the sight of
God. Is it not more shame to do evil the^ to speak upon it? Ought ye not to
dread God more then man? If ye be now ashamed to say what ye have done, in the
hearing of a man. Alas let that shame make you afterward to remember how
much more shameful it is to do the same openly in the sight of god. Learn
you that be so loathe now that a man should know your fautes, she which are
not unknown to god, what grief will it be to you at the day of dome, when as
all your abominable and shameful words and deeds shall be publyshed abroad to
the face of al Angels, men, and deuyls: ye that be so loathe to make one man
pryuie to your doings, how ashamed shall you be at that day. And verily if be
loathe to tell a sinful tale to your ghostly father, then do nothing that is
shameful, and so shall ye want that grief. If ye cast shame from you for the
deuyls pleasure when he moves you to evil: why should ye not be content to
bear shame for gods pleasure when he moves you to grace? Here is required of
you but that ye would do so much for god in your confession, as ye do for the
devil in his evil works. Wherefore good people, to make an end, I beseech
you for gods love to bear in your remembrance how honest in our behauoure
we Christen men ought to be: Also how foul and ougly a thing sin is, then
by whom, and in what mean ye may be dyght from it, and finally use the same
mean to your consolation and comfort, and to gods glory, to who^ with the
father, the son, and the holy ghost, be al honor and praise now and ever.
Amen.

Imprinted at London in Fletestrete at the sign of the Faucon against saint
Dunstones Church by VVyllyam Gryffyth, and are to be sold at his shop a little
above the Condyte at the sign of the Gryffin.

Cum priuilegio.


