THE COMMENDATION OF Matrimony, made by Cornelius Agrippa, and translated into
english by David Clapam. 1534



TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL AND HIS special good master, master Gregory
Cromwell, some to the right honorable lord Cromwell lord privy seal, David
Clapam sends gretynge.
THE VEHEMENT affection that I have to you, impellyth me often times to devise
with my self what pleasure or service my symplenesse might do, acceptable unto
your most gentylle goodness. But when I consydred my small ability and your
great diligence toward wisdom and excellent good qualities, that apperteyne
to your astate, I was in manner clean discoraged to attempt any thing to
present unto your maistershyp. Nevertheless when I again remembered your
great goodness, and most gentle famylyarytie showed to me in your young
age, which by outewarde signs appears stablysshed now in your most gentle
heart, I am encouraged to write some thing, to be a testimony of the love and
affection that I bear unto you. And among many other I choase out to
translate this little treatise, The commendation of Matrimonye, that you being
coupled in marriage to so noble, so good, and so virtuous a lady, and leadynge
your lives in such honest and chaste wise (which thing over many now
adays neglecte, little regardyng this holy and honorable sacrament) may
clearly perceive your selves in the same greatly commended and praised. And
other, that have not this holy band of wedlock in so great veneratio^ and
honor, as you have, shall take occasion, partly at your example, and partly
of this Declamation, to repent, that they have transgressed against so high
and so holy a sacrament, to the great ieoperdy of their souls. For the
apostell says: God shall judge fornicatours 1. Cor. 6
and aduouterers. And, The brekers of wedlock shall not Gala. 5. Ephe. 5.
inheryte the kyngedome of god. Wherefore I thought that this little queire
should do much good, to persuade such as are wedlock breakers, to lead
their lives virtuously within the bonds of this holy sacrament, according to
the apostels saying: Let wedlock be Hebre. 13.
kept honorable in all points, and let the chamber be undefiled. And as I
supposed, that this treatise set forth in english would do much good, with the
witty arguments, quycke reasons, and weighty authorities therein contained: So
I verily think, it shall no less farther, to dedycate the same to you, that
are a very true patron of honest life in wedlock. Whereto should I speak of
your virtuous educatio^, for the which your right honorable father my good
lord, has be very diligent? And surely his care in that behalf has not ben
only for you, but for many other: yea the thing that he specially wishes and
desires is, that the youth of this hole realm of England should be brought
up vertuousely, namely the noble men's children, in good litterature, and the
other after their abilities, wits, and aptenes, in sciences and crafts,
whereby they shall highly profit them selves, to the great advancement of the
common weal, and above al things, he would, that with their lernyng of good
letters, sciences, and crafts, they should be ernestly taught, obedyence to
god, to the kings highness, and to such rulers and laws, as his majesty
shall ordeyn. In which good mind, that he bears to the commonwealth almighty
god long preserve him, and send you both much welthe and prosperytie.

Amen.
FINIS.
THE PRAISE of matrimony.
THE SACRAment Genesis 1.
of matrimony, being most ancient, and first after that man was made, even at
the beginning of all things, was ordained and commanded of god, and was
honowred, and had always in high veneration and reverence, with people of
all nations, sanctified and hallowed with religion, establyshed by laws,
adurned with miracles and wonders. The which sacrament trewely is more
excellent, then other mysteries and laws, in that it was ordained before
them, ordained I say, not of the imagination and invention of men, but of god,
prince of all, even from the first beginning of the world, before any sin,
in the time of innocence, for the lauful office and propagation of mankind.
All other precepts, commandments, and mysteries, that after the fall of man
came forth for the reparation, safeguard, remedy, correction, and punisshement,
were scasely admytted of a few, when this sacrament of matrimony, through all
parts of the world, and by the consent of all men, was received and taken.
And farther it was no less strengthened and maynteyned with the power of god,
then it was by his goodness and wisdom ordained. For god the maker of al
things, would this most holy bond so to be knit with indissoluble glewe, and
persevere, that the husband in his wife, and the wife in her husband, should
always both live and abide, as a bone of bones, and flesh of flesh. For
this was the first commandment of god, institutynge matrimony: The man shall
forsake Genesis 2.
his father and mother, and shall cleave unto his wife, and they shall be two in
oone flesh. Which thing we read not only in the old testamente, but the
self same is confyrmed in the gospel, that by no diversity of manners, by no
sacietie or lothsomnes, not for age, barennes, or syckenes, nor for pestilence,
lepry, or any other contagiouse disease, and briefly for no crime of heresy,
nor by any man's power, that sacrament at any time ought to be broken. When
Christ commands, that whom the almyghtye power of god has ones Matthew. 16.
Marc. 20.
joined together, no power shall presume to separate. Nor it can be laufull
for any cause, the wife to forsake her husbonde, or the husband his wife,
because it is laufull for no man to depart from him self, nor no man to
leave him self. For she which is made of a man's rybbe, of flesh, the same
flesh, and the same bone of bones for an help unto the man: God never would
her to be separate from the man, but for fornication: which one only cause,
God did except. But if for any other cause the strong bond, and unity of
matrimony be loused, yet the persons being separate, be and remain manne and
wife, nor they with whom they be coupled after their deuorse, can be excused
from aduoutry. And therefore Christ adds, saying: He that after his Matt. 16.
wife is dimissed for aduoutry, maryeth an other woman, commytteth aduoutry:
and he that does mary her that is so letten go, is an aduoutrer. Now to what
end and use this reverend and most worthy sacrament was commanded, we will
declare. It was ordained for an help, for propagation, and to avoid
fornication.

The first cause is taken, where god did institute this holy mysterye under
these words: It is Genesis 1.
not good a man to be alone, let us make for him an helper like him self. For
man sythens he is a creature most accompenable, then trewely and well shall
use the office and duty of a man, and shall prepare a trusty keeper of his life
and goods, when he enters into the steadfast and indissoluble feloweshyp of
matrimony. And therefore both to men that be somewhat aged yea and to those
that be decrepite, and in who^ there is no might of generation, no hope left of
propagation, it is neuerlesse laufull to mary, and (if a man may say it) often
times nessary, whereby they may pass forth the later days of their life, in
the company of their well be loved wife, with more joy, suertye, and less
care. Whereof David, very old, with 3. Reg. 1.
the Sunamite maid, is an example. For what fellowship might happen among
men, more holy and pleasant? what more surer? what less careful, what more
chaste then the life of man and wife? when either of them is the same that
the other is, in one agreeable mind two bodies, in two bodies one mind and one
consent. Only man and wife, one enuieth not an other, they alone love each
other, out of measure, in as much as either of them hole hangs of the other,
and has quietness and rest in the other, one flesh, one mind, one concord,
one heaviness greueth them both, one mirth equally reioyseth both, the very
same and even like will is in both, their winning is common to both, the same
riches, the same pouerte, like dignity and worthynes, they be always of one
chaumbre, and at one table, they keep company together, night and day, in
sleping, nor in waking they depart not the one from the other: but their
life is conjoined in all acts, labors, ieoperdyes, and in every chance the
one serves the other, as long as they live, they keep company together to
their lives end, they never depart without they dye, and the one being dead.
the other can scante live. So great is wedlockes love, that uneath death can
set a sonder those, whom life has knytte together. Such is the perseverance
of matrimony, such is the unity, that one husband should have one wife, and
one wife one husebande. For one rybbe at the beginning was turned in to one
wife. And there Genesis 2.
shall be says god, two in one flesh. He says not, three or mo. And in Genesis 7.
the arch of Noe god commanded no mo women to be preserved then men, that for
one man there should be but one wife. For where a man has many wives, or a
womanne many husbands: there the unity of matrimony faylethe. Therefore her
alone that a man has taken to his wife, the same let him keep without
violation of kyndenesse, to the last end of his life in a perfect love and
continual remembrance. Let the father give place, the mother give place, the
children, the brothers and systers, let all the heap of friends give place to
the sweet beneuole^ce and entier love of man and wife, and that for great skyl.
For the father, mother, children, brethern, systers, kynsfolke, be the friends
of nature, and works of fortune: man and wife be the mystery of god. And the
man had a wife, and the wife a husband, before father, mother, brother, or
children. And therefore it was commanded Gea. 2.
to the man, to leave father and mother, systers, brethern, and children, and
cleave to his wife, that above all other things he should keep to his lives end
that thing, which was first of all given unto him: nor that one of them
should at any time be with out the other, of whom the one was not made without
the other. Wherefore the children to depart from their parents, and the
parents to leave their children, no law forbyddeth, sometime necessity
compels, profit styrreth, consideration moves, the children often times be
dymissed from authority of their parents, they often challenge to them self
liberty by religion, often times in strange countries they get they living,
and in other places seek their dwelling: but the wife from her husband, or
the husband from his wife, no law, no necessity, no pro fyte, no
consideration, no deuorse, no religion, no license, no absence, does permytte
to depart. For which of them, that leaves or neglects to keep company
together, the same as forsaken, and solitary alone, must of necessity led a
life most wretched, destitute of all gladness and help, because the help
that was made for him of god, and the companion of joy and gladness to him
given, he neglecting depyseth to take, or contemptuousiy is bold to leave and
forsake.

The second cause of matrymo ny, we showed to be for propagation of children,
as it is red, where god blessed Adam and Eve, saying: Increase, and multiply,
and Genesis 1.
replenyshe the earth. Which blessing after the floudde, was even fresh
again renewed by the same words. The effect whereof is, that Genesis 9.
man should render to nature, that he had borrowed of her, and to the image of
god, should bring forth and nourysshe children like him self, and restore the
common fellowship of mankind with a certain succession, and to keep it
perpetual. which blessinge he that did not regard, in the old law, was
counted of all men cursed and most unhappy, as it is written: Cursed is she,
that has not sede in Israel, and blessed is he, whose sede is in Syon.
Whereupon Abraham for Genesis 13. 15. 18.
the merit of his faith, was blessed in his generation, and Sara being then
old, and past child bearing, did put away the maledictio^ of her barennes,
with this blessing of generation. For in this sacrament it is not the merit of
nature, to conceive children, but the blessing of almyghtye God, and a mystery
far passing the merytes of nature. Which thing was not unknown to Jacob the
Patriarch, the which when his wife Rachel thought that the accompanienge with
her husband, was to give children, said to him, Give me children, or else I
am but dead, Jacob answered: Am Genesis 30.
I then in gods stead, which keeps the fruit of thy womb from the? And
Isaac made intercession Genesis 25.
to god, for his wife, because she was bareyn, which hard his petition, and
made her to conceive. For they knew, that the fruits of matrimony were of god,
not of nature. And of this the bastard children be called natural: but those
that come of matrimony, be only laufull. And therefore he is not admitted to
holy orders, whose mother is not knytte to his father by laufull copulation in
this most worthy sacrament of matrimony, for a bond of perpetual fellowship.
For a bastard shall not enter into Deuteronomy. 14.
the church of god. Which bastard also is straytely prohybited, both by
humayne laws and constitutions of wise men, to be the heir of temporal lands
and goods. For they have no laufull heir, which by neglecting and despising
matrimony, at the wanton and entysynge lust of the flesh, unlawfully take
their congresse. And it is the common sentence and judgment of lawiers, that
he has an uncertain father, and a naughty mother, which is not borne in
matrimony. For he is base borne, and is the son of the people, yea rather the
son of no man, which is the child of a woman not laufully married. But he is
the true heir, and true son, whose mother, without the infamy of sin,
without the blame of kynsfolke, without the offense of god, to a certain and
well known father, with the dignite of matrimonye, and with fruit certain is
married, and with out sclander abides by him contynually. Therefore only
matrymony makes children to be certain, and gives vndoubtful heirs it
makes honest the couplynge of nature, and for sin it gives merit, it
increases the stock and out the consent of either of them that is coupled,
the other without sin, may not intend to prayer, if thereby it might chance
the other to be defrauded, or lack the carnal duty. For (as the Apostle
says) the woman has not power 1. Cor. 7.
of her body, but the man: and like wise the man has not power of his body,
but the womanne. So great is the knotte of this bond, that though for
incontinency alonly it be taken, yet if one of the couples afterward would
continually live continently, in no wise it can be done, but with the others
consent, yea and though both do consent, yet it can in no wise be taken, that
the matrimonye is dissolved. So he that for cause of bryngyng forth of children
maryeth, can not without sin put away his baren wife, and mary an other,
where by he might have children. Which thing also as wytnessen Ualerius Maximus,
Plutarch, and Dionisius Halicarnasseus, was observed and kept among the Romans
after the City was builded, five hundredth and twenty years, to the time of
Spurius Carbilius, which first of all other preferrynge the desire to have
children, above his fidelity in wedlock, not with out his great blame,
forsook his wife for barennesse. But now I will return.

God the creator of all things, would this most holy bond to be so fast and
indyssoluble, that for what cause so ever it was ones begone, by no power or
strength at any time it should be dyssolued. He would it to be so general,
and throughout all the world, so prynted in all men's minds, that no man
should avoid this most holiest mystery, without most grievous offense,
except he would utterly forsake all humanytie. For he the first auctor of
wedlock, and god before all matrymony (when he would take on him the nature of
man) would his mother first to mary. And though without man's sede he would be
borne of a virgin, yet he would not be borne of her out of wedlock, but of his
mother married, though not defoyled with man. For he would not his mother to be
unmarried, that by his mothers example, he might exhort us to the very same.

Therefore what so ever they be that regard not this most ancient and most
holy ordinance, as dispisers of gods and man's laws, shall be iuged to
perpetual fire, even like the dry and baren trees. And therefore in the old
law, they that in their ripe age, did not mary a wife, were put forth of the
temples, their offerynges were rejected, they were counted not worthy to
receive herytages and bequestes, unworthy of gods and man's help, which
despysynge gods and man's laws, refused to take the help ordained for them
of god, and stablyshed by the laws of man. Nevertheless two kinds of men
may be except from contracting matrimony, which for weakness of nature, be
utterly not apt for it, as they that be cold of nature, bewyched and
enchaunted, mad persons, children, feeble persons, and such as be gelded,
and those which being moved with the spirit of god have chosen perpetual
chastytie. For this sort, religion discharges from the bond of matrimony: and
the other sort, by natural impedyment, is excused. But who so ever be not of
one of those two kinds, let them well know, that they are so bounden to
contracte matrimony, that if they leave it, or not regard it (except they be
greatly repentant) they are unworthy of the kyngedome of god. yet for all that,
no man should be compelled by force, to contracte matrimony. For in as much
as this bond is made by only consent of love, it ought specially to be free,
for love it self, is at no man's commandment. For the gifts of rich men
bye not love, no dignity, nor yet nobility counteruayleth love, no
thretnynges or vyolence of great men of power, can compel love, which god him
self does not constrain, but from the beginning created it free. And there
is no love so vehement, and so steadfast as between the husband and the wife.
There is nothing of greatter force, then the tender love of the wife, the
which no disloyalty corrupts, no misfortune causes to slide, no strange
acquaintance withdraws, no age, no process of time consumes. And therefore
by the commandment Genesis 2. Matthew. 19.
of god, the love of the wife should be preferred before father and mother,
children, brothers and syhers, kynsfolke, alyaunce, and all other things.
Wherefore they most grievously offend, what so ever they be, parents, nere
kynsfolke, tutours, and gardians, which (having no respect to the continual
benevolence of the life, to the procreation of children, nor to chastity, but
through covetousness and ambition that they have to worldly dignity
nobilytie, pawer, riches, and such like) beyond all due obedience to parents
by gods commmandemente (by a certain tyranny) restrain and make bond (which
to this sacrament ought to be given) the free consent of their sons and
dough ters, and compel them to be married to such as they hate, without any
consideration of age, love, condition, manners, and specially of gods
commandment. And hereof at lengeth do rise between man and wife,
fornication, adultery, debate, raylinge words, continual anger, perpetual
strife discord, hatred, divorces, and other infinite mischiefs. And also
other while poysonynge, slaugher, and violent murder ensues: that it may be
seen, that it was not god but the dyuell, that coupled such Tobi. 6.
persons to gether.

Furthermore in many places, certain worldly princes and lords of
christendom, the enemies of god, blasphemers of Jesu Christ, defilers of holy
things, presumptuousely taking upon them that perteyneth to god, at their
voluntary will, yea and sometime at their express commandment, compel their
subjects to mary. purchasing moreover to their cofers the dymes of dowryes,
not without abominable sacrilege, and so forbearing the aduouterers, they
punyshe them that mary, which wicked rulers at the last the ryghtuouse Matt.
21.
judge will destroy.

There is also an other no less damnable custom, which has taken place
among many nations to speak commonly evil of them that mary the second time.
yea and moreover they condemn them that mary again in a certain sum of
money, and the same they ley up for a knotte of good company, to make merry
with, and they make Joseph the husband of the most blessed vyrgin Mary, the
patron of this so wicked sclander against gods misterye. But the dyuell has
found these felowshyps and brotherhed, and the anger of god, has delivered
them into a reproved sense, that they reioysynge at Roma. 1.
adultery, horedome, and fornications, should rail upon second marriages, as
who says the grace of god is void in such marriages, mockinge that sacrament,
to which all honor, reverence, and liberty, is given. But this damnable
fascio^ must be taken away and plucked clean out of the dommyons of France:
for trewely the rulers thereof can not in any point do more service to god, and
profit the christen common welthe, then to do this, that is to say, that good
things may be taught, and euel things may be banysshed, not only that
perteine to the common society of men, but also to gods religion.

Thou therefore, who so ever thou art, that will take a wife, let love be the
cause, not substance of goods, chose a wife, not a gar meant, let thy wife be
married unto the, not her dowrye. With this mind almighty god being thereto
called (which alone gives a true wife) and the consent of the parents also
required, and dew obedieuce showed unto them, al co uetousnesse, desire of
honor, envy, and fear, set a part, with a temperate deliberation in thy
self with consent, free and fervent, but reasonable and chaste love, so take
thy wife, committed and given to the for ever by the hand of god, for thy
continual fellowship, not to service and bondage. Whom thou oughteste to rule
with thy wisdom, with all favor and reverence. And let not her be subject
unto the, but let her be with the in all trust and counsel, and let her be in
thy house, not as a drudge, but as maistresse of the house, in thy householde
not as a maiden, but a mother, and a brynger up of those children that thou
shall begette of her, which shall be lords of thy goods, and represent thy
name, to such as shall come after the. And so thou canste not chose but have a
good wife, and good children, for an evil wife never happens but to an evil
husband. For without a wife, the name can not continue, nor the progeny endure,
nor the stock increace, nor a family be, another a father of household named,
nor a house called, nor a common welthe stand, nor any impire endure. This
thing the buylder of the Romayne impire right well did know, which (when he
lacked wives for his subjects) made a sharp and fierce battle with the
Sabinis, that denied their daughters. For he knew very well, that his impire
could not continue, if wives should be away. For seeing that a city stands
of houses, and the commonwealth of pryuate things, and of rulynge of a
household, and family, the diseyplyne to govern a commonwealth is ordained:
how shall he rule a city, that has not learned to rule a house? how shall he
govern a common welthe, that never knew his private and familiar business?
Nereof Socrates testified, that he learned moral philosophy more of wives, then
natural philosophy, of Anaxagoras and Archelaus. For trewely matrimony gives
a great erercise to moral philosophy. For it has a certain householde commonwealth annexed, in ruling the which a man may sone learn and have experyence
of wisdom, temperaunce, love to god and his kynne, and all other virtues, by
which in loving his wife, in bringynge up his children, in gouernynge his
famyly, in saving his goods, in ruling his littel house, in procreatynge and
enlargynge his stock, he may lead a life most happy. Furthermore to see
before a man's eyes, his well beloved wife, and by children and succession, to
have his family and name extended, is great gladness and felicity, it is the
sweet consolation of travail. He that wants a wife, has no house, because
he has not settled a house, yea and if he have, he taryeth in it as a stranger
in his mne. He that has not a wife, though he be never so rich, has almost
nothing that is his, because he has nothing safe from deceytes, nor he has
not to whom he might leave, nor to whom he might trust. He that has not a
wise, lacks a famylye, lacks his nigh kynred, and without hope of succession
is always left alone and forsaken. His servants steal from him, his fellows
bribe from him, his neighbors despise him, his friends regard him not, his
nigh kindred begile him, his bastard children if he have any, be shame and rebuke
to him, and witness of his iniquity, nor he can leave unto the^ his riches,
nor the name of his famyly, but as he taryeth in life without marriage, so
being dead, his perishes without name, nor in this lif he deserves to have
any benevolence orloue, which is greatest comfort to man. But as a forsaker of
man's nature, worthy of all calamity, is most unfortunate counted of all men,
and most worthy to be forsaken. And hereof Lycurgus made a law, that who at
convenient time did not regard to mary, they in the summer time should be
kept back from open plays and sportes, from al pastime, and merry syghtes:
and in the winter, should be led bare round about the market place, and vexed
with mockes and scorns, abhored and cried out upon of all men, so that they
should confess that they did ryghtuousely suffer, because they despised
relygyon, obeyed not the laws, offended against nature, and as much as was in
them, caused that neither common welthe, impire, nor religion could stand,
because they had not endeavored them selves, to begette those, by whom these
things should be meinteined and vpholden. Plato in his laws ordained, he that
married not a wife should be put back from al common office and honor, and
should be ouerate with common charges more grievous then other citizens were.
And Augustus Caesar made a law, that young men should mary wives, and increase
the people of Rome. which law many other afterward confirmed, And more over
granted to be free from common office a year. and limited out of the common
treasure a reward to him that married a wife a new. Aduoutries every where in
the old time always were grievously punysshed with most sharp laws, because
that matrimony being ones violate, there is not only wrong done to man, but to
god him self. And hereof in the Leuiti. 20. Deuteronomy. 22. Exodus 22.
old law, who so ever with breakyng matrimony, had committed aduoutry, was
aduidged to be stoned to death. But he that took away other men's goods, and
so committed theft, was punished in four double and five double as much. For
this man vnlaufullye took away men's goods, and worldly things, the other
besides the offense and hurt of his neighbor yea being miuriouse to god, does
dishonest the godly things. The Romayne laws condemn to death aduoutrers,
and permit also unto the husband without any open judgment and without
punishment to sle thaduoutrer taken, which lyberty is not given to him that
has his father slain. Also for a man to slay his own wife, it is punished
with sharper death, then to slay father or mother, and worthily. For nature
makes father and mother, a wife is the mystery of god. and I think that he
can not be with sufficient punishment vexed, which was so hardy to slay his
help, comfort, and succor, and his companion to live with, given to him by
god. For he is cruel upon the gift of god, wicked against the holy, a
defyler of nature, and miurious to god. And therefore also the laws canon
forbeade him the fellowship and company of men, shut him forth of the church,
forbeade and take away from him second maryages, deny unto him the holy
sacrament, judging him unworthy of the food of god, which was not ashamed
to offend god, with so outrageous a trespass and mischief. But now I can not
tell by what negligence, and little regarding of justice and god, the sleers
of their wives, and aduouterers, escape now almost al punishment, and Roma.
1. Matt. 15.
thieves yea for a lyttel fault be hanged up with ropes, except because our
judges be given into reproved sense and understanding, to make the
commandment of god void, for the traditions of man. But now let us
conclude, and make an end.

Thou therefore who so ever, if thou will be a man, if thou wylt not clean do
away man from the, if thou wylt occupy the duetye of manhod before other
things, if thou wylt be the lawful son of god, if thou wylt be natural and
loving to thy country, to thy family, to the commonwealth if thou wylt possede
and enjoy the earth, and deserve heaven, it is necessary that thou enter the
laufull bond of matrimony, that thou chose for continuance a companion to live
with, that may not be separate, that thou encreace mankind, and as the son
and image of god, thou procreate children like thy self. and that thou wyselye
and vertuousely nouryshe bring up and govern them for the behoufe of the
common welthe, mayntenance of thy country, and the reverence of god, which
gave them unto the. He that does these things, he is a man, he that is a man, must of necessity do these things, except he will bring forth by his
nature so hyndered, some thing less then a man, and not worthy of man hode, or
else by clymynge over man's power, will chose some thing greatter then man
can do, that is perpetually to keep a chastity angelical. But who so ever is
not of one of these two things, and as a negligent person, does not regard
true matrimony, or violate the same, with cloked fornication, or put away
from him his companion of life, or slay her, keep no company with him, that
he may be trodden down as reproved of god, and a stranger from the fellowship
of Christen people.

FINIS.
LONDINI in aedibus Thomae Berthes Ieti typis impress. Cum priuilegio ad
imprimendum solum. ANNO. M. D. XL.


