THE SECOND part of the book of Battles, fought in our age: TAKEN OVT OF THE
best authors and writers in sundry languages.

Published for the profit of those that practice arms, and for the pleasure of
such as love to be harmless hearers of bloody broiles.

At London Printed for Gabriell Cavvood. 1587.

A PREFACE TO the Reader.
Lo here I present unto thee (gentle Reader) a continuation of the book of
all the famous Battles, fought in our age, and I do hope with better hap
than the first came forth, if the Printer have done his duty in reforming the
faults noted and corrected in his proves. For as for the first part it was so
maimed, mangled, and marred by the Printer, I will not say of purpose, but
certes of pride and negligence, that I like a passionate mother, that had her
fair child foulie deformed through the negligence, or malice of a lewd
Nurse, in manner forsware mine own child, bidding the Printer take it to
himself, and father it on whom he list, so he gave it not mine name, for I
would never acknowledge it for mine own, but account it a changeling. But
letting this matter pass, which is pleasant neither for thee to hear, nor for
me to rehearse: perhaps you long to know what novelties I do now bring:
forsooth, certain Battles mentioned in the first part, but not there
described, because I had then no good author to follow, that had set them forth
at large, but all the rest are battles fought since the publication of the
first part, unless it be two, which were set down in the first book, but
since that time having chanced upon far larger and better descriptions, I
have inserted them in this later part. And doubtless the battles do deserve a
very particular and exact description, as they which of al other were best
fought: the first is the battle of Dreux in France, the other a battle in the
leua^t seas, where the confederate Christians, under the conduct of Don John de
Austria, discomfited the fleet and forces of the Turk: the which battle I
called in my first part, the battle of Lepanto, and now in my latter, the
battle of Pescherias, and no doubt in both places falselie. For it was not
fought in the gulf of Lepanto, but in another gulf near thereunto, which you
shall find perticularlie described in this book, but not named neither by
mine author, nor by any Geographer that I can light on: and therefore for
lack of a true name, I call it the battle of Pescherias, of the forelong
that adioyneth to the gulf, and where the two Nauies first descried each
other, being then too near to retire, without apparent peril, if either of
them had had that cowardly mind and intention.

Moreover, in the description of every battle, I have, as also in the first
part, followed always some one certain author, whom I thought had best of
all other done it, without enterlacing or adding of any contradictions or
scholies out of other writers, unless it be in the Portugal battles: where
to take away all color of quarrel from the captious, I have adjoined notes
out of the book, entitled: The Explanation of the true and lawful right of
Anthony king of Portugal, because the common opinion is, that it was not
published without the kings priuitie: and therefore I would have made that
book my sole author in the enarration of those battles, if it had
perticularlie at large described them, as it does but summarilie touch them.
But the reason why I did not the like in the rest is: first, because I would
avoid confusion (for hardly shall you find two authors that do agree in the
description of one battle,) and secondarilie and principally, because I
would not be reputed the author of any thing set down in this book, but
only the bare translator and reporter of it in English: leaving the credit
of all perticulars in these books unto their authors, whose names I have
prefixed in the front of every battle, as also I have done in the table. So
that if any untruth shall be here found (which God forbid) the fault is not mine,
unless I have been unadvised, and careless in the choice of mine auctors: the
which I hope I am far from. Wherefore courteous Reader, seeing that I have
taken pains for to pleasure and profit thee, speak well of me, and so
farewell.

Faults escaped.
Fol. 2. a. line. 12. for 205. read 250. Fol. 3. a. line. 28. for league,
read even. Fol. 4. b. line 37. for compassed, read composed, Fol. 7. a. line
3^. for fevv, read we. Fol. 16. a. line 23. for Sologne, read Solongne Fol.
25. a. line 34. for armies, read arms. fol. 29. a. line 3. for some, read
soon. fol. 43. a. line. 4. for 1581. read 1585. fol. 42. a. Peter Badario the
Captain of the ninth galley is left out, and thereby all the names of the
Captains from thence to the nineteenth are falls set. fol. 43. a. line, 37. fot
62. read 1. and before it: The right vving, Names of Galleys. Names of
Captains. fol. 47. a. line 8. for deserve, read co^serue. fol. 50. b. l. 9.
for Despotedo. read Despotado. fol 58. a. line 4. for there, read therefore.
fol. 59. b. li. 9. for Figheron; read Fighero a. fol. 68 a. line, 19. for 1576.
read 1575. fol 77. b. last line put out noted. fol. 78. a. in the marginall
note, after doubtless, add 2000. Fol. 83. a. line. 6. for Hamet, read
Mahamet. In the same page line 23. for 1581. read 2580. Fol. 87. a. line 4.
for Macolin, read Marolin. As for Dandelut for Dandelot, Selini for Selim,
Ascania for Ascanio, up for of, and such like, I do hope the discreet Reader
will of himself easily correct.

Battles.
THE Battle of Dreux, fought in France, between Jews Prince of Condee, and
Annas Montmorency, high Constable of France, in An. 1562. Out of Seigneur
Popelliniere. The Battle of Saint Gemme, fought in France, betwee^e Monsier
la Noue, and Monsieur Puygaillard, the day of June, in An. 1570. Out of
Popelliniere. The Battle of Cheuraine, fought in Henault, between Don
Federick de Toledo, and the Lord Ienlis, in An. 1572. Out of Popelliniere. The
Battle of Barow, fought by Sea, between Monsieur de Boisot, and Julian de
Romero, in An. 1574. Out of Cornelio. The Battle of Mockerheid, fought
between Ludouick Comte de Nassau, and Sanchio Dauila, in An. 1574. Out of
Stratius. The Battle of Giblou, between Don John de Austria, and the Lord
Gugny, in An. 1578. Out of Stratius. The Battle of Couwenstein dike, between
Alexander Prince of Parma, and the forces of the States. 1585. Out of Dinothus.
The Battle of Pescherias, between Don John, and Ali Bassa, in An. 1572. Out
of Peter Contarini. The Battle of Alcazar, fought in Barbary, between
Sebastian the king of Portugal, and Abdelmelec, king of Marocco, in An. 1578.
Out of Freigius. The Battle of Lisbon, fought between Antony king of
Portuguall, and Ferdinando Duke of Alua, in An. 1580. Out of Comes. The
Battle of Saint Michaell, fought by Sea, between the Marquis of Santa Cruz,
and Philippe Lord Strozzi, in An. 1582. Out of a letter sent to the king of
Spain, by the Marquis: and also out of the book entitled the Explanation of
the true and lawful right of Antony king of Portugal, etc. The Battle of
Langside, fought in Scotland, between James Earl of Murray, and the Earl of
Argile, in An. 1568. Out of Buchanan.
FINIS.
THE SECOND Book of Battles.
The battle at Dreux in France, fought between Jews of Burbon, Prince of
Condee, General of the Protestants their forces, and Anna Montmorencie, high
Constable of France, and General of the Catholic army, in the year of our
Lord 1562. and the 19. of December, taken out of Popelliniere.
JEWS the Prince of Condee, having received aides out of Germany, and also
gathered together the French forces of the Religion, did take the field with
about 8000. foot men, and five or six thousand horse men, two Canons, one
Culuerin, and four field pieces, and came before Paris the xxviii. day of
November in Anno. 1562. and departed from thence the tenth day of December
following, after a vain parle of peace, and that he despaired of taking the
City, partly for the resolute courage of the Citizens, who wonted at other
times to be fearful, and cowardly, and partly, yea, and specially,
because the Catholics had drawn into the City a great army of Frenchmen,
and forreners: and marched toward Normandy, for to receive the succors of
men, money, and provision brought out of England unto New Haven, and thereby to
be able to content the Almaines, that now began to murmr and to demand pay.
But on the other side to stop and let the joining of the Prince with the
English, the Catholic army parted out of Paris, under the conduct of Anna
Montmorencie, the high Constable of France, and coasting to rights by ways
nothing good, was on ye 17. of Dece^ber come to the side of the town of Dreux,
and the river of Eure, within two little leagues of the prince, who by an
inco^uenient oversight (which yet was the falt of the Marshals of the camp)
lodged ye night with the battle at Yuoy, beyond and more near to the enemy
by one league, then the auantgard lead by the Admiral, who had his quartier at
the village of Neron, but the next day the Admiral repairing unto the Prince,
it was agreed upon that the day following the auantgard should betimes march
forth beyond the lodging, and battle of the Prince, and so take again their
old and due order and range, and by this time had all the Catholics passed the
water, the which when the confederats understood, some of the^ thought that the
battle would be presently presented them: but the Admiral was of another
opinion, because the Sun was not then above an hour and a half high, and
thereupon every man fell to fantasying and imagining the good and the ill, the
which might come of so great a mass of occurrents, which were presented on the
one side and the other: and seeing that the most part assured themselves, yt
some notable battle would be fought, every man judged of the event thereof,
according to his knowledge and practice in the feats of arms. Nevertheless
fear in some, heat in other, and ignorance in diverse, made their judgments
so diverse, that it was a wonder to see it. Many marked on the part of the
Protestants two faults, so much the more to be blamed, as they are of great
consequence, and yet ordinary with the warriors of this age and time. The
first was, that no man was sent forth to survey and take view of the enemy,
for the Catholics, which the Protestants might see, were gone to sound ye
foord that they might then pass over their army presently, or else that
night, as in truth they did. The second fault was, that in liew of going to
lodge in the good and strong villages near the river, and the which the
Catholics seized the next day, every man returned to his quarter, whereby
the night following the Catholics had means enough to pass the water, and to
lodge themselves in the villages about to their advantage, there being so
little order and good looking to things on the Princes side, that he was never
advertised thereof, although there was scarcely two leagues of ground between
the two armies. Likewise also many of the Catholics did judge that their
Chieftaines did manifestly amiss in this, that they did prepare themselves to
give battle directly in a place where the Campaine of Beause did end,
considering that al their force was in their footmen, and the Princes in his
horsemen: whereunto add the great multitude of wagons that the Reisters carry
with them: it being a thing of certainty, that if they had let the Prince
pass to the borough of Trion, as he pretended, he should have had such deep
and hollow ways, both on this side, and beyond, and in passing further should
have found the Country so full of trees, that the Catholics might with the
third part only of their footmen have defeated the Prince, and taken all his
cariages without any hazard, and another thing there was (say they) which
made their falt more in excusable, that seeing they were masters of all the
Country of Normandy on this side and beyond the river of Seine, it was in
their power to constrain the Prince to yield himself to their mercy, or else
to drive him back even to the gates of Orleans, without hazarding of
themselves any whit at all.

The Prince (having in that, better judgment than the Admiral) armed himself
two hours before day, and signed many dispatches to be sent into Albemaigne,
and other places from whence he hoped great succors would come, and because the
auantgard which was to come from Neron seemed to be slow, (whereof ye prince
complained much) he sent many gentlemen one after another for to hasten them,
but for all that ever he could do, it was far forth days before that they
came. So then at length his army marched, but after the accustomed manner,
without aduertising the companies perticularly, to prepare themselves to the
battle, either by solemn speeches, or particular, or by any other
aduertisements, than a few words, short, but very courageous, and with a good
grace: insomuch that many Gentlemen found themselves disarmed when they should
go to the charge, and fought without either harness on their back, or helmet
on their head, of this army parted into two bodies of men of arms, the
vantgard lead by the Admiral had about 305. French horse, four Cornets of
Reisters, six Ensigns of Almaines, and twelve of French men: the battle,
whereof the Prince had the conduct, contained 450. lances Frenchmen, six
Cornets of Reisters, six Ensigns of Almaines, and twelve of Frenchmen,
besides six cornets of Argoulets, which might serve for light horse, under the
conduct of La Curec, but they had not marched above a leage and a half, when
the vantcourers advertised the Admiral that they had discovered on this side
the water a great troop of horse: whom he having commanded them to assail at
a signal given as they did) with assurance that himself would follow them at
the heels, suddenly the battle which the Constable lead appeared at the
side of a village. The which being reported to the Admiral, and afterward to
the Prince, they caused all their horsemen to set their lances upright,
ranging their battles within a good Culuerine shot of them. Afterward seeing
that their enemies came not forth, they two went further with only Dandelut
(who had a third day Ague, and was mounted on an hackney, and apparelled for
all harness with a furred robe) until they came to a place, from whence they
might easily judge who had the advantage of the place, whereby they were
persuaded that it was not for them to assail the enemy whereas he was, that
is to wit, at the head of a village between Nogent and Lormay, toward the
which place the Country seemed to be plain, but it was not so indeed, but
they must needs go up an hill and down again: insomuch that the Prince to
pass over his men, and to avoid the fury of their artilerie, wherewith all
they were well furnished, was forced to hasten his people to march so fast that
he put them out of breath, but because they marched slowly, they abid at the
least three volees of their pieces, which might make a great check and
affright the army, in the which not all men had their ears accustomed to the
sound of such flutes. Furthermore, the army Catholic did cover so great a
compass of ground, that if they encountered in that place, one part of them
might compass in, and charge the Prince in the side, and so by that means he
being enclosed, should be at the mercy of his enemies. These things being
considred, and presupposing also that the Catholics were not very sharply
set to fight, a resolution was taken to go directly for to lodge at Trion,
following ye intention ye they had when they departed from Ormoy, and thither
were the Marshals of the lodgings sent. The better to represent unto you one of
the most renowned battles that ever was fought in this Realm, I will first
figure out unto you the seat and quality of the place, which afterward was
embrued with the blood of so many gallant men. Afterward I will set as it were
before your eyes, the estate and disposition wherein these two armies
maintained themselves before, during, and after the conflict. Which being
done, ye may easily judge, to whom the advantage of one so notable occurance
ought to be given, upon the end of the league and level champains of Beause,
Nogent le Roy does present it self to Normandy, pretty near to Dreux, a
little town at the foot of an hill (whereupon stands a Castle of sufficient
strength within the town, by the side whereof passes the river) a Country
fertile and well peopled, between the which two Countries that are separated by
the course of Eure (the which coming out of Beause for to water Chartres, does
trauerie No^mandie even to Pont de L'arche, and below the same does leese it
self in the Seine, the nurse of Paris) is a covert of certain woods, and a
number of little Towneshippes, of whom the Catholics had always to that
day, kept the advantages, as they that seeing themselves stronger in footmen,
and weaker in horsemen then the Prince, would not hazard ought, but where the
place did favor footmen, for lack of whom the Prince was constrained to
take a contrary course. The which was the cause that at his parting from
Lormoy near Nogent, he had purposed to take Dreux, more for to force the
Catholics to an open and general fight, then for the importance of the
place: where Sourdeual commanded, with an hundredth light horse, and five
Ensigns of footmen. But the Cheiftaines Catholics followed him, (coasting
always) within five or six leagues, but holding their way thorough countries
so strong and such couerts, that the Prince could not find any possibility to
encounter them, but with his disadvantage. And in the end the Catholics
seeing occasions and means to prevail in that country, by reason of the
great number of their footmen, resolved for to fight: and therefore the.xix.
day, did set forward to get before the Protestants, and if they could get to
Dreux before the Prince, there to offer him battle at the head of the town
upon an high piece of ground, lodging in the village two great Bataillons of
footmen, which guarded xiiii. Canons, placed and pressed to play before them, and
a little before on the side a number of Enfans perdus, whom they had chosen
out of all the Regiments. The two flanks of these Bataillons were two great
troops of horsemen, for mutual intersuccour of the footmen and horsemen, as
was best for their behoof. Moreover, they had chosen a place so favorable,
that the Confederates could not charge neither the one nor the other, but by one
way of a xiiii. or xv. hundredth paces, the which also the Herquebuzes
Catholic, did no less scour, then did their Artillery. Also a little
below, they had a small unwalled town for to guard their baggage, and the River
of Eure near to their back. But being resolute, and hot to fight, they
advanced themselves farther, for to get between two Villages, by a woods side,
with far greater advantage then before. Hereupon the Prince following his
resolution, began to turn head toward Trion, showing his right side to his
enemies, who perceuing the Argolets, and one esquadro^ of Reisters to be a
fair mark, discharged upon the^ one volee of great Ordenance, which did
affraie them in such sort, that almost all the Argolets ran away, and the
Reisters took the way in a little valley for to cover the^ against ye Canon
shot. Whereupon Anna de Montmorency Constable of France, and general of that
Army, taking occasion to go to ye charge, for to overthrow and break the^ all
entirely (as he had assured many ye his own battle alone was more then
sufficient for to overthrow all the Protestant Army) caused the principal of
his troops to come near to him, unto whom he made such a like speech.

At the length (my masters and friends) I have brought you within sight of our
enemies, who have always hitherto made semblance that they sought battle, the
which now they cannot fly, but also with ye loss thereof, and co^sequentlie
of all the rest ye they have and possess in France. For whether ye be
assailants, or defe^dants, the advantage is assured you, as well for number of
men, that doubleth theirs, for the order and disposition of the Army, for the
qualities of the arms and furniture, as also for the commodity of the places,
which favors us in all sorts, if they will come to us. Add thereunto a thing
more considerable, that we do maintain the cause of God, who will have but one
Religion in the world, that is to wit, the ancient Catholic Roman, from the
which these mescreans and infidels have lewdely cut of themselves: we do also
uphold ye party of our king and sovereign prince, who cannot permit other
exercise in his Realm, then ye of his predecessors: and finally, we fight for
the weal of our natural country, for the suertie whereof, we having ever to
this day done infinite exploites, and fought in so many places, with such honor
and profit, as your virtuous and holy desires have deserved: we should now be
of less belief then they are, and more timorous then women, if we should not
assure us all, that this act as the last of so many travails passed, shall
be crowned with the good honor and felicity that all good and courageous
people cannot but desire. Moreover, think ye yt we are not here to quarrel
for other men's lands, nor for the defense of the borders of any Lords, nor to
enlarge the Empire of the Crown of France, but for the salvation of our
souls, for the maintenance of the Religion of our ancestors, for the holy
alters, for the sacred reliks, for the reverent Priests, and the wonderful and
awefull mysteries of our Religion. In sum, it is for the honor of Jesus
Christ, and then secondarilie for the conservation of our own lives, and of
the life of our Prince, and of his Officers, and by a consequent, for the
honor, good, and surety of the state, the which these mischiouous heretics
would no less reuerse, than they have done already our true and Catholic
faith so defiled by the mortal venim of their pestiferous heresies. We might
well have hastened the battle, but that the counsel have always been of
advise for to stay for the coming of all our forces, as well naturals, as
alies and strangers, for to make them all pertakers of the present honor
attended of all, yet nevertheless rather remitted than denied any one of you.
Wherefore assure your selves of the victory, if ye do not beelie and deny
your valor heretofore: march resolutelie to the fight, keep well your ranks,
succor one another as shall be needful, hold your selves certain and assured
that this one day will be the beginning of your honorable liberty, and of a
treble miserable bondage of the enemies of God, of the king, and of all good
people.

But now he had caused the Artilerie to play upon the foremost of the
Protestants, who were therewithal so galled and affrighted, that many going
out of the ranks, made them believe that their General refused the battle
for to gain still ground: which caused them to begin to make toward the
troops of the Prince, who showed unto them his side with a dismarch, and an
araie and appearaunce so proud, that the army showed how great Captains did
lead it. The Catholic army was compassed of five five great battailons of
footmen, intermedled and interlaced still with their horsemen, because they
were weaker than the Princes horses, as their footmen were stronger by a
treble. The Catholic army seemed to be divided into parts, rather in the
respect of the Chieftaines that governed it, than for any difference of
troops (as the ancient fashion was to divide an army into an auantgard, a
battle and a rereward) for the Catholics represented the form of an hedge,
the which being bias, high, low, straight, and crooked, according to the
nature of the places where they stood, made the confederates to see more or
less the bands Catholyke, according as the nature of the passage did permit,
wherein the three chief Captains seemed to be well accomoded and placed,
either to receive, or to give the charge in this battle. If you will call the
troops lead by the Marshall of Saint Andre, the auantgard, it was composed of
nineteen companies of men of arms Frenchmen, thirteen ensigns of Spaniards,
so many of French, and eleauen of Almanes, with four pieces of Artillery, all
placed on the left of the Constable, who being chief of the army, lead the
battle, which was nearer the enemy than all the rest of the troops, and it
consisted of xvii. Estanders of men of arms, three of horsemen, xxii. ensigns
of Suisses, and xvii. of Frenchmen and Britons, with eight pieces of
Artillery. The Duke of Guise lead the rereward for to help the occurrents
which might be presented, but had but a few men: they almost all standing on
the right side of the Constable, who stood foremost of them all, and every one
of the three Chieftaines having before them their Enfans Perdus on foot to
begin the game. The sum of their army amounted to 19000. footmen, and 2000.
horsemen, and the Prince was about 4000. horsemen, all apparelled in white
Casaques, the which the Prince had caused them to wear for a mark of the
pureness of their conscience in the dessigne by them made for to maintain the
honor of God, and the public, with 6000. footmen divided into two
battaillens of Almaines and Frenchmen.

Then the army Catholic marching in this order against the Princes, that
showed them his side, arrived between two villages L'Espine, and Blainuille,
distant asunder 1200. pace. The which space not being capable to comprehend
the army Catholic in length, it happened that the battle Catholic was far
beyond the auantgard Protestant, so that it stood much behind it. Wherefore
the Prince imagining that they marched directly to him for to fight, he
without farther leisure to make public prayers to God for the victory, as the
Parisians did (that made the shrine of Saint Geneuiefue to come down, for to
emploie her as an intercesseresse to God for their behoof) made his troops
turn head with as much speed as he could: but as a whole army is not
easily removed, so specially by Chieftaines, that have always made more of
the estate of actions of the body, than of the spirit, and wit, prising higher
a furious valliance, shan an order and araie military, (whereby the troops
accustomed to turn, and change in all sorts, and in a moment, do carry
away more victories without great loss, than all those hardy and outrageous
feeses, the which cannot bring but a misery irreparable) the disorder showed
it self to be such, that the Admiral and the auantgard found themselves
ouerright against the Constable, and the Battle: and the Prince and his
battle that was opposed and set against the auantgard of the Catholics, was
so far behind it, as we said, that the Prince could scarce see it at all.
Moreover, the only battle of the Constable stretched almost as far in
length as all the whole army of the Prince. And for lack of order, if that
the constant resolution of some had not served for an example unto the rest of
the army, the Protestants had been that day the more unhappy. In sum,
that backwardness was the cause, that the Prince and the Constable bare all
the brunt, the Constables horsemen that strengthened his battaillon being
charged at one end by the Admiral, and the Battaillon of the Suisses that made
the other end, by the Prince, as I will tell you.

But as the troops of the horsemen Protestant were severed in diverse small
Battaillons of two or three companies Frenchmen, with as many or more Reisters
on their side, so they made diverse charges. And to set the battle abroach,
the Prince set forth out of a little valley, whereupon he marched, and resolved
to go to the charge, because that the Artillery of the Catholics being well
leuelled, lighted among his bands, with great slaughter of good men, as well
of one Nation as of the other: but in stead of going directly against the
auantgard Catholic, which was far from him, he left it on his left hand,
tourning head against the side of the esquadron of the Suisses which
strenthened the end and uttermost side of the battle of the Constable, the
which some went about to dissuade him from, as well because he should thereby
leave all the auantgard of the enemy whole, who might charge him on the back
or side at their pleasure, as also because his footmen tarried thereby behind
all naked, and abandoned to the mercy of the rest of the Catholics. Moreover,
seeing that he was the stronger in horsemen, he ought not to assail the
footmen of the enemies, who would of themselves either break, or yield shortly
after, if the horsemen of the Catholics were defaited, but the heat of the
Prince pricked him forward to effects, and inconveniences, which ye shall see.
For having assembled the principal chief men of the army, with the Marshall
of Hessen, and certain other that understood French, for to report afterward
the substance of that he should say, unto their Captains and soldiers,
he spoke to this effect.

My companions and good friends, if that I had not long time, and namely by
the false alarm yesterdaie, known your couragiousnesse and resolution to
fight, I would stretch out my self in discourses and remonstraunces as much
as my leisure would permit, for to represent unto you your deuoire in an
accident of so great consequence as this is, but the neerenesse of these
tyrants which do attend us, without daring to attach us, and your determinate
courages which are known unto me by so many feats of arms, whereby ye have
always gotten honor over your enemies, do dispense with me for saying of
any other thing unto you, but that time, occasion, and means do present
themselves to day more than ever heretofore, not only to make the fame of
your valiance to run throughout the whole world, but (that which is far
greater and iuster praise of so many pains passed, and of the virtuous
endeavor which you have showed in this action) the rest and tranquillity of
your Gentlemanlie souls, the enfranchisment of your bond consciences, and the
free exercise of your religion: for maintenance whereof God, yea, the great God
of Hosts, has assembled you here out of so many Countries and quarters, so
that it is more than a worldly hononour that ye ought to seek for in the
issue of this battle, although that you cannot want it, as also ye shall
gain and get an incredible booty of so many noble men, who have always
feared you, and fled your fight, neither durst they now approach you in any
equal and indifferent manner, but fortified on all parts, for the just
distrust that they have of their party, and the fear of your approved
prowess. But for the honor of God, by whose secret motion we be incited to
the defense of his holy name, ye must assure your selves that he will lead
and guide you himself, that he will double the force and dexterity of your
arm, and will in such sort favor your furious esfortes to the mischief of
this rascal Papist, which is nothing but a blown bladder, and a vain bragger
without heart or hardiness: so that ye having resolutelie charged, broken,
dispoiled, and slain these men, the rest of the runawayes will send unto you
the white paper for to permit you to live as ye will your selves. Have not ye
made them run away in all parts of France? Have ye not couped them up in
Paris, as it were foxes in their earthes? Have not ye beseaged and beat them
so often in this the chief City of the world? out of the which they durst not
put their heads for fear of blows? do ye think that they are now more
hardy? What other spur do you expect to prick you forward, for to purchase
their ruin, then so many losses of your goods, so many of your places ruined,
so many of your wives, so many of your daughters defiled, so many blasphemies,
so many denyings of the name of God. Such and infinite other barbarous facts
far more detestable, will be, I do assure my self, a sufficient occasion
for you to grow in heart, strength and diligence, for to cleanse the world of
such wicked souls. This does greatly grieve me, that we must blouddie our
hands in the bodies of our cosins, of our allies, of our neighbors, and good
friends. Our victory cannot be but lamentable, but theirs deadly, and what
end so ever then counter shall have, it will rest pitiful to either of the
two, that shall be blessed and embraced, with a good hour, But because we must
judge of the desert of all actions by the uprightness of the occasions of
them, we have a strong consolation in this, that seeing the motife of these
divisions came of the ambition of the Triumuirate, So be^^^ Guys^ (...) And
(...) and (...) Co^^^^^^.
we shall never be thought to have caused, much less to have begun these
wars. We have never sought ought then to live peaceably under the Edicts of
our king. On the contrary side they armed themselves for to destroy and murder
our poor brethren at Vassy, only for this, because they did pray unto God
according to the liberty which the king had caused to be published thoroughout
his whole Realm. Seeing then that they would take our lives from us, what
dishonor and punishable vilanie will that be not to use means desensiue? True
it is, that first nature, then a certain conformity of manners, entertained by
certain laws, which we do call bands politic, (the spring of the amiable
civility yt goes between man and man) has so allied us that few do hold
them for friends. But if that they degenerating from virtuous passions, do
pursue us as enemies, we have so much the more just cause to esteem them for
such, because the honor of God is the true and first foundation of their
hatred: for the maintenance whereof, we ought to expose all that we have, and
leave us nothing at all. And for the rest, assure your selves, that a multitude
of men assembled against the ordinance of God, against right, against all
reason divine, and humane, shall never do fair exploite, virtue has no
sympathy with wickedness. So then keep your selves together without
forsaking one an other, and for to enter, succor one an other, when need
shall be. After the first charge rallye your selves speedely, and disperse not
your selves to pillage, which is yours assuredly after the death of the owners:
follow the victory so sagely, that thenimie, and all those whose ears the
brute of this act shall beat, may have occasion to admire, and no less to
fear your discretion, then your valia^ce, whereof you have made so many
proves heretofore. Now for to show you, that I will not spare my self, but
give and receive my parts of the first blows: I do pray God that he will
make you all go as resolutelie to the charge, as I shall give you example.

This being done, every man returned to his troop, to encourage them by the
same reasons that they had learned of the Prince: whereof they had no sooner
assured the resolution to their people, but they did set them all in array, for
to follow their chieftaines, in the same order, and with such dismarch as I will
tell you.

First and foremost Mouy, with his troop incorporated with Danaretts, the
successor of Genlys, (both of them being of the Auantgard, prepared for the
first shockes) were also the first that charged the Suisses in the flank, with
such force, that being resolutely entered their ranks, they passed thorough them
trauerse. The Prince that followed them, not only pierced their bataillon, but
also brake all ye whole tail with great mortality of those footmen, as good
pikemen as they were. The Reisters that followed, gave in also after him, and
did a marvelous execution. The which Danuille, who was with three companies of
men of arms and the light horse, between the Bataillons of ye Suisses, and
Almans seeing, did set forth for to make head to the Prince, but two cornets
of Reisters setting upon him, did break him in such sort, that he was forced
to retire himself to the Auantgard Catholic, which was a good distance of,
which yet remained still firm. In this encounter was Monbron, one of the
Constables sons slain by an Esquire of the Prince, who had promised it him
before Paris. Upon these dismarches, Rochefoucaut with about an hundredth
lances, who were also of the troop of the Prince, who had not thought it
good to leave their footmen without succor, was also constrained to take the
same course, and charged the Suisses in the front, whom he found so close
together, and so well provided of courage, or perhaps not dismarching with such
resolution as the Prince did, and therefore could not break them, gained
nothing but thrusts of the pike, although he slew some, and among them the
Colonnell.

On the other side, at the very same instaunt that the Prince charged, the
Admiral with two cornettes of Reisters that were on his right side, marched
with his own regiment, and the troop of the Prince of Portian directly to the
Constable his Uncle, and seven or eight standers of men of arms, that
strengthened the other end of the batail Catholic. And after he had borne
one vollee of their Artillery, and certain Harqueburiers Enfans perdus, that
endamaged them a good little, brake all that he encountered, notwithstanding any
resistaunce that could be made against him.

Many did then their best, but their number was nothing equal to them, that
made more dear account of life then of honor, and who being better provided
of good spurs, then assured of heart, fled with such speed that a great
number were the next day at the gates of Paris, by eight of the clock in the
morning, crying that all was lost.

Now ye Co^stables horse was stain, and he remou^ted by Doraiso^, upon his own,
but yet anon after, he was so hurt wc a blow of a Pistolle on the lower iawe
(whereby he loft some of his teeth) and so enclosed, that he yielded unto
Vezines, from whom yet the Raisters that came to the speed, pulled him by
force, and took away his sword, and making him to give his faith, led him
away prisoner. Upon this the Prince of Portian son of the Countess of
Seniguan, to whom the Constable had done many displeasures, came to him: But
(as he was of a good and gentlemanly nature) in steed of his pistolle, offered
him his hand, promising him all help and favor.

The Bataillon composed of xvii. Ensigns of French men and Bretons that sided
the Suisses, were eaiely broken, and so all the whole battle of the Constable
was scattered and entirely defaited after a great slaughter of men, the rest
that fled were pursued even to the River, where many were drowned, whiles
that they that were more desirous of botie then of honor, rifeled the bagage,
which was almost all spoiled.

Hereupon the Lansquenets of the Prince, seeing so great a foil fallen on the
Suisses, would also lift up their hands, and do also some thing on their
party, worthy of memory upon them, namely, whom they saw as men astonished
after two so furious escheckes, to rest half broken, attending their entire
mischaunce: beside an old deadly hatred that they had borne against that
nation, with whom they have long contended for honor, the which never thelesse
the Suisses do carry away from all the footmen of the world. So then they
dismarched toward the Suisses, who were now closed together again,
notwithstanding all that had been done before, but so faintly, that as soon as
they saw that the Suisses that were left, did in steed of being dismayed,
buskle themselves to go straight to them, they lost their hearts, flying
without giving one push with ye pike. The which gave occasion at the same time
to two cornetts of Reisters, and certain French horses that were rallied, to
give a new charge on those Suisses. But in deed they found them so lusty and
of so haughty courage, by reason of the flight of those that durst not so much
as look them in the face, that they could not wholly break them, but their
front remained still whole, and made countenance to recover their eight pieces
of Artillery, which they had forsaken, and with the which they might bring
great damage to the troops, that the Prince and the Admiral rallied with all
diligence and speed: Wherefore for to meet with, and fully to defaite the^,
that vanted that they could not be, vanquished by reason of their courage,
their araie, and martial discipline (whereof other Nations being ignorant, for
the most part make so light account of) they were again attached so lustilie,
that they were forced to leave all to the irresistable fury of the desperate
French, before whom they fled in small bands, yet nevertheless hoped to
rallie and to sight again. And in truth they did retire in good number, and
with some order toward the auantgard, sundry times ten or a dousen of them
that remained behind joining together, and defending themselves with stones
(which was all the weapons that many of them had left them) even to the death,
in such sort, that never Nation did better than they did this day. All the
time of these hot attaches, the auantgard Catholic kept themselves close
together, and stirred not one foot for the space of about an hour and an
half, beholding with a discontented eye the events of so me^tall encounters,
the fear of whom bredde soon enough in some a desire to take back again
the way to Dreux, after that they understood, and in part had seen the
entire discomfiture of their battle, with the taking of the Constable. But
the Duke of Guise had soon enough considered, that after such charges and
endeauours, the Protestants could have neither weapons, nor araie for
themselves nor their horses, to sustain and abide the shock of so many fresh
men, and furnished fully with all necessaries. Moreover, he knew that their
batthillon of French footmen, amounting to 500. ill armed, and destitute of
horsemen (who now went about to rallie with them) was not able to abide him,
being resolved to die, or else to carry away the honor of so renowned a
battle: Wherefore using the counsel of Biron, he drew out 200. horses of
his troops, making a good number of Harquebuziers to march on his right side,
and the Bataillon of Spaniardes after them, while in the mean time he made
this speech unto the Chieftaines and personages of greatest mark, that he
found near him in that quarter.

Masters, and good friends, the only discovery of this bed of honor on the
which are now laid so many brave warriors, your kinsmen, your neighbors, your
allies, and your friends, cannot be unto you otherwise than very lamentable:
but again, therefore it is the stronger and more forcible occasion for to make
you run with bowed heads against these mischievous murdering Lutheranes, who
making no account of the leesing and damning of their own souls in the fire
of everlasting punishment, after that they had defiled our Churches and holy
places with so many villainies, have with a more than brutish fury, massacred
so many good Catholics throughout the whole Realm, are also so rash, and so
shameless, as to attainde the sacred person of the King, and of his most
faithful Officers, for to confound the Stater, for to turn all things
vpside down, and for to establish a tyranny most agreeable to their proud
passions, and have gathered together a troop of Thieves, of Roagues, of
Banqueroutes, and spendthriftes, and of men condemned to diverse punishments,
and other sorts of malcontents. Who have bewitched by certain Preachers, and
other Huguenotes, and so strongly inchaunted my Lord the Prince of Condee,
that he is made head of this unhappy troop, which you do see already
defaited by those violent endeavors, that they have sustained by our battle.
Seeing then that they are so broken, what rests for you but that raising up
again the honor of the General of this army, their Prisoner, ye go nobly
to the charge, and bring away the victory, the which otherwise the enemy
will carry away, with their no less honor, than the vnrepayable damage of
us and all Christendom? Ye need do no more but look them in the face. For
their horses tired with so many charges and long carriers, will no more than
the men wearied and unfurnished of weapons, sustain one moment the gallant
lustiness of your fresh dismarch. Do but dare to attempt it, and ye shall
get the noblest victory that ever Nation gained: as on the contrary part it
will redound to so much your greater dispraise, if that seeing ye have
advantage in all things, you do let so fair an occasion slip, and holding
your arms a cross, and fighting only with your eyes, ye will suffer the
enemies to remain masters of the field of the battle. But to the end that
the valiant may not be without knowledge of their reward, and that these
villains do not remain unpunished for their villainies, I do assure you of
the liberal recompense of our king, I do swear unto you by God, that I will
show my self so liberal toward them that I shall see or hear, bear
themselves valiantly, that they shall never lack goods, besides the courtesy
of the bounty of their Majesty's, and the honors which the law of arms, and
the custom of the Country do give. But those Chelmes and enemies of God
shall be fully assured of the same, yea, and a more cruel death, The most
reproachful name in Dutch.
whih they do think to escape by running away, for recompense of their
villainy, and punishment of example to all other, that dare usurp the name of
Soldiers, and men of war: with an everlasting inhibition of burying them,
but to lie in the field to have none other grave than the bellies of dogs, of
wolves, of birds, and other beasts, that shall glut themselves of the^ at their
pleasure. On, on then my friends, and let us see who has most desire to
sacrifice honorably the rest of his days for the service of God, of the
king, and of France.

Upon this resolution, and being well followed by these troops, he charging
on all parts this Bataillon of footmen, had a fair day, they being first
retired, that should have conducted other, and as well by words as
Gentlemanlike examples of their persons, have encouraged them to do their
beuoire, and afterward all the Soldiers, but not so speedily as they could,
because they were on horseback, and the other on soote, so that none of them
fought, but the three or four of the first ranks, after they had shot off one
volee of their four field yeeces. At the same time the Marshall of Saint
Andre, with all the rest of his horsemen, went to range with the two sides of
the battaillon of the Almans, which did close up the utter bound of the
auantgard. In the front whereof were seven or eight hundredth French
Harquebuziers, shooting at the Reisters, which had rallied themselves returning
from the chase of those that had been broken, as I told you before: Who
seeing their French footmen, and Lansquenets defaited, and so great forces
coming against them, returned with a pretty trot toward a wood that was
near them. In the mean while Dandelot, although he were pressed with his
ague, yet he forced himself to give order for all things that were needful.
And seeing those Lansquenets of the Prince to fly cross the village of
Blaynuille, near whereunto the Constable had been taken, he gallopped to cut
of their way, and to make them make head to a troop of horsemen, that chased
them a good way off: but they had no order once to stay, they were so
afrighted, it being most certain, that these fifty years there entered not
into France more errant cowardes than they were, although they had the fairest
apparaunce in the world. So that Dandelot, with whom abode not above seven
or eight horses, and who by reason of his age had no other armor than a furred
Cloak, could not reioyne with his fellows, but retired without great
impeachment toward Trion, into a place where he reposed and rested himself as
he could, finding means the next day to get again to the army both finely
and fortunately.

Upon this the Prince and the Admiral seeing the auantgard also to come upon
them, who had not yet rallyed more than about two hundred Frenchmen, of whom
one only had a Lance, prayed the Reisters to stay ready for the
recharge. But they being alr^^ie packing away said that they must go to
recharge their Pistolles. Moreover when they saw their footmen both French and
Allemans ran away, and themselves pursuen, they flung away a galloppe, and
the French men with them: so that the Prince was constrained to do so
likewise, and was hurt in the hand, and his horse, that had received an
Harquebusse shot in his leg, had not gone above 300. pace, but that he halted
down right, and before he could be remounted O. Anuille was on the back of
him, to whom he yielded. The Reisters and the French men, having crossed a
wood cut down, found a little valley the which they passed, and stayed upon
an high piece of ground in the sight of the Admiral: who had taken his flight
more on the right hand, with a number of other a long the side of the same
wood, to make head to their enemies, that closed it upon the other side, and both
the one and the other were above a good quarter of an hour without other
aduauncing, or making in one to the other, wherein a number of Catholics
curious quite to overthrow thenimie, noted a gross fault committed by S. Andre
and the Duke of Guyse, assuring that if they had lively followed their victory,
the Protestants trembling at such fearful accidents, would never have rallyed
together in gross. But the Admiral, as a wise, resolute, and diligent
Captain, had done all that he could possible to rallye his horsemen dispersed
thorough the whole field, and in great disorder, and finding that he had
assembled about 250. horses French, that had nothing but their swords and
pistolles, and about 1000. Reisters, of whom he set the one half on his right
side, and the other on his left, and being accompanied with the Prince of
Portian, Rochfoucaut, and other gentlemen, well deliberated, he resolved to go
yet once more to fight with thenimie, what price so ever if should cost him,
after that he had used a few words to the Chief men of the Horsemen, that
accompanied him, and the Marshall of Hessen, the Truchmen, and certain
Captains Allemains, that understood French, for to encourage them the better
to the charge.

Although it seems to me a matter needelesse to use any speech to them that
have sufficient assurance in their own virtue and valor, and to make trial
whereof ye are come: yet whilst we do stay until all our people be rallied,
I may well say unto you, that unless great enterprises were accompanied with
great perils and difficulties, the praise could be but small to them that
should attain to the honor of them. But as the high desseines for to
maintain the honor of God, and the good of their Country, can not be
executed without infinite bazardes, and pains incredible, so must they also
assure themselves, that the price and reward of so many extreme labors is
not only pressed and certain, but also great, when the virtue is great whereof
we constantly poursue the end. This is the reason, why that hearts that would
be known to be gentlemanly, do always purpose and attempt enterprises of
great hazard, because that they do know that hereby they shall get them
eternal honor, and their long travails be recognized with immortal renown.

On the contrary part, those that are of small stomach, baselie minded, and
of a vile cowardice, do never address themselves but to things base and
easy, as also their name does dye as soon as the effect of that they
enterprised. Moreover, as assurance of the will of God is necessary for to
testify all actions, can we fight more lawfully, or for a thing of so great
importance, then for the liberty of our conscience, (and do they not take
away the bright light of the world, that will take from us the liberty of our
faith) or can we keep wars more just then this which is of necessity? Be
not our weapons forced, and therefore consequently holy and religious in the
hands of them, that have no other hope to live, but by the help and endeavor
of them? In, in, valiant hearts, In, in. It is not the multitude, but the
valor of courage, that gives the victory.

God fights for us, as he has done heretofore for so many small troops,
which you have seen, and heard of, being well conducted to have broken those,
that were ten times greater then themselves. And otherwise also ye shall
mightily enrich your selves as well by the incredible booty and spoil, as for
the great raunsomes, that ye shall get. As touching the rest, ye have already
vanquished the greatest part, which are rallied with them, that durst not
advance themselves upon us after the taking of their General. Is it likely
to be true, that they which have been already tamed, and subdued, have taken
force by their fall? and that the victorious have been made more vile and worse
by their felicity? March then resolutely to the defaite of the rest, following
the good hour that has lovingly welcomed you. It is a common saying, he that
has begone well has half done, which is not spoken to make slothful or to
bring a sleep him whose first attempts have been happy: no but contrary for
to prick him forward still so much the more to the poursuit and perfecting of
his desseine. But as it is more dishonor for him that through negligence or
lack of courage does let the satisfaction and contentment to be lost, the which
he had almost thoroughly gotten, the^ for him that had always been unfortunate
at the beginning, in the poursuite, and at the end of his enterprise: so you
must assure your selves, that God did not send into your hands the beginning of
so renowned victory through the strange hardiness, and not credible valor
of my Lord the Prince, but for to heat and enchafe you to attempt the
advancement, and entier gain of accomplished happiness.

O thrice fortunate, ye that shall return unto your houses triumphing of the
victory, laden with the spoils of your enemies, which ye shall bring out of
the field, and see your selves embrased, and sweetly welcomed home by your
kinsfolks, wives, children, neighbors, and allies, who shall for ever from
Father to son sing the eternal praises of you, that have so willniglie
exposed your lives for the honor and glory of God, surety of the king, and
public good of your country. For although to die be a thing common both to
the good and the wicked, whatsoever they be, yet death is not honorable, nor
worthy of praise in any man, but in those, ye shot at no other mark then the
virtuous actions of their life. Go then my masters, and show thenimie by
effect, that our courage redoubleth in adversities, making them to know that
with the loss of our brave companions, we will revenge the wounding and taking
of our General. March then forward gallantly and lustely, and as they that do
fight with hearty hatred, making all ye world see, that as Germany and France
are two Nations of one original, so that the one can not bring forth more
resolute soldiers then the other.

Thus they being all encouraged, marched directly to the village of
Blaineuille, where the first fight was made. There the Catholics were in great
number ranged in three esquadrons, many of whom imagined a while, that the
Admiral and his people seeing they came again so soon, and specially seeing
that they had never a lance, were come to yield themselves to their mercy:
but they soon knew that it was to begin again the battle. For although
their forces were utterly unequal in number, specially the Reisters on the
left side, being slipped away without doing ought, yet the reencounter was very
furious and mortal to a great number of gallant men, In so much, yt the Duke
of Guyse the better to break, or to slack this furious dismarch that the
Admiral made upon him, following his first point near to the Mill against ye
village of Maumontell, caused to come with all speed ye French footmen, lead
by the young Chunte de Brissac, their Colonel in Piemont, Martigues and other,
which yet could not be perceived because he had set them in battle behind the
horsemen, they being without pikemen, were 2000. harquebuziers, with the
Spaniards, who all shooting incessantly against the Admiral, hurt many
horses, and a number of the Confederates, thorough their so hot and so long a
shower of harque busse shot. Who yet could not let but that the horsemen of the
Catholic, were perced lustily by the Admiral with two hundred horse, and by
600. Reisters in another quarter, and in the end were forced to recoile and
give place to blows, and they had been wholly broken if that the Harquebushes
had not slacked the course of the horses, and the fury of the Protestants, who
having now changed their trot into a gallop, and being chafed valiantly to
execute the charge, behaved their hands so well, yt of all the horsemen on the
side of the Duke of Guise, there remained not with him upon the place above
four score or an hundredth, who in the end went to rallie themselves by the
help of their great bataillon of Frenchmen, who bare all the brunt, for the
which it was well cheapned by the Admiral, who turned round about to find a
place of breach and ouerture, whereby he might do some great matter, to the
loss and euerthrow of the whole body of the army. But for lack of lances,
and because the Admiral was not followed by all the Frenchmen, nor the Almans,
they could never pearce them nor do other God, than destroy and endomage many
of their troops. The sight had now endured above five hours, and hardly
could one discern the white scarfes which the Admiral and his ware, from the
red of their enemies, when he caused his troops to close together, putting ye
Reisters that he had left in two esquadrons, and marching in the midst with
the French horsemen, and commanding Bouchauanes the Lieuetenant of the princes
Cornet, for to tarry in the tail with about 50. horses. The Duke of Guise
likewise rallied his men, and seeing that the Admiral retired, assaied for to
pursue him with all his footmen, as long as their breath would serve them, and
a very few horsemen that were left about his person, but they had scarce gone
seven or eight hundred paces, but that the darkness of the night did take
away the sight one of another. So the Admiral retired a pace with those
footmen that were saved, the great artillery, and all the baggage of the
army, a good league from the place of the Battle to the village of
Neufuille, where he lodged. You see how the Protestants retired from the
place where they had attached their enemy, whom they left in the possession
thereof, for to search, spoil, and burn the dead, and to lift up at leisure
the spoiled confederates. At the same time the Duke of Guise went to lodge in
the suburbs of Dreux, a little league from thence: the place of the battle
remaining void, unless it were of them that were appointed for the effects
before said, and a great number of dead men lying here and there spoiled of
all about them, and the Artillery of the Constable, with four field pieces of
the Princes.

Such was the end of the battle of Dreux, in the which God balancing the
victory as it pleased him, made many warriors to mark three notable
occurrances, and very rare in such feats of arms. The first, that there was no
skirmish before the battle: the second, that both the Generals were taken
prisoners: and thirdly, that they rallied so often. As touching the dead, the
Catholics said, after yt they had buried them, the next day, that they found
them to be eight or nine thousand. But other said assuredly, that there were
dead on the place not above 5000. without accounting the hurt men that died
shortly after, who were no small number. At the reuiew which the Admiral made
four days after, he found that there remained of the French footmen near one
thousand of about 2500. that had been there, and near 900. Almanes, of three
thousand that should have been in their regiments: of whom about 1400. (that
had yielded themselurs prisoners in the chase that we spoke of) were sent home
into their Country. Now of horsemen, to speak the most, he found not missing
above 140. both of French and Reisters, not comprehending those yt were taken
prisoners. So that there died on the Prince his side but about 2200. footmen.
But on the Catholics their part, the abatement of the Suisses was marvelous,
of whom 17. Captains were slain, their Colonel Freulich being dead before at
Paris of a laske. The rest of the men slain on that side were almost all
horsemen, who were hardly handled by the Reisters as well at the taking of the
Constable, as at the last charge: in the which among other, the Marshall of
Saint Andre, the Chieftaine of the auantgard having been taken prisoner, and
charged behind by a Gentleman to get a great ransom: Baubigny who had at
another time taken at the heart a certain displeasure done by him, coming
upon him slew him, with a Pistol shot overthwart his head. Many other knights
and Lords were slain there, as D'Annebault, Dr Gemy with his Guidon, and the
Marshall of the Logis, la Brosse, a great favorite of the Duke of Guise, and a
son of his.

It was a long time an opinion, both during and after the battle, that the
Duke of Guise was slain. But some had taken his Esquire from him, who was not
much unlike him in stature, and whom the Duke had mounted on one of his best
horses, upon whom he was slain, every man taking him for his master. Le
Conte of Rochfort, called Damoisel de Comeri, and de Beauuois, and Brichanteau
were sore hurt, Beauuois died in the end, the rest escaped. Saint Heran was
saved by the means of one of the Princes Trumpetters, yt was his Countriman,
wherefore he was afterward in great danger to be hanged. Pienne, whom we told
you departed from Orleans, fell into the hands of la Love, an honest and
valiant Gentleman, one of his old friends. Who notwithstanding rehearsing unto
him his fault, would have carried him away prisoner, but he could do and speak
well, so assuring him at the last, that he should soon die in his arms, he was
so sore hurt, that he let him go, and Pienne recovered. D'aumalle was hurt,
and had one of his shoulder plate thrust out of joint, whereof he remained long
time hurt. Ausson a gentleman of Gascogne so renowned in the parts of Piemont,
yt he had made a Proverb of his hardiness, ran away with the first, even to
Chartes, where he died of an ague, that he took for grief and sorrow: so much
can the fear to leese reputation do in a gentlemanly heart. But the death of
Frances of Cleues duke of Niuernois, governor of Champagne, the heir of the
late Frances of Cleues his Father, is most remarkable, of all things that
happened in this Battle. This young Lord being so won by Desbordes a
Gentleman of Niuernos, by whom and by his Secretary called Vigenaire, he let
himself be so wholly possessed, that notwithstanding that he had made
profession of the same religion that the Protestants did, and had twice
promised the prince to come unto him and follow him, yet he liked better to
fight that day for the Catholics, whom he had before followed. But it
happened upon the prick of the first charge, that Desbordes himself ill
handling his Pistol, wounded the Duke in the thigh three fingers below the
hanch, and toward the knee, so grieuouslie, that there could be no means
found to save his life. And being so hurt, he was carried as well as it could
then be, unto a village, and from thence to Dreux, passing upon the way with
five or six of his men, who carried him near to Dandelot, who enquiring what
he was, and having understood that it was the Duke of Neuers wounded to death,
would not stay him, but bid him think upon his faults and offenses. But as
for Desbordes he leaving his master, did for despair that he had slain him,
or for some other cause, run so far into the thickest of the enemies, that
he left his life in the place. But the poor Lord did sore torment himself,
but he was somewhat comforted by Mouie, who only of all the Chieftaines of
the Prince, had been taken in the last charge, and he having been in his
youth greatly loved of the Duke of Neuers, served him for a comforter, and as
a minister, even until he died. The principal prisoners besides the Constable,
was D'Oraison, De Rochfort, D'Esclauoles, and certain other Gentlemen. On the
Princes part were slain, the Baron of Arpaion, de Saux, de Chandien, de
Liencourt, de Ligneris, de la Fredonniere, de la Carliere, de Rougnac de
Mazelles, Saint Germier, almost all of them of the Cornet of Mouy, who was
taken prisoner in the last charge, having ben hurt, and afterward tarrying long
on foot in the wood adjoining. Throckmorton ye Ambassador of England, and
Fances Perrucel the princes minister, thinking ye all had been lost, saved
themselves in ye near town of Nogeant, where was the Dewager of Bouillon, the
daughter of the great Seneshall, who had given a taste to the Prince the day
before. And although they were delivered prisoners to the Catholics the next
day, yet Perrucel was afterward sent to the Prince, to whom he served well for
to fortify him, during the time of his imprisonment. Also two other Ministers
were sore hurt, but neither of them dyed: they were both gentlemen and bare
arms. The one being Minister of Mouy his company, had scarsely made an end of
prayers going to the charge, but that he was stricken to the ground with the
blow of a stone that hit him on the reins, and from thence after a thousand
strange chances, carried to the next village, and afterward to Dreux, and
finally to Paris, and was so well thought of among his enemies, without ever
being known, or constrained to do any thing against his conscience, that in
the end he came again safe and sound to Orleans. The other being brother of
de la Cour de Chire, a learned gentleman of Poitou, had received an harquebusse
shot in his reins, which carried a piece of his harness into his body, and
the bullet going to the other side even to the skin, near to the navel, was
so well thought of, and helped the evening after the battle, that the piece
of the harness being taken out at the entry of the wound, and the bullet at
the end, and he being shut up in the castle of Maintenon, was ready to take
horse again within three weeks.

The news of the battle was soon brought by the runawaies, both to Paris,
and to Orleans, both the one and the other reporting that all was lost on their
side. The first that gave the affright to Paris, was Guilaureau d' Orleans,
followed by many other, of whom some were good great ones, who all affirmed the
overthrow of the battle, and the taking of the Constable, as true it was, in
so much that the partakers of the Catholics stood in no great sure state:
when Losses arrived, reporting the taking of the General of the Protestants,
and how the Duke of Guyse had recovered all: adding also, that the Admiral was
intierly defaited. Upon the which report there were made at Paris, and in all
other places, to whom these news were written with all diligence, all kind
of joy, as bonefires, feasts, dauncings, Maskes, accompanied with Processions,
and ringing of Bells, with all joy and mirth On the other side the most
speedy to fly, made all things uncertain at Orleans, but not quite
desperate, which held all the people in suspense until the next day being the
xx. of the month, when certain news came with them that brought the
Constable prisoner, to whom they had given but a little refreshment on the way
after his taking, they making him march without once resting all that night,
and the day following, until he came to Orleans, and was put in the Princes
lodging. He was not rescued as he looked for, by 100. light horses, and eight
companies of French men over whom Charry commanded at Chartres, within sight
of whom they made him pass a pace. But for to come again to the two armies,
the Duke of Guyse encamped near Dreux, using all graciositie toward the
Prince: who also on his part showed himself nothing astonned, and so they
passed the night, having supped simply enough. In the morning the Duke who now
remained sole Chiefeteine of the army, having caused half a score or a dosen
pieces of Ordenance to be shot of, for to assemble his people, made all the
hurt men to be sent into Dreux, and all the dead that could be found, to be
buried. Also the Ensigns that had been won from the footmen of the Prince,
were brought unto him, which he sent afterward to Paris, in sign of victory,
because the field was left unto him. On the other side, the Admiral being at
Neufuille, and having but slenderly rested, and given order to all that was
possible, assembled all the Captains, as well Frenchmen as Reisters, that he
could, unto whom, for to encourage them to an intiere and assured victory, he
proposed the hope of certain victory, if that at the very break of the day
the next morning, they would charge their enemies, whom he knew were in great
fear, having lost their two principal Chiefeteines, and their horsemen being
for the greatest part slain, and the rest very much scatered, insomuch, that
they should scarcely find an hundredth horses together, as he also learned by
certain soldiers prisoners, that had escaped, and came back to the Camp
last night. Whereunto the Reisters made answer, that his counsel was very
courageous and good, but that it was impossible for them to execute it, many of
their horses being hurt, and the other tired, besides that, many of their
people were yet dispersed, with a good part of their Wagons, the which they
would not leese, and that they must needs mend and repair their pistolles. So
by this means was that enterprise broken of. Yet nevertheless they went
forth the next day in battle araie out of the village, and marched a little
way over against the quartier of the Catholics, where he tarried about an
hour, considering the countenance of his people, and for to revoke as many
of his men as he could, that had been scattered in the wood: and in the end
seeing himself out of hope to be followed for to begin again the fight:
drew directly to Gallardon, and the next day being the xxi. having left by the
way one of his great pieces, to wit, a Couluerine, which was mired, but
afterward waied up, and carried away by them of Chartres, he lodged at the
village of Arneau, where he was chosen General of the army in the absence of
the Prince. And from thence into Beausse, and Salogne, and from hence into
Normandy, to meet with the English, winning many towns in those parts. As
Guyse took Estampes, and was fair for Orleans when he was slain by Poltrot:
whereupon ensued a peace.

The Battle of Saint Gemme in Poitou, fought in Anno. 1570. between la Noue
a Protestant, and Puygaillard a Catholic. Out of Popelliniere.
PVygailliard, who had been sent into Poitou, by the King, with an Army of
about. 4000, men, for to impeach the roades of the Protestants of Rochell,
Marans, and other places thereabouts into Poitou, built a Fort at Luson, where
the ordinary and usual ways met, for to stop their passages, and placed
therein a great garrison under the government of Mascaron, with promise
assured, that he would succor him, if he happened to be beseeged, as in deed
he was shortly after by la Noue and Puuiant, with all their forces, which might
be four Cornets, and eleven Ensigns, with 300 Lansquenets, commanded by
Colonel Hector Reilen, and Frederick Vuis his Ensign bearer, and three pieces
of Ordenance, hoping to win it before that Puygailliard could bring thither
his forces that were disperced thorough Niortois and high Poitou. But the Fort
was not so soon beseeged, but that Puygaillard being advertised by Mascaron,
as well of the desseines, number, and power of the Protestants, as also of
their inco^modities, assembled his forces assuring himself, that the mean
that presented it self was more then pregnant, for to shave la Noue his beard,
as many gallants gabled. He had nine companies of Ordenances, and light horse:
his own, those of Malicorne, de Bouile, the governor of Nantes, whom his
Ensign Castemer led, and certain other all French, with two of Italians, one
that Iulio Centurio led, the other of Charles Birague, which had Brandy his
leuetenant, three regiments of footmen, to wit, one of the late Count de
Brissac, whereof Captain la Rade then absent, was chiefeteine, and the
regiment of Strossy, the Colonel general of the French footmen, and that which
Magarin an Italian, Sergent Mayor, led, all old soldiers, of the kings guard,
consisting of 18. or 20. Ensigns in all. He had other troops, but that he
made such have, that he might enclose the Protestants between Marans, and
Luson, that he had not leisure to assemble them. And the speed that he used in
the march was so extreme, that he made them travail on the way two days and
a night without eating or drinking, but very little, nor resting but a very
short time at Fontenay, and almost only so long, as their baggage was in
laying up, being left there that they might march more speedely and orderly.
But before I do go any farther, I think it expedient to give you a
topographie, and describe not only the place were the battle was fought,
but also the Country and the quarters near aboutes, as well to represent unto
you more plainly the most memorable perticulars of so famous a fight, as also
for to make you understand the better that which I have said before of the
fort of Luson, and the ways of Poitou.

The Catholics then came from Fontenay straight to Saint Gemme, from whence to
Luson is a good half league, and the fight was more near to Saint Gemme: from
thence going forth right, there are two tuffes of wood, to whom do adioyne a
great quarter of wood cut down. Between the two woods are vines which do
continue and stretch, being separated by hedges and great bushes, even almost
to Luson, both on the right and the left side, unless it be in three or
four places, where be certain plains laid out for the sowing of Corn: as
one comes from Fontenay to Saint Gemme, near to Nalliers, the way parts it
self into two, the one way goes straight into Nalliers, and from thence to
Saint Gemme, the other leaves Nalliers on the right hand, and after it has cut
cross over many quarters of vineyards, and many plain fields, and some
marshes, at the last it comes out again into the great way of S. Gemme unto
Luson, whereof I will speak unto you anon: for by reason of it the
Protestants did order their battle otherwise than else they would have done.
Puygalliard that did not believe yt the small number of Protestants would present
themselves unto his old bands in a plain, yet seeing yt they were come forth,
devised how he might force them to a general fight, and for that intent,
setting forward with his troops with all speed toward Saint Gemme, he sent
the Italians and Albanoises for to keep the passage of Moreilles for to cut
off their way of return, and also caused very subtly a brute to run
thereof, that he might bring the Protestants in despair of return to Rochel:
for they had none other way but yt, except another yt leads from Marans to
Luso^, which was very ill and bad, by reason of the waters, and the mirie
marshes which lie between them, where the horses would soon be stabled,
making by this means an estate of the victory, if ye they durst to present
themselves unto him, or if ye they would retire by Triaise and Charrie, that
then both they of the fort of Luson, and also his own army would pursue the^
in the tail: to the which ends he made his men march with all speed. And to
make you know more certainly all things that passed in this occurrence, I
will tell you the means that he used to assemble his troops, his march on the
way, and his conduct.

He having appointed the Rende-uos or place where all his troops should meet at
Fontenay, he did set them on their way, and with six horses he came thither
himself about middle night of the day before the battle. When he was come, he
caused a brute to be noised abroad ye he had gotten an hot ague, the which
made him to keep his bed very sick: and he caused many to see him in bed, to
the end yt the news might go the sooner to the ears of the Protestants, and
make them therefore careless to keep themselves upon their gards, yt so he
might more easily break them by a surprise, rather than by the hazard of an
entire battle. And yt he might not fail in his devise, he commanded the
Maire of Fontenay to send unto them a Trumpetter, who assuring the^ of his
sickness, might bring him word of the estate of their gards, ye number and
resolution of their forces, under color of dealing for ye deliverance of
Roussiere, and other prisoners, that they held in S. Gemme. In the mean while
his companies by little and little arrived at Fontenay, not without great pains,
and displeasure both for the length of the way, and also the trouble yt the
darkness of the night brought them, yt were to pass in such long marches, and
because yt no man should be suffered to stay in the town for to bait, or to
rest themselves, or to do any other thing than leave there their baggage: the
Maire caused a number of pipes of wine, and certain bread to be set forth in
ye streets for the soldiers to take as they passed along. In sum, yt he might
speed and assure his enterprise, he would give them no more time for to tarry,
than leisure for to make away that distribution. But the companies came
thither so by peecemele, so weary and so tired with the long journey, yt he
could not let them, but that the soldiers would needs lodge there, some to
rest both their body and spirit, that sleeped as they marched, some for to
bait and get them new strength, that they might be better able to accomplish
the commandment of their General, who being forced to please the soldiers,
and judging that he should be able to get them from their rest at the least
four hours before night, commanded ye Maire and certain of the inhabitants,
who might happily make 15. horses, for to beat ye ways, and to learn news,
and to bring him certain word of ye enemy, of who^ he had heard no certainty
3. days before: assuring them that he would be at Mozeuil (two leagues from
Saint Gemme) with all his army by Sun set. The scouts gave in as far as (
heuretes, a league of Saint Gemme, and sent some to tell him, that Puuiant and
the greatest part of the Poiteuins were at Saint Gemme, doubting nothing of
him. But because the soldiers marched not resolutelie, he was when he received
this news but half a league from Fontenay, which is distant 4. leagues from
S. Gemme, and as much from Luson) ranging his troops in battle near to
Longesue. In like manner Puuiant had sent forth a number of horse for to
discover the plain, and to have certain advise of the desseines of
Puigaillard, of whose fained sickness he had been advertised by the Trumpetter,
yt I told you of before, whom Puuiant (suspecting by his speech and
countenance, yt he was come to epsy the estate of the Protestants) had beaten
so long, until he discovered all that had been done, and thereupon he sent his
people into the plain, upon whose discovery the Maire of Fontenay retired
himself. Upon these things done by the one and the other side, Phygaillard
made his army march cross over the fields, to the intent to get between
Luson and Saint Gemme, meaning to overthrow and defait the Poiteuins first, who
were almost all the horsemen of the Protestants, lead by Puuiant, Saint
Es^^^^me, and others, and that done, to give upon the f^st that were at Luson.
But his people marched so slowly, that the (...) ^^ss^me upon their before
they were at Mozeuil, the darkness whereof having made them leese the sight
and light of the ways, where they should go: with in short time the greatest
part of them scattered, being disbanded here and there whether the
uncertainty of the paths lead them, yea, those that knew the way best could
not tell which way to take. At that instant the Ensigns and Cornets, found
themselves so forsaken of their scattered soldiers, and there happened thereby
such confusion among the^, that the foremost auantcourers found themselves near
to them that were foremost, to make the tail. But on the other side the courers
of the Protestants being returned to Saint Gemme, to make report of the
Catholic beaters of the ways that they had discovered, were the occasion that
certain Gentlemen (that well knew the ways of the Country) mounted on
horseback, to bring more certain advice, and they had not rode long, but that
they heard the great noise of the scattered troops, that hallowed and called
one unto another, for to be set into the way: and riding yet a little
farther, to be more thoroughly informed of all that was done, they lighted at
the last upon seven or eight of the enemies, some on foot, and some on
horseback, marching as men assured, because they were persuaded that about
500. of their auantcourers were before them, which was the cause, that when
they were asked whether go you? They answered amiablie, Amy, Amy, Friend,
Friend: marching still without putting themselves in defense, esteeming them
for their own people. But being astonished by three Pistol shot that was given
them for a good night, they refused not to mount behind the Protestants, who
carried them to Puuiant, to whom they declared their intent and purpose, and
the near approach of the troops. Presently the alarm runs throughout the
Borough of Saint Gemme: the Trumpets (all the men having upon the
aduertisements of the first scoutes armed themselves and saddled their horses)
and being ready to march, needed to do no more but sound to the standard and
set forward. For at that instant they dislodged, for to advertise la Noue that
abode at Luson, of all that we have fold you before, and to exhibit into
consultation of the counsel, what was to be resolved upon in this matter. The
which la Noue did also soon do, as well for to sound the hearts of his, as
also not to miss, but with the opinion of them all, if that fortune should
make their first desse in fall out ill.

The opinions were diverse, and the assembly was divided into two aduises, as it
does ordinarely happen in a matter of such importance, namely among ye
Chiefeteines, that would manage their affairs considerately, and rather by the
common advice, then their own particular motion. The chief Captains being
assembled, la Noue did declare unto them, the enterprise that they had made
against the Fort, and the occasion thereof, that now it was come to this point
that they could not longer abide before the place, but that they must either
fight, or else retire them selves. As touching the first, the army of the
enemy is great, well furnished both for men, and equipage, and a third mo in
number then the Protestants. But that which is more to be considered in this
occurrence is, that although we do obtain the victory, yet we shall thereby
not advance at all the affairs of the public, and the total cause, if that
fortune fall out ill to our great army, under the conduct of the Admiral,
which every day is in doings with the Marshall of Cosse, and upon the point to
darreyne battle with the kings forces: for then shall this victory of ours,
be rather lamentable, then profitable. For as it can not be obtained but with
great effusion of blood, and the death of many brave Captains and valiant
soldiers: so that if the army of the Princes be broken, those that shall dye
in this fight now at hand, will so lessen our forces, that we shall not be able
to maintain Rochell against the Catholics, who may soon repair and levy
an other army: because they do swarm in people under the authority that
they have stolen from the king. But, seeing that he remitted the resolution of
the one and the other unto the plurality of voices, those that maintained the
fight, carried it away in number. Besides the dishonor (said they) that the
army shall get by such a retraite, it can not be done but with an other
greater loss of men, then shall be spent in the battle: namely, seeing that
the Catholics march upon them with so great speed. Add thereunto, that the
Italians (as they thought) had set forth for to cut of the way for none
other consideration, but to impeach them of all ways of retires. Whereupon
Puuiant, took the word out of their mouths, and of a particular motion said
aloud: So that we do go resolutely to the charge, the victory is certainly
ours, for they are all so werie, so covered over with dust, by reason of the
long journey that they have made, and besides they are so charged with sleep,
that they will not be able to sustain the first charge of our people. As
touching the rest, God, who is as great, as strong, and as well willed toward
his, as ever he was, has provided for far greater inconveniences than those
that can befall to us, if our great army hap to be broken. If in all occasions
that are presented to men, man show himself noble and courageous, God will
supply, the rest, and furnish up the imperfection of man, of whom he demands
no more, but his deuoire. Let us then do that lies in us, and he that has
guided us hereunto for to maintain his cause, will of his almighty power,
accomplish that, which our feeble power lacks. The authority and no less
the good fortune, that accustometh to favor such a Chiefeteine, was of so
great force with the rest of that troop that la Noue had no sooner asked them
all whether they were resolved to fight, but that their long acclamatio^s, and
laughing countenances, assured him of the good will that they had to do it. In
so much that having admonished them not discharge before they were near their
enemy, to pursue their poinct furiously, and to recharge without cease, as
long as they should see any number of their enemies in troop, for fear, least
they should rallie after they were broken: gave commandment to every Captain
for to go and order and encourage his troops, and that the Ministers should
presently preach unto every company, praying God to send them an happy
success in this battle, so dangerous as every man is more religious when
he sees him self pressed near to any ill, but if all things laughed upon him
at pleasure, then our nature is to forget him quickly, to whom we were so
devout when we feared ye bastonnades of a mischief near at hand. But I will
leave them at their prayers, and preparing of themselves to the reencounter,
the which they held assured, and bring Puigaillard forward, who staying for
nothing less then for fear of raising of Puuiant and his companions out of
their beds, hasted amain. But he was scarce at Cheurettes, but that the
companies of the Kings guard, who being the speediest, had made a stand for a
certain time, staying for the rest, gave soon enough into the barries of
Saint Gemme, (for the Protestants had shut up the ways of Saint Gemme,
and Luson) which they got, and passed without resistaunce, and ran thorough
the borough, in the houses whereof, they found the beds yet hot,
wherewithal they finding themselves grieved, did whilst they stayed for the
army, some of them lay them down to sleep, other fell to filling of their
bellies, and some ran to hasten Puigaillard, and to carry him the news of
taking of Saint Gemme: whereinto he entered before the prick of the day,
crying in all quarters to his Soldiers to come out of the houses, to put
them in order, and range of Battle, for to follow the Protestants, who, some
said, were fled to Marans, and from thence to pass to Beraud. In the end,
seeing that the most part of the companies were out of the Borough, he made
them turn headde directly to Luson, where he hoped to be revenged of the
occasion that had had slipped out of his hand.

There fifty soldiers Auantcourers (of the best mounted of the Kings guard)
whom he had sent before the army, sent him word, that they had discovered
the enemy, who was pretty near, and in battle. These were a number of
Gentlemen of the country, who going out of Luson for to deuaunce the Army,
had given in as far as the tuffes of wood (which were before marked unto
you) being determined to try the assurance and resolution of the Catholics
by some notable skirmish, the which yet passed lightly enough, as well on the
one side as the other. Upon this certain of the Catholic army being
returning, reencountred x. or twelve valets of the Protestants, that led
Roussiere prisoner, whom they recovered, and sent him to Puygaillard, who was
so joyful thereof, that this encouraged him more to hasten his companies for
to follow the luck of so good a beginning. And upon this, making all his people
to assemble under their Ensigns, he placed in the front one of the companies
of the kings guard to serve for Enfans perdus, to skirmish with the foremost of
the Protestants, under the favor of the hedges, and bushes, that I have
described unto you before. As the footmen ranged themselves to march in
battle, the horsemen came piece by piece, and man after man, to be at the
medley: whom he divided into two hedges within a field near to the vale of
Erant, directly lying between Saint Gemme and Luson. But afterward seeing that
from that place he discovered not his enemy enough, he made them pass on the
left hand of the way, for to enter into a Viniard, which stood almost
ouerright directly against that valley, where the footmen had encamped
themselves. But by reason of the diches that they must needs pass, (with
whom I have already told you, the most part of the way is enclosed, to keep
those that pass by, that they come not into the Vines) they were forced to
make their horses leap over the dike, one after an other, and in like order
afterward to put themselves in battle as they arrived one after an other in a
row, at the place appointed, the which the horsemen of the Protestants, who
were already in battle marked: and seeing the Catholics as it were to rise
out of the ground before them, would not give leisure to above six or seven
score horses to take range of battle, and to put themselves in estate of
defense, but that they charged them before they were all assembled, and in array
for the reencounter: while in the mean time the footmen of the Catholics,
ranged themselves also by little and little under their Ensigns toward the
valley Eraut, where I do pray you leave them all to take range of battle,
that you may see the disposition that in the mean time, the Protestants gave
to all their companies for to sustain the assail of Puygaillard, or according
to occasion to charge to their advantage. The dawning of the day approaching,
began to chase away the thick darkness of the night, when the scoutes of
Puuiant advertised la Noue, that Puygaillard not willing to rest at Saint
Gemme, made his footmen to march forward a great pace on the left hand, and
his horsemen directly to Luson, and that he heard the noise of the foremost
that marched in battle without the Borough: which was the occasion that he
set Puuiant in the front with forty horses, and before him la Roch with
fifteen or sixteen horsemen, and yet farther before Saint Estienne with
thirty helmet men and certain Harquebuziers, leaving at his back twenty
horsemen, that Bruncliere lead. Afterward he ordered the rest of the army at
leisure. The footmen whereof were quickly ranged in battle, under the charge
of their Colonel Payet, at the four ways of the Mill Chapitre, flanked by
the troop of Soulize, to whose side la Noue sent those horsemen that he
himself would lead. Here was the gross of the army which la Noue caused
to encampe in that place, as well to supply the necessity of succor that
Puuiant might crave as for to cover and hide the play, and to keep the
besieged strongly in breath, to the end that he might take from them the
knowledge of the army that Puygaillard had brought, and consequently to
impeach them from issuing out upon the tail of the Protestants, whilst they
fought with other Catholics in front (as Hambal did a Tesin against P. Scipio,
whom he put to flight, by reason that he had sent certain Numidians to
charge him in the tail during the battle.) And without doubt all things
seemed to laugh on Puygaillard, if that fortune had not ouerthwarted the course
of his desseines, for he should never have put him self between two enemies,
although the Protestants were few. See what happened to the Fidenates, that had
put themselves between Mamercus Aemilius the Dictator, and Quintius his
Lieuetenant, for they were wholly broken. Likewise Aluian, the General of the
Pisans was unhappy, because he being assailed at Saint Vincent by Bentiuogli
the General of the Florentines on the Front, on the side, and behind, saw
all his whole army defaited. These troops were not so soon set in araie, but
that the Enfans Perdus advanced in two bands (without the body of the foot
men) in number of 100. or 120. harquebuziers lead by the Captains, Normand,
and la Guard, had the signal to charge, almost at the very same time that
Puuiant and Saint Estienne were at the charge.

Now see the form of the battle. Puuiant who lead the greatest part of the
forces of Poitou, had distributed all his troops in form of an hedge, by
reason of the small number of his men. Moreover, his troops did not follow one
another straight, but as it were bias, to the end that all his troops might
be seen within the way of Fontenay, fearing that Puygaillard would cause
some of his troops to march along that side to give them the flanquado. In the
mean time Puygaillard set his men in araie, and made the more have because it
was told him that the Protestants came to seek him. I have told you before,
that betwixt Saint Gemme and Luson, there is nothing but Vines enclosed with
hedges and thick bushes, and certain large plots of plain ground, which are
severed from the way, the which is straight and forth right, and of a good
largeness, and flanked on both sides with like defenses.

Having set one front of Enfans perdus behind those hedges, and in certain
ditches and chanells that are there, and namely behind the bushes of certain
vines, separated one from another by a plain field, the which is level
enough: he made one regiment to advance into the valley Eraut, and set the
rest of the footmen more on the left hand of Saint Gemme, he would have
flanked them with horsemen, but he had no leisure to do it, as I will tell you.
You have seen the desseines, the number, the journey, the conduct, and
disposition of the two armies for to fight: now it rests for you to behold
what was the charge, the medlie, the pursuit, and the flight of the less
happy, and how the victorious followed their good hour. I sent Saint Estienne
(otherwise called young Violle-uigne) followed by their helmet men, to the
front of the Protestants army. As soon as he saw the Catholics range
themselves in battle one after another in a row, he advertised la Noue: who
rightly presuming, that if Puigaillard had time and leisure to order all his
troops, that he might carry away the honor of this battle, gave the word
of S. Estienne, and commanded him to go resolutelie to the charge, and to
follow his point, as long as he saw himself accompanied by any of his
fellows. At the same instant he ordained Puuiant to sustain him, if he saw
him weak, and to second his good hour if he saw the first charge to bear it
self as he hoped: then he abode himself lower, with all the rest for to
succor al occurrances. At that very present, Saint Estienne dismarched in
view of all the Catholics, who would not set forward when they were so far of,
but suffered them to come within fifty paces of them, yea, and till they saw
them change their pace to a trot, that they might take a gallop for to charge
them: the 25. or 30. helmet men of Malicornes company of men of arms, whom
D' Heruilliers lead, disbanded themselves out of the troop, and hasting their
pace, received them after such a fashion, that if the other that moved not,
had seconded them as courageously, they had gotten more honor that day. But
the confederates, who as assailants went resolutely to the charge, turning
otherwise to their advantage, the small account that the Catholics made to
remove themselves, pierced so lustily, and with such pursuit all that they
reencountered, that after the death and wounding of some, the company of D'
Heruilliers found themselves not sufficient to sustaints them. But being
returned to the body of the horsemen, who now setting forth made a good number
of them, without the remonstrances of Puigaillard, (who took all pain for to
encourage and to advance them to the defait of them, that for the shocke
received of D' Heruilliers, were half scattered and ready to turn face if
they were lively pursued) to march: When the two troops of Puuiant presented
themselves on the left side, as though they would have charged them on that
side. But seeing that the Catholics came not forward at all like men resolute
to fight: as soon as they had received those that rested whole of the Cornet
of Saint Estienne, they turned upon the right hand and charged them so
furiously, that not one of them had the heart to sustain them, but all
turned their faces thither from whence they came. The worst was, that they
being hotly pursued, had no pity, and less fear to break the companies
of their footmen, that came at their backs, being scarce yet all in battle
araie, thorugh whom they passed so speedily, that the footmen felt their
harm as soon as they had discovered their flight. In sum, their so sudden
departure out of the field of the battle, did so discourage all the rest of
the horsemen, by reason of the assurance that they had in the foremost, and
farthest advanced, with whom the General thought to arm the front of his
horsemen, that all the words, threats, and remonstraunces of Puygaillard, who
thought to stay them for to rallie them for the defense, if not of their
honor, already half lost, yet at the least of the footmen, whom they left
to the boutcherie, profited him nothing, but was at last constrained himself,
being left alone, and so near his enemies, to follow that long and large
way which the best mounted had traced unto him. Puuiant and many other pursued
some so near, that those which were worse mounted were less happy, and first
urged to yield their life.

Insomuch that the most part being (as of the Ordinances, passing well
mounted, the poursuite profitted them nothing, and they retired themselves
within Fontenay, which was with four leagues, where Puigaillard arrived about
noone, and yet the retrait could not be near enough for them, that thought
themselves over hotly pursued. King Antigonus seeing himself mocked for flying
away, with the few that were left him: I fled not (answered he) but I pursued
the profit that I saw behind me. So the Catholics ran to Fontenay, for
to find there a neadeful commodie to save their lives. I have told you
already that the field wherein the horsemen of the Catholics began to range
themselves, had but one entry, flanked on both sides with Vines, fensed with
high bushes, between whom they must pass to charge the Catholics, these
bushes covered a great number of haquebuziers, who shot at Saint Estienne: but
they could not stay above three or four, but the rest of the horses furnished
their carriere, and carried their men (some of whom were hurt) even to the
charge. Granzay (the youngest of the Bogifiere Courterne le Re, and la Roche du
Gue, tarryed there. Chasselandiere the Ensign of Saint Estienne, and five or
six other, although they were hurt, yet went forward, but being sustained by
Malicornes men, they were so hurt, that they could live no longer then the next
day.

Now touching the Enfans perdus, they marched so courageously one against the
other, as though they would not fight but only with their swords, wherefore
they approached so near together, that all of them cried away harquebuzades.
Then the Captains with their swords and targets, and the soldiers recharged
as speedely, as the practice of wars would permit them, sending fresh
succors where need required, ^eming as though they would have continued that
play a long time. But the Catholics having heard the piteous cry of them,
whom their horsemen flying, had broken, did not so soon know that the
Protestants followed their victory (the which they pereeued by the long cries
and joyful acclamations of their enemies) but that they began to tremble and
shrink back in the mean time that their companions did their deuoire to
defend themselves under the auantage of the hedges and bushes that covered
them. But yet in the end, seeing the Protestants approach and still come upon
them thorough the vines, they forsook their bushes, for to cast themselves
into the plain, where the rest of their fellows had rallied with other, and
encouraged themselves for a certain time for to sustain their enemies. But
when the Protestants were seized of the bushes, behind whom they shot at
their ease without ever missing that great regiment, they with many horsemen,
crying victory, cast themselves among them, as on a lost body, for to
overthrow them intierely: so that they were in ye end constrained some to
fly, other to put themselves to the mercy of the sword, or the pity of the
victorious. And to say the truth, if it had not been for la Noue, very few had
escaped the fury of the Protestant, namely, of the Lansquenet who came to the
defait. These soldiers doing the worst they could upon these old hands, for
to show that they would be revenged of the ill hap, that had fell upon them
at Moncoutour, spoke nothing else but desticot Chelme Moncoutour, villain
do thou not remember Moncoutour, unto those that being disarmed, could not
defend themselves, much less answer to their outrageous speech. And except
their Colonel, who contenting himself with pillage, had appeased his wrath,
they were all determined not to return into their Country, but well revenged
for their companions, that had been so well feasted. This battle made many
Catholics and Protestants note and mark, as afterward some of them did often
confess, that as footmen are at this day furnished and conducted, they must
not fight in the plain against horsemen, unless they be flanked or sustained
by horsemen: seeing that the very Suisses who keep their ranks best, and rest
most assured to rallie, in case they be broken, will no more march, unless they
be flanked, with French Harquebuziers and horsemen, namely against the French
horsemen.

See what happened to P. Valerius and L. Aemilius, against the Vosces and
Latins, who had overthrown their footmen, if their horsemen had not come to
their succor. And what of our black bands before Naples, who being incited by
to much hardiness, as they which had passed well before, were so ill entreated
by the Neapolitan horsemen, because they had no horsemen to sustain them, that
their brave enterprise was bpoken: as were the Suisses by the Protestants at
the battle of Dreux, and by king Frances at the battle of Saint Brigide
near Marignan, upon the Milanese.

The footmen in general, were endebted and bound to la Noue and Soubize, who
caused the boucherie of the Frenchmen to cease, they yielding to have their
lives saved, except one Captain Ensign Colonel, who preferring death before
dishonor, the which he thought he should deserve by suruiuing so many valiant
soldiers slain, would not abandon one so honorable a piece of silk, but with
the loss of his life. And doubtless, the surety and saving of an Ensign is
of such consequence, that any good soldier will never omit to do his deuoire
to keep it for any danger that shall be presented him: in so much that he
will resolve to fight under the shadow of his Ensign, even to the last breath
of his life. Sixteen Ensigns, and two Cornettes were taken, and about 500.
slain, and 700. or 800. prisoners sent away with a white rod in their hand.
Many Captains died there, as Marguarin and other, but all either Liuetenants or
Ensignebearers: for there were not one but la Hiliere, a Captain in chief of a
company of the Regiment Real. Of horsemen less then thirty dyed, for they
saved themselves by flight. Upon a sudden the victorious presented their
Ensigns before the Fort, which yielded, the four Ensigns, whereof made up
the number of two and twenty, brought to Rochel. And because that Mascaron
complained of la Noue, for ye contrary to the promise of assured compositio^,
he had certain baggage taken from him, which had been permitted him to carry
away, la Noue took 400. crowns of a prisoner, which he caused to be carried to
him, to content him, and to maintain his promise. But the carier being slain
at the taking of the Minister de Chire at Mozeuill, as I will tell you in an
other place, the money was not delivered unto him. But to return back again
to our battle: the dismissed soldiers retired, attributing the occasion of
all the ill hap unto the over hot have of Puigallard, and for that it was
accompanied as some say, with a contemning of the Protestants. In deed he
little practiced the example of Paulus Aemylius, the Consul and General of
the Romans, who travailing with an army thorough Macedonie, against Perseus
the king of the Macedons, had marched almost all one whole day a great pace,
for to join with the enemy, and to come to fight the which was presented unto
him. But although his people made countenance of accepting of the good offerre,
and cr^ed of themselves that he should lead them to the enemy: yet never the
less because be saw the^ weary, by reason they had marched preatie long with
their bagage on their back, all bathed in sweat, lilling their tongue half a
foot out of their mouth, for extreme thirst, that tormented them, their eyes,
mouths and faces full of dust, and burnt up, and half roasted with the
scorching heat of midday, he would not present them to the battle, nor bring
them in sight of a fresh and aranged enemy, seeing that for lack of strength
many rested and stayed themselves upon their bucklers and iauelins, sticked in
the ground, for to hold them up: but contrary to the opinion of many,
commanded the foremost bands to lay down their burdens, and baggage that they
carried, and measure out the front of a Roman camp. (They were not so
delicate as our bands be, for the meanest of whom a dosen of baggage carriers,
and so many gouiats or drudges after them be not sufficient) And when Publicus
Nasica, one of the best qualited gentlemen in the army, told him, that it were
better to pursue the enemy, who unto that day had always fled before them,
then to leave him one night free for the fly longer, and to renew the pain of
the Romans in seeking him farther: he answered modestly without showing of
himself any whit altered for that bold advertisement: I have had heretofore
the mind that you have now Nasica, and you will one day have that which I
have now. Many and diverse accidents of war have taught me to know the time
when to fight, and when to refuse. But seeing that leisure is denied me to
say any more, content your self for this time with the authority of an old
Captain: never contemn your enemy more than you have had good occasion. One
ought also to consider the commodity of the place, the circumstance of time,
the quality of the furniture, the number of men of war, the form, the
manner of the fight, the good heart and hardiness of his men, the obedience of
his soldiers, the authority and brave reputation of the General, which both
serve oftentimes to bring to a good end an exploit well conceived. But so it is,
that always fortune does say and sing aloud, and clear, that all is hers,
and she does play in enterprises of war as freely as the fish does in the
great and wide Ocean. But of all other the old bands that served Puigaillard,
as the best footmen of this age, did take very impatiently to be spoiled of
their weapons. What (said one) after that I have done notable service to my
king for the space of fifteen years together, shall I suffer such dishonor?
And shall I after twenty years, and I after thirty, and I after forty, said
another, bear the scorn of a soldier disgraded? Good fellow, for Gods sake
leave me (said they) but my harquebusse, but my pike, but my sword, take all
even to my shirt, that the face of his majesty may not see me in the habit of
a gouiat and drudge. But the Soldiers victorious growing in despite, because
they could not take from them their lives for the countermaund of their
General, stopped their ears against such praters. The which one of the
Captains, an Ensign Colonel perceiving, for to show in what honor we ought
to hold the Armies and degrees that have been given us, and also what
difference there is between a chief of mark, and a simple Soldier, loved
better to die with honor, covered and wrapped in his Ensign, than to drink
of such shame. So before these brave chief died, he patiently saw the
purple of his blood die the white Taffetas of his Ensign Crimson. I do
remember me of the ensign Colonel of Caesar, that bare the Eagle Imperial in
the civil wars. This Roman Captain knowing what shame it is to leave the
Ensign to be won by the enemy, when he saw that he was near to his end,
did so much with his companions, that it was saved and brought unto the hands of
his General. I must needs also recite the notable example of the Count de
Charny, that bare the Banner of France in that so famous battle of
Malpertuis, near Poitiers, which king John lost against Edward the Prince of
Wales, and the English men. This gentle Frenchman loved better to die in the
field with the sovereign Banner of France in his hand, stricken thorough with
a thousand blows, than to live with the reproach to have fled from the
Englishmen as far as Poitiers, as two parts of the army did the twelfth of
September, Anno. 1356. But the ransom of so many prisoners was not
intolerable, but moderated for the pity and compassion, that they had of so
many brave warriors, who yet laid all the falt of their foul day on the
conduct of the army. But that I may omit nothing of my deuoire, Puygaillard
had great reasons for the iustifications of his doings. First, the ennie that
he bare him at the charge, saying that he was of too small an house to
command so many seigniours, was the cause that he was forsaken, by not only
two parts of the men of arms that were appointed him, but also of many
Ensigns of footmen, and namely of all the Captains in chief of those
bands that remained.

I will not speak of the Romans, many of whose armies were overthrown by the
hatred borne to their Generals, no more then I will of the Count de Galeaz
despighted, because that his brother Galeas Saint Seuerin was preferred before
him in the estate of General of the army against the French. I will also pass
over in silence how needful it is that a General be loved of those that
follow him: and will not recount unto you how Persy (by reason of the
authority that he had with the soldiers) made Monpensier leese many fair
enterprises at the conquest of the kingdom of Naples. Some men only wished
here, that the General and his soldiers had done as Liuiano and his army
did, who having travailed his army through foul and deep ways and full of
mire, and foulie soused with continual rain, and tired with marching day and
night: yet when they should have rested themselves, and being at the place
appointed therefore, he spoke unto them so effectually, assuring them of the
victory, and the great spoil of Ruiglio, that they quite forgot all their
long iourneyes passed, and behauing themselves as they ought, got no less
honor, than they did riches by their spoiled enemies. But the envy, that
namely the Poiteuins bare Puygaillard, overthrew the happy course of his
fair desseines. So ended the battle, the which began in the very break of
the day, although that the mist of the thick clouds would not at the
beginning thereof suffer the armies to enteruiew one another at ease. And it
may be, that if the Protestants had discoured so great a mass of men, that
they had chosen the retraite for the fight, through the means of such fogges,
that gave them the true mean for to surprise and break the enemy. After this
battle, the Protestants in those parts won Fontenay, Marans, Brouage, and
the Isle of Santogne, and besieged the City of Saints, when a general peace
was proclaimed.

The battle at Chieuraine in Henault, fought between Don Federike, son to
the Duke of Alua, and the Lord Ienlis, a Frenchman, in Anno. 1572. out of
Popelliniere.
THe Comte Lodouick of Nassau, having fortunatlie surprised the town of Mouns
in Henault, by the aid of certain French force^ lead by the L. Ienlis: within
short time after ^^r back Ienlis himself into France, so, respects. First to
advertise the French king (who seemed highly to favor these desseines of
Lodouicke, and the revolt of the low Countries from the obedience of the
Spaniard) of the success of their enterprise. What order they had given to the
estate of the cause, of the means that they had to advance their fortune
farther, of the stirs and reuolts in Holand and Zeland, of the favor that
they had received out of England, Scotland, and Germany, and above all, of the
great leauie that the Prince of Orange made in Germany, and of the hope of
their speedy ariuall: that it would please his majesty to pursue so brave a
beginning, or at the least, to suffer men to be leauied in France, to be sent
into Flanders, to join with the Prince and the Almanes, against the Duke that
prepared an army to take the field. But if the king refused so to do, then to
solicit the Princes of Bearn and Condey, and the Admiral for to send as many
soldiers as they could. Ienlis promised him to do what was possible, and did
for his own particular assure him, that he would emploie all the means he
could to leauie forces, and would lead them himself into the place
appointed. He went to the Court, and advertised the king and his Counsel of
all that I rehearsed before. The which did diversely move their minds,
according to the diversity of their favors and factions. Afterward having
received a good answer of the king, and a promission to leauie men, and
assurance of the Admiral, that he had already sent forth his commissions into
all parts of France, for to levy companies both of footmen and horsemen, and
had appointed them to meet all together within one days journey of Paris,
where by that time he hoped to have his own company of men of arms, to
conduct all these forces himself into the low Countries: he rode into
Picardie, where, upon the brute of the conquest of Flanders by the king, and
of the great and rich booties and spoils that they looked for there, he had
within few days leauied three or four thousand footmen, and 200. men of
arms, with two companies of harquebuziers on horseback.

The Admiral, that had told Ienlis, that he should go find out the Prince,
and serve him for the auantgard, willed that Beauieu the Ensign of his
company of men of arms, should take thirty of his company, and as for the
rest he should carry them that he could get without any regard had of what
religion they were. The Baron of Renty had one Regiment of nine Ensigns of
foot men, Ieumelles of eight, Berenguaruille of six, Ianissac was appointed
for to conduct the Auantcoureurs. The seventh of July they began to march with
a thousand insolences, and misorders committed on the paisants, and namely by
the footmen. As soon as Count Lodouick understood of their dismarch, he
sent Ienlis word that he should take the way by Cambresis, and go to join
with the army of the Prince his brother, as well for to assist him to pass
over the Mase, the which the garrisons of the country being assembled did
empeach, as also to avoid the hasard of being broken by the troops, of the
Dukes son (who was General of the army that then beseeged Mouns) which he
might happily send to assail him. Moreover, he could do him no service at
Mouns, for he had no such number of men as were sufficient to remove the seage:
and therefore his troops (seeing he lacked no men with in the town) could
serve him to no other turn, then to eat up his victuals, which they would
soon do, and he should be constrained in the end, to give up the town for
famine. But Ienlis returned answer, that he feared not the enemy, and that
after he had been at Mouns, and seen his old companions, he might pass
further as should be thought best. Upon this the troops marched still so
carelessly, and so taking their ease in the farm houses and small villages, as
though they had held themselves assured, that the enemy had not been within an
hundredth leagues of them: and that which was worse, they had not any sure
guide, not well instructed what way they should take to be far from the
enemy. In fine, they being come near to Bossu, one league and an half from
Mouns, they sent forth an hundredth horse to make discovery. The Regiment of
the Baron of Renty, marched foremost of the footmen, Iuinelle followed next,
and so the rest. Ienlis, le Ringraue, Ianissac, and others, being in the tail,
thinking that the enemy would assail the^ there, but they after felt ye
discovery before them, which they never once thought of. As the country has
many seueralls, and is full of hedges and bushes (which enduced Ienlis to think
he should prevail because he was strong in footmen) the scoutes advertised
that they had seen certain horsemen within a wood, which caused the Baron of
Renty to choose out certain hundrethes of his men for Enfans perdus, and
separate them for to serve at the head of his batta^llon, looking for the
charge. But as soon as the protestant horsemen that had discovered them, saw
that the horsemen that came out of the wood into the plain, did never make an
end, and that an number of harquebuziers were auaunced to draw them to the
skirmish, they were so estonnied, that they could not retire themselves but a
galloppe. This was on the xvii. of July. The horsemen of the Duke, who were of
the ordenances of the country commanded by Noircarmes, and others, seeing
these fellows retire so hotly, took courage to pursue them, and namely, seeing
that their hundredth Mosquetaires Spaniards, had already attached fight with
the head of Renty his Regiment, who being feared with the flight of their
horsemen, and the coming upon them of so great forces, fair and well ran
away: whom all the whole regiment not long after followed, over the bellies of
whom the discouerers had passed. Then the rest being dismayed with the flight,
and disorder of so many men, were not long, but they also disbanded. But three
thousand paisants, whom they had so tormented, and that followed them, crying
to God for vengeance, received them with ill courtesy, for besides those that
they striped into their shirts, there were slain there above 1200. Renty, the
master of the Camp, assuring himself upon the strength of his horse, slew
above twenty pa^sants before he dyed. The Ringraue was slain, Ienlis,
lanissac, and the Baron of Renty yielded, and were sent away prisoners to
Antwerpe or Tourney, and above 600. other into diverse prisons, of whom there
were above 60. gentlemen. That night Beauieu arrived with seven or eight at the
Abbay of Epinleu, adjoining to the walls of Mouns, and kept by the
Protestants, where he gave such cognizance and marks of himself, that Payet
let him in. And the next day 100. harquebuziers entered into Mouns. Ienlis dyed
shortly after in prison at Antwerpe. And the Prince of Orang, not being of
sufficient force to remove the seege of Mouns, Lodouick yielded it on honorable
conditions.

The Battle of Barrow, fought between Mounsieur de Boisot the admiral of
flissinghen, and Julian de Romero, Camp master of the Tierce of Sicicile, the
second day of January, An. 1574. Out of Cornelio.
FLissingen, the Kaye of the low C^^^trie, standing at the mouth of the river
of Scheld, th^^^ ^unneth by Antwerpe, and a great part of Holand (as we told
you in ye last battle,) being revolted from ye Spaniard, and forces repayring
unto Flissing out of England, Scotland, France and Germany, and the low
countries, they became so mighty, and namely, by sea, that they straightly
beseeged Middlebourg, their neighbor, the chief city of the Isle of
Walachren, and their fleet was so mighty, commonly called by the name of
Vribuiters, that they exceeded the number of 150. sail and had in An. 1572.
discomfited the fleet of the Duke of Medina Celi, consisting of xxv. Sail,
but most Merchants, of Spain, Portugal, and Italy, setting upon them upon a
sudden, who knew nothing of this revolt, and took twelve of their ships
with a prise of above 600000. Crowns, whereof 200000. was in ready coin.

This did set the Prince of Orang, the head of the Protestants (opprobiously
called Geux) so on slote, that as I said, he did in a manner take al traficke
from Antwerpe, and had brought the town of Middelbourg into extreme necessity
of all necessaries: to relieve the which lack, (being a matter of so great
consequence, as the cutting of all trafick and victualles by Sea from
Antwarpe,) Jews Requesenes, the great Commendador of Castilia, who lately
succeeded the Duke of Alua, in the government of the low Countries, thought he
might not neglect without his perpetual reproach, and contempt of his name,
power, and person, for ever, if at his first coming he should leese a place of
that moment. Wherefore seeing that he could not victual Middelbourg, unless
he did defaite the strong fleet that lay before it: he determined to assemble
and to gather together into one, all his dispersed nauall forces. To effect the
which desseine he commanded Sanchio Dauila the Castellane of Antwerp, to sail
with certain great ships from Antwerpe, down the Hont, toward Flissing,
and not far from the point of Tergoes, to expect the coming of Julian de
Romero, the Camp master of the Tierce of Sicile, who should set forth from
Bergen op Soome down the Scheld, with a navy of xxx. great Hoies and small
ships, very well appointed, in whom he had embarked besides Flemings and
Wallons, ten bands of Spaniards: so that both fleetes meeting together about
the point of Tergoes, might with joined forces pass thorough to Middelbourg,
and encounter the Princes fleet, if they would assay to stop their passage.
Sanchio Dauila, was so sharp set on this journey, that he would needs
wilfully launch forth both against wind and tide, thorough the which rash
part, it came to pass, that one of his ships striking upon the flattes, was
lost within the sight of the City of Antwerp, and an other near to Roiner-s
wald in Zeland, yet he being nothing dismayed for this unlucky loss, went
forward with his journey, and lay at anther not far from Flissing, staying
there as he was commanded, for Romero: who also had an unlucky abodement at
the beginning. For when the Comendador came down to Bergen to the fleet, and
they according to their manner would welcome him with a peale of ordenance: the
barrelles of Gunpouder that were in one of the ships caught on fire, and tare
the ship and the men therein into pieces, and yet better was the beginning
than the ending. For the Prince of Orange having some intelligence of the
intent of the enemy (as hard it is to find a sailer a Catholic) commanded
Monsieur de Boisot, the Admiral of Flissingen to speed him with all the
forces of his Fleet (the which some report to be an hundredth great hoies, and
Fliebotes) (leaving the great ships still before Middelburg, spoiled of their
men and munition, for a vain skarcrowe to Dauila.) And such in deed was the
diligence of Boisot, that Romero had scarce weied up anchor, when he presented
him battle in the sight of the Comendador. The two Admiralls ships, of
whom the one had two hundred, the other an 180. men, encountered the one the
other very fiercely: se that the Spaniards had boorded the Admiral of
Flissengen, and had gotten as far as the mast, when they were valiantly
driven out a gain by the Flissingers, and namely, through the succor of a
Fly bote, that timely laid Romero aboard on the other side, and Julian was
forced to save his life by swimming, after he had seen four of his ships
drowned and ten taken, and the rest flying fast toward Bergen, but yet the
Flissingers took four in ye chase. They report that almost a ridiculous deed
of a boie of Soutlant, a village near Flissing, much hasted and helped the
victory. Fortune showing that her force and fickleness is seen in nothing
more, than in universal conflicts and battles. This boie, whilst all men's
heads, eyes, and hands were busied below with fierce fight, stole of the
flagge of the Admiral of Spain, and wrapping it about his middle, slidde
down therewithal into the Admiral of Flissing: and then holding it up,
cried, victory, victory, not to the small terror and discouragement of the
Spaniardes, it being thus seen on a sudden. When Sanchio Dauila heard of
this overthrow, he wayed up anchor, and hasted him to Antwerpe for fear of a
foil. Heerevpon the valiant Mandragon surrendered the town of Middlebourg,
whereby the Protestants became Lords of all Zeland, yea, and of the Sea also,
the which they do retain still to this day: and ever since they first took
Flissingen, fortune has favored them on the water. As not many months
before, the Duke of Alua commanded a Fleet to be rigged at Amstelredam, and
to be conducted by the Comte Bossu, to encounter the Navy of North Holand: the
which ye Earl did, rather to accomplish the commandment of his governor,
than of his own good will, because he knew right well the strength of his
enemy, the which he could in no measure match: yet because he would not
seem to be a coward, and green liuered, he with nine or ten ships assailed
above thirty of his enemies.

The battle was passing well fought on both parties, as well at the first
with the great Ordenance, as afterward with small shot, push of the pike, and
sword and target. And at the first the victory seemed to incline to Bossu, but
at the last the North Holanders, being fortefied by a new supply of ships, ye
timely arrived carried away ye victory. For while part of them had environed
the Admiral of the enemies, casting down upon the^ incessantly from their
tops vnslacked Lime, in such sort, that they could not tell which way to
turn them to save themselves from the fury thereof: their fellows had so
lustily assailed them on the other side, that they within were constrained to
yield upon composition, although they had before been of opinion to have put
fire to their powder, and have destroyed themselves, fearing that they should
find no mercy with those of North Holand. The which the other ships seeing,
hoised up all their sails, and hasted amain toward Amstelredam, the which
they all recovered, except the ship of Captain Vesthen, the which was sunk
with Canon shot, and the Admiral a great ship called the Inquisition,
wherein was found great riches, and was taken with the Comte Bossu, many
Captains, and carried with great triumph and joy to Horn.

The battle of Mockerheid fought in Gelderland, between Jews Earl of
Nassau, and Sanchio Dauila, in the Easter week, Anno. 1574. Out of Stratius.
THE March following this discomfiture of the Spaniards at Barrow, the Comte
Lodouicke of Nassau, accompanied with his brother Henry, and Christopher, one
of the sons of Federike the Paulsgraue of the Rhin, came down toward
Brabant with an army of about eight thousand men, leauied in Germany, hoping
according to promise, to have had Mastretch, Antwerpe, Valencenes, and Gaunt,
delivered unto him. But the Comendador having intelligence of the approach of
these troops, commanded Sanchio Dauila to dismarch, with the forces that then
besieged Leiden, and to hasten toward Mastritch, for to let the passage of
Jews over the Meuse. The which he happily did, being arrived at Mastritch
the fourth of March, a little before the Comte could come thither. Whereupon
Lodouicke wrote unto his Brother the Prince of Orange, to meet him the next
day at a place between the Rhin, and the Meuse, called Herwerd, with his
forces, ships, barks, and boats, for to be ready to help him to pass
over the Meuse. And although the Prince liked nothing of this advertisement,
because it was impossible for him within so short time to send down to that
place all necessaries for that desseine, yet he went with his arm as far as
Gouicque, near Bommel, often saying these wise words: Although I would be
glad to see my Brother here, yet I would to God he were with his army an
hundred leagues hence: for the Prince did consider that he could not come
without extreme danger, as at the last the end showed. As soon as Sanchio
was come to Mastritch, he sent forth certain horsemen to survey his enemies
army, and to bring him word what number they were, the which they did, finding
the Earl mustering his men about a few miles from Masricht, which made him
abandon his first resolution that he had to bid them battle out of hand,
because they did daily increase, seeing that he found himself far too weak:
yet the eight of March he laid an ambush of 200. men, who slew certain good
soldiers of their enemies, and in such sort he kept his enemy continually
occupied with alarmes, and skirmishes, until such time as Colonel Mondragon
arrived with a new supply, the which Lodouicke understanding, retired a little,
and withdrewe his army to the town of Walkenbourg, where the 18. of March,
Sanchio Dauila using a stratageme, flue above 500. of his enemies. Whereupon
they retired wholly into the town, fearing that their army that consisted
almost of all fresh water soldiers, although they were more in number, yet
would be broken by the kings army, who were old soldiers, and far better
experimented in exploites of wars, and namely in supprises, embusses, and
camisadoes. And when Lodouicke saw that by reason of the resistance that was
made against him, it was impossible for him to come unto his brother, nor to
pass over the Meuse in that quarter, he made semblance as though he would
return back again into Germany, and to that effect removed his camp. But
Sanchio Dauila doubting that he would pass the river lower, because a long time
he heard no news of him, caused his army to dismarch (the which with the
regiment of Mondragon was 4000. or 5000. men) and as he marched a long the
river side to keep the passage, he understood of treason within the town of
Nieumegen, and how that those within would yield unto Comte Lodouick, that he
might pass over there. Wherefore to prevent that enterprise, he incontinently
thrust a garrison into the town, and continually followed his enemy, until
such time as he was advertised that the Earl would fortefie himself not far
from a small village called Moken, and two leagues from the kings camp, by the
rivers side. The Earl had chosen this place, because he saw that his purpose
of taking Nieumegen was discovered, and also that he might enter into Flandets
upon the first occasion that should be presented unto him. Between his camp
and his enemies, there was a river without a bridge, which kept the Catholics
from coming unto him. But Sanchio Dauila to bring his journey to an end, and
that he might leese no time, marched to Grave, a town in the confines of
Brabant, where he caused a great bridge to be made with all possible speed,
of many Botes and Barks, by the which he passed the river in the sight of the
Earl, and encamped himself in his enemies quarter. When the Earl saw this,
he removed his camp toward night nearer to Moken, not being minded to fight,
and strongly fortefied his camp. To whom Dauila gave many alarmes that night,
fearing least they would steal away priuelie in the dark. The next morning
both armies stood aranged in araie of battle, and the Trumpets called to the
encounter. Then Sanchio to leese no time, caused a certain number of
harquebuziers, with 100. pikes, in the manner of an esquadron, to back them,
for to assail the enemies their trenches: all the rest of the army standing to
look what the enemy their horsemen would do. This esquadron gave in lustily
on the enemy, who also received them couragioussie, but were at the length
broken, and their trenches won upon them: many of the Earls footmen, crying
out, money, money, and refusing to fight for lack of pay, Lodouicke being
rather chafed than affrighted with this unlooked for and sudden flight, and
treachery of his footmen, courageously charged the enemy (whom this good
hap at the beginning had made hot) with his horsemen, who also after many
had sold their lives dearly, were in the end forced to give place to the
force of their enemy, and to save themselves by flight.

But the three noble men, Christopher, Jews, and Henry, refusing to save
their lives with shame, honorably ended their days in the battle. When the
Spaniardes should have prosecuted the good fortune of this battle, they fell
to mutenie for their wages, and two thousand of them forsaking their Ensigns
and Captains, has^ed to Antwerpe, for to extort from the wretched citizens 35.
months pay for themselves, and their fellows. And also the kings fleet that
lay in the Haven, being affrighted with this fray, got them farther from the
town, where they were suddenly assailed by the Flissingers, and all either
taken or sunk. So that the Spaniards had not a ship of service left them
in the low countries, and in that predicament do continue even to this day.

The Battle of Giblou in Brabant, fought between Don John de Austria, and
Mounsieur de Gugny, General of the army of the States in the absence of the
Comte de Lalaing. In An. Do. 1578. the last of January.
DON John de Austria, Governor of the low Countries, not long after he had
sent out of the country all the forreyne forces, and the States of the
Countries fell so at two pieces, that he for fear of being supprised,
covertly under an other color, withdrew himself out of Brabant, and
fortunately thorough the practice of the Comte Barlemont, and his valiant
sons, (who almost only of the nobility favored him) supprised the Castle
of Namur, a place of great consequence for the recept of foreign forces and
entrance into Brabant. After he had furnished this town and castle with all
necessaries, he went into the Duchy of Luxenburg, (the which only province
continued in his obedience) there to expect men and money, from the King (who
still favored him) and also other aides. The Comte Barlemont levied a regiment
for him in Loraine, and the Comte Mondraquert an other in Luxembourg, also xix.
companies were sent him out of the County of Bourgogne, and Charles Manfelt
son to Peter Comte Mansfelt, and governor of Luxembourg, brought him 7000.
Frenchmen, and also the dismissed Spamards, who were not yet gone out of Italy
accompanied and increased with certain Italian troops, levied and led by
the Prince of Parma, Octauio Gonzaga, and other, were returned: that he had
now about 16000. footmen, and 2000. horsemen. With the which power he marched
toward Namur, for to make head against the great army of the States, that lay
not far from Namur, winning, wasting and harrying all even to the gates of
the town. And it was Don John's good hap to enter into Namur with 78. men,
the very same night that the army of the States (whether because their chief
Captains were retired to Bruxelles, or by reason of the cold weather, (for it
was January, or because the soldiers demanded their pay, or for all three
causes) began to remove their Camp, to trusse up their baggage, to retire
their artillery, and to do other such things, as in wars do give suspicion
of fear. Don John meruailing thereat, issued out of the town with the Prince
of Parma, and Octauian Gonzaga, the General of the horsemen, for to view the
Camp of the enemy, who came, as we told you before, even to the gates of the
Town, and all three went up upon a little hill, from whence they might well
discern all that passed, and then returning into the town, sent for the
Maire, and the counsel of the town, for to consult what was best to be done.
In the end it was determined, that the Colonel of the companies of Bourgogne
called the manne of Gibrao, should issue out at one gate with one thousand
Harquebuziers of his Regiment, and the Count Reux, with as many at an other,
for to skirmish with the enemies on two sides, not only to the intent to
assaie their forces, but also to take some of them prisoners, of whom they
might learn what the enemy was minded to do.

When the Soldiers were thus issued out, the enemy received them in such
sort, that Don John's men were forced to retire ^ncontinentlie, with some
little loss, but yet never the less with two prisoners, the which was it that
they did desire: by whom they knew that the army was conducted and governed,
by the Lord de Gugny, in the absence of the Conte Lalaing, and that they had
charge to retire themselves that night unto the town of Giblou near Louuaine,
and that for this effect the artillery had already begun to march, and they
did also particularly declare many other things, that were enquired of them.

When Don John understood this, he caused the men of arms that were there
abouts, to be assembled, and at the break of day he found there eight
Coronets of horsemen, Italians and Spaniards together, with whom Don John
issued out of the town, with intent only to take a view of his enemies, or to
give them some skirmish, as they had done the day before. The enemy that saw
him conte with this troop of six hundredth men, stayed, although they were in
march, and showed them their faces, they aranged their troops, and placed a
good part of their best soldiers, who were Frenchmen, in an embush between
trees that grew there. Then afterward they did set the horsemen on the left
hand of their esquadron, and the front was all of Mosquetayres, in such sort
that the arriereward came to make the auantgard, and with it joined the
battle, because that the auantgard having begun to march forward galantly,
could not come in good time. The Lord of Gugny showed great valor and
industry, in setting in array such an Army within so short a time, seeing he
did dispose it so well, as though he had had long time to have done it, and in
such sort, as if it should have encountered with a great army.

He composed his rereward, which was first to be charged, (reenforced as well
with mosquetaires, as with six thousand horse) of three companies of brave and
valiant French footmen, and xxiiii. companies of Walons, who were two
regiments, the one governed by the Conte de Eghmont, and the other by the Conte
de la March, otherwise called ye Lord of Lumay. He had in the battle xiii.
companies of English men and Scotts, and two other regiments of Flemings, the
Colonels, of whom were the Count de Bossu, and the Lord of Champagnie. In the
auantgard were the regiments of the Lord Montignie, and the Lord de Heze, both
which regiments were either of them of ten or twelve companies, and every
company had 150. men. They had also besides many other Gentlemen that served
on their own charges, in hope of advancement. The kings camp seeing this good
diligence, entertained them still by little and little, making a stand, as they
that had neither forces, nor intent to join in battle with their enemies,
until such time as a Captain of a company of Italian horsemen, called Mutio,
advanced himself a little forward with his company, being followed of some
few soldiers, and so between the one and the other, there began a skirmish,
when the kings men had so valiantly charged, and ventured so far, that it
seemed very hard and dangerous for them to return back and to retire, by
reason that the Frenchmen and the mosquetaires showed by their first fury
great resistaunce, and gave an honorable charge on the Spaniards, but with
little damage: the Prince of Parma seeing this, buckled down his helmet, and
taking his sheelde, made a show as though he would encounter them, having
left the footmen at a corner of the horsemen, who were seven hundredth men,
and nine Ensigns of the Ordinances, every Esigne of fifty men of arms, and
an hundredth and fifty archers, whom we do call light horse.

The intent of Don John was nothing less than to fight, considering as we
have told you, the small number that he had, but he made semblance that he
would do it, staying for mo of his people (for his whole army followed) that
he might retire safely. But when the Prince of Parma that was foremost in the
field, with a valiant knight called the Lord of Billy, otherwise Colonel
Robles, aduanuced to encounte^ and charge his enemies, they siedde at the first
re^^counter without any resistance, and flying, they ouerran^^ ^^d des^^ted
the esquadron of their own foot^^^^, which were in the way that they should
pass. And (...) mean time the people of Don John being come in, followed the
horsemen that fled, and perfected the defait of the esquadron, and slew still
following the victory, until they drove them into Giblow. Besides those that
were slain, there were taken prisoners about four hundred soldiers, and of
the principal Captains above thirty, among whom was the Lord of Gugny, who
was taken by the very same soldier, that at another time had taken him in
the town of Antwerpe They gained 70. Ensigns of footmen, and many Cornets of
horsemen, and all the money that they had to pay the soldiers, good store of
munition, and six pieces of artillery. After this, Don John divided his army
into two parts, and sent the one under the conduct of Signeur de Hierges to
Bouinges, whether the Frenchmen and certain Almanes were fied, and he himself
went with the other unto Giblou, whether the noblest and best of his enemies
their army were retired. Who considering the present fury, and the small hope
that they had of succor, yielded them selves to the mercy of Don John, who
chose amongst them twelve of the best to remain prisoners, whom he sent to
the Castle of Namur, for to exchange for other, if occasion required, the rest
he sent away with a stick in their hand, without any weapon unto the
estates, and yet nevertheless amiablie received them that would turn to the
kings sernice. The Lord Hierges did as much to Bouinges, for after that the
artillery had made a brech, those within never stayed assault, but yielded the
next day in the morning, with the same conditions that they of Giblou did, and
were used in like sort. There were slain (says Dinoth) in this journey on the
states their side 10000. and but ten men on the victours part. After this
ourthrow, Don John took Louaine, Tilemont, Arescot, Sichenen, Die, Spy,
Niuelle, Philippe ville, and the whole Duchy of Limburg.

The battle of Couwenstein dike near Antwerpe, fought between Alexander
Prince of Parma, and Monsieur de Haultan the Admiral of Flissing, and Monsieur
Saint Aldegonde, the 26. of May, in Anno. 1581.
WHen the Prince of Parma had taken away the use of the river of Scheld from
the City of Antwerp, by building of a bridge over the river. The Citizens and
their confederates of Holand and Zeland attempted to cut out Couwenstein dike,
and to bring the course of the river to Antwerpe that way. To the which intent
the 26. day of May, the Antwerpians having sent that evening twelve ships
against the bridge (hoping that through the violent force of them, it might be
broken) did that night about three of the clock send another fleese against
Couwenstein dike, the which the enemy kept. And the like was done on the other
side by the Holanders, who lay at anchor under Lillou. For first sending
certain ships set on fire, which should be carried against the bridge, they
incontinently after assailed the dike with about an hundredth ships full of
old soldiers: and such a furious storm of great shot, and so great a showee
of small was sent out of those ships, upon both sides of the dike, that the
kings men were not able any longer to defend themselves on the plain and open
dike, but having lost many of their fellows, were forced to forsake their
wards, and to retire themselves to safer places. In the mean time the states
went a shore, landing their men, and having brought with them sackes full of
earth, wool, and other stuff, did with incredible celeritie raise them up
fortifications, so that they were defenced with a Rampire and trench as high as
their necks. And winning still farther and farther through the help of their
ships, they had gotten more than half the dike, the which they did cut
thorough in cleauen places. They defended their Nations and wards for the space
of six hours together, within which time they had slain many of the
valiantest Captains and soldiers on the kings side: for they sent so great
force and store of shot against the kings men, that they not only tare all
their bulwarks and fortifications, but also rent almost all their artillery,
and made them of no use. Now when that the Spanish state was almost desperate,
and the Prince standing up to the wast in water, did drive his soldiers
against the enemy with his sword drawn: a Spaniard called Peter de Padillia,
a soldier of the Tierce of Peter de Paz, taking courage again, did with eight
of his fellows first renew the charge on the States, but he was slain in the
attempt, and his right hand cut off by the enemy. In the mean time the kings
men gathering together their forces, did very resolutelie with all their power
assail the munition that the Antwerpians had made, and bent their three pieces
of artillery (which only were left them whole) against it. When they first
planted their battery, there was a very thick mist, which by little and
little vanished away, so that the Master of the Ordinance might see the
enemies camp a far of, and more certainly level his pieces. The kings
soldiers did twice assault this fortification, and were twice repelled, but
at the third assault, they sighting with irresistible valor, wanne the trench,
and slew all that were within it, and the rest hasting to their ships, were
part slain, part taken, and part drowned.

The valor of the Almanes did appear singular in this fight, of whose
prowess almost all men had now despaired. Those that were in the ships,
disdaining to give place, fought so long, that the tide left them, and laid
their ships dry, so that they could not get them from the Flats. By this
means three and thirty ships were taken, a great number of men slain, and
mighty store of artillery, and other warlike furniture taken. There was found
in the ships many dead bodies of them that had been slain with the
Ordenance that was shot from the dike.

The kings men understood by the prisoners that two thousand of Antwerpians
were slain in fight, and many also drowned, and that among other ships there
was one taken, that carried the sons of very rich Merchants, but all the men
in her were slain. Moreover, not a few of the Holanders and Zelanders were
slain, among whom are numbered the Lord of Haultan, the governor of Flissing,
two Colonells of Scotts, and English, (but in truth there was no English
Colonel slain there) xiiii. other Captains, and xxix. Gentlemen. On the kings
side were found missing about 400. or as other report 300. Italians and
Spaniards: among whom were diverse renowned Captains and Colonells, who were
most of them hurt and slain from the Holand ships. For whilst the
Antwerpians fought on the Dike a front the enemy: the Holanders that kept
themselves in their ships plagued with their artillery, the sides of their
enemies. This fight endured from three of the clock in the morning, until
about two in the afternoon, and was fatal to Antwerpe, for after that time no
forces were assembled, nor enterprise practiced to relieve the City, which
yielded in August following.

The Battle of Pescherias, fought by sea, upon the coast of Greece, between
the Navy of the Christian league, under the conduct of Don John de Austria,
and the Turkish fleet, governed be Haly Bassa, the viii. of Octobar, 1572. Out
of Peter Contarini.
WHen Selini the second, the great Turk, had falsely on a sudden broken the
firm league of his Father, with the Venetians, and invaded with a mighty
Army, the Island of Cyptus, app^^teining unto the Venetians: they entered into
a (...) offensive, and defensive, against all the enemies of the ^^^stian name,
with Philip, the king of Spain, a^^ (...) Quintus, the Bishop of Rome: and Don
John de (...) base brother unto the king of Spain, was ordained General, and
high Admiral of the Navy, and army of the league, with whom were joined in
Commission the high Admiral and General of the Venetians and of the Pope,
with decree that to be executed, which should be allowed ano approved of them
all three, or else of any two of them. For the execution of this league, Don
John departed from Spain with forty seven Galleys, and after he had been at
Genoa and Naples about necessaries touching men, munition, and victuals, he
arrived at Messina in Sicile, where Mark Antonie de Colonna, and Sebastian
Veneri, the Admiralls of the Pope and Venetians, had stayed for him with their
Nauies, and also the four Galleys of the great master of Malta. There were
come thither also the Ambassadors of Venice, for to signify unto the
Admiralles of the consederates, how the Turkish Navy did so much hurt on the
coast of Slauonie, and also to be instant on them for speedy succor.

The next day after when the three Admiralls or Generalles met, accompanied
and assisted with other men of account, for to consult what was best to be
done: Veneri told them, that of a certainty the Fleet of Candie would also
be there very shortly. But when almost all men doubted that it would be
somewhat late before they would come, and the time of the year was well spent
(for it was the 22. of August) and because on the other side it seemed that
certain determination could be made without them: some propounded this devise,
and some that. But amongst the rest, Ascania de Cornia exhibited his opinion
conceived in writing to this purport. Because you have thought good (sovereign
General) that I should declare mine opinion in writing, what I think ought
to be done in these weighty affairs, with the power that we have now, I will
so dee, and will begin with the rehearsal of our forces.

We have now as I do think, 146. Galleys furnished, six great Galleys or
Galeares, twenty ships for but then, and so many Foistes, and we do look for
60. galleys out of Candy, of whom yet we have not heard these many days.
Again I do suppose that the Turks have two hundredth and fifty galleys
furnished, and be in Sclauonia, where they have an other army on the land, of
forty or fifty thousand men. If this be so (sovereign General) I do not
think, that our forces are so great, that we may be so bold as to seek out
the enemy, and to fight with him without apparent peril. For (we are to much
inferior, specially because it is likely that their navy is passing well
furnished both with rowers and soldiers: for seeing that they have taken
three of our galleies, and to many of our ships for burdeine, and have
conquered all the sea coast, they might if they wanted ought, repair it
easily, and also daily take into their navy soldiers, out of their army on
the land.

If you can pass over hence unto Brindisi (in Naples) without danger, (the
which I do leave to be adjudged by these excellent men, and most skillful in
Sea affairs) I would think it very well so to do, for hereby at the east,
the Venetians (whose affairs no doubt, are administered with great fear) would
be brought into some hope: then also seeing we should be so near unto our
enemies, perhaps God would give some occasion for us to have a fair hand upon
them. But if it be to be feared least the enemy do meet us by the way: I
do not see what we should do, but stay for the Galleies of Candy, or at the
least, for some certain news of them. For if we did knew that they would not
come at all (which God forbid) my adnise should be to furnish and arm
passing well, as great a number of our Galleys as we are able, and so to rigge
them, that if they lighted on the enemies, they might also escape from them by
flight, and then I would give charge to the rest of the Galleyes to follow
also after to Brindisi, with the Ships for burdeine: for with these galleys,
who happily will be three score or four score in number, we should be able to
signify many things unto ye Sclauonia^s, and put the whole province, which is
infested both by sea and land, in heart and hope: whereas other ways certes we
can send them no succor. Moreover, if we were there, we should be ready upon
every occasion to annoy the enemy, and therewithal also all the whole world
should understand, that you (sovereign General) were most ready to serve
God, and the holy league, in all things that may be dene. But yet I would that
all that I have said, may be so interpreted, that I had rather willingly
subscribe unto them that can judge better of this matter: and almighty God
bring to pass that we may use his counsels and help, unto an happy end.

In the mean time there had come unto the Turkish navy (which was at
Saseno) about the end of August, Mehemet Bey, and the Treasorer, who brought
news that Famagosta the chief city and kaye of Cyprus, was taken, and that
good fidings gave them a stomach to attempt some new enterprise. But anon
after when two small galleys of the espies, had returned, and brought news
that they had chased a ship of the Christians above Crotone, but could not
take her, but that yet they understood that the navy of the confederates
being met together, was in rigging at Messina, they leaving Saseno, sailed
toward the Leuant or East.

The case thus standing, Mark Quirini, and Canali, arrived at Messina the second
of September, with 62. Galleys of Candy, and were receued with great and
general joy, for they had been looked for with great longing, neither could
our Captains resolve upon any certainty without them. Also the day before
came the Marquis of Sancta Cruz, and John Andrew Doria, with twelve Galleys,
and anon after also 40. Neapolitane ships for burdeine, and thirty Galleyes,
with whom also all the Galleys of the Palermo had joined themselves.

But the enemies sailed from Saseno to Butrinto, and there taking in 500.
horsemen, carried them to Corfu, that they (...) wast and made the Island. But
there the ordenance of the Castle brake and drowned three of their galleys, and
much other harm did also the soldiers of the garrison do them, for our men
did take many of the enemies prisoners, and among other, Baffa an Apostata
Christian, a man of great authority with the Emperor of the Turks: which
made them, that afterward they did not much infest the suburbs that lay about
the Castle. Wherefore when the enemies had indomaged the Isle as much as they
could, they shipping again their horses, departed thence the eleauenth of
September. And when they were come to Parga, there arrived a messenger from the
great Turk, who signified unto Ah, the Admiral of the Navy, that seeing
Famagosta was taken, he should use the fruit of the victory: that is, he
should take all the Isles near, he should spare no man, yea, and should also
assail farther, and destroy the Christian fleet (as though that were in his
power to do.) Wherefore when he had received his message, he departed from
thence the sixth of September, and sailed toward ye Leuant into the gulf of
Patras, that after he had now furnished his Fleet with Biscuit and other
necessaries, he might set forth to assail the Christians. But our men
rejoicing that all their forces were joined in one, began to deliberate what
was to be done. And now all Christendom was mightelie feared with the
prosperous successes of the tyrant, and the deuastation of the Venetian Empire,
and dominions. Neither had the Venetians now any more hope than in the good
will of God, and this same Navy of the confederates at Messina.

Now there were in this fleet, for the Pope twelve galleys, for the king of
Spain four score and one, with twenty ships for burden, for the Signoria of
Venice one hundred and eight galleys, six great galleys, that they call
Galiares, with a good number of Fragats, and other small shipping. In this
fleet besides rowers and other necessary persons in a fleet, were 20000.
Soldiers of Italians, Spaniardes, and Germans, and besides these, a good
indifferent great many of them that served without pay (other authors do
make the number of them two thousand. So then Don John de Austria, the Admiral
General of the league, Mark Antonie de Colonna, the high Admiral of the Popes
power, Sebastian Veneri, the Admiral of the Venetian forces, consulted what
was best for them to attempt: there were also present at this consultation the
great Comendador of the knights of Malta, Ascanio de Cornia, Andrew Doria,
Augustine Barbarigo, Mark Quirino, Antonio Canali, the Secretary of the
Venetians, with ye Scribe, and sometime also the Princes of Vrbine and Parma,
Paulo Iordano Orsino, the Marquis de Sant Cruz, and other: among whom, Ascanius
de Cornia, after he had heard many men's opinions, spoke to this effect.

For two or three causes only, (most Honorable) may a General with honor
refrain to join in battle with his enemy. Of whom the first is, if he
shall gain less profit by the fruit of the victory, than he may fear
detriment if he hap to be overthrown: whereof take this example. When the
Duke of Guyse not many years ago, had invaded the kingdom of Naples, the
Duke of Alua had done unwisely, if he would have given him battle: for the
French could have lost no more in that battle than their army, but if the
victory had inclined to the French party, we did leese with our army the
kingdom of Naples too.

The second is, if he do understand that his enemies army will be broken and
scattered without fight: whereof the invincible Emperor Charles the fifth, your
Highness his Father, of sacred memory, may be an example. For when he made
wars against the Protestants in Germame, he would never join in battle with
them, because he understood that their army would be dispearsed without
battle, neither could the strength of that league long endure and continue.

Finally, for a third cause may a General shun battle: if he do know
that his power is so much inferior to his enemies, that he can in no wise
hope for victory. But (most Honorable) none of the former causes dubtlesse
can move us, for although the loss of this Navy of the Christians be a
matter of very great consequence, as some have said before me, and that we
do grant that the victory will fall on our enemies side, yet notwithstanding
if we do fight valiantly, as it becomes us, it is likely also that their
Navy will be so sore shaken and spoiled, that it cannot be easily and
lightly repaired by the Turk: neither again are our Princes of so small
strength, that they shall not be able to repair our power, at the least as
much as shall be sufficient for to defend their own. But if that we do
obtain the victory, then whereas we may hope for other greater matters, than
specially the enfranchisement of Greece.

Moreover, the which we ought chiefelie to consider, and hold for a certain
(as I have often admonished also heretofore) that we can do nothing, neither
with this present power, neither with any other that shall be supplied unto
us hereafter, nor do any thing of moment against the Turks, except that we
have first desaited and broken their Navy.

But that it will be dispearsed through weariness or lack of things
necessary, we cannot hope: but rather our enemies may promise themselves the
same of us. Seeing then that our power is now so great, that we may hope for
victory in battle: mine opinion is, that in any wise we ought to fight,
neither is this present occasion in anio ease to be let slip. But whether our
forces be so great as theirs, that in deed is to be considered. The forces
consist, as far as I can conceive, in men and in galleys. As for the men,
yea, although they be such as it has said before me, that is to wit, that the
Spaniardes and Italians are for the greater part fresh water Soldiers, and
of small experirience, and also that the Almanes are of small service in Sea
fight, and that there is but a small number of Harquebuziers among them: yet I
do not see how our enemies can by any means be in this point better
furnished, both by reason of the great plague that we do understand raged and
reigned in their navy the last year, and also because they are forced to have
a great army in Ciprus. But now of the greatness of their Navy we do hear
diverse reports, so that I cannot pronounce of certainty, whether that ours
be the greater of ye smaller. For seeing I am smallie experimented in sea
affairs, I cannot tell with how many, or how great common galleys, and Foists
of the Turks, our great Galleys may be matched: wherefore I will leave the
judgment of these things unto other. This only I do pronounce and think,
that we must try fortune: for war matters cannot so be managed, but that
fortune may do much in them. Therefore let us depart hence with this Fleet,
and sail either toward Brindisi or Corfu: for when we shall be so near our
enemies, we shall be able to understand some certainty of their state, and
thereby take advise: and unless some difficulty of getting victuals do let,
I do think it better that we sail to Corfu than to Brindisi, because the
enemy must needs pass that way when he saileth into the Leuant. But before
we do depart hence, I do think that we must first and chiefelie do one
thing, and that is, fully and assuredly to determine with our selves that we
must fight, and let this be the firm and fixed resolution of us, that
whenever we shall light upon our enemies, that we will assail them, and to
this end let all things be before hand disposed and ordered. For if we go
hence doubtful, then we shall be forced to take advice at the very instant,
and if we do chance to fall upon our enemies on a sudden, we being out of
order and uncertain what to do, shall easily be overthrown and scattered.
And these are the things (most Honorable) that I do think we ought to do:
but yet so, that I will willingly subscribe to them of more skill.

When Cornia had made an end of his speech, all men assented to that he had
said: for they being forced by necessity did understand, that this was the
only way to do well, for to set upon the enemy courageously, when occasion
should be offered. Wherefore Don John that he might omit nothing that did
beseem a good General, commanded what every man should do afterward, and
how and in what order they should go forth. He divided all the Navy into
four battles: that is to wit, two wings, a middle battle, which they
called the fight, and secret succors. In the eight wing were 53. Galleies,
under the conduct of John Andrew Doria, and they had a green flagge, in the
top of the mast. The left wing consisted of the like number of galleies, and
were led by Augustine Barbarigo, with a yelow flagge in the starre-bord side
of the mast. The middle battle, wherein were 61. galleies, did the General
himself Don John govern, and he had a blew or sky color flagge. These three
battles consisted of 161. Galleies, and were so enstructed, that the middle
battles with the two wings, on either side near to it, went forth with
equal pace, one neither before nor behind an other: but the wings were so
far distant from the middle battle: that three or four galleys might be
put into that void space between them: the which was left to that end, that
every one of the battles, might turn themselves as use and profit should
require. Aluares de Basan, the Marquis de Sancta Cruz, commanded over the
battle of succor, whose flagge was white, borne in the puppe. But this
battle had 38. galleies, of whom eight under their Cheifteine John de
Cordona, went about 20. or 25. miles before all the fleet, for to descrie: and
had in commandment for to signify unto the fleet by swift fragats, what
they had seen, or found: but if they should descrie so great a number of
Ships, that they suspected it to be the Navy of the enemy, then they should
retire to ye rest of the fleet, and four of them succor the left winge, and
so many with Cordona, the right.

The great galleies, that are called Galeazes, and were set about half a mile
before the middle battle, and the wings: and Antonie and Ambrose Bragadini
had the conduct of the two that went before the left wing, and the two that
went before the middle battle were governed by James Guory and Antonie Duodi,
and they that went before the right wing, were commanded by Andrew Pisauro,
and Peter Pisano. But every one of the Galeazes were almost a mile one from
another, that they might after a sort protect and govern the whole Fleet:
and because, they that were not so easily rowed with oars, as the rest of the
Galleys, the high Admiral General had commanded, that if the wind did not
serve for them to sail, that then they should be towed by other Galleyes,
whereof he had distrivuted the charge to certain Captains: for he himself and
Colonna had taken upon them to tow with their Galleies, the Admiral Galeaze of
Frances Duodi, and had committed the Galeaze of James Gori to Sebastian Veneri,
and to Christopher Leyni, the Galeaze of Andrew Bragadini, to Augustine
Barbarigo, the Galeaze of Antonie Bragadini, to Antonie Canali, the Galleaze of
Andrew Pisauro, to the Prior of Messina: and the Galleaze of Peter Pisano to
John Andrew Doria. The high Admiral General had chosen a place for himself
in the very midst of the battle, and was guarded on the right side with
Antonie Colonna the Admiral of the Popes Navy, and on the left, with
Sebastian Veniero, the high Admiral of the Venetian Navy.

And Colonna was strengthened on the other by the Admiral Galley of Genowayes,
whereof Hector Spinola was Captain, and he had with him the Prince of Parma,
and Venerio was also defenced on the left side with the Admiral Galley of
Sauoy, of whom Leyni had the government, and she also carried the Prince of
Vrbine. But behind at the puppe, the Admiral General, Colonna and Venerio,
had the Galley called the Prince of Spain, and also the Galley of the great
Commendador of Castilia. The right side of the middle battle, where it was
separated from the wing, did the Admiral of Malta commanded by the Prior of
Messina, close up, but the left side the Captain of Peter Lomelyno, under the
government of Paulo Iordano Orsino. At the right wing John de Corclona had
joined himself to the side of Doria. In the left wing Augustine Barbarigo had
on the one side Mark Quirini, and on the other Canali. But in all the
battayles, Galleyes of the king of Spain, of the popes, and of the Signories
of Venice were blended together without distinction. These things being
dispatched, the high Admiral General commanded all the Captains and Masters
of the Galleys, that they should do their best for to see that al those under
their charges did lead a godly and holy life, for thereby it would not come
to pass, that God, specially, in so just a cause would help them in that
they went about. Things being thus ordered, they departed from Messina the
sixtenth of September, being Sundaie, having sent the ships for burden the
day before, under their Captain John Dauolos, and upon sundry occurrents and
occasions went to diverse places in the kingdom of Naples, and then back
again to Palermo in Sicile, and from thence to sundry places in the Isle of
Corfu, and then to port Gomenizearo, a great and safe haven on the continent.
Here because the weather was cloudie, and they had no good winds, they thought
good to survey their Navy, that if any thing lacked, they might provide it,
and the same night arrived there Gildas Andrada, and John Baptista Contarini,
who had given in as far as Zante, and had learned that the 28. of September the
enemy was in ye gulf of Patras, and their Navy was in ill case, for about ten
of their Foists and small galleys, with the Moceniga, and Constantina, ships
for burden, carrying sick men (the which was yet afterward found to be false)
were gone toward Modone: the which news made all our men grow in heart and
courage, and excited them to pursue the enemy. But yet the adverse tempest
continued still* wherefore the high Admiral commanded the first of October
that all things should be laid up in their places, and the next day he
took a general muster, and spoiled four Galleies of all their soldiers and
equippage, that he might furnish the rest the better. The sixth of October the
wind was laid, wherefore they joyfully launched out of Port Gomenizearo, and
had their Navy thus particularly distributed, and their battles thus
arranged,

In the Battle that went before the rest of the fleet to descrye, were these
Galleies, and their Captains.
Galleyes. Captains. 1 The Saint Magdalene of Venice. Marco Contarini. 2 The
Sun of Venice. Vincent Quirino. 3 The Vice Admiral of Sicile. 4 The admiral
of Sicile. John the Cardona, the Admiral of the Sicilian flett, of David
Imperiali. 5 The Admiral. 6 The S. Ioa^nica of Sicile. 7 Saint Catherine of
Venice. Marco Ciconia. 8 The Our Lady of Venice. Peter Frances Malipetrol In
the left Wing.
The names of Galleies The names of Captains. 1 The Admiral of Venice.
Augustine Barbarigo the high and chief Prouiditore of the Venetian fleet. 2
The Admiral of Venice. Antony Canali, Prouiditore also of the Venetian fleet.
3 The fortune of Venice. Andrew Barbarioo. 4 The Archer of Naples. Martin
Pyrola. 5 The treble hand of Venice. George Barbarigo. 6 The double Dolphin of
Candie. Frances Zeno. 7 The Lion and Phoenix of Cania. Frances Mengano. 8 S.
Nicholas of Cherso. Colanes Drasi. 9 The victory of Naples. Occauo Rocardi 10
The Lomelina. Augustine Coneuali. 11 The Elengina of the Popes. Fabio Valciati,
Knight. 12 The Lady of Cania. Phillippe Polani. 13 The sea horse of Candy.
Antonie de Cabellis, 14 The double Lion of Candie. Nicolas Fratello. 15 The
Lion of Istria. Dominicke de Tacco. Before these vve^^ Ambrose Bragadin^ with
his galeaze*
16 The cross of Cefalenia. Mark Cimera. 17 The Saint Virginia of Cefalenia.
Christopher Chrissa. 18 The Lion of Candie. Frances Bonacchio. 19 The Christ of
Candie. Andrew Cornelio. 20 The Angel of Candie. John Angelo. 21 The Pyramid
of Candie. Frances Bono. 22 The Lady of Candie with the armed horse. Antonie
Eudomeniano. 23 The Chrit raised again of Venice. Simon Goro. 24 The Christ
raised again of Venice. Federicke Reniere. 25 The Christ of Corfu. Christopher
Condocolli. 26 The Christ raised again of Cania. Geogge Calergio. 27 The Christ
of Venice. Barthelmew Donata. 28 The Christ raised again of Vegia. Jews
Cicuta. 29 The Retimana. Nicolas Auonali. 30 The Christ of Candie. John
Cornelio. 31 The Christ raised again of Cania. Frances Zancaruolo. 32 The
Rodus of Cania. Frances Molino. 33 The Saint Euphemia of Brescia. Horacio
Fisogna. 34 The Lady Marquis of Doria. Frances Sphedra. 35 The fortune of
Andrew. John Jews Belui. 36 The arm of Cania. Michael Vizamano. 37 The Sea
horse of Venice. Antonie de Cauallis. 38 The Christ of Cania. Daniel Calefatio.
39 The arm of Venice. Nicolas Lipomano. 40 The our Lady of Za^te Nicolas
Modino. Before these galleies vve^t Antonie Bragadini with his galeaze.
41The Christ raised again of Cania. Frances Zancaruolo. 42 The our lady of
Venice Mark Antonie Pisano. 43 The God the father vp-the Trinity. John
Contarini. 44 The flame of Naples. John Cueua. 45 The S. John of Naples Garzias
Vorgaro. 46 The envy of Naples. Toribio Acaueso. 47 The valiant of Naples.
Michael Quesada. 48 The S. Iacobea of Naples. Monserratto Guardiolo. 49 The
Saint Nicolaico of Naples. Christopher Mongiua. 50 The Christ raised again of
Venice. John Baptista Quirini. 51 The Angel of Venice. Vmfrey Iustiniano. 52
The Saint Dorethe of Venice. Paul Nani. 53 The Admiral of Venice Mark Antonie
Quirini, prouiditore of ye Venetia^ Navy In the middle Battle which they
called the fight, this was the order of the Captains, Admirals, and Galleies.
The names of the Galleies. The names of the Captains 1 The Admiral of
Lomelina. Paulus Iordano Orsino, the Admiral of that fleet. 2 The master
Lomelina. Peter Baptista Lomelino. 3 The Admiral Bandinella. Bendinello Sauli,
the Admiral of that fleet. 4 The master of Genoa. Pallerano. 5 The Toscano
of ye popes Metello Caracciolo, knight* 6 The man of the sea of Vicenza. James
Dressano. 7 The our lady of Venice John Zeno. 8 The Saint Hieronima of Lesina.
John Balzi. 9 The Saint Ioannica of Venice. John Antonie Colleoneo. 10 The
Saint Alexandrica of Bergomo. George D'Asti, Admiral. 11 The Admiral Marina
Hierome Canali. 12 The log of Venice. 13 The Mongibello of Venice. Bertucco
Contarini. Frances Dandalo. 14 The virgin of Candie. Ciprian Marini. 15 The
temperance of John Andrew Doria. Vincentius Pascali. 16 The good fortune of
Naples. Roccano Fuluio. 17 The castle of Spain. Baccio Pisano. 18 The victory
of ye popes 19 The Pyramid of M. Antonie of S. Vliana* 20 The Christ of Venice.
Hierome Contarini. 21 The S. Frances of Spain Christopher Guasches. 22 The
peace of the popes. James Antonie Perpignano* 23 The perle of John Andrew
Doria. John Baptista Spinola. 24 The Wheel Serpentin of Venice. Gabriel
Canali. 25 The Pyramid of Venice. Frances Bono. 26 The Palm of Venis. Hierome
Veneri. 27 The Admiral of Gillio Andrada. Bernard Cinoguerra. Paul Botein. 28
The Granado of Spain Hector Spinola with the Prince of Parma. 28 The Admiral
of Genoa. 29 The Admiral of Venice. Sebastian Veneri the Admiral of the
Venetian fleet. 30 Behind ye pup of ye high Admiral General, and Veneri, was
the Master Royal. 31 The gallie royal. Don John of Austria, chief General
of the league. 32 The Admiral of the great Comemdador, which defenced Don John
and Colonna at the pup. 33 The Popes Admiral. Mark Antonio de Colonna high
Admiral of ye popes Navy. 34 The Admiral of Sauoy. The Lord Leiny with the
Prince of Vrbine. 35 The Grifonia of the Popes. Alexander Nigroni. 36 The Saint
Theodoro of Venice. Theodoro Balbi. 37 The Mendozza of Naples. Martino de
Caide. 38 The Mountain of Cania. Alexander Vizamano. 39 The Saint John Baptist
of Venice. John Mocenigo. 40 The victory of John Andrew Doria. Philip Doria.
41 The Pisana of ye popes. Hercules Lotta. 42 The Figiera of Spain. Diego
Lopes de Diglia. 43 The Christ of Venice. George Pisano. 44 The Saint John of
Venice. Daniel Moro. 45 The Florence of the Popes. Thomas di Medici. 46 The S.
George of Naples. Eugenio de Vargas. 47 The master of Naples. Frances
Benauides. 48 The Moon of Spain. Emanuel Aguilar. 49 The Passera of Venice.
Jews Pasqualigo. 50 The Lion of Venice. Peter Pisano. 51 The Saint Hierome of
Venice. Caspar Malipetro. 52 The Admiral of Grimaldi. George Grimaldi the
Admiral. 53 The master of David Imperiali. Nicolas Luano. 54 The Saint
Christopher of Venice. Alexander Contarini. 55 The Judith of Zante. Marino
Sicuro. Frances Dundo Captain of the galea^^^.
56 The Larmelina of Candie. Peter Gradenigo. 57 The middle Moon of Venice.
Valerio Valeresso. 58 The Doria of John Andrew Doria. James Casali. 59 The
order of S. Peter. Santubio. 60 The order of S. John. Jews Tessera. 61 The
Admiral of Malta. The Prior of Messina, Admiral. 62 The Admiral of Sicile.
John de Cardona the Admiral who yet went before when they sailed. 2 The
Piemontan of Sauoy. Octauiano Moreto. 3 The Admiral of Nicolas Doria. Pandulfo
Polidoro. 4 The force of Venice. Reniero Zeno. 5 The Queen of Candie. John
Barbarigo. 5 The Nino of Venice. Paul Polani. 7 The Christ raised again of
Venice. Benet Soranzi. 8 The armed man of Retima. Andrew Calergi. 9 The Eagle
of Retima. Andrew Calergi. 10 The Palm of Cania. James Medio. 11 The Angel of
Corfu. Stellio Carchiopulo. 12 The S. Ioannica Arbera. John de Dominis. 13 The
Lady Frauica. Jews Cipico. 14 The ship of Venice. Antonie Pasqualigo. 15 The
our Lady of Ca^dy Mark Foscarino. 16 The Christ of Crema. Frances Corneri. 17
The Saint Victorio of Crema. Evangelist Zurlano. 18 The master of Grimaldi.
Laurence Treccha. 19 The master of Marini Antonio Cornili. 20 The Margarit of
Sauoy Bataglino. 21 The Diana of Genoa. John George Lasagna. 22 The Gingana of
Naples Gabriel Medino. 23 The Moon of Naples. Iulio Rubbi. 24 The fortune of
Naples Diego Medran. 25 The hope of Naples. Peter Busto. 26 The fur^e of
Lomelino James Chiappeo. 27 The master of Lomelino. Georgo Greco. 28 The
Negrona. Nicolas Costano. 29 The bastard Negrona Laurenzo de Turri. 30 The fire
of Candie. Antonie Bono. 31 The Eagle of Candy. Hierome Georgio. 32 The S.
Chistopher of Venice. Andrew Trono. 33 The Christ of Venice Mark Antonie
Lando. 34 The hope of Candie. Hierome Conarini. 35 The Reatila of Padoa Pataro
Buzacarino. 36 The S. Iosephica of Venice. Frances Osedo. 38 The resolute of
Naples. John de Carasse. 39 The Sicilia of Sicilia. Frances Amadeo. 40 The
master of Nicolas Doria. Iulio Centaurio. 41 The Eagle of Corfu. Peter Buono.
42 The S. Trifonica of Cataro. Hierome Bizanteo. Peter Pisano with a galca^^
43 The tower of Vice^za. Jews de Portu. 44 The S. Marie of the Popes.
Pandulfo Strozzi, Knight. 45 The S. Ioannica of the popes. Augulo Bifalio,
Knight. 46 The master of Nigroni Jews Gamba. 47 The Admiral of Nigroni. John
Ambrose Nigroni. 48 The Monarcha of John Andrew. Nicolas Garibaldo. 49 The
hand maid of John Andrew. Nicolas Imperiali. 50 The Admiral of John Andrew.
John Andrew Doria. The battle of succor that followed behind for a guard,
had these Galleys and Captains.
The names of Galleys. The names of Captains. 1 The S. Ioannica of Sicile 2
The Baccana. John Peter Morilo. 3 The Leina of Naples. 4 The Constancy of
Naples. Peter Delagia. 5 The Marchesia of Naples. John Machado. 6 The Saint
Barbara of Naples. John Aschaleo. 7 The Saint Andrew of Naples. 8 The Saint
Catherine of Naples. John Rufio de Valasques. 9 The Saint Barthelmew of Naples.
10 The Saint Angelo of Naples. 11 The Terana of Naples John de Ripa Meillino*
12 The Christ of Venice. Mark Molino. 13 The double hand of Venice. John
Loredano. 14 The Admiral of Naples. Aluares de Bazan, Marquis de Sante Cruz.
15 The faith of Venice. John Baptista Contarini. 16 The pillar of Venice.
Caterino Malipetro. 17 The Magdalen of Venice. Jews Balbi. 18 The Lady of
Venice. John Bembo. 19 The Minidus of Venice. Philippe Leo. 20 The hope of
Venice. John Baptista Benedicto. 21 Saint Peter of Venice. Peter Baduato. 22
Saint George of Sabenica. Christopher Lucicho. 23 The Saint Michael. George
Cochio. 24 The Sybilla of Venice. Daniel Trono. 25 The Crane of Spain. Jews
de Hereda. 26 The Admiral of Vaschedo. Veschedo Coranado. 27 The Suprana of
the Popes. Antonie de Ascoli. Peter Roises. 28 The Occasion of Spain 29 The
master of the popes. 30 The fair weather of the popes.

The Navy being thus distributed, they sailed forth, and every man was
careful for his charge, the which, that it might be the more exactlie done,
the General had also appointed a Captain over every 20. galleys, who should
dilygentlie look that this order were observed by them all. So they sailed to
Cefalonia where they received Letters from Paul Contarini the governor of the
Isle of Zante, that signified how the enemies fleet was in the gulf of Patras
in ill case, and that forty vessels were gone away under the government of
Oluzali toward Modone, nor long after they received Letters from Famagosta.
Which things being known, our men were full persuaded that they ought to go
forward and to assail the enemy.

But whether in the mean time were our enemies idle, for when Ali their high
Admiral was come to Lepanto, within the gulf of Patras, the 28. of September
he sent Mehemet Bey, with three score galleyes to Aspropitio, a City within
that gulf, for to bring thence victuals, and specially soldiers, that he
might be ready for all events. And he had now dispatched the matter, and being
returned, had brought besides victuals and other necessaries 10000.
Ianizares, 2000. common soldiers, and as many voluntary. In the mean time
he had understood that our fleet was come from Corfu to Cefalenia, but of the
greatness thereof, or what they meant to do, he had yet learned no
certainty, for although that Caracoza, being sent to take view of our Navy,
had brought word back, that he had dilygentlie surueied it, and that there
were not in it above 150. Galleyes: yet that was false. But yet notwithstanding
as though they did foresee their misfortune, all in the fleet were afraid.
Wherefore Ali, albeit he was fully resolved to fight, yet for that cause and
reason he thought good to consult with the principal men that he had with him,
what was to be done herein, before that he did put these new aides and
supply into his galleys. Whereupon having called together all the chief men
of mark and authority, and the most skillful in martial matters, he gave
every man large leave freely to utter what they thought. They sat long in
counsel, for many to gratify Ali, whom they knew was resolved to fight,
affirmed that fortune was to be tried: neither on the contrary part were
there few that subscribed unto Portau Bassa, the General of the soldiers,
who held it stiflie that they ought in no case to sight. Thus when diverse
opinions were spoken by diverse men, Hassan Bassan, the son of Barbarossa,
sometime king of Argier, having craved license to speak, and laying his hand
upon his breast, according to the usage of that Nation, spoke to this effect.

Most excellent and mighty above all other, beloved and advanced by the
majesty of our most invincible Emperor, unto the highest degree of glory, men
most desirous to do service unto the immesurable glory of our Emperor, which
is the shadow and spirit of the living God for ever and ever. These Idolaters
are in divine matters worse than beasts, and enemies of the true son of God.
Therefore I would not have you doubt whether their Navy ought to be assailed
and taken. For besides those signs that many before me have wisely
rehearsed, we may certainly know by the prisoners, that these men are of the
same Nation, and gathered together after the same order, that they were that
thirty years ago, being joined together with a great number of Galleyes, in
these very same seas, were broken by Hariadin Barbaressa my Father, with so
great facility, that he never needed to do so much as once to brawe his
sword. For although they had a greater Navy than my Father had, yet as soon
as they saw the beakes of our Galleys, and heard the cry and valiant feese of
our men, they betook them to flight: for they are so faint hearted, that they
run away as soon as they do hear of our name. Besides this, they being
blended together of diverse Nations, do mutuallie hate one another, neither
will any one of them obey another, the which is a matter of very great moment
in an army: there be a great number of Galleys of diverse Princes come
together, not for to expose themselves to any peril for their common defense,
but that they may seem to have a great Navy. They be blasphemers, despisers
of God; apparelled and furnished with rich and precious clothes, and armor,
and laden with money. But we on the other side are ignorant what blasphemy is,
and do mutuallie love and reverence one another, and are met together here in
arms to this only end, that we may do our only Emperor, always
invincible Prince, service in fight. And seeing yt al our men have assembled to
this end, they will with one mind obey your valiant aduises, and chiefly
because they do know that ye are the lieuetenants of our Emperor himself, and
therefore fighting as it beseems valiant and well appointed men, will carry
away assured victory. And this we may the more lightly hope, because we have
280. vessels well furnished, of whom 200. are common Galleys, and fifty small
Galleys, all of them passing well armed: to the augmentation of whose power and
strength yet more, and to the farther encouragement of our most valiant men, if
that ye do distribute and put into the galleys ye 14000. men, ye came very
lately, and also those of the Leuant that are in the 20. foists, we shall rest
assured of the victory, although we do grant that our enemies are valiant
men. But now we do certainly know, as we have learned of our fellow Caracoza,
a very wise man, that they have but 150. galleys furnished with such men, as I
told you before. Wherefore (most valiant and wise Gentlemen) seeing that we do
suffientlie know their state, go forward, ye shall find them in the vale of
Alexandria, and dispearsed along that shore, more given to idleness, ease,
delights, and delicatenes, than is meet for warriors, so that thereby, ye
shall take them al without difficulty, for when they shall see our Fleet,
they either flying away, will run on the shore, and suffer shipwreck, or
else they will light and fall on our Navy, and be taken.

But that I may comprehend all the matter in few words: we have the greater
number of vessels, and them also better furnished than our enemies, very
valiant and skillful soldiers: wherefore we must not let slip this occasion
offered us to fight with them, that are so much inferior unto us, in number,
prowess, and experience, and specially, seeing that thereby we shall execute
the commandment of our high and mighty Emperor, whose glory shall endure
for ever, and win our selves immortal praise: but ye namely, shall perform
that which ye promised unto this our supreme Emperor, when he appointed you
in his own place for to conduct this most mighty Navy.

The same arguments used also at that time Oluzali, the Chieftaine of the
forces of Barbary, using a long speech of the power of the Turks, and of the
commandment and anger of the great Emperor of the Turks, who, as also
Cayabeg, the Sanzach of Smyrne, showed with an effectual speech, that neither
they ought, nor could without shame let pass this occasion, to destroy the
same Christians, having now a lesser power, seeing that they had always ben
defaitad and spoiled heretofore by the soldiers of Ottoman the great
Emperor of the Turks, although they had a fleet far better furnished than
theirs.

But of a flat contrary mind were Syrocke the Sanzach or governor of
Alexandria, and Carabiue the Captain of Suurasar, both very ancient Captains,
and singularly well experimented in sea affairs, and many other besides. But
Mehemet Bey the Sanzach of Nigreponto, who sometime had governed Barbary, going
about to extinguish this hot fire of Hassan Bassa, spoke to this sense.

I do think and judge (most prudent peers) that the words ye Hassan Bassa
has spoken, are signs and tokens of a very valiant man, and namely of him,
that desires in all things to obey our most invincible Lord and king of
kings, who draws his sword with the arm of God* and lives for ever and
ever, yet notwithstanding seeing it so pleases you, the Bassaes your
excellencies, who next after our supreme Emperor does deserve this Empire of
Ottaman.

I will also speak what I do think: doubtless it is likely ye our enemies
would not have come in this far, unless they had before diligently learned
out our strength and forces, wherefore it must needs be, that they have a
power at the least equal to ours, or else greater: because that otherwise they
would never have come thus far. Of the which thing this may be an argument:
that they themselves may easily know, that the hope of keeping and conseruing
of the rest of their dominions and Empire that is left them, or of recovering
that which they have lost, does lie in this only Navy. Therefore let us not
believe that this Fleet of our enemies has come hither for to expose them
selves to manifest peril, and to cast away themselves wilfully: the which
they must needs do, if their Navy be so simple, as it has been painted out
unto us, and also so small as our fellow Caracoza, yet a man of great prowess,
has affirmed.

I for mine own part do surely think, that a Navy that comes from
Sicile thus far, to seek their enemy, specially at this time of the year,
is very well appointed, and does come with certain advise and purpose to
fight, and with hope to obtain the victory. And if we do diligently wey the
thing, we understand that the reports of the Christian prisoners do in all
points agree heerewithall, for if they would only vantinglie and vainlie
show themselves, and then fly away, what need they to have come so far up
into these our seas? What? That they flying away, might leese all? Wherefore
grounding your selves upon these arguments, think that the Navy of our
enemies is very strong, and has determined to fight with us, seeing that they
are come up thus far, not provoked nor forced by us, but of their own
accord: Neither have we reason to compare this fleet with that which our men
in former years did put to flight at Preuesa. For this league of the Christian
Princes against us is another manner of thing, than yt which was made thirty
years ago, the preparation other, the skill in warfare other, so that there is
no proportion between them. In that fleet were many and diverse Generals,
but little wisdom, and that was the cause that they fled: In this Navy is
John of Austria, the son of the Emperor Charles the fifth, and the brother of
Philip the king of Spain, a very valiant man, and one excited by his Fathers
glory, and invited by the supreme degree of honor, that he has obtained in
this league through his brother, and finally, one beloved and reverenced of
all the whole Navy, the Captains, and Soldiers with one and common consent.
And therefore without all doubt he will give us battle, neither without hope
of victory.

Moreover, the Venetians, because they have been so deeply endamaged by us,
can (being almost mad for anger) seek nothing else but revenge: that is to
wit, because we have flaine so many of their people: whom to be all very
valiant men, we have learned by ye great loss of many of our men: and yt
certes we will the more easily believe, if we do call to mind how the same
Venetians went about the last year to give us battle, although they had not
then entered into league with these other Princes. Therefore without doubt they
will fight, and the more fiercely, because they being lead with emulation, will
endeavor one to excel another in prowes, and every man prefer his own
Nation before others, the which thing I have always thought to be a matter of
very great moment in wars. And this also am I the rather induced to think,
because we do hear, that Don John is an hardy and venterous young man, a
contemner of danger, and gold, and one that couetetl, and cares for nothing
so much, as that the fame of his valor may run even to the farthest coasts
of Spain. To bring the which thing to pass, can he seek for a more
commodious occasion than this is? Seeing yt he has them his helpers, who being
endomaged by us, do burn in desire of fight, and there with all hope, that as
soon as they have discomfited our Navy, they shall soon recover all that they
have lost? The which things certes, if they should happen, not only the
glory, but also a a great part of those things that they should get, yea, and
the Lordship of this whole sea even to the East, will redound to him.

But if contrariwise, he should run away, would he ever dare to come into
his brothers sight again? Also, the Venetians, that have diligently sought
and searched these seas, where could they seek to save themselves, if they
should betake them to flight? Therefore let us think that they have carefully
considered all these things, in whom the conservation of their lives, goods,
and Empire does lie, and that they will all fight-together most valiantly, the
which they did not at Preuesa. But we are now in this gulf, a place well
defenced both by nature, and two very strong Castles, and we have as good
means to get victuals and soldiers as we our selves would wish. But before
we arrived here, we wonderfully afflicted our enemies: we wasted a part of the
Isle of Candie, we destroyed Cerigo with fire, and harrying. The like we did in
Zante, and Cefalenia: we greatly anoied Corfu, we recovered Suppoto, we
entered into the gulf of Venice, and there we took Antiuari and Dulcino,
Towns nothing small, with many other places and Castles.

We burnt Budua, and with so great triumph we came at the last into this
gulf. Can we not hold our selves contented with these glorious gifts for this
time, specially seeing that we do understand our men have taken Famogosta,
and conserved the whole kingdom of Ciprus at this very same time?

Surely it is no less virtue to keep things gotten, than to get them: for
when we do attempt to win things by force, that enterprise has a doubtful
beginning, and is most commonly much subject to fortune: but the keeping of
things gotten has a certain and final end, which may be attributed to the
counsel of a wise General. But of our great Emperor, this do I certes
promise you, that he will accept as well the safety of this Navy, and will as
much commend you, for that ye have not exposed it to apparent peril, and for
the wasting of so many provinces, for the conquering of kingdoms and cities,
and for the presentation unto him of so great a spoil of all kind of riches.
For it will ask us many years to furnish so great a fleet, but our enemies
will prepare a greater within a short time. Wherefore my opinion is, (most
excellent) who are the soul of our great Emperor, the safety of the
Ottomanicall Empire, that fortune is not to be attempted, but our Navy is to
be very carefully and curioustie spread out, and set forth in good order and
arraie within this gulf, and that we do expect in this safe place what our
enemies mind to do: this day or to morrow they will be come as we do hear
unto Zante, and Cefalenia, and ye thereby taking occasion shall know what may
be done with most safety, for whereas in all martial matters, then specially
in nauall, it is of great consequence to catch the occasion, of doing things
fortunatlie and safely.

All which things I do understand that ye know better than I: and therefore I
do hope that ye will take advise of those things that shall be still reported
unto you, and that I do trust ye will do so much the more, because the enemy
cannot stay there long by reason of hard coming by victuals, and also because
the place is nothing safe. For the which causes doubtless, one of these two
things will happen unto them, that either they will be constrained to return
back from whence they came, or else they will come forward to meet with us,

But if that they shall resolve to go forth to meet us, certes I do not know
whether they can come into this gulf, and if they do come in, it cannot be
done without great danger, for we being defenced with two Castles, shall
anoie them safely, and shall know without conjectures and of a certainty, how
great their forces be. And if we shall seem to be superior, we may safely
assail them, if not, then remain here safely without any danger of our
Navy, or Empire, and yet nevertheless retain, and maintain the dignity and
honor of our selves, and our great Emperor. Neither is there cause why we
should in any wise fear, that they wandering on this coast, will farrie
here longer than we would, for that they can in no case do for lack of
victuals, and for ill weather, usual at this time of the year. And if they
would go about it, they should do it with greater danger of themselves than of
us, because the difficulty of the time of the year, will trouble and make
rough these seas now every day, and will scatter their Fleet, whereby we may
take occasion for to invade them being dispearsed here and there.

But yet I would not that we should be idle in the mean time, but seek to
learn by all industry (sending sundry espies) the power and purpose of our
enemies: for so, if that we have diligently learned their state, we may
take and follow that advise which shall be most for the profit and dignity
of our Emperor. But to go forth out of this well fortified and strong place,
while we are yet uncertain of all things, and to commit our selves unto the
daliance of fortune, do I deem to be an action nothing praise worthy.

I do not doubt but that our enemies will busily go about to provoke us out
of this strong place: and that they will do, being forced either by the time
of the year, or the season of the weather, but then it stands with your
wisdom to moderate and stay your selves so much the more. By the which wise
part, ye shall get no less praise and opinion of wisdom, than ye have
already gained in conquering so great a kingdom, and winning so many Cities
and Castles, because through your wisdom in this point, ye may seem to have
conserved the Empire of Ottoman.

Yet I would have all that I have said, to be so taken, that nevertheless I
am ready to yield and obey your aduises and resolutions, and will spend my
life in the execution of them.

This speech of Mahemet Bey liked Portau Bassa very well, and also the
Sanzaches Syrocke, and Caraby did approve it: but yet because they had
contrary commandment from Sultan Selim, the which was then publikelie read
by the commandment of Oluzali, and for that Ali being very desirous to fight,
had drawn many to take his part, and most chiefly because it was the good
pleasure of God, that the destruction of that Nation should one day have a
beginning, they decreed by common consent for to depart thence, and to give the
Christians battle. For they did think that they should find our Navy in
the Haven, without men, and so should without much a do take it: the which
falling out so, they had determined to conquer also Zante and Cefalenia, and
then besieging in the Winter the places of strength in Candie and Corfu, and in
success of time entering into the gulf of Catato, for to win these and
other places of the Venetian Empire, and so make themselves a way into Italy,
and all Christendom. Wherefore they did distribute into their Galleys the
14000. soldiers that came lately, they did manakle the Christian prisoners,
that they should be apt for nothing else but to row, and then aranged all the
whole Fleet into four battles, as follows.

The right wing.
1 The first was the Admiral of Mehemet Siroch, the governor of Alexandria. 2
The second Galley of Alexandria was governed by Caras Tubat. All these had
Galleys of Alexandria. 3 Bagly Saraf. All these had Galleys of Alexandria. 4
Giafer Chiagey. All these had Galleys of Alexandria. 5 Osmanan Celebin. All
these had Galleys of Alexandria. 6 Perusio Reis. All these had Galleys of
Alexandria. 7 Binke Casapogly. All these had Galleys of Alexandria. 8 Osman
Occan. All these had Galleys of Alexandria. 9 Driuis Aga. All these had Galleys
of Alexandria. 10 Bajazet Siman. All these had Galleys of Alexandria. 11 Osman
Ali. All these had Galleys of Alexandria. 12 Dely Aga. All these had Galleys of
Alexandria. 13 Dardagan Barda^bely All these had Galleys of Alexandria. 14
Casly Caian. All these had Galleys of Alexandria. 15 Iusuf Aga. All these had
Galleys of Alexandria. 16 Iusuf Magar. All these had Galleys of Alexandria. 17
Calafact Cheder. All these had Galleys of Alexandria. 18 Mustafa Genouell. All
these had Galleys of Alexandria. 19 Dermigy Pery. All these had Galleys of
Alexandria. 20 Mat Assan. All these had Galleys of Alexandria. 21 Cheder Aga.
Their Galleys were of Constantinople. 22 Soliman Bey. Their Galleys were of
Constantinople. 23 Hibraim. Their Galleys were of Constantinople. 24 Saban.
Their Galleys were of Constantinople. 25 Caiacebebin. Their Galleys were of
Constantinople. 26 Chedar Siman. Their Galleys were of Constantinople. 27 The
son of Cara Mustafa. Their Galleys were of Constantinople. 28 Iaran Saba.
Their Galleys were of Tripoli in Barbary. 29 David Iusuf. Their Galleys were
of Tripoli in Barbary. 30 Solack Raise. Their Galleys were of Tripoli in
Barbary. 31 Arnaut Ferrat. Their Galleys were of Tripoli in Barbary. 32 Iuzel
Memy. Their Galleys were of Tripoli in Barbary. 33 Schender Selim. Their
Galleys were of Tripoli in Barbary. 34 Lumag Iusuf. Their Galleys were of
Tripoli in Barbary. 35 Bardach Celebin. Their Galleys were of Tripoli in
Barbary. 36 Bagdat Asan. Their Galleys were of Tripoli in Barbary. 37 Guzel
Allibi. Their Galleys were of Tripoli in Barbary. 38 Brusali Pyri. Their
Galleys were of Tripoli in Barbary. 39 Rodle Ali. Their Galleys were of
Tripoli in Barbary. 40 Aga Bassa, with the Admiral of Constantinople. 41
Sinaman Mustafa. These commanded over Galleies of Despetado, in old time
Actolia. 42 Giegiore Ali. These commanded over Galleies of Despetado, in old
time Actolia. 43 Amurates Raise. These commanded over Galleies of Despetado, in
old time Actolia. 44 Callipey Memy. These commanded over Galleies of
Despetado, in old time Actolia. 45 Marul Mustafa. These commanded over
Galleies of Despetado, in old time Actolia. 46 Heder Lumet. These commanded
over Galleies of Despetado, in old time Actolia. 47 Sinaman Deruis. These
commanded over Galleies of Despetado, in old time Actolia. 48 Meminey Durmis.
These commanded over Galleies of Despetado, in old time Actolia. 49 Algagias
Sinan. These commanded over Galleies of Despetado, in old time Actolia. 50
Adagi Rustan. These commanded over Galleies of Despetado, in old time
Actolia. 51 Chingeuey Musata. These commanded over Galleies of Despetado, in
old time Actolia. 52 Iusuf Cebebin. These commanded over Galleies of
Despetado, in old time Actolia. 53 Tafer Mustafa. These commanded over
Galleies of Despetado, in old time Actolia. 54 Ali a Geneuose, and Pirate, a
Captain of small Galleys 55 Megil Reis with a small galleaze. 56 Mehemet Bey,
with the Admiral Gallie of Nigreponto.
The middle battle, which they did also call the fight, had these Captains
and Galleys.
1 Assam Bey, the governor of Rhodes. With Galleys of the Rhodes. 2 Dely
Chiafet, the warden of Rhodes. With Galleys of the Rhodes. 2 Occy Raise. With
Galleys of the Rhodes. 4 Postunag Ogly. With Galleys of the Rhodes. 5 Calefact
Ogly. With Galleys of the Rhodes. 6 Gazizy Reys. With Galleys of the Rhodes. 7
Dromus Raise, with an Admiral gally of Constantinople. With Galleys of the
Rhodes. 8 Herbetcy, warden of Rhodes. With Galleys of the Rhodes. 9 Caragias
Raise. With Galleys of the Rhodes. 10 Ocean Raise. With Galleys of the Rhodes. 11
Dely Piry. With Galleys of the Rhodes. 12 Giafer Aga. With Galleys of the
Rhodes. 13 Bachlan Raise. with Galleyes of Constantinople. 14 Coz Ali. with
Galleyes of Constantinople. 15 Colach Raise. with Galleyes of Constantinople. 16
Oluz Raise. with Galleyes of Constantinople. 17 Assan Bassa, the son of
Barbarossa. with Galleyes of Constantinople. 18 Caraf Raise. Their Galleies were
of Napoly in Romania. 19 Almau Raise. Their Galleies were of Napoly in Romania.
20 Gurngly Ogly Their Galleies were of Napoly in Romania. 21 Arnault Celibin.
Their Galleies were of Napoly in Romania. 22 Magar Ali. Their Galleies were of
Napoly in Romania. 23 Giafer Celebin. Their Galleies were of Napoly in Romania.
24 Dely Celebin. Their Galleies were of Napoly in Romania. 25 Dely Assan. Their
Galleies were of Napoly in Romania. 26 Carapery Aga. Their Galleies were of
Napoly in Romania. 27 Sinam Raise. Their Galleies were of Napoly in Romania. 28
Carau Mustafa. Their Galleies were of Napoly in Romania. 29 Saly Arnuar. Their
Galleies were of Napoly in Romania. 30 Preuil Aga, Captain of Napoly in
Albania. Their Galleies were of Napoly in Romania. 31 Balahzy Ogly. with
Galliees of Metilena. 32 Bararzy Mustafa. with Galliees of Metilena. 33 Sinan
Baly. with Galliees of Metilena. 34 Agdagy Raise. with Galliees of Metilena. 35
Two sons of Ali, in a Galley of Constantinople. 36 Osman Raise, in an Admiral
of Constantinople. 37 Dely Iusuf. with Galleyes of Metelina. 38 Ferath Baly.
with Galleyes of Metelina. 39 Caiacelebin. with Galleyes of Metelina. 40 Bagdar
Raise. with Galleyes of Metelina. 41 Haluagy Mustafa. with Galleyes of Metelina.
42 Giaur Ally Mustafa, with an Admiral of small Galleyes. 43 Caracoza, with a
Galleye of Vallona. 44 Mamatre Saiderbey, governor of Metelina. 45 Ali Bassa,
high Admiral of the fleet in the Galley Royal. 46 Portau Bassa, General of
land affairs, with an Admiral Galley. 47 Mustafa Esdey, Treasurer. 48 Marmary
Raise. 49 Alcicogly. 50 Caras Dely. 51 Ferat Ceragly. 54 Tramontana Raise, with
an Admiral of Constantinople. 55 Suliman Celebin. With Galleies of
Constantinople. 56 Deli Ibraim. With Galleies of Constantinople. 57 Murat
Chorosaa. With Galleies of Constantinople. 58 Demir Baly. With Galleies of
Constantinople. 59 Caby heit. With Galleies of Constantinople. 60 Murat Trasy,
the Scribe of the Arsenall. With Galleies of Constantinople. 61 Peruis Sinam.
With Galleies of Constantinople. 62 Dardagan Baly. With Galleies of
Constantinople. 63 Giafer Caran. With Galleies of Constantinople. 64 Deruis
Sach. With Galleies of Constantinople. 65 Curbaly. With Galleies of
Constantinople. 66 Giafer Aga the Captain of Tripoli in Barbary. 67 Carau
Hamat. These Galleys were of Tripoli. 68 Rustan Cialmagy. These Galleys were of
Tripoli. 69 Durmis Ogly. These Galleys were of Tripoli. 70 Schender Dernigy.
These Galleys were of Tripoli. 71 Maumet Alius. These Galleys were of Tripoli. 72
Afis Cluega the governor of Callipoli. These galleys were of Callipoli. 73
Sellim Sciach. These galleys were of Callipoli. 74 Heder Baschy: These galleys
were of Callipoli. 75 Sicuri Mustafa. These galleys were of Callipoli. 76
Salarais. These galleys were of Callipoli. 77 Dely Ischender. These galleys
were of Callipoli. 78 The Lord of Mania, with an Admiral Galley of
Constantinople. 79 Peruis Luhumagy Alius Raise. Their Galleys also were of
Callipoli. 80 Hasuf Baly. Their Galleys also were of Callipoli. 81 Siran
Bardachy. Their Galleys also were of Callipoli. 82 Iusuf Cinigy. Their Galleys
also were of Callipoli. 83 Piry Begogly with an Admiral Galley of
Constantinople. 84 Dely Osman. With Galleyes of Constantinople. 85 Piry Sisnam.
With Galleyes of Constantinople. 86 Demir Celebin. With Galleyes of
Constantinople. 87 Deruis Hidir. With Galleyes of Constantinople. 88 Sinam
Mustafa. With Galleyes of Constantinople. 89 Hasirgy Reis. With Galleyes of
Constantinople. 90 Ascy Ogly. With Galleyes of Constantinople. 91 Caias Saraf.
With Galleyes of Constantinople. 92 Agady Ahameth. With Galleyes of
Constantinople. 93 Osman Sehet. With Galleyes of Constantinople. 94 Deruis
Celebin. With Galleyes of Constantinople. 95 Giafer Raise. With Galleyes of
Constantinople. 96 Dardagan the Governor of the Arsenall.
The left Wing.
1 The first was an Admiral, whereof was Captain Carau Hozias, a Pyrate. 2
Catalus, a Pyrate. With Galleys of Natolia. 3 Chiuzel Sinam. With Galleys of
Natolia. 4 Chior Mehemet. With Galleys of Natolia. 5 Hignau Mustafa. With
Galleys of Natolia. 6 Cademly Mustafa. With Galleys of Natolia. 7 Vschiufly
Memy. With Galleys of Natolia. 8 Carau Morat. With Galleys of Natolia. 10 Passa
Deruis. With Galleys of Natolia. 11 Iagly Osman. With Galleys of Natolia. 12
Pisman Raise. With Galleys of Natolia. 13 Tasciuis Sisman. With Galleys of
Natolia. 14 Iesil Hogly. With Galleys of Natolia. 15 Cara Cialibina, Captain
of small Galleys. 16 Suizi Memi. They had small Galleyes, and did obey Cara
Cialibin 17 Magli Rays. They had small Galleyes, and did obey Cara Cialibin
18 Oscy Assan. They had small Galleyes, and did obey Cara Cialibin 19 Cumigy
Hasuf. They had small Galleyes, and did obey Cara Cialibin 20 Cadeh Sidir.
These 2. had Galleyes of Consta^ti. 21 Osman Raise. These 2. had Galleyes of
Consta^ti. 22 Carapery, a pyrate, and also a Captain of small Gal. 23 Iulio
Peruis. These had small galleies, and were commanded by Carapery, their
captain. 24 Calabodan Soliman. These had small galleies, and were commanded by
Carapery, their captain. 25 Iachuli Amat. These had small galleies, and were
commanded by Carapery, their captain. 26 Sayr Giafer. These had small
galleies, and were commanded by Carapery, their captain. 27 Chior Memy. These
had small galleies, and were commanded by Carapery, their captain. 28 Giusuel
Giafer, with a Galleye of Constantinople. 29 Ramazzan. 30 Calemy Memi. 31
Giesman Ferrat. 32 Hiupris Assan. 33 Zambul Murat. 34 Sarmusach Raise. 35 Tunis
Suliman. 36 Calcepy Iusuf. 37 Techedel Assan. 38 Cian Memij. 39 Osman Bagli. 40
Caragial with the Admiral Galley of Algier. 41 Caraman Ali. 42 Alman. 43 Sinam
Celebin. 44 Agdagy Mustafa. 45 Daglias Ali. 46 Seith. 47 Perius Selim. 48 Murat
Derus. These had small and also some common Galleyes of Algier. 49 Hes Ogly.
These had small and also some common Galleyes of Algier. 50 Muchaczur Ali.
These had small and also some common Galleyes of Algier. 51 Ioias Osman. These
had small and also some common Galleyes of Algier. 52 Saly Deli. These had
small and also some common Galleyes of Algier. 53 Nasut Fachir, with a Gallie
of Constantinople. 54 Gimongy Mustafa. Their Galleys were of Nigreponto. 55
Rustan Cinigy. Their Galleys were of Nigreponto. 56 Baly. Their Galleys were of
Nigreponto. 57 David Ally. Their Galleys were of Nigreponto. 58 Sitinau Raise.
Their Galleys were of Nigreponto. 59 Caram Hidir. Their Galleys were of
Nigreponto. 60 Magar Ferat. Their Galleys were of Nigreponto. 61 Arnaut Alius.
Their Galleys were of Nigreponto. 62 Nafis Raise. Their Galleys were of
Nigreponto. 63 Curmur Rhodo. Their Galleys were of Nigreponto. 64 Cos Clueagin.
Their Galleys were of Nigreponto. 65 Clusly Memi. Their Galleys were of
Nigreponto. 67 Caram Bey, with the Admiral of the sons of Vlueciali. 68 Deli
Murat. They had small galleys of Vallona. 69 Abazar Raise. They had small
galleys of Vallona. 70 Scin Schiander. They had small galleys of Vallona. 71
Alman Bally. They had small galleys of Vallona. 72 Assan Suambar. They had
small galleys of Vallona. 73 Seit Aga. They had small galleys of Vallona. 74
Assan Sinam. They had small galleys of Vallona. 75 Cumy Falagan. They had small
galleys of Vallona. 76 Osman Ginder. Their Galleys were of Suriasaro. 77 Dermar
Bey. Their Galleys were of Suriasaro. 78 Iusuf Alius. Their Galleys were of
Suriasaro. 79 Carau Alman. Their Galleys were of Suriasaro. 80 Murat Biassan.
Their Galleys were of Suriasaro. 81 Carabiney, governor of Suriasaro. Their
Galleys were of Suriasaro. 82 Calan Bastagy. These galleys were of
Constantinople. 83 Caraby. These galleys were of Constantinople. 84 Giafer Hidi.
These galleys were of Constantinople. 85 Ferath. These galleys were of
Constantinople. 86 Memy Beogly. These galleys were of Constantinople. 87 Osman
Piry. These galleys were of Constantinople. 88 Piry Raia. These galleys were of
Constantinople. 89 Casam Raise. These Galleys were of Constantinople. 90
Talatagi Raise. These Galleys were of Constantinople. 91 Rus Celebin. These
Galleys were of Constantinople. 92 Tatar Alius. These Galleys were of
Constantinople. 93 Oluzali the king of Algier, with an Admiral gallie.
The battle of succor.
1 Was an Admiral Gallie of Constantinople, governed by Amruat? Dragut Raise. 2
Caram Casly. These were Foists. 3 Hassam Reis. These were Foists. 4 Abdula
Reis, and that was a little Gallie. 5 Aligan Assan. These were also Foistes. 6
Cus Ali. These were also Foistes. 7 Giuzel Ali. These were also Foistes. 8
Curtat Celebin. These were also Foistes. 9 Dely bey. 10 Sandagy Memy, this was
also a Foist. 11 Dardagno Reis, and he had an Admiral foist of Constantinople.
12 Deli Dorni, and he had a gallie. 13 Caidar Memi, the governor of the Isle
of Scio. 14 Shetagi Osman. These had Foists. 35 Haeder. These had Foists. 16
Delius Heder. These had Foists. 17 Armat Memi. These had Foists. 18 Susan.
Reis. These had Foists. 19 Giafer Bey. 20 Cabil Sinam, his was a foist. 21
Amurat Reis. These were foists. 22 Sariogy Grafer. These were foists. 23 Mor
Ali. These were foists. 24 Piali Murat, and this was a small Gallie. 25
Caragiali Raise. These were Foists. 26 Murat Alius. These were Foists. 27 Iumez
Alius. These were Foists. 28 Assan Sinian, a Gallie of Constantinople. 29
Bostagi Murat, a Foist. 30 Deli Suliman: This was an Admiral Gallie of
Constantinople.
The Navy being distributed in this manner, they lanched forth the seventh of
October, and came to the coast of Galanga, two hours before Sun set, and
there they stayed. But our men, because they had decreed to fight, determined
with common consent to depart out of hand from the vale of Alexandria, that
making toward Patras, they might do what in them lay, to provoke the enemy
to battle. Yea, and if perhaps they would refuse it, that then they should
go farther forth, even unto the mouth of the gulf of Patras, and by battering
the Castles, and pitifully wasting ye places adjoining, urge thenimie to
battle. Therefore Don John, the high Admiral General, being very desirous,
that those things which had been decreed by common counsel, might be
executed, and namely being at that time earnestly desired and egged on by
Augustine Barbarigo, a very valiant man, and very zealous of the Venetian
safety, departed from the vale the same night, which went before the seventh
of October, being Sundaie, although he had no very good wind, and kept his
course to wards the rocks Cruzulari, which are not far from the maine, with
the intent to assail the enemy the next morning in the break of the day.

But they on the other side had the same saterdaie showed great sign of joy,
triumphing before the victory, because they thought that they had now already
gotten our Navy wholly at their devotion, and wrought their pleasure
therewithal. Wherefore they also launched from thence the eight of October,
very early in the morning, hoping to find our men yet in the Haven, for they
did not think that they would meet them, and were now in their way. And so
they sailed with their Sails somewhat low, and a good wind toward
Cefalenia, and as if GOD had of his immeasurable power then directed these
two most mighty fleets, one against another, although they were never above
twelve miles one from other, yet one of them all this while did not see
another, for certain eminences of the land, one sailing against another, not
far from the Navy. And when both kept on their course, and our Navy was
gotten out from the Rocks Cruzulari, in no very good araie, because the
rocks did impeach them, and our enemies were passing the foreland called
Peschieras, and of the Greeks Mesolognias: they did first descrie one another.
Wherefore our men rejoiced that they had happily espied their enemy, and now
they began to make all things ready for the fight, they set up their
netting, they laid weapons of all sorts at ye sides of the Galleyes, and in
other convenient places, they armed the soldiers with harquebusses, holbards,
pikes, pollaxes, and swords, and disposed them in their places: and there were
in every common gallie almost 200. men that used swords: and in the Admirals
(as some were greater than another) 300. and in some 400. men. Which things
being dispatched, they bestowed the great Guns in their places, being charged
with chain shot, and other square shot, and stones, and brought forth trunkes
to cast wild fire with all. And having made ready all things with singular
diligence, at last they enfranchised all the Christian prisoners that had been
condemned to the oar, pulling off their yrons, and armed them for to fight
valiantly for the name of Christ, who had made them free, and without
difference mingled them among the rest: and they in hope to obtain liberty,
did promise to perform the duty of valiant Soldiers. And whilst that
these things were thus in doing, every Galleie was come into his appointed
place, and the Galeazes had be towed thither whereas they should be, by
them to whom the charge had been committed, and now all the whole Fleet
was with singular silence set and placed in convenient order and araie. But
our enemies coming on-ward as fast as we, did also prepare themselves to fight.

And when they saw that John Andrew Doria, the Captain of the right wing, being
accompanied with many Galleies, stretched out his wing more into the seaward,
they had thought that he had fled. As also many of our men when they saw
the enemies to make out into the sea with their sails hoised up aloft, they
then thought that the enemy had fled. And this false conjecture on both
sides, made both our men, and our enemies the more bold and courageous to
fight. The two Nauies being thus furnished and arranged, did set forward to
fight valiantly, and occupied so great a space of the sea, as seemed unto them
sufficient to keep them from running on the shore, and making thereby
shipwreck, and so came fair and softly one toward the other. And now our men
had shut and locked all the cabines, a certain few excepted, for the hurt men
to be carried into, and out of whom the scribes were to supply things
necessary. And that whilst they were sailing toward the battle, they might
repair the strength of their bodies, they distributed Bread, Wine, Cheese, and
such like victuals, unto the soldiers, thoroughout every Galley. But in the
mean time, that the soldiers were at their victuals, the high Admiral
General him self, Don John of Austria, going a board a Skiffe, accompanied
with Don John de Cardona, went spedely about all the whole Navy, omitting no
one thing that does beseem a Prince and a valiant General. He exhorted both
the Captains of the Galleyes, and also all the rest of the soldiers for to
fight valiantly, for the name of Christ, for their Savior himself would be
present to help them, if they did the duty of stout soldiers, and that he
would give them assured victory: That this was the only occasion to revenge
so many injuries received, and to attain immortal glory.

Whiles he spoke thus, many answered him courageously: that he should not in
any wise doubt of their prowess, for they were come thither for no other
intent, and therefore they would accomplish the duty of valiant men. This
being done, he returned to his Galley Royal: neither was he him self also
less encouraged by the valor of Colonna and Venien, the Admiralls of the
Hopes and Venetian forces, then he himself had before confirmed the rest, with
his own prowess. For they being now armed, had so exhorted, provided and
commanded, that they omitted nothing that (...) make for the winning of so
great a victory. And now the Ensigns of all sorts were advanced in the masts
of every Galley, and in the high Admiral General Galley of Don John of
Austria, they hanged soorth the Ensign of the Holy League, where were
depainted the arms of the confederate Princes: and that the hearts of all men
might yet be more incensed to prowess: they made a great noise and sign of
joy with Drums, Trumpets, and Fiftes and other kind of instruments, and with
a loud voice called upon God Almighty, one in Trinity. Also Priests going
from the puppe of the galley to the stem, did exhort all men with effectual
words, to be valiant, for Christ himself would come down from heaven, because
they fought for his name, and would be present himself to help them all. By
the which exhortations of the Priests and Admiralls, all men were so
thoroughly confirmed with concordious consent, that they were ready to enter
into, and to undertake any danger. But it was much more worthy of admiration,
that at the very same moment, they that until that very instant had borne
great hatred, and used extreme enimitie one to an other, were then mutinally
reconciled one unto other, whereunto they could never before be brought, neither
by intercession of friends, nor by Magistrates for fear of punishment. Such
certes was the power and goodness of God, that brought to pass that those
that persecuted one an other before with deadly hatred, did now upon a sudden
forgetting all miuries, mutually embrace one an other.

But such was the nature of the place where the two fleetes did one happen on
the other, that it threatened manifest danger unto them that would fly: both for
that the fleetes were now to near one an other, and also because that gulf of
the sea was nothing greater, for it was not in compass round about above 250.
miles, and almost on every side enclosed either with the maine land, or
Islands, the Sea that runs between them being scarce twenty or five and
twenty miles broad. For on the North they had a part of Albania called
Natalico, which reaches from the I Will of Saint Maura to Lepanto, 80 miles in
length. On the East, was the coast of Morea, which lies out in length 70.
miles from the entrance of ye gulf of Patras, to the Cape Torneseo. On the
South, they had the I Will of Zante, whose length is 25. miles: and on the West
Cefalenia, and the I Will of S. Maura, of whom the one is 40. miles long, the other
15. On the coast of Albania, almost a mite from the maine, rise up the 3. Rocks
Cruzulari, differing in greatness, but yet neither of them notorious great:
they are from Lepanto 45. miles, from the I Will of S. Maura 35. from Cefalenia
70. and finally from Zante 80. miles. Now these rocks were to our men as they
sailed on the North, and they had Lepanto and the Gulf of Patras between the
East and North. Between the South and the East, was a creek of the sea, that
runs in between Morea, and Zante 25. miles broad. They had between the
South and the West, the sea that lies between Cefalenia, and Zante, 12. miles
broad. The gulf called Viscardo sited to them on the West, was but seven
miles broad. After that the two fleetes had thus on a sudden, unlooked for,
descryed one the other, they could not avoid the battle. Wherefore when one
about Don. John said, that it were good yt a consultation were held before yt
they descended to the fight: Don John auns wered very wisely, That now there
was neither time nor place left for new counsels and aduises, and that it was
enough and enough again, if that every man would by fighting valiantly,
endeavor to execute yt which had been before concluded in the counsel. But
our enemies had 270. vessels, of whom 200. were common Galleys, fifty small
galleies, and twenty Foistes. But they had distributed all this Navy into
four battles, as also our men had done. And the middle battle Ali himself
led, and he had therein nintie Galleies.

In the midst of whom he abiding, was guarded on the right side with Portau
Bassa, and on the left with the Treasurer of the Navy: who did defense him on
both sides with each of them three Admiralls. The right wing, which was opposed
against our left, had fifty Galleyes, and Mehemet Siroch, for Captain. Their
left wing, which came against our right, had 90. Galleies under the conduct of
Oluzali. In the battle of succor were not above ten galleys and 20. Foistes.
Being thus arranged, they came against our men, but yet otherwise affected in
mind the^ they were, for Don John, Colonna, Venieri, and the rest of our
Captains, and voluntary men, yea, and all the whole fleet, had with one
consent, determined to fight, and therefore they went forth to meet with
their enemies, not only with intent to fight, but also with good hope to
obtain the victory. But the Turkish Bassaes, with the rest of ye Pirates, and
the whole Navy went to meet our men with this mind, that they did assuredly
think that they would fly, insomuch that they measured the event of the fight
more by their own light belief, and their former success, then by comparing
of the powers: because they could not learn in so short a time the strength of
our holy league. Wherefore they were in truth astonned when they coming
nearer had seen that the power of our navy was so great. But seeing there was
now no time at all left for to consult, and they saw that our men drew toward
them courageously, they also prepared all things necessary for fight. They
advanced first very proud and rich Ensigns, and then after the manner of that
nation, the rest of the Galleies being almost filled full of other innumerable
Ensigns, they vehemently incited all their men to fight valiantly, setting
before them the favor of the great Emperor, and the hope of an inestimable
prise and booty. And yet they had still thought, that our men would fly, but
when the nearer they came, the greater they found our men's forces to be: then
they began to doubt of the matter, and saw that they must needs fight. But
although this was so, yet the Captains omitted nothing that became valiant
men. For seeing that they saw but only the right wing, she middle battle,
and the battle of succor, neither could yet see the left wing, because it
was hidden by the maine, they did not yet suppose the forces of our men to be
greater than Caracoza bad reported unto them. But when they had within short
time after descried also all the left wing, and had seen the Galleazes very
happily rowed forth with Dares, (a thing that they had thought impossible)
they began to be a little afraid. In our Navy the Drums and the rest, of
the instruments played, and sounded still incessantly, and all our whole
fleet went forward in the form of a croisant, with their ranges very well
kept, and every Gallie was so far one from another, that the Dares of the
one did not let another: for the which consideration, the rowers were forced to
mark and observe exactlie the motion of their fellows, that the order which
had been before appointed by the Captains, might be continually kept.

And now the two nauies were not far from asunder, when the majesty of God
being weary of the prosperous successes of the most cruel tyrant, and taking
compassion of the wrongful and heavy oppression of the Christian common
wealth, decreed at the length one day to deliver and extol the name and
honor of Christ our savior, and duly to punish the tyrant. And he first
began this thing, when he did by a certain mean beyond all men's
expectation, alaie the wind that hitherto had blown against our men, and ill
for them, and made the Sea so quiet and calme^ that it might seem to be
rather land than water. This happened about the leauenth hour, and now the
Nauye^ were almost upon the very point to join together, when the Sun that
had passed the fore part of the Heavens, did with his beams strike the
enemies, who stood Eastward: at which time a certain light small wind good
for our men, began to blow again from the West, in deed so great, that it
carried the mists and smoakes from the sight of our men upon their enemies.

Now a piece of Ordenances shot out of Ali his Admiral Galley, and ans wered by
two other shot from the two wings, was a sign for to assail our men with a
mighty seese. So then they making an hideous cry mended their course, rowing
toward our men a maine which being descried by Venerio, he strengthened his
Gallie at the puppe with the very well furnished Galleys of John Loredano, and
Catharino Malipetro. And Colonna did the like, calling two other unto his
defense: and now they were come so near together, that one might reach another
with their Ordenance, wherefore our six Galeazes who went before all the rest
of the fleet, very lustilie assailed the enemy with continual thu^der of
shot. And because they never missed, they made such a slaughter and spoil,
that they laid the greatest foundation of breaking the enemies, and the nearer
they approached, the more mischief they did them. In this terrible storm of
the Ordenance, the enemies could not repair themselves, wherefore being
stricken with fear, they kept not their cankes, yet they reselued to go
forward with obstinate hearts, that passing between our Galeazes, who they
thought had borne no Ordenance on their sides, they might enclose the rest of
our Navy. And when they passed between them, our men began to thunder upon
them ten times worse: and did indomage them so much the more, as they were
stayed and their course hindered by the wind that blew against them, for that
being a little augmented did let them, so that they could not soon pass beyond
the storm of mighrie pellets, and also it carrying all the smoke upon them,
made them that they could see almost nothing, and that also gave our men that
shot their great Ordenance lustily out of the Galeazes, time for to recharge
and shoot off their pieces again, with whom almost the third part of their
Navy was destroyed and broken, not without the death of many men. So that now
our men heard a mighty cracking and noise of the falling down of Masts and
sail yardes, and of the Galleyes broken trauerse and drowned, many Galleys
were seen light in fire, and other stood destitute of masters to guide the
healme. Moreover, there was seen an infinite number of men, oars, and sail
yards, barrells, hogsheads, and all sorts of weapons swimming in the sea: and
therefore was this accident most worthy of wender, because these six Galeazes
alone (the use of whom had never ben before found out in sea fight) did make
such a slaughter and spoil of the enemies by turning themselves round, and
shooting now from the stem, then from the puppe and sides. In this so great a
check, Mehemet Syroch that lead the right wing of the enemies, severed
himself a little from the rest of the fleet, that he might provide for the
safety of his charge, and creeping close to the shore, came against our left
wing. But that being espied by Augustine Barbarigo, he went forth to meet him,
keeping his ranges and araie most exactlie, and taking occasion by the help of
a certain mountain called Mahanguli, did so stop and shut up his way, that
he could not pass by, no not with the least of his vessels.

And Marino Contarini, the Nephew of Baibarigo, understanding that so great a
number of Gallyes ran against his uncle, made in, and impelled with too good
a persuasion of his own valor, and affinity of blood, rowed in before all
the rest of his fellows: so that the great ordenance thundering on both sides,
a mighty fight was begun in this place.

The left wing of the enemies which Oluzali lead, and our right commanded by
Doria, were almost joined sogether: but that both the Captains being very
skillful in sea fight, did either expect some occasion to be ministered to have
a fair hand, but by diverse and differing means. For Oluzali being ready
both for fight and policy, observed which way the victory inclined, but
Doria because he knew himself far inferior in forces, for that Oluzali had
ninety Galleys, and he himself but fifty, held his enemies in suspense as
much as he could: for the which reason he made out into the Sea, with certain
of his Gallyes, almost a mile from the rest of his wing.

In the middle battle, Don John, Colonna, and Venerio, keeping their ranges
very well and close, had with their battle met with the middle battle of
their enemies: but yet before they came to hand strokes, they had shot off
their great ordenance twice or thrice, yea, and some of them five times, which
was both a great terror, and also a detriment to the enemy: and so much the
more in truth, because that many of their pieces would not go off, by reason
(as it was afterward found) that our men had shot their Gunstones into them:
and again, those that would go off, could little endomage our men, because
the deckes of our enemies Galleys were so much higher than ours, that although
they did level their pieces a little downward, yet the shot did always fly
over our Gallyes. But notwithstanding these incommodities, they like men in a
rage, rowed in still, and joined with our men, at which time there arose a
mighty tempest of arrows and small shot, and all the whole sea seemed to
burn, by reason of so many arteficiall fires cast on the one side and the
other by diverse engines. And now in some places, four Galleys encountered
with three, and sire with four, and in other also six with one, and one
leaping into the other Galleys, made a great slaughter with swords, daggers,
knives, battleaxes, arowes, wild fire, and other short weapons: and also when
many would for diverse causes retire themselves, they were hurledhead long
into the Sea, the which was thereby now become as red as blood.

In the mean time Syroch had in the right wing of the enemy felt the force
of our valyant men of the left wing, and saw that he could not effect that
which he had thought to have done, because he beheld his Galleyes to lie
broken, their Sail yardes, and Masts fallen down, and other things carried up
into the air by the shot of our great Ordenaunce.

Wherefore he endeavored to his uttermost, to keep his men in their duty,
but yet for all that ever he could do, many of his galleies at length
coveting to escape out of so great a slaughter and garboile, and to save
themselves, ran headlong for have on the shore: after which mischance most
leaped into the Sea, that they might escape into the maine by swimming, but
many being wounded, and many unskillful of swimming, or else hindered and
impeached by some other means, stayed still because they had some hope in the
clemency of the Christians, that they would save their lives. At the which
place this old manner of the nation of the Turks, which is now plainly become
a custom, is worthy of noting. For at the beginning of an encounter they do
show singular fierceness, with a most vehement feese: but a little while
after, when they do perceue yt they are stoutly resisted, they casting away
courage, betake them to flight. And certes, at this time they could not hope
for help of their infinite number of footmen and horsemen, as they are wont in
battles by land. Wherefore when they could not withstand the valor of the
Christians, who having entered their galleys, slew all they found, they within
short time forsook their Galleys, and ran away: at the which time the
Christians that had been before prisoners in the Turkish Galleys, perceiving
that now they were come into the hands of our men, taking the Turks their own
weapons, brake of their chains and manackles, and valiantly revenged the
cruelty of the tyranny which they had suffered until that instant. Mark
Quirmi, and Antony Canali, who were in this same wing, but in an other part,
made out, but yet they could not so soon shut in this wing of thenimies, but
that they had first all leaped into the sea. Yet all the galleies were taken by
our men, and those that were left in them were all slain, for to revenge their
cruelty. But of our Captains there died in this left wing Marino Contarini,
Vincent Quirini, and Andrew Babarigo. But Augustine Barbarigo being shot into
the eye with an arrow, received a deadly wound, the which did incontinently
bereave him of his speech, of whose death we will speak hereafter. Also Mark
Antony Ciconia, was very sore hurt with wild fire.

In the middle battle Don John de Austria encountered with Ali himself, and
two other Captains that commanded Admiral Galleys. And Ali had in his
Admiral Galley three hundred Ianizars, with harquebusses, and an hundredth with
crossebowes, who fought all very valiantly both with shot and swords. And
again with Don John were four hundred chosen harquebuziers of Sardinia, under
the conduct of Lopes de Figheroa camp master, and many other Gentlemen and
valiant men besides, ye fought with great prowess. Colonna plied with might
and pain to lay a board the Galley that encountered him, and was vehemently
stirred up thereto, because he saw a mighty slaughter of his enemies
committed by his fellows before his face. Neither did also Veneiro less
execute the duty of a good Admiral, for that his Gallie was to fight with
three principal Captains of the enemies, and seven Admiral Galleys, to
whose succor also did other ever and anon come. But in the mean time when
the great Commendador of Messina, saw that our three high Admiralls were to
fight with such a great number of ye enemies, he taking with him the Galleys of
Loredano and Malipetro, went thither with a great speed and valor, and
thrusting into the midst of the troop, committed a great slaughter. But
Loredano and Malipetro entering into the thickest of the fight, like valyant
men, were straight way slain with the ordenance: but the rest that were in
their Galleys were so far from being dismaide with their death, that they
rather having increased their courage, and after a sort, their strength, with
desire of revenge and anger, began to fight ten times more fiercely: so that
within short time they had taken two Galleys of the enemies, and so many had
Veniero and Colonna overcome, that fought with them. And almost at the very
same moment Don John of Austria, who until now had borne the charge and force
of five Galleys, and had, conquered three of them, did take the Admiral royal
of Ali, who^ he had slain, but had been before beaten thrice out of her with
great slaughter, after that he was come as far as the mast. So then whe^n
Ali was slain our men joyfully cried, victory, victory, for although then
had done the like before, yet it was then doubtful, because both sides yet
fought most eagerly, and very great spoil and slaughter was yet committed on
both sides. But now the enemies resisted our men no more, so that they did
acknowledge them for victors: wherefore our men were now busied in gathering
together the pillage, and rather in binding than killing the enemies. And now a
very great number of principal men had been either taken or slain by our men,
but almost an infinite number of Ianizars and other soldiers, insomuch that
they only escaped, that foreseeing the entire destruction of their fleet by
the pitiful spoil that the Galeazes made, had fled away at the very
beginning of the battle in skiffes and other small vessels, as Portau Bassa
did: who straight after the beginning of the fight, stale away priuitie into
the maine in a small vessel, and saved himself by flight. There died also of
our Captains in this middle battle John Loredano, Catherino Malipetro,
Hierome Veniero, Fances Bono, John Baptista Benedicto a Cypriot, and James
Tresino of Vicenza, and there were wounded, John Bembo, Theodore Balbi, the
Prior of Messina, and many other noble men and knights.

In the left wing of the enemy, when Oluzali understood that his fellows were
discomfited, and perceived that he might be assailed and broken by Doria, who
did now acknowledge the happy event of this battle, began diligently to
consider what means he might make to save himself. Wherefore seeing certain
of the Galleys of our right wing divided and separated from the rest, he
taking hold of that occasion, valiantly charged them. But cur men received
them very courageously, trusting not so much to their own strength, as they
assuredly hoped for speedy succor from their fellows. But Doria, who I told
you before had made out into the Sea with a part of his wing, that he might
suspende Oluzali from fight,) was too far off for to come to succor them
presently: but he had prudently fet a compass as far as the Galleaze of
Pitano, that he might assail Oluzalion the back. But when Oluzah had perceived
him, and saw that he prepared to come against him with many of his own
Galleies, and other of the left wing, he passingly plagued these few that he
had assailed, and suddenly flying up into the sea, fled away with many of his
Galleys. But he had also taken of our Galleys, and being tied to his galleys,
had dragged after him, the galleys of Peter Bua of Corfu, of the Prior of
Messina, and of Jews Cipico of Trau. In this forious and fierce conflict,
Benedict Soranzo, although he had received three wounds in his face, yet he
fought most valiantly, and with a few men defended his galley a good long
while, until that the forces of the enemies being mightily augmented, they
took away from him with his Galley his life also, for a sacrifice unto Christ:
Neither yet was his death unrevenged, for when the enemies were entered into the
Galley, there was a fire kindled in the munitions, wherewith the Galley was
consumed, and the enemies cast into the air. There dyed here also besides
Soranzo, Hierome Contarini, Mark Antony Lando, Mark Antony Pasqualigo, James
Medi, George Corneli and Peter Bua. But among them yt were grieuosly hurt, was
Jews Cypico of Trau. For after he had fought valiantly, and had but only six
men left him, and had receaned seven very great wounds, he being at the last
vanquished, was carried away with his galley. But he and the Prior of Messina,
were soon succored, and rescued, and their Galleys taken away from Oluzali,
who had towed them after him, as taken prisoners, and they themselves were
brought back again alive.

In this encounter with Oluzali, there were much endamaged besides these, a
galley of Sauoy, an other of Florence, and a third of Spain: and although both
in this wing, and also in other places, many of our men had been grievously
hurt and stain, yet so great was their valor, that with the aid of Gods
goodness, they lost not one galley, but that of Peter Bua of Corfu, which was
carried away by the enemy, And now at ye 21. hour the enemy was utterly
broken. and overcome, so that the rest of the Galleys that remained were all
taken by our men without resistance. But they could not pursue Oluzali, because
it was almost night, and also for that he being got up into the maine Sea was
said to be gone too far for to be recovered.

But this now was a most memorable and horrible spectacle, that all the sea was
seen red of blood, and almost an infinite number of dead carcases were seen
swimming therein, and a wonderful number of cries were heard of the wounded
and swimming men, as well of the one side as the other, calling for help: yea,
and oftentimes our men and the enemies would at one time take hold of one
piece of wood, seeking thereby to save themselves, with such shriking,
roaring, and pitiful cries every where, as would have amazed a man, and all
these things seemed to be so much the greater and more pitiful, as the air
waxed darker by the approach of night.

After that the Fleet of Oluzali was now come into our men's hands, they fell
to getting and gathering together of the prise and pillage: and therein they
spent that little of the day that was left, and at evening went merrily with
the Ottomanicall spoils into certain Havens called Petalici.

And this was the success of this battle by Sea, which doubtless was very
great: for since Augustus his time, there was not so great a battle fought by
Sea. And this victory of ours ought to be esteemed the more worthy of
admiration, because it befell unto us near to that place where Augustus Caesar
did long before discomfite Mark Antonie at the foreland of Actium, where now
Preuesa is. Neither does it also less make for the augmentation of the renown
of this famous victory, that although they fought but only four hours, yet
they trod to pieces the head of that great Serpent of the East, and brake the
strength of Selim, that most mighty tyrant.

The first hour of the night after all our whole Navy was brought into the
Haven through the singular industry of our Captains, there suddenly arose so
great a wind, and so great a tempest, that the inhabitants of that place did
affirm, that they never in all their lives felt the like. But our men lying
there safely, were so careful for the healing of the sick and wounded, that the
Captains did take them into their own cabines.

Now to grow to an end, singular was the wisdom and diligence of our three
high Admiralls, Don John de Austria, Mark Antonie de Colonna, and Sebastiano
Venieri, in learning out the state and intent of the enemy, and also their
industry in sage consulting and discreet appointing what should be done: and
then again, no less praise worthy was the dexterity and readiness of the
rest of the Captains in the execution. And in particular, the Marquis de Santa
Cruz, that lead the battle of succor, showed rare prudence in sending of
succor with singular speed unto those that were oppressed by the enemy: and
finally, wonderful was the valor of the common Soldiers in the action and
fight. And to conclude, all that were there present at this battle, and
fought for the name of Christ their savior, if they be alive, may glory that
they were pertakers of this so great a victory: but if they lost their lives
there, they do enjoy the rest of the blessed, and having exchanged this
mortal life for immortal, do possess the true fruit of the victory: the
which may be a great comfort to their parents and kinsfolk. For seeing that
we do know that no man can be borne immortal of mortal parents, the only
way to obtain immortal life, is to get glory and praise by virtue and
valor. The number of those that were slain on our part, as far as could be
understood, were 7656. and they were these.

Augustine Barbarigo, the high Prouiditore of the Venetians, who having as I
told you before, lost the use of his tongue by a wound, when he understood
that our men had obtained the victory, lifting his hands up to heaven, did
declare the valor of his heart by evident signs, and three days after the
battle, dep^rting out of this mortal life into heaven, carried with him the
triumph of the Turkish tyranny.

Seventeen Captains of Galleys. Eight men in complete armor. Five
Chaplains, Priests. Six Contes of Galleys. Five masters of Galleys. Six
Scribes. Seven Pilots. A hundred and thirteen Gunners. Thirty two shipwrights
appointed to repair the Galleys. A hundred and four and twenty Mariners.
Nine hundred and five and twenty voluntary soldiers. Two thousand, two
hundred, three score and fourteen rouers. A thousand, three hundred, thirty
and three, common soldiers. Two thousand of the Spanish fleet dead. Eight
hundred in the Popes fleet.
But on the other side there were of the enemies slain or taken, nine and
twenty thousand, nine hundred, four score and ten, that is to wit.

Thirty four Captains of the dignity of Sanzaches.

An hundred and twenty Captains of Galleys.

Five and twenty thousand Ianizars, voluntary foot men and rowers.

Three thousand, eight hundred, forty six taken.

Our men did take 117. common Galleys, and thirteen small, and all of them
very well furnished with bread, tallow, butter, rise, beans, and other such
kind of victuals, and the same night they carried them away with them into
the Haven. Besides these, there were drowned, or otherwise destroyed about
four score of the enemies galleys: and those that escaped were thought to be
almost forty. Which things being thus dispatched, our men lying safe in the
Haven, praised God for giving of them so great a victory, and kept it holy
day for the space of three days, showing sundry signs of rejoicing, and
making good cheer. Neither did they in the mean time omit any of those
things that might make for the reparation of their Galleys, or for the pursuit
of the fruit of the victory. For the which cause when they had tarried in
those Havens, until the fifteenth of October: yet by reason of the adverse
season of Winter at hand, and because many of their wounded men did daily drop
away by death, they thought good to depart from thence. For Don John, because
he thought that no memorable thing more could be done that year, would
sail toward Messina, but did put them in great hope, that he would join his
forces with the rest the next year. But in truth he did not so, neither the
next year, nor next after that: so that the Venetia^s after yt they had spent
in these wars 14000. li. of gold (every pound containing 100. Ducats) were
forced to by peace of the Turk, who also having repaired his Navy, did in
Anno. 1574. conquer the kingdom of Tunes from the Spaniard, and his vassal
king, slaying above 10000. Hyspaniards in the Guletta and Biserta. So that the
fruit that the Christians gained by giving this great overthrow, was nothing
but the recovering of an obscure town or two that Winter by the Venetian
Fleet, besides the stay of the Turkish prosperous course, and the prise and
spoil gotten in this battle, the which when they came to Corsu, they divided
by common consent, as follows.

Galleys.
The Pope had nineteen common Galleys, and two small. The king of Spain 58.
common Galleys with an half, and six small Galleys and a half. The Signorie
of Venice 39. common Galleys and a half, and four small galleys and an half.
Great Ordenance.
The Pope had nintene great pieces, and of pieces that shot stones three,
lesser pieces. 42. The King of Spain fifty eight great pieces and an half,
eight pieces to shoot stones in, and 128. lesser pieces. The Seignorie of
Venice had 39. great pieces and an half, five stone pieces, and an half, 86.
lesser pieces.
Prisoners.
The Pope had 881. The King of Spain had 1713. The Signorie of Venice 162. The
chief men of name takn prisoners, were the Sanzaches of Alexandria, and
Nigreponto, and two of All, the Admiralls sons.
The Battle of Alcazar, fought in Barbary, between Sebastian King of
Portugal, and Abdelmelec the King of Marocco, the fourth of August 1578. Taken
out of a namelesse Portugal auctor, translated into Latin by Thomas Freigins.
THat ye may the better understand what the principal Persons that were
present and fought at this Battle were, and also to know the quarrel and cause
thereof, I have thought good to insert mine auctors whole History, not
omitting his, as it were pleasant and profitable preamble of the foundation and
family of these mighty Kings that reign now at Marocco.

The founder of that family and house, which are now Kings of Marocco, and the
first king of that stock, was a certain Moore of the Mahometicall
superstition, called Muley Mahamet Xeque. His father Muley Xarif, being
accounted in his country of Mecha in Arabia, the chief man of the Moors (as
he that was descended of the blood and line of the damned and cursed false
Prophet Mahomet) had heaped together an immeasurable mass of money, and great^
innumerable treasure. He being moved by I know not what dream, did take
occasion to depart out of his Country, and to get him into Africa with all
that he had. Wherefore that he might bring to effect that which he had
determined with himself, he going from Mecha with his only son, whom we
spoke off before, and travailing all Egypt and Africa, and other regions
subject to the Turkish Empire, came at last into that part of Barbary that is
at this day called Sus. In this Country when Muley Xerife had gotten a great
opinion of wisdom (as touching their sect and religion) among the Moors of
Barbary, and had obtained a singular surpassing fame throughout the provinces
there* defiled with the superstition of Mahomet, he wanne also the grace and
favor of the Alarbes (that do dwell in this Barbary) and namely of those
that did inhabit in the kingdom of Sus. Hereby it came to pass that within
short time he had gotten about a thousand horsemen to be as it were his
clients, vassalls, or reteiners at command: that I may pass over in silence a
great number of servants and ordinary waiters, that still attended on him
with horse and armor. Through the help of these men and many other that did
afterward join with him, he took certain Cities of that kingdom, and made
them subject unto him. But in all tourneies he carried about with him his son
Muley Mahamet Xeque, that the people subdued might be sworn unto him, and
promise to do all those things that faithful subjects doc^^^e ^o perform
unto their Princes. And in deed both the Father and the son did so stir
them about their business, that within short time they had gotten them that
power and strength, that they took by force Turodant, the head City of the
kingdom of Sus, and there the son Xeque was constituted king of that
Country. This victory did mightelie augment the power and courage of this n^w
king. Wherefore he ordained a strong legion of eight thousand pike men, with
purpose to attempt the City of Marocco, where the Marines reigned. Wherefore
leaving his Father in Sus, who being now broken with age, had become unable to
do any service, besieged Marocco with five hundred harquebussiers, and 7000.
pikemen that he brought with him. The twelfth day of the siege, the city
yielded, and taking also other cities, towns, and fortresses adjoining to
Marocco, took upon him the name and style of king of Marocco and Sus.

A few days after, he assembling a mighty army, besieged the city of Fes:
the which no man resisting, he tooks with the only terror of his mighty
army, the king thereof (whose name was Claude) providing for himself by
flight, and withdrawing into the city of Tremissen, which was then subject
unto him (for the Turk had as then nothing to do there) where he also spent
all the short time of his life that remained. But as soon as Xeque was
proclaimed king of Fes, all the cities, towns, and villages of that kingdom,
swear him homage and fealty, and subjected themselves unto him, and the like
did other Nations near, and came under his obeisance of their own accord, and
yielding him the victory without sweat or blood. So that the limits and
bonds of his kingdom were on the East Tremissen (which at this day is subject
unto the Turk) and beyond mount Clario, in old time Atlas, toward ye South,
the line that goes by the province of Figiga, a slope even to Zahara (actie
taken by the king of Portugal) and from hence toward the West the space of
forty leagues from the coast of the Atlantike Ocean (now Golsode Ynegas)
looking toward the Canaries. On the West the coasts and forelands of Aguesio,
Cafi, Azamor, Sala, Larissa, Letuams, all fronter cities of that kingdom, even
to the straites of Gibaltar, toward Ceuta, Penon, and Melilla (which cities ye
Catholic king of Spain possesses at this day) and from hence even to
Tremessen. Over all these Countries long and broad* did Muley Mahamet Xeque
reign, and his father being shortly after dead, held thempire alone, and was
the first king of M^^^^^^ (...) that house.

When Muley Mahamet had reigned many years after in passing great quietness
and peace: and was also desirous that his sons might enjoy peacebly the
kingdoms that he had gotten: being now grown in age, and laden with years,
he assembled the princes, noble men and governors of the provinces, subject
unto him, that thorough their counsel, he might the more maturely and wisely
set an order, for the succession of his sons. But although he had a great
number of them, as well lawful as bastards, yet we will speak in this place
only of them, which were cause of troubles and stirs in this kingdom, who
were in number four. Of whom theldest, borne in lawful wedlock, was called
Muley Abdallas, the second and youngest of the lawfully begotten, were called
Muley Abdelmunen, and Muley Abdelmelec: the youngest of all was a bastard,
called Muley Hamet, who does at this day possess the kingdom. But when the
peers of the kingdom were come together at the city of Marocco (the Kings
seat) and the King had proposed the matter unto the Parliament: it was inacted
by common consent, that the Kings sons should one succeebe an other,
according to their age, so that the right of the kingdom might come unto them
all, and thereby all cause of strife and contention among them, might be taken
away. This decree made by the princes, did the King like and allow, and
commanded that it being confirmed by his aucforitie, should be kept inviolable
by all their posterity: and wrought so much, that the Princes and principal
men of the kingdom did swear, to do their best, that it might remain stable
and firm for ever. But not only the Peers, but also the kings sons did
take that oath: for there was no man that gainesaied this law, or was of any
other mind and opinion. Whereupon Muley Abdallas (because he was the kings
eldest senne) was immediately after nominated in the camp Prince and heir of
all his Fathers kingedomes, and all men were sworn unto him.

These things being thus ordered and ordained, the old Ling, because ye he
himself (as he had of long time used) lay still in the City of Marocco, he
sent the new Prince for to govern the kingdom of Fesse, as the people of the
Country had requested. When he came to Fes, and was received very dutifullie
of the Citizens, he began his government over them very kindly and
courteously, showing him self very affable and gentle unto the people of the
province, and promising much more lenity and gentleness in time to come.
Within few days after, when Muley Mahomet Xeque flourished in great peace,
there happened a tumult in the province of Sus, which forced him for to leauie
an army for to repress the insolent. Having gotten together all things
necessary therefore, he departed out of Marocco with many horsemen, footmen,
and harquebuziers, and marched toward Sus. Now a few days before, 500.
Turks had come to him from Tremissen, with their Captain (whom they do call
in their language Alcaida) who counterfaited that they had run away out of
the garrison of Tremissen, but in v^^ie truth, they did it, that they might
dispatch out of the way (the which they did indeed) the king of Marocco, For
when they came to Marocco, the king that thought they had come to serve him,
caused them presently to be put in wages, and to follow him to the wars in
Sus. So they went forth with the king, marching with him a long journey toward
Sus, but when they were come to ye confines of those two kingdoms, they hasten
their purpose of murdering the king. Wherefore about a 15. or 20. of the most
audacious and despera^^st fellows, faining as though they had I know not what
to move the king of, entered his pauillion, and finding him fit for their
purpose, slew him and cut off his head after he was dead. This so sudden and
so unthought of a treacherous and villanc as part, stirred up a great tumult in
the camp between the Turks and the Moors (of whom the one favored the
great Turk, the other Muley Abdallas) and the matter at last came to that
pass, ye within one hours space, above 1000. Moors were slain, and not
passing fifty Turks. Who seeing themselves oppressed with the multitude of the
Moors, withdrew them (yet still keeping their face toward themmies, and
defending themselves into thick woods, and tops of mountains of hard
access. But when the Moors did also assail them there, and the Turks
perceived that they labored in vain to save themselves, and namely, seeing
now their victuals began to fail them: they set fire to seven barrells of
Gunpouder, that they had set round about them, chosing rather to destroy
themselves by furious fire, than to come into the hands of the Moors their
enemies.

But the kings army was also constrained to return to Marocco, where the
Prince Muley Abdallas (although that he was then in the City of Fes) was
again proclaimed king. But he, as soon as he heard of his Fathers death, went
forth of Fes, and when he bare him as king, there was none of the provinces ye
did not willingly and gladly receive him. Whereupon within few days after, he
gathered a mighty army of many Nations (who offered him their service) with
the which he marching to Marocco, was received of the Citizens with surpassing
joy, honor, and gratulation. For whilst his Father was yet living, he had
perceived the singular favor and good will of his subjects, and found it also
after his death: because as long as he lived, he sought for nothing else but
golden peace, and the quietness of his subjects, and to keep them happy and
blessed, without any harm. Whereby he gathered together so great riches and
treasure, as scarce any king that ever lived before him had gotten. So
Abdallas reigned alone certain years, and kept his Court by turns, one year
at Fesse, and two at Marocco, until such time as he made an heir apparent,
and instituted a successor.

After Abdallas had reigned long time in singular quietness, and had alone
used and exercised the supreme rule and government, he determined with himself
to abrogate and disanul the law, ye his Father with the peers of the kingdom
had made, for the succession in the crown: which should in order still descend
always to ye elder brother living. And although that Abdallas did priuelie and
secretly practice it, with those in whom he reposed greatest trust, yet
notwithstanding the matter came at length to the notice of his brothers: of
whom some being careful of their lives, and fearing to be made away by some
treachery, fled out of the kingdom, as Abdelmunen and Abdelmelec, who not
without passing great peril (because there were many privy awaites laid for
them in their journey by the servants of their brother Abdallas) fled to
Tremissen. And being there, they were courteously entertained by the Turks,
as young Gentlemen of the blood rotall. And anon after they withdrew
themselves to Argier, that they might live more safelte there, under the
defense of the Turkish Emperor. When Muley Abdallas, who as we told you
before, priuelie compassed the murder of his brothers, that he might safely
leave the kingdom to his sons, heard that they sought to save them selves by
flying out of the Country, he dissembling his anger (for it grieved him at
the heart that some of them had escaped) least the rest of his brothers should
be also afraid, gathered together all his forces out of hand, under pretense
of going to the City of Fes.

Wherefore being first encamped before the City of Marocco, and anon after
his Camp removed, as though he would go to Fes: When he heard that his
Brothers were come to salute him, he leaving his youngest brother (whose
childish years he contemned) stayed for them fear days journey from the
City of Fes.

So then when they were come together, and had saluted one another, it
happened that a littie while after, they suspecting no ill, nor fearing any
falschoode, were with monstrous cruelty all three beheaded in their Tents*
The which thing did not prick the kings subjects a little at the heart, but
deeply pierced it, yet they were forced to dissemble their sorrow.

After that he had done this so Tragical an act, he finished his journey to
Fes, to the intent for to thrust his son Muley Mahomet upon the Fessans for
their Prince and sole heir of all his kingdoms, and so force them to swear
faith and obedience unto him. For although he had other children and in deed
more worthy of the Empire, yet because this was his eldest, and also for other
causes, he rathest made choice of him to be his successor. Wherefore as soon
as he came to Fes, he assembling the States, brought the matter to that pass,
that they gave their allegiance to his son, and swear to be true liegemen
unto him, rather constrained by fear, than brought to it by love and good will
toward the Prince, or for any right that he could pretend to the kingdom.
After he had dispatched these matters, and seeing ye al things had succeeded as
he did wish: then, that he, who was now almost broken with age, might pass the
rest of his life in quiet idleness, he returned with his army to Marocco,
leaning his son in the City of Fes for to govern that Province.

Things standing in this state in Barbary, ye two brothers got then to Argier,
for to escape and avoid the fury of their brother Muley Abdallas, and the
younger of them, Muley Abdelmelec went to Constantinople. Where he did serve so
well both by sea and by land, that for his noble courage of heart, and passing
strength of body, he allured many men to his love, and through his valiant
acts and victories gotten of his enemies, he wan the fame of a great name, not
only among the people, but also with the Prince of the Turks himself. The
which thing got him not only singular favor, and honor full of good will, but
also gained him immeasurable riches. That I may omit with what and how great
promises the Emperor of ye Turks loded him, and in how great hope he did put
him, that he would reduce him into his fathers kingdom, out of the which he had been driven by his brothers injury. But Muley Abdelmunen that abode at Argier,
was so simple witted, that by the persuasion of his brother Abdallas he
returned again to Tremissen, whether Muley Mahamet ^e^t three cut throat
villains for to dispatch him out of ye way. And it fell out to, as he would have
it, for when these villains were come to Tremissen, they so well eied
Abdelmunen, ye one fridaie as he was praying in the temple, they wounded him
with an arow, of yt which wound he died within 2. days after, no auctor of the
treachery and villainous fact being known. When news was brought to Abdelmelec
at Constantinople, of the death of his brother, he was very heartely sorry
therefore. Which caused Solomon themperor of the Turks to promise him aid to
recover his kingdom. But that this promise was not performed, ye death of
Sultan Solomon that followed shortly after was the let. But when Sultan
Amurathes, was come to the Empire, (and now reigns over the Turks)
Abdelmelec obtained more favor and credit, then ever he had before. About the
same time, Muley Abdallas fell sick, and dyed within three days after, in the
City of Marocco. His death was concealed and kept close three days, not only
that in the mean time Muley Mahamet (who was then in the city of Fes,) might
be certified of the decease of his father, and but also least that if his
uncles had known of the death of their brother Abdallas before him) they would
make themselves Princes of the city of Marocco, in the possession whereof, the
state of the kingdom consisted. But the subjects bare more good will to the
two brothers of Mahamet, although they were younger then he. But when Mahamet
had received news of his Fathers death, he caused himself to be proclaimed
king of Fes, and immediately after went out of the City with an army, and came
to Marocco, the head and Metropolitan city of the whole kingedome, and there,
although the people were unwilling, did assume the dignity royal, no man
resisting nor impeaching him, except only his brother Muley Banacar, whom as
soon as he had ascended the seige royal, he bereft of life. But an other
brother Mule^ Hazar, he cast in prison, and sent certain men to murder his
youngest uncle of all, that then lived at Tasblet. But when he vnderstooee of
the treachery, he sought himself ^^f^tie by flight, and went to Tremissen,
with the household furniture royal. And being thus escaped out of the hands of
the cutthroates, he opened a way for himself to the kingdom. For this is he
th^^ reigns at this present in Marocco, called Muly Hamet. The death of
Abdallas and the (...) of things that had happened in Barbaria, were soon
brought into Turkey, and when Muley Mahamet had with singular diligence,
ordered and appointed those things that seemed unto him necessary for the
establishment of the state of the kingdom: at the same time Abdelmelec used
that diligence, that within few days he came to Argier with mandates of the
Turkish Emperor, in whom it was contained, that the Captains in those parts,
should supply unto him all things needful for the wars. And straightway he
had ready to take the field, five thousand harquebuziers, as well Turks, as
Azuagas, warlike men and well practiced in feats of arms. With these he
marched to Tremissen, taking up by the way so many horsemen of the Alarbes, as
he could get, and gather together. When he came to Tremissen, he was very
honorably received, and there stayed six days for to make provision of all
things necessary for the wars, and he with his younger brother Hamet, whom
he sound there, levied twelve thousand spears, and four hundredth
Harquebussiers on horseback, and took with him out of Tremissen, twelve field
pieces, with victuals, and all other munition. Being furnished with these
forces, he marched to take the City of Fes. But although Muley Mahamet, (who
was that time at Marocco) was certified of the enterprise of his uncle, yet he
did so contemn him, and did so despise his forces in comparison of his own,
that he took no regard thereof, until he saw that the matter was come to good
earnest in deed, and that he understood that Abdelmelec had now assembled
his forces at Tremissen. And then he leuying men in have, and in a hurly,
without choice, encamped a league or two miles from Marocco, and commanded all
the subjects of his kingdoms to repair unto him, spredding a rumor that he
would assail the Christians of Tangar, that by this allurement they might take
arms more cheerfully, because the Moors do desire no wars more, than
those that are kept against the Christians.

These forces being made ready, and furnished with great Artillery, he
commanded them to march toward Fesse, and because the greatest part of his
power had joined with him in his journey, as soon as he came to Fesse, he
mustered his army, which then consisted of four score thousand horsemen with
spear and shield, thirtene thousand footmen, harquebuziers, and four
thousand harquebuziers on horseback, with six and thirty field pieces. At the
same moment that Mahamet did set forth with his army against Abdelmelec,
there came unto him a noble man Ambassador from Sebastian the King of
Portugal, who promised him in his masters Majesty's name, aid against the
Turks, and his Uncle. But Mahamet being made more proud for that he saw so
great an army and so strong under his command, contemned the benefit of the
king of Portugal. Wherefore as soon as he understood that his uncle was
departed from Tremissen, he marched against him with that heat, that their
Armies met between Fesse, and Tremissen, the seuententh of March, in Au.
1576.

The Battle was begone about evening, and the furious tempest continued so
long, until that Mahamets army being wearied both in heart and body, turned
their backs. The fault of that flight was ascribed to one Dugall, who being
Captain of the Andalousians, revolted from Mahamet to Abdelmelec, with two
thousand very choice harquebuziers. The which when Mahamet had perceived
(who as soon as the Battles had joined, withdrew himself a nule off
providing for one, and standing upon a Wagon, did behold the fight a far
off) and was afraid least the rest of the Captains following that example,
would also take part with his enemy: he immediately stole out of his Tent, and
with five hundredth horsemen, posted a pace to Marocco, leaving his Soldiers
to the fury of the enemy, and all his Treasures and riches to the spoil.

So Abdelmelec got the victory, without much sweet or blood, on either side,
and doubtless Mahamet, might have easily defaited and destroyed Abdelmelec
his power with the tenth part of his army. But Abdelmelec having obtained so
famous a victory, sent a good great troop for to pursue and take Mahamet, but
he himself being received with great joy of the Fessans, was proclaimed king
by them, and the rest of the Cities and Towns of that kingdom. And because he
having caught an ague was not well in health, he determined to rest a little
while in ye City of Fes, and there dismissed the Turkish forces which came
with him under the leading of Rabadan Bassa, to the king of Argier. For that
Bassa had no more in his commission but to accompany Abdelmelec to Fesse, and
to put him in possession of that kingdom. So Abdelmelec dismissed all his
Turks, except a few that hid themselves when their fellows went away, that
they might gratify the new king, and become his subjects: who were in number
1500. very valiant and stout men.

But that we may return to Muley Mahamet: as soon as he came to Marocco he
repaired his power, he levied soldiers in all parts of the kingdom, he
opening his Cofers monyed the Captains, rewarded the soldiers, and went
about more diligently to win all men's good will with gifts, than ever he
had done in his life before, having regard and respect of this onelle, that he
might wash out with some notable victory, the shameful blot that his uncle
had given him, and to make amends therefore. So by this carfulness and
diligence, he got together ten thousand harquebuziers scotemen, and a thousand
on horseback, but fresh water soldiers, and besides them thirty thousand
horsemen with spear and sheelde. The which forces, with four and twenty
field pieces, he brought into the field, and provided so much victuals as was
needful for that journey. But if happened that also at this second muster the
king of Portugal sent again an Ambassador unto him, with Letters, and again
offered him aid against Abdelmelec his uncle. But he made the very same
answer to the second Ambassador that he did to the first: but that he
mustering all his whole army, brought it in the sight of the Ambassador, that
his master might understand that he had no need of the Portugalls.

When Abdelmelec had a little recovered himself of his ficknesse at Fesse, and
had augmented his army with six thousand harquebuziers, after the departure
of the Turks, (whereof we told you before) he lead forth his army with
purpose to march toward Maroccco, for he had heard that Mahamet was in the
field with a mighty army. And because he began to be now a little better, he
being carried in an horse litter marched toward Marocco with six thousand
harquebuziers, twenty thousand horsemen with spear and sheeld, two thousand
argolets, with twenty field pieces. On the other side Mahamet being advertised
of his uncles intent, went very speedily out of Marocco with great have, and
heat to fight, and to try the right of a kingdom with the peril of his
life. And because the narration of the order and araie of the battles which
they both used, makes almost nothing for the thing that we do purpose, we will
comprehend all the whole History in few words. So in a certain valley three
leagues from the river of Sala toward the West, a long the sea coast, in a
place called Motha Arracahana, they encamped, where the 29. of June at three of
the clock in the after noone, a cruel and a bloody battle was fought, in
the which the victory inclined now to Mahamet, and then to Abdelmelec his
party. But Abdelmelec being a wise and a skillful Captain, when he saw that
night was at hand, and that his men, although they had a long time laid on
with might and maine, could not obtain the victory, and that his enemies
resisted stoutly, he going out from the midst of his band, and vambrashing
his semitarre in his hand, compelled his soldiers with thick blows to renew
the charge, and he himself being seen among the foremost, ran in upon his
enemies with such force and violence, that he forced them to turn their
backs shamefullie, of whom Mahamet was the first that ran away.

The victours in this last battle slew above six thousand. But Abdelmelec
sent his brother Hamet for to pursue Mahamet with certain light horsemen, but
he himself after he had stayed a while for the burying of the dead, marched
toward Marocco with his whole army.

Mahamet seeking safety by flight, came to Marocco, not without the great
infamy of his men, followed by a six or eight spears, and then going into
the plain, he took out as much treasure as could be commodiouslie carried
away, and laid it on five Mules, and staying in the City not above two
hours, betook him again to flight, hasting to escape his uncles troops that
were not far off. Being thus departed out of the City with a few horse men,
he hasted a fling on the spur toward Mount Atlas (now Clario) which being
six leagues from Marocco, is the sanctuary and refuge of proscribed and
banished men and thieves. But leaving Mahamet in the mountains of Clario, let
us return unto Abdelmelec. He as soon as he had gathered together the spoils
of the vanquished enemies, marched with all his army to Marocco, and being
arrived there the eight day after the victory, was received with so great
pomp and joy, as never was seen before in those Countries, for he had gotten
a great fame, to be a good, courteous, affable, and pitiful man toward those
in calamity, and was also very well furnished with many other virtues: Then
again, the insolency and tyranny of Muley Hamet, made Abdelmelec the more
gracious and better beloved of all men. As soon as he was entered into the
City (which was the xv. of Iulie, in the same year) he began to set in order
the politic state of the kingdom, that he might show himself to be not
only valiant in arms, and the field, but also singular in wisdom for
framing of a public weal. For he abrogated many laws and statutes, made by
his ancestors, he used passing great courtesy and gentleness toward his
subjects, he also gave great gifts and largess, and divided victuals among the
people: applying all his actions to this end, that he might by these means
extend his same, and get himself immortal glory above all the kings of
Africa, that went before him. Although at the first he was nothing gracious,
specially because that the people were offended with the unreasonableness and
unruliness of the Turks, that he had with him, because yt they (as they are
proud, unruly, intolerable, and lawless) did very licentiously oppress
the poor Moors wc many grievous injuries and violences: but the king did
soon rid the Country of them, sending them away by little and little, and by
two and by three at a time, so yt at the length there remained not above 200.
whom yet he kept from his company and sight, and being brought into order,
constrained them to live quietly, and without doing harm. The which thing
made his subjects to turn their love toward him, and they bing moved with the
only fame of his virtue, did offer themselves unto him most humbly, and
promised him due obedience, and finally, they with liberal and bountiful
minds brought him a vie great, rich, and honorable gifts and presents, out of
all parts and provinces. There were also not a few Christian Princes, that did
take singular joy of his friendship: and he also on the other side received
them into his friendship with a most loving heart, and did think himself
flourishing in their familiarity and favor to be a happy and blessed man:
insomuch yt many Christians did continually and out of all quarters repair
unto his kingdom, whom he did more love, and made more of, than he did of any
other kind of men yt used to come into his countries. For he gave the^ many and
great beneuolences, and used the^ with wonderful courtesy and gentleness, he
also dismissed many free without ransom, gratis, of an unwonted benificence.
But I will not dwell long upon this his liberality and magnificence, namely,
seeing that his noble works are very well known to the whole world, through
the public report of fame. But after he had obtained the royal throne, the
first thing he did, was to appoint who should succeed him in the kingdom,
and to confirm the law made by Muley Mahamet Xeque his Father: and therefore
he swore all the peers of the kingdom unto his brother Muley Hamet, although
that he himself had a son, but yet of tender age, whom he might have
nominated to be his successor. The which thing, although it held the nobility
in suspense with admiration, yet incontinently incredible feasts and triumphs
were kept in honor of the new Prince, and memory of the old law, and also
the memory of his granfather Xarif was honorably mentioned and renewed by ye
peers. In the mean time Muley Mahamet, who had gotten him to the streights of
mount Clario, began straight way to gather together some soldiers, and
among them some outlawes and thieves: insomuch that he had gathered together
five hundred harquebuziers, and two hundredth horse men with sheelde and Spear.

Being furnished with which bands, he began to commit robberies, he spoiled
those that he met, and sacked the villages, and places that lay under mount
Clario, and forced their inhabitants for to acknowledge him for their Lord,
and to pay him tribute, as to their king. These robberyes and roades he used
the space of seven or eight months, so that Abdelmelec was forced to levy
forces for to cool his lustiness, and to drive ye thieves out of the dens of
the mountains. For the doing of the which exploit, he used the service of the
new prince Muley Hamet, who was with a power in the kingdom of Sus, for to
make excursions. He discomfited Muley Mahamet in certain places, and almost
wholly destroyed all his band as well footmen and horsemen, and forced him to
hide himself in the very thick woods, and inaccessible cragges of the
mountain, where he lurked above a year, almost killed with cold, snow, and
other miseries, and the inclemencie of the air, and most miserably molested
and beaten with despair of his life, and fear of awaites, which his Uncle
laid for him, proposing great rewards to him that could bring him either dead
or alive. At length he was driven by necessity, (the sharpest weapon) to that
which he had before refused, and took scorn off: that is, to desire the
aid of the King of Portugal, for to deliver him from the awaites, and hands
of his uncle, and to restore him unto his graund fathers and fathers kingedome.
For the which cause he sent a messe^ger from Mount Clario, with letters unto
the king of Portugal, and willed him to go by Mazaga. But that he might
receive some answer more safely and speadely, he resolved to leave the
mountains, and to get him to Tangar. So through the woods and wildernesses of
the mountains, where the way was very safe, and not beaten with tract of men's
feet, he came without any great danger unto Penon: where after he had stayed
a few days to gather his men together, he went toward Tangar, where he was
courteously received into the City, by the Governor, but leaving his forces
without the walls. From that City he sent two of his Captains in Ambassade
with letters, accompanied with two gentlemen of Tangar, unto king Sebastian,
and desired of him aid for to restore him unto his Fathers kingdom. And
because the governor of Tangar was not ignorant, that if he used the king of
Marocco courteously, that he should thereby well please the king of Portugal,
he dispatched a Carauell to Lisbon with the Ambassadors for their speedier
passage, of whose journey and success, we will speak, after that we have first
admonished the reader of certain things necessary to be known.

King Sebastian being by nature very much given to love of arms, sought for
no other pleasure then by martial matters, which had caused him in former
years to pass over to Tangar, to thentent to conquer Barbary, but with
vain endeavor. For Mahamet, (as we have told you before) had of a vain and
foolish confidence, twice refused aides offered him by the Portugal. But when
the king of Portugal saw that now his aid was desired by the letters of the
king of Marocco, he was very glad that a most wishshed occasion whereby he
might fill his long lust and longing, was offered unto him, who was desirous of
praise, and studious to enlarge his Empire, and Religion. Wherefore he receued
magnificently the Ambassador of Muly Mahamet, being arrived in Portugal, and
granted them their request in all demands, and also wrote letters to Mahamet,
wherein he promised his travail, help, and favor, in restoring him into his
fathers kingdom, no man of his cou^seile, or of the nobility holding much
against it. And this might be the cause of that interview, where the Catholic
king, and the king of Portugal met and talked together, in An. 1578. at
Guadalupea, a city of Castilia. Where the Catholic king labored all that he
could, to fear the king of Portugal from that enterprise: or if he would
needs go through with it, nor could not be disuaded from his purpose, that
then he would do it very substantially, and effectually, providing and
furnishing himself passing well with all things needful for so great an
attempt. But when the King of Portugal continued constant in that he had once
purposed, he returned home: whither anon after the Catholic king sent his
Ambassadors for to deal with him about the same matter that he himself had
talked with him off in presence. For the Catholic king was not ignorant, how
the king of Marocco did surpass in strength and power, and how skilful,
expert, and valiant a warrior he was, and how great power and provision, so
great an enterprise required, whereof he knew that the Portugal was yet fully
unfurnished. But ye king of Portugal remained constant in his purpose, and
began to provide all things necessary for ye voyage. First he made leuies of
souldious throughout his own kingdom, he sent some into Germany to take him
up 5000. footmen. He also wrote letters to certain knights of Andalouzia, to
bring unto him old soldiers. Moreover he commanded great store of
ordenance, wepons, armor, and other munition and victuals to be provided and
brought together, and that all these things might be the more co^modiously
transported, he commanded ships to be stayed in all havens of his kingdom.
The number of the soldiers that he levied in his own kingdom was great, but
they were ill furnished, and freshwater soldiers, taken up of clownes, and
hushandmen, and a rabble nothing fit for the field.

As for the Germans, they were also fresh water soldier, and unskillful of
martial matters, and when they came to Lisbon, they fell sick, and above 2000.
of them died. There came also unto the king, 600. Italians, with whom the Pope
had furnished the Count of Ireland, who being arrived at Lisbon, offered his
service to the king and promised to follow him in ye journey. Moreover the king
caused proclamation to be made with sound of Trumpet, thoroughout his whole
kingdom, that all Noblemen and Gentlemen his vassailes, should attend upon him
to the wars, upon (...) of loss of lands, and rentes, and all privileges
g^^^^ted by the king. So then all things needful for an army being provided,
and sufficient store of ships and boats gathered together, he commanded the
ordenaunce, victuals, munition, horses, and other necessaries to be shipped,
that when the feast of Saint John Baptist, (on which day he had determined to
leave his house) drew near, there might be nothing to let and hinder, but that
the army might be embarked, and transported into Africa.

When Abdelmele^ the king of Marocco was admonished, and advertised of these
things, and what the king of Portugal intended against him: he was very
sorrowful therefore, not so much because he feared the King of Portugal his
forces, as for that he being well affected toward men of the Christian
Religion, did foresee in mind that Africa would be the grave of the King of
Portugal, yea, though he brought with him thrice so great an Army as he had.

Wherefore it is well known that he spoke one day to this effect: The king of
Portugal ought diligent^ie to weigh and think with himself, how just and
lawful a cause he has to come into Africa. For seeing that he ^^eth about to
take the kingedome from him, to whom it dot^ of right appertain, and to give
it to the Negro, and that with no profit nor commodity to the Christians, that
will almighty God, who is a just Judge, never suffer. Furthermore, Abdelmelec,
as he was a man of a sharp wit, and in such matters of surpassing diligence
and providence, began also to make provision for the wars, and to bethink
him of things necessary therefore. Wherefore he commanded Tents to be set up
in a field a league from Marocco, and wars to be openly proclaimed through
his kingdom against the Christians: the which thing highly pleased the Moors.

He also commanded a great number of great Guns, and specially field pieces,
and also infinite store of victuals and of horses and Camells, for to carry
necessaries for their army, to be provided. Which being done, when he heard
that the king of Portugal was now upon the point to go a ship board, and to
ariue at Arzil, he also went out of Marocco the sixteenth day of April with
great applause of the people, and with almost an infinite company of men into
the camp, and kept the army in the Tents, where he stayed twenty days,
looking for the rest of his forces. From hence he marched with Ensigns
displaied by small iourneyes toward Arzill, and that he might the more
commodiouslie join with those forces that he looked for, he stayed a little
while at Temocen, which is in the confines of his kingdom. But the king of
Portugal, who was hot set on his voyage, commanded before he went on
shipboord, processions and prayers to be publikelie made throughout all the
kingdom, that God might vouchsafe to grant happy success to this
enterprise, and victory against his enemy.

At length on Midsommer day the whole army was embarked, and the next day
after very early in the morning, king Sebastian (having nominated before
seven of the chief of the Realm governors of the kingdom) because the
Cardinal his uncle had refused the government, for that he could not entreat
the king to relinquish the voyage, launched out of the Haven, and hoised up
sails the 26. of June, with ten or twelve Galeons, in whom were embarked
almost all the whole Nobility of his kingdom. The sea was passing calm, the
fleet of the whole army launching from Lisbon, was of great and small
vessels about a thousand and three hundredth sail, so pleasant a spectacle,
that many said they never saw such a fleet before, and having a good wind
they arrived at Caliz on Saint Peter's eve. The king being received with singular
gratulation and joy of the people, stayed there fifteen days, for to provide
necessaries that he lacked, and that he might transport with him certain bands
of Spaniards, that were levied for him in Andaluzia. Which things being
dispatched, he departed from Caliz the eight of Iulie, and sailed with the
Galeons toward Tangar, but commanded the rest of the Fleet to keep their
course toward Arzil. So the tenth of Iulie the king arrived at Tangar, but
before he was come into the haven, Mahamet sent his son, a child almost ten
years old, named Muley Xeque, against the king in a small vessel, whom the
king did very gently and courteously salute. But being come on land, he
showed greater signs of good will and friendship to Mahamet, and very
liberally offered his travail and aid for to restore him into his kingdom.
When Mahamet was come to the kings presence, although he had before
sufficiently certefied him both by Letters and Ambassadors of his will and
mind: yet that he might more safely provide for his state, he did then
more-plentifullie and more at large open unto him by speech what he was minded
to do: and did tell him how that his uncle, supported by the power and
strength of the Turk, did usurp the kingdom, the which he had taken from
him by force. He added moreover, that the vassalles and subjects of Abdelmelec
did practice nothing else, and were wholly busied, how they might secretly
kill Abdelmelec, or at the least forsake him, and reuoult to Mahamet, and that
thereof he received daily without intercession Letters from the Peers of the
Realm, in the which Letters they promised to renoult unto him, as soon as
ever he would come against the enemy, yea, and if it were but with a small
power He would also persuade the king of Portugal that he should not fight
with the Abdelmelec, but only go into the field: which thing if he did, then
his uncles soldiers would immediately be at his devotion and command. He
promised also to give the king of Portugal two or three Havens in Barbary,
with their territories adjoining, and for surety thereof he gave his son in
hostage. The king of Portugal as he was a Prince of noble passing good nature,
credited all that Mahamet spoke, and assented to his petition without
conditions, covenants, and sureties. From hence he went with Mahamet to Arzil,
where his army was, and there Muley Xeque was General of his Fathers small
forces, and had with him the horsemen and footmen of the garrison of Tangar.

The king came to Arzil on Sundaie, being the foureteenth of Iulie, and as
soon as he was come on shore, he commanded the Ordenaunce, victual, and
the rest of the warlyke furniture to be disbarked, but sent four ships well
appointed to Massaga, to carry thither Muley Xeque his pledge: but commanded
his camp to be pitched near the walls of Arzill, and it to be entrenched
round with rampires and ditches, that he might lie there the safer.

But that we may return to Abdelmelec: as soon as he came to Temocen, a
great multitude of horsemen that served with sheelde and Spear, and many
other forces joined with him. But three days after he came thither, he fell
very sick, the cause whereof, as then no man understood. But anon after when
he felt a mighty torment in his stomach, it was easily understood whereof
it came: that is, he had eaten greedelie of sour milk, which had curded in
his stomach. That he might cast it up, he assayed in vain two and almost
three days to make himself vomit (as he had used to do) and so at the
length be cast up a great gobbet of Cheese, which made his stomach so weak
and faint, that afterward it could concoct no meat. Also his sickness was
increased by hard and ill lodging. But as soon as he heard that the king of
Portugal was departed from Caliz, to sail to Arzil, although he were at that
time nothing well, yet he commanded his army to march forward toward
Arzil, he himself being carried in an horse litter.

And now he was from Alcazara (where his brother expected him with an army)
not above a days journey, but when he drew near him, his coming was
received with a great peale of great and small shot, in token of joy. And
there he was forced to pitch up his Tents, and to lie there in a Camp
certain days, staying for other forces and to recover his strength weakened
by sickness. Wherefore as soon as those forces that he looked for were come,
he sooke muster of his whole army, and found fifteen thousand footmen
harguebuziers, of whom five thousand were very choice old soldiers, and
the rest fresh water souldioure, and of none experience.

Then he had two thousand Argolets, two and forty thousand Alarbes with sheeld
and spear, and six and twenty field pieces very well furnished, and Gunners
very good and ready. Moreover, all his whole army was very well provided of
victualles, and his soldiers well paid, the which is one of the chiefest
things in wars, and whereof the General ought to have most special care.
So his soldiers were paid every month a Duckate or piece of gold,
wherefore they were also all ready to abide all extremity for Abdelmelec, and
to spendr their lives for him, except the horse men of the Alarbes, whom he
little trusted, as he that was not ignorant that they were full of falsehoode,
nor gave their minds to any thing else than to get booties, and to rob they
cared not whom.

And that I may tell you all in few words, he had more trust in none than in
those five thousand old soldiers harquebuziers. But the thing that grieved
Abdelmelec most, was, that at so great and perilous a battle, whereat he
must needs be present himself and order it, unless he would endaunger the
whole state of his Kingdom, he did find himself to be so weak and quite
broken with sickness, the which the burning Dog days did increase.

Wherefore he lay still there eight or nine days, until that the king of
Portugal constrained him, yea, unwilling for to march forward, and to encampe
at Alcazar. In the mean time the king of Portugal being issued out of Arzill,
and ready to march, mustered his army, wherein (besides the thousand
stipendaries, that he had left to keep the fleet, and the two thousand that
he had sent to Massaga) he had fourteen thonsand footmen, and two thousand
horsemen, a great part armed.

Moreover, there were three thousand pioners, and above a thousand cochmen, and
almost an infinite number of drudges, flaues, Negroes, mullotters, horse boys,
land resses, and those sweet wenches that the Frenchmen do merrily call the
daughters of delight, for now the world is come to that, we think we cannot
keep wars without these snailes. So that all ye insauorie company of baggage
did exceed six and twenty thousand persons. He had also six and thirty
field pieces, and 1500. wagons full of mattes, vessel, and householde stuff
only for noble men. He might in deed have brought a greater power in this
voyage, as well out of Spain as out of other Countries, but that he giving
credit to the words of Muley Hamet, who said that the army of Abdelmelec
would reuoult unto him, he dismissed many Spaniards that would have gone aboard
at Caliz, and did more easily discharge them, that under pretense of
sickness, desired that they might go home. In the army that followed him
were three thousand Germans, six hundredth Italians, two thousand Spaniardes,
sire hundredth Soldiers of Tangar, two thousand five hundredth light horsemen,
in whom he reposed his greatest trust. The rest were Portugalls. And the
greater part of these forces had their wages sparingly and very ill paid
them, and were distressed with want, and many other ills, for now victuals
began to fail, the which were so sparingly distributed, that many died for
hunger.

The fault was in the purueiours, who do full often in the time of wars through
their knauerie, cast princes and generals into extreme calamities. But that
which was worst of all, the greater part of the army consisted of fresh water
soldiers, who were without skill of martial discipline, neither had ever
seen battle or camp. That I may omit those eight thousand that bare long
pikes, then the which kind of soldiers there is none of less use and
service, and more unfit for wars in Barbary. By that time the king of Portugal
had mustered his army, Abdelmelec was come to Alcazar, with an army full of
fury and wrath. Which caused the King of Portugal his Counsel to desire their
Prince in no case to join in battle with his enemies, who did far surpass
him in men and might, but rather that he would march with his army to Larissa,
and take that fortified place, and provide for himself.

But when Abdelmelec knew by espies almost every hour what was done in the
camp of the Christians, and how weak the Portugal forces were, and how
coldly all things were ordered, and therefore did see that the wretchen king
being in the prime of his years, was near to death and desiruction: he
wrought by all means he could, that he should not be forced to fight a
battle, because he was not otherwise very ill affected toward Christians.
Wherefore he labored priuile and secretly by certain men, and they mostly
merchants, to certify the king of Portugal of the guiles and deceits of
Mahamet (that had brought him into these dangers, and so present ruin and
ieoperdie of life.) But although these aduises of Abdelmelec were not unknown
to the king of Portugal, and his counsaillours advised him the very same that
Abdelmelec did, and went about to withdraw him from his purpose: yet he
wilfully contemned all that could be said, not only that he might fulfill
his burning desire to fight, and to try his strength and valiant heart, but
also chiefelie because he trusted the promises of Mahamet, which he believed to
be verse true. To he short, his Counsel labored to their uttermost, to
disuade the king from joining in battle, but rather adeised him to march to
Larissa, and they wrought so much by blaming and brging him, that the king at
length yielded to go to Larissa. Whereupon the Navy was commanded to make
sail toward Larissa, and he himself marched by land the therwards, going out
of Arzil the 29. of Iulie (which was tues day) and three days he marched, but
making small iourneies by reasen of the multitude of haggage that followed the
army, and then he fraied the fridaie, because he looked for some aid from
Arzil. The Saterdaie very early he began to march again, and at length came
to the river of Mazaga, which runs to Larissa, and there he lodged, watches
and wards being diligently appointed and set after his used manner, for fear
of the Moors that were dispearsed round about him.

At that time Abdelmelec remained at Alcazar, very weak and sickly, and
although he heard that the Portugal was gone out of Arzil, and was encamped at
Mazaga, yet he would not stir out of his place, until that he understood by
espies, that his enemies made toward Alcazar. For he would have suffered his
enemy to have taken Larissa, thinking that the Portugal being contented with
the taking of it, would from thence return home. But when he was advertised
that the Saterdaie morning his enemy marched forward, he also at the same time
made toward Arzil by Alcazar. And when he had marched with his army a little
more than half a league (that is, above a mile) he encamped on a certain high
down in the sight of the Portugails, who were a league from that hill, and
were encamped on a great and pleasant plain. And being near to the river of
Alcazar, he commanded his Tents to be pitched on the bank of the river, not
far from confluence of another river that goes to Larissa. After that noone
was past, he and his army refreshed themselves from the heat of the Sun in
their tents, he taking his rest in an horse litter. In the mean time he sent
forth certain horsemen for to bring him more certain news of the en^^ie, and
placed soldiers before the waroes, for to let that none of his people should
fly out of his camp to the Portugal, and Muley Hamet. When the king of
Portugal was come the Saterdaie morning to the river of Larissa, and was
encamped near to the place where he thought there might be a foord found to
pass over his ordena^ce, and was minded to go to Larissa: then Mahamet, a
subtle fellow, ambitions, and deceitful, thinking with himself, that if the
Portugal should enter Larissa, and did consider the power and most puisant
army of Abdelmelec, that then he would return home, and do nothing, and
leave him forsaken and alone to be devoured of his enemies: he resolved to
talk with the Portugal that day, and to dehort him from the journey ye he
purposed toward Larissa: and ye he might the better bring it to pass, ^he
began with a crafty tale to tell him that many Moors horse men had fled unto
him from Abdelmelec, and that the rest of ye army went about to do the same.
That if he should go to Larissa, then all men would blame him, as one
fearful, and such an one as reposed sasetie in running away. That Abdelmelec
was naked of friends: for he handled his Soldiers hardly, and that they
did therefore mind to do him a mischtefe, either by slaying of him, or else
by forsaking him in the battle. That it was better and more wisdom to march
toward Alcazar, namely, seeing that enemy that came against him had not so
much heart as to go about to impeach him.

He added also other arguments making for his purpose, by the which he diss
waded the Portagall from going to Larissa, and to say the truth, it had
otherwise been an hard matter for him to have gone forward, seeing ye his enemy
was so near. The Sundaie morning very early the Portugal removed his camp,
and went up a long the bank of the river, that he might come into the high
way that leads from Arzil to Alcazar, and when he had found a foord, he
stayed, and commanded the pioners to make it ready against the next day.

But Abdelmelec understanding ye intent of the Portugal, caused a sign to be
given by sound of Trumpet, ye every man should make himself ready to fight.
Wherefore in the afternoon he marching forward almost a quarter of a mile,
stayed and commanded his army to breath, until he understood what his
enemy, that was about half a league off, meant to do. For as we have told
you before, Abdelmelec had determined not to join in battle, except the
Portugal did first desire it.

When the Portugal being encamped along the River of Larissa, heard that the
enemy made toward him, he was forced also to remove his Camp, and to put his
people in array of battle, not for to fight, because the fourde of the River
could not be passed over without very great difficulty, and also there was a
great troop of Moors that did continually provoke his men with skirmishes,
but that he might defense himself, and he used the mighty River in steed of
a wall against the enemy. In this sort those two Armies, when either did look
that the other should begin the battle, kept themselves in, the rest of the
day. So when it drew toward night, and Abdelmelec saw that the Portugals
stirred not out of their place, although ye chief Captains were very instant
on him to fight, and to give the signal of battle, yet because night was at
hand, he commanded the retreat to be sounded, and led his Army back to
their Camp. But yet he commanded proclamation to be made in the Camp by
sound of Trumpet, that no man should put of his armor, nor lay down his
weapon that night, and also commanded the watch to be doubled, as he also did
the night before, that no man could fly out of his Camp unto Muley Hamet. And
doubtless this watch was the cause of Mahamets overthrow, because that no man
durst to go out of his ward and tente. In the mean time Abdelmelec was fully
resolved to fight, for seeing he had heard that many horsemen, and men that had
abiured the faith, were fled out of his Camp, and did fear that if he
deferred to fight the next day, that then the greater part of his army would
revolt: he thought that he must stay no longer, but determined to go on
forward, and to adventure the battle. Wherefore he commanded that it should
be signified by a Trumpet, that all men should be in a readiness, and
prepared either to live or die. After that the king of Portugal saw that his
enemies were retired into their camp, he also did the like, and lodged in the
very same place from whence he came. He assembling in counsel the chief men
of the army that night, determined the next day, being mundaie, to offer the
enemy battle. And it is the constant same of all men, that Muley Hamet gave
him counsel to begin the battle the next day in the evening, not so much
because by this means the soldiers of Abdelmelec might the more
commodiouslie rououlf unto him, as for that he could not by reason of the
darkness of the night remedy it, if any confusion did arise in his army.
This counsel as good and wholesome was approved of all men, and therefore the
king commanded that the same night it should be proclaimed in the camp, that
the next day being mundaie, as soon as it was light, the ordenance and the
carriages should be speedily passed over the water through the foorde. For
if they had tarried longer, no doubt the enemies would have impeached their
passage, which also was the cause that the battle was not beg^n in the
evening, but sooner. The foord being made ready, the army straight way
passed over, and they encamped beyond the river, and also the king began to
arange his battles, to set forth his bands, and to dispose his ordenance in
commodious places.

He also made a long Oration to his soldiers, and exhorted the^ with courteous
and loving speech, using also very effectual arguments for to present
themselves to perils courageously, for the honor of God, and the increase of
the Christian Religion, promising them great riches, favor, honors, and
privileges, willing them to have good hope of the victory, specially through
the help of God, in whom he had all his whole trust fixed.

The like did the noble men that followed the king in this voyage do, to their
uttermost, name lie, the Bishops of Coimbra and Portua, and also the Popes
Commissarie, and many other spiritual persons. In these adhortations all the
forenoone was spent. On the other side Abdelmelec seeing the Christians come in
battle araie, he also commanded the signal to be sounded throughout his
camp, and willed the Captains to bring forth their soldiers, and to dispose
them into the order that he had prescribed. And because that he through
sickness was very weak in body, and of color pale and wan, and by reason
of the palsy could in no wise use his arms, the wiser and warier of his
counsailours dehorted him from coming in person into this instant battle: to
whom he would in no case consent, but whereas he had not come on horse his back
in more than twenty days before, he resolved to leave his horse litter, and
to be clothed in most sumptuous apparel, and to be adorned with infinite most
precious stones, and most excellent pearls of ye East, and mounted on a
goodly and lusty strong horse. Being in this sort prepared to fight, he began
to adhort his men to valor, promising honors and great warlike rewards to them
that should behave themselves like men, and do their duties and accomplish
their charges valiantly. With the which words and promises he did so
encourage and inflame his soldiers, into whose sight he had not come long
time before, by reason of his sickness, that they seemed to be inspired by
Mars, and to run to the battle like Lions. And although at the beginning
there were some that went about to murder him, or revolt from him, yet now
they changing their minds, did so subject themselves unto him with all
reverence, that they disdained not, yea to kiss his feet. At length his army
being cast into the form of a semicircle, or croisant, and divided into three
battles, he began to advance his army in that order that this table does
show.

The right wing the Prince, the brother of Abdelmelec did lead, who had with
him a thousand very choice Harquebuziers on horseback noted. He had also ten
thousand horsemen with spear and sheelde. The left wing of the new Moon,
which held two thousand argolets, and ten thousand horsemen with spear and
sheeld. These did the Vireroie Mahamet Zareo lead. The third battle, which
was the maine battle, wherein king Abdelmelec stood, was defenced with
harquebuziers on foot. Thou did the king follow, environed with his guard of
two hundredth soldiers, that had forsworn the faith, who were all weaponed
with halbardes. But he had in the battle of succor twenty thousand horsemen
divided by two thousand in a troop.

But ye Portugal ara^ged his army far otherwise, for he divided his whole
army into 4. battles. On ye right side was the first battle, consisting of
the light horsemen and garrison of Tangar, and Aluares Peers de Tauora lead
them. The left or the middle battle consisted of Germans and Italians,
which the Marquis of Ireland governed. In the third battle of succor, stood
the Spaniards and certain Italians, the Captain whereof was Alonzo Aquilar.
The fourth battle were Portugals, under the conduct of a certain noble man
of that Nation, whose name was Ludouicke Caesar. Every battle had almost
three thousand footmen, but some more and some fewer. But the General of the
whole army was Duartes Meneles, the governor of the City of Tangar.

Besides these forces, he had ten thousand horsemen very well appointed, and
divided by five hundreths, It should be tvv^^, doutl^^^
as well in the first battle and the battle of succor, as in both wings.

In the midst and middle of the whole army were placed the baggage, the
weak rabble, the wagons, and slaves. Muley Hamet stood on the right side of
the battle, with his few Soldiers, to the number of five hundredth
harguebuziers, and six hundredth Spears. The king had placed six and thirty
field pieces in the front of his battle.

So then the two armies were thus aranged on a mighty large plain, which was
so open and bare, that there was neither tree, plant, nor stone, to be seen
within two leagues round about. The Moors were defenced on the left side with
the river of Alcazar, which served them for a rampire or munition, and the
Portugalls had on their backs the river of Mazaga, that runs to Larissa.
But for two causes he desired to come to the river of Alcazar before they came
within Gunshot: first, that he might take the wind from his enemies, and
secondly, that he might use the river for a rampire and wall. So the
Christians had the wind indifferently well with them, although at the
beginning the Sun beams were against them. For afterward, and that too
sodein^^^, the clear Sun shine was turned into dark weather, and so
cloudie, that the Sun beams troubled them nothing. But when the two armies
were come within an ha^quebusse shot one of another, about half an hour
before high noone, the Moors began to stay their march, and to level their
pieces.

The fourth day of August, which was mundaie, in the year of our salvation
1578. the battle was begun between the two kings about twelve of the clock,
and the Moors did first begin to shoot off their great ordenance against the
Christians, but they had not shot off three, but that the Christians answered
them with theirs. And straight way the harquebuziers on foot on both sides
discharged as thick as hail, with such an horribie, furious, and terrible
tempest, that the cracking and roaring of the Gunnes did make the earth so to
fremble, as though it would have sunk down to hell, and the element seemed
to burn with the fire, flames, lightning, and thunder of the Gunnes. After
that the storm of the shot was past five hundredth men of arms of the first
battle, whom the Duke de Auero lead, gave a charge on the left wing of the
Moors, and brake and scattered them, and having slain many, compelled the
rest to fly, so that above eight thousand harquebuziers on horsebarke, and
twenty thousand Spears (who were Alarbes) left the place, and flying some one
way, and some an other, almost twenty leagues, spread every where a rumor of
the victory of the Christians. In this first encounter the Moors lost two
guidons, not without the great grief of Abdelmelec, who when he sitting on his
horse in the middle battle did see his men fly so soulye, he was so kindled
with anger and fury, that although for weakness he could scarce sit on his
horse, yet he went about to charge our men in that quarter where his men
fled, that he might repair that winge broken, and shamefully dispersed, and
to stay them that fled, and to turn them again against the enemy. But the
soldiers of his guard knowing his extreme weakness, took his horse by the
bridle, and would let him go no farther. But when he would have set his hand
to his sword to have rid himself out of their hands, he perceived that his
arms and hands were as stiff as a stone, with the palsy: whereof he
conceived so great grief at the heart, that leaving himself forward upon the
pommel of his saddle, he lost his speech, and never spoke word after, but yt
should they ^o forward fatter: the which was done but no farther then a man
could cast a stone. In the mean time the ga^d ^ooke ^^^king from his horse,
and laid him in his horsel^^ter, where he gave up the Ghost within half an
hour after. Ye^ his death was subtly dissembled, they bru^ing th^^ (...) was
laid down to rest him. But although the Christians vanquished in the first
encounter, yet the rest of the king of Mortugall his Army knew not how to use
the victory: For because there was no man to command what was needeful to be
done, or did send the bands of succors with aid, they did suffer a goodly
victory to slip out of their hands. When the Moors saw so great a
discoms^ture was given by the enemies their only horsemen, neither was there
any man that backed them, they sent out a thousand Argolets, and many other,
who made the Portugalls before victors to fly with that force, that they
running upon the middle battle of their footmen, mightily disordered all the
whole army of the Christians. The thing was done in the sight and presence of
the king, who through the counsel of them about him was yet in his Coch, but
as soon as he saw the flight and disorder of his men, he speedely mounted on
a horse strangely bardbed, and accompanied with the Duke of Auero and other men
of arms, charged the enime. But although he were carried against his enemies
with that force and feese, that he brake their araie again, yet because the
army of the Moors did not abandon the place, those horsemen that were scarce
five hundredth, were forced to retire: whom the Moors followed with such force,
that flying many of them, they forced the rest to run among their footmen
with such have, that they ouerranne and troade to death a great number of their
own footmen, and committed a miserable misorder and slaughter. In the mean
while all the forces of the Mohammedan army running down from the hill, began
to charge the Christians with great violence. In that conflict the Duke of
Auero was slain, and many other noble and valiant men, and also the horse of
the king of Portugal was slain, but he himself safe and unhurt, and the
great ordenaunce which served the Christians to no use in this battle, was
taken. Now as touching the right wing of the Moors: the soldiers thereof
never ceased from the beginning of the battle to power down showers of shot
upon the Christians, yea, and moving out of their place, but always keeping
the croisant figure of their army, they began to enclose the Portugal
army, and to charge the hindermest battle of the side.

Wherefore the king (who had mounted another fresh horse) perceiving that the
hindermost battle needed succor, taking with him five hundredth men of arms,
who had been appointed for that purpose, charged the third tune the Moors
that were under Muley Hamet, the brother of Abdelmelec: whom he did so skarre,
that he forced them to give ground more than half a league, slaying many and
scattering the rest.

But seeing he was alone, and had no man that would follow him, he was forced
with great grief, and full sore against his will to retire to his army, for
to behold the sorrowful sight of the entire discomfiture of his whole forces.
For the Moors in the left wing after they had taken the Ordenance of the
Christians, pursuing the victory, did also so discomfite those Christians that
stood near to the bank of the river, that they ran upon the forces of
Muley Mahamet (that stood between the Christians and the River) and made
miserable spoil and slaughter of them, yea, and many of Mahamet his men ran
upon the Christian troops.

Muley Mahamet seeking to save himself by flight, as he would have passed over
at the foord of the river of Larisla, which is myrie and moorish, was cast out
of the saddle by his horse that striued and struggeled to get out of the dirt,
and being unskillful to swim, was drowned and perished in the river. The
victours Moors following the vanquished, came to the ward of Muley Hamet, the
brother of Abdelmelec, and there either slew or carried away prisoners the
principal men of the Christians being enclosed, and as it were brought into a
pinfolde. So then our men being thus enclosed on all parts, and not having
Gunnepouder (for that through negligence had taken fire, and was all consumed)
nor any other thing to defend themselves, or else had with indifferent
slaughter as well destroyed their own fellows as their enemies, ran away
amain, so that through headlong and hasty flight, one ran upon another,
and many were squised with the weight of horses running over them with a
miserable slaughter. For ye might see the heaps of men trodden down and
squised lie as thick as sheafes of Wheat cast down in a Barnes flower.

The enemies also that did insatiablie thirst for Christian blood, shot off
their Harquebusies thick and three fold upon them, with whom they did hurt
not a few of their own men, and foulie tare them. But as for the eight
thousand pikemen, whom the Portugal had in the field, seeing they did nothing
else, then leave so many pikes for the barbarous enemy, experience it self
taught how little good they did in the battle. For when the King used them
for so many harquebuziers, whom he should have sent against the enemy, by
taking them, he devised assured ruin for himself. And although the Christian
state was now become desperate, yet the king of Portugal ceased not to indamage
the enemy, now in this quarter, now in that, being accompanied with no nto
then seven or eight soldiers of Tangar, for the noble men, gentlemen, and
horsemen of Portugal were so cowardly, and so delicate, (they say) that many of
them leaving their horses, got them to shadowy places, and under the shadow of
the wagons, for to cool themselves: with this mind, that when they saw all
lost, they might seek to save themselves by running away. And so when they
began to fly, part on foot, and part on horseback toward Arzill, from whence
they came: the Moors followed them with such violence and speed, and specially
the horsemen, (who were yet fresh) yt they made a miserable slaughter of them.
Yet king Sebastian forsakes not his people: thinking it dishonorable to seek
safety by flight, and with those few that followed him, behaved himself
valiantly. He slew so many, he sent so many to hell, that many called him the
lightning, and few durst to look him in the face, or to defend themselves
against him. At length about a three score of Abdelmelec his soldiers seeking
glory by slaying of a King, enclosed him. Then he seeing no way left him to
escape, commanded one of them that followed him, to hold up a white scarf
hanged on a lance, in sign yt he would yield. But they that had enclosed him
(that is to wit, Alarbes, a kind of people of all other most barbarous and
cruel) supposing that by this sign he did call the Portugalls to ^ide him,
charged him a fresh on all parts, and wounded him in many places, and at length
took him, and cutting a sunder the lace of his helmet, gave him two blows on
the ^edde, and as many in the face, so that he tumbling off from his horse,
gave up the Ghost.

The Moors followed the flying Christians until it was late nights. So when
all were vanquished and scattered, or brought into wretched captivity, Muley
Hamet commanded the retraite to be sounded, and returned to the Camp with the
body of his brother Abdelmelec, and it was even night when he came thither,
and straight way was the death of king Abdelmelec published, and thereby also
Muley Hamet acknowledged and received for king, and all the whole army was
very sorrowful for the loss of Abdelmelec. Although ye this overthrow was
no doubt sent us by God for our sins, yet two hundredth or few less, with
happy success escaped out of the hands of the Barbarians alive and well, of
whom three score were horsemen, and the rest footmen, and among them Don
Antonio, a Portugal, who was delivered by a certain Moore out of the hands
of his enemies, and brought to Tanger. But there were slain of Christians in
this battle, above twelve thousand. For all the whole field was filled with
dead bodies of men, yea, and of horses, mules, asses, oxen, and other beasts of
burden and draught.

Among the nobler sort that died in this battle, were besides king Sebastian,
the Duke of Auero, the Bishops of Coimbra and Portua, the Commissarie General
sent by the Pope, the Marquis of Treland, Christopher de Tauora, and many other
knights and Gentlemen, whom I do omit for breuities sake. The Tuesdaie,
which was the fifth of August, the new king sent in the morning a band of
footmen to seek out the men slain on their side, of whom a thousand five
hundredth being known, were buried in the same place, among whom were many
valiant and renowned Captains, friends and familiars of king of Abdelmelec,
They being buried after their manner, the body of Muley Mahamet (who was the
author of so many evils and slaughters) was found on the bank and sands of the
river, wherein he had been drowned.

The body of the king of Portugal was also found among the bodies of the
slain Christians, by two of his servants that were prisoners: whom the new
king had sent for that purpose in the hard morning, promising them liberty, if
they did find the kings body. Wherefore when they had found it naked, they
brought it to the new king covered with their own clothes, and with it was
also brought the body of Muley Mahamet. These dead bodies of three kings being
brought into one Pauilion, made an horrible spectacle, and wrong tears from
the beholders. For what more sorrowful and horrible a sight could there be,
than to behold three most mighty kings, that died in one battle, lying
together. The army of one of whom was vanquished when he lived, and after he
was dead did straight way overcome the army of the other two kings: and
whereas all three did aspire to the kingdom of Marocco, none of them held it.
But this thing being shut from man's senses, and reserved to the hidden
judgment of Gods majesty, I do omit.

The body of Abdelmelec was carried in an horse litter to Fesse, distant about
twenty leagues from Alcazar, that it might be buried there. All the horsemen
with one legion or regiment of footmen attended on the coarse. Which being
brought to Fes, and received with the great sorrow of the Citizens, was laid
in the tomb of his ancestors, in the very same sumptuous apparel, and
precious garnishment of gems that the king died in. Many of the noble men that
were taken prisoners, were very desirous to redeem the body of the king of
Bortugall, and they offered Muley Mahamet ten thousand Duckates if he would
vouchsafe to send it to Tangar.

But the Barbarian answered, that it was not seemly to sell a dead man's
body, yet notwithstanding if they would give him Tangar or Arzil, they
should have the body, but when that was not in their hands and power, they
could go no farther: yet this they obtained of the new king, that he
suffered the body of the king of Portugal to be carried to Alcazar, where
also it was buried in the Hospital, (which is in the palace of the governor
of the Town,) and some appointed to keep it continually, least the
Christians should steal it away. But as for the body of Muley Mahamet, the
new king his uncle commanded the skin to be pulled off (because he had
been the author of so many slaughters) and to be salted, and then stuffed
with straw, and to be carried about thorough out all provinces of his
kingdom, for to defer all other for attempting the like at any time after.
The men, women, boys, slaves, and black Moors taken in this battle by the
Moors, were in number above fourteen thousand, and they being the next day
divided among the Soldiers, were carried into all Provinces of Barbary. For
as the Moors came out of all places to the battle, so every man carried
home with him his prisoners and spoil. But although the counsailours of the
new king were very earnest with him to besiege either Tanger or Arzill,
namely, seeing that there was no man that would resist or defend it: yet he
refused so to do, but rather prepared himself to go to Fes, that having
taken the possession of that City, he might be seized of the inheritance of
all the kingdoms: thinking that there would not otherwise want them, that
would assaie to set him besides the saddle, if they did perceive him to be
slack therein. And he was acknowledged for king but with unwilling hearts,
and in a manner repining thereat: neither in deed was he received with the
same cheerfulness and joy, that they used to receive other kings: and the
cause thereof was, for that there was no metal in this new king Hamet, an
artlesse man, not caring for martial matters, nor such an one as was fit for
to uphold the dignity of a king, but contrariwise effeminate, nice, given to
delicacies, delyghtes and pleasures, and lurking at home in the Palace.

He was then about nine and twenty or thirty years of age, of color
black, not big, but yet faule and weak, and of no strength, and much less
skillful of things, and endued with that wisdom which is required in the
governing of a kingdom, and that I may comprehend all in few words, he was
altogether unlike his brother Abdelmelec, for he was of a mean stature, of a
fine proportion of body, with broad shoulders, white face, but intermixed with
red, which did gallantly garnish his cheeks, a black beard thick, and
curled, great eyes and graie. In sum, he was a very proper man, and very
comely in all his actions and iestures, and very strong: the which strength
he conserved by continually exercising of himself in skirmishes, and in
bending of bows. He spoke Spanish very well, and with a great grace, he could
also write in Spanish. But he had the Italian tongue best of all other, yet he
took most delight in the Turkish tongue, so that for love of it he cared not
for the Arabian, the which was his mother tongue, and wherein he was accounted
for the most excellent Poet of his time. He was ingenious, sharp witted, and
passing prudent and wise, whereas in other things than specially in the
government of a kingdom. He played well on diverse instruments, and also
daunced excellently, but delighted above measure in arms, and the art of
war, in which things he also exercised himself much: insomuch, that he made
with his own hands many great pieces of ordenance, that are yet at this day
in Barbary. For he was of a singular and wonderful wit in all things that he
went about or took in hand. And although he professed the religion of Mahamet,
yet he so loved Christians, and of them Spaniardes, that I cannot express with
words the love and good will which he showed toward many captives and
prisoners. For he suffered the^ to return into Spain, being dismissed without
ransom, and we this munificense and liberality he had set at liberty above
200. within ye 3. years tthat he reigned. I do now omit to tell you with what
favor and courtesy he used ye prisoners, least I be ouerlong, or may be carried
too far with his love. But ye he needs not my publication of his praise, the
thing it self does witness: and the hospital built for sick Christians,
adioining to ye temple of Marocco, and endowed we great revenues, does prove it
manifestly. He died in the 35. year of his age. When he had reigned not full
3. years, leaving a son of 3. years and an half old, whose name is Ismaell,
and as yet is it at this day brought up with the Queen his mother, the wife of
Abdelmelec at Argier. But as touching his nephew Muly Hamet, he was younger
then Abdelmelec, being about xxix. or xxx. years of age: of stature mean, of
body weak, of color so black, that he was accounted of many for a Negro or
black Moore. He was of a perverse nature, he would never speak the truth, he
did all things subtelly and deceitfully. He was not delighted in arms, but as
he showed in all battles, of nature cowardly, and effeminate. But he so
cruelly hated Christians, that he would kill either with famine or nakedness,
those that he caught. If that in these wars he being constreined by
necessity, gave any signification of good will toward them, he did it against
the heart, and in a manner unwillingly, that he might make them the more ready
and chierfull to endaunger themselves for him.

The Battle of Lisbon, fought in Portugal, between Antonio king of Portugal,
and Ferdinando, Duke of Alua, General of the Spanish forces, the 24. of
August. An. 1581.
PHillippe the king of Spain, (...)
prosecuting his pretense unto the Crown of Portugal, wherein Don Antonio son
of Don Jews brother unto Henry the last king, was invested, sent Ferdinando
the Duke of Alua into Portugal, with an army of 25000. footmen, part
Spaniards, part Italians, and 2000. light horse, and 600. men of arms. Against
which forces king Antonio had levied in have of unskillful warriors,
Portugalls, about 20000. Encamping himself before the City of Lisbon, within
a piece of ground fortified with diches and rampires, there minding to expect
the doings of Alua. Who being arrived near unto ye kings camp, 6000.
footeme^, and 80. horsemen.
assembled the chief of the army in council what was to be done. And there
it was concluded that the kings camp was to be assaulted, seeing that neither
the skill nor the number of their enemies were such, as might make the victory
much doubtful: and again the army being overthrown, the conquest of the
whole kingdom would incontinently follow, because there were no places of
strength in the whole Realm, to stay the course of the victor: the late kings
of Portugal being wholly busied in enlarging their Empire abroad by inuading
others and utterly neglecting for tifications at home, to withstand the
injuries of their neighbors, with whom they had long lived in peace. And so
accordingly the next day Alua dismarched to assault the camp, and sent before
a great band of Italians for to take a foridge nere unto ye city, leading to
Al^^tara, ye which bridge was kept by certain Portugals. The victory for a
while was doubtful, now the Italians, now ye Portugals, having the better, but
at ye length through the valor of the Italians, ye Portugalls were beaten from
the bridge, and it won. And over it Sanchio Dauila passed, with many bands of
footmen, for to assail ye camp, and he had not fought long, but ye he wenne
ye first trench committing great slaughter, sent unto the Duke to send thither
the horsemen, whiles he went forward, and assailed ye second trench. In ye
mean time Ferdinando de Toledo, coming with a part of ye horsemen, fought by
ye way with 400 Portugal footmen, and a few horsemen whom he met, and put them
to flight, pursuing them even to Lisbon, at the which time Sanchio wan the
second trench. When Ferdinando hearing a great noise of harquebusse shot at ye
camp, rallied together his horsemen, and hasted toward ye camp. But by ye way
he met with 15 ensigns of footeme^, and almost 100. horsemen whom he
courageously charging, easily put to flight, chasing the^ even to ye gates of
ye city. And anon after ye whole army of the Portugals was defaited and put
to flight, The Explanat^^^ says,
and their artillarie taken, and many of ye ensigns of ye footeme^, and at
last ye king being wounded in two places fled we a few horsemen, after he had
long fought. Dauila followed ye chase we his whole power even to ye gates of
Lisbon, whether also shortly after came Ferdinando, but they gave no attempt
upon ye city because the king of Spain had severely commanded ye they should
not enter the city although they could for fear of tacke, ye which he in no
case could like. When the citizens understood ye overthrow of their army,
they yielded their city and themselves to the mercy of the victor (who refused
to receue their submission under any other conditions). Where upon a messeger
was sent unto the king of Spain for his resolution, but before it could come,
ye unruly soldiers had sacked ye suburbs. And ye citizens fearing ye the like
would be done to the city, promised a certain su^me of money to be divided
among ye soldiers, ye which when they could not perform at their day, they
could not avoid the fury of the soldiers, who endamaged the^ above 3.
Millions. But when ye Spanish fleet ye lay before the haven of Lisbon
understood of the victory of their army by land, they assailed the Portugal
navy ye lay in the haven, consisting of 42. great ships, of whom 7. were
goodly galeons, and among the^ diverse ye bare above 90. pieces of great
ordenance and had 400. men in a ship. But when they heard of ye discomfiture of
their land forces, and of the flight of ye king, neither had they any Admiral,
they yielded to ye Spaniard, not making any show at all of defense. Afterward
when Alua understood that king Antonio was at Monte Mayor, not far from the
sea, with an army of 6000. footmen, he not thinking ye he had ye kingdom
free, wherein his enemy had an army: sent Sanchio Dauila with 3000. Spaniards
and certain Italians, and 500. horsemen for to encounter him. When Sanchio came
to ye river of Rubera, his horsemen swam over, and he transported his footmen
in flat botom boats. When the king understood of the small number of his
approaching enemy, he determined to give the^ battaill, seeing that he himself
had also 600. horsemen Sa^chio sent certain harquebuziers before for to take a
view of the kings camp, and in the mean time marched toward the king with ye
rest of his forces. But the Portugals as soon as they saw the Spainiards a
far of, never once stayed for the signal of fight, but showed them a fair
pair of heels, incontinently. Which being known, Dauila poursued them, and
slew many, and came before the Port of Portugal, where many had saved
themselves. When the citizens understood of the first and second overthrow of
their countrymen, thinkeing it no wisdom to expect the fortune of worse
war, yielded themselves voluniarilie. But when the king saw that his army so
shamefullye fled from him, neither could he by any means revoke them to
fight, neither if they did rallie, could repose any trust in such fearful
fellows, he also fled with his horsemen, and left the Spaniard the full and
entire possession of the kingdom.

The Battle of Saint Michaell, fought at the Isles of the Aslores, between
Phillip Lord Strozzi, Admiral of the navy of Antonio, king of Portugal, and
Aluares de Basan, Marquis de Santa Cruz, Admiral of the fleet of Philip king
of Spain, the 25. day of July. In An. 1582. Taken out of a letter sent by the
Marquess unto the King of Spain his master: Whereunto is adjoined the
enarration of the same Battle, out of the book entitled: The explanation of
the true and lawful right of Antony king of Portugal. etc.
AFter that overthrow at the Port of Portugal, the Spaniardes sought for the
king of Portugal as it were with a candle and a lantern, and yet could not
find him, he was so carefully kept and concealed by the poor paisants of the
country, among whom he seiourned in wretched state until the ninth of June,
in An. 1581. When he happening on a ship of Enckhusen in Holand did take
ship not far from Setuball in Portugal, and was brought to Cales in
France, from whence he wafted over into England, and from thence he sent news
unto the governor of Tercera that he was alive, the which news confirmed him
in his fidelity and purpose not to yield the I Will unto the Spaniards. Whereupon
the king of Spain for to assure the trade into both Indies, prepared a navy
for to conquer the Isles. Whereof when the king of Portugal, who was then
passed over into France had intelligence, he obtained of the queen mother of
France a navy of 57. sail, great and small, wherein were embarked 4000.
soldiers, besides 600. gentlemen, and the officers of the ships, and
mariners, under the conduct of her cousin the Lord Philip Strozzi, Captain
General of the French footmen, and his sieuetenant the County Brisac. With
this fleet the king of Portugal himself sailed to succor the Assores, and
recovered the Isle of S. Michael, except the castle. When the king of Spain
heard yt the king of Portugal was gone with a navy toward ye Assores, he
hasted the departure of his Admiral the Marquis de Sante Cruz, commanding him
not to tarry for yt 19. ships, 2. galeons, 2. galleies, and 2. pinisses, which
were ^^^ging in Andolouzia, but presently to depart with the fleet yt he had
at Lisbon. The which the Marquis did in such have the 10. of Iulie, with 28.
ships, and five small pinasses, yt he (...) behind him three ships ye should
have gone with him, because they could not be ready before ye next day, and
also by reason of ye foul wether an Argosie, wherein were three companies of
old soldiers, and the Physicians, Surgeons, and other officers, for the
diseased and hurt, with their provision of all things necessary for that
purpose, returned back again to Lishon, a leadging that their ship was in
leake. But the rest of the Navy the 22. day of Iulie being Sundaie, approached
near unto Villa Franca, a town of 500. houses, in the Isle of S. Michael one
of the Assores.

The day before their ariual at the Island, the Marquis had dispatched two
pinasses under the charge, of Aguirrei, the Capiaine of the aforesaid five
pinasses, with letters unto Ambrose Aguer, ye governor of the Isle of S.
Michael, certefieng him how his majesty's navy which he had brought was very
strong, containing 5500. soldiers, in which number was Don Lopes de Figueroa,
with 1800. of the old soldiers of Flanders, over and above 200. Gentlemen, and
particular persons entertained with their advantages, who came voluntary to
serve his majesty. And that the navy which was made ready at Caliz, (for the
which they looked every hour) was of the number and quantity aforesaid, with
other five thousand soldiers, of whom five ensigns were of the Tierce of
Flanders. And the Marquis did desire the governor to send him such news as he
had of the French navy, and whether they had passed that ways or not, and
the number of their ships, because he was determined to go seek them, and to
fight with them. And that he should said unto Pisoto, if he chanced to be
there, that he should make himself ready to follow him with the ships of
his charge.

Whilst the Marquis lay at anchor in the road of Villa Franca, there did
ariue to the Admirals ship one Carauel of the three that were left at Lisbon
for to bring the horses, who gave him to understand, that the day before there
had arrived at Villa Franca the three ships that had been left at Lisbon, who
departed from thence the next day after the Marquis, in company with the same
carauells. They reported also that the three ships after they had fallen with
Villa Franca, were forced back again into the sea, and that two of the
carauels were taken by the enemy. The other with the horses belonging to the
General of the field, and others, went back to the sea, being chased by a
French ship. Whereupon the Marquis sent some particular men to understand
somewhat of them of the Island, who would not suffer them to come on land, but
discharged their pieces at the^. But there was a Priest yt told them, yt the
Island was for his majesty, and that he knew nothing of the French army,
others willed them to go to the City. The Marquis understanding what had
passed, and learning by one of the pinasses yt had been sent with Captain
Aguirre, yt the other pinasse with the Captain was taken by a French ship, and
other barks, yt came from the land. He did then suspect yt the Island had
rebelled, and having sent for Don Lopes de Figueroa, General of the field, to
confer with him about the landing of some good number of men, that they might
have speech with them of Villa Franca, and likewise to take in fresh water, and
having sent to the Captains Michael Oquendo, and Rodrigo de Vargas, for to
take notice in what place they were best to anchor: in the mean time they that
were in the top of the Admiral Galeon espied certain ships near to Ponta
Delgada, wherabouts stands the chief City of the Isle, and the Castle.
Whereupon the Marquis supposing that those ships should be of the enemies, he
altered his determination, and made straight way to Ponta Delgada, and by and
by they discovered me ships, and then they perceived that it was the navy of
Don Antonio (so the Spaniards do call Antonie ye king of Portugal.) So our army
approaching unto the enemies, and having now certain knowledge of them, for yt
they prepared themselves toward the sea, and perceiving them to be about 60.
ships, of great and small, the Marquis called a counsel, and with the advice
of Don Pedro de Tolledo, Camp master General, the Marquis de Fauora, Don
Pedro de Tassis, Comptroller general, Don Francisco de Bouadilla, master of
the camp, and other Captains and knights being called thereunto, they
determined to present the battle, and to sight with the enemy, who did the
like, and put themselves in araie, and so they discharged a piece of ordenance
toward us in toke^ of battle. With that the marquis commanded a banner of
defiance to be put forth, and shot off one piece of ordenance, and sent
Captain Marolin and Captain Rodorigo de Vargas, to advertise the whole navy
to set themselves in order of battle, which was done in this manner: In the
forefcont was a rank of ships and galeons, and on ye right hand of ye Admiral
was placed the galeon S. Mattheo, wherein was the General of the field, and
the comptroller general, and on the left hand was the ships wherein went Don
Francisco de Bouadilla the master of the camp, and four ships mo to be
assistaunt: the ten Biskaines with ye other ships, in whom were the Captains.
Michael de Oquendo, and Vilia Visiosa were placed in the rereward. And by
reason that the ship wherein Don Christopher de Erasso went, had strained the
head of her maine mast, by means whereof she could not bear her top sail,
she was forced to stay behind, and could not therefore take her place
accordingly, to the great grief of the Marquis to lack his help at such a
pinch. The Marquis himself went in the galeon Saint Martin, which was Admiral
of the fleet. He gave this order for the battle, that in the uppermost fight
upon the poope, should be 20. Gentlemen, and pistolets, and 20. caliuers, and
below all the Gentlemen of Portugal, (except sir James de Castro, who was upon
the poope) and lowest of all should be for help and succor sir Antonie
Pessoua, sir Jews Osorio, sir Goston Ronkelio, Colonel Mandonario, Captain
Quessatha, and other four pistolets, and upon the hatches of ye galcon 40.
pistolets upon either side under ye charge of Captain Gamboa, near to the
chamber of the poope was the body of the guard with 40. soldiers, and most of
them particular and special men, which had been in office before under the
charge of Augustine Deherrara, for to help and succor where should be most
need. In the stearne of the ship was John Suffono, a Gentleman of Milan, and
the Sergeants of the Captains, Austen Deharrara and Gamboa with xv. pistolets
and x caliuers: in the great top was the Sergeant Sir Frances Galeio with eight
caliuers, and in the top of the trinket six, besides those that were in the
small tops. Under the hatches where the great ordenance does lie, were the
Captains, Sir Christopher Deaccouia and Scouetho, and John Alter, and the
sergeant Tauste, and Esquiuel, and with every piece of ordenance one gunner,
and six men to help him, and every one had an instrument called Hauspikes,
with the munition yt was upon the hatches was Marcelus Carraceolus: and like
service was beneath. And for the keeping of the gunpouder was Captain Grimaldo
appointed, with four mariners. He commanded also that there should stand hard
by the stern of the galeon, the great boat called the Salua, and four small
ones, for to carry directions, and fill tubs with water, and hogsheads in
diverse places of the Galeon, and likewise to distribute pikes in convenient
places. He also charged the mariners to be in the ships apparaile, and the
Captains Marolin, and Roger Deuargas (as sea men of great experience) to
attend on the ordenance, and other necessaries. All this was executed very
speadely, and with great cheerefulnes for all this was provided before they
approches unto the Island.

This being done, with great noise of Fifes and drums, and their banners
displayed, our navy set forth to assail the enemies: who did the like in
good array. But because the wind was calm, they could not fight that day,
but went to seaward. And yet the Marquis could not understand of the state of
the Island: but afterward within night arrived to the Admirals Galeon a Pinasse,
wherein was Domingo de Adutriaga, master of a ship called the Catelina. Who
brought a letter from Don John de Castilio, containing as follows.

IN the army of Don Anthonio, there are 58. ships, of whom 28. be great
ships, and the rest small, and in them are 6000. Frenchmen. If our army be
not strong enough to fight with them, then if may draw nigh to the Castle,
which is for the King. And I would wish you to have a great regard to it, for
if you should loose the victory, great inconvenience would ensue. Furthermore,
the Master, and his company declared, that Don Authonie with his army, came
to the Island ye xv. day of July, and the xvi. did set a land 3000. men, with
whom Don Lorenco Noguera, with f^ure Ensigns of footmen did encounter, being
in number about 500. men, and with 150. harquebuziers taken out of the Biskaine
ships: who a little from the City did skirmish with the French army, but
being ouerpressed with number, were forced to retire to the Castle to Peter
Pisoto, with the loss of ten Castilians, and twelve Biskaines: Don Lorenco
being hurt, whereof after he dyed. And in the Castle with Peter Pisoto, is the
son of the governor Ambrose de Aguiar, and the Bishop, the Corrigedor, and
other 2. or 3. gentlemen, and all ye rest went out of the city, some calling
in Don Antonio, and that the soldiers of ye French army sacked the city, and
ye Don Antonio sent to the captain Don John de Castillio, willing him to yield
unto him the castle, knowing it to be his, and that he would give him free
passage for him and his company, the which ^^ing if he refused, that then he
would bring aland seven pee^es of ordenance from the ships, and would batter
the Castle: and moreover, he gave him to understand that the army of Spain
would not come this year. To whom Don John the governors son, and the
Bishop and the Corrigeder made answer, yt the castle was the kings of Spain,
and that they would not yield it unto him. The Marquis did likewise understand
by the said Master, that the Frenchmen the next day (having knowledge of the
approach of our army) had embarked themselves in all have, and that the two
Galcons, and two great Carauels of Peter Pisoto, were overthrown near unto
the castle, and the Frenchmen took the 4. Biskaine ships, after that ye men
were gone a land, and had withdrawn themselves into the castle. The Marquis
being informed of all these things, wrote unto the Captain, and governor, and
others in the castle by the said master, encouraging and certifying them of
the force of the kings army, not doubting but the next day to give battle,
and to have the victory, and that therewith they should hold themselves
contented, as he himself was very joyful of the service which they had
already done to ye king, which he knew should not remain unrewarded. And with
this answer they returned with the Pinasse to the Island.

The next day, being monday, and the 23. of July, the two armies came to
present battle, the French army having both the advantage of the wind, and
also of the Sun, came to assail our navy, being divided into three
esquadrons, and made three several attempts, and yet could put nothing in
execution. And toward night the Spanish army making toward the sea, the
French army placed ten ships along the Island, thinking that night to have
gotten the wind of us, but by reason it was calm, they could not prevail.

The 24. day of July, the Marquis returned, approaching nearer the French army,
who having the advantage of the wind, gave two several attempts, and yet put
neither in execution. Then the Marquis perceuing that the course toward the
land was not convenient for him, he caused the army to take the course
toward the sea, thinking with him self that whilst his ships were trimming
of their sails, that the enemy would assault them, having the wind for their
purpose, which fell out accordingly, for one of ye French Captains, with seven
Galeons, came to assail the Captain of the Spaniards, and the Galeon S.
Matheo, but approaching near unto them, did not board them, but discharged
great quantity of ordenance, against them, and likewise did the rest of the
ships against ours, of whom they were received accordingly, in so much that
our Captain did shoot at them above 40. pieces, and also the Galeon S. Matheo,
shot of many, as also did the ship of Don Christopher de Erasso, (who was now
joined with the army) and also the ship of Don Francisco de Bouadilla, and
Myguel de Oquendo, and others, which was a pleasant sight to behold how the
pellets sang from either side. They did hit our Captain with four shot, one
in the foresaile, an other in the shroudes, the third upon an anchor, the
fourth on the ships side, without doing any harm. They hit the Galeon S.
Mathco, with three shot, without doing any harm, no more did many other of
their pieces, which did hit many of our ships. And again, we might perccue
that many of our shot lighted in the Galeons of the Frenchmen, but specially
four out of the Captain, which made them to retire, whereby it appeared they
had received some harm. There came in the French army two captain, and 2.
Admiralls, and there was a small galeon, like a Patacha, being excelent good of
sail, carrying a standard in the poope, which did not approach the fight, but
kept a far off, to beeholde what passed. There came to the number of forty
great Ships, and among them some were very fin^ Galleons, the rest were small
Pinasses, dispersed round about the army, two or three leagues off, for to
discover and to understand of all things, and also two Saities of Marseilles,
very good of sail, and many other light boats with oars, by whom they did
set the battle in order and array, and direct things as time served.

The same day at night the armies did separate themselves, and the Marquis
determined at the going down of the Moon to procure to get the wind of the
French army, and in the morning to assault them again: which he did, so that
the xxv. day of July, he found himself to windeward of his enemies, and so
sought to board them, but because his ships were great and heavy of sail,
he could not put in effect that which he purposed, but was forced to return to
the rescue of Don Christopher de Frasso, who was in some distress in following
the enemy thorough default of his maine mast: wherefore he gave him a towe
with his Captain. This day there was descried a great ship of the enemies,
which wanted her foremast, and other two ships, that did help her, but they
not being able to perform it, she was forced to sink. It was judged that she
had receued some harm by shot, the day before.

But memorandum, that of the ten Hulkes of the Spanish navy, there wanted two,
which carried Almaines, and likewise were wanting the three ships that
departed from Lisbon, after the Armado, so that the Marquis had in his navy no
more then xxv. ships with the two Galeons.

The xxvi. of July, the French came again to assault the Spanish army in very
good order, and with a favorable wind. The Marquis did cause his ships to be
placed in order and array, although the Galeon Saint Matthew, was somewhat a
stern, which was some grief to the Marquis, doub^ing that the enemy might
board her before she could conuemently be reskued: and so it fell out, for she
was boarded by two Galeons, a Captain, and an Admiral, against whom she did
defend her self very valiantly, being likewise assailed by two other ships,
who after they had discharged certain ordenance at her, passed forwards. At
the same time came other 2. French ships upon the Captain, who beginning to
fight with her, she gave them two such welcomes with her ordenance and
harquebusse shot, that one of them was ill to pass, and almost sunk: and so
they retired having shot many pieces at the Captain, and the Captain at them.
At which time came the ship of Don Francisco de Bouadilla, who was near the
Captain, who did likewise anoie the French men greatly with their shot.

All this while did the Admiral and vizeadmirall of the French army fight
with the Galeon Saint Ma^theo, who did defend her self, and offend her enemies
valian^^e: ^he Camp master General, Don Lopes de Figueroa, Don ^^dro de
Tassis, ouerseer general, with the rest of the Gentlemen and soldiers that
were in her, courageously sho^ting at the enemies, both with great shot,
harquebusse sho^^^^ musket shot. The marquis perceiving that the Span^^h navy
was too windward of the French, and seeing the distress that the Galeon Saint
Mattheo was in, by reason of the two Frenchmen, he commanded the Captain to
turn toward the enemy, and so did Don Christopher de ^rasso, and the rest of
the ships of the Spanish army, and the ships of Miguel de Oquendo, Villia
Viciosa, and other Bishai^es, which were before the stearnmost, by changing of
the wi^^ were then the foremost, who came and boorded the Admiral of the French
Navy, who fought with the Galeon Saint Mattheo, and afterward came the ship
wherein went Michael de Venesa, who fought with the Captain of France like a
good Captain, and so in like sort did the soldiers that were with him, and
because his ship was between, the marquis could not at that time boorde the
Captain of France, but passed forward. In the mean t^^^ the Admiral of France
was in fight with the Galeon Saint Mattheo, and three ships more, who boorded
her, Villia Viciosa being one of the three, and having boorded the French
Admiral at the prowe, was slain with many of his company, as shall be
declared.

The ship of Oquendo did board her a stearne, and did enter his men into her,
and began to sack, and took four prisoners and the ensigns. The battle
began now to increase: with that came two other French ships to rescue
their Captain, and putting aboard her three hundred fresh men, she got from
them.

In the mean time the Marquis gave another charge on the enemy with much
shot, and at the last boorded with the French Captain prow to prowe, and so
grapled together, where was a cruel fight on both sides, shooting the one at
the other both with great shot and small, for the space of an hour, until
she yielded, where were slain above 300. French men, and the Gentlemen and
soldiers that were in the two fights, did defend themselves valiantly: so
likewise did the two Captains, Augustine Deharrara and Gamboa, and their
lieuetenants. The Marquis like a General, went through the fights, encouraging
his people to the assalting of the enemy, foreseeing and ordering all things
needful to be done. The artillery both below and aloft did great good through
the great diligence of those Captains that had the charge thereof. The
battle between the other ships did proceed, giving and receiving great
charges one upon the other. The battle continued five hours, and at the last
the enemy fled. Don Anthonio was departed in a small pinasse with another ship
the night before the battle. Some ships were sunk, and some spoiled, having
slain all the men that were found in them, and some fled to other ships. And
for that we could not tow their ships, the Marquis commanded that we should
burn them, and sink such as we could, as we had begun to do. The Carauell
with the horses that had been taken was recovered.

It is thought that there was of the enemies above 1200. slain, drowned, and
beheaded, besides many that were hurt of them ye escaped in the ships yt fled.
There might have been taken many mo of their ships, if we had had time and
mariners sufficient for to have towed them, but they were suffered to depart
without men and spoiled: and it is certain, that the Admiral which was left
for half drowned, and other four or five ships, more were cast away in the
Isle of S. Michael, and it is thought that other have done the like in other
places.

The number of those that were slain in the navy of the Spaniards, was 224.
men, and of those that were hurt 553. which is in all 777. Besides some that
were burnt with wild fire, among whom was the comptroller general, Sir Peter
de Tassis in the face.

The names of the principal men that came with Don Anthonio, of whom some are
prisoners, some were slain, (...) some ran away.
Philip Strozzi Captain General, was taken prisoner, and hurt with the shot
of an harquebusse, whereof he died as soon as he came into the presence of the
Marquis. The Earl of Vimioso was prisoner, and hurt with an harquebusse shot,
and thrust in with a sword, whereof he died in the Generals ship the day after
the battle. The County Brisac, lieuetenant, some say that he escaped in a
boat of his ship, other say that he was slain with a shot, the truth is not
known. Monsieur de Piamount, master of the camp General, was slain in the
battle. Of the principal Captains of the eight regiments that came in the
army (which was 6800. soldiers, accounting the adventurers) some were
slain, and some fled away,
The Lords of Towns and Castles that were taken alive.
Monsieur de Bocamaior, Lord of Rousela. Monsieur John Delatus, Lord of Heria.
William de Sanclear, Lord of Sanclear. Jews de Clen, Lord of Bronnes. Peter de
Oule, Lord of Queen's. Gilbert de Louel, Lord of Vuel. Peter de Bean. Monsieur
de Gal, Lord of Gal. Monsieur de Gifford, Lord of Giffordel. Monsieur de la
Onet, eldest son unto the Lord of Gresoul. Edward de Langert, Lord of Piel.
Fabio Gansete, son to the Lord of Gansete. Monsier de Vda, Lord of Vda.
Monsieur Fransoius, Lord of Montilla. Monsieur Laquesbay, eldest son of the
Lord of Biapolis. Monsieur Robert Debella, eldest son of the Lord of
Veseola. Monsieur Guillam Mason, Lord of Falla. Monsieur Bigart de Piloart,
Lord of Manterie. Monsieur Beltram de Amigat, Lord of Stituias. Monsieur
Iailato, Lord of Sans. Monsieur Philip Mentado, Lord of Sabrussa. Monsieur John
de Bocca mayor, Lord of Rosilla. Claudio de Pomolin, Lord of Popalin. Iacobo
Lasarean, Lord of Lasserian. Monsieur Demondoc, Lord of Mondoc.
The Gentlemen prisoners that were no Lords of Towns nor Castles, were in
number one and fifty, and of mariners and common Soldiers three hundredth
and three.

The marquis seeing that there was peace and amity between the king his
master and the French king, and knowing that those adventures came only in
the favor of Don Antonio, Prior of Crato, with mind to rob his majesty's
fleetes of both his Indies, and to make themselves Lords of his Islands and
dominions, as they had begun in the Isle of S. Michael, and that their meaning
was to do other spoils and piracies: in punishing of the fault and common
offense committed by them against the public peace, sworn, maintained, and
kept, between these two crowns, and their subjects, did declare all the
prisoners to be enemies of the common quietness and good, troublers of the
entercourses, favorers of his majesty's rebels: and that as such kind of
men, and public thieves, rouers and pirates, the chief Justice of the fleet
did ordeine, that for the punishment of those and for an example to other in
like cases: that the noblemen should be headded, and the rest should be hanged
from xvii. years upwards. And this sentence being given, it was put in
execution, the first day of August of this present year 1582.

Of this battle thus we read in the book entitled the Explanation of the
true and lawful right of Antony the king of Portugal.

When they were come unto the Isle of Saint Michaells, wherein was a garrison
of 800. Castilians: the people of the Island understanding that king Antonio
was come, did with little or no a do yield unto him, for all the resistance
the Castilians could make to the contrary: who then dispeiring, fled all into
the castle. Within the which when they had held them about three days, the
king of Castills navy was descried, the Admiral whereof, was the Marquis of
Sancta Cruz, who brought an army of nine or ten thousand men. Thorough the
occasion of coming of this navy, the king and the rest that were with him
must needs forsake the Island, and go aboard their ships, and prepare
themselves to fight. Albeit in the mean time Strossi, and the Conestable (that
was the Earl of Vimioso) and other of great authority did very earnestly
admonish and beseech the king that he would withdraw himself into the Isle of
Tercera (which is the strongest of all the Aslores) least he should endanger
his person in a doubtful battle: seeing that upon his safety did depend the
liberty not only of the kingedome of Portugal, but also of whole
Christendom. But the king after he had a long time refused, yet at length
yielded unto them, and went to Tercera in a Pinasse, attended by his Procurator,
Ed-ward de C^stro, and certain other, leaving with the navy the Conestable,
with about two hundredth Portugalls, among whom ^^^ry many were Gentlemen that
had followed the King (...) France. But the next day Strossi setting his navy
in array, assailed the adverse fleet of the Castillanes: and they fought very
fiercely on both sides: and when that Strossi had now almost boarded the
vizeadmirall of the Marquis, whereof Lopes de Figueroa was Captain, having
slain in that ship about 600. Castilians: at last the marquis assailed
Strossi on the other side with a very mighty great and very well appointed
ship called the Galeon San Martino, and did casely board and take him,
because there was no man that would succor him, besides the Comte de Brisacq,
with two other ships, with whom he had fought very valiantly, having slain
many Castilians. Which Brisacq when he saw that he was wounded, and that he
labored in vain, neither was succored by his fellows as (he thought to have
been) at length withdrew himself out of the fight, whereas in the mean time
ye lord of Sansolenne, the Vizeadmiral of Strossi and the Lord of Fumey, who
was Captain over 5. ships, refused to fight at all, alleging that the wind
was against them. Whereupon Brisacq as one now in despair, returned into France
with certain ships, but Sansolenne and Fumei came with 20. ships into the Isle
of Tercera unto the kng, who when he understood ye success of the battle,
was very sorrowful (as he had good cause) and namely for the death of the
Constable and Strossi, but anon after he dismissed the^, yet reteining still
with him 2500. Frenchmen, yt he might be able to defend the Island against the
invasion of the Castilians, not taking it well that Sansolenne and Fumey had so
wretchedly forsaken Strossi, and the Constable. But the enemy, who had lost in
that battle about 2000. men, and those for the most part of the chief men yt
he brought with him, durst attempt nothing against the Island of Tercera, but
staying for, and taking with him the fleetes that about that time of the year
do usually come out of the East, and west Indies, returned into Portugal with
his navy.

The Marquis recovered immediately after this overthrow the Isle of S. Michael:
and reenforcing his power, wanne the next year the Tercera, and whatsoever
else the king of Portugal had in those parts.

The Battle of Langside in Scotland, fought between James Stuard Earl of
Murray General of the forces of James the sixth, and Gilespick Cambell Earl of
Argile, General of the army of Marie the late deposed Queen, the 13. of May.
An. 1563.
MArie, who being imprisoned in the castle of Lochleuin, had resigned the
kingdom of Scotland unto her son James the sixth, being not a year old,
under the government of James Earl of Murraye, her base brother, made an escape
out of the castle of Lochleuin, the fourth of May, and came the next day
accompanied with a great train unto Hamilton, the which is a village eight
miles from Glasquo, where then the Regent kept his Court. The brute of the
Queens ariuall at Hamilton being spread abroad, many either that distrusted
the kings party as not strong enough, or had conceived hope of getting grace
with the Queen, or else reposed confidence in the memory of their old
services, did part openly show themselves of her ^^ction, and part secretly
procuring pardon for that they had done against her, remained with the Regent,
expecting the event of this new accident. But whereas the revolt of other bred
no great admiration, yet the departure of Robert Lord Boid, who until that day
had gotten singular good opinion of constancy, gave great occasion of diverse
speeches: insomuch that it was sharply debated at the Counsel table before the
Regent, whether they should continue still at Glasquo, or remove to Sterling,
where the King was kept. Many did vehemently counsel them to depart thence,
declaring that Hamilton, a great town was near, and the tenaunts of that
whole mighty house of the Hamiltons, spre^^^ round about them, that there came
about five hundredth Horsemen with the Queen, and many were said to be coming
out of farther places and parts, but with the Regent were almost none but his
own householde, the rest being part fled to the Queen, and part by little
and little slipped away, (all things being very quiet) every man to his
private business: and although the Citizens of Glasquo seemed faithful
enough, as they that had suffered many great wrongs at the hands of the
Hamiltons when they ruled, yet the city it self was a wast thing, nor
populous for the greatness, easy to enter in all parts. Other reasoned on the
contrary part, that all things do depend on their first beginnings, that
their departure would be infamous, and next coosen to flat running away, that
suspicion of fear was then utterly to be shunned, least they did increase the
courage of the enemies, and bring their friends out of heart: that they were
near neighbors unto the mighty families of the Cunigames, and the Semples:
and on the other side to Lenneux, the kings private patrimony: that from
thence those that were next would come within few hours, and the rest the next
day or at the farthest, within three days, that they would be a sufficient
guard, namely, with the help of the citizens, until the succors farther off
were come. This opinion prevailed at the Council table. The French Ambassador
went to and fro between both parties, rather like a spy, then a peacemaker,
as he pretended. For when he saw at the first the forces at Glasquo small, and
the power about Hamilton showed great, he vehemently encouraged the Queen to
give battle. Now had the Regent gathered together his friends out of the
nearer parts, and looked for other out of Marchland and Lowthian. And when they
were come, being about 600. very choice men, he granting them but one day to
rest themselves, minded so march to Hamilton, and out of hand to give them
battle, if he could: for he thought delay would be hurtful to him and his,
but profitable for the enemy, as whom the farthest parts of the kingdom did
favor.

In the mean time he was advertised ye next morning betimes before day, that
the enemies were gathered together from many places where they lodged, for they
trusting in their number (for they had in arms above 6500. and they knew that
the Regent had not full 4000) were determined for to march by Glasquo, and
leaving the Queen in the Castle of Dunbritton, at the pleasure either to sight
or draw forth the wars: or if the Regent (which they hoped not) would meet
them in the way, to give him battle, neither did they doubt of the event of
the fight. But he that had resolved of himself to provoke them to battle, as
soon as he could bring forth his men, stood certain hours in araie of
battle before the City, in the open field, in the way that he thought they
would march. But when he saw that their army marched a long the farther side
of the river, he straight way understanding their purpose, passed his footmen
over the river by a bridge, and his horsemen by the foords, which were then
free of the tide of the Sea, and commanded them to march to Langside. That is a
street upon the river of Carth, through which their enemies their way lay,
seated at the foot of an hill, on the Northwest the East, and the North with a
descent, but on other parts decreasing gently into a plain. They hasted
thither with so great speed, that they had almost gotten the hill, before that
their intent could be perceived by the enemy, who also coucted that place,
yea, and had the shorter way. But two things happened ill for them, and well
for us: the first, that Gilespicke Cambel the Earl of Argile, who was General
of the Queens army, being taken with a sudden pain had fallen down into a
sound, and by his fall stayed the whole army a while: the other was, that
their army being ever and anon down in a bottom, could never see at one
time all the kings army: and therefore they taking it to be small (as in truth
it was) did both contemn it, and also the disadvantage of the place. At length
when the Queens army drew near, and saw that their enemy had gotten the
place where they thought to have lodged, they took another little hill over
against it, and divided their army into two battles. All the strength they
had they placed in their forward, wherewith if they could overthrow the
enemies battle that stood against it, they supposed that they should
conquer the rest without fight, they being feared with the flight of their
fellows. The kings Chieftains had also divided their army into two battles:
in the battle on the right hand were, James Douglasse, the Earl of Morton,
Robert Lord Semple, Alexander Lord Hume, Patricke Lord Lindsey, with every one
his followers, and in the left, John, Alexander, William, Earls of Mar,
Gleucarne, and Taich, and the Citizens of Glasquo: the harquebussiers kept the
street below, and the gardems by the high way. When both armies stood
aranged, the Queens gunners being beaten from their ground by the kings,
abandoned the place: and on the contrary side, the kings horsemen being
inferior to the Queens by one half, were not able to abide the charge, but
fled. And when the Queens horsemen had thus discomfited their counterpartie,
they assaied to mount the hill, that they might also disorder the ranges of the
footmen, but being repelled by the kings archers, and a part of his horsemen,
that had rallied and returned from their flight, they returned back. In the
mean time the left wing of the enemy dismarching into the high way, down a
long where the hill descends into a valley, did although that they were
galled by the harquebusses, yet being gotten out of that straight, spread
forth their battailen. There the two esquadrons having before them on both
sides a thick trench of pikes, fought with such vaior on both sides for the
space of half an hour, the victory inclining to neither part, that those
that had broken their Pikes, did hurl their daggers, stones, and pieces of
their Pikes, and finally, whatsoever came to hand, at the heads of their
enemies. But when some of the hindermost ranks on the Kings side fled,
(whether of fear or falsehoode, it is not well known) doubtl^sse their flight
had affrighted them that fought, but that the thickness of the ranks would
not suffer them that were in the fore ranks to perceive what was done in the
hindermoste, and also those of the second battle having marked the danger,
and seeing no man coming against them, joined them selves with the auantgard
by deflecting certain of their bands by little and little, toward the right
hand, with their ranges whole. When those on the adverse part were not able to
abide their charge, they being driven back as it were with a great ruin, ran
away, neither had the vanquished escaped without some notable loss, (seeing
the hearts of many were privately incited by anger and hatred) if that the
Regent sending out horsemen into all quartiers, had not commanded that none of
them should be slain that fled. The second battle of the kings, that had
stood still until they saw the discomfited enemy to fly in every quarter
without order, and then at last turning themselves to pursue them, that turned
their backs loosed their ranks. The Queen that had stood almost a mile of
to behold the fight, took her way toward England, with the horsemen of her
part, that retired out of the battle whole, but the rest ran every man that
way that would soonest bring him home. There dyed few in ye fight, more being
worn with weariness and wounds were found lying every where along the
country: the number of all slain, was about 300. but the prisoners were more.
On the kings side were not many hurt and among them men in the chief range
Alexander Lord Hume, and Andrew Stuart, one man only was slain: the rest of
the army except a few, horsemen that followed the fliers farrre, went joyfully
to the town, where after they had given thanks to God, who had given them
almost an vnblouddie victory, against far greater forces then their own,
they gratulating one an oth^^, went to dinner. This field was fought the xiii.
of May, the eleventh day after the Queen escaped out of prison. The French
Ambassador who had stayed the event of the battle, and had in his conceit
promised assured victory unto the Queen, being now defranded of his hope,
cast up his visard, and without once taking his leave of the Regent, to whom
he (...) pres^^ded to be sent, and taking such horses and guides as he could
for soonest get, galoped toward England, but being robbed by the way, James
Dowglasse the Lord of Drumlanrick, procured that he had that again which he
lost, for the honor that he bare to the name of an Ambassador, although that
he knew that he took part with his enemies. The Regent spent the rest of the
day of the battle in taking view of the prisoners, some he let go free,
some upon suerties, the principal were kept still, and chiefly those of the
family of the Hamiltons, and dispersed into diverse prisons. The next day the
Regent went forth with 500. horse, and took the abandoned Castells of
Hamilton and Defran. The like terror forced the Queen to go into England,
either because she thought there was no place in that part of Scotland safe
enough for her, or because she did little credit the fidelity of John Maxwell
Lord Heris.

FINIS.

