A TREATISE OF AMANDVS POLANVS, CONCERNING GODS ETERNAL PREDESTINATION.

Wherein both this excellent doctrine is briefly and syncerely delivered, and
many hard places of Scripture are opened and maintained against the corrupt
expositions of BELLARMINE and other Adversaries.

S.P.O.^.



PRINTED BY JOHN LEGATE, Printer to the University of Cambridge. 1599.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL SIR EDWARD Ratcliffe knight, high Sheriff for her
Majesty in Bedfordshire, and the virtuous and good Lady his wife, increase of
honor and grace and all spiritual blessings.
IT is recorded of a certain merry fellow (right W.) who passing by Zeno the
Philos. his school at such time as the old man was reading lecture to his
scholars about the definition of virtue, merrily asked one in the company, how
long he thought it would be, ere the Philosopher would use virtue, that at
these years had not learned what it was. This apothegme though uttered in jest
(according to a proverb we have, Ridentem dicere verum quis vetat: a man in
merriment may mean good earnest) may both serve my turn for a just apology,
and also meet with the braine-sicke humor of this scribbling age (whereof I
may use the Poets words (Tenet insatiab^le multos Scribendi cacoethes, Men are
mad upon booke-making) that does nothing else but write, and nothing less
the^ use aright, the things already extant. For albeit the great respect of
your honorable desce^t, self worthiness, and deserts to me: besides the
affinity of both out houses by my Fathers matching with the virtuous
gentlewoman your sister, or the consideration of mine own place and calling
(thus far furthered by your Worships care and kindness) might justly exact
something of mine own invention; yet partly the vnnecessarines of se^ding new
books abroad, without caring of profiting by the old, and partly the
disabilitie of my own wit that way, altogether insufficient to produce any
thing, that is able to pass the censure of mine own quill, much les the
judgment of another coal, has induced me rather to carry other men's books,
the^ exhibit any of mine own, give the spurs to another then stir my
self, and commend to my friends such as I find sap and soundness in rather
then fill the world with new or newefangled stuff my self. Let such as the
Lord has imparted a greater measure of his grace unto that way, employ their
tale^ts; I, who am the least of all my masters servants, think it sufficient
with Ahimaaz, 2. Sam. 18.19. to be sent second, seeing he thinks me unworthy
to carry the first tidinges with Cushi, knowing the Lord may so bless my
indeauoure^ that I may overtake if not outstrip the first messenger, that is,
do as much good by translating, as some do by first inventing. But to the
point. The blindness of former ages has been so gross and palpable, that
they would strain at gnattes and make such bones at a greek word, that they
would balke it with a Graecum est, non potest legi, its greek, I cannot skill
of it, but in points of deeper learning especially divinity, and especially the
point of Predestination, it was esteemed the highest branch of all impiety,
and praesumption surmou^ting that of the Bethshemites, 1. Sa^. 6.19. that would
peer into the arc, to diue never so little into that doctrine. Contrariwise
our days have hatched such pregnant wits, that learning seems to go a
begging, so that both children and chapmen, martial and mechanical, that
never set foot within the school gates can as roundly talk of Predestination
and universal grace, as any point in their own trade. But as I must needs
mislike the neevish niceness of the one, that would tie our faith to the ring
of the Church door; and with the good collier to believe as the church
believes and the Church to believe as he believes, by an intricate and
implicit says, so cannot I approve of their rotten ripeness and overripe
rottenness, that vnreverently do handle holy things, and lay profane hands
on God's ark. There is a modest wisdom taught in Sion, to be wise, but with
sobriety, and the language of C^^^^^ must be learned, but with this memento,
that it is a holy language. Whether so deep matters be to be dealt in, I do
not now dispute, mine author shall decide that controversy. To return
therefore unto your Worships, for your own and others instructions in this no
less dangerous then deep a point, I have done into English this treatise of
another man's, that you whom God has advanced to great place in your country,
may both have your self what to hold, and also countenance the Orthodoxalliud
gements of the learned about you, as occasion may serve: your Worships own
lone to religion, and the forwardness of the excel^e^t lady your wife have
imboldened me thus farte. It remains that I crave of your Worships, that as
I have presumed to publish this abroad under your protection, so my endeavoures
might be accepted by you both, that, whom for your virtuous disposition the
world does agnize for a blossom of true nobility and for the excellent
ornaments of all gentilitie, that you are beutified with, all men admire for a
mirror of men, I among other may also have cause to admire for vouchsafing me
regard the least of all men. And thus resting in your favor I commit you both
to the grace of the almighty, which as it has hitherto bin your direction so
he grant it may still be your Wor. load-starre to everlasting happiness.

Camb. this 24. of Ian. 1598. You Worships unworthy servant and Or^t^r Roger
Gostwyke.

OF GODS ETERNAL PREDESTINATION.
Whether this doctrine may be taught.
BEing to entreat of Gods everlasting predestinat. with the help of Christ, I
have thought good first of all to handle this question: whether we may
publicly propound this doctrine to the people in the Church of God or no? I
am of opinion I may do it, and that for these reasons. 1. Because God has
delivered and commended the same by his Prophets, Christ himself and his
Apostles unto the Church, as shall appear more plainly by the testimonies I
shall afterward allege. Now to say we may not teach that in the Church which
God himself has delivered, is sacrilegious impiety and wicked folly. 2.
Because the doctrine of Predestination is the foundation and principal part of
the Gospel. For the Gospel teache^^^, that God so loved the world that he gave
his only begotten son, that whosoever believed in him should not perish but
have everlasting life. What gods love is.
Phil. 3.16. This doctrine of the Gospel will not be found, unless it be showed,
what manner of love that is, wherewith God loved the world. Now the doctrine of
Predestination shows that it is the fatherly good will that God bears unto
us, that it is the free love wherewith he loves those whom he has chosen,
not that have chosen him. Malac. 1.2. that it is that everlasting and
unchangeable love, which he bears to his elect vnchaungeablie from eternity
to all eternity. The doctrine of the Gospel will not be sound, if it be not
understood that God has given his only begotten son unto us, as who was
foreknowne before the foundations of the world, 1. Pet. 1.20. as the elect of
God the father, as is plain by the testimonies I will afterward deliver. The
doctrine of faith will not stand, unless we bring it from the true fountain
thereof, namely gods free election: whereupon it is called the faith of Gods
elect, Tit. 1.1. and again that they beleeu^^, as many as were or dained to
eternal life, Act. 13.48. In brief the doctrine of justification
regeneration, and eternal life, will not stand unless the ground work thereof
be sought for and she we^ in the free election. Again, is it not a part of
the gospel and glad some tidings of eternal salvation, which Christ says
Luke 19.20. rejoice rather that your names are ^^r it (...) heaven, the same
that is Mark. 13.20. unless the Lord had shortened those dates, no flesh
should be saved: but for the elects sake whom he has chosen, he has
shortened those days, according to that he says, Mat. 24.24. that it is not
possible that the elect should be seduced by the false Christ's and false
Prophets. Consonant again to Mark. 3.26. Then they shall see the senne of Man
coming in the clouds, with much power and glory, and he shall send his
angels, and gather together his elect from the 4. winds, from the end of the
earth to the end of the heaven. And Paul Romans 8.30. Whom he has
predestined, those also he has called, and whom he has called, them he
has justified, and whom he has justified, those also he has glorified: and
v. 33. Who shall late any thing to the charge of gods elect? and again, Romans
9.23. to declare the riches of his glory toward the vessels of mercy,
prepared to glory. And Romans 11.7. The elect have obtained namely,
righteousness by faith, and v. 5.6. a reservation is made according to his
free election: if by grace, not now of works, else grace is not grace: if by
works, then not of grace, otherwise work is no work, and 1. Cor. 1.27. and
above all in that excellent gospel-thanksgiuing. Ephesians. 1.3.5.6. Blessed be God
and the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed with all spiritual
blessing in heaven, in Christ, as he has chosen us in himself before the
foundation of the world, that we might be holy and unblameable before him with
love, who has predestined us, whom he has adopted into his sons by Jesus
Christ in himself according to the good pleasure of his will, to the praise of
the glory of his grace, etc. and verse 11. In him also we are chosen, when we
were predestinate according to the purpose of him, which works all things
after the counsel of his own will. and Iam. 2.5. And in a word Gods promise
that he will keep his elect from worshipping the beast, which all the
inhabitants of the earth shall worship, whose names are not written in the
book of life of that lamb which was slain before the foundation of the world
was laid. Apoc. 13.8.

Therefore he that denies the doctrine of predestination is a part of the
Gospel, renounceth God and Christ and the Gospel. And what is the doctrine of
reprobation else, but an illustration of the greatness of the grace of election.
For contraries laid one by another, are more perspicuous. We never perceive
the sweetness of the grace of election truly indeed, till such time as we see
that it is not given to all men, but is a gift peculiar to such, as he
especially loves from everlasting.

3 The third reason is, for that this doctrine of predestination has many
uses, which they defraud the Church of God of, that would have this doctrine
smothered from the people, or only to be canuased in the schools among the
learned. 1. As first it makes to the confirmation of our affiance concerning
the certentie of our salvation in Christ against all distrust and despair, The
uses of this doctrine.
as is plain by these places of Scripture. Luke 10.20. Luke 12.32. Ioh. 6.37.
Ioh. 10.28. and 17.12. 2. Secondly, it helps to fortify us against pride and
carnal security, that we may ascribe all the glory of our salvation, not to
our selves but to God alone that has chosen us to salvation, as appears by
these places. Romans 11.5, 6. Math. 11.25. and 13.11. Ioh. 15.16. 2. Cor. 10.17.
1. Cor. 1.31. and 4.7. Ephesians. 1.3, 4. 3. Thirdly it proves the deity and
godhead of Christ. For seeing Christ has elected us to eternal life, Ioh.
13.18. and 15.19. Mark. 3.27. we gather thereupon, that he is true eternal
God. 4. Fourthly it makes to the confutation of the heresies of the Pelagian^,
Papists, and other enemies of the grace, power, and righteousness of God. 5.
Fifthly it stirs up in us a lively sense of the eternal love of God toward
us, and kindles again in us a love toward him. For who would not require him
with love again, that loves him so entirely? Mal. 1.2. Romans 9.13. 6. It
engenders love toward our neighbors, and the other elect, 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. 7.
It whetteth in ^s a longing to do good works. Ephesians. 1.4. and 2.10. 1 Thessalonians.
1.4. 2. Pet. 1.10. Lastly it breeds patience in us against the cross and all
calamities. Romans 8.28, 29. And thus having briefly handled this question, now I
will proceed by the help of Christ to the matter it self.

What is Predestination.
The eternal Predestination of God (to speak generally) is Gods holy, wise,
just, and immutable decree, whereby he has preordained all things from
everlasting with himself, to such ends as whereby he may be glorified. In
greek (...).

Whereas Predestination every where is taken only for the predestination of
men to certain ends, we are to know that is done by a synecdoche: for
proorismus pertaines as well to other things, as is evident by places of
scripture, which I shall after be occasioned to quote.

1 Predestination is twofold: of matters; of men. Predestination of things or
matters is Gods decree, whereby he has ordained universally all things from
everlasting to their proper end, that should be made or done. As, the things
that Herod and Pontius Pilate with the Gentiles and people of Israel did, the
hand and counsel of God decreed all should be done, thas is to say, did
predestinate or appoint beforehand to be done. Act. 4.27. So says Paul, 1.
Cor. 2.7. that God did ((...)) that is, predestinate or decree the wisdom
which is hid in a mystery, before the world to our glory.

2 Predestination of men or persons is Gods decree, whereby they are ordained
from eternal to certain ends. And it is twofold, Election and Reprobation.
Election.
Election is predestinating to a gracious and blessed end: and it is 1. of
Christ. 2. such as are united unto Christ.

1 The election of Christ is his predestination, whereby God has designed from
all eternity his only begotten son, Christ's Election.
to be the head of Angels and men, and mediator between God and men.
Concerning this election God has given testimony by the Prophets and
Apostles. Esa. 42.1. he says, Behold my servant whom I uphold, mine elect in
whom my soul delights. Math. 12.18. Behold that servant of mine whom I
have chosen, my beloved in whom my soul does rest. Likewise 1. Pet. 1.20. it
is said, we were redeemed by the precious blood of that blameles and
unspotted lamb, that is, Christ. Foreknowne, that is, foreordained according
to the knowledge of his gracious pleasure, before the foundations of the world
were laid. Hereupon 1. Pet. 2.9. Christ is termed a living stone, refused of
men, but chosen and precious with God. In the head that election does shine and
show, by which we are adopted into the hope of eternal life. The son of God
is by the eternal decree elected to be in respect of his humane nature the
son of god, and head of men and angels. Whereupon 1. it follows, that men
and angels must not refuse him, The use.
because that were ignominious and sacrilegious against God. 2. That we may
safely and confidently rely upon Christ, seeing he was ordained by Gods
eternal counsel for our salvation, and therefore that our salvation both is
and always was in him. This point is very necessary to be known For besides
the suspicion which novelties carry with them, what assurance could we have of
our faith, if we should believe, that after some millions of years, this
remedy came suddenly in Gods head to succor men by? But some may ask this
question, seeing Adam fell not before the creation, how was Christ ordained a
redeemer? for the remedy must be after the evil for which it serves. To this
I answer, that this has reference to Gods foreknowledge. For doubtless God
before he made man, foresaw that he would not stand long in his innocence:
therefore in his great wisdom and goodness, he ordained his only son the
Redeemer, to deliver from destruction mankind that should be lost. For in this
does the infinite goodness of God more fully appear, in preventing our
wretchedness with his grace, and ordaining a restoring again to life before the
first man had fallen into death.

The Election of Christ is merely of free gift, as Austin proves, Tom. 7.
lib. 1. de praedest. Sanct. cap. 15. The Savior himself is a very excellent
proof of predestination and grace, I say the mediator between God and man,
the man Jesus Christ, who to be so, by what foregoing merits of faith or
works, did the humane nature that was in him procure? J pray you answer me,
that he, that man that was taken into the unity of person with the word which
was coeternall to the father, should be the only begotten son of God, how
did he deserve that? what good quality of his of any sort went before it? what
did he, what believed he, what asked he before, to obtain this unspeakable
excellency? did not that very man, by the words procurement and taking him up,
from the time that he began to be the son of God, begin to be the only
begotten? did not that woman that was filled with grace conceive that only
begotten son of God? was not the only son of God borne of the holy Ghost
and virgin Marie, not thorough the lust of the flesh, but by the singular gift
of God? was there any fear left in process of time that man should sin by
free will? or therefore was there no free will in sin, or was it not so much
the more, by how much the less he could serve him? surely all these things
which are particularly admirable, and other, which may truly be said were
proper in his humane nature, that is, ours, did particularly receive in him,
without any deserts at all before going.

2 Election of those that are united unto Christ is that predestination whereby
all they are ordained to salvation, that the father had appointed to unite unto
Christ, as the head. For there ought to be given a head to such as were to be
predestinate to salvation, in whose order, perfection, and virtue the
predestinate were to stand. And it is either of the blessed Angels, or of men
that were to be saved.

Election of Angels.
The Election of the blessed angels is that predestination, by which God from
eternal ordained, to stablish some angels by grace in the good wherein they
were created, to the enjoying of eternal bliss. Hereupon Paul calls them elect
Angels, 1. Tim. 5.21. J beseech ye in the sight of God, and the Lord Jesus
Christ, and his elect Angels, to keep these things. The blessedness of good
angels is twofold: first, enjoying of God: secondly, their certain knowledge,
Their blessedness.
whereby they are secure of their own everlasting standing, and never to fall
any more. Angust. E^chirid. ad Laurent. cap. 29. Now the angels were elect
before their creation by God, and that not for any merits of theirs, but of the
sole mercy and grace of God. And therefore their constancy and perseverance
in good, was grounded upon the good pleasure of God.

The schoolmen speak much of the angels merits absurdly, upon misconstruing
of S. Austin, as also out of a curious and subtle dispute of Anselmus, in his
dialogue of the fall of the devils.

The Elect are in Christ as in their head. Hereupon Christ himself for the
primacie he has among the angels as their head, is called an Angel, Mal. 3.1.
and hence it is that the angels are subject to Christ.

If any other object, The angels sinned not, and therefore need no mediator;
I grant indeeded they needed no redeemer, but they needed a head, by whose
hold they might cleave fast and firm unto their God. They did not need any
restorer, but they did a preserver in good, without whom they had not remained
sure in their innocence. Bernard in his 22. sermon upon the Canticles. How can
you say, says he, that our Lord Jesus Christ was the good angels redeemer? he
that lifted up man when he was down, gave this gift to the angel that stood,
that he should not fall. By the same means drawing him out of captivity, by
the which he defended this from captivity. And in this regard, he was
redemption to both of them alike. Delivering that man, preserving this angel.
Therefore it is plain that the Lord Christ was redemption to the holy angels,
as he was rightousnes, wisdom, sanctification. Thus much says Bernard. And
this opinion some other do gather out of Col. 1.20. and 2.10. but the
faithful servant of Christ Theod. Beza extracts a truer sense of those places.

And thus much of the election of the blessed angels, now follows of the
election of such men as are to be saved.

Election of men.
The election of men to be saved is Gods predestination, whereby he has
decreed with himself from everlasting what me^ he would one day take out from
the rest, and exempting them from the common destruction, adopt to salvation.

Sign of the word.
The name of election is ambiguous: for one while it signifies the taking of one
into some office, 1 as Saul was elected to the kingdom, and Judas Iscariot to
be an Apostle. 2. Another while it signifies Gods eternal decree of separating
and taking some from the rest. 3. of mankind and adopting them to eternal
life: again, sometime that execution of his eternal decree, done in time. 4.
And lastly sometime by a metonymie, the elect themselves, as Romans 11.7. the
election has obtained, that is, the elect. Here it is taken in the second
signification. It shall not be amiss to consider, the causes, effects,
subjects, adjuncts, disperats, comparats, coniugats, and examples thereof.

The efficient ca^se of election.
The proper cause or the principal efficient is only God the father, the
son, and the holy ghost: according to these proofs. Ephesians. 1. 3.4. Blessed be
God and the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with all
spiritual blessing in heaven, in Christ, as he has chosen us in him before
the foundation of the world was laid, to be holy and unblameable before him
with love. Ioh. 13.18. I speak not of you all, I know whom I have chosen.
and John 15.16. you chose not me but I you. And of the holy ghost we read he
said Act. 13.12. Separate me Paul and Barnabas to the work whereunto I have
called them. Now this calling of the holy Apostles, was with eternal
election, as Paul declares saying, Gal. 1.15. that he was separated to the
Apostleship from the womb. Therefore election is made no les, by the son and
by the holy ghost then by the father, but it is chiefly ascribed to the father,
because he is as the fountain of the Godhead, so the beginning of every
action in the deity.

Hence we ^ather 1. that none of us chose himself, none ordained himself to
eternal life: so that damnable is the ledger demaine of a certain Apostat
corrupting that place, Act. 13.48. And they believed, so many as were ordained
to eternal life:, and construing it thus, that ordained and disposed
themselves to embrace eternal life. 2. that the father son and holy ghost
are one God in essence.

Concerning the cause that moved God to choose us, or for which he made choice
of us, there is hard hold and great controversy both a great while since in
Saint Austins time exercising and at this day troubling the church. For the
plain teaching whereof, it shall be good to show, which is not the cause for
which God chose us, then which is. Now of all this disputation let this be the
ground or position. The cause whereby god was moved to choose us or for which
election was made, Of false causes.
is not man's will, nor faith forseene, nor merits of men foreknowne, nor
nobility of birth, nor any other prerogatives, nor yet the merit of Christ,
nor lastly the end it self of election, but only that good pleasure of God
founded and grounded upon his free love.

This position consists of two parts: 1. the remoouing of the false causes.
2. the assertion of the true one. There are 6. false causes removed away, man's
will, says foreseen, men's merits, dignity or prerogative of stock, Christ's
merit, and the end of election. Whereupon we say the decree of election is
absolute, for that the efficient cause, for which it was made, was not the
condition of man's will, faith foreseen, foreknowne merits, worthiness any way
etc.

Therefore for the first, Election was not made for the free will of man, or
because man did will, and that forthese reasons. 1. The Apostle does flatly
deny it, Romans 9.16. Election is neither of him that wills nor of him that
runs, but his that has mercy namely God. Not because man would and man
would not but because by our own strength we are not able to will. Here he
calls our will, the thought, desire, and laboring of our mind, this will
does the Apostle plainly exclude from election, ascribing it wholly to Gods
mercy, which takes us unto him, neither willing, nor desiring, no nor yet so
much as once thinking on it of our own accord.

They that go about to prove out of these places that any strength is
attributed to our will, but indeed of it self can do nothing, without the
help of Gods mercy, are wide: for the Apostle does not show what is in us,
but excludes whatsoever does seem to be in us. 2. Because man's will is not
eternal, and therefore cannot be the cause of eternal election. The efficient
cause must of force be either in time or at least in nature before his effect.
But man's will is not first so much as in nature, much less in time before the
decree of election: therefore it is not the efficient cause thereof. 3. If we
were elected for our will, many inconveniances would grow thereupon. 1. Gods
grace should be subjected to men's wills, as Prosper speaks, which is as much
to say, as that the grace of election were under man's will, as the effect is
inferior to the cause, the excellency of man's will should exceed the grace
of God electing. 2. This were to derive the beginning of salvation from him
that is saved, not from him that does save, as the same Prosper says. 3. It
were in man's power if he would to be either elect or reprobate. 4. All
assurance of salvation should be clean taken away, seeing man's will is unsure
and unstable, and we should bring in the popish suspense or doubting of
salvation. 5. Election should be by hap hazard, as depending upon the
changeable will of man, and so we should make god fortunes idol, as Luther does
well note: he should elect if men would, and he should not choose if men would
not: nay the same man should sometime be elect and sometime not be elect. So
then man's will is not the efficient cause of election.

2 Neither faith foreseen is the efficient cause of election: for the right
understanding of this, we must put off one slander that the adversaries hang
upon our backs. They say we teach, that without any respect at all of faith in
Christ Jesus, a little small number is elected, by a certain absolute decree.

First there is ambiguitie in those words: without any ^^spect at all of faith
in Christ: for it may ca^^^^ do^ble meaning, either that faith is not the (...)
cause, for which God elected us, or that he had no respect at all unto faith in
election, not so much as the effect of election. In the first sense it is
truly spoken, that we were elected without any respect at al of faith, that
is, we were not elected for faiths sake, or that faith was not the efficie^t
cause, for which election was made, and this we truly maintain. The contrary
assertion is plain Pelagianisme. In the latter sense we neither say it,
neither can it be truly said: for faith is the effect of election.

Secondly, the decree of election is termed absolute, not that it does not any
way look to faith, but it does not respect it as the efficie^t cause,
otherwise it does as an effect. This is it then that we say, That faith
foreseen is not the efficient cause for which election is made, as appears
bythese proofs.

1. It is not said any where in the Scripture that election was made for
faith, or is of faith. 2. Men's faith is not from eternal, but the efficient
cause of eternal election must be eternal. 3. Faith is the gift of God. 4.
The grace of election goes before faith, Ioh. 15.16. You chose not me, but I
you. 5. Our faith is the effect of election, Act. 13.48. So many believed as
were ordained to eternal life. 6. We obtained mercy not because we were
faithful, but because we should become faithful: as Paul professes of
himself, 1. Cor. 7.25. 7. Faith is not the cause of second grace or of
calling, by which faith is given, nor of the nearer means, namely of the word
and sacraments, much less then is it the cause of the farther remote or first
grace, namely of election. 8. If this were granted, many absurdities would
ensue. 1. Election should not be grace. 2. This were the next way to give man
the first part, and God the second. 3. The grace of election should depend on
man, and not on God. 4. There should have bin no elect: because none of his
own nature believes, but should have bin hurled headlong into miserable
perdition, out of which none could recover himself, if God did not help him
out: we are nothing, we believe nothing but so far forth as he works faith
in us, as he says without me ye can do nothing, therefore not believe; and
Paul, Phil. 1.29. it is freely given you, not only to believe in him, but also
to fuffer for him.

By all which arguments it is clear, that faith foreseen is not the efficient
cause of election, which opinion the Pelagians of our time do gainesay and
control, The adversaries proofs.
affirming that faith is the cause of election, which they go about to prove,
both by some places of scripture, and by arguments. Now they abuse 6. places
of scripture to do this.

1 2. These. 2.13. Paul says, That God did choose the Thessalonians from the
beginning to salvation by the sanctification of the spirit, and faith given to
the truth: and faith foreseen is the efficient cause of election.

Ans. First there is a fallacy of composition, in joining together things that
should not be joined, for with that word (he chose) there are joined these
words (by faith) which should not be: but to the word (salvation) the
isntrumental cause whereof is faith, for from those words (to salvation) an
ellipsis of the greek article (...) coming between have those words that
follow their dependancie, to wit, (by sanctification, and belief of the
truth.)

2. If Paul's meaning were, that we were elected elected for faith foreseen, it
should follow also that sanctification of the spirit were the efficient cause
of salvation, for the Apostle sets them both together: but sanctification of
the spirit is not the efficient cause of election, because it follows after
election, for not whom he has sanctified, those he has chosen, but whom he
has chosen, those he has both called and justified and sanctified. Seeing
sanctification is a part of glorification. Again that sanctification comes
after election is plain by Ephesians. 1.4. He chose us in him, before the foundation
of the world was laid, to be holy and blameless in his sight with love: and
faith is not the efficient cause of election. 3. I will show the true meaning
of election. Apostles speech. Paul teaches that God from the beginning or
before the foundation of the world chose the Thessalonians to salvation, which
salvation they obtain through sanctification of the spirit, and faith given to
the truth: therefore he teaches that sanctification, the spirit and beleese
given to the truth, are not the efficient causes of election, but of
salvation, being but effects of election. Therefore they are set down by Paul
as tokens and marks of election, showing that in it self it is not to be
comprehended of us. Therefore to know that we are elect of God, we need not
seek and diue into the secret counsel of god: for this is the bottomless pit
of wicked desperation. But we shall find a sufficient proof of election in
our selves, if so be that God has sanctified us by his spirit, and lightened
us to believe his gospel.

Act. 13.48. And they believed so many as were ordained to life. Ergo faith
foreseen is the efficient cause of election.

Ans. 1. The testimony is falsely cited, for they should prove that faith is
the efficient cause of election: and this that is alleged shows no more but
who did believe. 2. This speech does quite overthrow the Adversaries opinion;
for it proves, that ordination to eternal life is the cause of faith, not
that faith is the cause of ordination to life; otherwise it should have bin
said, And they were ordained to eternal life so many as believed. 3. They
offend by misinterpretation, expounding the place of Luke actiuely of our
disposition, when as the verb passive is used in the text, (...) as many as
were ordained: therefore they were ordained by another, namely of God: ergo
Luke says not, that so many as disposed themselves in mind to believe,
believed; but so many as were ordained to eternal life: now none does ordain
or dispose but God, who does predestinate his to the inheritance of eternal
life. 4. This place does prove, that faith does depend upon Gods election,
that faith is grounded on Gods eternal counsel, and that we are assertained
of election by faith.

3 Romans 8.29. it is said, whom he has foreknowne, he has also predestinate:
therefore foreknowne belief is the cause of election.

Ans. 1. They dally with us with an homonymie in the word [foreknowne,] making
us believe the Apostle used that word here for [foresaw:] but Paul uses it in
this place for [he acknowledged for his own, approved, loved,] for he speaks
of his foreknowledge, not of his bare knowing, but joined with his gracious
will, wherewith God appointed with himself in his secret and eternal counsel
to love those that should be borne and called in their due time, as it is said,
that he loved Jacob and hated. Esau, Mat. 1.2. For God is said to know such as
he vouchsafes his love, and to be ignorant of other, Exodus 33.17. Psalm. 1.6.
2. Tim. 2.19. ergo the foreknowledge, that Paul speaks of in this place, is not
his bare prescience, but the difference which he always put between his
children and reprobates.

2 This testimony is also impertinent. For the Apostle does not say, whose
faith he foreknew those also he has predestinate. Neither does h^ speak of
the faith but of the persons.

4 Hebr. 11.6. It is impossible without faiths please God. ergo faith is the
cause of election.

Ans. 1. Neither is this any thing to the purpose, because the Apostle does not
say, it is impossible that without faith any man should be electe^ from
everlasting.

2 There is an elench of a false subject. For the Apostles speech touching
reconciliatio^ with God and justification, is inconsiderate^ wrested to
election. We are elected, without foresight of our faith coming between, as
of the cause, but we cannot be acquit from the guilt of sin and please God,
that is, be reconciled without it.

3 I will show you an impossibility: if our adversaries question were true, it
should follow that none were elected; seeing we had nothing that could please
God, and we are nothing nor believe nothing, but in as much as he works it in
us, both to will and to work. Therefore it is wrongfully imputed to faith
foreseen, which should rather be ascribed to grace and Christ, in whom we are
loved and elect.

5 Paul says, Romans 11.20. Thou stand by faith: ergo faith is the efficient
cause of election.

Ans. 1. It is beside the matter: for he says not, Thou art elected to
eternal life for thy faiths sake.

2 There is another elench of the false subject, detorting that foolishly to
election that is spoken of the perseverance of the Saints. Thou stand
through faith, that is, thou do persevere in the people of God, in the
communion of the Church.

6 Romans 11.23. And they also if they remain not in unbelief, shall be grafted
in, ergo faith is the cause of el^^^ion.

I answer, (...) ^^^s is as little to the purpose, both for the words and
sense. For the words, he says not, they shall be elected to eternal life.
For the sense: the election to life is not to be any more, but it is past,
before the world began. Now Paul speaks of a matter that shall be, they shall be
ingrafted.

2 It fails in the subject: the place does handle their calling to the
Church, not election.

3 To be ingrafted in this place, is to be made a member of the mystical
body, which is the Church, and that through outward calling. As the olive is
the Church or people of God.

Thus having cleared six places of Scripture corrupted by the adversaries, let
us now examine some of their arguments which they bring for foreseen faith.

1. Arg. Election among men is of such as seem to have some excellency above
other. Such therefore is Gods election, of them as by faith were to be better
then unbelievers.

Ans. Here is a sophisme of an equality, in making an equality between hods
election and man's, being most unlike. For 1. man's election, makes choice of
nothing but such as seems to have some excellency above other: but Gods
election because it is free, does not find but makes them that are to be
elected. Ioh. 15.16. You chose not me, but I you. 1. Ioh. 4.10. In this is
love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us. Therefore well says S.
Austin against Julian, God made choice of none that was worthy, but by his
choice made them worthy. 2. Man's election is with a long or at least
sufficient delibetation before hand, so is not Gods: for all the works of God
are known to him from everlasting, Act. 15.3. Man's choice may fail, so does
not Gods: therefore repentance often follows that, but this is without
repentance.

2. Arg. If God be better excused by saying he chose them, whom he foresaw
would be worthy, and believe, and rejected them, whom he foreknew would be
unworthy and unbelievers, the^ it follows that faith foreseen is the cause of
election. But he is: ergo

Ans. It is a false supposition that God needs to be excused, for choosing some
and rejecting other: and again that one excuse is better then an other. For
God stands not in need of any excuse, not the best that can be. For what shall
the most omnipotent Creator need to purge himself to his most base and weak
creature? though he had cast off all men, and chosen none at all, who should
accuse him, and before what judge? 2. The assumption is false, because it
takes away the glory of salvation from God, and gives it unto man.

3. Arg. Look how God does save us in time, by the same he did choose us from
eternal: but he saues us by faith: ergo he chose us for faith.

Ans. 1. I deny the consequence, because there is more in the conclusion then
was in the premises. It is one thing, by faith: an other, for faith. As we are
justified by faith, not for faiths sake. 2. There is a fallacy in the
consequence of the proposition: for the consequence in likelihood is converted
with the antecedent. Thus it should be, By what means God saves us in time,
by the same he decreed from eternal to save us. But now the decree of election
does not stretch so far: for God in time saves us by the preaching of the
gospel: did he therefore choose us by the preaching of the gospel? he saves us
by the ministers of the word, did he choose us therefore by them?

4. Arg. If God foreknew who should believe, then he chose by faith foreseen:
but the first is true: as appears by Augustine, tract. 42. upon John, upon
those words, Ioh. 8. He that is of God, hears the words of God: where S.
Austin says, God knew who should believe: ergo the latter is true also.

Ans. I deny the consequence of the connex: otherwise many absurdities would
follow as well as, if God foreknew that Saul should be of a tall stature,
therefore for his tallness he decreed to make him king. Again, if God foreknew
who would do good works, then he chose them for good works: for the bare
prescience is not the cause of things. 2. Austins testimony does the
adversaries little pleasure, but rather overthrows their assertion. He does
not, says Austin, put a difference in their merit, or finds any thing in
men, but Christ foreknew who should believe. According to this predestination
the Lord spoke, not for that he found any, that were already of God.

5. Arg. All that are elect are elect in Christ: but without consideration of
faith, none is in Christ: therefore without consideration of faith none is
elect.

Ans. 1. The conclusion is doubtful: because it may have a double force; 1.
that we are elected into faith, and so it were true, because we are elected
both to the end, and to the means leading to the end. 2. That we are elected
for faiths sake, as our adversaries mean it, but so it is false.

2. This syllogism has four terms: 1. all the elect. 2. to be elect in
Christ. 3. without respect of faith. 4. to be in Christ.

3. Though we should grant this proposition, [They are elect in Christ,] yet
for all that there were four terms, because of the homonymie of the word
[Elect.] For in the proposition it is a nowne substantive; in the conclusion, a
participle of the passive voice. Now every one knows that has the least
smacke of logic that substantia and passio, substance and suffering, are two
diverse things.

6. Arg. Austin makes faith foreseen the cause of election, in his book
depraedest. Sanct. cap. 3. J brought my reason to this point (says he) to say,
God therefore in his foreknowledge chose no man's works, which he himself
would give: but in his prescience he chose faith, so that whom he foreknew
would believe in him, him he chose.

Ans. They offend by citing a testimony that is not authentike. 1. Because
Austin retracted this very thing, yea and that in the very same book, and that
self same place. For he presently crosses it, saying, J had not yet sought
diligently, nor found, what manner of matter Election of grace is, neither
would I have said it, if J had known that faith is found among the gifts of
God. For it is said, I obtained mercy, that I might be faithful, not because
I was faithful. The same opinion of faith foreseen, as it were the rags and
relics of Pelagianisme, he plainly confesses. Retract. lib. 1. cap. 23.

2 This opinion of foreseen faith, Austin himself has notably confuted. de
praed. Sanct. lib. 1. cap. 17, 19. Therefore yet it stands that we are not
elected for faith foreseen.

Neither is faith the isntrumental cause of Election.

1 Because faith it self is altogether the effect of election. Act. 13.48. And
they believed as many as were ordained to life everlasting. Now an effect can
neither be efficient nor isntrumental cause of its own cause.

2 Faith is not from eternal, but the cause of eternal election must be from
eternal: for it is not likely in any reason, that the efficient cause of a
thing that was from all eternity, should be a thing that began to be but in
time.

3 Faith comes after election in her due time, as Paul speaks of himself,
1. Cor. 7.25. I have obtained mercy at Gods hand, that I might be faithful.
So says Justin Martyr in his dialogue with Trypho the Jew. page 202. Here now
if J shouldrecken up all other things that Moses ordained, I could prove they
were figures and notes and denouncements of such things as were to befall unto
Christ, and them that were foreknowne that they should believe in him. And
Augustine, tom. 7. lib. 1. de praedest. Sanct. cap. 17. Let us understand the
calling whereby the elect were made, not that were elected because they did
believe, but who are chosen to believe.

4 There is not the same reason of election and justification. For they that
are to be saved are actually and in deed elected, even before they believe, as
Paul, as Dionysius Areopagita, Damatis, and other that being at man's estate
learned Christ. But no man is actually justified, but he that believes already.

3 Neither are merits of good works the efficient cause of election. Works.


1 So Paul avouches, Romans 9. 11, 12. When the children were not yet borne, and
had done neither good nor ill, that the purpose of God, which is according to
election should remain firm, not of works but of him that calls. and
Moses, Deuteronomy. 9.4, 5, 6.

2 Election is not of him that runs, Romans 9.16. that is, must not be imputed
to man's industry, study, or labor.

3 Election is of grace by Paul's record, Romans 11.5, 6. Therefore now there is
a reservation made according to free election. If by grace, then not of works,
otherwise grace were not grace.

4 The merits of good works are not from everlasting, and future matters
cannot be the efficient of election that was made from everlasting. 2. Tim.
1.9. Who has kept us and called us with a holy calling, not of our works, but
of his own purpose and grace, which was given unto us in Christ Jesus before
the world.

5. God foreknewe and prepared good works also before hand, in which the elect
should walk, Ephesians. 2.10. We are his wormanship made in Christ Jesus to good
works, which God has prepared that we should walk in them.

6 Good works are the effect of election Ephesians. 1.4. as be chose him before the
foundation of the world was laid, that we should be holy and unblameable before
him with love.

7. No man can met it at all at Gods hand, by Paul's witness. Romans 11.35. Who
gave unto him first, and it shall be restored unto him.

8. If merits should be made the efficient cause of election, these
inconveniences would ensue. 1. Election should not be grace, as Paul collecteth
Romans 11.6. if of works, then not grace, else work now: were not work. 2. we
had matter to boast of. 3. God should be made subject to men. 4. Election and
salvation should be uncertain.

9. The Jesuits themselves deny that we are elected for works foreseen, as
Bellarm. tom. 3.3. general controversy, lib. 2. de gratia and lib. arbit.
cap. 9. and so forth.

Therefore the opinion of Ambrose Catherinus and other Papists is false, that
hold that merits of good works foreseen are the efficient cause of election.

Now they uphold their opinions with some places of the scripture.

1 Romans 8.29. Whom he foreknew, The Papists proofs.
those he has predestined to be conformable to the image of his son, Out
of which place they reason thus. If God has predestined those who^e he
foreknew should be conformable in the merits of works to the image of his
son, then he did predestinate them for their merits of works: but he did, as
is alleged. Ergo

Ans. 1. The assumti^o is false. 2. to prove that they wrest that testimony
to a wrong s^ese. For Paul does not teach that they are predestinate of God,
whom he knew would be conformable in merits of works to the image of the
son of god, but that God did predestinate those whom he foreknew, that is,
appointed to hold for his sons, to this that they should be conformable to
the image of his fonne: but wherein? in bearing the cross, whereunto they were
appointed. Therefore the conformity to the image of the son of God, is the
end of Predestination, no efficient meritorious cause. Bellarmine does thus
and rightly expound this saying of Paul, whom he foreknewe by his knowledge of
approbation, whom he loved, whom he would, those also be predestined to be
conformable, that is, that they should be conformable to the image of his
son: for to know and foreknowe in the scripture is often taken for his
knowledge of approbation. As Romans 11. God has not shaken of his people whom
he foreknew, 2. Tim. 2. The Lord knows who are his. Math. 5. I know you not.
Psalm. 1. The Lord knows the way of the just. Ioh. 10. I am a good shephard and
I know my sheep.

Here they make an exception: Paul does not say he predestined the^ that they
should be like, but he predestined them being like. (to be, or that they
should be, are not in.)

Ans. I grant indeed, the words (that they should be) are not expressed, but
they must necessarily be understood, for the verb substa^tiue is usually left
out in Paul. 2. much less does the Apostle put in those words which they do,
namely, that they are predestined that should be made like the image of the
son of God. 3. The Apostles words depraved, in placing the conformity to the
image of the son of God among merits, which the Apostle places in bearing
the cross, as is clear by the place where the Apostle shows from the very
order of election, that all the afflictions of the faithful are nothing else
but the way whereby they are made like to Christ. Therefore we should not grieve
at it, nor think much to be afflicted, unless we will think much at the
Lords election, whereby we are predestinate to life: or take it ill to show
forth the image of the son of God in us, which is the preparatiue to heavenly
glory. The sum of all is this, that his free adoption wherein our salvation
does consist, cannot be severed from this other decree, by which he ordained us
to the cross, because none can inherit heaven, that is not first made like the
only begotten of God.

2. 2. Tim. 2.20. In a great house there are not only vessels of gold and
silver, but also of wood and stone, some to honor, other to dishonor.
Therefore if any purge himself from these things, he shall be a vessel of
honor, sanctified and fit for gods uses, and fit for every good work. From
hence they dispute thus, If any man shall purge himself from these, he shall
be a vessel to honor etc. Therefore predestination is for good works sake, the
first is true by the Apostles own words, therefore the latter also.

Ans. In the proposition there is a fallacy of the false cause, for the
purging of ones self from the dross of false doctrine, such as was that of
Hymeneus and Philestus, and other corruptions of the wicked, is falsely
alleged to be the efficie^t cause of election. Paul in this present place
only shows, how we may know who be vessels of honor, that is, elect,
namely by true doctrine and pure life, according to Christ's rule, by their
fruits you shall know them. For this purging consists of 2. things, a
separation from heretics, erring from the truth and subverting some men's
faith, the words of which heretics eats like a canker, and 2. amendment from
the natural stain. In a word, Paul here does not teach what is the efficient
cause of election, but only what is the sign and token thereof.

Object. They urge Paul's words he shall be a vessel to honor. Ergo
predestination depends upon works foreseen. Ans. I answer we must beware
of the double signification of the word (shall be) which does not signify any
thing else, but he shall declare that he is, or he shall be known to be.
Bellarmine answers very well to this, save for two things. 1. he says men are
made vessels to honor by their own actions. 2. that God does justify us, but
so as that our free will does concur, and work together with his grace.

3. Apoc. 3.11. hold that thou have that none may take away thy crown. From
hence they reason thus. If the crown may be lost by ill works, God has
predestined none to a crown, but by foresight of good works.

Ans. 1. The defendants of prescience of works are ouershot in the
signification of the word (crown) For Christ in the named place speaks of the
crown of the Ecclesiastical ministry, not of the crown of eternal glory.
For he exhorts the bishop of the Church of Philadelphia to be constant in his
ministry, lest if he faint and fail in his duty, another be put into his
room.

2. The assumption is true but only of the crown of the Ecclesiastical
office, and not of the heavenly glory: many may loose the crown of their
bishopric, without any change of Gods election to eternal life: but the
crown of glory none can loose.

3. There is no connection in the proposition, for it does not follow: for
what? if ill works are the cause that the crown of ones bishopric may be
lost, shall good works be the cause of election to the crown of glory? so
this objection fails in argument. Bellarmin does not answer here currantly.
For he says out of Thomas Aquinas 1. p. quaest. 23. art. 6. ad 1. That the
crown of glory may be due in 2. respects, of predestination, and of merit;
and though in the first regard it cannot simply be lost, yet in the latter it
may. But the crown of glory is due to none, but is bestowed by gods free gift
to whom soever it is given, and ergo due debt by notitle.

4. Mat. 25.15. The Lord deals his tale^ts to every one according to their
own virtue, and this they do also auerre. If that be so, then by foresight of
merits, or disposing of nature: but it is. Ergo. Ans. They corrupt the place,
with a false translation: for whereas indeed the vulgar has it so, the greek
text is according to every ones ability: for so the greek word (...). 1.
power puts the matter out of all question. 2. The proposition does not follow:
False causes of Election.
for what consequence is this, If God does distribute his tale^ts to every man
according to his power, therefore he chooses unto life for foreseen merits.
For dividing his talents and election to eternal life is not all one, but it
is a bestowing of gifts, which God gives to every man, according to their
calling for the enlarging of Jesus Christ his kingdom, such as the reprobates
have also. For that servant that had but one talent is the pattern of a
reprobate, for he shall be cast into utter darkness, that is, he shall be shut
out of the kingdom of God, which is a kingdom of light. 3. Whereas it is
further said according to his own power, therein is not noted the efficient
cause of the bestowing the gifts, but the measure, as if he had meant thus, he
gave to every one a greater or smaller measure of gifts, according as he had
bestowed ability upon every one. That is, knowledge, wisdom, and dexterity in
following his calling. For God as he enabled every man with power and cunning
to deal, so he inioyneth him a bigger or less work: to one he gave 5.
talents, to another 2. the other one, that is, he bestowed more gifts upon
some, and fewer on other, thereafter as he enabled him with gifts to use them
well and lay them out to best advantage. Therefore that power also is not the
disposition which every man has of nature, but grace given to every one of
God, to use the talent well that is committed unto him.

4. This place cuts the throat of the adversaries opinion. For if God does not
distribute his gifts for deserts, as is clear by that which is already said,
then much less does he choose us to eternal salvation for our deserts.

Math. 28.8. Call the laborers and give their hire. Whence they argue thus, if
eternal life be a reward, then they that are elected thereunto are elected for
their merits: the reason is, by course reward is given for merits.

Ans. 1. There is an homonymie in the proposition in the word (reward.)
Properly a reward is the due requital of desert. Reward.
But eternal life in this sense is not called a reward, but a busiuely, being
in truth a mere gift, as Paul declares Romans 6.23: and it is not the wages of
servants but the inheritance of sons, for the son of the bond maid shall
not be heir, but the son of the free woman. Gal. 4.30. Whereupon it
follows, that there is no coherence in the proposition.

2. This place quite and clean overthrows merits. For lest we should think
the reward which the Lord promises us, comes in way of merit, he propounded a
parable, wherein he resembled himself to the master of a house that sendes all
he could light upon, to work in his vineyard, some at the first hour of the
day, other at the second, some at the third, and some at the eleventh. Now at
night he gives them their hire every man alike, not because any deserved so,
but because he would needs do so. This has Ambrose very well declared de
vocat. sect. lib. 1. cap. 3. In this rule, says he, of comparison the Lord
has taught the diversity of diverse kinds of callings, belonging all to one
grace, where out of doubt, they that were sent into the vineyard at 11. of
the clock, and made equal to the^ that had labored all the day long,
resemble the estate of such as for the commendation of the excellency of
grace, at the end of the day and last cast of their life, Gods mercy did
reward: not paying the price of their work, but pouring upon them whom he
elected without works, the riches of his bounty, and that they who had toiled
and moiled, and yet had no more then the last, might know they received the
gift of grace, not the wages of works.

6. Matthew. 25.34. Possess ye the kingdom that was prepared for you before the
foundation of the world was laid. For I was an hungered, and ye gave me to
eat, etc. hence they make this collection. If the kingdom of God be possessed
for good works, Election was for good works: but the first is true: ergo the
second.

Ans. 1. The assumption is false. 2. In the proof they offend by alleging a
place nothing to the purpose. For Christ does not say, Possess the kingdom
for your works sake: neither can this meaning be drawn out of his words for
then Christ's speech could not hang together. For if the kingdom of God be
given for merits sake, then not to the blessed of his father. But Christ
calling them the blessed of his father, puts them in mind that their salvation
does proceed from the mere mercy of God* So then the faithful are saved,
because God the father did bless them, that is, bestowed his free favor and
love upon them. Again, if it be given for their merits, it is no inheritance
but the words of our Lord are plain, (...), that is, by right of inheritance
go and take possession, if so it betides because we are the sons of God not
by nature or merits, but by free adoption.

Object. 1. Nay, say they, but Christ reckens up the works, which he
recompenseth with the reward of heavenly glory.

Ans. They deceive us with a false cause. He rehearses up works, not as the
cause of election or salvation, but as marks and true testimonies of the true
heirs of heaven. For Christ persuades to the study of a good life, and
promises eternal life to such as do good works, but not for their good
works.

Object. 2. Nay but Christ in this recital of good works, uses the causal
particle [{potestas}, for:] ergo he teaches that works are the cause of
inheriting of heaven.

Ans. That causal preposition [(...),{potestas} for,] does not always note the
cause, but generally the consequence or argument, which is not always taken
from the cause but other heads also. As, Romans 3.22. The righteousness of God
is made manifest by the faith of Christ Jesus, toward all and upon all that
believe: for there is no difference for all have sinned and are deprived of the
glory of God. I am sure sin is not the cause of the righteousness of faith,
but a forerunning adiunct only inherent in all men. So, this is the mother of
the infant, because she will not have it cut in two. This refusal of the
childs parting in twain is not the efficient cause of the mother, but only
the true and infallible token which is the true mother in deed.

7 Act. 10, 34, 35. Peter opening his mouth said, Of a truth I do find that
God has no respect of persons, but in every nation each man is accepted of him
that fears him, and works righteousness. From this they frame such an
argument. If God does not respect the person, then he chooses for good works:
because he is no respecter of persons, but gives to every man according to his
desert, reward or punishment. And this is again confirmed by Paul, Roman.
2.11. There is no respect of persons with God. ergo:

Ans. 1. The connex holds not. 2. It proves nothing. For 1. the words
[accepter of persons] is doubtful: for it is taken in one sense when we talk
of men, and an other when we speak of God. For some judge may be said not to
regard men's persons, that in hearing of a case shows no more favor to the
rich and his kinsman, then to the poor and a stranger, and such as will give
sentence according unto law, giving every man as he deserves, and as the law
requires, good or ill. But God is here called of Peter no regarder of men's
persons in another sense, not for giving reward to one that deserves it: for no
man does deserve any reward at Gods hand at all, neither is he tied to any law,
as men are; but because in loving and accepting of men he has no respect of
nation: and the meaning is, that incircumcision does not a whit hinder God from
rewarding and approouing righteousness in a Gentile. Romans 2.11. in the other
place God is called [no accepter of persons,] because he punishes all
unrepentant sinners, whither Jews or Gentiles, making no difference between
nation and nation. 2. There is a fallacy of that that is not the cause, as if
it were. For it does not follow, because he is no regarder of persons,
therefore that election is for good works; but rather election is free, because
God did not foresee any good works in man, because there should never be any.
3. They take a great deal of needless pains to prove the assumption, which
no man does deny.

Ob. But they urge farther out of the foresaid place; that the words that
follow in Peter do prove that election was for good works. But in every
nation he is accepted of him that fears him and works righteousness. Whence
they make this collection: Therefore the study of godliness and uprightness
is the cause of election.

Ans. The proposition does not follow, by reason of the doubtfulnes of one
word: man's acception in Gods sight is double: 1. when he adopteth us by his
mere mercy called of nothing, there being nothing in our nature that he can
approve. 2. When, after he has regenerated us, he inricheth us with his
gifts, and prosecuteth with his favor that image of his son which he
recognizeth to be in us. In the first part of the proposition and saying of
Peter, this second acception of the word is: but here the question between us
is of the second.

Therefore it stands vnappeachable, that good works foreseen are not the
efficient cause of election. 4 false cause of election.
And so having removed the third false cause, I come to the fourth.

Neither worthiness of birth, or of any other prerogative is the moving cause
why God chooses us, Birth. etc.
as shall appear by these reasons following.

1. Arg. If the scripture does not teach in any place, that our worthiness is
the efficient cause of election, nor can be drawn by any good consequence out
of the same, then it is not: but the first is true: therefore the second.

2. Arg. The cause of election must be from everlasting, seeing election is so;
but man's worthiness is not: therefore it is not the cause of election.

3. Arg. If there be no natural worthiness in man, then that is not the cause:
but there is not: for all have sinned and are deprived of the glory of God,
says Paul, Romans 2.23. the same he confesses of himself and other Jews, Ephesians.
2.3. we were by nature the children of wrath, as well as others* therefore
natural worthiness is no cause.

4. Arg. If neither Abraham nor his posterity were elected, for any dignity
or worthiness before other people, then that is no cause: but they were not:
for Abraham was an idolater when God called him, and Moses says to his
offspring, Deuteron. 7.7. not because ye were more then other people, the Lord
^ad a liking to you and chose you, for you were the fewest of all people: ergo
worthiness no cause.

5. Arg. If election be not hereditarie, nor propagated by generation from
parents to children, then worthiness of stock or birthright is not the
efficient cause of election: the first part of the connex is sure: for not all
that came of the father Israel, nor that are the scede of Abraham are Israel,
or sonn^s, as the Apostle speaks, Romans 9.6, 7. therefore the consequence is
true.

6. Arg. If God has made us meet to be partakers of the lot of Saints in
light, then our own worthiness is not the cause of election: but that is plain
out of the Apostle, Coloss. 1.12. ergo this. If we will make our own worthiness
the cause of election, we must needs make it natural: but natural it is not,
for it is the gift of God. For God did not find any worthy whom he might
choose, but by choosing made them worthy, whom he might ransom out of the
power of darkness, and translate them into the kingdom of his beloved son:
ergo no meritorious cause of election.

7. Arg. If none ever was or is chosen of God to the ministry in the Church
for his worthiness, surely much less to eternal life: the antecedent is
infallibly true, the Apostle confessing it of himself, 1. Corinthians. 15.9. For.
J am the least of the Apostles, and am not worthy to be called an Apostle,
because I persecuted the Church of God, but by the grace of God I am that I am.
Now I may conclude from the less to the greater: therefore much less is any
man, for any dignity whatsoever elected of God to eternal life.

8. Arg. If God of set purpose had no respect, no not of the birthright, in the
right whereof one excelled another, then for the dignity of eldership he chose
none: but the first is true. For he was not delighted with Cain, but accepted
Abels sacrifice, refused Ismael, cast his mind on Isaac: rejected Esau,
accepted Iaacob: and in a word, gave to the younger that which he denied the
elder brother. Therefore the latter is true.

9. Arg. If any be chosen for worthiness of stock or any other matter, he had
cause to vaunt of the flesh before God: but that can no man do: therefore I
conclude, that worthiness of birth, nor of any other prerogative befide, is the
efficient cause of election.

Object. But one place of Scripture seems to make against it, and that is
Apoc. 3.4. Yet thou have some heads at Sardis which have not defiled their
garments, therefore they shall go with me all in white, for they are worthy.
Whence they argue thus: If some shall walk all in white with Christ, because
they are worthy, then they are chosen for their worthiness: but the first is
true: ergo.

Ans. There is a fallacy in the double signification of the word [worthie,]
for they are termed worthy in that place, that are made fit by Christ's grace,
being justified by Christ, which they have effectual proof of. For he is
righteous that does righteousness; but so as the tree bears fruit. But in the
proposition they are named [worthie] that have native worthiness, such as
whereby god was induced to choose the^.

2 Neither does the proposition follow. For the antecedent speaks of worthiness
or fitnes to participate the white robe, that is to say, purity from all spot,
and glittering glory, or full glorification and regeneration. And the
consequent, of the cause of electing. Now glorification or regeneration is one
thing, and election to eternal life an other. The dignity or cause of getting
the white garment, that is, the accomplishment of sanctification, is
justification: for whom God has justified, those he has glorified.

3 They conclude more then was in the premises. For the antecede^t is
indefinite, [because they are worthy,] without defining whether they are
worthy from him, or of their own nature. Now the elect are worthy, not by
nature, for so they are the children of wrath: but by grace: ergo that
worthiness is an effect of election, and not the cause.

Neither is the merit of Christ the efficie^t cause of election. 5. false cause
of election.
And least any man should misconster my meaning, they must know, that we speak
not here of the meritorious cause of our salvation, Christ's merits.
which from my soul I confess to be the merit of Christ, and that only, but
the question is, of the cause of eternal election, which eternal election is
not salvation it self, but the precedent cause of the same. Having given this
caneat in the beginning, we say that Christ's merit is not the efficient cause
of eternal election, which I prove thus.

1. The cause of eternal election must be eternal, this is not. Ergo

2. If Christ himself as he was mediator, was elected from eternity, then
his merit is not the cause of election: but that is true, 1. Pet. 1.19.20.
which was ordained etc. Ergo

3. It is the effect thereof and ergo not the cause. For God did not therefore
choose us, because Christ was to die for us, but therefore Christ died for us
because God had chose us in him.

Now against this doctrine, the adversaries make these objections.

Object. 1. We are elected in Christ, therefore for his merit. The proof of
that is, Ephesians 1.4.

Ans. The connex is faulty by misinterpretation of the place, for there (in
Christ) is not the same that for Christ's merit, but he has chosen us in
Christ, as members in the head. Then here Paul does not show the cause for
which we are elected, but the mean or subject in whom. Christ indeed is the
mean in who^e we are elected, in whom we are joined and united with God that
chose us: he is the head in whom the election of the members is sure and so
the order of election is laid out, 1. the head is chose, 2. the members in the
head. Because the heavenly Father found no worth in all the seed of Adam, he
cast his eyes upon Christ, to choose members as it were out of his body, whom
he would take up into the participation of life. Therefore we are elect in
Christ, because we were no way capable of such excellency in our selves.

Ob. 2. As we are justified in time, so were we elected before the world was
made. But we are justified in time by the merit of Christ. Ergo

Ans. The proposition is false: for not the decree of election, but the decree
of justification is an swerable to justification: therefore if they would make
this argument prove any thing, they should frame it thus: as we are justified
in time, so God before the world decreed to justify us, but we are justified
for Christ's merit, therefore so God decreed to do it. And this I grant with
all my heart: but this is not the question in controversy.

Object. 3. In whom we have redemption and remission of sins, and in whom
we are taken into the company of the Saints, in him we are elected. But by
Christ apprehended by faith, we have redemption etc. therefore for him we are
elected.

Ans. 1. I deny the conclusion, they put one thing in the proposition and
conclude another: for thus it should follow, ergo we are elected in Christ,
which in the sense above showed we confess. For Paul teaches the same to the
Ephesians. 1. there are 4. termini. 1. in whom we have redemption etc. 2. to
be elected in Christ. 3. to have redemption for Christ. 4. to be elected for
Christ.

Object. 4. If election be done without respect of Christ laid hold on by
faith, then also without respect of those benefits which proceed from Christ,
as redemption and remission of sins. But not without these: for then we
should be saved without these, which is as blaspemous as impossible. Therefore
not without respect to Christ.

Ans. 1. I grant the conclusion of the principal syllogism, if it be rightly
understood, for if election be made in Christ as Paul speaks then not without
Christ. But if their meaning is this, that election is not made but for Christ's
merit, I utterly deny it.

2. There is a double signification in that phrase (without respect of Christ)
for there may be many and diverse respects of one and the same thing, according
to the manifold and diverse arguments and mutual affections in the same.

3. There is a strange kind of speech in that phrase (if election be made
without respect or looking unto of Christ apprehended by faith.) For first it
may note, that God when he made election laid hold on Christ by faith, which
is most fond to say. 2. or if it be meant of men, it should follow that
before they were chosen they laid hold on Christ by faith, which is absurd.
This they should say if election is made for Christ, who^e me^ should after
apprehe^d by faith

4. Again there is a double meaning in the consequent of the proposition.
(Ergo also without beholding or respect of those benefits that proceed from
Christ.) 1. that we are not elected to be made pertakers of redemption and
remission of sins. 2. or that we are not elected for redemption etc. If it be
taken in the first sense, the consequent will not follow of the antecedent; in
the second it does, if the antecedent be taken in this sense, if election be
made for Christ's merit. But both ways is sophistical for their double meaning.

5. The same amphibolie is in the assu^ption, for it may be understood 2.
ways, either that election is made to that end, that we should be partakers of
his benefits, or that election is for those benefits, as the moving cause,
which none will grant that is well in his wits I trow.

6. In the probatio^ of the assu^ptio^, the co^nnex proposition is false. There
being a manifest confusion of Gods decrees, making the decrees of election and
redemption all one. But who sees not they are several. Therefore seeing there
is no soundness either in the principal syllogism, nor yet in the
prosyllogisme it it is a clear case, that the Adversaries opinion is very
false. And so is the fifth false cause refuted.

Lastly, neither is the end of election, the efficient cause of election.
Because God according to his own good pleasure, would have the end first and
principally: and then the means for the ends sake.

And thus we have removed the false impellent causes of election. Now let us
come to the true.

The true efficie^t cause then for which God elected us is his only good
pleasure grounded upon his mere love and mercy, according to these
authorities. Luke 12.32. Fear not little flock, it pleases the father to
give thee a kingdom. Romans 11.5. therefore at this time there is a reservation
made according to his free election. Ephesians. 1.11. When we were predestinate
according to his purpose, that has wrought all things according to the consent
of his own will. and verse 5. who has predestinate us whom he has adopted
into his sons, through Jesus Christ himself, after the good pleasure of his
will. Deuteronomy. 7.7.8. Not because ye were more then any other people, did the
Lord affect and choose you, for you were the smallest of all people, but
because God had a love unto you. and 10.15. so greatly did the Lord love your
forefathers and like them, that he has indeed chosen his seed after them.

But beside these testimonies of scripture, there are very strong reasons for
it.

Reason. 1. If Christ himself as he was man did not deserve to be made the
son of god, the head of the Angels, and mediator between God and man, but had
that honor freely bestowed upon him, then also is our election of free gift.
But that is so. Ergo. Psalm. 2.9. it is said, (...), he gave him frank and
free, a name that is above all names, that is, as he was God and man. Again
Saint Austin proves the same, tom. 7. lib. de praedest. Sanct. cap. 15. Look
how great soever he is, says he, he is it by grace. why is grace diverse,
where nature is common? surely there is no accepting of persons with God: what
man, that is a Christian if he be well in his wits would say this. Therefore
the very fountain of grace appears unto us in our head, from whence he
powers upon all his members according to every ones measure. By that grace is
every one made a Christian, so soon as ever he believes, by which grace that
man from his first beginning was made Christ. Man is regenerate of the same
sparit, that he was generated, by the same spirit is made remission of sins
in us, by which it came to pass that he had no sin: these things God
foreknew that he would do. Therefore this is the predestination of the Saints,
which was chiefly to be seen in the holy of holies: which none can deny that
understand the sayings of truth aright. And a little after: therefore this so
great and glorious advancement of his humane nature was predestined, so high
that it could go no higher, as the divinity also was abased so low that it
could go no lower (for our sake) then it went by means of the humane nature
with the infirmity of the flesh even to the death of the cross: therefore as
that one was predestinate to be our head, so are many of us predestinate to be
his members: as for men's merits let them be silent, which perished in Adam, and
let grace bear the sway, which does reign by Jesus Christ the Lord, and only
son of god. Whosoever has seen the foregoing merits of his singular
generation, let him look for the forenamed merits of manifold regeneration, in
us his members. For that generation of Christ's was not rendered to him, but
given, to be borne of the spirit and the virgin without all guilt of sin, so
to us it was not given for any merit of ours, but francke and free, to be
regenerate of water and the spirit. And if faith has brought us to the washing
of the new birth, we must not presently think, that we gave him first, to be
recompensed again with regeneration of salvation. For he caused us to believe
in Christ, that made Christ for us in whom we do believe. He makes in men
the beginning of faith and perfection in Jesus, that made Jesus man, the author
and finisher of faith, as he is called in the Epistle to the Hebrews. Thus
far S. Austin.

2 If God has chosen us, then of Grace. For all the gifts of God are free,
wherein I refer me to Paul's judgment. True causes of election.
Romans 11.35. Who has given him first, and it shall be given unto him again.

3 Jf God has chosen us in himself, Ephesians. 1.5. which is as much to say, as he
considered nothing without himself to regard in choosing, whereby he should be
moved to elect us, it follows, that his election is of free will: but that is
true: ergo this.

4 God chose not all, but only such as it pleased him, which inequall parting
of grace, proves it to be merely of free will.

5 He has chosen us to the praise of his own glorious grace, Ephesians. 1.6.
therefore of his own free will: otherwise the mere grace of God should not be
spoken of.

6 He chose us in Christ: therefore of free good will.

7 From eternal: therefore of grace.

8 That we should be holy, therefore freely: or else these two would be
contrary, that the godly have it from election to be holy, and to come to it
by means of works.

9 The Patriarch Jacob was elect through grace: therefore election is of grace.
For, Romans 9.11. before the children were borne, when they had done neither good
nor ill, that the purpose of God, which is according to his election, not of
works, but of him that calls, might stand firm, it is said unto him, The
elder shall serve the younger.

10 The elect are vessels of mercy: therefore election is of grace.

Against this the Adversaries allege:

Object. 1. If the decree of election be according to his absolute pleasure,
then is it not according to his foreknowledge: but it is. The proof of this
proposition is this. If in his absolute will there is nothing before or after,
but in prescience there is, then if election be according to his absolute will,
it is not according to his prescience: but that is so: therefore this. This
assumption is confirmed by Paul's and Peter's words, Romans 8.29. whom he foreknew
them he predestined: and 1. Pet. 1.2. to those that are elect according to
his foreknowledge.

Ans. 1. To avoid the fallacy of the homonymie, we must know that his
pleasure is said to be absolute, not because it has no cause at all, so much
as in himself; but for that the cause thereof, is not the condition of faith,
or works, or merits, or any other thing in the men that are to be chosen: and
so we call this absolute, not in the first but in the latter sense.

2 The connex of the principal syllogism is faulty for the ignorance of the
elench, setting his absolute will and his prescience in opposition one against
another, not being contraries. For the knowledge according to which we are
chosen, by an excellency, signifies nothing else, then that special knowledge
which is spoken of, 2. Tim. 2.19. the Lord knows who are his. that
approbation love, and fatherly favor which God extends to them that shall be
saved. For those he loves, he is said to know, and not to know and be
ignorant of other, Exodus 33.17. Psalm. 1.6. Matthew. 7.27. therefore this
foreknowledge is the cause of his will or good pleasure. Therefore does not
disprooue its own effect.

3 Where it is said in the connex of the prosyllogisme, that granting
prescience, prioritie and posterioritie is granted; it is true in man's
foreknowledge, but false in Gods. For when we ascribe prescience to God, our
meaning is, that all things everlastingly were, and continually shall be under
his eyes, so that in respect of his knowledge, nothing was or shall be, but all
things are actually present, and in such sort present, that he does not imagine
by the bare idees, as we do when we remember any thing, but truly discern
and see, as if they were laid before him.

Object. 2. If the only will of God be the cause of election, then is their
acception of persons with God: but the Scripture says he is accepter of no
man's person.

Ans. They go about to ensnare us with an ambiguous word, taking [acception of
persons] in an other sense then the Scripture does, speaking of God. For the
Scripture saying, God was no accepter of persons, by the word [person] means
not man, in which sense the adversaries take it; but those things that in man
lying open to sight use to procure them favor, grace, and worship, or else
hatred, contempt, and shame. Such as are riches, wealth, power, nobility,
office, country, personable shape, and so forth: or poverty, weakness,
baseness, deformity, contempt, and the like. So does Peter, Act. 10.34. and
Paul, Romans 2.10. Gal. 3.28. show that the Lord does accept of no man's person,
because he puts no difference between Jew and Grecian, so that only in regard
of country, he should take the one and refuse the other. The same does Iam.
2.5. affirming that God in judging stands not upon riches: and Paul, Ephesians. 6.9.
and Coloss. 3.25. says, there is no respect of persons with God, because he
regards not in judging bodily freedom or servitude.

2 The connex does not follow. For then God is an accepter of persons, if in
one of the two whose meries are all alike, in one I say which is received,
there were any thing to draw Gods liking to him: but if there be nothing at
all, it follows that God looks on no man, but has his reason from his own
good will, why he makes him his son. Whereas then the one is taken, and the
other not, it proceeds not from any respect of man, but from the sole mercy
of God.

Object. 1. Here they reply thus: If God kept the same course in his
predestination toward all men, then indeed he were not an accepter of persons:
as for example; if finding all faulty she should punish all alike, or else if
innocent, he should forbear all: but that he does not: ergo.

I answer, the connex is not simply but in some sort, If God should bear the
same hand oward all men, that is, if he had pleased to mitigate the rigor of
his instice with mixture of mercy. But they handle God, as if they would
forbid him to use mercy, or when he would use clemency, would constrain him
totally to renounce judgment. 2 We acknowledge all are guilty, but we say
and say it with joy of heart, that Gods mercy does succor some.

Object. 2. Again they urge. Then let him have mercy on all.

I answer, 1. God is in debt to no man, because no man gave unto him first,
that he might challenge his own. 2. It is equity, that even in punishing he
should show himself an equal judge: which while the adversaries will not
suffer him to do, what else do they but go about to rob God of his mercy,
or else at least with this condition to yield it him, that he quite relinquish
judgment.

Therefore let this remain immooueable, that the cause for which we are
elected, is the free mercy of God only. And thus much of the efficient cause
of election of such men that shall be saved, now see we the other causes.

The matter of eternal election, is the decree, appointment, purpose, 2. The
material cause of election.
or counsel of God, that is to say, the judgment as it were of the heavenly
mind of those that shall be saved. Some say, the matter of election, are the
elect: but they take the word matter in an other sense, namely, the matter
about which, or the object. We by that name, mean the cause. And some again,
that the matter remote of election is Christ as he is Mediator, and they also
use the word abusiuely for the subject in which, or the matter wherein. Again
they say, the next matter of our election is the death and obedience of Christ,
which indeed is not the matter but the effect of election. For to this end
did Christ die for us, and was obedient to his father, because we were
eternally elected.

3. The formal cause of election.
The form of eternal election, is the putting a difference between certain men
that should be taken to salvation, from other that should perish: or, the
ordaining out of the general number, of some certain men, who being
delivered out of the general destruction should be taken to salvation. Again
other say, the removed form of election is the adoption into the sons of
God, the nearer, our union with Christ. But these are nothing but effects of
election, and not formal causes.

4. The final cause of election.
The end of eternal election is double: 1. the glory of God, that is, the
manifestation and celebration of the grace and mercy of God in his Church. For
God did choose some to make known the riches of his glory, toward the
vessels of mercy, which he has prepared unto glory. Romans 9.23. And he has
predestinate us, whom he has adopted into himself to be sons through Jesus
Christ, according to the good pleasure of his will to the praise of his
glorious grace, Ephesians. 1.5, 6.

2 An other end of election, is the glory of the elect, Romans 9.23. he says,
the elect are prepared unto glory. Now this glory of the elect, contains
both salvation, and the means leading thereunto. Therefore the elect are said
to be elected to eternal life, Act. 13.48. Elect to this to be holy and
unblameable before God with love, Ephesians. 1.4. made in Christ Jesus to good works,
which God has prepared that they should walk in them, Ephesians. 2.10.

Election then is not Gods simple will without any end. For to imagine such a
will in God as has no purposed end, is impious. For if nature does nothing in
vain, how much less God?

Thus much of the causes of election: now follow the effects.

The effects of election are these. The mediation of Christ, adoption,
effectual vocation, saving faith, justification, and glorification. And these
effects are the means and degrees by which God does bring his elect unto
salvation: the ladder of salvation, or the means of bringing our election to
the end thereof. Therefore eternal predestination is the grou^dworke and
fountain of all Gods saving benefits.

1 Christ's mediation is the first effect of election. For the cause why Christ
is our mediator, is our election.

Effects of Election.
2 Adoption, is our receiving into the number of the sons of God: which Paul
testifies is an effect of election, Ephesians. 1.5. saying, that God has
predestined us, whom he has adopted into his sons by Christ into him.

3 Of effectual vocation, which is wrought by the preaching of the word of
God, in our heart by the holy spirit, as Paul speaks, saying, Ro^. 8.30. whom
he has predestined, those also has he called: and our Lord himself, Ioh.
6.37. what soever my father gives me shall come unto me. Therefore it is by
the arbitreinent of eternal election, that the gospel of life is preached to
some, and finds place with them, and is not preached to other, or being
preached is not received.

4 Saving faith does inseparably accompany effectual calling: therefore it
flows and proceeds from predestination or election who shall beleene, says
Luther, in his dutch preface upon the epistle to the Romans. Hence is that
which Paul delivers. Romans 9. why all the Jews did not believe in Jesus
Christ? because all were not elect to life everlasting. For he says the sons
of Abraham are of two sorts: some according to the flesh, and other according
to the promise: they believed so many as were ordained to life eternal, says
Luke, Act. 14.48. therefore faith is said to be theirs that are elect of God,
Tit. 1.^

5 Justification and glorification do issue from election, Paul says, Romans
8.30. whom he has: predestined, those also has he called, and whom be
has called (namely, effectually) those also has (...) justified, and those
whom he has justified, those also has be glorified. Now this glorificatio^
contains 2. Things in it: 1. Regeneration, or sanctification.

1 Regeneration has in it continual or perpetual repentance, love,
vprightnes, and hate of sin, study of good works invocation of God: true
humility of the sons of God (for if salvation comes from no other thing unto
us but the mere grace of election, we have nothing in our selves to boast of:
true humility is our glory:) and farther, the prop of a sure affiance by
Christ's own words, (who to free us from all fear and put us out of all
danger of so many casualties, snares, and deadly broiles, promises that
whatsoever he has received to keep of his father, shall be safe:) again, a
longing desire of the bright appearance of Christ: also the gift of
perseverance in spiritual combats, that is, constancy to the very last gasp
in the true faith. Heb. 10.28. Mat. 24.13. and Romans 11.5. so therefore also at
this time is there (...) reservation made according to his free election: that
is, forasmuch as in that universal falling away well near, some remamed
steadfast in the covenant, it came to pass by virtue of the eternal election.
Therefore perseverance also depends upon free election, Ier. 32.40.

2 Glorification comprehends the accomplishment of glory in the other life, 2.
Tim. 4.8.

And thus out of election arises the Catholic invisible Church, Catholic
Church.
which is nothing else but the company of such as are predestinate to life
everlasting, as the holy martyr John Hus did truly maintain in the Council of
Constance. For so did God answer Elias when he complained he was left all
alone: I have reserved to my self 7000. men that have not bowed their knee to
the image of Baal, Romans 11.14. For they were not elect, because they had not
bin idolaters, but therefore they were no idolaters: ergo they were the Church,
because they were elect. Hence it also appears, that whosoever are
predestinate to salvation, they are all predestinate also to the means of
obtaining salvation. And therefore as the elect do necessarily come in the
end to salvation, for the firmenes of election; so also they must of
necessity be lead and walk by the means ordained to salvation, for the same
firmenes sake.

These are the effects of election. Now follow the subjects.

The subject in whom we are elect is Christ, not as he is God, The subjects of
election.
or the Word, for in this regard he chose us, Ioh. 13.18. I know whom I have
chosen nor yet as he is man, for being no more but man, he was no meet subject
for us to be chose in: but as he is God and man, our head and everlasting
mediator, who for that cause as Saint Austin does relate, was predestined
mediator, and the glass of predestination.

Now this is the cause why we are elected in him, 1. because in our selves we
were not capable of such excellency: 2. because he alone is a fit mean for us
to be chosen in, seeing in election our union and coniunctio^ with God that
chose us, was made.

2. The occupying subject or object of election are all the elect, upon whom
God does bestow the inheritance of eternal salvation, who to say truth are a
great many in themselves, as by Christ's obedience many are made righteous. Romans
5.19. Yet in comparison of the great number of reprobars, are but few according
to Christ's own words saying, many are called namely, by the outward
preaching of the word, but few are chosen.

Therefore election belonges but to a few, and not generally to all me^.
Neither is it more absurd to say that but a few are elected, then that which
our Lord himself speaks. Math. 7.14. they are but few that find life, and
Esaie cries out upon Israel, Esaias 10.21. and Paul To. 9.27. repeates it,
though the number of the children of Israel were as the sand of the sea, The
subject of election.
but a remnant shall be saved.

Against this doctrine the aduersaties do object thus.

Object. 1 Those whom God will have saved shall be saved. But God will have all
men saved as Paul affirms. 1. Tim. 2.4. therefore all men are elected to life.

Ans. There is an homonymie in the word (will) which in the proposition
signifies his absolute will, but in the assumption or allegation out of Paul,
his conditional will. For God will not by his decree and working, but by his
invitation and commandment have all men saved. But if he will have all saved
by his absolute will, either all men without exception are saved (which is not
so) or else men's nilling or refusing is more powerful and strong the^ gods
willing. As Austin bringes the Pelagians to this absurdity. lib. 1. contra.
Inlianum.

1. There is another homonymie in the assumption or Paul's words in the
adjective all, by which are not meant all and every one, but the men of all
estates and conditions, as Austine does expound it, de correp. and gratia, cap.
14. and in his Enchiridion to Laurentius, cap. 103.

2. For whom Christ died they are elected to eternal life. But Christ died
for all. Ergo.

Ans. The assumption is stark false. For Christ Ioh. 10.15. says, I lay down
my life for my sheep. and Paul Ephesians. 5.25. Christ loved his church and gave up
himself for it. Heb. 5.9. Christ was made a perfect author of eternal
salvation, to all that harken unto him. Apoc. 14.3.4. They song as it were a
new song before the throne and before those 4. beasts and the elders, and none
could learn that song, but those 14400, which were brought from the earth.
These are they that were not defiled with women, these follow the lamb
whither soever he goes, these were redeemed from men, the first fruits
consecrate to god and to the lamb.

3. Those whom Christ calls unto him, are elected to eternal life, but he
calls all Ergo Math. 11.28. Come unto me etc.

Ans. The proposition is not generally true, but only of such as obey his
inuiting and come at his calling. 2. the assumption is false, for he calls
none but such as hear, but how many millians of men never hard of Christ, nor
do yet at this day.

4. They that are called to Christ by the preaching of the gospel, are elected
unto life. But all are. Ergo

Ans. The proposition is only true of them that are effectualy called
according to the purpose of his election. 2. the assumption is false, being
slatte contrary to Christ's own words saying, many are called but few are
chosen. Again experience does confute it. For how many thousand men never had
the gospel preached unto them. For before Christ's incarnation, he was not
preached to the gentiles, and after he was exhibited in the flesh it was not to
many, nor yet is. As in the kingdom of the Sinars, in all the countries of
Tartarie, and other heathen people, to say nothing of the new world, of late
years found out by navigations mexico, Perow, magellana, where there was never
word, yet of Christ nor of the gospel. Therefore it is not true that all and
every several man either were in time past called to Christ by the preaching
of the gospel, or yet are.

5. They to whom the promise of eternal salvation does belong, are elected to
eternal life: but the promise pertaines to all. ergo.

Ans. The proposition is only true of such as to whom the promise of
salvation does belong, not only by preaching or declaring it, but also by
effectual applying the same.

2 The assumption is false. The promise of salvation is not made generally to
all, no not by preaching or declaration, but only to those to whom the
preaching or declaring of the promise is from everlasting predestinate, and
therefore to such as indeed it is preached and declared. Now because both the
Prophets in old time did not show forth the grace of God to all the men in the
world, nor the Apostles were permitted to teach every where, as in Bithynia,
and yet to this day the promis of grace neither has bin published, nor is to
many nations, by the event and self experience it is plain, that the promise
of eternal salvation does not belong to all and every one.

3. To whom the promise of grace does belong by the preaching, to those but
not to all notwithstanding, it does belong by effectual application. Because
that effectual application is ordained but only for the elect.

6. The regenerate are elect, but all that are baptized are regenerate,
therefore all that are baptized are elect.

Ans. 1. There is an homony mie in the particle (regenerate) form the
proposition it signifies those, that are inwardly renewed and framed to the
image of god by the spirit of adoption. But in the assumption by a metonymie
such as are out wardly washed in baptism. For it is usual to call the
baptizing of water regeneration, and those that are baptized with water to say
they are regenerated, as Iustine Martyr speaks in his second apology for the
christians to Antonius Pius. Whosoever shall be persuaded and believe
steadfastly, that the things are true which we teach and deliver, and shall take
upon them to live thereafter, we instruct them with fasting to pray and ask
those things at the hands of God, and the remission of their former sins,
with whom we also do fast and pray: then we carry them to the water, and
there they are regenerated with the same kind of regeneration that we are:
for they are then washed in water in the name of the father our Lord and
creator of all things, and of our Savior Jesus Christ, and of the holy ghost.
And a little after that he says, that washing is called enlightening, for that
their minds are enlightened, that learn these matters. Therefore the baptism
of water is called regeneration, and illumination, not properly, but by a
metonymie, because it is a sacrament of the pouring out of the holy ghost, who
does properly regenerate us. Therefore the proposition is only true of such,
as not only are regenerate with the outward sacrament, but inwardly in their
hearts by the spirit of adoption: but the assumption is true of all, so far
forth as they are regenerated but with the sacrament; but if you take it
simply it is not true. For many want the inner regeneration of the spirit,
that had the outward, as Judas Iscariot, Simon Magus etc.

2. Though we should grant that all that are baptized with water, are also
inwardly renewed yet it should not follow that all men were elected to
salvation, seeing all are not so much as baptized. Therefore it is still true,
that all shall not be saved.

7. They that are sanctified by the blood of Christ, they are elected to life:
but all men universally are sanctified by the blood of Christ. Ergo. the proof
of the minor or assumption. Heb. 10.29. Of how much more sharp punishment shall
he be thought vvorthie (think you) that shall tread under his feet the son
of God, and count the blood of the covenant by which he was sanctified, an
unholy thing and reproach the spirit of grace?

Ans. 1. There is an honomynie in the participle (sanctified.) For in the
proposition it signifies those that are truly invisiblie cleansed inwardly
from their sins; but in the place to the Hebrews it signifies them that are
baptized, or initiated by baptism, and are said to be sanctified by the
blood of the covenant, because they have taken the water of baptism, which is
a sign of the blood and sanctification: in which sense also Heb. 9.13. The
blood of bulls and goats, and the ashes of a heyfer, being sprinkled upon them
that are defiled, is said to sanctify to the purity of the flesh, that is,
purify, purge, cleanse from sin, but sacramentallie. Like wise Augustine
speaks tom. 4. lib. 3. of questions upon the old testament, quest. 84. With
visible Sacraments man is visibly sanctified. And a little after: We may
gather, that some had invisible sanctification and to their profit, without
visible sacrament, which altered according to the diver sitie of times, as some
were then, but now are not. And that a man may have, but without any profit,
visible sanctification, which is by the visible sacraments, without this
invisible. And yet mast we not contemn the visible sacrament, for whosoever
contemens it, cannot possibly be sanctified inuisibly. And least one should
think, that Austin speaks of the typical sanctification only of the old
law, he presently inferres of Christian baptism. Hereupon it is that Cornelius
and they that were with him, though they appeared already inuisibly
sanctified, by having the holy Ghost powered down upon them, were baptized for
all that; neither was the visible sanctification thought superstitious, though
they had the invisible before. Cyprian epist. 72. in the Gulartian edition.
Then may men be fully sanctified and the sons of God, when they are borne of
both sacraments: and in many other places he says the same, but all that have
the external baptism as well as other, have not the virtue of baptism. de
poenit. distinct. 4. Theresore Paul means [to be sanctified by the blood of
the couenant] to be initiated and consecrated by the water of baptism, which
is the sacrament of the blood of the testament. And that this is his meaning,
is evident by his drift, because he threatens very grievous punishment to the
renolters or backsliders from Christiaitie. And least any man should think it
were but a trifle to go back, he does exaggerate this sin, showing that the
contempt of baptism, by which they were initiated, was the contempt of Christ,
and to account the blood of the testament an unholy thing is said in the same
sense that 1. Cor. 11.29 [not to discern the body of the Lord] is said. For
the reproach of the signs redoundes to the things that are thereby signified.

2 The assumption is false: for many thousands God wot were never baptized.

3 The authority that is alleged to prove it by, is nothing to the purpose,
saying nothing of the universality of sanctification.

8 Those that Christ has redeemed, they are elected to eternal life: but
Christ has redeemed all men: ergo. the assumption is proved out of Peter, 2.
Pet. 2.1. the false teachers deny even the Lord that has bought them,
bringing down upon themselves swift damnation.

Ans. 1. The assumption is false. 2. It is not to the point, the testimony
that is brought: because it says nothing of the universality of the
redemption of all and singular persons, whereof the assumption speaks. Ob. But
they urge, thus: if the Lord has purchased the^ also that deny him, etc. then
he has not purchased the elect only, but the very reprobate also, and
therefore all and singular persons: but the first is true by this place: ergo.

Ans. 1. It is a point of sophistry, to understand that simply, which is
spoken but respectively. Peter says those false reachers deny the Lord that
bought them, that is, in their own opinion and as they boasted. As if he had
said: Indeed they give out and vaunt, that they are redeemed by Christ, and
name him their redeemer, and yet for all that they deny him. And this does the
assumption affirm simply, as if indeed they were redeemed by him: which is
flat contrary to other places of the scripture, Apoc. 14.3, 4. Matthew. 7.23.
Matthew. 25.12. Ioh. 17.9. Matthew. 20.28.

Justin Martyr in his dialogue with Trypho, says that Christ suffered for
those men, whose hearts are cleansed from all iniquity.

Thus much of the subject of election: now I will show the adjuncts thereof.

Election was from everlasting, The adjuncts of election.
or before the foundation of the world was laid, Ephesians. 1.4. not only before we
believed, but before we were. So says the Apostle of Jacob, Romans 9.11. when
the children were yet unborn, 1. Eternieie.
and had done neither good nor ill, that the purpose of God which is according
to his election, not of works but of him that calls, might stand steadfast,
it was said unto her, the elder shall serve the younger. Austin in his book
of predestination and grace, chap. 5. Before he made us, he foreknew us: and
foreknowing us, when he had not yet made us, he elected us: and again, we were
made since the world, but elected before the world.

Election is free, 2. Liberty.
not bound to any conditions of man's judgment, nor indebted to any; the Lord
is at liberty in his free choice, and not tied to that necessity, to deal
his grace to all alike: but he passes over whom he will, and where he will he
likes, Romans 9.18. He takes mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he
hardneth: and v. 21. Has not the potter power over the clay, of the same piece
to make one vessel to honor, and an other to dishonor? the same is clear by
Ephesians. 1.11. We are predestinate according to the purpose of him that does all
things by the counsel of his own will.

3 It is also unchangeable, 3. Immutabilitie.
inviolable, firm, certain, sure, and steadfast, it never faulters, it never
fails, or becomes void. Which unchangeableness and certentie does not consist
in our perseverance, but in the immutable decree of God. Neither does it depend
on men, but on the mere mercy and good pleasure of God, 2. Tim. 2.19. The
foundation of God stands steadfast, having this seal, The Lord knows who
are his. By a metaphor he calls Election a foundation, nothing thereby the
firmenes and constancy of the same. Having this seal, that is, the election
is closed up from us, we know not certainly whether this man or that be elected.
but the Lord knows who are his. For it is a thing proper unto God, to know
his own. Therefore it does not depend upon us but on the most constant and
unchangeable will of God, who has mercy upon us in his everlasting mercy,
whereof it never does repent him.

Now they that make it mutable and uncertain, let them consider this; is it a
small matter to them to weary men and prick thorns into the elect to doubt
of salvation, but they must weary God, making hun changeable in his counsels?

Object. 1. The tokens of election are not always apparent: therefore election
is changeable.

Ans. The connex that is wanting is false, for though the signs of election
are not evident at all times, yet that remains inviolable as the exile of the
Jews in Babylon, and the long shaking them off as it were, might seem an
interruptio^ of election, but was not. Therefore God in Es. cap. 41.9. saying
thus, I have chose thee and have not cast thee off, commends the continual
course of his great bounty and fatherly good will, and expresses the
consta^cie of election, as if he said, I never gave thee over nor forsook
thee, since the first time I elected thee, although thou have given me cause
enough to do it for indeed the people of the Jews showed so great
ingratitude, that God might justly have cast them off. And that which is said
of the Jews may as well be said of us.

Ob. 2. That which may be made void is changeable: but election may. Of. 14.1.
God shall have mercy of Jacob, and choose the Israelites again. He uses the
future tence, as if the first election had been void. Therefore election is
mutable.

Ans. There is an homonymie by a catacresis in the word of the future tence
shall choose, as if he had said, he shall take as it were again unto him, as
if the election were new to begin again, the nation that in show was cast
of and given over into another man's jurisdiction: this is spoken after the
manner of men. When the Lord chasteneth those that are his, this carries a
show of casting off, as we gather by many of the Saints complainings. Lord why
have thou for saken us? For we conceive of Gods reiection or election according
to our own weakness, and judge the effect thereof by the work. The meaning
then is this, though God handled his people so severely, as if he had cast them
off, yet in the end he will show in truth and prove his adopting of them,
at what time he will give a sufficient testimony of his election, and will have
mercy on them for ever.

Ob. 3. If the crown of heavenly glory where unto a man is elected may be
lost, then is not election sure, but it may. Apoc. 3.11. hold that thou have,
least another take thy crown. Therefore.

Ans. 1. This proof is not to the purpose. 2. There is an homonymie in the
word (crown) for the assumption talks of the crown of glory, but Christ speaks
of the crown of the ecclesiastical ministry. Look before in the refutation
of foreseen good works.

4 Ob. He that stands must take heed least he fall, 1. Cor. 10.12. ergo
election is mutable.

Ans. It follows not. For the admonition is not a threatening that he shall
fall, but only to stir up to more carefulnes.

5 Ob. Zac. 1.17. and 2.16. God chooses Jerusalem again. Therefore the first
was void.

Ans. There is an homonymie in the word [choose,] the Prophet uses it
metonymically: for this he shall show by evident tokens and outward effects
that he has chosen Jerusalem, and really declare that he holds certain
Ierusalems election. For so the Scripture does often speak, to say something
is done, when it is but ratisied or declared to be done. Psalm. 2.7. This day
have I begotten thee.

Another adiunct is, 4. Sealing.
that it is sealed with that holy spirit of promise, as it were a sure pledge.

Again, it is declared by earthly notes; as by the translation of the
birthright to Jacob, 5. Notes.
was his election witnessed.

Ratified and confirmed by deliverance and other corporal benefits: 6.
Plighting.
ergo the word choose is used, Esa. 14.2.

Every one of the faithful must make it sure, 7. Assurance.
that is, approve it to other, and confirm it to himself by the fruits of
faith. Wherefore, brethren, labor to make your vocation sure, 2. Pet. 1. The
signs of our free election, 8 Signs.
that is, whereby we may certainly know that we are elect, are these: 1. a
lively sense of vocation and bringing unto Christ, Romans 8.30. 2. the ardencie
and joy of saving faith, Act. 13.48. Tit. 1.1. 3. a quiet conscience proceeding
from the blessing of justification, Romans 5.1.4. an earnest and constant desire
of a new life, such as becomes those that are rewarded by the holy Ghost,
Romans 8.14. 2. Tim. 2.10. 5. the witness of our own spirit, 1. Ioh. 5.6. 6. and
lastly the inward testimony of the holy Ghost, sealing election, and all these
things bearing witness together with our spirit, that we are the sons of God,
Romans 8.6. whosoever finds and knows these tokens truly and certainly in
himself, he may well, and ought to rejoice that his game is written in heaven.

Thus having showed some of the adjuncts of election, there follows the
disperates.

Election differs from vocation, The disparates of election.
justification, and sanctification, and ergo may not be confounded with them.
And also from adoption. Besides from the promise of salvation. And lastly from
salvation it self, which is caused of election.

Election is compared 1. to a foundation that stands steadfast, The comparats
of election.
by reason of the immutable firmenes thereof. 2. Tim. 2.19. 2. to writing in a
book or a pair of tables, Exodus 32.32. Moses says to God; Blot me now out of
the book which thou have written. but God said to Moses, I should blot him out
of my books who has sinned against me. And Psalm. 69.29. David in a figure of
Christ, prays against his enemies. Let them be blotted out of the book of
the living and not be written among the righteous. Ap. 13.8. it is said, they
whose names are not written in the book of the lamb, shall worship the
beasts. And 17.8. the inhabitants of the earth shall wonder, whose names are
not written in the book of life from the beginning of the world. So our Savior
Luc. 10.28. Do not rejoice that spirits are subjects unto you, but, that your
names are written in heaven. And Dan. 12.1. Thy people shall be delivered,
whosoever shall be found written in that book.

For look as they that are enfranchised into some common wealth, are written
into the public register or notarie of the city, so they that are received
into the number of them that shall be saved, are said to be written into the
book of life: that is, in the prescience of gods mind: such is in a more sure
plight then the heavens themselves. The grace of election is greater the^ the
grace of creation.

The Coniugate.
Of the grace of election the godly are called elect. Of whom mark these
ensuing axioms. 1. the elect are known to none but to God. 2. Tim. 2.19. 2.
they only believe with a lively and saving faith. Ioh. 6.37. Act. 13.48. Tit.
1.1. 3. they only obtain salvation. Romans 11.7. the election has obtained it,
that is, the elect: the rest have bin hardened. 4. they were the fathers,
before that ever he gave them to his only begotten son. Ioh. 6.37.
whatsoever my father gives me, comes unto me: if he gives it, then it was his
first. 5. they are blessed and dear to God. Psalm. 33.12. Blessed is that
nation whose God the Lord is, the people that he has chosen for a possession
for himself. And Psalm. 65.5. To. 11.28. 6. they alone are lively members of
the church, alone members of the catholic invisible church: therefore they are
said to dwell in the courts of the Lord. Psalm. 65.5. 7. the redemption of
Christ is proper to them. Apoc. 5.9. 8. there number is certain and can be
neither increased nor diminished. 2. Tim. 2.19. the foundation of God stands
immovable etc, the Lord knows who are his. To this Austin subscribeth de
correp. and gr. c. 13. saying, this I speak of such as are predestinate into
the kingdom of God, whose number is so certain, that none can be taken either
in or out. Et retract. 4.26. the almighty God wanted no counsel to fill up
the number of citizens of his city, which was predestinate in his wisdom
even of the damned crew of mankind. 9. they are severed from the reprobate,
not by meritts, but by Gods predestination, not by the quality of their own
virtue, but by the heavenly decree, not by nature but by especial grace. 10.
they are free from peril of reprobation: for the elect cannot be reprobate.

Against this doctrine may be objected.

Object. 1. They that may be blotted out of the book of life, may be
reprobate: the elect may be blotted out of the book of life. Ex. 32:32. Moses
says, blot me out, etc.

Ans. 1. The assumption is false. 2. the allegation does not prove the point:
for he does not say he can be blotted out. Ob. but he prays that he may:
therefore he could. Ans. the antecedent must be understood but in respect,
namely with two conditions. 1. if it be possible, such for all the world as was
in Christ's prayer, Father if it be possible, let this cup pass from me: as if
Moses had said rather adiudge me to the pains of eternal death for the
peoples sin, then destroy thy people, and so have thy name blasphemed of the
gentiles, and yet not except it may be done. 2. If God does allow and like of
this request: which God did not, for he rebuked him thus. He that sins
against me I should blott out of my book. Cyprian in his 2. book de lapsis
says thus. He was Gods friend, he talked face to face with God, he could not
have his petition, neither did he appease Gods wrath with his prayer. So then
out of this petition of Moses, being conditional and not liked neither, we
cannot infer that Moses could, or that the elect can be scraped out of the
book of life.

Object. 1. They urge further: at the least we may gather it out of Gods answer
unto Moses, saying, he will blott him out that sins against him. To this I
say: this is not so, because the commination is conditional. Thus, if any do
sin against me, him I will etc. 2. there is an homonymie in the word
(sins) which is not meant here of any sin, but of that which is committed
of set malice, and continued without repentance: which John calls the sin
unto death, and never falls unto the elect. 1. Ioh. 3.9. Again they urge.
Psalm. 69.26. Let them be blotted out of the book of the living: therefore the
elect may etc. Ans. This does not prove the point for two causes. 1. because he
does not speak of the elect, but of the stubborn and stiffnecked enemies of
Christ. 2. there is a double meaning in the phrase (let them be blotted out of
the book): whereby is meant, not that they that were written indeed should be
scratched out, but they that were so written in their own opinion and other
men's, might indeed be declared not to be written. For such remaining in the
visible church, and having an external profession of faith, both think
themselves they are and so do othermen take them so, when to say truly it is
nothing so. And so does S. Austin understand those words in his enarration of
this psalm. tom. 8. page 509 etc. saying, brethren we must not so take this,
as if God wrote any man into his book, and scratched him out again: if a man
said, that that I have written, I have written, of the title wherein it was
written the king of the Jews, shall God put any into his book and take him
out again? And a little after: this was said according to their hope, because
they thought they were written in it: what is let the^ be blotted out? this:
let it appear unto themselves that they are not there. For the verse that
follows expounds that, and let them not be written with the just: for this I
said let them be blotted out, according to their own hope, but according to
thy justice what say I? let them not be written in: thus much for S. Austin.

3 Yet further they allege. Apoc. 3.5. He that ouercomes shall be clothed in
white garments, and I will never put out his name out of the book of life:
therefore God does put them out that do not overcome, but suffer themselves to
be overcome of the devil and other spiritual enemies, and sin against God.
To this I say. 1. the consequence is doubtful. For if they mean, that god will
show that they that do not overcome are not written in the book of life, we
grant it, but if they understand it thus, that God will ranch them out that
are once written, it is false: for they that do not overcome, but suffer
themselves to be overcome of the devil and sin against God, they are never
written, as the Lord speaks Ezech. 13.9. They shall not be in the count of my
people, and shall not be written in the catalogue of the house of Jsrael,
neither shall they come into the house of Israel: that is, neither shall be, in
the book of life, nor shall obtain the deliverance, but remain estraunged
from the church, and the visible signs of the same, and God and all. 2. Here
is an elench of similitude; for he that over comes, and he that does not
overcome are not like in that whereon this consequence does depend. For both
are not written in the book of life: which if both were, it would follow of
the contrary sense, he that overcomes shall not be blotted, ergo he that does
not, shall.

Object. 2. They that may be anathema from Christ, the same may be reprobates:
that may the elect be. ergo. Paul wishes Romans 9.3. for his brethren the Jews.

Ans. 1. The assumption is false. 2. the place of Paul does not prove it, for
he does not say he can be, but wishes he might: that is, by an earnest and
enflamed zeal desires his own destruction, that he might (though it were with
his own loss) advance the glory and kingdom of God in preserving of Israel.
Yea but he wishes he were, and therefore might be. He does it not simply but
with condition, as if he had said, I wish my self alone were rather deprived
of that everlasting felicity which I shall have with Christ, if it were
possible, then that so many of my brethren the Israelites should be shutt from
grace, and so the name of Christ and the glory of God should be called into
question: for this is a true testimony of true love indeed when a man makes no
account of his own salvation, in respect of Christ's honor and glory and the
salvation of other men.

Object. 3. 1. Cor. 9.29. J beat down my body (says Paul) and keep it in
subjection, least by any means, when J have preached unto other I should be
a reprobate my self. Ergo. the elect may be reprobates.

Ans. 1. The authority is nothing to the purpose: for he says not he can be a
reprobate.

2. there is an homonymie in the word (reprobate) for in the question it
signifies such an one as is passed over by God, and is opposed to one that is
elected unto salvation, but in Paul's speech it stands for him, as by
experience is proved not to be the man he should be, especially he himself
setting down the rule of holy life unto other, that is, observes not that
himself that he prescribes other: and therefore as a badde teacher is
unworthy to be made of, but is such as very worthily deserves to be rejected
of all men. And so the word (...), reprobate, is contrary to (...), approved,
that does do that himself that he teaches other. So Ier. 6.30. the silver is
called reprobate, that is not so good as it should be, and therefore worthy
to be cast away. And the earth reprobate. Heb. 6.8. that is, badde and not
worth the tilling and sowing, since it brings forth nothing but thorns and
thistles. The meaning then is this, I prescribe other men a square to live
after, therefore I labor to carry my self in such sort, that my dealings
shall be answerable to my doctrine, and that I may not seem to neglect that my
self which I require of other men, to mine own reproach and other men's
offense.

3. Though I should grant that the Apostle speaks of reprobation to eternal
death, yet he shows not here what is done, but what is not done concerning
himself, as he says, 2. Cor. 13.6. but I hope ye shall know that we are not
reprobates. and Romans 8.28. he speaks more plainly. Therefore the consequence
is too weak. Paul labored that he should not be a reprobate, therefore he
might be one. For this care of his does not fight against the certentie of
election, but rather is thereby confirmed. For as God would have perseverance
to be stable, so would he have it cherished and confirmed by this godly care
and endeavor, 2. Pet. 1.10. Labor to make your election sure.

Object. 4. Judas Iscariot became a reprobate: but Judas Iscariot was an elect:
ergo: the proof of the assumption is this, Have not I chosen you twelve?

Ans. In the assumption and the proof thereof [Elect] signifies admitted to
the office of an Apostle, but in the conclusion, one that is ordained to
eternal life.

All this has bin but the defense of the 10. axiom, now follows the eleventh.

II. Axiom. The elect cannot loose the faith and righteousness that they have
received of God.

Against which Bellarmine, tom. 3. lib. 3. de iustificatione, cap. 14. brings
ten testimonies, 2. examples out of the Scripture, 3. a definitive sentence of
the Church, 4. a reason.

1. Testimony, Ezech. 18.26. When the just man shall turn away from his
justice, and work iniquity, he shall die therein. A very clear case. How I
pray you is a righteous man turned from his righteousness, if he be justified by
faith alone, and faith once received cannot be lost? Bellarmines syllogism I
reciact into this form: if faith by which alone the elect are justified, once
had, may not be lost, then a righteous man does not turn himself from his
righteousness: but the Prophet says, he does: ergo.

Ans. 1. The argument is ambiguous. For in the proposition, the word righteous,
signifies him that is truly righteous, that is, freely justified before God for
Christ's sake: and righteousness stands for that blessing of free remission of
sins, obtained at the hands of God for Christ's sake. But in the assumption
and place out of the Prophet, the first signifies him that is just only in his
own opinion, as hypocrites, and those that believe for a time, and afterward
slide back. For he that is righteous indeed, is like a tree planted by the
rivers of waters, whose leaves shall never fall away. Psalm. 1.3. he shall he
had in everlasting remembrance, Psalm. 1.12.6. his righteousness remains for
ever, v. 3. and he shall not die. But of him that is such but in show, thus the
Lord speaks in Ezekiel, his righteousness which he has done shall not be
remembered: again, he shall die. Therefore he speaks of such who in their
own conceit and other men's are just. Of whom Christ says, I came not to call
the just but sinners to repentance: and not of them that are such indeed.
Again, justice in the assumption and the Prophets words, is not free
remission of sins, but works in show righteous, such as hypocrites do.

2 Though I should grant that there is meant true righteous and righteousness,
yet he could hence conclude nothing. For Conditionals put nothing, as the
Logicians say.

Test. 2. Luke 8.13. out of this place he reasons thus: They that receive the
seed of the word of God with joy, and believe, but do not continue, may loose
faith: but so do the elect: ergo.

Ans. 1. The argument here again is doubtful. For in the proposition the word
[beleeue] signifies no more then to consent, but in the assumption to be
certainly and undoubtedly persuaded of Gods mercy toward him, and the remission
of his sins.

2. The second part of the assumption is falfe, for the elect continue for ever.

3 The place alleged does not prove the assumption, which speaks of the
elect, whereas Christ's words are of hypocrites only, and therefore of
reprobates: who believe for a time, and in tentation fall away, but the elect
keep the word they have heard in a good and upright heart, and bring forth
fruit by long continuance.

4. They falsify the text, which has these words, believe [for a time,]
which they leave out.

Object. To prove that Christ there speaks of the elect, they go this way
to work: They that receive the seed of the word with joy, ^o ^leeue.
and believe, are elect: these do so: ergo.

Ans. 1. There is an homony mie in the word [beleeue,] which does not mean in
this place to be certainly persuaded by the holy Ghost of Gods mercy and the
obtaining pardon for sins, but to give bare assent, and historically to
receive the Gospel as true.

2 Though that were as it should be, the proposition is faulty, for making
that a true propriety of elect (which is peculiar to other as well as to them)
to receive the word with joy and yield historical assent thereunto. For, Heb.
6.4, 5. it is attributed to some reprobates, that they were enlightened, and
had received that he ^^enly gift, and were made partakers of the holy Ghost,
and had tasted the good word of God, and the virtues of the world to come. and
2. Pet. 2.20. that they had flien the corruptions of the world thorough the
knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and that they that had known
the way of righteousness.

3 Again in the assumption Christ's words are depraved in quoting, quite
gelding out the words [for a time,] whereby it is very manifest that he spoke
not of saving but of historical faith.

Test. 3. If some of the elect are taken from Christ, then they may loose their
righteousness and faith: but they may, Ioh. 15.2. every branch that bears not
fruit in me shall he take away: ergo.

Ans. 1 The assumption is false. 2. the place does not prove it.

Object. All the branches that do not bring forth fruit shall be taken from
Christ: but some elect are branches bearing no fruit: ergo. Ans. There is a
fallacy in the word [branch] by which name all such are called, as are
externally called to Christ and make, profession. But they are not branches.
For the Lord makes an express difference of branches. Some fruitful and other
not. Of these he says they are cast forth of the vineyard, wither, are
gathered together, cast into the fire and burnt. Such are meant in the
proposition. 2. The assumption is false, because all the elect are fruitful
branches, which the father does daily purge more and more to bring forth more
fruit, so far are they from being plucked up.

Object. They prove the assumption thus. They that are regenerate in Christ
alive, are elect: but unfruitful branches were regenerate in Christ alive:
ergo unfruitful branches were elect. Bellarmines proof is this. Because it
cannot be a branch, that did not sometime live in the vine. For branches are
not grafted in from any other where, but spring out of the vine, and spring out
alive and not dead. So then are the faithful regenerate in Christ, and when
they are borne anew they are not dead but alive: and yet if after their
regeneration they will bring forth no fruit of good works, they wither, are
cut away, and die.

Ans. There are many faults in this probation. 1. False application of the
similitude that Christ uses. For Christ does not compare those that are called
unto him unto branches, because they are not grifted in from otherwhere, but
are borne alive out of him. For all his branches are grifted in; for they
spring out of Adams stock, but by grace are set into Christ. 2. It is falsely
supposed that all branches are borne again and live in Christ: for none but
the fruitful do so. 3. It is more false that the regenerate will not, or
refuse to bring forth the fruit of good works. 4. But most of all false that
the regenerate do wither, are cut off, and die.

Object. They vige again that the Lord does not only say that the branch that
does wither shall be separated from the vine, but moreover they shall gather
it, cast it into the fire, and it shall burn. And therefore he that has once
bin a branch in the vine, that is, a member in the body of Christ by a lively
faith, may be cast into the fire and their burn for ever. Ans. To which I say,
1. it follows not; for the entecedent speaks of an unfruitful branch, the
consequent of a fruitful; that shall indeed be cast into the fire, so shall
not this. 2. A branch in the vine is defined to be a member in the body of
Christ by a lively faith, which definition is not large enough, containing
only one kind, namely the fruitful only: but generally all such are called
branches that are externally called to Christ by the preaching, joined to the
visible Church, and professing faith in Christ: whom the Lord himself does
distinguish into fruitful and unfruitful. And so may dead members also be
ingrafted into the visible Church.

Test. 4. Matthew. 24.12. And because iniquity shall abound the charity of many
shall wax cold: but he that indureth unto the end shall be saved: whence he
reasons thus. If some of the elect do not persevere unto the end, then the
elect may loose their faith: but some do not: ergo.

Ans. 1. The assumption is false. For all the elect do persevere as the Lord
does promise, Ier. 32.40. I will put my fear into their hearts, that they may
not depart away from me. and Ioh. 6.37. whatsoever my father gives me, shall
come unto me, and him that comes unto me, I will not cast out.

2 They allege Christ's testimony falsely. For whereas the assumption says,
that some of the elect do not persist unto the end, Christ says not so, but
to those that do, he promises life.

Object. If he that does persevere shall be saved: then some do not: but the
first is true: ergo.

Ans. I grant all, if the consequent be rightly understood: some, that is,
such as are not elect, hypocrites and reprobates do not persist: but all the
elect do.

Object. If many men's charity shall wax cold, and quite and clean die, then
they do not persevere: but it shall: ergo.

Ans. 1. The assumption is stark false. 2. Christ's speech does not prove it,
because he speaks not of the elect, who shall persevere to the end. For howbeit
in the elect by reason of many men's ingratitude, treachery, and villainy,
liberality sometime is much abated, yet it shall never finally be put out.

Test. 5. If the elect may become reprobates, they may loose their faith: but
Paul says they may, 1. Cor. 9.29. I do chasten my body, and bring it into
bondage, least when I have preached to other, my self be a reprobate.

Ans. 1. The assumption is false. 2. The proof is nothing to the purpose. See
the explication of the third Axiom.

Test. 6. They that can be made void from Christ and fall from grace, the same
may also loose their faith: but that may the elect do: witness Paul's own
mouth, Gal. 5.4. You that are justified by the law are made void from Christ,
and fallen from grace: ergo.

Ans. 1. There is ambiguitie in the phrase [to be abolished from Christ, and to
fall from grace.] For in the syllogism they signify to be separated from that
conjunction with Christ, which in truth they had, and to fall from grace
wherein a man truly was. But in Paul they signify that Christ is made
unprofitable unto them, to be excluded from Christ's communion, Grace.
not to be partaker of him, and to have no society with him. And to fall from
grace, is to fall from the Gospel, which they had before time received (for
grace here is the doctrine of the Gospel, set against the law) to have refused
the grace offered in the Gospel. 2. The assumption is false. 3 Paul speaks of
the reprobate, not of the elect.

Object. Yes of the elect: for they that are truly in Christ and in grace, are
elect: these were such: ergo. for they fell from it: therefore they had bin
truly in it. Ans. 1. The assumption is false again. 2 The proof that is
brought does not prove it: because it is borrowed out of Paul's testimony not
rightly translated. For Jerome does flatly reprove the vulgar translation,
turning it, you have ceased from the work of Christ, not so well, but yet so,
as that hereby we may perceive he is not the author of the common translation:
2. because of the amphibolie or doubtful taking of the phrase, as I said even
now.

Object. But they fell from it: therefore they were in it.

Ans. They are said to fall from it, because they had entered into the way to
get it, which the reprobate may do, seeing there are some degrees to true
says.

Test. 7.8.9. They that make ship wrack of faith, revolt from faith, err from
the faith, may loose faith: the Elect make shipwreck of faith, 1. Tim. 1.19.
revolt from the faith, 1. Tim. 4.1. err from the faith, 1. Tim. 6.10.
therefore the elect may loose their faith.

Ans. There is an homonymie in the word [faith,] for in the first part of the
proposition it signifies the true and wholesome doctrine of God: but in the
second, the certain persuasion of Gods election and mercy. 2. The assumption is
false. 3. The places do not prove it: for they speak not of the elect, nor
yet of this persuasion of the heart of Gods mercy: but by a metonymie,
wholesome doctrine.

Test. 10. They that fall may loose faith: the elect may fall, Hebr. 6.4, 5, 6.
It can not be that they that once have bin enlightened, and have tasted of that
heavenly gift, and have bin partakers of the holy spirit, and have tasted the
good word of God and the virtues of the world to come, if they fall, should be
renewed again to repentance. ergo

Ans. 1. The proposition is false: for they that fall, never had that saving
faith: therefore can not loose it. 2 So is the assumption: for it is impossible
the elect should fall, that is, finally fall for ever from the Gospel. 3. The
testimony alleged will not prove it, the question being of the Elect and
this being spoken of Apostates and temporary men: and therefore of the
reprobate.

Object. But here they take exception that Paul speaks of the elect. They
that are truly justified, enlightened, have tasted the heavenly gift and are
partakers of the holy ghost, are elect: but these of whom Paul speaks are
such: ergo

Ans. The argument consistes of very diverse and differing points. For to be
truly justified is the property of the elect, and therefore as many as are
truly justified are elect, as that golden chain of our salvation does show,
To. 8.30. those whom he has predestined, he has alsocalled: (namely
according to the purpose of eternal predestination,) and whom he has called
those he has justified, and whom he has justified, he has also glorified.
Now the other arguments, are either ambiguous or obscure. For to be enlightened
in this place signifies either to know the doctrine of the gospel, or else it
signifies by a metonymie to be baptized, as the Syrian interpreter does expound
it: because of the effect of the baptism of persons of age that were
catechized, (...) or to enlighten is taken for to baptize: and enlightening
baptism, and the set day for baptism of the catachumeni: lights of the
ancient greek divines, as appears by Iustine Martyrs second apology for the
christians to Mar. Antonius the Emperor. To taste the heavenly gift signifies
to have some taste of the life to come. To be made partaker of the holy ghost
is here to have light and understanding of the doctrine of the gospel, and
receive some joy thereby, which the spirit does communicate in a general
kind of manner.

2. These things be common to the elect and reprobate: and so having
distinguished and laid open the arguments, it is an easy matter to answer the
premises severally. The proposition is partly true and partly false. This is
true, they that are truly justified are elect: but all the rest is false, they
that are enlightened and are elect: for both sorts have these alike, but the
elect rest not here but proceed further: so likewise is the assumption in part
true and in part false: it is true, that these of whom the Apostle speaks
are enlightened and the rest, but false that they are truly justified: for no
syllable here soundes to that. 3. Bellarmine does wrong here to Paul's words
saying impossible, is as much as most hard and rare, which is far from the
signification of that word.

Object. They for whom Christ was crucified, are elect, but Christ was
crucified for these: ergo. because Paul says, they crucify again to
themselves the son of God.

Ans. The assumption is false. Again there is a double amphibolie in this: one
from the fallacy of composition and division. For in that assumption that word
(again) is not to be construed with that (to themselves) but with the verb
(crucify) being in the greek (recrucifying,) the second is of the phrase,
crucify again to themselves; wherein is not meant that Christ was crucified
for the apostates, as to redeem them, as it is impiouslie expounded in the
conclusion, but that the backsliders, contemn, make a mock, and (as it is
presently found in the text for illustration sake) cause to be reproached. So
says Paul, Gal. 6.14. that the world was crucified to him and he to the
world, that is, as he was despised of the world, so he again despised the
world: as the Jews cared not for Christ whom they crucified.

Object. 2. They argue: the words are plain, they crucify again, therefore
Christ was once before truly crucified for them.

Ans. 1. It follows not, 2. rather the flatt contrary, that Christ did not
die for them. For they are said to crucify Christ to themselves, who of a
malicious hate make a mock of Christ crucified, which the wicked Jews did
once before; and the apostates do again. If Christ had been once already
crucify him to themselves, that is, make light account of him, but love and
honor him very much.

Testimony 11. They that sin willingly after they have received the
knowledge of the truth, loose faith: the elect do so. Heb. 10.26. To us that
sin willingly after we have received the knowledge of the truth, there is no
sacrifice left for sin, but a fearful expectation of judgment etc. Ergo.

Ans. 1. The argument is ambiguous, to sin willingly after knowledge, may
be taken two ways, either to commit same particular sin, as theft,
adultery, ma^slaughter etc, with knowledge and yet of infirmity, or utterly
to reuoit from Christ and his gospel, with a hie hand, of malicious wickedness.

2. Which way soever you take it the proposition is false: First of them that
commit particular sins, or else woe be to David and Peter: nay every man living
were in hazard of eternal death. 2. of such as show by open apostasy that
they have no part in Christ, because they never had that saving faith: and
therefore could not loose it.

3. If the assumption be understood of sin committed with knowledge, and
consent of will but yet of infirmity by the elect, then it is true; but
neither the proposition nor Paul's words speak of that. But if it means of
general backsliding, it is most false: neither does Paul prove that,
speaking of none but apostates, that leave the Lords assembly as it is ver.
25, that is utterly forsake the church, as Arius, Julian the apostate and
other did.

Object. To prove that he speaks of the elect they say, they that have
received the knowledge of the truth are elect: but so did these. Ergo.

Ans. The proposition is not generally true; for only some that have received
that knowledge are elect: other have it for a witness against themselves:
therefore the conclusion is false.

Testimony 12. They that after the acknowledgement of the way of righteousness
go back from the holy commandment delivered unto them, return again to
their vomit, after cleansing of their stomachs by vomiting, and being come out
of the mire and thoroughly wrenched, return to wallow in the same again, loose
their faith: but the elect do so. 1. Pet. 2.21.

Ans. 1. The proposition is false: for such men never had saving faith, and
ergo could not loose it.

2. Peter's words does not prove it, for he speaks of hypocrites and temporary
men, and therefore of the reprobate; that suffer themselves to be seduced by
false prophets, and return to their old byas.

Object. Nay but even of the elect: for they that had truly left those that
are in errors, and the corruptions of the world by the knowledge of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, are elect and of those does Peter speak. To this I say
in the proposition there is a false property appropriated to the elect, which
the reprobate have as well as they: some of whom have well left heretics, and
heathenish idolaters, and mended their outward manners in good sort.

Object. Yea but they were once freed and at liberty.

Ans. I grant all, free from their former heresies and evil conditions for a
time, but whosoever do so, are not presently elect.

Object. They to whom true faith is ascribed, are elect. Peter ascribed true
faith to the^, namely knowledge of Christ and the way of righteousness, and his
holy commandment. Ergo.

Ans. 1. The assumption is false. 2. there is an unsound definition in the
assumption: For true and saving faith is not the bare knowledge of Christ, for
the devil exceeds even me^ in this point. Ergo.

Thus far we have answered those places of scripture that Bellarmine does
bring: now follows his 8. examples.

Argu. 2. Bellarmines second argument is examples of such as by the witness of
the holy ghost, have lost faith and charity: and to begin somewhat hie. First
the evil angels, who as the scripture records, sinned, and of angels
deserved to be made devils: they before there sinning were just, as some of the
fathers have collected out of Esaias. cap. 14. and Ezech. cap. 28.

Ans. 1. Here are to many interrogatories, for the justifying faith which
cannot be lost is one question, and the love of God either as a creator, or as
a redeemer is another. The love of God as a creator may be lost, as the evil
angels have lost it, but the love of God as a redeemer cannot, being a
necessary and inseparable effect of justifying faith.

2. The example of the evil angels is beside the matter: for the question is
whether men elected may loose their justifying faith, but evil angels are
neither men nor elect: nether ever had they or could have justifying faith,
seeing the promise was not made to them to give them righteousness by Christ, nor
yet are justified for or by him.

Object. But yet they were just before they fell, as some have gathered out of
those places, and therefore lost that righteousness by sin.

Ans. 1. They seek to enueigle us with an homonymie in the word justice: for
the aniecedent talks of inherent righteousness, and that quality that they had
at their first creation, the consequent not of inherent righteousness, but such
as is imputed for Christ. 2. we grant the assumption, but they offend with
their double diligence, in proving that which no man does deny. 3. the places
alleged will not prove it. For whereas Esaias cap. 14.12. says how did thou
fall from heaven o Lucifer, thou son of the morning. The Prophet does not
speak of Satan, but of the king of Babel, whom he calls by those names by a
metaphor, for his magnificence and glory, wherein he exceeded other kings: he
says he fell from heaven, to note his fall from that heavenly light and
dignity of his: and ergo they that expound this place of Satan, are fair wide
of the Prophets meaning: but that passes for absurdity, to think that Lucifer
is the king of the devils, and that the prophet should so term him. The place
in Ezechiel is cap. 28.13. etc. Thou have him in Eden, the garden of God, etc.
the text is clear, he speaks of the king of Tire and not of Satan.

Exam. 2. Our first parents, made after the image and similitude of God, were
adorned with faith and grace, even in the judgment of our adversaries, and yet
they cannot deny but that they fell most grievously. If etc.

Ans. 1. Here is an homonymie in the word faith, in the proposition.
notwithstanding for that persuasio^ of remission of sins for Christ's sake,
which our first parents before there fall could not have: so in the consequent.

2. The example is not to the purpose: for the question is of the elect, that
have justifying faith by the grace of regeneration, which they had not before
the fall being still in the estate of their natural integrity.

Exam. 3. Saul the king of Israel lost justifying faith: but he was elected to
eternal life.

Ans. The premises are both false; he neither lost that heneuer had, nor was
an elect.

Object. To prove the mayor: if he were a good man, so that none was better
then he of the children of Israel, then surely he had justifying faith, but he
was. 1. Sam. 9.2.

Ans. 1. These is an homonymie rising of the hebrew id^ome, where the word Ton,
signifies, good, and proper of personage as here, as Rab. David Kimchi expounds
it, and the hebrews for the most part. Whereupon the Targum of Jonathan, the
Chaldie paraphrase has (goodly to look upon:) ergo the word here is referred
to the body not to the soul.

2. Though it did signify here goodness of the mind, yet it were not to the
point, because we speak of the justice of the gospel, imputed to us by
Christ, not of the law which is an inherent quality.

Object. Against the minor of the principal sillogisme he was elect. 1. Sam.
9.2. ergo to life eternal.

Ans. The translation is false, it should be he was young. For oachur indeed
does signify elect: that is chosen, or fit for any thing, or work, for war,
etc. more then an old man as Kimchi faies.

Object. They urge 1. Sam. 10.24. See you whom the Lord has chosen: ergo
elected to eternal life. of Saul.

Aus. There is an homonymie in Samuels words, his meaning being of his
aduauncing to the regal dignity.

Exam. 4. David lost his faith, but he was an elect: Ergo, some elect may loose
their faith.

Ans. The proposition is false: for which they prove the assumption thus: they
that commit any great sin loose even their justifying faith as he did. Psalm.
6. but this proposition is false again. For Christ is stronger then that the
devil is able to take any sheep of his out of his hand by his instruments,
sins, tentations, persecutions or seducers: but Christ will not permit Satan
to carry any of the elect so far as to be quite cast from his estate of
salvation: for he is the stronger of the two. Ergo: Satan cannot pluck Christ's
members away by his entisements. Besides they offend with their ouerbusying
themselves, needleslie proouing the assumption which no body denies.

Object. Yea but if the elect do not loose their justifying faith, when they
sin grievously, they may sin freely: they shall be saved though they wallow
never so in their sins, al which is very absurd to think: ergo.

Ans. The proposition does not follow, but thus rather, let the elect that have
fallen into sin never despair with Cain and Saul, but repent, and turning
unto God, believe that their sins though never so grievous, are pardoned for
Christ's sake, and comfort themselves with this, that there is no co^de^nation
for those that are in Christ Jesus. 2. I give an instance: for if that
consequence be good, this will also: if they which sin, have an advocate with
the father Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our
sins, then we may lawfully sin, and wallow therein etc.

Exam. 5. Solomon lost his justifying faith, but he was elect to eternal
life: ergo: the assumption he proves by two places, and a reason. Ans. But 1.
he takes superfluous pains in proouing that none denies. 2. there is an
homonymie in his reason, saying he was the son of a holy man David,
therefore according to Calvin and Peter Martyrs doctrine himself was holy.
For one is called holy, either for inherent righteousness, as our first parents
were before the fall, or for the imputation of Christ's holiness and beginning of
inherent holiness, sanctified by Christ Jesus, or else for pertaining to a
holie-people, with whom God made his covenant, always to convert some of them
and give them true and inward holiness. In which last sense Calvin and Peter
Martyr say that a holy offspring comes of holy parents, by Paul's own witness
Romans 11.26. If the root be holy, the boughs are so also. And 1. Cor. 7.14.
An unbelieving husband is sanctified in his wife etc. otherwise your children
should be unclean: but now they are holy.

2. The proposition is false, he proves it thus: the scripture records that in
his old just days he fell from grace and righteousness, and how he worshipped
all his concubines idols. Cyprian also lib. 1. Ep. 5. and Aust. 22. contra
Faustum lib. 22. cap. 88. affirms that he was a castaway and damned.

Ans. 1. The scripture testifies no such matter as Bellarmine speaks of: as
that he fell from grace and righteousness. 2. his argument is to weak, because
he worshipped idols. For God did not utterly take away his mercy from him as
he promised by Nathan. 2. Sam. 7.14. Ergo Solomon did repent, as the book
Ecclesiastes which he afterward compiled does well declare.

Object. Yea but that promise by Nathan must be understood of his temporal
kingdom.

Ans. That is begging of the question. 1. proof gainesaies it. for the
greatest part of the kingdom was taken away from his successors, and in process
of time the whole kingdom: and so the event were not answerable to the
promise. 2. the same is apparent by the applying of the promise to all the
elect. Psalm. 89.31. 3. as for the testimonies of Cyprian and Austin are not
authentical in divinity disputations.

Exam. 6. Peter lost his justifying faith, and was elect. Ans. The proposition
is false: for Christ prayed for him that his faith might not fail, and he
proves it thus. He sinned greatly by denying Christ and binding it with
perjury, Ans. the antecedent is true but in part, he sinned, but not with his
whole heart and full consent, as appears by his repentance. Confession faild in
his mouth, but not faith in his heart.

Exam. 7. Simon Magus lost his justifying faith, and was elect. Ans. they are
both false: the mayor he proves Act. 8.13. Simon Magus believed also. Ans. it
is meant of historical faith. Bellarmine pinnes a slander on Caluins back,
saying he avouches that he did not truly believe, but dissemblingly, whereas
Calvin mislikes that, as appears by his commentaries upon the Acts,

Exam. 8. Judas the betrayer lost his faith and was elect: ergo: Ans. both
false: he proves the minor: whosoever is given to Christ, is an elect: but so
was Judas. Ioh. 17.12. Those thou gave me etc. I ans. 1. the phrase is
doubtful to be given to Christ Jesus: for some are given him as to a
mediator and redeemer, that he should give them everlasting life Ioh. 17.2. so
was not he, either as to a Lord and king, as all things in heaven and earth are
given to Christ, that is, are subjected under his rule and government. 1. Cor.
15. Heb. 2. Again some are given him to bestow life upon, other to bestow an
Apostleship upon.

2. The proposition is meant of such as are given to Christ as to a mediator:
the assumption of such as are given him as a Lord, and to commit the
Apostleship unto. Ergo: the meaning of Christ words is this, those thou have
given me to make Apostles, I have kept from being infected with the leven of
the Pharisees and priests, and swaruing from thy truth which I have taught
them. 3. although I should grant that Christ Jesus speaks there of those
that are elect to eternal life, yet nothing can be picked out thereof but
this, that Judas only perished: for so Christ Jesus speaks exclusiuely, none
of them perished beside that son of perdition: but the adversaries very
grossly affirm the same of other the elect, because Judas perished alone, ergo:
other may perish also: but the clean contrary collection should be made:
ergo: other of the elect cannot perish.

Object. They reply to the answer of the mayor he that is just has justifying
faith. Judas was sometime just: ergo had justifying faith.

Ans. The minor is false, which he proves by Christ's words Ioh. 17.12. which I
have already answered.

Object. He that is in Christ's flock has justifying faith, but so was Judas.
Ans. they that are so in Christ's flock that they are also of it, it is true of
them, but so was not Judas: for if he had been of him, he would have stayed
with him.

And thus far for his examples.

Arg. 3. Because the church has so defined and judged it, condemning this
self same error long ago in Iouinian. as Hierom relates lib. 2. contra Iouin,
and Austin haeresi. 82.

1. He alleges a witness that is insufficient in ecclesiastical
controversies.

2. He would cosen us with a false testimony, saying, the church condemned
this opinion in Iouinian, that the elect cannot loose their saving faith, which
was not condemned in him: neither can that be showed out of Hierom or Austin,
because these fathers condemned in him, that man could not sin after
baptism: which is another case.

3. If Iouinian taught this simply, he was in an error, and not in that sense
that John does 1. Ioh. 3.9. that one regenerate cannot sin, that is, give
himself wholly unto sin, and not labor for sanctification, because he is
borne of God: which if he did, I see not why he should be condemned, unless
they condemn John also. Therefore we set more by the truth of Gods word, then
by the authority of councels. Hierome because he was at deadly hate and fewde
with marriage, most sharply reproues them that defend the holiness of wedlock,
and Iouinian, and Vigilantius, whom he wrongful charge with sundry
heresies. And so much to the definitive sentence of the church.

Argu. 4. He brings 5. reasons. 1. Any habit may be lost: justifying faith
is a habit: Ergo.

Ans. 1. The philosopher will hardly grant the proposition, because a habit is
a firmed settling of the mind and as it were another nature.

2. It is not universally true, such habits may be lost as are got by our
own industry and is not confirmed in man's mind by God: but faith is not got
by our labor, but infused, and it is confirmed in whomsoever has it, by God,
that it may persevere. For those that God does justify, he does also
sanctify. Romans 8 30.

Object. He that commits one act of infidelity loses the habit of
faith: but he that has the habit of faith may commit an act of infidelity:
Ergo: may loose faith.

Ars. He says the mayor is true by the scripture, and the adversaries
doctrine, which is, that justifying faith is shaken out, and the holy ghost
poured forth of the heart by every sin. The minor he proves thus, a habit
does not necessarily hinder the contrary act, as is evident by the reason and
nature of al other habitts, which incline to their act but do not force it.

Ans. The mayor is false, for the habit does not depend upon the action, as I.
Scaliger does very learnedly dispute Exercit. 71. and ergo is not overthrown
by one or two actions. As David did not presently put off all clemency, when
he caused Vrias to be slain: nor cast away all faith in God, when he fledd
for fear of Saul to the Philistines. In the proof of the mayor, he appeals
very impudently to the testimony of the scripture, which he has none: and to
the adversaries on whom he fathers a lie, ascribing that doctrine to us which
we renounce.

2. The minor is also false, and foolish the proof: for a habit is a quality
imprinted in our minds, and such an affection as brings not only propension
and alacrity of mind to do the same thing always, but also a settled
resolution and grounded, and desire of our will, and does not admit the
reasons and motions of the contrary affection, so Bellarmine leaves us to
skanne, whether he is a worse divine or a more sottish philosopher.

3. There are four terms, for to do an act of infidelity, and to be able
to do it are diverse. After this objection he faines, that we take exception
where we do not: namely that God does not permit men that are truly
justified to fall into sin, according to his promise: and then asks where is
that promise, and disputes against it, fighting as it were with his own
shadow, most foolishly reasoning thus: When the righteous turns him away
from his righteousness, etc. Ezekiel. 18. if we deny him, he will deny us, 2.
Tim. 2. ergo. he suffers them to fall.

Ans. These proofs are impertinent, and ergo prove nothing: they deal not of
those that are truly justified. 2. We never deny but that truly justified men
may sin: and therefore let him fight no more without an enemy like the
Andabate.

2 Many that are baptized in their infancy, when they come to age sin
grossly and are damned: but all that are baptized in their infancy, are
predestined unto life, are truly justified by baptism and receive faith:
ergo many that are predestined unto life, etc. sin and are condemned: the
minor he appeals to the Lutheran for proof for.

Ans. 1. He alters the state of the question, and fathers that on us which is
not ours. For we do not teach, that infants are justified by baptism, nor yet
we deny not but they may sin grossly that are elected and justified. 2. He
goes in hand to deceive us with joining many questions together, that are
distinct; as whether the elect may sin grievously, and whether they may be
condemned. 3. The assumption is stark false. 4. For the probation let the
Lutherans look what they grant to the Papists, and how they will keep
themselves from the error of ^pu^ operatum in the sacrament.

1 Object. Nay even without baptism by the opinion of Calvin, Peter Martyr,
and Bucer, the children of the faithful are borne holy. Ans. The instance is
beside the matter, because we speak now of those that are baptized. 2. Paul
says the same that these holy men do, Romans 11.16. Jf the root be holy, the
boughs also. 1. Cor. 7.14. the unfaithful husband is sanctified in his wife,
etc. otherwise your children were unholy, but they are holy. Whereby it is
evident, that the children of the faithful are holy by force and virtue of the
covenant; even before baptism also: afterward baptism serves for a sign of
that holiness.

2 Object. That all the children of the faithful, or at least all that are
baptized when they are young, are predestinate and can not sin, Calvin says:
or cannot be condemned Bucer and Martyr say. This is a forgerie and slander.
They never taught it, and therefore Bellarmines reason is frivolous he brings
after. If these men's paradox were true, then all Papists that are baptized in
their infancy, are predestinate to life and cannot perish, which
notwithstanding these men count infidels and members of Antichrist. Well, that
paradox is none of theirs. If the Lutherans hold any such thing, let them look
to it, we will not put our selves into other men's quarrels.

3 If the elect cannot loose justifying faith, surely there will be no
heretics in the world: but that is forergo.

Ans. It follows not: but this rather, that they that are elected unto eternal
life cannot become heretics, that is, such as will stiffely hold such errors,
as overthrow the ground of salvation. They prove the mayor: because this is
the difference between Pagans and heretics, that Pagans had never any faith,
heretics have had it and lost it. There shall rise some out of your selves that
shall speaks perverse things, Act. 20. and, 2. Tim. 2. Hymeneus and Philetus
fell from the truth. and Tit. 3.

Ans. This is impertinent, unless we presuppose that only they that are
elected unto eternal life become heretics: which we will never grant 2. If
they mean by faith, knowledge of the doctrine of the Gospel, this difference
between Pagans and heretics is not always true. For Lucian that had
professed Christian religion, afterward fell to heathenisme: so did Julian the
Apostata. For under the name of Pagans, we understand the Gentiles or Ethnicks,
with Augustine and other of the fathers. But if they mean that firm
persuasion of remission of sins granted for Christ, the second part of the
difference is false: for they never had justifying faith. The places do no way
prove it that are brought.

4 If the just cannot sin, the Apostles admonitions are in vain to fear, to
beware, to be careful: it is to no purpose God taught us to pray, forgive us
our trespasses, etc. it is superfluous to maintain repentance, absolution, and
reconciliation of those that fall, against the Novatians: but all these are
absurd: ergo.

Ans. 1. He changes the state of the question: for this is not the
controversy between us, whether the just may sin or no; but whether they
that are elected to eternal life may loose justifying faith or no? 2: there is
a double ambiguitie in the question, whether they may sin, or no: 1. in the
subject in the word just. For it may be taken either after the law, as Adam was
before sin, or after the Gospel, as they that believe in Christ are said to
be just: and this we mean here. 2. In the word sin: either of humane
infirmity, or of sin to death. In the first sense we deny not but they may
sin, 1. Ioh. 1.8, 9. If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and
the truth is not in us, etc. therefore those absurdities touch not us any way.
In the latter sense they that are justified by the obedience of Christ and
renewed of God, can not sin, 1. Ioh. 3.9. He that is borne of God, gives not
himself to sin, because his seed is in him.

5 That opinion that brings in desperation, is not true: to say that the elect
cannot loose justifying grace, brings in despair: ergo not true.

Ans. Both the premises are false. Bellarmine goes about to prove the
assumption, but leaves the point, and shakes hands with the question, saying,
He that can promise himself nothing of future events but rashly, cannot
certe^ly hope that himself is just: but none that is well in his wits can
promise himself any thing but rashly. ergo.

Ans. Surely this man needs somewhat to purge his head, for his brains crow.
For both his speech and his reason are ill at ease, that for using the word
hope, of present affairs: for hope is for future: we feel or trust in
present. But his reason is skared out of his wits. For where be should
prove, that the opinion of the infallible certentie and firmenes of justifying
faith, brings in desperation, he concludes, that none that is in his right
mind, can certainly hope that he is truly just: o wit whether wolt? then he
proves the assumption of the prosyllogisme with testimonies which none denies.

Thus then having refuted all that Bellarmine can oppose against this doctrine,
it stands steadfast, that they that are elect unto eternal life can not
loose justifying faith. And thus much of the 11. axiom, now follows the 12.

Ax. 12. The Elect can not perish: which Austin also delivered in his book de
side ad Petrum, cap. 35. Hold this steadfast and no way doubt, says he, that
all whom God by his free goodness has made vessels of mercy, before the
beginning of the world, are predestined of God into the adoption of the
children of God, and that none of them can perish whom God has predestined
to the kingdom of heaven, and that none of them whom he has not
predestined unto life can by any means obtain the same. And before him
Ambrose de vocat. Gentium, lib. 2. cap. 10. All that shall be called at any time
into the kingdom of God, are sealed in this adoption, which was made before
the world. And as none of the unfaithful are reckened in this number, so are
none of the godly left out. For the prescience of God which cannot be deceived,
loses nothing of the full number of the members of Christ's body, neither can
any casually deminish the sum that was foreknowne and elected in Christ
everlastingly.

13 They cannot be taken out of Christ's and his fathers hands, Ioh. 10.28, 29.

14 They are not elected conditionally, as the adversaries say of Paul, if he
fulfill the course he began unto the very end.

15 They shall not be forsaken of God, as Samuel cheereth us, 1. Sam. 12.24.
The Lord will not forsake his people for his own great names sake, because it
pleased the Lord to make you a people to himself.

16 They are like to pure wheat, Matthew. 3.12.

17 They are not proud in themselves, or with the contempt of other. They
insult not over other, that have not obtained the like grace, Romans 11.10.

18 It is their part to put on the bowels of mercy, with patience, gentleness,
modesty, rendernes of mind, to endure other, to pardon other, to be in love
with all, Coloss. 3.12.

19 For their sakes the ministers of the Church especially must suffer all
things, 2. Timoth. 2.10.

20 For their sakes the days of the cruel enemies of the Church are
shortened, that they should not without end make havoc: as God hastened the
last end of the perfidious nation of the Jews, which otherwise would not have
left any just man alive, they so hungered after the utter suppressing of all
Christ's disciples. Mar. 13.20.

21 The elect are counted fools, base, vile, nothing in the world, but are
beloved of God, that we may perceive that Gods favor is not bound to any
persons. 1. Cor. 1.27.

22 They shall be gathered and knitte unto Christ at the last day by the
angels, etc. Math. 24.31.

23 God hears and reuengeth them daily suffering injury and calling upon
him, though he seem to be slow in revenging their grieuances. ^uk. 18.7.

24 Nothing can be laid to their charge at Gods judgment seat, he justifying
them. Roman. 8.33.

25 They are with the lamb and fight against Antichrist. Apoc. 17.14.

26 We must thank the Lord for them, by Paul's, Syluanus, and Timotheus
example, who gave thanks for the Thessalonians, as knowing they were elected.
1 Thessalonians. 1.2, 3, 4.

27 Every one of the elect may be and indeed is, certainly persuaded of his
election to eternal life: 1. by the internal witness of the holy Ghost, Romans
8.16. for the spirit of God bears witness with our spirit that we are the
sons of God. 2. of the gospel calling all those elect that believe in Christ.
3. of the effects of election, which God works in the elect alone, and by the
feeling whereof as of certain seals, election is signed unto us.

28 Every one ought to trust of his brethren in Christ, that they are elect
unto life, and not to be out of hope of other.

The examples of such as were elected to eternal life, Examples.
are as many as there have bin such as by a true and lively faith believing in
Christ have bin and yet are saved: as Adam, Eve, Abel, Seth, Enoch, Noah,
Abraham, Isaac, Iocob, etc. but of king Solomon there is some doubt made,
whether we should reckon him for an elect, seeing he fell so fowlly and
worshipped idols: now albeit I take not upon me this judgment, being the
Lords only, (who knows full well who are his,) yet to show my hope of other
men's salvation, seeing I have very good arguments for it, may stand with
charity. I say the^ that we must reckon Solomon among the elect, and that for
these 4. reasons.

Salomonan elect.
1 The promise was made unto him by Nathan, and to David of him, that the
mercies of God should not be utterly taken from him. 2. Sam. 7.14. When he
shall do wickedly I will correct him with the rod of men, etc. but my loving
kindness shall not quite be taken away from him, as I took it from Saul. Now
that this promise was not of his temporal kingdom is manifest by the applying
of it to all the elect, Psalm. 89.31. If his sons forsake my law and walk not
in my judgments, if they break my statutes and keep not my commandments, I
will visit their sin with the rod and their iniquity with scourges, but I
will not make void my kindness from him, nor lie against my faith. Cyprian also
applies it to all the elect, Epist. 52. and in his book to the heretic
Novatian.

2 He was a great and princely figure of Christ.

3 He witnessed his repentance in the book Ecclesiastes, which he afterward
composed.

4 He was a profitable and immediate minister of the holy Ghost, in setting
down doctrine of faith and manners to the Church: the penman of Canonical
Scripture.

And thus much of the first part of Predestination, that is, Election: now
follows the second of Reprobation.

REprobation, is that predestination whereby God does reject from the kingdom
of heaven such as are ordained to everlasting destruction. And it is meant in
the name of hate, Mal. 1.3. Roman. 9. 13.

Some are afraid to name reprobation, as if the word were unlucky and
unfortunate, and utterly to be banished out of Christian doctrine: but they
should not be so must afraid of it, because the holy Scripture it self does
use it. For Ier. 6.30. it is said, they are called refuse silver, because the
Lord has reprobated them: where the Prophet uses the word maas, which is
contrary to bachar, which is to choose, as appears, Esa. 7.15. The Greek
translation has (...), the Lord refused them. And the Scripture sates they are
(...), reprobates.

There are two parts of reprobation: first, a deputation to reproach, that is,
both to uses dishonest, or to those works which the reprobates do commit
afterward, and also to eternal destruction: secondly, Reiection from the grace
of election, and the effects of the same grace, and so from the end eternal
life.

Destination to shame, is before reiection from the grace of election. For that
which is last in execution, is first in intention, that is, in counsel and
cogitation. See Zanch. de natura Dei. p. 506.6.

Bellarmine in his third tome of disputations, lib. 2. de great. and lib.
arbitr. cap. 16. says, Reprobation compriseth two acts in it: one negative,
the other positive. For first he says God had no will to save them: 2. had a
will to condemn them. All which we would have liked well, but that he inuerted
the order of the actions, for that which he sets first, indeed is last.
Again, we like not his making of election double, one negative, the other
affirmative, calling that privatiue, this positive. But other call that
passive, this active. For every thing that consists of two parts, is not
twofold. There is but one eternal reprobation, not two, and that has but one
object and no more.

Eternal reprobation is 1. of the devil: 2. those that are united to the
devil.

Reprobation of the devil, is that whereby God from everlasting has rejected
the devil that should become the prince and head of falling from God, and has
adjudged him to everlasting punishment.

Reprobation of them that are united to the devil, is of such as are joined to
the devil as their prince and head: and it is either of the evil angels, or
damned men. Mat. 25.41. Genesis 3.15. Ioh. 8.14.

The eternal reprobation of evil angels is predestination, whereby God from
everlasting decreed to forsake some angels ordained to eternal destruction,
not to confirm them in good, to suffer them to fall through pride, and casting
them from heaven to exclude them from eternal happiness. Math. 25.41. Apoc.
12.9.

That there is a reprobation of some of the angels is evident by this, because
some angels are elected, by Paul's witness: now election can not stand without
reprobation.

Concerning the cause thereof, Bellarmine is of this judgment, that the
negative reprobation of the angels, does not depend on the foresight of sin.
For God foresaw that the angels which perish should most undoubtedly perish, if
indeed he should give them but that grace only which he did give them,
therefore giving them no more grace, he would withal not predestinate them to
glory, but suffer the^ to fall from salvation. For if he would absolutely have
saved them, his wisdom would have found a means to do it. Therefore there
can be no reason given, why God would give some angels grace, by which he saw
they should most certainly be saved, and to other whereby he saw most certainly
they should not, but only because he would save these and not them. But the
cause why he would positiuely damn the evil angels was out of doubt their
sin foreseen. For the punishment of condemnation is not justly inflicted,
but where sin went before. Now in this we like it well, that he
acknowledges no other cause why some angels were not elected to salvation, but
only the mere will of God. But we very much mislike, first that he makes two
kinds of reprobation in stead of the two parts of one and the self same
thing: secondly, that he makes foresight of sin the cause of his will in
condemning the evil angels, seeing it is impossible that the efficient cause
should in time be after the effect. And it is very gross that the sin should
be the efficient cause of the eternal will of God, that is, of Gods very
essence, willing. The argument he brings is beside the point, because the
punishment of damnation is one thing, and the eternal decree of inflicting the
punishment of damnation is an other. Indeed God decreed to lay the punishment
on the devils for sin, but sin is not therefore the cause of the decree.
Sin is the cause of punishment, but not of the decree of punishing.

The eternal predestination of men to be condemned, is that predestination
whereby God has determined from everlasting to pass by those that are left in
the common destruction, into which all men should plunge themselves by sin.

1 There are two parts of this definition, the genus, and the difference: or,
the matter and the form. The genus or matter is Predestination, which is
common to election and reprobation: as Austin teaches, l. 15. de Civ. dei, c.
1. We divide (says he) mankind into two kinds or branches, one of those that
live according to man, the other that l^ie according to God. Which mystically
we call two cities, that is, two societies of men, the one whereof is
predestined to reign for ever with God, the other to undergo everlasting
torment with the devil. And again in his Enchirid. to Laurentius, cap. 100.
God should bring to pass that which he would, using well even the evil, as
chiefly good to their condemnation, whom he justly predestined to
punishment, and to the others salvation, whom in mercy he predestined to
grace. And the author of the book of the calling of the Gentiles, calls the
reprobate predestinate. So does Fulgentius ad Monimum, lib. 1. cap. 27.
Therefore sinners, says he, are not predestined to the first death of the
soul, that is, sin; but to the second, the state of fire and brimstone. And
in the second book to the same man; Gods predestination is nothing else, but
the preparation of his works which in his everlasting disposition he foreknew
he would do either mercifully or justly. And Anselmus in his book of the
agreement of prescience and free will, says, Predestination is not only of
the good, but of the badde also. So do the schoolmen under the same name of
predestination, deliver as well the reprobation of the wicked, as the election
of Saints. Therefore we do not so ill, in using the word predestination for
reprobation to destruction: nor yet do we foist into the Church any new
opinions of the eternal predestination of the reprobate to condemnation, as
the adversaries charge us: unless they will likewise accuse Augustine,
Fulgentius, and the other fathers for the same fault. Again, whereas some
would have the reprobate called [foreknovvne] rather, indeed they know not
what they say, for that Christ and the Elect are called foreknovvne both in
Scripture and by Justin Martyr, lib. 2. Apolog. and in his dialogue with Trypho
the Jew; so are not the reprobate once in all the Scripture, that I can
remember.

2 The form or difference to distinguish reprobation of men condemned, from
eternal election, is, that God determined and appointed to reject and exclude
those men whom he prepared to everlasting destruction, from the communion of
eternal salvation.

So then there are two parts of reprobation of men to be damned, 1. deputing
them to ignominy, and so to everlasting destruction: 2. excluding them from
grace of election, and the effects thereof.

Of the first part it is said, Romans 9.21. Has not the potter power over his
clay, to make of the same mass one vessed to honor, and an other to
dishonor? and verse. 22. they are called vessels of wrath made to destruction.
2. Tim. 2.20. In a great house there are not only vessels of silver and gold,
but also of wood and stone, some to houour, other to dishonor. and 1. Pet.
2.7. The disobedient are set for this, namely to stumble at the word. Jude, v.
4. Certain are crept in, long ago^ ordained to this condemnation, wicked men,
that t^rne the grace of our God into lust.

Of the second part Christ speaks, Ioh. 13.18. I speak not of you all, I
know whom I have chosen. Mat. 20.16. Many are called, but few are chosen.
Math. 15.13. There are plants which the heavenly father has not planted. Apoc.
13.8. All the inhabitants of the earth shall worship the beast, whose names
are not written in the book of life of the lamb. And Apoc. 17.8. The
inhabitants of the world wondered whose names were not written in the book of
life, before the foundation of the world. Therefore reprobats are shutt from
the grace of election. Mat. 11.25. I glorify thee O father, Lord of heaven and
of earth, for hiding these things from the wise and learned. Ioh. 17.9. I
pray not for the world, but for those which thou have given me, because
they are thine. Matt. 7.23. J never knevve you. Therefore reprobates are also
excluded from the effects of free election.

That there is reprobation, both the scripture does affirm and other arguments
prove: the places of scripture are these. Ier. 6.30. They shall be called
reprobate silver, because the Lord has reprobated them. Object. That is spoken
of temporal reiection. Ans. If we should grant that, they could not deny
reprobation, nay that necessarily proves it. For whomesoeuer God has rejected
in time, he decreed from everlasting to reject: both because God knows all his
works from everlasting. Iam. 15.18. As also because God works all things
according unto the counsel of his own will. Ephesians. 5.11.

Test. 2. To. 9.22. The reprobats are called vessels of wrathand of
destruction. To which they answer, that is not to be meant of reprobation,
because vessels of wrath are made of the devil, to destruction, that is, the
devil does frame and fit them, to be more and more prepared to everlasting
dishonor. But they are deceived two ways. 1. in the efficient cause of this
fitting, 2. in the exposition of the word. For they say the efficient cause
thereof is the devil; then they construe the word, to induce ability and
fitnes upon the vessels of wrath, that they may be more and more prepared to
everlasting dishonor.

Er. 1. But 1. it is blasphemy to say they are prepared of the devil to
destruction: for by this means the work of distinction of mankind, and the
just judgment which is proper unto God, is made the devils. Much better does
S. Austin speak lib. 2. contra 2. Epi. Pelagii. He has mercy on whom he
will, and whom he will he hardens, that makes one vessel to honor, and
another to dishonor; and yet more clearly Epis. 105. to Sixtus the priest: God
makes vessels of wrath to destruction, to show his wrath and declare his
power: And lib. 1. ad Simplicianum. Whereas of the number of the wicked whom
he does not justify, he makes vessels to dishonor, he does not hate this in
them which he makes. And again, see he hates Esau, which vessel he made
himself to dishonor.

Object. 1. The adversaries prove their assertion thus. 1. Paul says not that
the vessels of wrath are made of God to destruction: ergo God made them not.
Ans. The like collection may we make, Paul says not, that they are not made
of the devil: ergo: the devil made them not.

Object. 2. God is delighted with them that that he makes: he is not delighted
with the vessels of wrath: ergo: he made them not. Ans. The proposition speaks
of their substance, the assumption of their accident, sin. For God is
delighted withal he made, in respect of their substance and the good things
created therein: but he is not pleased with the vessels of wrath, as they are
defiled with sins, by which they provoke Gods wrath upon their own heads:
therefore it follows not, that god made not the vessels of wrath: that is, made
not the reprobate against the evil day, raised not the^ up to show examples of
his wrath: for the vessels are called vessels of wrath, because God made them
to show in them examples of his wrath for the declaration of his power.

Object. 3. Those which he does endure, he made not: but he endures and
bears with the vessels of wrath: ergo: he made them not. Ans. If the
proposition be general, it is false. For the Lord made all things for
himself, the wicked also against the day of evil. Pr. 16. And does he not
bear long with such? yes, he bestows many good things upon them: suffers his
sun to shine upon them, he feeds them, etc: so much for their first error.

Er. 2. They expound the word ill: it does not signify to induce an ability
and fitnes etc. for seeing it is the just work of God, it is not the induction
of any such fitnes: that is, of sin, by which the reprobates are made fit to
condemnation, as they speak, though improperly: for God is not the author of
sin.

Test. 3. Jude v. 4. There are crept in certain me^, appointed long since to
this condemnation. Against this they object, the meaning of the word (...) is
this, described before, of whom now long ago, it is written and foretold in
the prophetical scripture, that at their due time, they should invade and
disturb the church of god, and so in the end perish everlastingly: but this
exposition is not true, being repugnant unto the Apostles words, which says
flatly, men long ago described before, and not of whom it is written long
since in the scripture.

Thus far authority of scripture: now follow other arguments.

Arg. 1. If there are not many written in the book of life, then there is
reprobation: but many are, not Apo. 13.8. and 17.8. ergo.

2. If but few are elected, the^ the rest are rejected: for we cannot conceive
of election, without reprobation, one necessarily establishing the other: but
the first is true. Mat. 20.16. ergo.

Object. There is an homony my in the word Elect: Christ Jesus there calls
elect, sincere, the true and lively members of the church, as choice gold, that
is pure, and tried. Ans. Though they take elect in that sense: yet it cannot
agree but to those that are predestined to eternal life, for they are only
true and sincere: nay if we stand strictly upon this signification, there is no
man living that shall be elect, because so long as they live in this body, none
is without greatstore of dross and refuse.

3. If God has not mercy upon all, then there is a reprobation: but he has
not. Ex. 33.19. I will be gracious to whom J will be gracious, and have mercy
on whom I will have mercy. This place does the Apostle bring in the mystery
of predestination. Romans 9.15. What shall we say then? is there any
unrighteousness with God? God forbid, for he says to Moses, I will have
mercy on whom I will have mercy etc, Ergo: there is a reprobatio^.

Ob. 1. To. 11.32. God has concluded all under contumacie, that he might have
mercy on all.

Ans. Paul does not gainesay us. For this general particle is understood one
way in my argument, and another way in him: we mean al and every one, none
excepted, but Paul means all that believe, or that are to be saved, not only of
the gentiles, but also of the Jews: that they obtain salvation no way but
only by the mercy of God: that there is nothing in man, for which he should be
saved, the gentiles have no privilege over the Jews; for look how many so
ever are saved, are saved by the mere mercy of god. Therefore they show their
ignorance that stretch the universal particle to another meaning then Paul
does: but yet they will confess themselves, that God has not mercy on all
actually.

Ob. 2. The Lords words to Moses do not prove* the opinion of absolute decree,
but to co^fu^e the wicked grudging of the Jews, who falsely judged, Gods
justice was called into question if he denied the reward of eternal blessedness
to their labor and travel.

Ans. 1. They cavil in the word (absolute decree) for they imagine, that we
call absolute decree, an inordinate decree: wherein the whole order of
election, is distracted from election it self, and the order of salvation is
not included in election, but is under the same only in the execution. But we
call it an absolute decree, because the efficient cause thereof is not the
condition of faith foreseen, or of merits foreknowne, but the only will and
pleasure of God.

2. They beg the question, saying those words do not belong to the secret of
predestination: the text does prove the contrary: for Paul taught a little
before, that al are not Israelites that descend of the father Israel, not all
sons that are the seed of Abraham: that is, that all are not elect that are
borne of the holy seed: this he proved 1. by the example of the sons of
Abraham, of whom none but Isaac was chosen, Israel being rejected. ^. of
Isaacs sons, of whom Jacob alone was chosen. For when the children were yet
unborn, before they had done either good or ill, that the purpose of God that
is according to election, not of works but of him that calls should stand
fast, ^t was said to Rebecca their mother, the elder shall serve the younger,
as it is vv^^tten, Jacob have I loved, and Esau have J hated: that is, that
Esau was rejected from everlasting, and the sign of this reprobation was, that
he should serve his younger brother. Now against this doctrine carnal reason
objects this. If god respected neither good nor ill deeds in election or
reprobation, then there is unrighteousness with him. This consequence Paul
denies saying: God forbidd. And he sets down the reason of this negation,
taken from the end: because whomsoever God has chosen, he chose for the
declaration of his mercy in them, and whomesoeuer he rejected, it was to
declare his power in them.

4. If he hardens whom he will, there is a reprobation: but he does Romans 9.18.

5. If most men take the broad way to destruction, they are reprobated: but
they do. Mat. 7.13.

6. If at the last day many shall not be taken but be left, then they are
reprobated: but that is true. Mat. 24.40. But why shall this be so, because
everlasting predestination has so appointed it. Act. 15.18. Gods works are
known unto him from everlasting. Ephesians. 1.11. He works all things by the
council of his own will.

7. If some be called to Christ by the preaching of the gospel, and other not,
then there is reprobation: but some are and for experience shows it,
Christians are called, but many thousands of Turks, Tartars, and other heathen
people never heard of Christ.

8. (...) christians some repent and are saved, other remain and die in their
sins, then etc. ergo.

9. Some wax hard Romans 11.7. The elect obtained it, but the rest are grown
hard: ergo: there is reprobation.

10. None shall enter into the heavenly church, that commit any abominable
thing or speak lies, and Apoc. 21.17. Ergo: it is certain there is an eternal
reprobation.

11. Every plant which the heavenly father has not planted shall be rooted
out. Mat. 15.13. Ergo.

And thus we have sufficiently proved that there is an eternal reprobation:
now to answer the false arguments, which the adversaries bring against it.

We are all by nature the children of wrath: ergo: Adv. 1. arg.
there are no vessels prepared to destruction.

Ans. 1. The consequent is blasphemous, flatt contrary to the holy ghost. Romans
9.22. saying there are. 2. it does not follow, but rather the contrary (viz.)
therefore all by nature are prepared to destruction, and that is true: but
whereas some are elected to be delivered from the general destruction, it is
the grace of God that electeth.

2. The way to remove the envy of others destruction from God, is to make no
reprobation.

Ans. 1. Although we make a reprobation, yet shall not the envy of the others
destruction rest in God, seeing whosoever perish, they may thank themselves.
For salvation is Gods. Ps. 3. vlt. 2. Paul labors not greatly, to excuse God
with a lie, but only gives warning that it is not lawful for the clay to
choppe logic with the potter, nor the creature with the Creator.

3 Whom God does in great gentleness endure, he has not reprobated: but he
does tolerate the vessels of wrath: ergo. Ans. The proposition is true of the
repentant only. The assumption speaks of those that are not repentant. Besides
they gold Paul's words; for he adds, vessels of wrath that are made to
destruction. Lastly, Paul does not ascribe that patience to God, whereby he
looks for their conversion; who^ he says are made to destruction. For well
says August. l. 5. c. 5. against Julian, expounding this place: where power of
suffering is set down, that God does not let, but moderate with his might.

4 They that are not prepared of God to destruction, are not reprobate: but the
vessels of wrath are not, Romans 9.23. Of the vessels of mercy indeed Paul
says, God has prepared them to glory, but of the vessels of wrath, it is not
said that God prepared them, but only that they are prepared, namely of
themselves, to destruction.

Ans. The assumption is not denied. 2. The place quoted does not pertain to
the matter: seeing Paul denies not that God prepares them, nor says they
prepare themselves. 3. How gross is it that any body should make himself to
destruction, as if any made themselves. 4. The comparing the members together
shows that both are the works of God: the place in the Acts puts it out of
controversy, Act. 13.48. where it is passiuely spoken of the elect that they
were ordained to eternal life. and Prove. 16.4. God made all men for himself,
even the wicked also for the evil day: ergo Reprobation stands, their
objections notwithstanding.

The efficient cause of Reprobati^^
The efficient principal cause of eternal reprobation is God, for he refuses
all that are not elect. Ier. 6.30. the Lord rejected them. Against which they
oppose.

Object. 1. The beginning of so great a mischief is not from God. God is not
the author of evil. but this is evil.

Ans. 1. The proposition is not generally true, but only of the evil of
sin. 2. The assumption is false.

Object. 2. God is not delighted with the destruction of a sinner, Ezekiel. 18.23.
and 32. Psalm. 5.5. Wisd. 1.13. ergo he is not the author of eternal
reprobation.

Ans. 1. The proposition that is wanting is false for the elench of the wrong
cause: because it supposes that the delight of the destruction of the wicked
is the cause for which God rejected them. 2. The assumption must be taken but
in part: for God is not delighted with their destruction as it is destruction,
but as it is the execution of his just judgment. 3. There is an homonymie in
the place alleged out of Ezekiel: for there God speaks of the wicked that is
converted; with his death he is not delighted, nor wills his death. Therefore
it is not truly cited of the destruction of the reprobate, who never turn, and
of whom the holy Ghost pronounces the clean contrary, Pro. 1.24. I will
laugh at your destruction, etc. 4. The place out of the Psalm is impertinent:
for is eternal reprobation, vanity, or iniquity? 5. To the place out of
Wisdom, the answer to Ezekiel will serve.

The moving cause for which eternal reprobation was made, is not sin: for
the better understanding whereof, I will explane this position.

Whomsoever God condemns and punishes with eternal death, those he decreed
to condemn everlastingly and punish with death, so that the immediate cause of
damnation and punishment is sin. But this is not now the question, but only
what is the cause of the decree, why God when he foresaw that all men would be
sinners alike in Adam, and by nature the children of wrath, determined to show
his mercy in the one, and to leave the other in their sins and condemn them
for the same? there can be no other cause tendered of it, but Gods pleasure
only. Yet more plainly. Why did God choose the one, and refuse the other, that
is, decreed to cast off them, to leave them in their sins, and for their
sins to condemn them, when as the Elect should have bin no less the
children of wrath by nature then all other? I answer, because it so pleased
him. It can not be answered it was for sin, because sin was to be in the
elect also. If here any do object, that there is a difference between the
elect and the reprobate, because the elect were to declare their repentance,
and to believe firmly and constantly in Christ, and so were not the reprobate,
yet that does not take away my answer. For still the question remains, why God
gave unto the elect the gift of repentance and constant faith, and not to the
reprobate? Whereunto no other answer can be made but this, that it pleased God
so. As that only master of ours teaches us, Math. 11.25. I give thee glory O
father, Lord of heaven and earth, that thou have hid these things from the wise
and prudent, and have revealed them to babes: even so O Father, because it was
thy good pleasure before thee.

Hence we see how unjustly our adversaries do slander our doctrine, saying,
that we teach, that God by a certain kind of absolute decree, has ordained
some to eternal destruction, without any respect of sin, or regard of
unbelief and unrepentance. Whereas we teach, that God has reprobated, that
is, decreed to leave the reprobate in the destruction, whereinto they should
voluntarily plunge themselves, and to condemn them for sin, and punish them
with everlasting punishment. He decreed, I say, to condemn and punish for
sin.

This did Zanchius plainly teach, lib. 5. de natura Dei, cap. 2. and lib. 3.
of his Miscellan. page 53. of the edition set forth 1592.

So do the Palatine Divines, as the admonition of Neustad witnesses, page
313. de formula Concordia. Their words are these: We teach with the Apostle
that God in the condemning of the reprobates will declare his justice, and
therefore has not allotted any to condemnation but for sin, and does not
will damnation, as it is damnation, but as it is a most just punishment. And
punishment has no place, but where sin goes before. But in the Elect he
would declare his mercy, because when he might very justly cast away all
mankind, for the sin whereinto they were fallen, (for all of us were the
children of wrath as well as other) of his only mere mercy, he determined to
take some out of the common destruction, that every mouth might be stopped, and
all the glory be given to God.

The very same does Luther, Calvin, Martyr, Beza, Bucer, and other excellent
Divines teach.

Although God decreed to reprobate, and condemn, and punish for sin those
that were reprobated, yet is not sin the cause of the decree. And that I
prove by these reasons.

1. Arg. If Esaus reprobation was decreed, before he was borne and had done
either good or ill, then sin is not the efficient cause of the decree of
reprobation: but the first is true: ergo. Romans 9.11. proves the first.
remoouing both Jacobs good works and Esaus ill from being the efficient cause
of reprobation.

1 Object. The adversaries object, that this place is not so much to be
understood of Jacob and Esau, as of the people that were borne of them, which
they prove because the places of Moses and Malachie that are alleged talk
of the people of Israel and Idumea, or the posterity of Jacob and Esau.

Ans. 1. They cavil of set purpose. For they do not answer the place of Paul,
which I brought to confirm mine argument, namely, when the children were yet
unborn, and before they had done either good or ill. Let them say that the
Apostle remooues not away both Esaus ill works and Jacobs good ones. Here is
the pith of mine argument, let them hamstring this sinew if they can or dare.
2. They pass by this argument with silence, and object against the two
testimonies alleged by Paul, as if the argument of proof had been fetched
from them, and so gainesay Paul's words, who most certainly speaks of Jacobs and
Esaus persons. verse. 10. Neither did he only (says he) but Rebecca also, when
she had conceived by one, namely our father Isaac, had experience of the same.
I pray of whom did she go then, not of Esau and Jacob? the same is clear by
verse. 11. for before the children were yet borne, or ever they had done either
good or ill. Of what children does he speak? of Esau and Jacob. 3. They refute
themselves wherein they said, that Paul speaks not so much of Esau, as of his
posterity, when they say when Esau was a type of the reprobate Jews. If Esau
was here brought in as a type of the rejected nation of the Jews, what need
they in Esaus name, understand Edumeans or posterity of Esau? Again, he that
takes the words of the Prophet, Malach. 1.2, 3. to be understood of their
posterity, and not of Esaus and Jacobs own persons, do injury to the text.

2 Object. This place of Paul may not be understood of eternal election or
reprobation, because else it should necessarily follow, that not only Jacob
was absolutely predestined to eternal salvation, but also the whole people
that descended of him. And again, that not only Esau was simply rejected from
the grace of God, but that all his posterity every one was simply reprobates.
For the testimonies which Paul brings to prove his purpose, speak of the
people that issued from these fathers.

But these consequences were absurd, because all Jacobs posterity were not
saved, nor yet all Esaus condemned. Therefore.

Ans. 1. It is false that this place of Paul's is not to be understood of
eternal election or reprobation. For he speaks so plainly that none that is
well in his wits can deny it. When the children were yet unborn, etc. that
the purpose of God which is according to Election, not of works, but of him
that calls, should stand sure. Now granting there is Election, we must
needs allo grant Reprobation, because there is no election without
reprobation.

2. It does not follow: for those absurdities do not ensue by granting our
opinion, because v. 11. out of which the argument of our reason is fetch,
speaks of their persons and not of their posterity, but they deal not with us
as if we disputed out of Moses, Genesis 25. and Malach. 1.

3. In the application of our authorities, v. 12. and 13. they accuse not us
but Paul, as if he had wrongly drawn it unto their persons, which the seat it
self (as they fondly speak) does show it should be referred to the people
which came of them. As if they were better interpreters of Moses and Malachie
then the Apostle Paul, and that which he applies to their persons, did not
indeed belong to them, but to both postetities.

But to the end that Paul's applying of it may be tho^owly understood, we must
observe 3. axioms very behoouefull for the interpretation of this Scripture.

Ax. 1. Corporal and temporatie matters promised unto the fathers in the old
testament, were types and sacraments of greater matters, even of spiritual and
eternal.

2 The things that God joined which his promises, no man may pluck asunder, but
he joined spiritual and eternal things with corporal and temporal: ergo
not to be severed.

3. Paul's use is to comprise the question or the sentence to be confirmed and
the confirmation thereof both together in the testimony he alleges, so that
omitting the sentence to be confirmed, he sets down the testimony only,
because there in the sentence to be confirmed is contained also. Now I will
annex the reason of Paul's application; because that the chief or greater part
of the Jews being puffed up with the title of the church set at naught the
gospel of Jesus Christ, the faith of many simple men began to faint, who
among the gentiles had embraced the gospel: because they thought it not
likely that Jesus Christ and the salvation in him promised could possibly be
rejected of the elected people, the holy nation and natural Israelites.
Therefore Paul to arm the weaker sort against this scandal, gives them to
wit: that none of the believers ought to be offended, that all the Israelites
did not embrace the gospel and believe in Christ Jesus, because they were
rejected: which reiection on some good reason he sets down very obscurely.
Romans 9.1.2.3. then ver. 6. there is an occupation, wherein he meets with
this objection. Jf the nation of the Jews be rejected, then the word of
God is fallen to the ground: that is, his promise that he made to Abraham is
made void, whereby he adopted his posterity into a people to himself. Paul
denies the consequence, and says the promise is not annihilated, because all
are not Israel that are of the father Israel. that are of the father Israel. We
must understand there are two houses of Jacob, one of flesh and blood the other
borne of the spirit and faith says Iustine Martyr in his dialogue with Trypho
the Jew. Now the promise belongs to the sons that were borne of the spirit
and faith, and not to the sons of the flesh: and this he proves by two like
examples.

1. The first is of Abraham's children, of whom Isaac was only counted for his
son: and lest any man should surmise, that this difference stretched no
further then Isaac and Ismael only, the Apostle sets down the general
application. Those are not the children of God that are the children of the
flesh, but they that are the children of the promise are accounted in the seed.

2. The second example is of Esau and Jacob: who albeit they were borne of
Isaac the son of the promise, both of one mother and at one birth, not at
diverse as Ismael and Isaac were, yet only Jacob was chosen and Esau was
rejected. The time of the reiection is described in these words: when the
children were yet unborn: that is before she was delivered: then their works
are denied to be the efficient cause of Jacobs election and Esaus reprobatio^,
in these words when they had done neither good nor ill: ergo: good works were
not the cause of choosing Jacob, norill works the cause of casting of Esau. And
thus does Augustine expound this place tom. 7. in his book of the
predestination of the Saints cap. 16. But we come back to little ones, to
twins, to them (if that be two little) that were yet unborn: who were begot
both at one time, and to be borne both at one instant. The diverse and
discrepant judgment of Gods will appears in them: where the deepnes of the
question will trouble the sense of men, that argue to proudly of the will of
God. Exalt thy voice with all thy power now thou unjust accuser of the just,
and tell me what harm he did, what good the other: and Paul shall answer thee
not I, neither of them had deserved any thing, but the potter has power over
the clay, to make of the same lump, one vessel to honor, another to dishonor.

Then is set down the end why their works must not be accounted the cause of
election and reprobation, (viz.) that the purpose of God which is according to
election, not of works but of him that calls, should remain firm. After
that Esaus reiection is hereby proved, for that albeit he were the elder
brother, yet he was given to be his brothers servant, according to the divine
oracle extant Genesis 25.23. But as Paul's style is concise and brief, the
sentence concerning the difference between Jacob and Esau is included in the
testimony that he cites out of Genesis: when they were yet unborn etc. as if
he should have said: the elder was rejected and the younger elected, as it was
said to Rebecca. The elder shall serve the younger.

Object. But this application of this oracle may seem unseasonable for two
causes.

1. Because that speaks of the whole people, whereas Paul deals but of Esau and
Jacob only.

2. That speaks but of corporal servitude or Lordship, but Paul of their
spiritual condition. Ans. For the first, we are to learn that the oracle
speaks so of two peoples as not excluding their beginners: nay
comprehendeth-them in their authors. For to speak properly the two nations
themselves were not in Rebeccaes womb, but only their authors: therefore that
which the oracle spoke of the nations, Paul did rightly apply to their
beginners: because the trial and truth ought to be exhibited in the authors
and heads of the nations themselves. Therefore Isaac-saies to Esau Genesis 27.39.
Behold I have made him thy Lord.

Now for the second, the truth is, the oracle soundes of the external
prerogative of the birthright and possession of the land of Canaan, translated
unto Jacob and of the corporal servitude wherein the posterity of Esau was
subject to the posterity of Jacob, but it does not exclude spiritual and
internal matters.

For the translation of the birthright and title of possessing the land of
Canaan unto Jacob, and Jacobs dominion over Esau, and Esaus servitude, was a
tipe of a greater thing, namely of Jacobs spiritual election, and Esaus
reprobation: that is, that Jacob was elected, both to be the heir of eternal
life, as also to be the enlarger of the church, so that his posterity
possessed the name and title of the church and enjoyed the prerogative of the
covenant of grace. And on the other side that Esau was rejected, both from the
inheritance of eternal life, and also from the society of the church: and
therefore that his offspring the Idumeans should be cut from the body of the
church. So does Augustine expound this place of election or predestination to
honor. lib. de praedest. and gra. cap. 9. saying, that the blessed Apostle,
speaking a little above of the judgment of Gods power in men's election,
confirmed it with impregnable examples, where he spoke of Rebeccaes child
bearing and issue yet within her belly, referring the whole matter to Gods
grace: and he concludes the chapter thus, he says not of works before going,
but when he said generally not of works, there he would have us understand
both past and to come: past which were not at all; to come, which were not yet.
Jacob was predestined a vessel to honor, because not of works, but of him
that calls i^ voi^^ said, the elder shall serve the younger. What could
Saint Augustine have spoke more plainly? for out of the very oracle the elder
etc. he concludes, that Jacob was predestined a vessel unto honor. The like
he does de praedest. sanct. cap. 16. and again in his book de correp. and gra.
cap. 7.

Object. If that oracle must be understood of election and reprobation, then
all Jacobs posterity were elected and all Esaus rejected: but they were out:
ergo:

Ans. The connex is untrue, for it follows not, if Jacob be elected unto life,
that al his posterity must needs be so: because election does not depend upon
the carnal generation of Jacob, but of the freewil of god electing whom he
will: likewise again it is not necessary that al Esaus sons should be
reprobates, because of the same reason: for that reprobation does not depend
upon the carnal generation, but of the just will of God.

Object. But neither Rebecca not Esau understood that oracle (the elder shall
serve the younger) of Esaus eternal reprobatio^, no more must we: and much
less, that he was by Gods most absolute will and decree never more to be
repealed, adjudged to the punishment of hell fire eternally: and this is good
for two reasons. 1. because if Isaac and Rebecca, by the illumination of Gods
spirit, had thought the oracle concerning the children yet unborn must be
understood, how could it possibly be, that they should not be utterly
swallowed up and killed up with such unspeakable grief, if they had though that
there little babie dandled on his mothers lapp, and sucking at her breast had
bin by force of the oracle a firebrand of hell, in so much as that all means
of grace and salvation had been barred up against him most infallibly, and
that for no other cause in the world, but because God would have it so? and
ergo the mother understood it not thus.

2. Because Isaac, or rather the very spirit of God, professedly expounding
the oracle Genesis 27. did not understand it of eternal reprobation.

Ans. 1. They deal sophistically by many captious interrogations as if they
were al one: for in this consequent there are two questions put for one. The
first of which only pertaines to the controversy now in hand: the second is
nothing to the purpose and detractory: because by the simple will and
unchangeable decree of God, whereby Esau is adjudged to hell fire, they
understand according to their manner, to be ordained to damnation without
respect of sin: but we hold that god has adjudged none to damnation, but
only for sin: therefore auaunt with this slander.

2. The proposition that is lest out does not follow, if Rebecca and Isaac did
not understand the oracle so, then we must not: for all things were not so
plainly delivered to the faithful in the old restament, as they are in the
new: ergo though Isaac and Rebecca did not fully know the meaning of it, yet
Paul did, whom we follow, as a most true interpreter of the old testament.

3. But Rebecca and Isaac did understand it so, as for the proofs they prove
it not. For the first is but a mere and idle flourish of rhetorike, and an
exaggeration of the sorrow which Isaac and Rebecca should have taken if they
had understood the oracle of eternal reprobation, and such as would greatly
move pity in seely women, that can easily shedd tears very te^derly for any
thing, but not such as truly believe, and reverently submit themselves unto
the will of God; as Isaac and Rebecca did, without grudging or resisting gods
will. What? did not Abraham understand that Ismael was excluded from the
earthly inheritance and therewithal from the inheritance of eternal life? and
yet he died not for grief: Did not David know that Absalom was the child of
hell, and yet was never swallowed up with sorrow for the matter? we must not
be more merciful then God, but with reverence approve his good will, though
it seem somewhat hard to flesh and blood. The second proof beggs the
question, as if Isaac when he blessed Jacob, had his mind settled upon corporal
and temporal matters only, and had not rather his eye upon spiritual and
eternal, as we collect Heb. 11.20. Where the Apostle brings the example of
Isaac, by faith blessing his sons of future matters; thereby to prove the
nature of saving faith which is not fixed upon earthly but heavenly things.

Object. Yet Esau in Paul is brought in not for an example of eternal
reprobation, but for a type of the reprobate people of the Jews: arguing thus,
he that was a type, etc. is not an example of reprobation.

Ans. 1. The proposition is false, and such an other as this; He that was a
type of Judas the betraier as Doeg was, is not an example of betraying. Doeg
both was a type and the man himself: and so was Esau. 2. They di^prooue their
assumption themselves, saying the person of Esau is not so much meant in this
place, as the people that sprung of him. For if the Edomices be here meant by
Esau, how then is Esau here put for a type of the rejected Israelites? if they
say the Edomites are also by him understood, this answer is not worth a rush.
For if by Esau all his posterity be understood that were engaged to be slaves
to Jacob and his posterity, and rejected from the land of Canaan, it will
follow that all were servants: which is false. For Esaus posterity was first
of all subdued by David and brought into bondage, 2. Sam. 8.13. whereas
beforetime they had bin free, and their kings no others vassals. Neither did
they ever serve, because the Edomites shook off the yoke of bondage and
servitude under Ioram the son of Iosaphat, 2. King. 8.20. as Isaac
prophesied, Genesis 27.40. yea and that which is more then so, Herod the Edumean
and his posterity ruled and reigned afterward in the land of Ganaan. 3. If
the assumption were true, that is, that Esau was a type of the people of the
Jews that was so to be rejected, then can it not be denied but that Esau
himself was a reprobate.

They prove their objection thus: Ismael also was cast out of his fathers
house, and in him there was a type shadowing out that mystery that the people
of the Jews should one day be rejected: but who would hereupon infer, that
Ismael was rejected by everlasting reprobation from salvation? Ans. Marry that
does Paul, Galat. 4.30. What says the Scripture? cast out the bondsman and her
son, for the son of the bondwoman shall not be heir with the son of the
free: but the barring from the earthly inheritance, was a sign and token of
barring from the heavenly.

2 Object. That by this place of Paul we are not to gather Esaus eternal
reprobation, is clear by the very manner of applying this type of Jacob and
Esau to his purpose. For thus he would say. Even as the title of the
birthright and the promise of possessing the land, did not depend upon works,
as it did not upon this carnal privilege, that Esau was elder then Jacob, but
upon free election, by which, not of works (which the children yet unborn
could have none of, neither good nor badde,) but of him that called it was
said, The elder shall serve the younger. So again in the type, (the
inheritance of eternal life) we must not think is theirs, that stand upon
their carnal generation and nativity of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, or seek
salvation in their works: but the inheritance is theirs, who neither vaunt of
their works, nor brag of their carnal prerogative from Abraham, but put
their whole trust and affiance of their righteousness and salvation in the
free mercy of God. This is Paul's only drift in this place, and not any other
thing contrary hereunto.

Ans. This instance is false, foolish, and hangs not together. False, first
because Paul does not in this manner apply those things he spoke of Esau and
Jacob, to his purpose, but the clean contrary way. For this is Paul's
proposition in the 6. verse, Not all that are of the father Israel, are Israel:
that is, not all that derive their pedigree from Israel, are to be numbered
among the true Israelites, or all the posterity of the Patriarch Jacob, are in
truth the sons of Jacob. This the Apostle proves by two very like examples:
first, because all the sons of Abraham, are truly sons: secondly, not all
the sons of Isaac and Rebecca, are sons in deed. And thus does the Apostle
apply them. As all the sons of Isaac and Rebecca are not truly sons, so
not all that are of the father Israel, are true Israelites, or truly the sons
of Israel. That all the sons of Isaac and Rebecca are truly sons he
proves by the adjuncts, because one of them, that is, Jacob was elect, the
other, to wit, Esau, was rejected. And shows that the translating of the
birthright upon Jacob, was the testimony of his election, as also his Lordship
over Esau, and the taking away of the birthright from Esau, and giving him to
be a bondsetuant unto Jacob, was a sign of Esaus reiection. And the cause of
Gods disposing matters after this order, by which means Esau was rejected and
Jacob elected, he says was not their works, either good or ill. 2. It is
false for so consitruing the privilege of the birthright, as if there were
nothing else meant thereby, but only the enriching Jacob with earthly
blessings, and depriving of Esau of temporal commodities, without any respect
had unto the heavenly. And so that Jacobs faith was fixed but only upon
temporal things, which is very absurd.

2 It cannot stand. For it says that the promise of possessing the land did
not depend on works, as neither on this carnal privilege that Esau was the
elder brother; seeing that promise was made to Jacob, how can the remoouing
away of Jacobs works and Esaus prerogative of the flesh stand both together?
therefore they should have said thus, that the promise of possessing the land,
did not depend on Jacobs good works, nor yet was hindered by Esaus carnal
privilege, because Esau was the elder. And not that it did not depend thereon.

3 It is also frivolous and foolish: making the inheritance of eternal life a
type: but of what can they tell? so doltish they are, that they know not what
they say or asseuere. They say the inheritance of eternal life is (...), that
is, the very truth of the type say they. But I say (...) and (...) are simply
taken for the same thing in the Scripture, Heb. 9.24. the holy things made with
hands are called (...) of the true ones, that is, types. Sometimes, for a new
type agreeing with the old in the end or scope, 1. Pet. 3.21. baptism is
called (...) of the deluge, that is, a type answering, signifying, and sealing
the same thing: but never of the thing it self signed, or the truth of the
type. So these men are both absurd Divines and foolish grammarians. If they had
but looked upon Bezaes larger notes on the new testament, there they might have
learned the exposition of this word: but they are ashamed to learn, and will
rather say any thing, be it never so false or foolish then yield to the truth.

And thus far in defense of the first argument, showing that the cause of the
decree of reprobation is not sin. Now follow more.

2. Arg. Sin is not the cause of the eternal will of God: but the decree of
reprobation is the eternal will of God: therefore sin is not the cause of
the decree of reprobation.

The proof of the mayor is, because the eternal will of God is the first and
highest cause other wise it were not, but sin should be before it: for every
efficient cause is before the effect. August. tom. 1. lib. 1. de genesi contra
Manich. cap. 2. If the will of God has any cause, something goes before it:
which is gross to surmise. 2. Because Gods will depends on no superior
cause.

3 That which was from everlasting has not sin for the efficient cause, for
nothing that began to be in time can be the efficient to that which was from
eternal: but the decree of reprobation was from eternal: ergo.

4 Whatsoever is after the decree of reprobation in time, is not the efficient
cause of the decree: sin is after it in time: ergo.

Object. Though sin be after it in time, yet it may be the cause thereof,
because with God nothing is past or to come, but all things are present
actually.

Ans. If this be a good argument, so is that: Because with God there is nothing
past or to come, therefore good works is the efficient cause of election, how
soever in time it comes after it.

5 If sin be the cause of the eternal decree of reprobation, it follows that
either all men are reprobated to everlasting death, because all are by nature
the children of wrath, for (...) have sinned and are deprived of the glory of
God; or else that the elect are not subject to sin, or else are better then
other in nature, and there sore for their dignity and merits are not
reprobate: both which are absurd and contrary to the Scripture: therefore.

6 If sin be the cause of the decree of reprobation, merits are the cause of
the decree of election: but that is not so: ergo. this is Luthers reason, Tom.
6. printed at VVittenberge, fol. 532. page 2.

7 If it proceeds originally out of eternal predestination, who shall not
believe, nor be delivered from sin, then surely the efficient cause of that
predestination is not unbelief nor any other sin: but the antecede^t is
true: ergo. Luther says it in his Dutch preface upon the epistle to the Romans.

8 If God has decreed reprobation of his mere free will and good pleasure,
then surely sin is not the cause of the decree: but the first is true. For if
God decreed to conceal his saving knowledge from the wise and prudent, for no
other cause in the world but his own free pleasure, then he decreed their
reprobation also, only of his mere pleasure. For there is no other cause of
hiding the grace Evangelical from worldly men, then there is of rejecting the
same. But the first is true, Math. 25.26. Therefore the last also.

9 If sin were the cause of eternal reprobation, many absurdities would
thereof ensue.

1. Paul had erred, urging this expressly, when they had done neither good nor
ill.

2. His answers had bin frivolous to the following objections, as first: If God
rejected Esan because he hated him, he is unjust: secondly, why is yet
displeased, for who has resisted his will? for the readiest answer had bin
this, to have said sin was the cause of Esaus and Pharaos reprobation. But he
is so far from betaking himself to this answer, that by prevention he cut
the throat of it, saying, when as yet they had done neither good nor ill, and
commanding us to rest in the sole will of God. Thirdly, God should be curbed,
that he should not have free power to do with his own what he will, and at his
own pleasure to make himself a vessel, wherein to show his wrath and exhibit
an example of his power.

10 The orthodoxall fathers, Augustine, Jerome, Prosper, Fulgentius, Bernard,
nay and the very schoolmen themselves, Peter Lombard, Thomas Aquinas,
Gregorius Ariminensis and Durandus: yea both Luther and some of his own
sectaries (I speak this for the Lutherans sakes) do prove that the cause of
eternal reprobation is not sin: for breuities sake I will here allege but
some of them.

Augustine, tom. 4. lib. 1. ad Simplicianum, quast. 2. page 447. in Frobens
print, says, If because God foreknew Esaus evil works, therefore he
predestined him to serve his you^ger brother, for that cause also he
predestined Jacob to have dominion over his elder brother, because he knew
his works would be goods. And again to hate Esau but for merit of injustice, is
unjust: but grant that once, and we shall have Jacob begin to be loved for his
merit of righteousness: which if it be true, the^ is that false, that not of
works: And by and by after, why was Esau yet unborn disliked: when he could
neither believe him that called him, nor yet contemn his calling, nor work
either good or il, without gods foreknowledge that his will would be evil:
which if you graint once, that any could be liked or disliked, for that which
yet was not in time, but only because god knew before hand that it would be,
it will follow, that he could be liked for his works also which God foresawe be
in him, albe it yet he had done nothing. Again in his Ench. ad Laur. cap. 98.
it is in all men's judgments an unjust matter, that without the merits of good
or evil works, god should love one and hate another: here, if he would have
the ones good works, and the other ill bin me^t, which God foreknew, he would
never have said, not of works: but, of future works, and so would have assoiled
that question, or rather have made no question that should need the assoyling.
The like he says tom. 2. Epist. 105. ad Sixth. page 305.

It is strange, when they are pinched with these straits, into what downfals
they cast themselves: being afraid of the vessels of truth: for this cause
(say the Pelagians) before they were borne he hated the one and loved the
other, because be foresaw their future deeds: who does not wonder that the
Apostle was so ouershort: for he thought not of this, when as it were the
aduersatie popt him in the mouth with this question, he did not answer thus
briefly, plainly, soundly and easily. And a little after. Whatshall we say
then? is there iniquity with God? God forbid: but why God forbid? for the
works which he knew both should dono, God forbid this too.

Therefore it is the heresy of the Pelagians, that God did elect or reject men
for their works good or ill foreseen, by Augustines judgment, whom we are
bound to credit more then a company of vpstarts, of yesterdaies growth as
Tertullian calls them contra prax. cap. 2.

Peter Lombard lib. 1. did. 41. cap. 1. Then seeing there are no merits of the
grace which is laid before a man to justification, much less of predestination
it self, whereby god eternally elected whom he would, can there be any merits:
so nether of reprobation, whereby he foreknew from eternal, that some would
be evil and condemned, as he elected Jacob and rejected Esau, which was not
for the merits which they then had, because they had none, for they themselves
were not, nor for their future works which he foresaw, either elected he the
one or cast of the other.

Thomas Aquinas 1. par. quest. 23. art. 5. and pan. 5. quest. 6. art. 2.
evidently proves that there is no cause besides his will only, why he chose
the one or refused the other: and so does Luther Tom. 6. in Wittenberg print.
fol. 532. page 2.

And thus far we have showed that sin is not the cause of reprobation: now
we must dismember our adversaries forces, maintaining the contrary opinion.

Hose 13.9. Thy destruction is of thy self O Israel: ergo sin is the cause
of eternal reprobation.

Ans. The place alleged is wrongly translated: for in the Heb. it is thus.
Shicethca Iisrael chi by beezreca: that is, it has destroyed thee (meaning the
calfe which they worshipped) O Israel, when as in me (as) in thy help (thou
stoodest or should have stood firm and fast.) The Chaldie paraphrase of
Jonathan expou^ds it thus. When you corrupted your own works you house of
Israel the gentiles had domination over you: but you returned unto the law of
my word, I was your help: or thus, Thy king on whom thou didstrelie neglecting
me has undone thee: or, thy fained comfort, as Aben Ezra gives it the he brew
has neither (thy destruction) noryet (of thy self.) Now out of this corrected
translation it is clear, that here is no hold to ground any efficient cause
upon of the decree of reprobation, but teaches that whether it was the calfe
or their imaginrie comfort or (which better a grees with the text) their king
in whom they were some what to confident, was the cause of the peoples
destruction whereas contrary wise had they relied upon the Lord they should
have had experience of his help.

2. Though the version were sound, yet they would pick out nothing else out of
it but this, that the Israelites were the cause of their perdition, but
eternal reprobation is neither their destruction nor cause of the same.

2. Arg. That whose be ginning is from man's homebredd naughtines, is caused of
sin: but the beginning of reprobation is such Romans 11.20. They are broken of
by unbelief: ergo.

Ans. 1. The assumption is not true: for the beginning of eternal reprobation
is from the will of God, that would show his power upon man, and his great
right and rule.

2. The proof of the assumption is beside the cushion; for the assumption
talks of the eternal cause of reprobation: but the Apostle speaks of the
Jews temporary barring from the church: for the olive tree wherfrom the Jews
are broken, is the church or people of god: now that breaking of, is their
reiection from the communion of the church and people of God, made for their
unbelief.

3. Argu. The reprobate by repelling the word of god whereon faith arises,
make themselves unworthy of eternal life. Act. 13.46. Ergo.

Ans. 1. Here is an elench of a false cause: for the making themselves
unworthy of eternal life, is not the cause of the decree of reprobation which
is eternal, that in time.

2. They wrest Paul's words to a wrong sense: for he does not their deliver the
cause of the decree of reprobation, but accuses the Jews of ingratitude,
because being chosen by God out of al people, to whom the gospel of Christ the
Savior of the world should be preached, maliciously contemned so great a
blessing, and therefore judged themselves to be unworthy of eternal life:
that is gave sentence of themselves that they were not worthy of life eternal.

4. Argu. That whereof the holy ghost was to condemn the world, is the cause
of the decree of reprobation: but that was concerning sin, as Christ Jesus
witnesses. Ioh. 16.9. Ergo.

Ans. 1. The proposition is false, for sin was a thing temporal: the cause
of the other, eternal.

2. They take needeles pains about proouing the assumption, which none denies,
and let alone the proposition that needs it more.

5. Argu. God is not the author of eternal reprobation because it is evil:
Ergo: sin is.

Ans. 1. The antecedent is false: and 2. the proof thereof: for how can
eternal reprobation be cuil, being Gods eternal decree, as Theodoricus
Snepsius in his Theses of predestination discussed at Tubing anno 1583.

6. Argu. God is not one that wills iniquity Psalm. 5.5. therefore sin is the
cause etc.

Ans. Here is a rope made of sand: for the heretics (as faieth Irencus lib. 1.
contra hereses cap. 1.) la bour to make ropes of sand: they go about to prove
their assertions, by applying either the Lords parables, or the sayings of the
Prophets or speeches of the Apostles thereunto, least their brains child
should want color: wherein they pass over the order and course of the
scripture, and as much as in them is, pluck a sunder the members of truth: for
they translate and transform, and making one thing of another, deceive a great
many, with wisdom ill contrived out of the Lords words, that they pretend to
their error: even so play our adversaries in this case: for how hangs David's
words with their cause? how prove they it, if not thus?

That which God wills not, the cause of that is sin: but the decree of
reprobation God wills not: proof, because it is iniquity: ergo: the cause of
reprobation is sin.

Ans. 1. The proposition is not universally true: for god will not many things
whose cause notwithstanding is not sin, as that Christ should be an earthly
king, or that thou should be God, or an angel, or the monarke of the whole
world.

2. The assumption is false: for when god did reject those he elected not,
surely by the counsel of his own will he rejected them, because he does all
things by the council of his own will. Ephesians. 1.11.

3. The proof of the assumption is false, that Gods decree is iniquity: what
fend would say this?

7. Arg. They that being invited refused to come to the feast, the cause of
their reprobation is sin: the reprobate refuse. Luc. 14.24. Ergo.

Ans. There is an homonymie in the word Reprobation: for in the mayor it
signifies the depriving of their partaking of the feast, whereof the master of
the house says, I say unto you that none of the men that were called shall taste
of my supper, but we mean Gods eternal decree. 2. if they mean so, their
mayor is falset of that which is done in time as the refusing of the supper
cannot cause a thing that is from everlasting. 3. Their assumption is
particular where it should be general: otherwise the conclusion must not be
general: for all reprobates refuse notto come, as he that came without his
wedding garment.

8. Arg. They that are rebellious to god that calls the^, sin is the cause of
their reprobatio^, the reprobate are so. Esaias. 65.2. I stretched out my hand
all the day long to are bellious people that walk in no good way, by
following their own ima ginations.

Ans. There is a fallacy in the proposition of a false cause: for rebellion is
not the cause of the decree of reprobation, but consequently flows from it.
2. The proposition is half crazie, and he confirms the assumption. 3. The
prophets words are impertinent, for the cause of reprobation is not there
handled, but the Jews wickedness: which is not said to be the cause of the
decree of reprobation.

9. Argu. The reprobate contemn their calling, despise his council, and
neglect his reproves. Pr. 1.24. Ergo: sin is the cause etc.

Ans. The proposition that is wanting is false: for those things are not the
cause, but the consequent of the decree of reprobation. 2. No man denies the
assumption, yet that does he prove. 3. The place out of the Proverbs is
nothing to the matter: because Solomon does not thereuppon in far, that sin
is the cause of reprobation: now impertinently to quote a place, is not at all
to prove any thing.

10. Argu. The reprobate rest not in goodness. Romans 11.22. Ergo: sin is the
cause of reiection.

Ans. 1. The proposition is false, that is away. 2. for the reprobate were
never in goodness, but rather in bountifulnes (...): for so the greek is. 3.
the proof of the assumption is from the point: for Paul's words are
conditional, which put nothing in esse, ^ffirme nothing, but the assumption is
categoricall or affirmative. Again the assumption speaks of the reprobate, but
Paul of the elect.

Object. 1. He threatens them with cutting off, and therefore speaks not of the
reprobate.

Ans. Though it cannot fall out that they should be cut off, yet have they
need of such round dealing to abate the pride of their flesh: which as it is
indeed contrary to their salvation, so must it be skared with fear of
damnation. As the^ we are elect we hear to our assurance [that the gifts of
god are without repentance,] but in as much as we carry flesh about with us,
which is skittish and wanton against the grace of God, we had need to be
schooled with this commination to be humbled and shake off this drowsines of
the flesh.

11 Coloss. 1.23. The reprobate are said to be instable in the faith, suffering
themselves to be removed from the hope of the Gospel ergo.

Ans. 1. In the proposition is a false cause, of that eternal decree: because
it is temporatie.

2 The assumption meant of lively faith is false, because that hangs not for
reprobates mowing; it being a thing they never had nor could have, but the
elect only: if they mean the doctrine of faith, I yield.

3 The place does not prove it, being conditional, if you persist founded and
stead fast in the faith, etc. Lastly, the assumption speaks of the reprobate,
Paul of the elect.

Object. Against the answer to the mayor. Although sin be after it in time,
yet is it the efficient cause of the decree of reprobation, because all things
are present to God, and nothing is either past or to come in his foreknowledge,
or rather knowledge.

Ans. The same did Pelagius object against the orthodoxall fathers, that
maintained that Faith was not the efficient cause of election, which was before
the world. Which objection of Pelagius I would feign have our aduersaties to
answer. But we will use no other answer but that the fathers gave him. To that
Austin answers, tom. 7. lib. 1. cap. 17. de praedest. Sanct. denying that Faith
foreseen or foreknowne was the cause of election. So do we that sin is of
reprobation. Now if under pretense of Gods prescience, the difference of things
past, present, and to come shall be taken away, then we may conclude that all
things are from everlasting, the world, angels, men, the devil, and sin;
because they were all present unto God everlastingly. Therefore now Aristotle
may say the world is eternal, because it was in his prescience: the Arians may
say the son of God was eternal, not for that he was indeed, but as in Gods
prescience. See what Augustine says, 4. tom. 1. lib. ad Simp. 2. quest.

12 If sin be not the cause of the decree of reprobation, then God condemns
innocents and those that do not deserve it unto death: but that is absurd:
ergo.

Ans. It follows not: for though sin be not the cause of that decree, yet
does he not judge innocents to death undeservedly. For all are subject to death
by nature, and children of wrath, and cut out of a corrupt lump: and all that
are condemned have the cause thereof in themselves. Therefore how can they
charge God with any injury?

Therefore it stands fast, that sin is not the cause of the decree of
reprobation: and thus far is one false cause removed, now to the next.

Neither is Gods hate toward the reprobate the cause of the decree of
reprobation. 2. false cause.


Object. Mal. 1.2. Romans 9.13. it is said, Jacob have I loved, Esau have I
hated: ergo hate is the cause. Ans. The meaning of that saying is, I have hated
Esau, that is, I have preferred Jacob before him, not vouchsafing him this
honor, to be a vessel to honor; I have rejected him from the favor I have
bestowed on Jacob. Therefore Gods hate in this place does not signify a passion
or disease of the mind, moving him to some thing, which is not incident to
God, but to prefer some before him, not to vouchsafe him that honor that an
other has. Luke 14.16. If any comes to me and hates not his father, etc. that
is, makes more account of his father then of me, is not worthy of me. For
Christ does not here disanull the 4. com. honor thy father, etc. In a word,
the reprobation it self is here meant under the word hate; as election under
love.

And thus have I removed the false moving cause for which the decree of
reprobation was made, now I come to the true, whereof I say this position.

The moving cause, whereby God was induced to make a decree of reprobation, is
his only (...), that is, mere pleasure, that is, his good and free will.

The explication.
Gods beneplacitum must not be restrained to his works that concern the elect
only (unless it be by an excellency sometime) but is also the cause of his
works which belong to the reprobate, Matthew. 11.25. Luke 10.21. I give thee
glory O father, Lord of heaven and earth, etc. So that out of his good
pleasure is not only the revealing, but also the concealing of the mystery of
the Gospel. Therefore we must not acknowledge Gods good pleasure by his
benefits only, but also by the declaring his power, right, and authority over
men. Whatsoeuor God wills he wills well, and whatsoever pleases him is good,
as the very hiding of his mysteries from the wise and prudent, is his good
work. And thus we see, that it is truly said his pleasure is cause of both
decrees.

The demo^stration.
1 The moving or impelling cause of Gods will, is nothing but his mere will:
but his eternal decree of reprobation is his will: ergo the only cause
thereof is his will. The reason of the proposition is, because there is nothing
without God to move him to will any thing. For therefore he wills because it
pleases him. Neither could there be any thing without him eternally to move
him to will.

2 If Gods will only be the cause of the decree of election, then of
reprobation also: but it is the first: ergo. the consequence I make good thus,
because Paul makes them equal in their cause, Romans 9.18. of whom he will, he
will have mercy, but whom he will, he hardens, that is, has not mercy: as
the opposition requires and Augustine does expound, tom. 4. lib. 1. ad Simplic.
quaest. 2. The assumption has bin proved.

3 If Paul makes Gods will the cause of the decree of reprobation, then it is:
but he does: ergo.

The antecedent is true, 1. because Paulrenders no other reason of Gods will,
Romans 9.18. saying, Whom he will he hardneth. nor any where else. 2. He makes
this prevention of Gods will only, thou will say unto me, why then is he yet
displeased, who has resisted his will? This praeoccupation had bin nothing
worth, if besides Gods will, he had bin of opinion that there had bin any other
cause of reprobation, as suppose sin. For he made the objection of his own
head, knowing himself and understanding himself better then any other body.
3. Because he granted the antecedent of that objection of Gods will, Romans
9.19, 20. which he would never have done, if it had not bin the cause of the
decree of reprobation.

4 If reprobation be for this end that thereby God might show his power to do
with his own what he would, and power and authority over all men, then surely
the whole will of God is the impulsive cause of the decree of reprobation: but
it is so: ergo. Roman. 9.17, 21.

5 If the potter for no other cause makes one vessel to honor, and an other
to dishonor, much more God chose us for no other cause and rejected other, but
because he would: the first is true, Ier. 18.4, 6. Romans 9.21. ergo.

6 If the will and pleasure of God only be the cause of hiding the mystery of
the Golpel, the^ also of the decree of reprobation, because this is the cause
of that: but the antecedent is true, Math. 11.25. Luke 10.21. ergo.

But the adversaries deny this doctrine, and allege these reasons to the
contrary.

God will not the death of a sinner, Ezekiel. 33. ergo his will is not the cause,
etc.

Ans. They are put as contradictories which are not, by an homony mie in the
word [will.] for in the Prophet it signifies to take delight: and not to will,
signifies not to delight in. But in the question it sigolfies, sirmely and
unchangeably to decree. 2. Though it did stand for that in the Prophet, yet not
to will the death of a sinner, and to will the decree of reprobation, were not
contradictorie: 1. because the same predicate is not affirmed and denied: for
the death of a sinner, and the decree of reprobation are not all one, neither
is the decree of reprobation the cause of the death of a sinner. 2. Because
both wills belong not all to one thing, but to two diverse matters. For God
wills not the death of a sinner, that repents, but he wills the decree of
reprobation of such as he does not give the gift of grace and of repentance
unto.

Object. The Prophet speaks of all and singular persons, and not of the
repentant only; because all and every one are sinners.

Ans. The first falsitie of this objection is this proposition, God will not
the death of any sinner at all, whether he repent or no: therefore it is
cunningly omitted, and that is clear first by the text. For that which
follows, but that we might be turned and live, shows the former speech is
referred to sinners that do convert and repent: so that in those other he
only puts repentants in good hope, that none might doubt that God is ready
to pardon so soon as a sinner does return. 2. The untruth thereof is evident
by other places. For if be will not the death of a sinner, why is it given to
some to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, and is not to other? why
punished he Sodom and Gomorrah with death? why were Core, Dathan, and Abiram
swallowed up of hell? why are Cain, Saul, Doeg, Abimelec, the rich glutton, and
Judas, thrust down into hell torments?

1 Object. Yea but God does earnestly and ardently wish the eternal blessing
of all and every one, as appears by his protestation most religiously and
solemnly swearing and saying, as I live, etc.

Ans. Here is a sophisine of many questions, changing the state of the
controversy. For we deny not but he does earnestly and ardently wish all men's
eternal happiness. For we say, That God offering all men salvation, does not
dissemble, nor envy salvation to any, but is delighted with all men's
repentance and salvation, Admon. Theustad. de form. Concord. page, 19, and page,
112,
and with no man's blindness and destruction. And again, That God wills
earnestly all men's salvation and health, in his own approbation and joy. For
he wills not nor approoues of sin, but is highly displeased with it, nor is
delighted with any man's, no not the very devils perdition, ^^^ment, and
destruction, so far forth as it is destruction of his work: He does not
dissemble then in bidding all repent, that they might be saved, etc. But we
deny that God did decree from eternal, to adiudge no sinner at all to death.

2 Object. God preaching the same doctrine, Ezekiel. 18. adds this moreover, why
should ye die ye house of Israel, because I will not the death of him that
dies, says the Lord God. Therefore God absolutely wills not any way the death
of those that die or perish.

Ans. Again he changes the state of the question: for we deny not that it is
truly said, that God does not absolutely will the death of those that die and
perish: but say with the Apostle, that death is the stipend of sin. Romans
6.23. and with the Prophet, that soul which sins shall die. Ezech. 18.4.
neither deny we that it is truly said, that God will not the death of him
that dies, that is, that he delights not in it, but this we deny, that it
is truly said that the will of God is not the cause of the eternal decree of
reprobation.

Object. 3. God speaks not in the foresaid place of the temporal death only,
but of eternal.

Ans. Neither do we understand it of temporal death only, but of eternal.

Object. 4. If it be contrary to Gods nature and will for any to die a
temporal death, much more it is repugnant inco^parably to his bountiful will
for one to be tormented with everlasting and endless pains.

An. Again the state of the question is altered: for we say not that God in his
bountiful will, will have any punished everlastingly, but this, that God
justly will that the reprobate be endlesly tormented. For this is the question:
whether the will of God be the cause of the eternal decree of reprobation:
we say it is. 2. The antecodent is doubtful, and may be taken 2 ways, either
that God is not delighted so much as with ma^s temporal death: or that God will
by no means the temporal death: in the first sense we grant it, but that is
no question: in the second we deny it: for if by no means he would it, none
should die.

Object. 4. If an earthly father cannot abide that his son should cruelly be
whipped and scourged, and it would even gripe him to the heart to see him put
to death? much more truly may we say it of God, if he does a strange work by
afflicting men with temporal punishments as he calls it Es. 28. much more
strange a work is it to deliver him up to be punished in hell everlastingly.
Therefore this opinion stands fast and firm enough: yet that God by his simple
and absolute hate without respect of impenitencie will not by any will, the
destruction or damnation of any.

Ans. 1. The state of the question is changed again, because this opinion
stands stable and firm to us also, that God by his simple and absolute hate
without respect of impenitencie will not by any will the destruction or
damnation of any.

2. The first part of the comparison is but particular: for I could give some
instances that should infringe it: for example T. Manlius Torquatus commanded
his son should be scourged to death. Iunius Brutus sat judge himself to
condemn his sons going about some treachery, and when they were beheadded
looked on; a memorable example of justice. Turius a wealthy man banished his
son and was commended for it through all Rome: as Seneca records lib. 1. de
Clem. cap. 15. Philip king of Spain that now is, suffered his own son as a
sacrifice to beheld captive for Pius 5. sake bishop of Rome, and after that to
be murdered, as is evident by the kings own hand to the same Pius, witness
Gitolam Catena page 94.

3. The reddition of the comparison is faulty for two causes. 1. ambiguous in
calling the inflicting of punishment and sending affliction Gods strange work:
as if it were not gods own work to be the judge of the world, and show
examples in the wicked of his justice. Es. 38.21. That is called Gods strange
work and uncouth, that is rare and unusual, infrequent and very admirable:
namely when he oppressed the Philistines and threatened to do the same to the
Jews ere they wist, without any man's art: therefore it is so called strange
that yet it is said to be Gods. Gods work to come upon them suddenly from heaven
as he served the Philistines 2. Sam. 5.24. 1. Cr. 14.15. yet a strange work,
because it was rare, strange and admirable.

2. False, because it avouches that it is a work far from Gods nature, to
deliver a man up everlastingly to be tormenred in hell fire: when as God
says. Deuteronomy. 32.35. Revenge and retribution is mine* and ver. 41. I will avenge
me of mine enemies and repay it those that hate me. And Christ Mat. 10.28.
Rather fear him that is able to destroy the soul and body both in hell. Was
it strange from Gods nature to stir up Pharao to show his power in him, or
to thrust the damned into hell torments, that is, to exercise justice?

Romans 11.32. God has concluded all under unbelief that he might have mercy
on all: therefore none of those that are shutt under unbelief, is absolutely
reprobate from the mercy of God, but Gods saving mercy is offered unto all
indifferently.

Ans. 1. The question is altered, for this should have bin inferred: Ergo: the
will of God is not the cause of the decree of reprobation. 2. Again they
deceive us by a captious plurality of interrogatories, as if they were but
one. The first whereof is false, the second true: for we grant that Gods
saving is offered indifferently to all: but we deny that none of those that
are shutt up under contumacie or disobedience (for so the greek does rather
bear) is absolutely rejected, without the condition of their future naughty
works, as impelling causes; for we euicted the contrary before. 3. This false
consectarie is but even ilfauouredly picked out of Paul's words. For therein the
general particle of the elect both Jews and Gentiles is to be understood;
for of them the Apostle spoke, which also the article set before the general
particle does declare (...): God concluded those: every one in contumacie,
that he might have mercy on them every one. The meaning the^ is this, all
that are saved of the Jews or Gentiles, are not saved any other way but by the
mercy of God, whereas all of them are concluded under contumacie and in
themselves are guilty of eternal death. And therefore the Gentiles had no
cause to despair of the Jews, for whatsoever they were now they had been as
all other: and if by Gods mere mercy they had escaped out of unbelief and
rebellion, they should give other men leave to have the like favor. In a word
the Apostle shows that God has so ordered matters by his own providence,
that all should be guilty of rebellion and disobedience and under the
judgment of God, and that for this purpose, that salvation should proceed
from his mere mercy. Therefore they aree freely saved whosoever are saved,
because all are lost indifferently.

Object. If this place is meant of the elect only, it follows the elect only
are shutt up under disobedience, and not the reprobate: which is absurd.

Ans. The connex is deceitful because doubtful: for the place is not to be
understood of the elect only, as if they only were shutt under disobedience,
but because they of whom God has mercy to save them being none but the
elect, are all shutt up under disobedience, as well as the reprobate. This
then is the Apostles meaning, that none of the elect, or such as should be
saved, should attribute their salvation unto their works, but altogether unto
Gods mercy. 1. Tim. 2.4. God would that all men should be saved and come to
the knowledge of the truth: Ergo: his will is not the cause of the decree of
reprobation.

Ans. Here is a sophisme, making them opposites which are not: for the word
will in the latter part of the enthymeme, signifies Gods eternal counsel,
which he has propounded with himself from everlasting: but in the first part,
of Paul's words, his precept, commandment, incitation unto salvation and the
knowledge of the truth: as that, Come unto me all you that are weary and
laden. Mat. 11.28. Look unto me and ye shall be saved all the ends of the
earth. Es. 45.22. with fear and trembling work your own salvation. Phil.
2.12. And indeed the whole preaching of the gospel is the inuiting of all men
to salvation and the knowledge of the truth: as Paul speaks Act. 17.30. The
time of this ignorance God regarded not, but now he admonishes all men every
where to repent. That this is the meaning of the word will in the Apostles
speech, the text will manifest: for by what means he would have men come to
the knowledge of the truth, by the same he would have all men saved: for he
compriseth both these under the same will. But God would have all men come to
the knowledge of the truth, by bidding, inuiting, commanding, and even
praying the^ to come: therefore he would have them saved by bidding, etc. as is
clear by the testimonies above alleged: whereto we add this. 2. Cor. 5.20.
We are Ambassadors in Christ's name, and as if God did beseech you by us, we
pray you in Christ's steed be reconciled to God. But it cannot be meant of Gods
eternal council: for if it were his eternal decree that all should be saved,
surely all should be saved. For the council of God consists for ever, and
the thoughts of his heart every age. Psalm. 34.11. The Lord of boasts has
purposed and who shall frustrate him. Es. 14.27. My counsel shall stand and I
will work all my pleasure. Es. 46.10. But yet all men are not saved. For the
gate is large and the way is large which leads to destruction, and many are
they that enter through it. Says our Savior Mat. 7.13.2.

Arg. 4. Pet. 3.9. God is patient toward us unwilling that any should perish,
but that all should come to repentance: Ergo: Gods will is not the cause of the
decree of reprobation.

Ans. They are made opposites here that are not, by the same homonymie that was
in the former: therefore must have the same answer that it had before.

Arg. 5. He that has mercy on all, and loves all things that are, and hates
nothing of that he has made, doubtless his will is not the cause etc. but those
things are true of God: ergo: Wis. 11.24. etc.

Ans. There is an homonymie in the words to have mercy, to love, to hate: For
in the proposition is meant a special love and mercy, by which God as a most
free Lord has mercy on whom he will Romans 9.18. and an especial love which
peculiarly he extends to his elect, enriching them with all the benefits
thereof, in which sort he loved Jacob Mat. 1.2. To. 9.13. and a special hate
by which God (having chosen to salvation whom he would) passed over whom he
would, such as he used toward Esau Mat. 1.3. Romans 9.13.

But in the assumption and place out of the book of wisdom, gods general
mercy extended to all creatures that are in any miseries, and therein to al
men as well unjust as just, wherein he is prone to succor them and does indeed
preserving and nourishing all things, even the eury ravens that cry Psalm.
147.9. that is that croke.

The old translation has that call on him, but it is not so in the hebrew:
that is his own. So likewise his general love etc, so God hates nothing of
that he has made so far forth as he made it, 2. If the words be hardly urged
and understood of the special mercy, love, and hate, it will follow, that no
man at all is rejected of God, no not for sin, which I think they will not
say.

Argu. 6. He that will gather all, his will is not the cause of reprobation:
God would gather all Mat. 23.37. How often would J have gathered thy children
etc. ergo.

Ans. 1. Under the name will, in the subject is meant a desire and earnest
labor, but in the predicate Gods counsel and purpose. 2. But be it so, that
the counsel of God should be meant in the subject of the proposition, yet
there should be still a fallacy of homonymie in the objection, because in the
assumption by will is meant desire and earnest labor. 3. They offend in
proouing the assumption, by allegation of an impertinent testimony; because
the assumption speaks of the will of God, but the saying that is brought out
of Matthew is spoken of the humane will of Christ. For Christ speaks of
himself as he is man, namely as he is the minister of circumcision, or a
Prophet sent to the people of the Jews, which Christ by his humane will
desired and sought to gather together every one that was offered unto him, into
the kingdom of God by the preaching of the word.

1 Here they urge: 1. if Christ's humane will be here meant, then was that
contrary to his will as he was God, which is the cause of the dectee of the
reprobation of the Jews. 2. The divine will is rather to be understood, by
which he would gather the Jews by the Prophets which he sent unto them, and
that continually rising early and sending them as Ietemie speaks, Ier. 7.13:
11.7. and 35.15.

Concerning the former part of this their exception, 1. there is an elench of
non consequence. For how could Christ's humane will be contrary to the divine
will, seeing it wholly rested in the eternal good pleasure of God, as appears
by Math. 11.25, 26.2. If the consequent were true, God also might be thought
contrary to himself: for he would, that is, he desires that all men should
be saved, and yet he does indurate whom he will. Now as touching the second
part of this exception, though we should grant that the divine will of Christ
be meant, yet it follows not thereupon that his will is not the cause of the
decree of reprobation: for the homonymie remains still. For Christ would so
gather together the Jews, namely by inuiting them to come unto him, that they
should repent and believe the Gospel, and so would the decree of reprobation by
his eternal counsel and purpose.

2 They urge again. If Christ would have the gathering together of the Jews,
and yet withal willed the decree of reprobation, then was he a dissembler, and
had contrary wills. But this is absurd. Therefore that. Ans. I deny the
consequence. For he was no dissembler, for he willed in earnest and not
dissemblingly, but they would not: neither had he contradictorie wills. For in
a contradiction the terms must be the same in both places, and take all one
way. But when it is said, God would the gathering together of the Jews, and
God would the eternal decree of their reprobation, there is no contradiction
at all. First, because the same predicate is not in both places: secondly, will
is not all one in both subjects. In the first it signifies to desire, in the
latter everlastingly to decree. Indeed thus it were a contradictorie, God did
desire to gather the Jews. God did not desire to gather the Jews. Gods
counsel is the cause of the decree. Gods counsel is not the cause, etc.

They reply and say; yes two wills are ascribed to God, if he will all should
repent, and yet wills eternally the reprobation of many, that do not repent. I
answer there is an homonymie in the word will. For God would have all repent
[by his commandment:] but yet would the reprobation of many by his counsel and
purpose.

Object. Then his commandment crosses his eternal counsel. Ans. No: because
in that he declares what he likes and seeks heartily for, in all men, but not
what he will do in every one: but by this he casts what he will do in every
one. Therefore God willing and commanding repentance, shows he is pleased in
all that repent, but willing the decree of reprobation, he determines to reject
those that do not.

7 He that promises salvation to all, his will is not the cause of
reprobation. God does promise so: ergo.

Ans. He that promises salvation to all, (simply without any condition of
faith.) 2. God promises salvation, but not simply but with this condition, if
they believe, if they lay hold on salvation by faith. For the universal
promise of grace belongs indeed to all, but yet to all that believe only;
because promise and faith are relatiues one to an other. Now then he is simple,
to understand that simply that is spoken but in respect.

8 He that offers salvation to all, his will is not the cause of the decree of
reprobation. God offers to all. Ans. He that offers it without commandment
of taking it by faith, but so does not God. No marvel then if he would have
their reprobation which were not to obey this commandment of belief.

9 If there be any absolute reprobation, that is, if Gods will be the sole
cause of the decree of reprobation, the reprobates cannot choose but sin: but
that is false: ergo.

Ans. 1. The connex is false. For reprobation is not the cause of sin, nor
yet is sin the end of reprobation. 2. The assumption is false also. For it is
not absurd to say that the reprobates cannot choose but sin, who lie
altogether in wickedness. Though no man sins against his will, as Cyprian
says, lib. de bap. Chri. Yet he sins necessarily, because he cannot do
otherwise, as Jeremy speaks, chap. 13.23. Can the Ethiope change his skin,
or the leopard his spots? then may ye also do good, that are accustomed to
do evil. and our Savior, Matthew. 7.18. An evil tree can not bear good
fruit. and, Matthew. 12.34. Generation of vipers, how can you speak good things
being evil. Romans 8.7. The wisdom of the flesh is enmity against God. For it
is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be.

Object. If they cannot but sin, then they deserve to be excused. Ans. Nere a
whit. Nay they deserve to be punished so much the more, because by how much the
more necessarily they sin, by so much the more voluntarily they do it,
seeing their will has brought them this necessity, and they resist and
injury God wittingly and willingly. Therefore they cannot excuse themselves by
pretending necessity.

10 If Gods pleasure only be the cause of the decree of reprobation, then God
is a tyrant and unjust judge, that for no cause is angry with them that never
offend him: but not so. Ans. The connex is false, because it is plucked in by
head and shoulders of that antecedent. But if Gods pleasure be the sole cause
indeed of the decree of reprobation, then it follows only that God has
highest rule and free power, to do with his own what he list. Which right and
power whosoever depriues God of, denies him, or at least preferres himself
before him. Seeing every one would dispose of his own how he list, may not a
creditour of his mere good will exact his debt of one and pardon another? may
not a prince take one into his house to serve him and let pass many other? now
should that prince or creditour be unjust for so doing? no. Then if a man be
not unjust for dealing according to his own mind, shall God whose judgment
is most just? so then there is great difference between a tyrant that deals
in all things as he list, and God that works all things according to the
counsel of his own will. For their list is unjust and ruled by no law, but
Gods will is the rule of all justice, so that whatsoever he wills is just and
equal. Neither frame we a God that is law less, but he is a law to himself.
Men need laws, that are subject to lewd desires, but Gods will is not only
pure from all vice, but the chiefest rule of all perfection, and the law of all
laws.

2 The proof of the connex is false: arising of a false definition of the
decree of reprobation, namely to be Gods wrath. But the decree of reprobation,
is his eternal will, (not his wrath,) passing over some in electing whom he
thought not good to take. Gods wrath is stirred up by sin, so is not his
decree of reprobation: other wise God were a tyrant and unjust, being angry
for nothing with them that never grieved him.

11 If Gods mere will be the cause, then God does with cruelty abuse his
creatures: but that is blasphemous.

Ans. It follows not. For God rejecting whom he will, does not abuse, but use
most holily and justly the reprobate to declare in them his great power and
freedom, so that even they also serve Gods glory. Does a king cruelly
tyrannize over his subjects whom he takes not to honor and offices in his
court? then if he be free from this, God much more.

Thus far of the efficient cause of the decree of reprobation: now follows
the rest.

2. the material.
The matter of eternal reprobation, is Gods purpose or decree.

3. the formal.
As the form of election is the taking of some men out of the whole rout, to be
delivered out of the common destruction, and ordained to life everlasting, so
the form of reprobation is the passing by of some in the general destruction,
whereinto all thorough sin were fallen.

I will set certain theses or positions of the ends.

4. the final.
1 The end of reprobation is not sin, as it is simply a transgression, that
is, no man is predestined of God to sin. 1. Because sin, as it is sin
or transgression, is hateful and abominable to God. As it is sin I say: to
distinguish between the act and defect. For example: the crucifying of Christ
as it was a grievous sin committed of the Jews and Gentiles, God did hate
and detest it, but as it was an act or work to satisfy Gods justice, it liked
and pleased him. 2. Because it is contrary to Gods wisdom and goodness, for
God to ordain any to that which is ill, as it is ill. 3. Because God could not
predestinate a man to that, which himself had decreed both to forbid by
express commandment, and in mercy to blotte out and in justice to punish.
Neither can he be the author of sin, whereof he is a merciful disposer and a
just revenger, as says Fulgent. lib. 1. ad Monimum.

Object. But Christ was delivered up by Judas the betraier by Gods determinate
counsel, Act. 20.23. and, 4.27. Therefore the reprobate are predestinate of
God to sin.

Ans. They infer more then their argument will permit. For only this can be
concluded, Therefore they were predestinate to do those actions: but not to
sin, that is, euilnes and naughtines concurring by Satan's instigation and
men's fault with those actions.

2 Neither is the end of reprobation the destruction of the reprobate. 1. For
if sin be not the end of reprobation, then nor their destruction which is
caused by sin. 2. If it were, God might seem to be delighted with men's
destructions: for he takes delight in the end of all his works.

1 Object. Salvation of the elect is the end of election, therefore
destruction of the reprobate is the end of reprobation. Ans. It follows not,
for there is not the same reason. For salvation is of God, and the destruction
as it is destruction is the creatures; not of God but from himself. 2. God
finds a man in destruction, and does not cast him into it: but he finds
none capable of salvation, but choseth them unto it.

2. Object. God creates the wicked to the day of evil. Prove. 16.4. Ergo:
destruction is the end of reprobation.

Ans. The meaning of Solomon is this, God creates not wickedness, but the wicked
men: for after the fall he makes man of that lump, that he came unto by his
fall: that is, corrupt, which thing the harmony does acknowledge in the point
of original sin fol. 261. of the edition set out in Germany 1580. And so
God creats the wicked man for the evil day, that is, to declare his own power
by justly punishing of him.

3. But the end of reprobation is both Gods glory and the salvation of the
elect. It serves the glory of God two ways. 1. it makes to the declaration of
his free power and absolute right, to do with his own creatures what he
please. For God says to Pharao, For this very end have I stirred thee up to
show my power in thee, and to declare my name throughout the whole earth. Romans
9.17. Therefore willing to show his wrath and make his power known, be bears
with great gentleness the vessels of wrath Romans 9.22. If earthly princes have
that authority, God much more.

2. It makes to the commendation of his mercy to the elect: that is, God has
rejected some, to make known his great love to us: for his benefit which he
freely bestows on some would not be seen, but by passing by some, and so
declaring what he might lawfully have done to both, but the more that are
rejected, the brighter does his grace shine unto the elect. This is the highest
grace of faith (says Luther) to believe that he is merciful, that saves so
few and condemns so many. Thus by eternal reprobation, is his glory
advanced, which they detract from him that would have the doctrine of
reprobation suppressed and foisted out of the church doors. And this is the
first end of reprobation.

2. The second is the salvation of the elect as Austine tom. 7. lib. de
praedest. and gratia cap. 6. says. He would have the destruction of them
that perish to be an argument of salvation to them that are predestined of
him vessels of mercy, and he uses the death of some to the life of other:
for the potter has power over the clay to make of the same lump one vessel to
honor, another to dishonor.

The faluation of the elect is wrought by others reprobation two ways. 1. for
that the elect are stirred up with the thought that other are reprobated to
fear and reverence the power of God in them set forth. 2. seeing by meditation
of the same they grow to more knowledge and feeling of the greatness of gods
grace to them ward, in as much as the elect do know that by nature they are not
a whitt better then the reprobate, and therefore cannot but discern and see
the excellency of Gods grace to them ward: which is more evident and sweet
unto us when we think how it is denied unto some as we make not so much
account of a good thing that more have the^ our selves, as we do of that no
more partake. This may be declared by enumeration of Gods benefits that are
temporal, both simply in them selves, as of temporal life, riches, and
honor, and in comparison of spiritual gifts, as eternal life, everlasting
riches, heavenly promotion etc. 1. Whereby we are stirred up to a greater love
of God, for showing so great love to us, in that God has not reprobated us as
well as other. 2. Again we are moved to abate our peacocks train and be
humble, by knowledge of our vile unworthiness, no better by nature the^ the
reprobate, to think basely of our selves, so that if we will needs boast, we
boast only in the Lord that has not rejected us a swell as other. Thou art
not a reprobate, then be humble, be not proud, boast not in thy self, as if
by thy desert thou deseruedst not to be so: but boast in the Lord, that has
not made thee so as he made Esau, Pharao, Saul, Judas, Nero etc. then whom
thou were not better, but like. 3. Lastly we are moved to show all thankfulness
to God for ever, gratefulnes to him for not reprobating us, patience in
adversity thinking it enough that we have the grace not to be reprobated,
study to do good works, confidence toward God, and hope of everlasting life:
which al they shall surely have that are not reprobats. Thus the elect do reap
by reprobation great fruit, which they envy them and defraude them of, that
would have this doctrine of reprobation buried or more sparingly handled in the
church.

Thus much of the causes of reprobation, now follow the effects.

The effects.
The effect of reprobation is not sin: and this does Tho. Aquinas acknowledge
1. part. q. 23. art. 3. and is clear by these reasons 1. because reprobation
is the holy work of God and ergo not the cause of sin. 2. the devil is the
principal cause of sin. 3. sin is not gods effect, nor therefore of
reprobation.

Object. If the reprobate cannot but sin, then their reprobation is the cause
of sin: but it is: ergo.

Ans. I deny the consequence, for reprobation is not the cause that they can
do no other but sin, but the corrupt nature of the reprobates: who being evil
trees cannot bear good fruit. Mat. 7.18. For the very elect themselves
before regeneration cannot chose but sin, but they that are borne of God
sin no more. 1. Ioh. 3.9. Therefore sin proceeds not from predestination:
and to this does Iustine Martyr consent in his dialogue with Trypho saying, God
is not in fault that men or angels are predestined unjust: but every one is
such by his own default as he appears to be.

They except, why then does he bestow the grace of election upon the elect and
not upon the reprobate. Jans. with Austin in his book de genesi. ad lit. c.
10. God could conquer the will of evil men into good, seeing he is omnipotent:
he could so, but why does he it not? because he would not: and why would he
not? it is his own power: for we may not be wiser then we should.

2. The effects of reprobation are 1. a stirring up of the reprobate for God
to show his power and justice in them. 2. a hiding of the mystery of salvation
from them. 3. a breeding a reverence in the elect of Gods power and judgments
toward the reprobate.

Thus much of the effects, now follows of the subjects. The subjects


1. As all that God does beffow eternal life upon, are elected unto eternal
life, so contrarily all are rejected and excluded from it, that God will not
bestow it upon.

2. We may know how many are reprobate by Christ's words, few are chosen: for
if it be so, then many are reprobate: and it is not more harsh to say, many are
reprobated, then to say, many run the broad way which leads to destruction.
Mat. 7.13. seeing none are reprobate but such as run to destruction.

3. Therefore more are reprobate the^ elect. 1. because more are condemned then
saved: as Esaias cries over Israel and Paul repeats it. Romans 9.27. Although the
number of the children of Israel were as the sand of the sea, but a remnant
shall be saved.

2. More hear the word without profit the^ with profit, seeing as appears
Luc. 8.15. the fourth part of the hearers only receive the seed of the word
with a good and holy heart, and bring forth fruit by patience.

3. More are unbelievers then believers. Esaias 53.1. Who has believed our
report etc. And the Lord, Luc. 18.8. The son of man when he comes shall he
sinde faith in the earth? therefore he calls the company of the faithful a
little flock. Luc. 12.32.

4. The causes why God has rejected more then elected, are, 1. because he
would: which will of his none can justly reprehend. 2. because so it was the
wisest and best course: wherein every godly man must rest. 3. The more are
rejected, the greater shows his grace to the elect, as his love to the
Israelites was more apparent in choosing it alone unto himself and refusing
all other, then if he had made choice of more. Deuteronomy. 7.7.4. the salvation of
the elect is more set forward, the more are rejected. For the more they know
are reprobated, the greater they know and feel his love to them: and therefore
are moved to more thankfulness to him, and study to make their election sure.

5. The number of the reprobate is so certain with God, that it can neither be
increased, nor diminished, nor changed: that is neither more nor less can be
reprobated then were from everlasting. Thus far of the subjects.

The adjuncts.
1. There are three necessary adjuncts that ensue of Reprobation. The depriving
of saving grace, sins, and the punishment of sinners: that is, whosoever are
reprobated, 1. they are not made partakers of that grace whereby we are saved,
namely neither of that fatherly favor which he extends to the elect, nor
yet of the effects of the same, namely vocation according to the purpose of his
election, faith, justification, and regeneration. 2. they sin necessarily:
that is, they can do no other but sin, when as being destitute of saving
grace they are evil trees that cannot bear good fruit. 3. They are sure to
abide both in this life and that to come most justly for their sins.

2. Concerning the vnchaungeablenes and certainetie of reprobation: which is
such: that as the elect cannot become reprobate: so the reprobate cannot become
elect. And reprobation is immutable both in respect of God reprobating, in as
much as he does not change, make void, nor repeal, the decree of his will
set down from everlasting: and in respect of men reprobated, in that having
not received saving grace they cannot but remain in eternal death, whereinto
they voluntary plunged themselves: now he does not bestow that saving grace
upon the reprobate, because he is not bound to give it, but has mercy on
whom be will.

That reprobation is immutable, I prove it thus.

1 Because God is immutable, with whom there is no alteration nor shadow of
turning Ieam. 2.17. The force of the argument stands thus because reprobation
is an internal and eternal action of god, which in truth differs nothing at
all from his very essence, but only in reason: else God should be compounded.

2. Because it is his decree, made according to his good pleasure, now all Gods
decrees made according to the pleasure of his will are unchangeable, or to
speak more plainclie, because it is Gods will, and his will is immutable.

3. Because it is eternal, and whatsoever is so is unalterable and
unchangeable.

4. It only depends on his will, It cannot be hindered with any thing without
God.

5. It is joined with his infallible prescience, and therefore unchangeable.

6. It is linked with Gods omnipotency which cannot be impeached. God is
omnipotent, able to execute his decree, neither can it be hindered any way.

The adversaries to infringe this vnchaungeablenes of reprobation object.

Object. By this means, man's free will is clean taken away, and a mere
fatal necessity is induced, which is absurd.

Ans. That does not follow: for God by his immutable decree, does not abolish
second causes, nor overthrow their nature: therefore man's freewill may stand
with the vnchaungeablenes of predestination. Besides necessity of supposition,
and (as the schoolmen call it) of infallibility, must be distinguished from
coactiue necessity, as also from fatal and Stoical necessity.

Fate or destiny (which the Greeks call (...) of (...), that is, (...), to
divide or part,) the Stoics called the vntwineable linking or order of the
second causes, whereof all things are so necessarily and irresistably ruled,
that God himself cannot change the order thereof, nor work against it. We
that are Christians know no such foolish fate.

Object. If it be immutable, God complains of the reprobate unjustly, and
unjustly punishes them for sinning: but this is blasphemy to say so: ergo.

Ans. The consequence were true if reprobation were the cause of sin, as it
is not: and therefore his complaining and punishing of them is not unjust,
being for sin.

Now to refute the contrary opinion.

1 If eternal reprobation be changeable, Gods purpose is so too: which is
false. For if reprobation be the purpose of God, then if reprobation be
chaungeable, his purpose is chaungeable: but it is: ergo.

2 If it be mutable* it may be frustrated of his own proper end. For that
which is mutable may be frustrated of his end: but reprobation cannot possibly
be put by the end: because it ^s the purpose of God, which must needs take
effect.

3 If it be mutable, it is because God sees, that either he could have better
deliberated then he has done, and taken better counsel then he has, or else
that he could not execute his first devise: but neither of these can agree to
God: for he is always both most wise and most omnipotent. Thus far of the
adjuncts.

Some things differ from Reprobation as diverse only from it, The dissentanies.
some as contrary unto it. They dissent as diverse only, that may stand with
it and be attributed to the reprobate: such as are those that are reckened up
Hebr. 6.4, 5. illumination, a taste of that heavenly gift, participation of the
holy Ghost: a taste of the good word of God, and the virtues of the world to
come. and Heb. 10.26. a receiving of the knowledge of truth, sanctification by
the blood of the covenant. and 2. Pet. 2.20. flying the carruptions of the
world, knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, knowledge of the way of
righteousness. and Luke 8.12. hearing of Gods word, receiving it with joy,
temporary faith.

Of which I think it not amiss to explane some, least by their ambiguitie
they trouble the rude and unskillful reader.

1 First Illumination, Illumination.
Hebr. 6.4. is the same that baptism is: which by a metanymie of the cause, of
the baptism of men of years that were instructed, was called illumination,
whereupon (...) is here taken for baptizari, to be baptized: as Hebr. 10.32.
and so does the Syriack translatour expound it, who makes to be enlightened in
this place the same, that to go into the water to be baptized. And so does
lustin Martyr expound it, in his second apology for the Christians to M.
Antonius the Emperor. This washing is called illumination, because their
minds that learn these things are enlightened. The Apostles drift shows this
exposition to be true. For he admonished such as had been baptized, not to
become apostates. Whereupon in the verse next before the second, he flattely
names the doctrine of baptismes, by which they were enlightened, that before
time had their understanding darkened with the clouds of ignorance. This
inlightening of the understanding is in the reprobate without the amendment or
change of their wills for the better, their understanding is enlightened with
knowledge of the truth, but their will remains unchanged, neither is it turned
unto God.

2 There is ascribed unto them, a taste of that heavenly gift, that is to say,
of the sweetenes of eternal life. This taste they have by knowledge only, and
not by any sound fruition. As he that tastes meat only, is nor fed of the
same, nor nourished by such tasting: so some reprobates have indeed a taste of
the sweetenes of eternal life which God bestows upon the elect, through a
smackering of knowledge, but enjoy not the gift to the full fruition of the
thing. Therefore that very taste is in a short time gone and without fruit.

3. More then these some reprobates have a participation of the holy Ghost,
namely as much as pertaines to his operation that is common to the elect and
reprobate. For that knowledge of the doctrine that brings salvation, which is
great in some of the reprobate, and there joy upon that knowledge arising, is
wrought by the operation of the holy Ghost, but without any grace of
regeneration, which the holy Ghost works in none but the elect, by his own
gracious action.

4 They have also a taste of the good words of God, and of the virtues of the
life to come, that is, their receiving of the Gospel with joy, as is said of
the second kind of auditors, Luke 8.33. which they are as glad of as if they
enjoyed the commodities of future blessedness.

5 And some have sanctification by the blood of the covenant, Hebr. 10.29.
which is, no internal clensing of their heart from sins such as befalls
the elect only, and those that have the gift of saving faith: but a
sequestring of themselves from the profane without the Church, and a joining
of themselves to the company of the faithful, by participation of baptism,
which is the sacrament of the blood of the covenant. And this is the Apostles
meaning, as is evident by his scope; because he threatens the apostates and
backsliders from Christianity after receiving of baptism. And least any
should think it a small matter after baptism to slide back from Christ's
Church, he does exaggerate this sin so, as he declares that the Apostates
that contemn and make light account of baptism, by which they were admitted
into the Church and number of the faithful, contemn and make light account of
the blood of Christ, whereby the covenant of grace was established. Besides
the text shows to less from the two and twenty verse to this present place.
The like is said, Heb. 9.13. The blood of bulls and goats, and the ashes of a
heifer being sprinkled upon the unclean, is said to sanctify them, namely
figuratively and in a sacrament. To this does Augustine agree, calling outward
baptism visible sanctification.

The opposites of eternal reprobation, Opposites
are either Disparates or Contraries. Those are temporal exclusion from the
Church of God for a time; Damnation, Commination of eternal death.

1 Exclusion from the Church for a time, is either of the elect before they
become members of the Church by calling; or else of such as are excommunicated.

For God will have all the elect be members of the Church so soon as ever they
be borne, but many times deferres their calling a long time, as he did Sergius
Paulus, Dionysius Areopagita, Damaris, Lydia the seller of purple, and many
other; this their shutting out from the Church for a space, is not that
everlasting reprobation, neither were they that believed at Paul's preaching,
Act. 13. reprobates before that. For it is said in flat words, that they were
ordained to everlasting life.

Again, Excommunication.
that same excommunication from the Church, caused of some public scandal
given, is not that everlasting reprobation. For it may be that one that is
elected from eternal to everlasting life, may be excommunicated for giving
some offense, and delivered to Satan, to the destruction of the flesh, that his
spirit may be saved in that day of the Lord Jesus, as Paul speaks, 1. Cor. 5.7.

2 Secondly, Damnation is disparate from reprobation. For 1. reprobation is
from eternal, damnation in time. 2. sin is the cause of damnation, so is it
not of reprobation. It is necessary to know this difference between them, for
fear of confounding unskillfully damnation and reprobation together, and least
that which is said of the one be foolishly referred to the other.

3 Threatening of eternal death, differs also from reprobation. The Contratie.


Election is contrary unto it. For when some of mankind are elect and
ordained to salvation, we are necessarily to understand, that other are refused
and reprobate. We can not conceive the one without the other, much less can
one be without the other. For contraries are by nature together.

And thus having declared the dissentanie arguments of it, I come to the
comparates, Comparates.
especially such as belong to the equality or inequality of reprobation and
election.

Reprobation is equal to election, 1 Paritie.
1. in the efficient causes. For God is author of both, Gods good pleasure or
freewill is the motive cause of both.

2 In the matter. For both is the decree of God.

3 In the ends: for both are for the glory of God and salvation of the elect.

4 In the common subject, which is mankind, in as much as it was to be corrupted
and thrown into eternal death by their own default. As then election is the
decree of delivering such as are given to Christ by mercy out of the common
destruction: so Reprobation is the decree to leave such as are not given to
Christ in that common destruction by justice. Therefore as election found not
men worthy but made them so, so reprobation cast none into eternal death, but
by just judgment leaves them that are plunged into it by their own sin and
fault in it. For as God decreed not to choose any that was just already, but
the sinner to be made just by grace, so likewise he did not decree to reprobate
the just, but the sinner to be justly condemned for sin.

5 In the adjuncts both were from eternal: both are firm and immutable: both
not to be altered, whether you respect Gods counsel, or the persons themselves
elected or reprobated. So that neither the counsel of God can possibly be made
frustrate, nor the elect become reprobates, nor the reprobates elect.

The inequality or vnlikelines of reprobatio^ and election, 2 Disparitie
appears in these.

1 In the form. For as election is a decree of pitying and delivering out of
the universal ruin, and taking into salvation: so reprobation is a decree of
not pitying but relinquishing in the common wast, and of not vouchsafing of
salvation.

2 In the effects. For inward calling, faith, justification, glorification,
good works, and eternal salvation, are the effects of election: but debarring
from the grace of inward calling and faith, and justification, glorification,
good works, and the blessing of salvation, and sins, and the punishments of
the same, are not the effects of reprobation.

3 In the proper subjects. For election is of such as shall be saved,
reprobation of them that are to be condemned.

4 In the ensuing adjuncts. For though sin be not the cause of reprobation,
yet it is of damnation: for no man is condemned but for sin: but the good
works of the godly, as they are not the cause of election so neither of
salvation, but only the way that God has prepared for the godly to walk in.
Ephesians. 2.10. We are his workma^ship framed in Christ Jesus to good warks, which
God has prepared that we should walk in them: Now as the way is not the
cause of the mark, so are not good works the cause of salvation.

Having thus laid forth the Co^parates, now comed to the Coniugate.

Of the mystery of Reprobation they that are to be condemned are called
reprobats: of whom these positions following must be observed.

1. The reprobates are reprobated of God according to his good pleasure, and
free, holy, and just will: because God does all things of the counsel of his
own will. Ephesians. 1.11. so says a certain Prophet to Amazia king of Judah 2.
Cr. 25.16. I know god has entered into a determination to destroy thee.

2. They give themselves to do evil, as Elias sares to Achab. 1. King. 21.20.
Thou have given thy self to work that which is evil in the eyes of the Lord.
They sin, or* set their mind to sin as John speaks. 1. Ih. 3.

3. They are rebellious and stiff necked. To. 10.21. Esaias. 65.2.

4. They are raised up for this end that gods power might be shown in them.
Romans 9.17.

5. They are made of God against the evil day. Pr. 16.4. But the question is
what the meaning of this place may be. The adversaries of the truth avouch,
that it cannot be collected out of this place, that the reprobates are created
against the evil day: and they make the wicked against the evil day, to be,
to reduce him to be justly and worthily punished for his former wickedness: if
this be not to deprave the sense of the scripture, I know not what is: The
hebrew goes thus.

Colpagnal Jehoua lamanguanchu vegam rashang leion raguah: which words cannot
possibly be otherwise translated but thus: The Lord has made or wrought all
things for his own self, Aug. tom. 7. lib 2. de nup. etc c^ncup. c. 17. He
does so create the evil as he feeds and nourishes the evil.
the wicked man also to the day of evil. In these words Solomon treats of
the principal end of Creation, which he affirms to be God himself, or which
is all one, Gods glory. For (for himself) is the same that (for his glory):
therefore God made all things for himself: this sentence he does illustrate,
by a particular example, adding (namely he made) the wicked also to the day of
evil: for every body sees that word must be understood indifferently in both
places. What peeuishnes is it then to sever that which the spirit of God has
joined, and to foist into the Bible that, that is not there? What audaciousnes
is it to say that to make the wicked to the evil day, is to draw him back to
punishment: but the verb pagnal is spoken of both: of the wicked and all other
creatures or works of God: therefore is God made all things, all one, with this,
God drew back all his works: well thus stands the case: look in what sense God
is said to have made all things, in the same he is understood to have made the
wicked man: but he made all things by creating: therefore he made the wicked
man by creating.

Now he speaks of the continuance of the creation of man as he is after the
fall. God had made the first man, pure, holy, godly, but after the fall such,
as he is, of the mass whereof he made him: that is, corrupt of a corrupt
lump, and by nature the child of wrath: for none are borne holy, but al are
borne wicked. Now the elect by Gods free bounty are made godly of ungodly,
whereas the reprobate remain ungodly. Now then whereas God creates man such,
that is, wicked, it is a most just punishment, like as in creating him at first
holy it was his gracious bounty: God creates the wicked man but not wickedness.

6. They are set for this to stumble at the preaching of the gospel. 1. Pet.
2.8.

1. These words two sophisters at this day do corrupt and falsify. One of them
says that the reprobats also are placed, on Christ the corner stone, being so
in Luthers germane translation, but this is far from Peter's words, who
speaking of the disobedient, to whom Christ is a stumbling block, writes that
they are set to this cis o: he does not say they are placed upon Christ:
neither will the text abide this falsifying: for the article o is of the neuter
gender and to be set after: therefore can not be referred unto Christ: beside
that, no noune of the neuter gender that is understood of Christ ca^ go
before: for (...) is either the masculine or feminine gender.

2. The 2. sophister says that those words (to which also they were set) are
so to be understood, as if it had bin said, They believe not the word of the
gospel, whereunto notwithstanding they were called in times past by the
prophets, and placed for this by the gracious will of god, that that word
should first be preached to the^: but this sense is tugd in by the eats, and
not collected out of the words, being repugnant thereunto, which go thus. v.
7.8. To you then it is an honor that believe: but to the disobedient, the same
stone which the builders refused, is made the head of the corner, and astone to
stumble at, and a rock of offense: namely to such as stumble at the word being
disobedient, to which they were also set. These words will not bear that
construction for that (to which) cannot be referred to the word (...) that
goes before, because (o) is the neuter gender, (...) the masculine. This
caueling companion shall not teach us a new grammar, that (o) should be the
masculine gender, or have any reference to (...): which must of necessity be,
if his exposition should go for current. But I will declare their true
meaning: which is this.

Peter exhorts those that believe, that leading a holy life, they would be
edified more and more, as it were living stones in Christ Jesus. Now that the
faithful must be edified in Jesus Christ, he proves thus: because he is that
stone which God has laid in Sion in the bottom of the corner, in which stone
whosoever believes shall not be ashamed. Out of this promise made to the
believers, Peter draws this consequence. Therefore to you it is an honor that
believe: that he does amplify by that that is unlike: But to the disobedient
he is a stumbling block and a rock of offense. How that is, he shows in the
next words: saying that they stumble at the word. Now least any might think
that is by mere chance, the Apostle says moreover, that they are set for
this purpose, namely to stumble at the word preached. So then there are three
things in this speech that may breed any doubt, First to what the disobedient
were set, secondly by whom, thirdly what that is, they were set.

1. For the first, they were set to this, that they might stu^ble at the
preaching of the gospel of Christ, and that by the just judgment of God, by
this means punishing the sins of the disobedient with sins. This
construction the sintaxe must needs have to refer the neuter relative ^ to
the whole oration next before going, seeing there is no word of the newter
gender before to refer it to: if it be not absurd that Christ is set for a
downfall for many, no more is it, that many should be set for this to stumble
at the preaching and so fall.

They were set for this of god, as a just judge, by that means revenging the
sins of the rebellious and stubburne Scribes and Pharisees, and punishing them
with sins. For all sin is either a proof and declaration of man's frailty,
as was the transgression of our forefathers (whom God suffered to fall to
manifest and make proof of the greatness of man's weakness, and how little
auailable even the most innocent man of all other is, unless he be vpheld by
Gods especial grace) or else a just chastisement, as are most of the sins of
the holy, or else a punishment of former sins, or the merit of greater sins
and punishments, as are all the sins of the reprobats.

Therefore they are not placed to this of themselves: and it is not more absurd
that the disobedient are placed to this of God, to stumble at the preaching of
the gospel, then for Christ to be set of God in Sion a stone to stumble at, a
rock of offense, or that the ministers of the gospel should be a good savor
unto god at the very time that they are a savor of death unto death.

3. They were put, is the same that they were ordained, appointed, and by
consequence stirred up and framed as Paul speaks Romans 9.17. and 22. whereupon
this also does ensue that necessity to sin, is laid as a just judgment upon
the unregenerate.

7. They are vessels of wrath made to dishonor and framed to destruction. Romans
9.21.22. Now here arises a great doubt, who did make and frame them so. God,
or the devil, or themselves. Some cauilling sophisters say themselves: some
say the devil: both these do rake the heresy of the Maniches out of hell.
But the orthodoxall writers say, God. August. to^n. 4. lib. 1. ad simply.
quaest. 2. Behold he hates Esau, which vessel himself did make to dishonor.

And a little after: In that of the number of the ungodly whom he does not
justify, he makes vessels to dishonor, he does not hate this in them that
he makes, for in as much as they are wicked they are abominable, but in as
much as they are made vessels, they are made for some use, that by their
appointed punishments the vessels that are made to honor might take some
profit: therefore God does not hate them neither so far forth as they are
men: nor yet as they are vessels: that is to say, neither that which he makes
in them by creation, nor that he makes in them by ordination: for he hates
nothing of that he made. But yet in as much as he makes them vessels of
destruction, he makes them for this use, to correct other; for he hates the
wickedness in them, which he made not: for as a judge hates the fact in a man,
but does not hate that he is set to the mines. For that the thief does, this
the judge does; so God in making of the corruption of the wicked vessels of
destruction does not hate that he does himself: that is, the work of his
own ordination. So again tom. 7. lib. 2. de nupt. and concup. ad Valor. cap.
3. God is so the maker of them that are borne, that all of one go into
comdemnation, whose deliverer he is by regeneration: for he is termed a potter,
of the same lump making one vessel to honor according to his mercy, another
to dishonor according to judgment: And in the same book cap. 16.

God by his own goodness made men, the first without sin, and the rest under
sin for the uses of his own profound counsels: for as be knew not what to
do with the euilnes of the devil himself, and whatsoever he does is just and
good, though he of whom he does it is on just and naught, neither refused
therefore to make him, because he knew he would be evil; so of the whole
stock of mankind, though no man is borne without the contagion of sin, he
works good who i^ (...) good, making some as it were vessels of mercy, whom
he seuereth from those that are vessels of wrath by grace, other as it were
vessels of wrath, to make known the riches of his glory upon the vessels of
mercy. Now let this fellow go and dispute against the Apostle whose sentence
this is, nay against the potter himself, whom the Apostle forbids to answer
saying; O man who art thou, that make answer to God? does the clay say to
him that made it, why have thou mind me thus? has not the potter power over
the clay to make of the same lump, one vessel to honor, another to dishonor?
does he then deny that the vessels of wrath are under the devil? or because
they are under the devil, does any other make them but he, that makes the
vessels of mercy or of any other stuff, but of the same lump.

Again tom. 2. Epis. 105. ad Sixtum. page 302. But if there be vessels of
wrath, which were made to destruction, which is given them of due, let them
thank themselves: because they are made of the same lump, which God did justly
and worthily condemn for one man's sins sake wherein all had sinned.

8 They are of old ordained to this condemnation. Iud. ver. 4. VVranglers say,
this is the meaning of these words, of whom it was long ago written and
foretold in the books of the Prophets, that at their time they should creep
in and molest the church of God, and in the end come to everlasting perdition.
But it is plain that they delude the Apostles words. For he says not, of
whom it was written, but, which (that is men) were before described. For
I pray you what manner of speech is this, of certain men it is forewritten
and prophesied to this destruction. The true and natural sense of these words
is this. Those wicked men are long since ordained, and appointed to this
condemnation: of whom are they ordained and appointed? of God: how? by his
eternal counsel and decree. And he whosoever he is, that reprehends this
doctrine, as absurd, reprehends Gods justice and power as absurd: For in that
God rejects many, makes the wicked man against the day of evil, sets the
reprobate for this, to stumble at the preaching of the Gospel, makes them to
dishonor, frames them for destruction, it is the just work of Gods judgment,
which we must no less holily and faithfully maintain, then the work of his
mercy.

Again, we must so maintain Gods mercy, as that we ouerturne not nor darken
his justice. He that can take it let him take it: he that cannot, let him leave
it to such as can: and never let him find fault with that he has not learned,
nor speak ill of that he does not understand. As all men have not faith, so
have not all men the knowledge of the mysteries of faith.

9 The mysteries of the kingdom of heaven are hid from them. Math. 11.25.

10 They are hated of God. Mal. 1.3. To. 9.13

11 Christ is placed to them for a fall. Luke 2.34.

12 The preachers of the Gospel are to the^ the savor of death to death. 2.
Cor. 2.16.

13 They are hardened of God according to his will. Romans 9.17.

14 God gives them the spirit of stumber, eyes not to see and ears not to
hear, Esa. 29.10. and 6.9.

15 They are cursed for ever. Math. 25.41.

16 They are not of God. Ioh. 6.47.

17 They are not written in the book of life. Apoc. 17.8.

18 It is not given to them to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven.
Mat. 13.11.

19 They believe not, Ioh. 12.39. because they are not of Christ's sheep. Ioh.
10.26.

20 They cannot believe, because god has blinded their eyes. Ioh. 12.39.

21 They are not healed, that is, obtain not remission of sins, Math. 13.15.
Mark. 4.12.

22 They obtain not righteousness and life, but wax hard, Romans 11.7.

23 They are not regenerated, first because they are not made righteous: for
denying of the cause makes the effect be denied; they that are not justified
before God are not regenerated, because regeneration is the inseparable effect
of justification. Secondly, because God has given them the spirit of slumber,
eyes that cannot see, ears that cannot hear. Romans 11.8.

24 They are not converted. Math. 13.11. Mark. 4 12.

25 They cannot receive the spirit of truth, because they neither see nor know
it. Ioh. 14.

26 Christ reckeneth them not as his. Mat. 7.23. I know you not.

27 He does not pray to the father for the^. Ioh. 17.9.

Now remain examples of them, Examples
which are so many, as damned persons. For none is condemned, but he is
reprobated from everlasting: as, Cain, Esau, Saul, Achitophel. Judas Iscariot,
Simon Magus, Caligula, Nero, Heliogabalus, etc.

And thus through the assistance of God I have brought this doctrine of
Predestination to an end. The Lord grant by the same assistance of his grace,
that it may serve for the setting forth of his glory, and edifying of his
Church.

Now because Augustine assoyles many doubts which arise in the secret of
Predestination in Tom. 4. lib. 1. ad Sim^lis. in his answer to the second
question, I have thought good to set down the whole answer in this place. His
words are these: But now I judge it high time to proceed to the other
question, which in these words you have laid down, of that that is written,
Romans 9.11. Neither he only felt this, but also Rebecca when she had conceived
by one, even by her father Jsack. For ere the children were borne, and when
they had done neither good not ill, etc. to the nine and twenty verse, Except
the Lord of hosts had left us a seed, etc. we had been as the city of
Gomorrah. The whole discourse being debated, would be something more
intricate. But I shall not be able to explane these things rightly unto you, as
I know you look for at my hands, unless you become an humble suter to God
for me, by whose help being made something more confident, I willingly come
to the point. And first I mean to betake my self to the full intent, and
scope of the Apostle, quite through the epistle, which I will chiefly respect.
And that intent, I take it to be this; That no man boast him of his good
deeds, as the Israelites did, because they had been obedient unto the law
which was given them, thereupon challenging wholly unto themselves the grace of
the Gospel of God, as due to them by desert, and denying that it was to be
offered to the Gentiles, who were altogether unworthy of it, unless they
would receive the sacraments of the Jews. The which doubt, is cleared in the
Acts of the Apostles. For they understood not, that even for this cause,
because it is the grace of the Gospel, therefore it is not due to works.
Otherwise this grace should now be no grace at all. And this is in many places
testified by faith, preferring grace before works, not that it might thereby
clean extinguish works; but that it might show how works do not go before
grace, but rather follow it: and that no man therefore: ought to think, that
he has received grace, because he has wrought well; but rather that he could
not possibly have wrought thus well, unless he had first received grace by
faith. Now a man begins then to receive grace, when being stirred to faith,
in or by some earthly admonition, he begins to believe in God. But it
concerns us to know at what time, or celebration of the lacraments, a more
full and evident grace is infused into us. For even those which have not been
instructed, do not believe, or else C^^nelius did not, when by his giving of
alms, and making of prayers, he seemed worthy to have an Angel sent unto him.
But, had he not first believed, he would never have wrought such things.
Neither would he ever have believed, unless he had bin called, either by the
secret admonitions of his mind, and spirit; or else by the more manifest
warnings through the senses and parts of his body. But some have only so much
grace of faith, as that they can not attain unto the kingdom of heaven
thereby; as those which are newly taught, and as Cornelius before he was made a
member of the Church, by the participatio^ of the sacraments. Now contrariwise,
this grace of faith is so great in others, that they be even now reputed
members of Christ and of the Church of God. For the temple of the Lord, says
the Apostle, is holy, which you are. And this is the Lords own saying, Unless
a man be borne of water and the holy Ghost, be can not enter into the kingdom
of heaven. There are then certain beginnings of faith, much like unto
conceptions, yet notwithstanding we most not only be conceived, but also
borne, that we may fully enjoy everlasting life. Neither is any thing of all
these, without the grace of the great mercy of God; because if there be any
good works, they follow this grace, as we said before, and can in no wise be
before in. Which thing the Apostle being very desirous to persuade us,
because, as he mentions in an other place; it is not from us, but it is the
gift of God, not by reason of our works, least peradventure any man should
extol himself, he spoke of them which were not yet borne. For no man could
say that Jacob being now unborn did move God by his works to speak of him:
And the elder shall serve the younger. Therefore, says he, not only Isaac was
promised, when it was said, About this time I will come and Sara shall have a
son, who by no means may be thought to have deserved at Gods hands by his
works, to be thus promised before his birth, and that the seed of Abraham
should be called in Isaac. That is to say, That those should belong to the
company of the Saints, which is in Christ, who knew themselves to be the
sons of promise, not waxing proud upon any of their own deserts, but
imputing it wholly to the grace of vocation, that they were made fellow heirs
with Christ. For when they were promised only, it could not be that they as
yet deserve any thing, before they themselves had any being. But Rebecca also
having brought forth after one copulation with our father Isaac, utters this
saying very circumspectly. After one copulation. For she conceived a couple,
least peradventure, it might be attributed to the fathers deserts, if some man
should speak on this manner; The son is thus, or thus, because at the very
same instant that he was placed into the womb of the mother, the father was
thus, or thus affected: or because the mother was thus affected when she
conceived him. For both Isaac begot them both at one time, and Rebecca at the
same time conceived them both. To commend this thing unto us, she speaks
thus, By one copulation. That she might neither leave any place here for the
Astrologian, or rather to that kind of soothsaier, who by the nariuitie is
wont to conjecture of the conditions, and fortune of those which are borne.
For they have nothing to allege for themselves, why at the same conception,
likewise at the same moment, the constitution of the heavens, and planets
nothing differing, when every thing did so jointly agree, there was such great
difference betwixt that couple. And they may easily perceive, if they please,
that those their answers which they sell to poor distressed wretches, proceed
not from any art, or skill they have, but only from a casual kind of
suspicion. But to leave all things not pertinent to our matter. These things
are rehearsed to break the neck of their pride, who are so unthankful for the
grace of God, and dare boast of their own deserts. For when they were yet
unborn, and had done neither good nor evil, not for their works, but in
regard of him who called them, it was said unto him, that the elder shall serve
the younger. This grace therefore is his who calls, and consequently good works
are his who receives this grace; yet not so as that they were the bringers
forth of grace, but rather themselves were brought forth by grace: even as the
fire does not hear other things that it self may be hot, but because it
self is hot, nor the wheel does therefore run smoothly that it may be
round, but because it is round: so no man does therefore effect good works,
that he may hereafter receive grace, but because he has already received it.
For how can he live righteously who has not been justified, or he holily, who
has not been sanctified, or he at all live, who has not had life ministered
unto him? Now grace does justify, that he which is justified may live
righteously. Grace therefore is first, and then follow good works, as he says
in an other place. But to him which works there is a reward ascribed, not
according to grace, but according to debt: As that immortality after good
works, yet if it be required as due, as the same Apostle says, I have fought
a good fight, I have run my race, and kept my faith, and now there remains
a crown of justice for me, which the Lord being a just and upright judge
shall render unto me in that day. For happily because he said, he shall
render, it is now upon debt. But when he ascending lead captivity captive, he
did not render, but bestowed gifts upon men. For whereupon I pray you should
the Apostle presume, that it was restoto him as dew, unless he had before
received grace which was not dew, whereby being justified, he fought a good
fight? For he was a blasphemer, and a persecutor, and a doer of wrong; but he
obtained mercy, as himself testifies; believing verily in him, who
justifies not the godly, but the ungodly, that by iustifiing him he may make
him godly: not in regard of their works, says he, but in regard of him which
calls, it is said unto him, that the elder shall serve the younger. Hither
tends that which he says, for when they were yet unborn, and had done
nothing, either good or evil, that it might be said, not for their works, but
in regard of him that calls: whereupon it comes to my mind to enquire,
wherefore he said, that Gods purpose might remain, according to his election.
For how may that be called, not only a just election, but so much as a bare
election, where there is no difference? For if Jacob, unborn as yet, and
having wrought nothing, was not chose for any desert of his, neither could he
be chosen at all, there being no difference whereby he might be chosen; Again
if Esau was disliked without any desert, because he was as yet unborn and had
wrought nothing: when it was said, and the elder shall serve the younger: how
can his reproof be thought just? with what discretion therefore, or with what
proportion of equity, do we understand that which follows, I have loved
Jacob, but hated Esau? which thing is set down in a Prophet, who was long
after their birth and interring. But yet that sentence should seem to have
been spoken whereby it is said, and the elder shall serve the younger, before
they were borne or had yet wrought any thing: Where-hence therefore is this
election, or what manner of election may it be thought to be, if these two
being yet unborn, and clean void of works, there were no quantity of
desert? or will you say that their natures and essences did some thing differ?
who can ever gather this by one father, one mother, one copulation, one maker?
Or did the same maker, as he brought forth diverse kinds of living creatures
and mates, out of the same earth: so out of the same marriage of man and woman
raise a diverse issue which he might partly affect, and partly hate? There was
no election therefore, before there was that which might be elected. For if
Jacob were made good to the intent that he might please, how did he so please
before he was, that he might be made good? Therefore he was not chosen that he
might be made good, but being now made good he might very well be chosen. What
therefore according to election, because God foreseeing all things, had also a
foresight into Jacobs future faith being yet unborn? That although every man
do not deserve to be justified by his works, since he is not able to work: but
being justified, yet because God does justify the nations by faith, and no man
believes but of a freewil, God foreseing the future will to believe, chose him
before he was borne, upon the foresight whereby he justified him. If the^
election be through the means of this foresight, and God did foresee the faith
of Jacob, what proof ca^ you bring for it, when as he chose him not now in
regard of his works? But because neither of them was yet borne, nor had done
good or evil, hitherto likewise neither of the^ had believed. But as by reason
of this foreknowledge he had an insight into his future belief, so by the same
he might assure himself of his works which were to ensue. That as he is said
to be chosen for the after faith, which God was privy to before hand, so some
other body may affirm, that he was rather chosen for those works of his which
were to come, whereof notwithstanding God had a certain foresight. Whereupon
therefore the Apostle shows, that it was not spoken by reason of their works,
And the elder shall serve the younger; but because they were not yet borne, it
was not only not spoken in regard of their works, but even without any respect
of their faith also, because before their birth, they had no iotte at all of
either of them. He would not therefore have us understand that by this
foreknowledge there was choice made of the you^ger, that the elder should serve
him; for being desirous to show that works were not the cause of this election,
he did add this upon set purpose saying, for when they were yet unborn, and
had done neither good nor evil. Otherwise might it have bin objected to him:
yea but god did now know whatsoever he was to do hereafter. Wherefore, may it
be demanded, where hence did this election spring? because certainly it could
in no wise arise from works, which in these yet not borne, were none at al; nor
from faith which was even as little to be seen in the^ as the other. Shall we
say that there could be no election, so long as there appeared no diversity
either of faith, or works, or any deserts at all in the womb of the mother?
But it is said, that the decree of god might remain according to the election,
and we therefore demand because it is said, unless peradventure we must make
this distinction upon the sentence, that we do not understand it to be spoken
not in regard of the works, but in regard of him which calls, when it is
said, And the elder shall serve the younger, that the decree of God might
remain according to election; but thus rather, that no election at all being
here understood, we should receive this as an example of those who were neither
yet borne, nor had wrought any thing at all. For whilst they were yet unborn,
and had done nothing, either good or evil, that the decree of God might remain
according to election: that is to say, and had done nether good nor ill, in so
much that for the very, actio^ there might be some choice made of him who had
done well* Since therefore there was no choice of the well doer, according to
which the decree of god might remain, not in regard of works, but of him which
calls: that is to say, of him which by calling the ungodly to faith through
grace, does justify him, it is said, and because the elder shall serve the
you^ger. Therefore the decree of god does not remain according to election,
but election by the decree: which is in effect as much as one should say, the
decree of gods justification does not therefore remain, because God has found
any good works in me^ which he may choose. but because that does remain that
he may justify those which believe therefore has he found out works, which
he may choose for the kingdom of heaven. For were there no election, what
elect could there be? or how might it be well said, who stood accuser against
the elect of God? yet election goes not before justification, but
justification before election. For, what should any be elected, unless there
were some difference between him and the rejected person? Whereupon I know not
what to make of the saying, because God has chosen us before the foundation of
the world, unless I should think that here is understood foreknowledge. But
whereas he says in this place; It was said unto him not in regard of works,
but of him who calls, because the elder shall serve the yo^ger, he would have
the place thus interpreted, not by choice of merits, which show themselves
after the justification of grace, but by the infinitenes of Gods rewards, least
some man should boast himself of his works. For we are saved by the grace of
God: And this proceeds not from works, but it is the benefit of God; not
from works least some man peradventure should be puffed up. Now there arises a
doubt by the way, whether faith merit a man's justification, or it be rather to
be thought that the deserts of faith, do not go before the mercy of God, but
the faith is rather to be accounted amongst the gifts of grace. Because even
in this place, when he had said, not by works: he does not presently infer,
but by reason of faith it was said unto him, because the elder shall serve the
younger, but this is it which he adds immediately, but for his sake which
calls. For no man believes, unless he be called: Now the merciful God
calls, giving thus much to no merits of faith, because they rather follow
vocation then go before it: for how shall they believe him whom they have not
seen? and how shall they hear unless some man tells them? If therefore in
calling, the mercy of god go not before, neither without doubt can a man
believe, that hereby he may begin to be justified, and receive power to do
well: Grace then is before all desert: For Christ died for the wicked.
Wherefore it was given to the younger that the elder should serve him, not for
any deserts of his own, but in regard of him who calls, and that should be
imputed to the calling of God, and not to Jacobs works where it is written, I
have loved Jacob. But what was the reason that Esau served his younger brother,
and that it was thus written of him, but Esau have I hated? what evil had he
committed whereby he deserved this, being yet unborn and having done neither
good nor evil when this was spoken of him, and the elder shall serve the
younger? Or will you say, that as that was spoken of Jacob for no good thing
done on his part: so this is also said of Esau for no badd deed of his that he
was hated? For if because God foreknew his bad works which he was to perform
hereafter, he was therefore predestined to serve his younger brother, by the
same reason was Jacob predestined also to be served by his elder brother,
because God foresaw his future good works: And then it is very false which he
says, not by works. If then it be true, that there was not such force of
works, and he proves that after this manner, because this was spoken of those
which were yet unborn, and had wrought nothing, and likewise if faith be of as
little moment, which they were even as much naked of before their birth, how
could Esau deserve to be hated, being as yet unborn? For without all question
God made those things which he loved. And there is another place of scripture
which will condemn us of great absurdity, if we say he made those things
which he hated, for nether would thou have ordained any thing that thou
batest, neither have thou hated any of these things which thou have ordained.
For upon what desert was the sun made to be the sun, or in what thing had
the moon offended that it was made so much inferior to the sun, or what had
it deserved why by the creation thereof it should so much exceed the other
stars in brightness? But all these things being good were severally made in
their kind. For God would not say I have loved the sun and hated the moon,
or I have loved the moon, and hated the other stars, as he said I have
loved Jacob, but Esau have I hated. But God loved all those things,
notwithstanding their difference in excellency, because he saw that they were
good, when they were ordained at his word: but there was no show of justice,
that without some merit of injustice, he should have hated Esau. Which being
granted, it will necessarily follow, that Jacob was also loved for some merit
of righteousness. And if this be true, that is most false, to say, he was not
loved for his works. Or will you say it was for the vprightnes of his faith. I
pray you what have gained by this, since they being yet unborn, could not
possibly have any vprightnes of faith? The Apostle very well perceived
therefore, what might arise out of these words to the mind of the hearer and
^^ader, and for this cause immediately added this which follows, What shall
we say? Is there any unrighteousness with God? god forbid. And teaching that it
cannot be so: For, says he, he tells Moses thus: I will take compassion on
him, of whom I will have compassion, and show mercy to him, of whom I will
have mercy. By which words whether has he released us of our former doubts
think you, or rather increased the same? For herein consists the very head of
all our doubts; If he takes compassion on him, of whom he has compassion, and
show mercy to him of whom he has mercy, why did not Esau find this mercy,
that as Jacob, so he might also thereby be made good. Was this the cause why it
was said, I will have compassion on him of whom I will have compassion, and
will show mercy to him of whom I will have mercy, because whomsoever God of
his mercy calls, him also of his mercy he causes to believe: and whom of
his mercy he causes to believe, to him also he will show mercy, that is, he
will make him merciful, that thereupon he may work well? Whereby we are
admonished, that a man ought not to boast and puff up himself with the bare
works of mercy, as though by them as by his own works he has won God unto
him, since he received mercy it self through his means, who will take
compassion on him, of whom he will have compassion. But if any man will brag
that he has deserved it by believing, let him know that he was the ground of
this belief, who by the inspiration of faith, takes compassion upon him of
whom he will take compassion, that yet he might impart vocation to the
unbeliever. For there is now some difference betwixt the faithful and the
wicked. For says he, what have thou that thou have not received? and having
received it, why should thou brag as if thou had not received it?
Indeed this is well, but why was Esau abridged of this mercy, that so he
might not be called, and have faith inspired into him being called, and by
this faith be made merciful, that thereby he might do good works? or was it
because he himself refused it? why then if Jacob did therefore believe because
himself would, God bestowed not this faith upon him, but himself by his
willingness gained it to himself, and so he had something which he did not
receive. Or does God work faith in men by calling them, because no man can
believe unless he be willing, nor any man be willing except he be called, nor
no man by his own power work his own calling? because bowsoeuer a man can
not possibly believe against his will yet without vocation he can in no wise
believe. For how shall they believe him whom they have not heard? or how shall
they hear unless it be preached unto them? Therefore no man believes but he
that is called, nor does every one which is called believe. For many are
called, but few are chosen. As also whosoever have not contemned the caller,
but followed him by belief, without doubt they have believed willingly. But
what follows? Therefore it is the power neither of him that wills, nor yet
of him which o^steneth, but of God only which takes compassion. Or because
we cannot so much as will unless we be called, and our will is of no force
to perform without Gods assistance. We must therefore both be vvilling and
also speedy. For that was not spoken in vain, and in earth the peace of good
will unto men, and so run, that you may take hold of. Yet it is in the
power neither of him that wills, not him that runs, but only of God
who takes compassion, that we may attain unto that which we desire, and
come thither vvhither we vvish to come. Esau therefore refused, and would not
run, but although he had both been vvilling and had also run, yet it
should have been the aid of God which should have brought him vvhither he
would, who also by calling him should cause him both to will and run,
unless neglecting his vocation, he would become a reprobate. For God does one
way cause us to be vvilling, and an other way cause that to have effect
which we do will and desire. For it has pleased him that it should proceed
partly from him, and partly from our selves to will any thing. But whatsoever
it is that we do desire, it proceeds wholly from him; that is to say, to be
able to do well, and to live blessedly. But Esau being yet unborn could
neither will nor nill. Why then was he disliked being in the womb of his
mother? For he betakes himself again to those difficulties, which are much
more troublesome, not only in regard of their own obscurenes, but also of our
so often recital. For why was Esau rejected being yet unborn, who could
neither believe him which called, nor contemn the vocation, nor do either
good or evil, without Gods foreknowledge of that future ill disposition of
his? why was not Jacob also approved by Gods foresight into his good
disposition which was to come? Now let it be but once granted, that any man was
ever either approved, or reproved, for that which was never hitherto found in
him, only because God did foresee that it would be in him, it may be here
hence very easily gathered, that he might also be approved by those works
which God did foresee would be afterward in him, although he had not yet
wrought any thing. And that will make very little to our purpose, that they
were yet unborn, when it was said, And the elder shall serve the younger,
hereby to show it was not spoken in regard of works, because he had not yet
wrought any thing. And besides, if you mark those words well, Therefore it is
neither in the power of him that runs, nor of him that wills, but of God
which takes compassion, you shall see that it is not the Apostles drift hereby
only to prove, that we come to that which we desire by the assistance of God,
but also to signify that which he intends in another place, when he says,
With fear and trembling work your own safety, for it is God which works
in us both to will and to work according to his own good pleasure. Where he
makes it very plain, that even the very will to good is caused, God working in
us. For if this be the only end of that saying, It is neither in the power of
him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God which takes compassion,
because man's will of it self is not sufficiently able to make us line
uprightly and well, without Gods mercy aiding us, why may not it be said as
well after this manner. Therefore it is not in the power of God which takes
compassion, but of man that wills, because Gods mercy alone is not of force
enough, unless the agreeablenes of our will be added thereto? But that is most
manifest, that our will is not worth a rush without Gods mercy. And yet me
thinks that I can not tell what to say to the inferring of these words, That
God takes compassion to no end unless we be willing. For it necessarily
follows that we be willing, if God once take compassion. For it belongs to the
same mercy, that we be willing. For it is God who according to his own good
pleasure works in us both to will, and to do. For I should wonder if any
man would deny me that our will to good were the gift of God. Now because our
will to good does not go before vocation, but vocation before it, therefore
it is most justly attributed to God that we will, but by no means to us,
that we are called. We must not therefore think that this is the cause why
it is said, Therefore it is not in the power either of him which runs, or
him which wills, but of God which takes compassion, because we cannot
attain unto that which we desire without his help, but rather because we
have no will without his vocation. But if this vocation be the cause of a
man's will to that which is good, in so much that whosoever is called
attaineth to it, how then can that be true, Many are called, but fevv are
chosen? Which if it be so, and he which is called do not consequently obey
this calling, and moreover it be in his will vvhither he will obey it, it may
be very well said, It is not therefore in the power of God that takes
compassion, but of man which does both will, and run: because the mercy of
him which calls is not sufficient, unless there follovv a certain
obedience of him which is called. Or, it may be, that those which being thus
called do not agree, being otherwise called, could apply their will to
faith, whereby that might be also true, Many are called, but fevv are chosen.
In so much that, notvvithstanding many are alike called, yet because all are
not alike affected, they only do attain unto this vocation who are found
fit for the receiving thereof: and that is even as true, Therefore it is
neither in the power of him which wills, nor of him which runs, but of
God which takes compassion, who so called as he judged it to be fit for
them who attained to this calling. Now there came also a calling to the lotte
of other men, but because it was such a one, as that they could not be moved
thereby, nor were fit to receive it, they might indeed be termed called,
but not chosen. And now it is not likewise true, Therefore it is not in the
power of God which takes compassion, but of man which wills; and
runs, because the vvorking of Gods mercy can not be in man's power, in so
much that his mercy should be of no force if man were unwilling. Because if he
would have mercy upon men he might so call them, as it was fit for them,
both to be stirred up to understand, and attain to the same. It is therefore
very true, Many are called, but few are chosen. For those are elected who are
congruously called; but they which did not agree unto, nor obey their vocation,
howsoever they were called, yet are they not chosen, because they attained not
unto this vocation. Again this is true; It is neither in the power of him that
wills, nor of him that runs, but of God which takes compassion on,
because although he call many, yet amongst those many he takes compassion on
them only who^ he so calls as it is meet for them that they may attain unto
this vocation. But contrariwise most false if any man say, therefore it is not
in the power of God which takes compassion: but of man which wills and
runs, because God takes compassion of no man in vain, but he so calls
whomesoeuer he takes pity on, as he knows it to be meet for him, to
withhold him from refusing him which calls. But here will some man say, why
then was not Esau so called that he had a desire to obey? For we see diverse men
to be moved by the same things sundry ways showed and signified, to believe,
as for example, Simeon believed in our Lord Jesus Christ being yet a little
infant, acknowledging him by the revelation of the spirit. Nathanael after one
sentence which he heard from his mouth, before Philip called thee, when thou
were under the fig tree I saw thee, answered, Master, thou art the son of
god, thou art the king of Israel. Which because Peter confessed so long after,
he deserved to hear, that he was blessed, and that the keys of the kingdom
of heaven should be given unto him. After he had done that miracle of turning
water into wine, in Canaan a city of Galilee, which the Evangelist S. John
reports to be the entrance to his other signs and wonders, his disciples
presently believed in him. He trained diverse to believe by speaking, and many
believed not although he had raised the dead to life again. His disciples being
terrified as concerning his cross and passion, did stumble; and yet that
thief did then believe, not when he saw him so excel in his works, but even
when he hung on the same cross with him. And one of his disciples, after he
was risen again, believed not so much his living parts, as the fresh wounds
which had been made in his flesh. Many of them by whom he was crucified, who
contemned him when they saw him work miracles, believed his disciples
preaching of him afterward, and working the like things in his name. Since
therefore one man is stirred up to faith one way, and another another way, yea
and oftentimes the same thing diversely uttered works diversely also in diverse
persons, moving or not moving, according as it is uttered, who dares say that
that kind of calling was wanting, whereby Esau might apply his mind, and
join his will to that faith, wherein Jacob was justified. But if there can be
such great stubburnes of the will, that the frowardnes of the mind can harden
it self against all means of calling: I ask further whether this hardness be
a punishment inflicted by God or not? For when God does forsake us by not so
calling us, as we may be moved to faith, who will also say, that the means
whereby we might be persuaded to believe, was wanting to the almighty? But why
should we make any question of this, since the Apostle adds this immediately:
For the scripture says to Pharao, because I have stirred thee up hereto, that
I might show my power in thee, and that my name might be reported through the
whole earth? Now the Apostle annexed this saying, that he might thereby prove
that which he had said before: therefore it is neither in the power of him that
wills, nor of him that runs, but of God which takes compassion. For, as
if some man should question with him, what ground have you for this? he
aunswers, because the scripture says to Pharao, because I have stirred thee up
to this end, that I might show my power in thee, and that my name might be
made known over the whole earth. And as he shows here that it is neither in
the power of him that wills nor of him that runs: but of God which takes
compassion, so he shuts up this: therefore he takes pity of whom he
will and hardens whom he will, since both of them were not mentioned before.
For it is not all one to say, it is neither in the power of him which wills,
nor of him which runs, but of God which takes compassion, and to infer it
thus: It is not in the power of him which wills and contemns, but of God
which hardens. Wherehe^ce we may understand that as that which in the latter
place he has set down both ways, therefore he has compassion on whom he
will, and hardens whom he will, may thus be applied to the former meaning,
that the hardening of God be thought to be his unwillingness to mercy, not that
any of this be abrogated from man to make him worse, but only that he arrogate
nothing to himself to make him better, then indeed he is. But if there be
difference made of deserts, who has not cause to burst forth into that
complaint of the Apostles? Do thou then ask of me why he does yet
complain, since no man resists his will? For God complains oftentimes of men,
as may appear by many places of the scripture, because they will not believe,
and like well: whereupon the faithful and those which do the will of God, are
said to be conversant without complaint, because the scripture complains not
of them. But why does he complain, says he, since no man resists his will, he
taking compassion on whom he will, and hardening whom he please? But let us
look into that which went before, what the^ shall we say? Is there any
wickedness with God? God forbidd. Let this therefore be rooted in the mind of
every faithful and religious man, that there is no wickedness with God; and
let this be a chief point of our faith, whereunto we may stick close, that
this which is spoken of God, that he will take compassion upon whom he will
take compassion, and harden whom he will: that is, that of whom it pleases
him to have mercy, he will, and of whom it pleases him not, he will not,
that this I say; is a hidden point of his equity, and deeper then man's shall
ownes is able to search into which is to be observed in all human affairs and
earthly contracts, wherein unless we should retain some prints of heavenly
justice, the scope of our weak capacity would never be able to look up or
prye into the admirable secrecy, holiness, and pureness, of spiritual precepts.
Blessed are they which hunger and thirst after righteousness, because they shall
be filled. Therefore unless we were cherished with some small blasts of
righteousness descending from above, whilst we be combred with this mortal life
and condition, we should first wither away before we would ever thirst.
Wherefore since the fellowship of man is, as it were tied together, with a
mutual kind of giving and receiving, and those things are given and received
mutually, which are either due, or contrary, who sees not that no man can be
justly accused of injustice, who demands that which is due unto him, which is
willing to forgive, that which is due unto him? But this is not at the pleasure
of the debtors, but of him to whom the debt belonges. This image, or as I said
before, this print is settled in the businesses of men, from the very height of
equity. Men therefore, since, by the testimony of the Apostle, all do die in
Adam, from whom the very root of oftending God, sprung forth amongst all
mankind, are even a lump of sin owing penance to Gods great justice, which
whether God inflict upon them, or pardon them, he shall by doing neither of
the two show himself unjust. But it is a toke^ of great insolency in the
debtors to make them selves judges to whom this punishment is to be forgiven,
and upon whom to be inflicted, like as their indignation was most senseles who
being hired in the vineyard, repined when they saw others as largely rewarded
as themselves. The Apostle does thus therefore beat back all impudency that
may arise out of this question. O man, who art thou, that do thus gainesay
God? For what does he else, when that displeases him which god complains of
concerning sinners? As if God do presently constrain a man to sin, if he do
but only withhold the mercy of his justification from him whilst he sins,
and for this cause must be said to harden some offenders, not because he
inforceth them thereto, but because he takes not compassion on them? Now those
they are of whom he takes no compassion, upon whom he finds in that secret
justice of his, to which man's weak sense is in no case able to attain, that
there is no compassion to be taken: for his judgments are not to be searched,
nor his paths to be passed. But he justly complains of sinners, as of those
who^ he would by no means have offend; and with all that those of whom he
bath compassion, seeing their god so grievously to complain of sinners, might
attain unto this vocation, and being gauled even at their very heart, return
into his favor. Most justly therefore and mercifully does he complain. But if
this move us, for that no man resists his pleasure, because whom he so
pleases he helps, and whom he will again he forsakes; when both he whom
he helps, and he also whom he forsakes, come both of the self same lump of
sinn^^^, and howsoever both of them be subject to punishment, yet one of them
has it pardoned unto him, and the other performed upon him: If then this do
move us, O man, who art thou, that thou gainsaist God: For I guess it to be
all one with that where it is said, are you not men, and do you not walk
after the manner of men? for under this name are meant both the carnal, and the
spiritual, to whom it is said I could not speak to you as to spiritual men,
but as to carnal. And again, for you could not as yet, neither hitherto can
you: for ye are yet carnal. And again, but a carnal man does not understand
the things which belong to the spirit of God: To these therefore it is said,
O man, who art thou, that thou gainesaiest God? Does that which is framed say
unto him which has framed it, why have thou thus fashioned me? Or has not he
which works in clay, power, to make out of the same heap, a vessel for
honor, and a vessel for reproach? Even therehence it may happily sufficiently
appear that he spoke to a carnal man, because the very clay of which man
was first framed, signifies as much. And because al, as I showed ere whilst out
of the same Apostle, are dead in Adam, he says we are all of one and the same
stuff. And although one vessel be made for honor, and another for disgrace,
yet it must needs be that eue^ that which was made for honor, have a carnal
infancy, and so afterward arise up to a riper kind of spiritual age; since
they were now made for honor, and borne in Christ, but being he speaks to
those which are yet infants, he calls them carnal, saying, I could not
speak to you as to spiritual, but as to carnal. I gave you being as yet
little ones in Christ, milk to drink not stronger meat, for neither were you
able, neither yet are you: for even yet ye are carnal. For all therefore he
term them carnal, yet he adds further that they are borne in Christ, and
little ones in him, and sucklings; and in that he joins to all this, neither
yet can you: he insinuates thus much, that when they have profited something
more hereafter, they will be able, because that now grace is begun in them,
being spiritually borne a new. Therefore they were now vessels made for honor,
and yet so as that it might well be said unto them, O man, what art thou, that
thou should gainesay God? And if it be rightly spoken to such, much more
rightly may it be spoken to such as are not yet so regenerate, but are made for
disgrace. Let us still hold this with a steadfast faith, that there is not
injustice with God: and whether he be content to pardon man his debt, or to
exact it at his hands, neither can he rightly find fault with his injustice of
whom he exacteth this debt, nor be in any case boast himself of his own
deserts to whom he forgiueth it. For both that is debt which the one pays,
and the other receives whatsoever he has. But here we must labor, with the
help of God, to see how that may be true, which is written, thou have hated
nothing which thou createdst. And again that, I have loved Jacob, but Esau
have I hated. For if he therefore hated Esau, because he was a vessel made for
disgrace, and the same potter makes one vessel for honor another for disgrace,
how have thou hated nothing of that which thou createdst? For see, he has
hated Esau, which himself created a vessel for disgrace: which doubt may be
thus manifested, that we know God to be the maker of all creatures; now every
creature of God is good: and every man so far as he is man, is a creature of
god* but not as he is a sinner. Therefore God is the maker both of the body,
and of the mind of man, and neither of these is evil, neither does God hate
either of them, for he hates nothing which himself has created. But the
mind is more excellent then the body, and God, then either the body or the
mind, being the maker and creator of them both, neither does he hate any thing
in man but sin. Now the sin of man is a certain disorder and crookednes;
that is to say, a turning backward from his excellent maker, and a bending to
his baser creatures. Therefore God hates not Esau as he is a man, but as he is
a sinner: as it is said of the Lord, He came amongst his own, and his would
not entertain him: to whom also he says himself, yet therefore have not
heard, because ye are not of God. How were they his? and how were they not of
god? unless because the one be spoken of men, whom the Lord himself made, and
the other of sinners whom the Lord himself did condemn. And yet the same are
both men and sinners: men, by their estate, but sinners by their own proper
will. Why then did he love Jacob? was he not a sinner? But he loved in him not
the fault, which he clean extinguished, but the grace which he bestowed on
him. For Christ died for the wicked, yet not that the wicked should remain
dead, but that being justified they might be converted from their wickedness,
believing in him which justifies the wicked. For God hates wickedness,
therefore in some be punishes it by condemnation, in others he takes it away
by justification, as he thinks best in those his unsearchable judgments. And
because he makes them vessels of disgrace amongst the wicked, whom he does
not justify, he hates not this in them which he makes; for inasmuch as they
are wicked, they are accursed, but in as much as they are made vessels, they
are so made for some use. That through the punishment ordained for them, those
vessels which were made for honor might reap some profit. Therefore God
hates them, neither as they are men, nor as they are vessels; that is to say,
he hates not that in the^ which by ordinance he made: for he hates nothing
that he has made. But yet in that he makes them the vessels of perdition, he
makes them to the end to correct others. For he hates in them the wickedness,
which himself made not. For as the judge hates the theft in the man, but not
the weapon which he used in the attaining of his booty, the one being the
trespass of a thief, the other no more then the judge himself does and may
use: So God when out of the heap of wicked men he makes vessels of perdition,
hates not that which he makes, that is, the work which he ordained, in the
punishment due to those which perish, wherein they of whom he takes
compassion may find means of their own salvation. So was it said to Pharao:
I stirred thee up thereto, that I might show my power in thee, that my name
might be made known through the whole earth. This manifestatio^ of the power
of God, and illustration of his name through the whole earth, is good to draw
them to fear, and correct their ways, with whom such a calling agrees. So
consequently he says, that if God being desirous to show his anger, and make
known his power, did in great abundance of patience bring the vessels of
anger, which were made for destruction (there must be understood who art thou,
that thou should gainesay God? that the sentence taking recourse to the
former words, this may be the meaning.) If God being desirous to show his
anger, and make known his power, brought the vessels of wrath, who art thou
that thou should gainsay God? yet not only being desirous to show his wrath
and make known his power, brought in abundance of patience, the vessels of
wrath which were made for destruction, but that which follows too; That he
might manifest the riches of his glory upon the vessels of mercy. For what
profits it the vessels made for destruction, that God sustaineth them
patiently, that he may destroy the ordainer, and uses them as an instrument of
other men's salvation, whom he takes compassion on? But it likewise profits
them for whose safety he uses these: That, as it is written, the righteous
may wash his hands in the blood of the sinner, that is to say, that he may be
cleansed from his evil works through the fear of God, when he sees the
punishment of sinners. It therefore avails to cause a profitable fear in
other men, and to make known the riches of Gods glory toward the vessels of
mercy which he has prepared to glory, that God willing to show his anger,
brought the vessels of wrath. For that hardening of wicked men makes both these
plain: As well what is to be feared that every man may be converted to God in
piety, as also how great the graces of Gods mercy are, who shows how much
he pardons some, by punishing others. But if that be no just punishment which
he inflicteth upon some, he pardons nothing unto others, upon who^ he does
not inflict this punishment. But because that is most just, and there is no
injustice with God, who is able worthily to thank him that remitteth this,
which if he would inflict upon us, no man could rightly say that he ought not.
Whom also he called. Us, quoth he, not only of the Jews but also of the
Gentiles, that is, the vessels of mercy which he prepared to glory. For he
called not all the Jews, but some of them: nor all the Gentiles, but likewise
some of them. For there is one lump of sinful and wicked men proceeding
from Adam, wherein both Jews and Gentiles, the favor of God being set apart,
have equal share. For if the potter, as out of the same heap he makes one
vessel for honor, an other for disgrace; now it is manifest that some of the
Jews are made vessels for honor, and some for disgrace, as likewise it is
with the Gentiles. It follows that all be understood to belong to the same
heap; Then he begins to rehearse diverse protestations of the Prophet in
every particular kind, the order being changed. For first he spoke of those
of the Jews which were converted, and afterward of those of the Gentiles. Now
he first alleges testimony for the Gentiles, and then for the Jews. For as
he says in Osee, I will call those which are not my people, my people, and
those which are not my beloved, my beloved: and where it is said you are not my
people, there shall it be said, you are the sons of the living God. This
saying is meant of the Gentiles, because they had not one appointed place of
sacrifice, as the Jews had in Jerusalem. But the Apostles were sent to the
Gentiles, that every one might believe, in the place where he was, and might
there offer sacrifice of thanksgiving, wheresoever they believed, to whom he
gave power to be made the children of God. But Esai says, he cries out for
Israel. That all Israel may not be thought to have gone again into destruction.
And then he shows, that there were other besides made for honor, other for
disgrace: If, quoth he, the number of the children of Israel shall be as the
sands of the sea, the remnant shall be safe; the rest of the company then,
were vessels made for destruction. For, says he, the Lord shall accuse upon
the earth. That is to say, that by the benefit of faith, he may save those
which believe through grace, not through the infinite observations wherewith
that multitude being most basely laden was oppressed. For thorough grace he
finished his word for us upon the earth, saying my yoke is light, and my burden
pleasant: which is here mentioned a little after. The word is almost in thy
mouth, and in thy heart, that is, the word of faith which we preach, because if
thou confess in thy mouth, because Jesus is the true Lord, and believe in thy
heart, because God raised him from the dead, thou shall be safe. For we believe
in our heart for righteousness sake, but confess with our mouths for
salvation. This is that accomplished word which God made upon the earth, by
which accomplishment, the thief was justified, who having all his other
members fastened upon the cross, and these two only free, believed in his
heart for righteousness, and confessed with his mouth for sal^ations sake,
thereupon deserving to hear this, To day shall thou be with me in Paradise.
For now his good works should follow, if by the receipt of grace, he were to
live longer amongst men. But yet those good works went not before, that he
might deserve the same favor, being after his offense fastened to the cross,
to be transported to Paradise. And as Esaias foretold, says he, unless the
Lord of the Sabbath had left us seed, this is in the same place, the remnant
should be safe. But the other as vessels of destruction have perished as they
ought. And it was not their desert, that all of them perished not, as at the
downfall of Sodom and Gomorra, but the grace of God left a seed, from whence
new increase might spring throughout the whole world. And this a little after,
So therefore, says he, in this time also the residue was saved by election of
grace. And if by grace then not by works: otherwise grace is no grace. What
then? Israel obtained not that which it sought, but the chosen obtained it, the
other being blinded. The vessels of mercy obtained it, but the vessels of
anger were blinded, yet proceeding both out of the same heap, as in the
fullness of the nations. There is a place in the Scripture very fit for the
point which we have in hand, ratifying the same with a wonderful
contestation, in the book, which some term, Jesus of Syracke, some
Ecclesiasticus, where it is thus written. And all men are of the same mould or
earth, from whence Adam was created. In the multitude of discipline, God
separated them and altered their ways. And some of them he blessed and
exalted, sanctifying them and applying them to himself, and some he cursed and
brought low, and turned them to their disagreement, as the clay of the potter
in his hand, to lay it and order it. All his ways are according to his own
disposition, so man is in the hand of him which made him, and shall restore
unto him according to his judgment. Good is contrary to evil, and life to
death: so is the just also to the wicked. And so look into all the works of the
most high. Two against two, and one against one. Here first the discipline of
God is commended. In the multitude of discipline, says he, he separated them;
From whence but only from the blessedness of Paradise? And altered their ways,
that they might now live as mortal men. The^ was there made one lump of all
coming out of the bra^ch of sin, and punishment of mortality, howsoever God
made and created in all things good. For the shape and proportion of our
bodies, is in every member so well ordered, that the Apostle to win men to
charity, did there hence draw a certain likeness to be in all men. Our breath
is also full of life, and cherishes our earthly limbs, and all the nature of
man, by the government of the soul, and service of the body, and wonderfully
tempered condition thereof, but so that the lust of the flesh does now reign
by reason of the punishment of sin, had confounded all mankind, as one and
the same heap, the guiltiness from the beginning remaining over all; and yet
it follows, some of the^ he blessed and exalted, and sanctified them, and
applied them to himself, and some of them he cursed and brought low, and set
them at dissension among themselves. As if the Apostle should say, Is it not in
the potters power to make out of the same heap one vessel for honor, another
for disgrace? And therefore that which is added, and it is not unlike that. As
the potters clay, says he, is in his hand to lay and order it: all his ways
are according to his own disposition, so is man in the hand of him which made
him. But because the Apostle says, Is there any injustice with God? see also
what he ioynes hereto, he shall pay him says he according to his judgment.
But since just punishments are inflicted upon the damned, yet because it is
turned to that use, that they may reap profit thereby who are taken pity on;
mark what follows. God is contrary to evil, says he, and life to death; so
also the just to the wicked: and so look into all the works of the most high,
there are two against two, and one against one. That out of the comparison of
the good, better may arise, which are better as it were by grace. As if he
should say, the residue shall be saved: he goes on and speaks in the person of
the residue. And I have very lately watched, something like one which gathers
grapes after the master of the vineyard has done. And how will he make this
good, because not for their own deserts, therefore by the mercy of god? In
the blessing of God, says he, and I hoped: and like the labourer in the
vineyard I filled my press. For although he watched very lately, yet because,
as it is said, the latest were first, he hoping in the blessing of the Lord,
glauncing out of the relics of Israel, filled his press out of the
fertility of the vineyard, which proceeded from the whole world. Then I can
see no other meaning of the Apostles, and all the justified, through whom the
knowledge of grace was showed unto us, but that he which boasts should boast
in the Lord. For who can search into the works of God, that out of the same
heap, condemns one, and justifies another? The free choice of will, is of
great force; very true: but it little avails them which are sold under
sin. The flesh says he, lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against
the flesh, that ye cannot do what you would, we are warned to live well: this
reward being propounded to us, that we may get to live blessedly for ever. But
who can live well, and do that which is good, unless he be justified by faith?
we are warned to believe, that through love receiving the gift of the holy
ghost we may do well. But who can believe unless he be touched with some
vocation, that is, with some testification of things? In whose power is it to
have his mind touched with such a vision, as that his will may thereby
bestirred up to faith? And who embraces that in his mind which delights him
not? Or who has that power to meet with that which may delight him, or if he
do meet with it, to delight himself therein? Since therefore those things
delight us by which we may come to God, this comes by the grace of God; not
at our beck, nor is it gotten by our industry or works: because it is his
gift that we have a will, industry, and works of charity. Therefore we are
bidden to ask that we may receive, to seek that we may find, to knock that
it may be opened unto us. Is not one very prayer sometime so luke warm, or
rather so cold, and almost none, nay none at all, that we do not so much as
mark this in our selves with grief, because when we grieve at it we do even
then pray also: What is therefore else showed unto us, but that he commands us
to ask, seek, and knock, who bids us fly all these things: therefore it is
not in the power either of him which wills or of him which runs, but of
God who takes compassion on, since unless he stir us up thereto, we can
neither will nor run. But if here were any election, that we should thus
understand that which was spoken, The residue were saved, by the election of
grace, not that the election of those which are justified should be to life
everlasting, but that they might be known which are justified, surely this is
so secret an election, that it can by no means appear unto us out of the same
heap: or if it do appear to some, I am content herein to acknowledge mine own
weakness. For have not wherewith to look into the choosing of men to saving
grace, if I be drawn by any cogitation to think upon the top of this
election, unless I had either more wit or lighter sins, or both, or, if you
will have a fourth, unless I had honest and profitable doctrines: whatsoever
he be therefore that is tainted but with the least sins, for well I know
that there is none free from all sin, if he be of a quick wit, and have the
liberal sciences at his fingers ends, my thinks he is worthy to be chosen to
this grace. But whilst I profess thus, he which choseth the weak of the world
that he may confound the strong, and the foolish that he may confound the wise,
will come upon me so, that I being now with eying him become somewhat
shamefast, may thus scoff at many, which both in regard of some sinners are
something pure, and in respect of fishers accounted orators. Have we not seen
many of these our faithful ones walking in the way of God, to be for wit
compared, not only to no heretic, but not so much as to any base morrise
dauncer? Again do we not see diverse of both sexes live in all matrimonial
chastity without complaint, and yet either heretics or pagans, or at least
scarce warm in the true church and belief, in so much that we wonder seeing
them surpassed not only in patience and temperancy: but also in faith, hope,
and charity, even of very bagages and stageplayers, who are but newly
converted? It therefore remains that our wills be chosen. But the bare will
unless something meet with it that delights and inticeth the mind, cannot
by any means be moved. Now it is not in ma^s power that any such thing should
meet with it. What was Saul's will, but to rush amongst, draw, bind, and kill
the christians? what a raging, furious, and blind will was his, who
notwithstanding was made to dapp to the very ground by one voice sent from
above, and a vision appearing with it; which mind of his, and headstrong
wilbe^t to all cruelty, being wrung and wrethed to belief; he was in a trise
made of a marvelous persecutor of the gospel, a more marvelous preacher of the
same. And yet what shall we say? is there any injustice with God? which
punishes and pardons whom it please him, punishing them only that deserve
it, and pardoning ^^^^y one, not for any thing that the pardoned can allege
for himself? Is there now any injustice with God? God forbidd: but wherefore
then does he deal thus with one, and contrariely with another? O man, who art
thou? if thou suffer not that which thou deseruest, give God thanks: thou art
happy: marry if thou do suffer it, thou have no cause to co^plain: let us
only believe, if we cannot take hold of: because he which made every creature,
both spiritual and corporal, disposes al things in just number, weight, and
measure: but his judgments are unsearchable, and his paths not to be trodden.
Let us say Alleluia, and sing a song of praise, without questioning, either
what is this, or for what end was that? For all things were created in their
due time. Hitherto were Augustines words pertaining to the setting clear of the
second question. And least any should think that Austin handled this doctrine
which he sent to Simplician concerning predestination* more the^ once hear
what he himself, after he had absolved the 2. book of his retractations,
writes in the 7. tome of the 1. book de praedest. Sanct. chap. 4. page 843.
Ye see now what I thought then of faith and works, although it were my care to
commend unto you the grace of God, in which opinion I see that these brethren
are now also, because they had not the like care to profit with me in these
books, that they had to read them with me. For if they had taken any care,
they might have found this question discussed, according to the truth of the
holy Scriptures, in the first of those two books which I wrote to Simplician
bishop over the Church of the Mediolanenses, that man of blessed memory, in
the very beginning of his bishopric, then succeeding S. Ambrose, unless
peradventure they came not to the knowledge of those books; which if it be so,
be a means. I pray you, that they may know them. Again out of the same
Augustine, tom. 7. lib. de praedest. and great. cap. 16. page 832. But I come to
the little ones, I come to the twins; that is not enough; I come to those
which are yet unborn; which were begotten at one and the same copulation, and
were to be brought forth at the same instant. The differing and diverse
judgment of Gods will appearing to the^, The greatness of this question
troubles the senses of me^ disputing so proudly of the will of God. Now
stretch thy windepipe, and baule thou as loud as thy throat will give thee
leave, thou unjust accuser of the just. What ill had he committed, tell me? or
what good had the other deserved? and he answers thee, not I, but Paul the
Apostle, truly neither of them had deserved any thing: but it is in the
potters power, to make out of the same lump one vessel to honor, and another
to disgrace: you will ask why? what confused diversity is there in this
judgment? Let him again confute this presumption, and say, O man what art
thou that thou thus gainsaiest God? especially because the intent being again
changed, answers to that comparison of man's actions, that the creditor
cannot be condemned of injustice, who means thus to dispose of two of his
debtors, that he will ask of one, and remit to the other, that which he may,
if he please, exspect alike from them both. And surely it is most true, that in
all the sleights and contracts of man's conversation, which are applied to the
desciding of any matter or to the judging of this justice whereby we seem to
try any other, it flows into our hearts, out of the unspeakable fullnes of
Gods justice, blessed John affirming that same in his gospel, because we have
all received of the fulness thereof: of: which being so, with what impudency
shall man being as clay in comparison of the potter, judge of God? Not only
saying why have thou fashioned me so? but also with a damnable kind of
curiosity, questioning of others, and asking, why have thou out of the same
lump made one thus, and another so? If man, which at the first was made of
nothing, were not borne subject to death and sin, and yet it would please God
to send some of them into utter destruction, who would say to the omnipotent
creator, why have thou fashioned me so? For we cannot deny him to appoint
them to what end pleases him, who when they were not, gave the^ their being.
Neither should some others say, why does Gods judgment differ, since all
deserts are alike, because it is in the power of the potter, to make out of the
same lump one vessel for honor, another for disgrace. But now since the
damned be justly punished, and those which are saved, cannot claim their
salvation upon due, who being forgetful of man's estate, may so far look
into the secret of God, as that himself being deservedly punished, he dare
ask why another received that favor which was not due unto him? Moses
therefore when he them taught that fleshly people, showed that this divine
election, was not due to deserts, but that it was given to me^ by the sole
bounty of God. For thus he speaks to the people most manifestly in
Deuteronomie, Behold the heaven is the Lord thy Gods, and the heaven which is
above the heavens, the earth and all that therein is. But the Lord chose your
forefathers to love them, and their seed, and after them he chose you before
all other nations. And he added, Be ye circumcised therefore from the hardness of
your hearts, and stiffen not your necks any more. But blessed Steven, when he
called upon the Jews, showed that this hardness of heart was in them, as I
said before. For he says in the Acts of the Apostles on this wise. You have
always resisted the holy ghost, with stiff necks and uncircumcised hearts and
ears. VVherehence arose the stiffeneckednes in the people which was chosen
from the whole world besides, who by ten miracles got to be freed from
bondage, to whom the law was given, for whose safety the mouths of all the
Prophets did contend, for whom Christ became flesh, and to whom he was sent,
but because there was blindness over a great part of Israel, till it being
adopted, out of the fulness of the nations, entered into the kingdom, and the
Lord shut up all of them in incredulity, that all of them might stand in need
of the mercy of the Savior. The sacraments of which divine counsel, and
mystery of Gods majesty, even he which for persecutions and blasphemies
deserved not to be termed a vessel of election, shortly touching (for
howsoever by the multitude of revelations he knew them, yet he was feign to
yield in regard of his humane weakness) in admiration cries out, O the depth of
Gods most rich wisdom and knowledge! confessing furthermore, that his paths
and counsels were unsearchable. Therefore whenever there arises any question
amongst us concerning such things, let us wonder, and holding this still for
certain, that there is no injustice with God, if that whereof there is doubt,
be a thing exceeding our understanding, and our capacity cannot reach into the
depth of it, let us confess it to remain in that fulness of the justice,
mercy, and foreknowledge of God, without any breach of his justice. Least
disputing of the high secrets of Gods will, otherwise then the pitch of our
estate will permit us, we forsake the justice of God, and coveting to build up
our own, fall down headlong into the bottomless gulf of disobedience.

FINIS.

