DEPOPVLATION ARRAIGNED, CONVICTED AND CONDEMNED, BY THE LAWS OF GOD and Man:
A TREATISE NECESSARY IN THESE TIMES;

By R. P. of Wells, one of the Society of New Inn.

Regis, Ecclesiae, reipublicae, and pauperum ergo. LONDON, Printed by R. B. and
are to be sold in S. Dunstans Churchyard near the Church door, 1636.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL, truly Learned, and most judicious, Sir John Banks
Knight, Attorney General to the sacred Majesty of our Sovereign Lord King
CHARLES.
Right Worshipful,
IT is a true saying, that the lives of some men are like a long vacation: I
cannot altogether excuse my self of some fruitless vacancies, and do therefore
sincerely acknowledge my self a debtor to the Common weal: yet upon the
occasion of some employment by a very worthy friend Thom. Hughes Esquire, in
the County, where I live, upon the execution of his Majesty's Commission
addressed into that, and other several Counties for the discovery, and
reformation of a monstrous and growing evil, Depopulation; this small
treatise, by my slender labors of the last long vacation, had its conception,
birth, and being. A little creature it is, and though it has obtained license
to walk abroad into the world, yet it cannot be bold without the protection
of authority to adventure into the hands of this age for fear of crushing. As
under his Royal Majesty, and his most honorable Privy Council, it properly
apperteyneth unto the eminent trust of your place to provide for the discovery,
and prepare for the suppression of such, and the like oppressions; (wherein
your faithful care, and vigilance has been sufficiently remonstrated) so is
it most proper for your worthiness, to patronize the labors of any well
affected Subject in this kind from the spurnings and tramplings of the grander
sort of delinquents. To you therefore Right worshipful, this little one does
humbly present it self, and earnestly implores your favorable patronage and
safe conduct to be vouchsafed to it, wherewith being encouraged it will not
fear the face of any greedy and grinding Achabs or Nimrods of the times, it
will modestly presume to tell those peop e how injurious they are to his
highness royal State in the diminution of his people, in the multitude of
whom consists the honor of a Prince, as also in the lessening of his
revenewes: It will tell them, how sacrilegious they are to the Church and
painful ministry: how pernicious they are to the Common weal, and what
wretched starvers they are of all sorts of poor: The criminous actors in this
mischief have spread themselves throughout all the quarters of the Kingdom,
and have scattered and dispersed the many samples of their worst actions, as
the Levite did the twelve parts of his Concubine per omnes terminos, through
all the quarters of Israel. I might more aptly say that his Majesty has dealt
in justice with this crying crime, as the Levite did in the case of his dead
Concubine, with the Gibeathites. He dispersed her membratim, by pieces and
morsels, as well for a shame, a byword, and a parable against the unruly actors
in that tragedy, with a nunquam res talis facta est in Israel: As also to
summon a general assembly, for the just destruction of them; This only puts
the difference; there was then no King in Israel. Blessed be God, we have a
blessed King over our Israel, who (not for destruction) for reformation of
oppressing Depopulators has by his gracious directions to his honorable
Judges circuiting all the quarters of his Kingdom, seconded with his careful
Commissions, and by the consequences ensuing thereupon, endeavored to
distribute all parts of Royal justice in omnes terminos Israelis; And as the
offense of late time has grown so monstrous, as never was it so great, nor so
exemplary in its evil in any former age: So the unpatterned proceeding in
proportionable Justice by his Majesty, and his right honorable Counsel, does
justly meet with it: Nunquam res talis facta est in Israel; Heerin, as in other
things your prudent and provident care neither has been, nor is wanting: And
that it may long continue, and increase with length of happy and honorable
days, he, who beggeth pardon for this presumption, will not fail to offer up
his continual prayers to Heaven.

Your Worships in all observance and duty, ROE. POVVELL.
New Inn 1. July. 1636.
December. 3. 1635.
Perlegi hoc Opusculum cui Titulus (Depopulation, Arraigned, Convicted, etc.)
quod continet paginas 64. in quibus nihil reperio sanae doctrinae au^ bonis
moribus contrarium, quo minus cum utilitate public a imprimi possint, sub ea
tamen condition ut si non intra sex menses proxime sequentes typis mandemur,
haec licentia sit omnino irrita.

Guil. Haywood R. R. P. Archiepisc. Cantuar. Capell. domest.

Depopulation ARRAIGNED, CONVICTED, AND CONDEMNED.
I Have in another Treatise handled the grand offense of Forestallers and
Ingrossers of Corn, and therein touched his Highness careful directions, and
just proceeding, against them; I shall now presume to add one debt more unto
the remembrance of his Majesty's many and memorable deeds of impartial
Justice, his zealous and indefatigable care often commended, and charged to his
Counselors of State, for rooting up and extirpation of that crying sin
Depopulation, and the thrice honorable proceedings of his highest judicatorie
Court against some delinquents, and his Majesty's no less goodness in
addressing several Commissions (according to former presidents, of his most
noble progenitors) into most part of his kingdom, for the more absolute
discovery of this monstrous overgrowne evil, which I may well term peccatum
Camelinum.

an offense at the Common Law, it might and may be inquired at the ancient
Courts of Leet or view of Franckplegde. And though it be now in this age grown
Gyant-like without a proper name, save what the deplorable issue and fruit of
its prodigious birth does render (Depopulation;) and though by connivence and
impunity in former times, it is now grown so huge, that the proportion of
remedy must exceed the ordinary verge of Justice, and appeal to the highest
seat, yet fit it is, that the discovery thereof should be revived, and enjoined
within the inquisition of the Leet.



Forestaller and Ingrosser, or the Depopulator, be the heaviest in the scale,
both being the spawne of that bloud-sucking Cynomyia covetousness, might at
first apprehension seem doubtful; But if, to shut and close up the womb of
the earth, communis reipublicae matris, from bringing forth any increase at
all, be a worse sin than the hiding and hoarding up of her fruits after it is
birth; then is the one more pernicious and intolerable then the other, both too
bad, neither of them worthy of the least indulgence, for both are horribly
guilty of privative injustice. And if the curse be denounced against that, Qui
abscondit frumentum maledicetur in populo, Pro. 11.26. it must needs, fall
heavier upon this. Depopulation is praefocatio matricis, a strangling or
choking of the womb, and causing an utter sterility. The other forestalling
and engrossing, is suffuratio partus matricis, a privy stealer (though a
public enemy) of the birth of the womb, both Monopolists, and both
Foster-fathers of miserable Famine, this preventing a plenty, that raising a
dearth, and scarcity in the time of plenty.

Civilians call Nocturnos Depopulatores agrorum, invaders of other men's
possessions in the night, whom it was lawful to kill if they resisted, Liceat
occidere propria authoritate; but with an offender of a far worse nature.
That being an open enemy, may be easily resisted or prevented: this under a
Mask and visage of his own private, destroys the public good. It is like
the biting of an Aspe, a little Serpent in Afric, which takes away the life
of him whom it bites in a kind of swowne, sensibus sine sensu deficientibus.
Before I can well proceed in deciphering the odious conditions of that
abominable sin of Depopulation, I must render a definition and description of
it. The word is not obvious to the understanding of those whom it most
concerns and offends, that is, his Highness liege people, versed and employed
in rural affairs of Husbandry.

Depopulation has its Etymon from the preposition De, and the verb Populor,
which singlie signifies and imports to rob and spoil people, to waste and
destroy Countries. Seneca tells us, Cura populatur artus, Care consumes the
joints: and it is aggravated by the word (De) which imports ablatively, in and
by some unlawful act, and the consequence and effects of that unlawful act,
by the privation of some lawful and common good.

To describe it more plainly, it robbes and pills the people of their due
means and maintenance, and thereby disables them both in body and state from
performing their service, and liege obedience, immediately to their Prince, and
mediatly to the Commonweal; By which I mean, Clergy, and Laiety: And it
alters the quality of the people; from good Husbands, it makes them houselesse
and thriftlesse, puts them in a course of idleness (the mother of mischief,
and bane of all rule and order.) So as they become aliens and strangers to
their national government, and the kingdom by that means in a manner
dispeopled and desolated.



their example other inferior persons) griping and avaritious Landlords, who
commonly suffer ancient demiseable tenements, to fall into their hands, and so
retain them without granting further estates, at conscionable fines; and then
wilfully, or negligently decay the houses, and either keep their grounds in
their own, or a Bay liffes manurance, or let it out by several parcells, at
rack and extreme rents, to several persons; who to make the best of a bad
bargain, are enforced (for want of the entierty of a Message, or farm to
maintain a Plough.) to turn Tillage into pasture, and thereby only keep a
few Sheep and a Cow.

Civilians is called Mansus, and does consist of foundation, wall and cover; in
our French Law Maison, and in our legal latin Messuagium, which contains the
buildings, Curtilage, Orchard, and Garden; and Message consists of two things,
land and structure. And though before the building, it was but land, yet when
the edifice is erected, then is it called a Message: And albeit the structure
be afterward utterlie ruinated, Et aequata solo, yet for dignities sake, in
regard it was once a place of habitation, which is highly esteemed in the Law,
it shall have no more the name of Land, but be called a TOFTE, (that is) a
place wherein a house had been.

Terra in the natural sense is taken for the emblem of mortality, terra quam
gerimus, The earth or earthly Tabernacle of our flesh, which we bear about
us, and which must return to earth. In the interpretation of the Law it does
comprehend any ground, soil or earth whatsoever, and is the most general name
of all sorts of soil: But properly, Terra dicitur a terendo. The earth on
which we tread and walk, and must make use of the fruits and increase
thereof, to sustain and support our houses of clay, and yet more specially a
terendo, quia vomere teritur, broken, bruized, and worn with the plough-share.

As the Heavens are the habitation of Almighty God; so the earth has he
appointed as the suburbs of Heaven, to be the habitation of man. Behold the
Heaven, and the Heaven of Heavens is the Lords, the earth also with all that
therein is, Deuteronomie 10. ver. 14.

Agricolari fuit hominum prima conditio and status: even before the fall, God
took Adam, and put him into the Garden of Eden to dress it and to keep it,
Posuit in paradisum voluptat is, ut operaretur and custodiret illum. After the
fall and the expulsion of our first Parents, it was then primum opus homini
impositum propter peccatum.

Agriculture was the first work enjoined to man for sin: God then gave the
earth to man with limitation and condition, Genesis 3.17. Cursed is the ground for
thy sake, in sorrow shall thou eat of it all the days of thy life. 19. In the
sweat of thy face shall thou eat bread, until thou return unto the ground:
for out of it wast thou taken; for dust thou art, and unto dust shall thou
return: And it follows. 23. The Lord God sent him forth to till the ground
from whence he was taken, Vt operaretur terram de qua sumptus est. The grazing
of herds, of beasts, and sheep, are part of Husbandry; Pars rusticae vitae,
in illis qui armenta and oves pascunt, consistere videtur, says the Civilian,
li. 24. Syntag. cap. 5.

Adams two sons, Abel and Cain, were both Husbandmen, Abelcustos ovium, Cain
agricola, the one a keeper of Sheep, the other a Tiller of ground; and there
were houses, habitations, and Cities built by them.

terram dedit filiss hominum. But God saw the wickedness of man was great in
the earth, Genesis 6.5. He therefore by a general deluge over the face of the
whole earth, does cancel his former gift of terram dedit, with a proviso of
preservation reserved to Noah and them that were with him in the Arc, Genesis
7.23. But after the waters had prevailed upon the earth an hundred and fifty
days, Genesis 8.1. God remembered Noah and every living thing, and all the
cattle that was with him in the Arc: And God made a wind to passover the
earth, and the waters assuaged; And afterward the face of the ground was dry,
Noah and his family by Gods direction went forth. 20.21. And every beast, every
creeping thing, and every foul, and whatsoever creeps upon the earth, after
their kinds, went forth out of the Arc. And Noah builded an Altar unto the
Lord and took of every clean beast, and of every clean foul, and offered
burnt offerings on the Altar; God accepted the sweet favor of Noah's thankful
sacrifice, and renews his former grant of terram dedit by a strict covenant.
Nonigitur ultra percutiam omnem animam viventem, sicut feci, etc. I will not
again smite any more every living thing as I have done: Cunctis diebus terrae,
while the earth remains, seed time and harvest, and cold and heat, and Summer
and winter, and day and night shall not cease.

Habendum per servitia, To hold in capite of Almighty God, as of his Throne of
Heaven, to which the earth is but a footstool, and to uses too, dispensatores,
non dissipatores; To be Stewards of it, terram colere, aras excolere, to till,
manure and husband the earth, and out of the increase thereof to build, polish
and repair Altars, Churches and Oratories for the God of Israel, and to
maintain and support the beauty of holiness, and to give unto Gods Ministers,
the sacred Priesthood, his own reserved portion, their dues and duties, and
not to commit any spoil, waste or destruction of the earth, or the inhabitants
thereof. Thus we observe that the first institution of Husbandry upon the
earth, enjoined by God for the sin of man, was agriculture, tillage, and must
be performed by the work of the hands, and sweat of the brow; the maintenance
of the Ox at the crib, and the pasturage of the Sheep, are but handmaids to
do their office in that great labor, The Ox to plough the ground, the sheep
to compester it in due times of season.

Tillage, is to bring food out of the earth, and bread to strengthen man's
heart, Psalm. 104.15. all sorts of victual or sustenance, either, oil, wine,
or any other food are inferior to bread. When God pronounces any commination
of famine for the wickednese of the people, it is by breaking the staff of
bread, Ecce ego conteram baculum panis in Jerusalem; Ezec. 4.16. Behold I will
break the staff of bread in Jerusalem, and they shall eat bread by weight and
with care, and they shall drink water by measure and with astonishment.

agriculture has bin universally esteemed in all nations of the world. Among
the heathen Idolaters (who had a glimmering of a deity) many of them in the
variety of objects finding contentment to their desires, forthwith collected
that to be God, which had given them such contentment, from whence sprang
Idolatry. The earth and the fruits thereof were had in so great honor, that
they ascribed a kind of deity to it. Let me a little prosecute the fictious
allusions of Heathen Poets in this kind, that I may convince the
earth-choaking Christians of this age: they feign Coelus (further they do not
aspire) to be married to Terra his sister, by some called Vesta, sive quod
omnibus rebus terra vestiatur, sive quod vi sua stet; either because the earth
is clothed with all things, or because it subsisteth of its own strength. The
latter seems to be borrowed from Ovid, Lib:

Stat viterra sua, Ovid l. 3. Fast.
vi stando, vesta vocatur. But the first in my judgment is more probable. For
vesture ( vestitura) signifies a garment, and in that sense it may be taken;
for grass, corn and all kind of Trees, Woods, and under-woods, are as it
were the comely clothing and garments of the earth. I find in an old Law of
King Inas, Lambert Archaion.
which herein I shall have occasion to touch: Qui december hidas terrae
occupaverit, sex hidas frugibus vestito. In the use of our common Law, it is
taken metaphorically to betoken a possession, or an admittance to a possession;
and with the feudists, possession it self. And so it may well stand according
to Gods grant before mentioned; terram dedit filijs hominum. Sometimes it is
taken for the profits of the land: And so 4o. ED. 1. Stat. 1. entitled extenta
manerij; Inquiry was to be made pro quanto vestura cujuslibet acre possit
communiter appreciari, how much the vesture of an acre is worth. But I return
to my poetical pedigree: They further feign, that in this marriage Saturnus.
Atlas, Ops, and others, brothers and sisters were begotten: And from the name
of Coelus they derive the appellation of the highest heavens: Ab cujus nomine
miravarietate formosissimum, supremum Corpus coelum dicunt fuisse appellatum.

Some think that Ops the daughter was so called; Quod terrae open vita hominum
sustentatur, by the help of the earth, the life of man is supported; or from
the ancient adjective Ops, which fignified rich. For the people of ancient
days, whose riches did especially consist in Agriculture and cattle, did
adore the earth by the name of the goddess Ops, as the bountiful Mistress of
their wealth; they also feign Ceres to be the daughter of Saturn and Ops, and
to be the first Inventrix of fruit and tillage, whence Virgil. 1o. Geo.

Prima Ceres far mortales vertere terram
Instituit --
Ceres did first direct the use of Iron Plow.

This goddess was sometimes called Thesmophoros (i.e.) legum latrix. For some
would have the original of laws, for metes and boundaries, and right of
property, to begin with the use of Tillage and Husbandry: Coeptum est de
agrorum finibus (qui antea nulli erant) disceptari: Then the limits and bounds
of fields (which were not before) began to be in question. And certain it is,
the occasion of Tillage and Corn, begat the more frequent use of distinctions,
Landmarkes and boundaries.

Dimensiones terrarum terminis, positis vagantibus ac discordantibus populis
pacis utilia praestiterunt: The allotting and bounding of land, did yield the
profitablenesse of peace, unto wandering and disagreeing people. The luxuriant
fruition of peace, by this means made them fancy, and frame to themselves the
worship of an Idol called Terminus, to whom they offered up their sacrifices
in the month of February; Numa Pompilius the second King of the Romans after
Romulus, having made a public perambulation throughout the kingdom, and
prefixed private limitations and bounds, betwixt party and party; did for
establishment thereof dedicate a Chapel, upon the top of the Tarpeian Hill
unto this Idol; to whom the people by way of sacrifice brought Cakes, pulse,
and the first fruits of the field. In the emblem of peace, Agriculture is
pourtrayed as her Companion, sister, and daughter, carrying ears of corn, and
grapes in her hand.

Quae comes haec spicas manibus quae gestat, and uvas. Agricultura, quid illa?
Fida comes pacis, soror haec, and filia, --
Licurgus of Sparta, the Lacedemonian Law maker, observing what great emolument
the study and industry of husbandry did afford unto the public Weal, did
divide and farm out all his fields unto his Citizens; that thereby laying
aside all private envy and grudge, they might all alike share in pains and
profit together.

Cato the elder was wont to say, that the choicest men for strength and
martial designs, and that imagined least mischief, had their off spring from
Husbandmen, ex agricolis nasci. It is reported by Suetonius, that when Domiti^^
the Emperor, taking notice that studio colendi vineta, negligerentur arva; the
sollicitous care in pruning, and trimming of Vineyards begat a neglect of
tillage, commanded all the vines to be rooted out and destroyed. The remedy was
as bad as the evil; his care of husbandry (had it been singly) was
commendable, but not his absolute destruction of Vineyards; which was a type of
his bloody persecution of Christians, and was intolerable to the weal public.

Amongst the Romans, Agriculture grew in so high esteem, that the Senators
themselves would put their hands to the plow. And it never prospered better,
than when the Senators themselves plowed: Scipio major is reported by Seneca,
often to have exercised himself in Tillage, Vt mos erat priscis, as the
custom was; and was wont after he had tired himself with rural labors, to
refresh his body by bathing, abluere corpus rusticis fessum laboribus.

The best of ancient Orators, in describing of liberal, Cic. l. 1. Offi.
and illiberall arts and sciences, tells us, That Omnium rerum ex quibus
aliquid exquiritur, nihil agricultura melius, nihil uberius, nihil dulcius,
nihil libero homine dignius: Nothing better, nothing more plentiful, more
sweet, more worthy of a free man, than Tillage.

Agriculture, and Tillage, by the line and level of the ancient government in
this kingdom. Amongst the laws of King Inas, whom I mentioned before, and who
began his reign in the year of Christ 712. the 65 Law is de fundum
occupantibus, and is to this purpose; Archaion.
Qui viginiti hidas terrae possederit, is migraturus undecim hidas segetibus
satas a tergo relinquito: Qui december occuparit, is sex hidas frugibus vestito,
etc. He that was possessed of twenty hides of land, and was to depart thence
to dwell elsewhere, should leave behind him twelve hides sown with corn: And
he that had ten, should leave six, and so after the like proportion. By this
may be collected, what provident care those times had for maintenance of the
Plow and Tillage.

service of the Plow, servitium socae. And therefore the Tenant had common in
the Lords wastes, to gain ( i. e to till) and to compester the land, for the
maintenance of tillage; which was much regarded and favored by the Law. This
sort of land was anciently called hide and gain, the word hide signifying such
a portion of land, as might be labored and tilled in a year, and a day, by
one Plow: and gain ( i. e. Quaestus, lucrum;) Metonymically from the profit
and advantage which arises by Tillage; whence the Civilians do term Corn and
harvest fruits, Fructus industriales. And whereas all service due for land, is
either Knights service or socage: The word socage is derived of the word soc
(i. e.) vomer a Plow-share or Coulter. Et inde (says Bracton li. 2. ca. 35.
number. 1.) tenentes qui tenent in sockagio sockmanni dici poterunt; co quod
deputati sunt (ut videtur) tantummodo ad culturam. The tenure of socage has
more privileges than that of Knights service. The son and heir of a socage
tennant, sockmanni, was understood to be of sufficient age to enter to his land
cum quindecim compleverit annos, whereas the son and heir of the other, not
till he attain the age of 21. Glanvill lib. 7. ca. 9.

Praecipe upon a fine, and in a writ of entry, before meadow, pasture, wood, or
any other soil.

Yea the very beast of the Plow, averia carucae have a privilege. For in the
old Statute, de districtione Scaccarij. 51. Hen. 3.1266. It is provided that no
man of Religion (or other) shall be distreyned by his beasts that gain his
land, nor by his Sheep for the Kings debt, nor the debt of any other man, nor
for any other cause, by the Kings, or other Bayliffes; but until they can
find another distress, or Chattells sufficient, whereof they may levy the
debt, or that is sufficient for the demand, except impounding of beasts, damage
Fezant. By the Statute of Artic. super chartas 28o. EDW. 1. ca. 12. The King
willed, that distresses to be taken for his debts, should not be made upon
beasts of the Plow, so long as a man may find any other; upon this Law a writ
is founded, ne quis distring atur per averia carucarum, vel per oves suas,
Regist. Brev.
against those that shall transgress, and impound any cattle of the Plow, or
sheep, contrary to that ordinance being made; ad communem utilitatem Regni, as
the writ sets forth.

Indians, Agricolae were the second degree of men, after the Philosophers or
wise men. And when all the Provinces in that great Country (being by some noted
to be the third part of all the earth, containing 50000. Towns) were imbroyled
with civil Wars; amidst all their hostilities, Strah. li. 55.
Agricolae erant sacrosancti and intacti, agrique little, etc. the Husbandmen
and their fields, were privileged from any violation or invasion, and they had
the happiness, quietly to apply themselves unto their Plow, their vintage,
lopping of trees, or their harvest labors, according to the season of the
year: Arrianus in Indicis. Whence it may be probably conceived that the
industry of the people, as well as the fertility of the soil was the means,
that the earth in those parts brought forth its fruits to maturity twice a
year. This custom of the Indians grew to be part of the Civil Law among the
Romans, li. 2. Synt. Tit. 27o.

Fredericus Caesar; which meetely symphonizeth with our common Law,
Agricultores circa rem rusticam occupati, dum villis insident, dum agros
colunt, securi sint in quacunque part terrarum: ita ut nullus inveniatur tam
audax, ut personas, boves, and agrorum instrumenta, aut si quid aliud sit, quod
ad agrorum rusticam curam pertineat, invadere, aut capere, aut violenter
auferre praesumat: That Husbandmen versed about their Country affairs, whilst
they abode upon their farms, and whilst they tilled their grounds, should be
quiet, or safe in all parts of the land. So, that none should be so hardy, as
presume to assault, take, or forcibly carry away, their persons, their Oxen,
and tools of Husbandry, or any other thing that belonged to the affairs of
Husbandry. The penalty follows, and deserves a due perpension: Si quis autem
hujusmodi statutum ausu temerario violare praesumpserit, in quadruplum ablata
restituat, and infamiae notam ipso jure incurrat, imperiali arbitrio
nihilominus puniendus: The rash and insolent violater of that Law was to make a
fourefold restitution of the things taken away, to be accounted infamous by the
Law, and notwithstanding to be punished at the pleasure of the Emperor. I
shall in its proper place, parallel the late Decree of the Kings great
counsel, and high Court of Star Chamber against Depopulation, with this
imperial constitution for rural immunities, to show that no Law or ordinance
never so strictly contrived, has been hitherto more proportionably and
conveniently medicinable for this sore then the Arbitrary proceedings of that
great Court.

Depopulation, Contraria contrarijs illustrantur. And therein I shall not need
to inquire any further, than into the Statute Laws of our kingdom, and to
take a survey, as well of the preambles, and the reasons therein comprised,
which are Medulla legis, as of the proviso or act it self, which is (I may
term it) medicina mali; where the symptoms and circumstances of diseases,
either corporal or political, are not first discried, the remedy may be
misapplyed. In this case therefore Optima statuti interpres est (omnibus
particulis ejusdem inspectis) ipsum statutum.

King Henry the seventh, Lord Bacon.
by an eminent writer of his life, is highly commended for the laws enacted in
his time, to advance Husbandry and tillage; Though the common Law, at that
time, was furnished with sufficient power to defend and conserve it, and to
punish the delinquents; yet that being lex non scripta, was not so conspicuous
to the vulgar eye, as an act of Parliament made by all the three States;
whereof, as every man has by his suffrage of electing of Knights and
Burgesses, an interest in the making of it, so he may the sooner take notice of
it. And therefore to prevent the then growing evil, the first positive Law was
made in the third Parliament, 4 He. 7. ca. 19.
holden in the fourth year of his reign, ca. 190. providing penalties against
decaying houses of Husbandry, or not laying of convenient land for the
maintenance of the same: Eodem Anno. ca. 12.
But I must look back upon another Statute, the same time, Cap. 120 which was
made to rowze up the remiss and misdemeaning Justices of peace of that age,
with more care to execute their Commission, to redress injuries, and maintain
the laws, which is termed by that learned Writer, Monitory and Minatory. And
therein amongst other enormities, which did daily arise by the impunity of
murders, robberies, felonies, idleness, extortions, and other offenses, it is
expressed, that the Husbandry of this land was decayed, whereby

The Church of England was upholden,

The service of GOD continued,

Every man thereby had his sustenance,

Every inheritor his rent for his land.

His Majesty then did therein further declare his consideration, that a great
part of the wealth, and prosperity of his land, did depend upon the increasing
and upholding of Husbandry. This Statute is but by way of reflection, and
strikes at this evil, but through the sides of the Justices.

(i. e.) the Statute ca. 190. which sets forth; That among all other things,
great inconveniences did daily increase by desolation and pulling down, and by
wilful waste of houses and Towns within the Realm, and laying to pasture,
lands which customably had been used to tilth. And thereby,

1. Idleness, the ground and beginning of all mischiefs, daily did increase:
For, where in some Towns, 200 persons lived by their lawful labor, they are
now occupied, by two or three heard-men.

2. Husbandry, one of the greatest commodities of the Realm greatly decayed.

3. Churches destroyed, and the vice of God withdrawn by diminution of Church
living, decay of tithes, and the like.

4. Patrons and Curats, Gods Ministers wronged.

5. The defense of the land against foreign enemies feebled and impaired.

The two consequences that follow of these inconveniences, Are,

1. The displeasure of Almighty God. 2. Subversion of the policy, and good rule
of the land. For remedy whereof it was enacted; that if any owners of houses of
Husbandry, which had been let to farm, with twenty Acres of land at least, or
more lying in tillage and Husbandry; And the occupiers did not maintain the
houses and buildings convenient for upholding the said tillage; The Lord of the
Fee had power to receive yearly half the issues and profits of the land,
until the houses were sufficiently builded or repaired again. The Statute of
70. of HEN. 8. ca. 1. was to the same purpose, not much different, and so was
the Stature of 27. Hen. 8. ca. 22.
Edw. 6. by which, so much providence was had for the supportation of tillage,
as that Commissions were awarded into several Counties, to enquire of the
offenses, and delicts, committed contrary to the tenor of that Stature; And the
acts 2. and 3. Phil. and Mar. ca. 2. by which the Statute of 4. Hen. 7. ca. 19.
was revived and confirmed, and Commissions a warded to certain persons, to
enquire of all defaults and offenses committed since An. 20. Hen. 8. or then
after to be committed, contrary to the tenor of the forecited Statutes of 4.
H. 7.19. and 7. Hen. 8.1. and the act of 5. Eliz. 2. which repealed the Statues
of 5. and 6. Edw. 6.5. and 2. and 3. Phi. and Ma. 2. confirming the rest, were
all repealed 39. Eliz. cap. 1. And thereby explained and enacted, that every
house which at that time, or then after, had twenty acres (to be adjudged
according to the ordinance, de terris mensurandis) of errable land, meadowe,
and pasture, or more, thereunto belonging, and so let to farm for three years
together, since the beginning of the Queens reign (not being the Castle, or
dwelling House of any Nobleman, or Gentleman, nor the chief mansion house of
any Manor) shall be adjudged a house of husbandry for ever, with many
provisions for repairing, and newbuilding houses of husbandry: 39. Eliz. cap. 2.
was same Parliament an Act ca. 2. was made, that errable land converted to
sheep pastures, or to the fatting or grazing of cattle since 1. Eliz. should
be restored or laid to tillage, and so continue for ever, according to the
nature of the soil, and course of husbandry, with some clauses and
restrictions, and a penalty of twenty shillings for every acre for every year
not restored. I cannot omit the reasons of this Law enforced in the entrance of
it.

1 That the strength and flourishing estate of this kingdom has been always
upheld and advanced by the maintenance of the Plow and tillage.

2 Tillage is the occasion of multiplying of people, both for service in the
wars, and time of peace.

3 A principal means that people are set on work, and thereby withdrawn
from idleness, drunkenness, unlawful games, and all other lewd practizes and
conditions of life.

4 That by tillage and husbandry, the greater part of the subjects are
preserved from extreme poverty in a competent estate of maintenance and means
to live.

5 The wealth of the Realm kept, dispersed and distributed in many hands,
where it is more ready to answer all necessary charges for the service of the
Realm.

6 It is a cause that the Realm does more stand upon it self, without out
depending upon foreign Countries, either for importation of Corn, in time of
scarcity, or for vent and utterance of our own commodities.

These two last mentioned Acts, were but to endure to the end of the next
Session of Parliament, which being holden 43. Eliz. they were then revived and
continued, ca. 9. and likewise continued 1. Iacobi. 25. and afterward
discontinued, and by the Statute of 21. Jacob. all the said other Statutes
against decay of houses, were utterly repealed. And so the remedy must have
recourse to the Common Law, and the wisdom of the State.

yet the inconveniences and mischiefs pointed out by them, still remaining,
and increasing, and the nature and quality of the offense, transcending from
mean Tenants to great Land. lords, from small quantities of acres, to whole
Towneships, tythings and hamlets; The care and cure must be greater and
speedier, then any Stature-Law has hitherto provided: Yet there is one Law
made 25. 25 He. 8. ca. 13.
Hen. 8. ca. 13. entitled, An act limiting what number of sheep men shall
keep, occupy, and have in their own possession at one time, still in force,
and unrepealed, which though in the frontispice it seems to look upon a
silly company of sheep, it does unkennell a subtle sort of Foxes, which
waste and spoil the Vineyard of the Common wealth. Observe (1) the footing of
these Foxes, by their practizes, and injuries to the common good: (2) the
mischiefs, and inconveniences thereupon happenning: (3) the great consequence
ensuing: (4) the remedy provided by that Law.

1 It discovers unto us, that sundry of the Kings Subjects, to whom GOD had
disposed great plenty of moveable substance, did daily practice and invent
ways and means how they might accumulate and gather together into few hands,
as well great multitudes of farms, as great plenty of Cattle, and in
especial sheep, putting such lands as they can get, to pasture, and not to
tillage.

2 The incoveniences four fold.

1 That thereby they have pulled down Churches, and Towns.

2 Inhaunsed the old rates of the rents of the possessions of this Realm, or
brought it to such excessive fines, that no poor man is able to meddle with it.

3 That they have raised the prices of all manner of Corn, Cattle, Wool, and
such other, almost double above the accustomed prices.

4 That multitudes of people not able to provide necessary victuals and
clothing, for themselves, their wives and children, were so discouraged with
misery and poverty, that they fell daily to theft, robbery, and other
inconveniences, or pitifully dyed for hunger and cold.

3 The consequence or enormities ensuing, five fold.

1 That things thus used be principally to the high displeasure of Almighty God.

2 To the decay of the hospitality of this Realm.

3 To the diminishing of the Kings people.

4 To the let of Cloth-making, whereby many poor people had been accustomed
to be set to work.

If remedy were not found, it might turn to the utter destruction and
desolation of the Realm.

4 The remedy prescribed, 2. fold, restriction and limitation.

1 That none should occupy in farm, or otherwise have of his own proper
cattle, in his own proper lands, nor in the possession, lands or grounds of
any other, which he shall have in farm, by any manner of means, craft, or
cunning above two thousand sheep at one time, within any part of the Realm,
upon pain of three shillings and four pence for every sheep above that
number.

2 That none should take in farm for term of life, years, or at will, any
more houses and renements of husbandry whereunto any lands are belonging, in
Town, Village, Hamlet or tything, above the number of two, upon the penalty of
three shillings and four pence for every week.

municipalis aperturae legis, overtures of the ancient Common Law; One of the
mainest special occasions of this grand mischief, is a growing evil of late
years practiced and set on foot by certain greedy and covetous persons,
Carnifices and carnivoros regni, grazing butchers, who under color of their
mechainck trade in butchery, respecting their own private gain and lucre,
above the general good of his Highness Subjects, do accumulate and gain
into their hands, at excessive yearly rents, several great portions and parts
of the grounds and lands of this Realm, from several Landlords, and persons,
to the value of four hundred, five hundred, eight hundred, or a thousand
pounds a year, more or less, from the occupation of poor husbandmen, to the
intent to use it in pasture, and not in tillage; and thereby not only to graze
and feed great store of sheep, and other Cattle, which they usually buy in
great numbers, to the intent to sell them alive, contrary to the true meaning
of a good Law, made in the third and fourth years of the Reign of King Edward
the Sixth, cap. xix. continued by the last Parliament, An. 3. Car. Reg. ca. 4.
but also to agift, and take to pasture in those several grounds, the Cattle of
diverse poor husbandmen and others at very high and unusual rates and prices;
By means whereof the poor laborious husbandmen in most parts of the Kingdom,
whose tenements do most consist of errable land, are intercepted and
forestalled from renting any competent quantities of medowe, or pasture to
maintain their Oxen, and other Cattle, to keep the plow in use according to
the season of the year; And those grounds which within the space of few years
have been let at reasonable yearly rates to neighboring husbandmen, are now by
the supplantings and outbidding of those and such like covetuous accumulators
inhaunsed to the full double value; to the great discomfort and discouragement
of the husbandman, who ofttimes is enforced for want of food and fodder for
his Oxen and Cattle, to sell them away, and to leave his grounds untilled.

ever some argument, to elude (if it could) the intention of all Law and
Justice; In this case it will with a high hand, umbonibus junctis, press a
double argument by way of question. 1. a proprio (2) ab utili.

1 A proprio, Is it not lawful for me to do what I list with my own, to
pull or let down my own houses, or alter the property of my own soil, etc?

2 Ab utili, Shall I not buy and purchase as much as I am able to pay for; And
shall I not make the most of my own?

maxim will serve to answer both, Interest reipublicae, nequis re sua male
utatur; The interest of the Common weal has such a power over the actions and
estates of men, that no man must abuse or mis-imploy the talent of his means;
And by the rules of contraries, every man must well and rightfully order and
employ it.

It agrees with the rule of Law and reason, Prohibetur ne quis faciat in suo,
quod nocere possit alieno: Et sic utere tuo, ut alienum non laedas: No man must
do that in his own property or possession, as may hurt another man's; And we
must so use our own, that we may not offend our neighbor: This rule may seem
to reflect upon particular nusances, to the discommodity of vicinage and
neighborhood, which are to be remedied by actions at the Common Law, whereof
many particular cases might be plentifully urged: If in such cases the Law
provides a remedy, contra vicinum and privatum nocumentum, against a private
annoyance; a fortiori, against commune nocumentum, that nuisance which offends
many, which the wisdom of the Law meets with, by Indictments, presentiments,
and other ways in several Courts of Justice. But a mulio fortiori, against
generale nocumentum, that which displeases and offends not one alone, or
many, but All, God and man, and of men all sorts, from the highest to the
lowest.

omne bonu^ est sui diffusivum; Al goodness does communicate it self to others:
he that racketh and tentereth his bona fortunae, his fortune, and means, to
improve his private, and impair the public good, has not participation of
this goodness: And as little has he of that cardinal and all-crowning
virtue, Charity, the groundsell of religion, without which nothing avails,
sine Charitate nihil prodest, quia fundamentum religionis Charitas est.
Charity, says Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 13.5. non quaerit quae sua sunt: It seeks
not her own, it prefers the good of others before its own private; In a
former Chapter, cap. 10. ver. 24. Let no man seek his own, but every man
another wealth; The words, either in the literal acceptance, or taken
according to the Apostles meaning, do insinuate, that no man must so use his
own, as thereby to offend his neighbor.

Non nobis nati sumus, we are not borne for our selves, but partly for our
friends, and partly for our Country, It is a vulgar Country proverb, every man
for himself and God for us all. But a reverend Divine thus inverted it; Where
every man is for himself; non deus, sed diabolus, The Devil is for all: The
rich man's barn is full of Corn; It is his own, jure proprietatis; But he
must not hide and hoard it up to inhance the price, he must expose it to
public sale, and at reasonable prices, propter commune bonum, Or else a vae
qui abscondit is denounced against him: He that received but one Talent
committed to him by his Lord, wherein he had but a fiduciary interest, and hid
it, and did not rightly use it, was cast into utter darkness, and had his
Talent taken from him: Matthew 25.15. we are all but trustees of this worldly
estate or earthly Talent; As we must not hide, but use it; So must we use it,
not for our selves only, but for the common utility of the weal public.

Charity, the Crown of all good gifts and graces; It does likewise offend
against the rules of Justice, the Queen regent of all virtues; The confession
of sins daily celebrated by the Church, does conclude by way of prayer, that
we may live a godly, righteous and a sober life, which implies three duties,
piety to God, Just ce or upright dealing to our Neighbor, and sobriety to our
selves: I meddle but with the second.

ut ex earum praescripto omnes alias virtutes colat: That by the rule or
prescript of those laws, he may have all other virtues in esteem, which
Aristotle calls legal, quia leges eam praecipue intendunt, for that the whole
use and operation of the law is for the support and execution of it.

Or it is particularis, which is also called Moral, and is a virtue busied and
exercised in the distribution and commutation, or merchandising of all outward
things. The object of her employment and negotiation, sunt bona externa, and
fortunae, ut opes and honores, all external goods, and goods of fortune, as
riches, and honors; Hence it is divided into distributive and Commutative
Justice.

This observes an arithmeticall proportion in all exchanges, contracts,
covenants and commerce, between man and man, strictly looking upon the
equality of the thing bought, sold, bartered, or exchanged, without respect of
the person, party in the bargain, whether he be a Noble man, Citizen, or
Plebeian, rendering the price no less unto the one, than to the other; It has
this general rule to be exercised in all entercourses of buying, selling, and
dealings whatsoever, These. 4.6. That no man outreach, or circumvent his brother
in any matter, ne quis supergrediatur, vel circumveniat in negotio fratrem
suum; This Justice, the depopulating questionists may in some measure observe,
when they do buy or sell, they may afford rem pro pretio, pretium pro re; But
they will not sell their lands and commodities with conveniencie, either of
time or price, till the members of the Common wealth are ready to suffer for
want of it: And in buying and accumulating Vineyard to Vineyard, they are so
excessive and outrageous, that they become masters of a whole Country, and
none must have any thing near them, but at their prices; This kind of Justice
commutative respects only private persons; That other (i.e.) listributive,
respects public persons: By the one we defraud or do injury to no man; by
the other we benefit and do good to all men.

Distributive Justice has this indeleble character, alienum non vendicat,
utilitatem propriam negligit. Vt communem aequitatem custodiat; She claims not
that which belongs unto another, she passes by her own profit, that she may
preserve common right; It has this general rule, Galathians 6.10. As we have
occasion,(...), Let us do good to all men; Not only individually to any
particular person or member, but to the King, the head of the State, and to the
Church and Common weal, the body, and not at any stinted or expectatory times,
but upon all opportunities, Salutem qui cum poterit, protrahit, negat; The
delaying of succor and relief, when a man may afford it, is as much as an
absolute denial.

The violating of this Justice, is ever a privative injustice, whereby we do
not that common good, as we ought to do; It is as well injustice (though not
alike) not to do for our brother what we ought, as to do what we ought not,
according to that saying, pasce esurientem; si non pavisti, occidisti, feed
thy hungry brother, if thou feed him not, thou art a homicide privatively, if
not positively. If so; In what case is the Depopulator? He does not only not
feed the hungry, but robs them of their bread, and therein he is a man of
blood: panis pauperum est vita pauperum, and qui defraudat, vir sanguinis est:
Nay he is a matricide, he choakes up the earth our common mother, from yielding
her foizon and increase unto her offspring.

Walter Map Archdeacon of Oxford, who was bred up with Hen. 2. That the
Abbots and, Monks in that time were very criminous in matter of depopulation,
whence a proverb did arise of them, Monachi desertum, aut inveniunt aut
faciunt wheresoever they settled themselves, they either found it, or made it a
desert: It is said of them, that they laid more places waste, then ever William
the Conqueror, or his Son Rufus did, when they demolished and destroyed many
parishes with their Churches to enlarge the bounds of New forest.

The Abbot of Osney, was principally noted for a great Depopulator; he made all
poor that dwelt within the compass of his possessions; whereof King Hen. 2.
took such notice, that one day, when he had not poor enough, to bestow his
alms unto, upon some festival and solemn time did discontentedly affirm,
that rather then his bounty should be undisposed, he would make as many
beggars, as the Abbot of Osney had done.

Their monasteries and religious houses were no sooner dissolved, but eftsoons
their goodly structures were wasted and ruined, yet their lands (as if they
seemed to carry with them a successorie adherence of this leprosy) have fallen
into the hands of many more uncharitable then ever they were; for as they made
poor, they did in some competencie maintain and releeve them; But these do
not only make many poor, but starve those that are poor.

mouth of Moses, Lev. 19.9. When you reap the harvest of your land, thou shall
not wholly reap the corners of the field, neither shall thou gather the
gleanings of thy harvest. Verse 10. And thou shall not gleane the Vineyard,
neither shall thou gather every grape of thy Vineyard: thou shall leave them
for the poor and stranger: The like, Chapter 23. Ver. 22. Thou shall not make
clean riddance of the corners of thy field, when thou reapest, neither shall
thou gather any gleanings of thy harvest: thou shall leave them unto the poor,
and to the stranger: He that had forgotten a sheafe behind him in the harvest,
should not go again to fetch it, but leave it behind for the stranger, the
fatherless, and the widow, Deuteronomy. 24.19.

A blessing is promised, that the LORD thy GOD may bless thee in all the
works of thy hands; then needs must be employed, whosoever does it not, shall
not be blessed; where benedictions are excluded, woes and maledictions soon
make their entrance, where there is no tillage, there can be no harvest, and
where no harvest is, no relics, no gleanings can be.

Deest cultura? labant messes, and mess labanti.
Deficient inopi, spicas, frumenta legenti.
If tillage fail, the harvests fail, which once failing,
The corn cannot yield unto the poor their gleaning.
Woe then to the Depopulator, who is so far from making riddance of the
corners of the fields, that he rids whole fields, and takes away all occasions
of gleanings and harvest, in debarring and forechoaking the work of tillage,
by converting errable into pasture, and ruinating the habitations of husbandry,
by turning them into sheep-coates; Our times cannot make good that saying, Nunc
seges est ubi Troj a fuit: Now corn grows where houses stood; but we may take
it up with a lamentation; where hospitable Farms, and plentiful fields of
corn have been, nothing remains but a champant wilderness for sheep, with
a Coat, a pastoral boy, his dog, a crook and a pipe.

In casulas, veteres mansus mutantur oviles. Or as the Thebans in the time of a
devouring pestilence, bewailed the loss of their husbandmen.

-- Viduas colonis Respicis terras miseranda Thebe: Senec. tra. in Oedip.
We might in these contagious days of depopulation, justly expect the like
querimony, if his Majesty's gracious, and watchful providence, in preventing
such mischiefs, did not cheer up our fainting hearts.

depopulation is enclosure, I do not mean of wastes, woods and pastures, so
far as they are warranted by several Laws and Statutes; for where a man
has Common in the Lords wast ground, the Lord by the Law may enclose part of
the waste for himself, leaving nevertheless sufficient Common with egresse
and regresse for the Commoners: And it is called approvement (appruamentum)
that is, to make the best benefit thereof by increasing the rent; And if the
Lord does approve his waste, not leaving sufficient Common for the Tenants, the
Law gives them a remedy against the Lord by writ of assize: But my aim is at
enclosing of common fields used to culture, and converting them into pasture,
whereby one grand offense and inconvenience not yet formerly mentioned does
arise: The stopping and straightning of the Kings high ways: For whereas by
the Statute of Winton, 13. Edw. 1.5. It was commanded that high ways leading
from one Market Town to another, should be enlarged, where bushes, woods, or
dykes were, so that there should be neither dyke, tree nor bush, whereby a man
might lurk to do hurt, within two hundred foot of the one side, and two
hundred foot of the other side of the way, (except Ashes or great Trees) By
the meaning of which Law, the Kings high ways (which the Common Law had ever
in high estimation) were to be of such sufficient breadth, that three or four
Carts or carriages might well pass in range together, without any stop or
impediment: Now in most parts of the Kingdom, within the space of these forty
years, There have been so much Circumseption and wounding in of common
errable lands and fields, abutting and adjoining to high ways, by Tenants with
consent of the Lord of the fee (all partakers of the crime) and the high ways
thereby so straightened, that in many places, but one Cart, and not without some
danger and difficulty, can pass, and scarce two horsemen side by side, without
climing upon side banks, whence these inconveniences and mischiefs must needs
arise.

1 A great danger to his Majesty's Subjects in being exposed to assassinations
and robberies, with little possibility to avoid or resist them, by reason of
the narrowness and incombrance of the ways.

2 As great a danger to his highness liege people, who upon necessitated
occasions, either for his highness publik service, or for common intercourse
and traffic, being upon the height of speed (which brooks no delaie) Omnis
nimium long a properanti mora est, do oftentimes in straight and narrow lanes
(I cannot term them ways, for the way as well as the word are become
diminutives, via is turned into viculi) meet with countercourses and are ready
for want of competent spatiousnesse, which might decline the sudden
distress, rashly encounter each other, to the peril of their limbs or lives.

3 A manifest impairment or population of the ways themselves does this
straightness produce, and thereby not only makes them unpassable upon some
unseasonable times and weather, to the great trouble and impediment of the
Subjects, who are enforced to compass their journey with much tediousness,
through private grounds, and other by-ways; But it does also exhaust from the
poor neighboring Inhabitants, a far greater and more frequent charge of
reparations, then if they had the Statute allowance of latitude; the often
pressures and treadings in one tract, will sooner founder a way, then if there
were variety and choice of tracts which would be supplied in breadth according
to that law of Winton, if enclosures were not in the way.

All the mischiefs and miserable inconveniences before cited, I shall reduce in
one distick.

Rex patitur, patitur clerus, respublica, pauper;
Et non passurus depopulator erit?
Rex patitur: The King suffers; 1 First in his Royal Majesty, he cannot
number so many strong and able men as he might do, if tillage had its ancient
esteem: In the multitude of people is the Kings honor, but in the want of
people is the destruction of the Prince: In pautitate plebis ignominia
Principis, Prove. 14.28. It was the lamentation of Jerusalem, Lamen. 1.1. How
does the City sit solitary, that was full of people? how is she become as a
widow? Amongst people the husbandmen are noted to be homines strenuissimi, the
strongest men, and fittest for any labor, whence Seneca observed; Nullum
laborem recusant manus quae ab aratro ad arma transferuntur: Their hands refuse
no labor, who from the exercise of the Plow are trained to the field; The Law
therefore of 39. Eliz. ca. 1. does excellently set forth; That the strength and
flourishing estate of this Kingdom has been always upheld and advanced by
tillage, and people thereby multiplied for service, both in times of war and
peace, and by the decay of it, the defense of the land, against foreign
enemies have been feebled and decayed.

2 Secondly in the means and maintenance of his imperial state, and therefore
a depopulator may be well called depeculator, a robber of the Kings treasury:
for it must of necessity be diminished and far shortened, if sufficient
Families (who were able to pay subsidies, fifteenes, and other duties to supply
the KINGS necessities, as well for the support of his regality, as for the
defense of the Kingdom) be utterly decayed and disabled: And it is a common
practice with Landlords and others, to keep tenements in their hands, and
instead of Subsidies, to pay the King with Certificates. It is the prudent
policy of a Prince, in the time of peace to make provision for the maintenance
of war, Nulla quies gentium sine armis, the peace of a Nation cannot be
without an army; No armies without Soldiers, no Soldiers without salaries, no
salaries without tributes and taxes to the Prince. And where there are no
people, there can be no paime^ts, and then the desolation of a Kingdom must
needs follow, which I hope our Nation shall never see.

Patitur Clerus: The Church suffers, 1. in the decay and ruin of material
temples, oratories, chapels and houses of religion, 2. abating and diminishing
the number of painful and learned Pastors, 3. in robbing God and his holy
Church of tithes both personal and prediall: for where Towns, Parishes, and
Villages are dispeopled, there must be a failing of personal duties: And where
errable lands are converted into pasture, there must needs ensue a diminution
of predial tithes: sheep do never yield so much profit and advantage to Gods
Ministers, as the sheafe; this is commonly sure to be paid in kind: In the
tything of the other, which consists in wool and lamb, there are many
slights and subtle deceipts of late crept in, and many devices started up by
covetous and ill disposed persons; They will either shift away their sheep
from one place to another; and sometimes upon a petty composition with a
neighbor incumbent from one parish to another, and so incumber the tything for
the fall of Lambs, and set a variance between the Ministers, or they will
sell their sheep a little before the time of shearing, and so cheat the
Minister of his dues in the title of wool; And to countenance this pillage,
some strange prescription, or modus decimandi must presently be set on foot, a
prohibition speedily had, and the litigious Countrymans next labor is, to
provide for a trial at the assizes, and to prepare (as the too common proverb
is, horresco referens) good swearers, that may cleave a pin, and so by horrid
perjury outstrip God and his Ministers of their just dues; It is lamentable to
see what perplexed swearing and counterswearing do often happen upon such
trials.

Qui rem Sacram legit; He that robs Churches, or Chapels, or other holy
places, and takes any ornaments out of them feloniously, is to suffer death by
the Law, without benefit of Clergy: I will not term the Depopulator
Sacrilegus: Sacred things which are stolen a way, may be possibly found and
had again; But I shall call him sacrivorus, such a devouring Leviathan, that
swallows Steeples, Churches, and whole fields, and makes a non entitie, and
takes away the very being of sacred things appointed and designed for the glory
of God, and the maintenance of religigion: He adnuls that sacred rule, honor
God with thy substance, and with the first fruits of all thine increase: Pro.
2.9. The Prophet brandeth such men with a just accusation of robbery, will a
man rob God? yet ye have robbed me: But ye say wherein have we robbed thee?
in tithes and offerings: ye are cursed with a curse, for ye have robbed me,
Malac. 3.8. Therefore just was the complaint of the Parliament, 4 He. 7. ca.
19. That Churches were destroyed, and the service of God withdrawn by
diminution of Church living, decay of tithes, and the like; and Patrons of
Churches, and Curats, Gods Ministers were wronged.

Patitur respublica.

The Commonweal of England, is a Society or common doing of Freemen,
collected together, and united by common accord, and governed by the
administation of laws, as well in peace as in war, under the Princely rule
and protection of an absolute Monarch, who, under God, is supreme head both of
Church and State, and acknowledges no other Superior. It is called the
Commonweal, quia respicit communem utilitatem, because it respects the
common good: The Depopulator strikes at the very structure and frame of a
Commonweal, by dispeopling of Societies in Towns, Parishes, and Hamlets. He
brings in Idleness, the ground and foundation of all mischiefs, accompanied
with luxury, ebrietie, unlawful games, and all other lewd practices and
conditions of life: He is the common inhanser of the prizes of all manner of
Corn, Grain, and Victual, and of all the old rents of ancient Farms and
Possessions: He makes the kingdom beholding to foreign Countries for
importation of Corn in times of scarcity. By his unconscionable enclosures
the Kings high ways are straightened and impaired, and commonly foundred, to
the hinderance and impediment of common mercature, and travail to and fro:
There is not one good quality in him for the common good.

Patitur pauper.

The poor suffers: for whereas by tillage and husbandry the greater part of
the subjects are preserved from extreme poverty in a competent estate of
maintenance, and means to live; now by the decay of it multitudes of people,
not able to provide necessary victuals and clothing for themselves, and their
families, are so discouraged with misery and poverty, that they daily fall to
theft, robbery, and other inconveniences, and either die by the hand of
Justice, or perish and starve in a Jail. It is woeful to see, that those
places are now more pestered with poor prisoners, than heretofore they were.
As it does depauperate able men, so, for want of alms and gleanings, it is a
means to starve and famish them, when they are made poor; for the poor
labourer, who, like the painful Ant, was wont in harvest time to glean, and
lease up so much corn, as would thriftily maintain him a good part of the
winter, is now for want of tillage, destituted of that benefit.

Passurus est depopulator, you have heard him discovered, described, arraigned,
and convicted, and ere long you shall hear his sentence: His crime is no less
than crimen laesae majestatis, high Treason against the sacred Trinity of
heaven, in compassing about the violating and cancelling of that great Charter,
or, magna Charta of terram dedit filiis hominum, ut operarentur; and
endeavoring to overthrow Gods institution of husbandry, primum opus
impositum; and in stead of operari, to bring in otiari, in stead of many
laborers in the harvest, to maintain only a shepherd and his Curre.

England, and the forests, made 10. Octo. 25. Edw. 1.1297. does provide cap.
4. that all Archbishops, and Bishops, should pronounce the sentence of
excommunication against all those that by word, deed or counsel, do contrary
to the said Charters, or that in any point break or undo them: and that the
said Curses should be twice a year denounced, and published by the Prelates
aforesaid. The sentence of excommunication is extant, styled sententia lata
super confirmatione Chartarum; whereby Robert Winchesly then Archbishop of
Canterbury, did excomunicate all the violaters of those Charters, from the body
of our Lord Jesus Christ, from all the company of heaven, and from all the
Sacraments of holy Church for ever, fiat, fiat, Amen. Though neither the
Anathema of that time, being now expired, nor any of this time do meet with
them; yet let them expect, (my charity interdicts the word Curse) but little
blessing from heaven. Sure I am, the sacred Scripture pronounces many a Vae,
many woes against the several qualities and species of that grand offense: One
they have heard already, a Vae qui abscondit, etc.

For whom do I labor, and bereave my soul of good? Eccle. 4.8. and presently
follows verse. 10. a Vae soli, woe to him that is alene. The Depopulator may
take up this woe, who will be alone in his habitation, without the comfort of
neighberhood; alone in his actions, without any participation with other; and
he shall be alone in his punishment: Vae soli, Woe to him that is alone when
he falls; for he has not another to help him. He that offends all
generally, may have the prayers of many to convert him, but scarce the prayers
of any to help him, Solitudinem faciunt, and habent, shall be the Motto of
such persons, Qui neminem miseretur, a nemine miserebitur; He that pittieth
none, shall be pitied of none. There is a Vae qui conjungitis domum ad domum;
Isai. 5.8. Woe unto them, that join house to house, that lay field to field,
till there be no place, that they may be placed in the midst of the earth.

The Prophet Micha, cap. 2. verse. 1. does second this woe with a Vae qui
cogitatis inutile, and operamini malum, etc. Woe to them that devise iniquity,
and work evil upon their beds, when the morning is light they practice it,
because it is in the power of their hands. Verse. 2. And that covet fields, and
take them by violence; and houses, and take them away. So they oppress a man
and his house, even a man and his heritage: Their doom follows pronounced by
the Prophet: Idcirco hoc dicit Dominus, ver. 3. Therefore thus says the Lord,
with an ecce, Behold, against this family do I devise an evil, from which you
shall not remove your necks, nether shall ye go haughtily; for this time is
evil. 4. In that day one shall take up a parable against you, and lament with
a doleful lamentation, and say (in the words of S. Ieromes translation,
Depopulatione vastati sumus) We beutterly spoiled: He has changed the portion
of my people: how has he removed it from me? turning away (or in stead of
restoring) he has divided our fields. This woe was pronounced against the
Israelites, and the Jews, and as well against their Princes (their mighty
men) as against the people, for a memorial and example to all the posterity of
Adam. It is remarkable, and should take very much to observe the Analogy and
proportion between the sin and the sentence against it.

sin there is a devising of an iniquity, a working, of an evil, malum
culpae, they think upon the evil of sin, Vae qui cogitatis.

In this sentence there is a cogito, a devising of an evil too against the
sinner, but it is malum poenae, God against them thinks upon the evil of
punishment. In the sin, there is an extension considerable in the persons
against whom the evil is devised and wrought; it is not against a man and a
field, but agros and domos, fields and whole houses, families, men, women, and
Children; not gray hairs, not men of strength, not the nursing mother, nor the
tender babe; not the very embrion in the womb were exempted from this
oppression.

Under the Law the Dam was not to be taken with her young ones, And therefore
if a birds nest chanced to be found, whether they were young ones or Eggs;
and the Dam sitting upon the young, or upon the Eggs; The Precept was, Thou
shall not take the Dam with the young; Deuteronomy. 22. v. 6. If God had such care of
the fowls of the air, which was typical, what shall be expected amongst
Christians, to whom the Veil of the Law is opened; woe be to him that shall
oppress the Dam with her young ones.

In the sentence there is an extent of the evil of punishment devised,
quadrant to the sin; Cogito super istam familiam, Against that family do I
devise an evil; As if he should say, Against the old and strong, the Dam, and
her young ones, this evil shall cleave to all; In quo quis peccat, in eo
punietur; I will add a qualiter, and a taliter; in that kind as a man
offends, he shall be punished; he that wastes and destroys families, shall
be destroyed in his families.

violenter tulerunt agros, and rapuerunt domos, They take away fields and
houses by violence. 2. Of fraud and circumvention, Calumniabantur virum and
domum ejus, virum and haereditatem ejus; They oppress a man and his house, a
man and his heritage, or posterity. Oppression is ever attended with two bad
Angels, Force and Fraud. In this place the word calumniabantur may be taken for
oppressing a man, his house and heritage, by some malicious, deceitful, or
crafty allegation and cavil.

It was the oppressing sin of Ahab, who first coveted Naboths field, and when
he could not get it by a specious pretext of composition with him, then with
the wicked art and assistance of Iesabel, an instrument of blood is contrived,
two children of Belial are raised up against him, Calumniantur viru^, vitam,
and haereditatem, By false and deceitful accusation they rob him both of
life and land.

malum unde non auferetis colla vestra, non ambulabitis superbi: As if he
should say, Such an evil will I devise, I will so subdue you, that you shall
not pull your necks out of the collar; I will so curb you, that ye shall have
no more power to oppress, ye shall walk no more so proudly as ye have done.
I will bind your Princes with chains, and your Nobles with links of iron. In
a word, God threatens to them a miserable and shameful end. 2. The fraud or
false circumvention is likewise met with, and the punishment amplified by a
proverb or form of execration or cursing, calumniabantur, is answered with a
Sumetur super vos parabola, A parable shall be taken up against you, We are
spoiled, your cruelty shall be recompensed with perpetual ignominy. No less
judgment did God himself denounce by the mouth of his Prophet agianst the
Princes of Judah, and others, That they should be a reproach and a proverb, a
taunt, and a curse in all places, in opprobrium, and in parabolam, and in
proverbium, and in maledictionem in universis locis: Ierem. 24.9. Amongst all
the curses pronounced against the children of disobedience, Deuteronomy. 28. from
verse 15. unto 45. one of the last, and not the least, is a curse of reproach
or infamy; Eris perditus in proverbium ac fabulam omnibus populis, Thou shall
become an astonishment, a proverb, and a byword among all nations. verse 37.

evil, coveting of fields, joining house to house, laying field to field,
taking by violence, and oppressing men, and their houses, and their heritages;
and whatsoever can be comprised under the word depopulation.

Shall not the authors of this evil, the Nimrods, and migty ones expect the
same sentence, the same punishment of evil; the same reproach, parable, and
proverb of Depopulatione vastati sumus? Yes verily: They will perhaps flatter
themselves, that the curses were never intended to this nation; if it were, yet
it is far off, not imminent; and they have time enough to expiate their error:
(they will not confess it a sin) They will pretend, that though they build
not Churches or Chapels, yet they maintain a stipendary Preacher in their
houses; and though they are alone, and remote from Churches, yet they are duly
fed with the word of God, and they themselves do feed the poor too at the
times of Christmas, and such solemn times: These are but shadows, and poor
palliations. They must know, that the curses of sacred Writ will one day or
another cleave unto them, their houses, their families and posterities, without
true repentance, satisfaction, and restitution; and they must know it is not a
light error, but as the Poet has it,

Sape error ingens sceleris obtinuit locum.

It is a stupendous error, and has ever equivalence with a heinous crime:
They must not think, that such a grand transgression against the Majesty of
Heaven, his pious and prudent Vicegerent here on earth, against the Church, the
State and poor, can be expiated by a Parlor sermon of a stipendary
Schoolmaster, who must sow down under his Patrons Elbowes; Vlcus est, ne
tangas, he must not touch this malady, for fear he should lose his Salarie;
no, nor with their petty alms at stinted times of solemn festivities, when
every man's hands are open the give, Ad aliud remedium recurrendum est; They
must resort to other Physicians, true penitence, and her two companions
mentioned before.

omne grave and grassans malum aliquem semper in populo principem habet; There
is not any great and growing evil, but has ever some Prince (I mean some
great man) to be an example, a patron, and protector of it. If a mean man be
like to be questioned for ruinating a house of husbandry, or translating
culture into pasture; he is ready presently to stop the mouth of authority
with an exprobration of his great Ringleader and President; You (says he) can
look upon me, and upon my petty slips, why should not I for my own private
profit and advantage do this, as well as such as have no need, and yet suffer
many houses together to decay, not habitable nor hospitable, naming, and
meaning their great Princes, and Patterns of this evil? So that this great
one, either by parity in authority, or by alliance in blood, affinity, or some
other respects, is so near upon the eye of Country Justice, that the object
commonly hinders the sight, and because the greater cannot, the lesser must not
be seen: The greater break the Net, and hold off ordinary power, and so all
escape together impune, if it were not for Superior Jurisdiction.

careful dictates, and remembrances have been yearly delivered by the right
honorable Lord Keeper, from the mouth of his sacred Majesty, in the greatest
threshing floor of our Nation, to the Reverend Judges and others, before their
address unto their several Circuits; requiring them to take special notice
and inquiry of this grand evil? And in pursuance thereof, how earnest and
sollicitous have those noble Iusticiaries been in their charges, and
directions to the Justices of the Peace, and the body of the county, the grand
Jury, strictly to inquire after, and present those offenses? was there ever
any presentment or indictment effectually prosecuted against them, without which
the judges could work little reformation? Might not the single-hearted eye of
one body behold a depopulator upon the Bench, when the many eyes of that County
body, either for fear, favor, self-guiltinesse, or other by-respects, or
neglects, did over-looke him? The meanest Country capacity in every County
understands what I mean, and therefore I repress my self from pressing this
point any farther upon the Country, lest I be shent from my labor,

passurus est Depopulator; He must suffer in this world by the temporal stroke
of Justice; for where inferior Courts leave him, Superior find him: I have
before touched upon distributive Justice, and her opposite privative injustice:
The Philosophers divide distributive justice into remunerative and punitive;
This kind of Justice observes a geometrical proportion; It does not barely and
absolutely regard the equality of things, as Justice co^mutative does rei ad
rem, ut tantum quis reponat quantum accipit, that is to deposite to all persons
alike in commerce, the price for the thing, and the thing for the price, but
she keeps her equality, according to the diversities of circumstances, and
the differences of persons to be rewarded warded or punished. In wars more
reward is to be given to a Captain in respect of the trust and weighty care of
his place, and the dignity of his person, then to a common Soldier; And if he
offend, he must look for a proportionable punishment, according to the
circumstances of his offense, and the quality of his person and place.

Omne animi vitium, tanto conspectius in se
Crimen habet, quanto major, qui peccat, habetur.
As the example of an offense in a man of eminence and trust in the Common
wealth, does not only scandalize the government of a State, but ministers an
occasion of liberty to others of meaner rank, to commit the like or worse, who
are ever most prone and forward to run with a multitude, soothing themselves
with a vain and false opinion, that multitudo errantiam parit errori
patrocinium; So the punishment of such a person must be in all things
exemplarily proportionable.

jus talionis to be part of this Justice: Ius talionis is either simplex or
proportionale; It is simply taken, when the same or the like is rendered as was
taken away, an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth; Taken the other way, it
is compensatio bonorum and malorum facta proportionaliter, a proportionable
compensation of good and evil, and is most necessary in every Christian common
weal; This compensative part of distributive Justice (without farther
distinctions, I will give it that appellation) has been constantly practiced
for many ages in this famous Island.

According to the rule of this justice was that constitution of Fredr. Caesar
before remembered, made for the protection and vindication of husbandry, which
limits a quadruple restitution of the things taken away, for the comfort and
compensation of the party greeved; And for satisfaction of the Law against the
offender, nigro carbone notatur, he is branded with infany ipso jure in the
place of a vae so often pronounced by the Prophets, and in steed or resemblance
of the Parable and Proverb, threatened by the Law in Deuteronomie, and
denounced by Jeremy, and Mich. And he is to undergo an arbitrary censure at
the will of the Emperor. According to this Justice the Lords and others in the
high Court of Starchamber, have ever used to proceed, and ground their
sentences against delinquents of this and the like nature.

Michelmas term 10. Car. Upon an information exhibited by his Majesty's
Attorney general against a gentleman of note and worth for Depopulation,
converting great quantities of land into pasture, which formerly for the space
of about forty years had been arrable, used to tillage, and occupied as
belonging to several farm houses or houses of husbandry, and suffering the
farm houses with their outhouses to be ruined and uninhabited, and a
water-grist Mill to decaie and go to ruin, for that it appeared to the Court
upon evident proof, that there were many servants and people kept upon those
farms when they were used in tillage; And the same were furnished with
sufficient houses, barnes, and outhouses, necessary for farmers to dwell in,
and many quarters of wheat and other grain out of each farm, were yearly sold
and vented to London and elsewhere; And many poor men and women, were then
there set on work, and about twenty persons fit for wars were maintained in
and upon the said farms, as also several Carts, ready and fit to do his
Majesty service, both in carrying timber for repair of his Navy and
otherwise: And for that the defendant had then of late years, taken into his
own occupation all the said farms, and converted all the lands formerly used
for tillage unto pasture, and had also Depopulated and pulled down, three of
the said farm houses, and suffered the other two to run to ruin, and to lie
uninhabited, and one of the said farms which was before a great defense and
succor for Travelers who passed that way, since the Depopulation thereof,
has been a harbor for thieves, and many robberies have been thereabouts
committed, and moneys recovered by the robbed persons from the hundred, which
together with the wants of those clowes there formerly kept, had been a great
burden to that part of the Country; And for that also the defendant, to the
great inconvenience and prejudice of a Town near adjoining, had pulled down
and suffered to go to decay not habitable, one water corn mill which
thentofore did grind good store of corn weekly: Upon grave and deliberate
liberate consideration, the Court did with a joint consent and opinion declare,
that the defendant was clearly guilty of the said Depopulation, and conversion
of errable into pasture before expressed, And that the same offenses were
punishable even by the Common Law of this Kingdom, and fit to be severely
punished, the rather for that it was a growing evil, and had already spread it
self into very many parts of this Kingdom, and might in time (if it were not
met withal and prevented by the just Censure of that Court) grow very
prejudicial and dangerous to the State and Common wealth, and therefore their
Lordships did think fit, order, adjudge, and decree.

1 That the defendant should stand and be committed to the prison of the Fleet.
2 That he should pay a fine of four thousand pounds to his Majesty's use. 3
That he should at the next assizes to be holden for that County in open Court
(the Judges and Justices there sitting) acknowledge his said offenses, and for
the better manifestation of the offense to the Country, and to the end that
others seeing his punishment might be thereby after warned to forbear the
committing of the like: It was ordered, that their Lordships sentence and
decree should be then at the said assizes publicly read.
And further, the Court considering and commending the pains, care, and
travel, taken by the Relator in bringing that cause to judgment, and being
satisfied upon the hearing of the cause, that the poor of the parish and the
Minister there had been severally damnified by the defendant; Their Lordships
did farther order and decree.

4 That the said defendant should pay unto the said Relator one hundred pounds
for recompense of his travail, besides his costs of suite.

5 That he should pay unto the Minister of the Parish one hundred bounds.

6 That he should pay unto the poor of the Parish one hundred pounds to be
distributed to and amongst them at the discretion of the four next Justices of
peace adjoining to the said Town.

7 And lastly, the Court did order that the defendant should within two years
after, repair and build again all the said farme-houses with their outhouses,
and the said Cornemill fit for habitation and use, as formerly they were, and
should restore the lands formerly used and let, with the same farms, unto the
farmehouses again, and let and demise the same several farms to several
Tennants for reasonable rents, such as the Country would afford, and that all
the said lands, should be again plowed up and used to tillage, as formerly it
had been.

As by the decree remaining of Record in that honorable Court may plainly
appear; The true contents whereof are here set down, that as it was published
at the Assizes for an example in that Country, the benefit thereof may hereby
redound to all the Counties of his Majesty's dominions.

That it may please him to indue the Lords of the Council and all the
Nobility, with grace, wisdom and understanding. And without Gods special
indowments conferred on them, and on their Head under CHRIST, the Ship Royal
of our State could not be so religiously, providently, and prosperously steered
as it is: Methinkes when I considerately weigh the Composition of this decree,
all parts of Justice seem here to be included.

1 Here is punition, 1. by imprisonment, 2. by fine, 3. by public
acknowledgment.

2 Here is remuneration to the party Relating, for discovering, and bringing
the offender to the public seat of Judgment.

3 Here is compensation, 1. to the Minister, 2. to the poor of the Parish, for
the detriment and damage by them respectively sustained according to the
circumstances of the cause.

4 And lastly here is reparation and restitution, which concerns the Common
weal, 1. in repairing and reedifying the farms, 2. in restoring the Land
formerly used and let with them, 3. in letting and demizing the same farms to
several Tennants at reasonable rents, 4. in converting the land to tillage
again

malum culpae was answered with the malum poenae; So it is fully accomplished
in this decree; for hereby All that any way suffered 1. King, 2. Church, 3.
Common weal, 4. Poor, are all righted and salved, and therefore it deserves
the more earnest pressing, first for the comfort of those who grieve and groan
under the burden of this oppression, that, though they be remote in the
Country from the eye of superior Justice, yet in the particulars of this
decree, they may tanquam in perspicillis behold a far off the vigilant care
which his Majesty and his honorable Council have of the meanest member of his
Common weal: Secondly that others delinquents of the same rank and quality,
may tanquam in specule, as in a looking-glass, view their own evil of sin,
and justly expect the same evil of punishment.

goodness has of late directed several Commissions into most Counties of the
Kingdom, out of the high Court of Chancery, I shall but briefly touch some
special points therein.

First, the motives which induced his Majesty thereunto; His intelligence that
in diverse parts of his Kingdom, very many Messuages and Mansion houses (which
had been for many years past habitations for husbandmen, farmers, and others
exercised in tillage) did now remain in decay, ruinous, destroyed, or
uninhabited, and the farms and errable lands severed and divided from the
houses whereto they belonged, and great quantities of such errable land, have
been converted from culture into pasture, whereupon great wast, and
depopulation of Towns, Villages, Parishes and Hamlets in diverse parts of his
Kingdom have insued, and are like daily, more and more to increase to the
dishonor and prejudice of his Majesty and his Crown, and to the damage and
detriment of his people and whole Realm.

Secondly, his Majesty's readiness to meet with such mischiefs, and to
provide for the welfare of himself and his people, by assigning and appoynting
certain Commissioners in most parts of his Kingdom, and giving unto them full
power and authority under his great Seal, to enquire by the oaths of good and
honest men, as well within liberties as as without, as also by the depositions
of any credible witnesses, to be called and examined upon their oaths, and by
all other ways and means, and to make Certificate of the Inquisitions taken
before them, into the Chancery.

Thirdly, the Subject of this inquiry: What and how many Burroughes, Towns,
Villages, Parishes, Hamlets, Farms, Farmehouses or other Messuages or houses,
since the tenth year of the late Queen Eliz. have been and now are
depopulated, wasted, destroyed and ruinated, or converted from the habitation
of husbandmen to other uses, and what lands and Tenements have been converted
from tillage and plowing to other uses, with diverse other particular clauses
and branches.

Fourthly, a Command unto the Commissioners, to give notice unto all persons,
who claim title to any Lands or Tenements so wasted, depopulated, or
separated, either as heirs or purchasers, or by or under any person committing
such depopulation, and waste, their Farmers or Assigns: That within a time
limited by the Commissioners, or any two, or more; They, and every of them, do
respectively cause to be re-edified and repaired, all and singular the said
houses of husbandry, and all the separated lands to be restored to the houses,
and that the lands converted from tillage to pasture and other unlawful uses,
be again restored to tillage, and to admit of husbandmen to be Tenants to
those houses, prout hactenus fieri consuetum fuerit.

In novo casu novum apponendum est remedium, variety of cases must have variety
of remedies; The wisdom of a Parliament or a State may foresee an ensuing
evil, and they may enact a prohibiting of it, and a provision of some pain
and penalty against it, but they can never provide de futur is contingentibus
of future circumstances and contingencies, and therefore ubi non est directa
lex, standum est arbitrio Iudicis, where a direct positive Law cannot meet with
an offense in the very apple of the eye, the defect must be supplied by an
arbitrary Judgment according to the circumstances and occurencies of things.
Let all the Statutes that ever were made, against the decaying of houses of
husbandry and tilage, be strictly inspected, and not any one of them either did
or ever could prescribe such a proportionable remedy, for such a crime in all
things, as the sentence of that great Judgment seat has done.

Edw. 6. cap. 5. entitled, An act for the maintenance of tillage, and increase
of corn; It was ordained that his then Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, at
his and their will and pleasure, should from time to time, direct his and their
several Commissions under the great Seal of England, to such persons as it
should please them, to inquire by the oaths of a sufficient Jury, what Lands
and Tenements in every Town, Parish, Village, or Hamlet within the limits of
their charge, had at any time or times since the first year of King Henery the
eight been converted and turned from tillage to pasture, and was then, or then
after should be continued and occupied in pasture, and to certify the
presentment thereof into the Court of Chancery with convenient speed, to be
thence delivered over into the Court of Exchequer, there to remain amongst the
Records of the same Court, to the end that Statute might be the more
diligently and indifferently put in execution.

By the Statute of 2. and 3. Philip and Mary cap. 2. entitled, An act for the
reedifying of decayed houses of husbandry, and for the increase of tillage,
citing the Law of 4. Henery 7. which is before largely recited, it was ordained
that the like Commissions in effect should be awarded, and that the
Commissioners should have full power and athority, to enquire, hear and
determine, by the oaths of twelve men, or by information, or other lawful
ways or means, all and singular defaults and offenses, committed or done
since the feast of Saint George the Martyr, in the twentieth year of Henry the
eighth, or then after should be committed or done, as well contrary to the tenor
and effect of the said former act (4. Henery 7.) as contrary to one other act
of 7. Henery 8. entitled, An act to avoid letting down of houses, and also to
enquire, hear, order, and determine by the said ways and means of and
concerning all grounds whatsoever converted from tillage to pasture since the
said feast, or then after to be converted from tillage to pasture, and also of
all ground in or near any corn fields newly used or employed since the said
feast, or then after newly to be used, employed and converted to the keeping of
Conies, not being a lawful warren, and whereby the Corn of any persons, other
then the owner of the same Conies since the said feast had been, or then after
should be, destroyed or consumed; And that the said Commissioners should and
might bind by Recognizance the persons offending, and guilty in any of the
foresaid decaies or defaults in such sums of Money, as to the Commissioners
should seem reasonable, for the reedifying of such decayed houses, and for the
converting of such grounds from pasture to tillage again, and for the
diminishing and destroying of Conies within such convenient time, as the
Commissioners should think meet, limit and appoint; with many clauses and
provisoes in the said Statute at large expressed.

K. E. was to inquire and certify; This of. K. Phi. and Q. M. to inquire,
hear and determine.

In this Statute there is one clause of moderation in these words. And for
as much as it is like to be that some ground converted from tillage into
pasture, is divided into several small parcells, remaining and being in diverse
and several men's hands, so that any one part will not be sufficient to keep a
plow upon: and for that some grounds have been tilled for the destroying of
moss, bushes, brown firs, heath, and not only to be continued in tillage and
such like, and that also some demeanes in the absence of the owners have been
divided to sundry occupiers, who have tilled the same, not being commonly used
to tillage, before the said feast of S. George: and for that diverse other
particular cases may fortune to be, which the general purveiance of this
Statute cannot remedy without greater hurt then good to be done by the same:
and for that also in some places of this Realm it is not necessary the
purveying of this estatute, to extend and to be fully executed, but in some
places, and upon some occasions or causes, it may more conveniently be spared
then put in ure, and is therefore necessary to refer such things with all
other circumstances, to the discretion of the Commissioners who may more
perfectly understand the same.

left unto the Commissioners.

But this evil being now grown great, and in favor and alliance with the
greatest men of a Country, the providence of his Majesty and the State, has by
this Commission only delegated a power to inquire and certify, but not to
determine, reserving that to the discretion of himself and his sacred Council
who never confine their Judgments to the faces, but the facts of men, and
secundum allegata and probata.

There is another provision in that Law of Philip and Mary, in these words: And
be in enacted by the authority aforesaid, that if any person or persons, shall
be condemned or charged with or for any offense, that he or they ought not to
be charged withal, by this act or by any of the foresaid former Statutes: That
then the said party or parties shall and may have his or their traverse and
remedy therefore in the Starchamber before the Council there.

Act done by the body of the Council, but is presumed to be the Act of the
King; In the time of Ed. the 3. Thorpe and other grave Judges would not in
cases of difficulty deliver their final Judgments, until they had resorted
to the Lords of the Council; Of cases in that kind, the year books in his
Reign are plentiful.

This Statute, according to the practice of former times, seems to refer the
party grieved to a remedy by way of traverse and defense in the Starchamber, a
Court consisting of the greatest Lords of the Honorable Council, spiritual
and temporal, reverend Judges and other assistants. Whither should there then
be any refuge, either for the interpretation or moderation of positive Laws
(in the vacancy and cessation of the great Court of Parliament) but unto this
Court, where Kings themselves have often vouchsafed to sit in person?

His now Mts providence and Justice in dispersing his said Commissions, cannot
take so good effect, if the people and Country (for redres of whose grievances
they are awarded) be not dextrous and careful in performing their duties of
inquiry and discovery, the Cmmoissioners are enjoined under their faith and
legiance to discharge the trust in them reposed; and all his Mts Subjects,
as well officers as others by the last clause of the Commission, are required to
be attending, ayding, and assisting unto them, so often as they shall be
thereunto summoned.

I cannot therefore pass by those good and lawful men of the Country, who not
only by virtue of their natural and legal legiance, but also, by a
Sacramental tie and bond, are or shall be engaged and charged to inquire of
those offenses in the country without a monitory caution, that they imitate
especially, one of the properties prescribed by Iethro, his Counsel to Moses
in selecting his Rulers of the people to be viri fortes, able men, non
fortitudine corporis, but animi, not in strength of body, but strength of
mind, not to fear the faces of men, not of a Landlord, not of a potent man
(were he a Livetennant or greater) in a Country. Fortitude is one of Tullie his
cardinal virtues, it banisheth all sordid and slavish fear; It was an old
complaint, that, Laws were aranearum telis similes, like Cobwebs, wherein the
smaller flies are caught, great ones break forth: Surely our Laws are not such
of themselves, and most sure it is, that our superior seats of Laws and
Justice are not so easily passed through, but that they will seize and hold the
most griping and rapacious, bird, or beast; And with them is observed as well
the practice as the rule.

Inde ortae leges, ne fortior omnia posset. But it is the abuse of bad men,
together with the cowardice and pusillanimity of those who should be probi and
legales homines, for want of presenting and bringing offenders under the eye of
Law, that the Laws are so much disesteemed: Such men who are so regardlesse of
their allegiance, so careless of their conscience, and respectlesse of their
oaths, that they will not see and discover the desolations and greevances of
their Country, are themselves a greevance to the Country, and enemies to the
King and State.

-- Hostis est, Sen. in. Her. fur.
quisquis mihi non monstrat hostem -- He is a foe unto me that discovers not my
foe: A man may as much transgress in conniving at, and concealing an offense,
as the offender himself in the acting of it, and therefore may justly expect a
proportionable punishment.

This may suffice for a brief remembrance to the Jurors, whereof the
Counstables and other Country Officers may partake. I shall conclude all with a
Caution to Farmers and Husbandmen, and then draw to an end.

Culture was the first work enjoined unto man after the fall, renewed upon the
renewing of the world in Noah and his posterity, that it has been highly
honored and privileged amongst all Nations, that it is most precious in the
esteem of our laws and government, and with what circumspection and
watchfulnes his gracious Majesty and his honorable Council have proceeded for
the upholding and maintaining of it, and punishing all sorts of delinquents
against it; Will it not well beseem them to make themselves fitly deserving,
and worthy of so great a favor? The way to do it, is to act their part of
distributive Justice, in bringing their corn and grain cheerfully into the
Markets for supply of the poor and others at reasonable prices, and not to
hide and hoard it up, to expect, nay to make and raise up a dearth.

ingens crimen, a very great fault, they are grown to be the common favorers
of Forestallers and Ingrossers, and fosterers of an unruly generation of
Maltmakers, and by consequence of a pernicious number of Alehouses, who have
all a dependency one upon the other.

It is a common practice, Et malum quo communius, eo pejus, for a Maltmaker to
resort to a farmors house, and after a scrutiny made what store of barley he
has in his hands and possession, he presently deals with the husbandman to
bring a sample of it to market in a quantity of four or five bushels, and
there he will bargain for all the rest in mow or barn, though it be five
hundred quarters, to be threshed out and brought home to his house, vainly
flattering himself with this conceit, that because the compact was made for
it in the marker, and earnest there given, it is a lawful buying, and not
within the compass of forestalling or engrossing, Pereant arts and artifices:
Let all such who by these wily and wicke subtilties, go about to Circumvent
the true intention of the Law, perish with their own devices: as it is the
trick of a forestalling Maltmaker, so is it as frequent with Bakers, Badgers
and other forestallers of Wheat and other grain at the houses of husbandmen.

Norfolk, and other places by several Censures and Decrees of the honorable
Court of Starchamber, made in the term of S. Michaell in the seventh year of
his Highness Reign, one especially xxiij of November, in the same term,
whereby some delinquents were sentenced for contracting with Corne-masters upon
market days for great quantities of Corn, and afterward causing the same to
be brought home to their houses, as by the decree of the Court may appear.

It has not only infected those parts, but like a venomous humor has spread
its infection through the veins of the body of the whole Kingdom, and
poisoned almost the life blood of government, especially in many parts of our
Western region, where it has crept into borough Towns and Corporations, and
there sojournes in the houses of Magistrates and Aldermen, who being expressly
required by his Majesty's Articles and directions published for the good of his
people in the year 1630 to take care for the suppressing of Maltsters; did in
affront thereunto, take up and exercise the trade themselves, having great
means and other trades to live by.

forestalling and engrossing, and so wastfull and disordered the other in their
inordinate tippling, that scarce can a poor man buy a peck of barley in a market
day for his money, and not five barley loves for the sustenance of a hungry
multitude (if need required) to be found in a whole Country.

Emporium est optima aestimatrix rerum; No kind of Grain, Victual, or other
vendible mercimony can be so truly valued and estimated, as in Faires or
Markets overt, where there is a plentiful concourse of buyers; Markets are
either by grant from the King, or by ancient prescription; The Common Laws of
this Land have ever had the well using and ordering of them in great esteem.

To which end and purpose the office of Clarke of the market being very
ancient, was first ordained to take care, and to view and inquire that all
weights and measures be agreeable to the Kings Standard in his Exchequor at
Westminster, and that all Corn and Victual be sold by such, and by no other,
and diverse good Laws have been made for appointing and observing the assize
of bread and beer, according to the prizes of Corn in the markets adjoining;
Of these things I have more amply treated elsewhere.

to inhaunce the price of his Corn, and rather then he will sell it at the
ordinary price in the market, slide it into some private corner, to remain for
a dearer sale: It is not long since that a Country man standing by his Corn in
a market, and observing the price that day to be more moderate then his
covetuos mind expected, did with some fury and indignation, close up his bags,
conveigh them away, and fearfully swear, that he would keep his Corn till
Mice had devoured it, rather then he would vent it at the rate of the market.

Against all false, decitfull and hard hearted sellers, the Prophet Amos
denounces a woeful Commination, rowsing them up first with, Audite hoc qui
conteritis pauperem, and deficere facitis egenos terra, Dicentes, Quando
transibit messis and venum dabimus merces? Et Sabbatum, and aperiemus
frumentum, ut imminuamus mensuram, and angeamus siclum, and supponamus stater
as dolosas, and possideamus deamus in argento egenos, and pauperes pro
calciamentis, and quisquilias frumenti vendamus: Hear this o ye that swallow
up the needy, even to make the poor of the Land to fail, saying, when will
the new Moon be gone, that we may sell Corn, and the Sabbath, that we may set
forth Wheat, making the Ephah small, and the Shekell great, and falsifying the
balances by deceit, that we may buy the poor for silver, and the needy for a
pair of shoes, yea and sell the refuse of the Wheat; Amos ca. 8. verse 5, 6,
7. The sentence follows: Shall not the Land tremble for this, and every one
mourn that dwells therein? verse 8. I will turn lla your feasts into
mourning, and all your songs into lamentations, ver. 10.

common good of all; It is much to be hoped, that the Farmers and Husbandmen of
his Kingdom will shake off those Vipers, and have no fellowship with them in
their ways and courses of oppression, that they will not hide their Corn, and
keep it up to be devoured by vermin, rather then at Competent rates, to
disperse and distribute the blessings of the earth, amongst his Majesty's
people, at public times and places appointed by the Laws and Government under
which we live, that they will avoid, all unwarranted transportations of Corn,
and in all things do, as they would be done unto; And then,

Virg. Geor. l. 3.
O fortunatos nimium bona si sua norunt Agricolas. Then the blessings of
obedience shall be pronounced to them: Blessed shall thou be in the City, and
blessed shall thou be in the field, blessed shall be thy basket and thy store,
Deu. 28.3, 5. The King shall be blessed in his people, and the people shall
be blessed in their King, we shall not have cause to fear the faces of them
that grind the faces of the poor, those lapides molares; depopulators and
racking Landlords. Nor ever take up that parable of lamentation, depopulatione
vastati sumus. The King shall cover us under the wings of his Royal and
religious protection, and we shall render to him the dues of our faith and
obedience, the Almighty shall cover us all with his blessing of peace and
plenty, and all shall go well between King and Subject, better then prout
hactenus fieri consuetum fuerit.

IN CAMERA STELLATA CORAM CONCILIO IBIDEM, VICESSIMO TERTIO DIE Novembris, Anno
Septimo Caroli Regis.
THis day was brought to this Bar, William Tailor, Toby Pedder, John Tubbin,
Nicholas Brown, Robert Money, John Boult, and Henery Cougham, against whom
William Noy Esquire, his Majesty's Attorney general, did inform ore tenus, on
his Highness behalf, that notwithstanding the care taken by his Majesty for
this Realm, and Subjects thereof, as well from the scarcity of Corn and grain,
as from the excessive prizes and dearth of the same, and notwithstanding the
wise directions given, and politic orders devised and established, and by
Proclamation published, for the preventing of such abuses and inconveniences
which might otherwise happen, to the inhaunsing of the prices of Corn and
grain, to the great prejudice of the rich, and even to the destruction of the
poorer sort of people; And not withstanding, that the Lords of his Majesty's
most honorable Privy Council did take continual care that his Majesty's
gracious and provident direction in that behalf should be put in due and
constant execution, especially this last year when as a great dearth and
scarcity of Corn and grain was generally feared throughout this his Majesty's
Kingdom, and therefore the better to prevent all inconvenience by the well
ordering and disposing of all such Corn and grain, as God had blessed this
Kingdom withal, they did prudently provide, that first there should be a
general and strict restraint from transportation of all sorts of Corn and
grain out of this Kingdom, and that the Justices of the peace in every
County, should take care that the Markets should be weekly served by such as
had Corn to spare, and that none should sell out of market any Corn what
soever, except it were to laborers, that so through the covetousness of those
that hoard up their Corn of purpose to inhaunce the prizes thereof, and make a
dearth without cause, the Kings loving Subjects, the poor especially should
not be pinched; ye the said William Tailor, Tobby Pedder, John Tubbin, Nicolas
Brown, Robert Money, John Boult, and Henery Cougham, not regarding the said
directions, nor deterred with the punishments which by the Laws and Statutes of
this Realm may be inflicted upon such offenders, but covetously and
unconscionably desiring to enrich themselves by the oppression and loss of
others, and endevoring to raise the excessive prises of Corn, where there was
no want (praised be God) of the same, but want of Charity and Obedience in
these and such like wicked and wretched minded persons, who strive to enrich
themselves by engrossing of Corn, keeping their Corn up, and keeping it out
of market, that their store and plenty might not be known, to the great
contempt and breach of the said Laws, Statutes, and Ordinances, and to the
great offense of his Royal Majesty, to whom nothing is more pleasing then the
peace, plenty, and prosperity of his people, and to the great scandal of all
good and charitable minded persons, have this last year, notwithstanding they
had knowledge of the Orders and Proclamations* lately published concerning
Corn and grain, bought great quantities of Corn out of the markets, having
great store of their own growing, and also forborne to bring any Corn at all
into the markets all this last year, as by their several examinations may
appear, which he humbly prayed might be read in Court, and that thereupon
their Lordships would be pleased to inflict such punishment upon them for their
said offenses as they in their great wisdoms should hold fit; Whereupon the
several examinations of the said defendants were severally showed unto them,
and acknowledged by them, and upon reading thereof, it appeared that the said
William Tailor having knowledge of his Majesty's said Proclamation and book of
orders, which came forth this last year by the Justices of the Peace of the
County of Northfolk, where the said Tailor dwelt, for restraint of Maultage,
did about Michelmas last was a twelve month buy twenty quarters of barley at
several times in Burneham market, but the said Corn was not in the market,
nor ever brought to the market, but did not at any time carry or sell any Corn
at any market this last year, notwithstanding he had five score quarters of
Barley, ten quarters of Wheat, and ten quarters of Rye, of his own, growing the
last year, and had but only fifteen persons in his house all that year. And
it likewise appeared, that the said Toby Pedder having the last year about
forty quarters of Wheat, ten or twelve quarters of Rye, and above two hundred
and threescrore Combs of Barley of his own growing, and having notice of his
Majesty's Proclamation and of the book of orders, set forth this last year,
for serving the markets with Corn, did not send to or sell any Corn at any
market all the last year, but sold about fifty quarters of Barely about
Candlemas time last, to Matthew Hunt near to Peterborough, and fifty quarters
more to diverse others at the water there, which was carried away, and
delivered at Holme in Huntingdon shire, as he takes it, and also bought this
last year out of the market two quarters of wheat, and after he had notice of
the said Proclamation and book of orders; bought five and twenty quarters of
Barley, which he used for seed, but sent not any in liew thereof to the market,
and thirteen or fourteen quarters of Barley to malt which he put out to
maulting to others, and did not use any maulting house of his own the last
year; and it likewise appeared that the said John Tubbin taking notice of the
said Proclamation and book of orders for serving the market with Corn the
last year, and having above thirty Combs of Rye, and above five or six
hundred Combs of Batley, of his own growing this last year, bought ten
Combs of Rye after Michelmas last was twelvemonth, and five Combs of Rye more
about Midsummer last, all out of the market, and sent not any Corn at all to
any market, nor sold any thereby all the last year, but sold to several
persons, from Farningha^, and Aldborough, 80. Combs of Barley about Candlemas
last, and sold 60. Combs of Barley more to a Cambridge shire man a little
before Christmas last, and sold to one Baker of Colchester in Essex threescore
Combs of Barley more about Michelmas last was twelvemonth, all which with
several quantities of Barley were sold out of market, and shipped away at
Burneham by Sea, and exported to the several places aforesaid (by license from
the Justices) as by way of excuse is in his examination set forth, and also
maulted sixscore quarters of Barley that year: And it likewise appeared that
the said Nicholas Brown of Walsingham in the County of Norfolk Gentleman,
having knowledge of the Proclamation and Orders aforesaid, touching Corn and
grain: and having nine score quarters of Barley, fourteen quarters of Wheat,
fourscore quarters of Rye and Maslyn, and threescore quarters of Oats of his
own growing, the last year carried not any Corn to the market, but twice the
last year (for that as he alleges in his excuse it is not the usage of that
Country to carry any Corn to the market, and at those times when he did carry
it to the market he brought it back again, for that none came to buy the same
as he alleges, but the said Brown did buy threescore quarters of Barley and
part thereof, together with a great quantity of his own, he maulted by license
of the Justices as he alleges, and by like license sold the same, some into
Yorkshire, some to Molden in Essex, and the rest to Brewers in and near
Walsingham, and likewise maulted all his Oats, and sold them to Brewers, in
and near Walsingham, and of his Wheat he spent only four quarters in his
family, and sold the rest to the Bakers of Walsingham, but neither bought or
sold any in the market as he ought to have done, only he contracted for the
Corn he bought, with Corn growers upon the market day at Walsingham, who
shortly after brought it to his house, and there received their money, and it
likewise appeared that the said Robert Money of Wells in the County of Norfolk
Gentleman, having knowledge of the said Orders and Proclamation published
concerning Corn and grain, and having twelvescore Combs of Barley, betwixt
forty and fifty Combs of Wheat, and about fifty Combs of Rye and Maslin of his
own growing, the last year did not carry any Corn to the market to be sold,
but says he spared thirty Comb of Wheat out of his own provision, and sent
the same to London in the middle of the year, and sold the same there at the
best rate he could get, which was thirty shillings the Comb, and also sold
threescore Comb of Barley to one Pemberton of Ipswich, which the said
Pemberton affirmed he had warrant from some of the Justices of Suffolk to buy
for the poor of Ipswich, and further affirmed that he had warrant from some of
the Justices of the peace of the said County of Norfolk, to export the said
grain from his house to Ipswich, but the said Robert Money did not see either
of the said warrants, and yet notwithstanding carrid the said Corn in Carts to
the Seaside to be conveyed from thence to Ipswich. And further it appeared that
the said John Boulte late of Wells in the County of Norfolk Gentleman, having
knowledge of the said Orders, and Proclamation late published concerning Corn
and grain, and having the last year fifty Comb of Barley, and above thirty
Comb of Wheat of his own growing, and having a Family of fourteen persons,
did buy ninescore Comb of Barley more which he contracted for at Burneham
market, and had the same sent home to his house, and there paid the money for
the same, and also bought forty Comb of Rye of another Corne-master which he
contracted for at Falkenham market, and had it sent home to his house and there
paid the money for the same, but since harvest last was twelvemonth, did not
bring any Corn to the market to be sold, for that as he alleges in his
excuse two of the Justices did give leave that the poor, and handicrafts men
of the town being provided for, the said Boult and the rest of the
Corne-masters might dispose of their Corn as they pleased, as also for that it
is not usual in those parts to bring Corn into the markets to be sold, but to
utter their Corn either in their houses, or by exportation to other remote
places within the Kingdom, nevertheless the said Boult did malt a great
quantity of the Barley he bought, and by License from the Justices as he
alleges shipped the same away to Newcastle, and there sold the same, and also
sold twenty Comb of his Wheat to one Arwaker of Chelmesford who brought a
License from the Justices of Essex and showed the same to the Justices of
Norfolk for his buying the same: And lastly it appeared that the said Henry
Cougham of Wells in the said County of Norfolk Gentleman, having knowledge of
the said Orders and Proclamation concerning Corn and grain published as
aforesaid, and having in harvest was a twelvemonth fivescore Combs of Barley,
twenty Comb of Rye, and twenty Comb of Wheat of his own growing, did not
since harvest aforesaid carry any Corn to the market to be sold, but bought
sixscore Comb of Wheat of several Corne-masters dwelling near the said town
of Wells, and delivered the same to Francis Carter of London Baker, and Samuel
Satchfield of London Grocer, which in his excuse he alleges he did by virtue
of a warrant from the Lord Mayor, and two other Justices of the peace of the
City of London, but upon reading the said warrant, it appears that the said
Cougham was not required or authorized to buy any Corn of the said parties for
the use of the said City of London, but to convey Corn to London which was
bought before by the said Carter and Satchfield, and the said Cougham did also
the last year buy twelve score Comb of Barley at several times in several
places, and maulted all the same, as also the Barley of his own growing,
excepting about threescore and ten Comb, with twenty Comb whereof he sowed
his land, and by the direction of the Justices he kept in store the fifty Comb
residue for the poor of Wells, and about forty or fifty comb of the malt he
made he sent to Newcastle, and the rest to Ipswich, and that he alleges in
his excuse he did by Order from the Justices under their hands. Upon reading of
all which their said examinations the said delinquents at the bar were
severally demanded what answer they could make to their said offenses who
endeavored to excuse the same in such sort as some of them in their
examinations had done by alleging that it was not the usage of that part of
the Country to carry any Corn to the markets nor for any to buy at the markets
in respect of the plenty of Corn in those parts, and that after provision was
made for the poor of the several Parishes and hundreds where they live, they
had license from the Justices to dispose of the rest of their Corn as they
pleased themselves, and humbly craved the favor of this most honorable Court:
And thereupon the Court well weighing the nature and quality of their said
offenses to be such as justly deserved the censure of this most honorable
Court considering the great peril whereunto the Commonwealth is subject, if the
same should increase and continue the uncharitable and unlawful hoarding up
and engrossing of Corn and keeping their own from the markets being a great
means to arise and continue the excessive prizes of Corn without any scarcity,
and withal the Court considering that all offenses and misdemeanors tending to
the inhauncement of the prizes of commodities, especially of Corn and Victual
to excessive rates, are great and general oppressions against the ancient and
good Laws of the Kingdom, and conceaving that these delinquents have not
only offended against the laws and Statutes of this Realm made and provided
as well against ingrossers and hoorders up of Corn, and forestallers of
markets, as against such as shall practice or procure the raising of Corn,
Victual or other commodities unto unreasonable prizes, but have also highly
offended against his Majesty's Royal Proclamation, and the good and politic
Orders made and taken by the Lords of his Majesty's most honorable Privy
Council for preventing the dearth and scarcity of Corn, and relief of the
poor in times of dearth and scarsity, have therefore adjudged and decreed that
the said William Toby, Pedder, John Tubbin, Nicholas Brown, Robert Money, John
Boult, and Henery Cougham, shall all and every of them for their offenses
aforesaid stand and be committed to the Prison of the Fleet, and pay a hundred
pounds apeece for their several fines to his Majesty, and withal the Court
holding it fit to have some example made thereof in the County of Norfolk
where all the said defendants dwell, to the end other persons of like
uncharitable dispositions may take warning thereby, and be deterred from
offending in the like kind hereafter, have therefore further ordered, adjudged,
and decreed, that all the said defendants shall at the next Assizes to be
holden for the said County, severally make their humble acknowledgments of
their offenses publicly in the face of the Court, the Judges and Justices
then there sitting, but the Court does forbear to inflict any further
corporal or ignominious punishment upon them, in respect their offenses seem
to be somewhat qualified by the License given them by the Justices, who should
and ought more strictly to have required their obedience to the said
Proclamation and Orders, and not to have given way to the breach thereof, which
their Lordships hold a great offense in them, and worthy to be punished, if it
be true as the delinquents in their excuses have pretended.

FINIS.

