RELATION OR Iournall of the beginning and proceedings of the English
Plantation settled at Plimoth in NEW ENGLAND, by certain English Adventurers
both Merchants and others.

With their difficult passage, their safe ariuall, their joyful building of,
and comfortable planting themselves in the now well defended Town of NEW
PLIMOTH.

AS ALSO A RELATION OF FOUR several* discoueries since made by some of the
same English Planters there resident.

I. In a journey to PVCKANOKICK the habitation of the Indians greatest King
Massasoyt: as also their message, the answer and entertainment they had of him.

II. In a voyage made by ten of them to the Kingdom of Nawset, to seek a boy
that had lost himself in the woods: with such accidents as befell them in that
voyage.

III. In their journey to the Kingdom of Namaschet, in defense of their
greatest King Massasoyt, against the Narrohiggonsets, and to revenge the
supposed death of their Interpreter Tisquantum.

IIII. Their voyage to the Massachusetts, and their entertainment there.

With an answer to all such objections as are any way made against the
lawfulness of English plantations in those parts.

LONDON, Printed for John Bellamie, and are to be sold at his shop at the two
Greyhounds in Cornhill near the Royal Exchange. 1622.

TO HIS MVCH REspected Friend, Mr. I. P.
GOod Friend: As we cannot but account it an extraordinary blessing of God in
directing our course for these parts, after we came out of our native country,
for that we had the happiness to be possessed of the comforts we receive by
the benefit of one of the most pleasant, most healthful, and most fruitful
parts of the world: So must we acknowledge the same blessing to be multiplied
upon our whole company, for that we obtained the honor to receive allowance
and approbation of our free possession, and enjoying thereof under the
authority of those thrice honored Persons, the President and Counsel for the
affairs of New England, by whose bounty and grace, in that behalf, all of us
are tied to dedicate our best service unto them, as those under his Majesty,
that we owe it unto: whose noble endeavors in these their actions the God of
heaven and earth multiply to his glory and their own eternal comforts.

As for this poor Relation, I pray you to accept it, as being writ by the
several Actors themselves, after their plain and rude manner; therefore doubt
nothing of the truth thereof: if it be defective in any thing, it is their
ignorance, that are better acquainted with planting then writing. If it
satisfy those that are well affected to the business, it is all I care for.
Sure I am the place we are in, and the hopes that are apparent, cannot but
suffice any that will not desire more then enough, neither is there want of
ought among us but company to enjoy the blessings so plentifully bestowed upon
the inhabitants that are here. While I was a writing this, I had almost forgot,
that I had but the recommendation of the relation it self, to your further
consideration, and therefore I will end without saying more, save that I shall
always rest

From PLIMOTH in New England. Yours in the way of friendship, R. G.

To the Reader.
COurteous Reader, be entreated to make a favorable construction of my
forwardnes, in publishing these inseuing discourses, the desire of carrying the
Gospel of Christ, into those foreign parts, amongst those people that as yet
have had no knowledge, nor taste of God, as also to procure unto themselves and
others a quiet and comfortable habytation: wear amongst other things the
inducements (unto these undertakers of the then hopeful, and now
experimentally known good enterprice for plantation, in New England, to set
afoote and prosecute the same and though it fared with them, as it is common to
the most actions of this nature, that the first attemps prove diffecult, as the
sequel more at large expresses, yet it has pleased God, eue^ beyond our
expectation in so short a time, to give hope of letting some of them see
(though some he has taken out of this vale of tears) some grounds of hope, of
the accomplishment of both those ends by them, at first propounded.

And as my self then much desired, and shortly hope to effect, if the Lord
will, the putting to of my shoulder in this hopeful business, and in the mean
time, these relations coming to my hand from my both known and faithful
friends, on whose writings I do much rely, I thought it not a miss to make
them more general, hoping of a cheerful proceeding, both of Adventurers and
planters, entreating that the example of the hon: Virginia and Bermudas
Companies, incountering with so many distasters, and that for diverse years
together, with an unwearied resolution, the good effects whereof are now
eminent, may prevail as a spur of preparation also touching this no less
hopeful Country though yet an infant, the extent and commodities whereof are
as yet not fully known, after time will unfold more: such as desire to take
knowledge of things, may in form themselves by this ensuing treatise, and if
they please also by such as have bin there a first and second time, my harry
prayer to God is that the event of this and all other honorable and honest
undertakings, may be for the furtherance of the kingdom of Christ, the
enlarging of the bounds of our Sovereign Lord King James, and the good and
profit of those, who either by purse, or person, or both, are agents in the
same, so I take leave and rest

Thy friend, G. MOVRT.

CERTAIN VSEFVL ADVERTISEMENTS SENT in a Letter written by a discreet friend
unto the Planters in New England, at their first setting sail from
Southhampton, who earnestly desires the prosperity of that their new
Plantation.
Loving and Christian friends, I do heartily and in the Lord salute you all,
as being they with whom I am present in my best affection, and most earnest
longings after you, though I be constrained for a while to be bodily absent
from you, I say constrained, God knowing how willingly and much rather then
otherwise I would have have borne my part with you in this first brunt, were I
not by strong necessity held back for the present. Make account of me in the
mean while, as of a man divided in my self with great pain, and as (natural
bonds set aside) having my better part with you. And though I doubt not but in
your godly wisdoms you both foresee and resolve upon that which concerns
your present state and condition both severally and jointly, yet have I thought
but my duty to add some further spur of provocation unto them who run
already, if not because you need it, yet because I owe it in love and duty.

And first, as we are daily to renew our repentance with our God, special for
our sins known, and general for our unknown trespasses; so does the Lord
call us in a singular manner upon occasions of such difficulty and danger as
lies upon you, to a both more narrow search and careful reformation of our
ways in his sight, lest he calling to remembrance our sins forgotten by us
or unrepented of, take advantage against us, and in judgment leave us for the
same to be swallowed up in one danger or other; whereas on the contrary, sin
being taken away by earnest repentance and the pardon thereof from the Lord,
sealed up unto a man's conscience by his Spirit, great shall be his security
and peace in all dangers, sweet his comforts in all distresses, with happy
deliverance from all evil, whether in life or in death.

Now next after this heavenly peace with God and our own consciences, we are
carefully to provide for peace with all men what in us lies, especially with
our associates, and for that end watchfulnes must be had, that we neither at
all in our selves do give, no nor easily take offense being given by others.
Woe be unto the world for offenses, for though it be necessary (considering the
malice of Satan and man's corruption) that offenses come, yet woe unto the man
or woman either by whom the offense comes, says Christ, Math. 18.7. And if
offenses in the unseasonable use of things in them selves indifferent, be more
to be feared then death it self, as the Apostle teaches, 1. Cor. 9.15. how
much more in things simply evil, in which neither honor of God nor love of
man is thought worthy to be regarded.

Neither yet is it sufficient that we keep our selves by the grace of God from
giving offense, except withal we be armed against the taking of them when they
are given by others. For how imperfect and lame is the work of grace in that
person, who wants charity to cover a multitude of offenses, as the Scriptures
speak. Neither are you to be exhorted to this grace only upon the common
grounds of Christianity, which are, that persons ready to take offense, either
want charity to cover offenses, or wisdom duly to weigh humane frailty; or
lastly are gross, though close hypocrites, as Christ our Lord teaches, Math.
7.1, 2, 3. as indeed in mine own experience, few or none have been found
which sooner give offense, then such as easily take it; neither have they ever
proved sound and profitable members in societies, which have nourished in
themselves that touchey humor. But besides these, there are diverse spe^iall
motives provoking you above others to great care and conscience this way: As
first, you are many of you strangers, as to the persons, so to the infirmities
one of another, and so stand in need of more watchfulness this way, lest when
such things fall out in men and women as you suspected not, you be inordinately
affected with them; which does require at your hands much wisdom and charity
for the covering and preventing of incident offenses that way. And last^y your
intended course of civil community will minister continual occasion of
offense, and will be as fuel for that fire, except you diligently quench it
with brotherly forbearance. And if taking of offense causlesly or easily at
men's doings be so carefully to be avoided, how much more heed is to be taken
that we take not offense at God himself, which yet we certainly do so often as
we do murmr at his providence in our crosses, or bear impatiently such
afflictions as wherewith he pleases to visit us. Store we up therefore
patience against the evil day, without which we take offense at the Lord
himself in his holy and just works.

A fourth thing there is carefully to be provided for, to wit, that with your
common emploiments you join common affections truly bent upon the general
good, avoiding as a deadly plague of your both common and special comfort all
retiredness of mind for proper advantage, and all singularly affected any
manner of way; let every man repress in himself and the whole body in each
person, as so many rebels against the common good, all private respects of men's
selves, not sorting with the general conueniencie. And as men are careful not
to have a new house shaken with any violence before it be well settled and the
parts firmly knit: so be you, I beseech you brethren, much more careful, that
the house of God which you are and are to be, be not shaken with unnecessary
novelties or other oppositions at the first settling thereof.

Lastly, whereas you are to become a body politik, using amongst your selves
civil government, and are not furnished with any persons of special eminency
above the rest, to be chosen by you into office of government: Let your
wisdom and godliness appear, not only in choosing such persons as do
entirely love, and will diligently promote the common good, but also in
yielding unto them all due honor and obedience in their lawful
administrations; not beholding in them the ordinarinesse of their persons, but
Gods ordinance for your good; nor being like unto the foolish multitude, who
more honor the gay coat, then either the virtuous mind of the man, or
glorious ordinance of the Lord. But you know better things, and that the image
of the Lords power and authority which the Magistrate bears, is honorable,
in how mean persons soever. And this duty you both may the more willingly,
and ought the more conscionably to perform, because you are at least for the
present to have only them for your ordinary governors, which your selves
shall make choice of for that work.

Sundry other things of importance I could put you in mind of, and of those
before mentioned in more words, but I will not so far wrong your godly minds,
as to think you heedlesse of these things, there being also diverse among you
so well able to admonish both themselves and others of what concerns them.
These few things therefore, and the same in few words I do earnestly commend
unto your care and conscience, joining therewith my daily incessant prayers
unto the Lord, that he who has made the heavens and the earth, the sea and all
rivers of waters, and whose providence is over all his works, especially over
all his dear children for good, would so guide and guard you in your ways, as
inwardly by his Spirit, so outwardly by the hand of his power, as that both you
and we also, for and with you, may have after matter of praising his Name all
the days of your and our lives. Fare you well in him in whom you trust, and in
whom I rest

An unfeigned well-willer of your happy success in this hopeful voyage, I. R.

A RELATION OR IOVRNALL OF THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE Plantation settled at Plimoth
in New ENGLAND.
WEdnesday the sixth of September, the Wind coming East North East, a sine
small gale, we loosed from Plimoth, having been kindly entertained and
courteously used by diuer^ friends there dwelling, and after many difficulties
in boisterous storms, at length by Gods providence upon the ninth of November
following, by break of the day we espied land which we deemed to be Cape Cod,
and so afterward it proved. And the appearance of it much comforted us,
especially, seeing so goodly a Land, and woodded to the brinke of the sea, it
caused us to rejoice together, and praise God that had given us once again to
see land. And thus we made our course South South West, purposing to go to a
River ten leagues to the South of the Cape, but at night the wind being
contrary, we put round again for the Bay of Cape Cod: and upon the 11. of
November, we came to an anchor in the Bay, which is a good harbor and pleasant
Bay, circled round, except in the entrance, which is about four miles over
from land to land, compassed about to the very Sea with Oaks, Pines, Juniper,
Sassafras, and other sweet wood; it is a harbor wherein 1000. sail of Ships
may safely ride, there we relieved our selves with wood and water, and
refreshed our people, while our shallop was fitted to coast the Bay, to search
for an habitation: there was the greatest store of foul that ever we saw.

An^ ^uery day we saw Whales playing hard by us, of which in that place, if we
had instruments and means to take them, we might have made a very rich
return, which to our great grief we wanted. Our master and his mate, and
other^ experienced in fishing, professed, we might have made three or four
thousand pounds worth of Oil; they preferred it before Greenland
Whale-^ishing, and purpose the next winter to fish for Whale here; for ^od we
a^^ayed, but found none, there is good store no doubt in their season. Neither
got we any ^i^h all the time we lay there, but some few little ones on the
shore. We found great Mussles, and very fat and full of Sea pearl, but we
could not eat them, for they made us all sick that did eat, as well sailors as
passengers; they caused to cast and se^ure, b^t they were soon well again.
The bay is so round and circling, that before we could come to anchor, we went
round all the points of the Compass. We could not come near the shore by
three quarters of an English mile, because of shallow water, which was a great
prejudice to us, for our people going on shore were forced to wade a bow shoot
or two in going aland, which caused many to get colds and coughs, for it was
many times freezing cold weather.

This day before we came to harbor, observing some not well affected to unity
and concord, but gave some appearance of faction, it was thought good there
should be an association and agreement, that we should combine together in one
body, and to submit to such government and governors, as we should by common
consent agree to make and chose, and set our hands to this that follows word
for word.

IN the name of God, Amen. We whose names are vnde^written, the loyal Subjects
of our dread sovereign Lord King JAMES, by the grace of God of Great Britain,
France, and Ireland King, Defender of the Faith, etc.

Having undertaken for the glory of God, and advancement of the Christian
Faith, and honor of our King and Country, a Voyage to plant the first Colony
in the Northern parts of VIRGINIA, do by these presents solemnly and mutually
in the presence of God and one of another, covenant, and combine our selves
together into a civil body politic, for our better ordering and preservation,
and furtherance of the ends aforesaid; and by virtue hereof to enact,
constitute, and frame such just and equal Laws, Ordinances, acts,
constitutions, offices from time to time, as shall be thought most meet and
convenient for the general good of the Colony: unto which we promise all due
submission and obedience. In witness whereof we have here under subscribed our
names. Cape Cod 11. of November, in the year of the reign of our sovereign
Lord King JAMES, of England, France, and Ireland 18. and of Scotland 54. Anno
Domino 1620.

The same day so soon as we could we set ashore 15. or 16. men, well armed,
with some to fetch wood, for we had none left; as also to see what the Land
was, and what Inhabitants they could meet with, they found it to be a small
neck of Land; on this side where we lay is the Bay and the f^rther side the
Sea; the ground or earth, sand hills, much like the Downs in Holland, but much
better; the crust of the earth a Spits depth, excellent black earth; all
wooded with Oaks, Pines, Sassafras, Juniper, Birch, Holly, Vines, some Ash,
Walnut; the wood for the most part open and without underwood, sit either to
go or ride in: at night our people returned, but found not any person, nor
habitation, and laded their Boat with Juniper, which smelled very sweet and
strong, and of which we burnt the most part of the time we lay there.

Monday the 13. of November, we unshipped our Shallop and drew her on land, to
mend and repair her, having bin forced to cut her down in bestowing her
betwixt the decks, and she was much opened with the peoples lying in her, which
kept us long there, for it was 16. or 17. days before the Carpenter had
finished her; our people went on shore to refresh themselves, and our women to
wash* as they had great need; but whilst we lay thus still, hoping our Shallop
would be ready in five or six days at the furthest, but our Carpenter made
slow work of it, so that some of our people impatient of delay, desired for
our better furtherance to travail by Land into the Country, which was not
without appearance of danger, not having the Shallop with them nor means to
carry provision, but on their backs, to see whether it might be fit for us to
seat in or no, and the rather because as we sailed into the Harbor, there
seemed to be a river opening it self into the maine land; the willingness of
the persons was liked, but the thing it self, in regard of the danger was
rather permitted then approved, and so with cautions, directions, and
instructions, sixteen men were set out with every man his Musket, Sword, and
Corslet, under the conduct of Captain Miles Standish, unto whom was adjoined
for counsel and advise, William Bradford, Stephen Hopkins, and Edward Tilley.

Wednesday the 15. of November, they were set a shore, and when they had
ordered themselves in the order of a single File, and marched about the space
of a mile, by the Sea they espied five or six people, with a Dog coming
toward them, who were Savages, who when they saw them ran into the Wood and
whilled the Dog after them, etc. First, they supposed them to be master
Jones, the Master and some of his men, for they were a shore, and knew of their
coming, but after they knew them to be Indians they marched after them into
the Woods, least other of the Indians should lie in Ambush; but when the
Indians saw our men following them, they ran away with might and may ^e and our
men turned out of the Wood after them, for it was the way they intended to go,
but they could not come near them. They followed them that night about ten
miles by the trace of their ^ootings, and saw how they had come the same way
they went, and at a turning perceived how they r^n up an hill, to see whether
they followed them. At length night came upon them, and they were constrained
to take up their lodging, so they set forth three Sentinells, and the rest,
some kindled a fire, and others fetched wood, and there held our Randevous that
night. In the morning so soon as we could see the trace, we proceeded on our
journey, and had the tracke until we had compassed the head of a long creake,
and there they took into another wood, and we after them, supposing to find
some of their dwellings, but we marched through boughs and bushes, and under
hills and valleys, which tore our very Armor in pieces, and yet could meet
with none of them, nor their houses, nor find any fresh water, which we
greatly desired, and stood in need off, for we brought neither Beer nor Water
with us, and our victuals was only Biscuit and Holland cheese, and a little
Bottle of aquavite, so as we were sore a thirst. About ten a clock we came
into a deep Valley, full of brush, wood-gaile, and long grass, through which
we found little paths or tracts, and there we saw a Dear, and found springs of
fresh water, of which we were heartily glad, and sat us down and drunk our
first New England water with as much delight as ever we drunk drink in all
our lives. When we had refreshed our selves, we directed our course full South,
that we might come to the shore, which within a short while after we did, and
there made a fire, that they in the ship might see where we were (as we had
direction) and so marched on toward this supposed River; and as we went in
another valley we found a fine clear Pond of fresh water, being about a Musket
sho^ broad, and twice as long; there grew also many small vines, and Foul and
Dear haunted there; there grew much Sasafras: from thence we went on and found
much plain ground, about fifty Acres, fit for the Plow, and some signs where
the Indians had formerly planted their corn; after this, some thought it best
for nearenesse of the river to go down and travail on the Sea sands, by
which means some of our men were tired, and lagged behind, so we stayed and
gathered them up, and struck into the Land again; where we found a little path
to certain heaps of sand, one whereof was covered with old Matts, and had a
wooden thing like a mortar whelmed on the top of it, and an earthen pot laid
in a little hole at the end thereof; we musing what it might be, dug and
found a Bow, and, as we thought, Arrows, but they were rotten; We supposed,
there were many other things, but because we deemed them graves, we put in the
Bow again and made it up as it was, and left the rest untouched, because we
thought it would be odious unto them to ransacke their Sepulchers. We went on
further and found new stubble, of which they had gotten Corn this year, and
many Wallnut trees full of Nuts, and great store of Strawberries, and some
Vines; passing thus a field or two, which were not great, we came to another,
which had also bin new gotten, and there we found where an house had been, and
four or five old Plankes laid together; also we found a great Ketle, which
had been some Ships ketle and brought out of Europe; there was also an heap
of sand, made like the former, but it was newly done, we might see how they had
padled it with their hands which we dug up, and in it we found a little old
Basket full of fair Indian Corn, and dug further and found a fine great
new Basket full of very fair corn of this year, with some 36. goodly ears
of corn, some yellow, and some red, and others mixed with blew, which was a
very goodly sight: the Basket was round, and narrow at the top, it held about
three or four Bushels, which was as much as two of us could lift up from the
ground, and was very handsomely and cunningly made; But whilst we were busy
about these things, we set our men Sentinel in a round ring, all but two or
three which dug up the corn. We were in suspense, what to do with it, and
the Ketle, and at length after much consultation, we concluded to take the
Ketle, and as much of the Corn as we could carry away with us; and when our
Shallop came, if we could find any of the people, and come to parley with them,
we would give them the Ketle again, and satisfy them for their Corn, so we
took all the ears and put a good deal of the loose Corn in the Ketle for
two men to bring away on a staff; besides, they that could put any into their
Pockets filled the same; the rest we buried again, for we were so laden with
Armor that we could carry no more. Not far from this place we found the
remainder of an old Fort, or Palizado, which as we conceived had been made by
some Christians, this was also hard by that place which we thought had been ^
river, unto which we went and found it so to be, deviding it self into two
arms by an high bank, standing right by the cut or mouth which came from the
Sea, that which was next unto us was the less, the other arm was more then
twice as big, and not unlike to be an harbor for ships; but whether it be a
fresh river, or only an indraught of the Sea, we had no time to discover; for
we had Commandment to be out but two days. Here also we saw two Canoas, the
one on the one side, the other on the other side, we could not believe it was
a Canoa, till we came near it, so we returned leaving the further discovery
hereof to our Shallop, and came that night back again to the fresh water
pond, and there we made our Rande^ous that night, making a great fire, and a
Baricado to windward of us, and kept good watch with three Sentinells all
night, every one standing when his turn came, while five or six inches of
Match was burning. It proved a very rainie night. In the morning we took our
Ketle and sunk it in the pond, and trimmed our Muskets, for few of them would
go off because of the wett, and so coasted the wood again to come home, in
which we were shrewdly pus-led, and lost our way, as we wandered we came to a
tree, where a young Spritt was bowed down over a bow, and some Acornes strewed
under neath; Stephen Hopkins said, it had been to catch some Dear, so, as we
were looking at it, William Bradford being in the Rear, when he came looked
also upon it, and as he went about, it gave a sudden jerk up, and he was
immediately caught by the leg; It was a very pretty devise, made with a Rope of
their own making, and having a noose as artificially made, as any Roper in
England can make, and as like ours as can be, which we brought away with us. In
the end we got out of the Wood, and were fallen about a mile too high above
the creake, where we saw three Bucks, but we had rather have had one of them.
We also did spring three couple of Partridges; and as we came along by the
creake, we saw great flocks of wild Geese and D^ckes, but they were very
fearful of us. So we marched some while in the Woods, some while on the
sands, and other while in the water up to the knees, till at length we came
near the Ship, and then we shot off our Pieces, and the long Boat came to
fetch us; master Jones, and master Caruer being on the shore, with many of our
people, came to meet us. And thus we came both weary and well-come home, and
delivered in our Corn into the store, to be kept for seed, for we knew not
how to come by any, and therefore were very glad, purposing so soon as we
could meet with any of the Inhabitants of that place, to make them large
satisfaction. This was our first Discovery, whilst our Shallop was in
repairing; our people did make things as fitting as they could, and time would,
in seeking out wood, and heluing of ^ooles, and sawing of Timber to build a new
Shallop, but the discommodiousnes of the harbor did much hinder us for we
could neither go to, nor come from the shore, but at high water, which was
much to our hinderance and hurt, for oftentimes they waded to the middle of the
thigh, and often to the knees, to go and come from land; some did it
necessarily, and some for their own pleasure, but it brought to the most, if
not to all, coughes and colds, the weather proving suddenly cold and stormy
which afterward turned to the scurvey, whereof many dyed.

When our Shallop was fit indeed, before she was fully fitted, for there was
two days work after bestowed on her, there was appointed some 24 men of our
own, and armed, then to go and make a more full discovery of the rivers
before mentioned. Master Jones was desirous to go with us, and took such of
his sailors as he thought useful for us, so as we were in all about 34. men;
we made master Jones our Leader, for we thought it best herein to gratify his
kindness and forwardnes. When we were set forth, it proved rough weather and
cross winds, so as we were constrained, some in the Shallop, and others in
the long Boat, to row to the nearest shore the wind would suffer them to go
unto, and then to wade out above the knees; the wind was so strong as the
Shallop could not keep the water, but was forced to harbor there that night,
but we marched six or seven miles further, and appointed the Shallop to come
to us as soon as they could. It blowed and did snow all that day and night,
and frose withal; some of our people that are dead took the original of
their death here. The next day about 11. a clock our Shallop came to us, and
we shipped our selves, and the wind being good, we sailed to the river we
formerly discovered, which we named, Cold Harbor, to which when we came we
found it not Navigable for Ships, yet we thought it might be a good harbor for
Boats, for it flows there 1^. foot at high water. We landed our men between
the two creekes, and marched some four or five miles by the greater of them,
and the Shallop followed us; at length night grew on, and our men were tired
with marching up and down the steep hills, and deep valleys, which lay half
a foot thick with snow: Master Jones vvearied with marching, was desirous we
should take up our lodging, though some of us would have marched further, so we
made there our Randevous for that night, under a few Pine trees, and as it fell
out, we got three fat Geese, and six Ducks to our Supper, which we eat with
Soldiers stomachs, for we had eaten little all that day; our resolution was
next morning to go up to the head of this river, for we supposed it would
prove fresh water, but in the morning our resolution held not, because many
liked not the hillinesse of the soil, and badnesse of the harbor, so we
turned toward the other creek, that we might go over and look for the rest
of the Corn that we left behind when we were here before; when we came to the
creek, we saw the Canow lie on the dry ground, and a flock of Geese in the
river, at which one made a shot, and killed a couple of them, and we lanched
the Canow and fetched them and when we had done, she carried us over by seven
or eight at once. This done, we marched to the place where we had the corn
formerly, which place we called Corne-hill; and dug and found the rest, of
which we were very glad: we also dug in a place little further off, and
found a Botle of oil; we went to another place, which we had seen before,
and dug, and found more corn, viz. two or three Baskets full of Indian
Wheat, and a bag of Beans, with a good man, of fair Wheat-eares; whilst some
of us were digging up this, some others found another heap of Corn, which
they dug up also, so as we had in all about ten Bushels, which will serve us
sufficiently for seed. Note.
And sure it was Gods good providence that we found this Corn, for else we
know not how we should have done, for we knew not how we should find, or meet
with any of the Indians, except it be to do us a mischief. Also we had never
in all likelihood seen a grain of it, if we had not made our first Journey;
for the ground was now covered with snow, and so hard frosen, that we were
feign with our Curtlaxes and short Swords, to hew and carue the ground a foot
deep, and then wrest it up with leavers, for we had forgot to bring other
Tools; whilst we were in this employment, foul weather being toward, Master
Jones was earnest to go abourd, but sundry of us desired to make further
discovery, and to find out the Indians habitations, so we sent home with him
our weakest people, and some that were sick, and all the Corn, and 18. of us
stayed still, and lodged there that night, and desired that the Shallop might
return to us next day, and bring us some Mattocks and Spades with them.

The next morning we followed certain beaten paths and tracts of the Indians
into the Woods, supposing they would have led us into some Town, or houses;
after we had gone a while, we light upon a very broad beaten path, well nigh
two foot broad then we lighted all our Matches, and prepared our selves,
concluding we were near their dwellings, but in the end we found it to be
only a path made to drive Dear in, when the Indians hunt, as we supposed;
when we had ma^ched five or six miles into the Woods, and could find no signs
of any people, we returned again another way, and as we came into the plain
ground, we found a place like a grave, but it was much bigger and longer then
any we had yet seen. It was also covered with boords, so as we mused what it
should be, and resolved to dig it up, where we found, first a Matt, and under
that a fair Bow, and there another Matt, and under that a board about three
quarters long, finely carved and painted, with three tynes, or broches on the
top, like a Crown; also between the Matts we found Boules, Trayes, Dishes,
and such like Trinkets; at length we came to a fair new Matt, and under that
two Bundles, the one bigger, the other less, we opened the greater and found
in it a great quantity of fine and perfect red Powder, and in it the bones and
skull of a man. The skull had fine yellow hair still on it, and some of the
flesh unconsumed; there was bound up with it a knife, a pack-needle, and two or
three old iron things. It was bound up in a Sailors canvas Casacke, and a pair
of cloth breeches; the red Powder was a kind of Embaulment, and yielded a
strong, but no offensive smell; It was as fine as any flower. We opened the
less bundle likewise, and found of the same Powder in it, and the bones and
head of a little child, about the legs, and other parts of it was bound
strings, and bracelets of fine white Beads; there was also by it a little Bow,
about three quarters long, and some other odd knackes; we brought sundry of the
pretiest things away with us, and covered the Corpse up again. After this, we
dug in sundry like places, but found no more Corn, nor any things else but
graves: There was variety of opinions amongst us about the embalmed person;
some thought it was an Indian Lord and King: others said, the Indians have all
black hair, and never any was seen with brown or yellow hair; some
thought, it was a Christian of some special note, which had dyed amongst them,
and they thus buried him to honor him; others thought, they had killed him,
and did it in triumph over him. Whilst we were thus ranging and searching, two
of the Sailors, which were newly come on the shore, by chance espied two
houses, which had been lately dwelt in, but the people were gone. They having
their pieces, and hearing no body entered the houses, and took out some things,
and du^st not stay but came again and told us; so some seven or eight of us
went with them, and found how we had gone within a slight shot of them before.
The houses were made with long young Sapling trees, bended and both ends stuck
into the ground; they were made round, like unto an Arbor, and covered down
to the ground with thick and well wrought matts, and the door was not over a
yard high, made of a matt to open; the chimney was a wide open hole in the top,
for which they had a matt to cover it close when they pleased; one might stand
and go upright in them, in the midst of them were four little trunches knocked
into the ground, and small sticks laid over, on which they hung their Pots,
and what they had to sees; round about the fire they lay on matts, which are
their beds. The houses were double matted, for as they were matted without, so
were they within, with newer and fairer matts. In the houses we found wooden
Boules, Trayes and Dishes, Earthen Pots, Hand baskets made of Crab shells,
wrought together; also an English Paile or Bucket, it wanted a bail, but it
had two Iron ears: there was also Baskets of sundry sorts, bi^ger and some
lesser, finer and some courser: some were curiously wrought with black and
white in pretty works, and sundry other of their household stuff: we found
also two or three Deeres heads, one whereof had bin newly killed, for it was
still fresh; there was also a company of Deeres feet, stuck up in the houses,
Hearts horns, and Eagles claws, and sundry such like things there was: also
two or three Baskets full of pa^ched Acornes, pieces of fish, and a piece of a
broyled Hering. We found also a little silk grass, and a little Tobacco seed,
with some other seeds which we knew not; without was sundry bundles of Flags,
and Sedge, B^ll rushes, and other stuff to make matts; there was thrust into
an hollow tree, two or three pieces of Venison, but we thought it fitter for
the Dogs then for us: some of the best things we took away with us, and left
the houses standing still as they were, so it growing toward night, and the
tide almost spent, we hasted with our things down to the Shallop, and got
abourd that night, intending to have brought some Beads, and other things to
have left in the houses, in sign of Peace, and that we meant to truk with
them, but it was not done, by means of our hasty coming away from Cape Cod,
but so soon as we can meet conveniently with them, we will give them full
satisfaction. Thus much of our second Discovery.

Having thus discovered this place, it was controversall amongst us, what to
do touching our abode and settling there; some thought it best for many reasons
to abide there.

As first, that there was a convenient harbor for Boats, though not for Ships.

Secondly, Good Corn ground ready to our hands, as we saw by experience in
the goodly corn it yielded, which would again agree with the ground, and be
natural seed for the same.

Thirdly, Cape Cod was like to be a place of good fishing, for we saw daily
great Whales of the best kind for oil and bone, come close aboard our Ship,
and in fair weather swim and play about us; there was once one when the Sun
shone warm, come and lay above water, as if she had been dead, for a good
while together, within half a Mu^ket shot of the Ship, at which two were
prepared to shoot, to see whether she would s^ir or no, he that gave fire
first, his Mu^ket flew in pieces, both stock and barrel, yet thanks be to
God, neither he nor any man else was hurt with it, though many were there about,
but when the Whale saw her time she gave a snuff and away.

Fourthly, the place was likely to be healthful, secure, and de^ensible.

But the last and especial reason was, that now the heart of Wint^r and
unseasonable weather was come upon us, so that we could not go upon coasting
and discovery, without danger of loosing men and Boat, upon which would follow
the overthrow of all, especially considering what variable winds and sudden
storms do there arise. Also cold and wett lodging had so taynted our people,
for scarce any of us were free from vehement coughs, as if they should continue
long in that estate, it would endanger the lives of many, and breed diseases
and infection amongst us. Again, we had yet some Beer, Butter, Flesh, and
other such victuals left, which would quickly be all gone, and then we should
have nothing to comfort us in the great labor and toil we were like to
undergo at the first; It was also conceived, whilst we had competent
victuals, that the Ship would stay with us, but when that grew low, they would
be gone, and let us shift as we could.

Others again, urged greatly the going to Anguum or Angoum, a place twenty
leagues off to the North-wards, which they had heard to be an excellent harbor
for ships; better ground and better fishing. Secondly for any thing we knew,
there might be hard by us a far better seat, and it should be a great
hindrance to seat where we should remove again. Thirdly, The water was but
in ponds, and it was thought there would be none in Summer, or very little.
Fourthly, the water there must be fetched up a steep hill: but to omit many
reasons and replies used here abouts; It was in the end concluded, to make
some discovery within the Bay, but in no case so far as Angoum: besides,
Robert Coppin our Pilot, made relation of a great Navigable River and good
harbor in the other head land of this Bay, almost right over against Cape Cod,
being a right line, not much above eight leagues distant, in which he had
been once: and because that one of the wild men with whom they had some
trucking, stole a harping Iron from them, they called it theeuish harbor. And
beyond that place they were enjoined not to go, whereupon, a Company was
chosen to go out upon a third discovery: whilst some were employed in this
discovery, it pleased God that Mistress White was brought a bed of a Son,
which was called Peregrine.

The fifth day, we through Gods mercy escaped a great danger by the foolishnes
of a Boy, one of Francis Billingtons Sons, who in his Fathers absence, had
got Gunpowder, and had shot of a piece or two, and made squibs, and there
being a fowling piece charged in his fathers Cabin, shot her off in the
Cabin, there being a little barrel of powder half full, scattered in and
about the Cabin, the fire being within four foot of the bed between the
Deckes, and many s^ints and Iron things about the Cabin, and many people about
the fire, and yet by Gods mercy no harm done.

Wednesday the sixth of December, it was resolved our discoverers should set
forth, for the day before was too foul weather, and so they did, though it was
well ore the day ere all things could be ready: So ten of our men were
appointed who were of themselves willing to undertake it, to wit, Captain
Standish, Master Carver, William Bradford, Edward Winsloe, John Tilley, Edward
Tilley, John Houland, and three of London, Richard Warren, Steeuen Hopkins and
Edward Dotte, and two of our Seamen, John Alderton and Thomas English, of the
Ships Company there went two of the Masters Mates, Master Clarke and Master
Copin, the Master Gunner, and three Sailors. The narration of which Discovery,
follows, penned by one of the Company.

Wednesday the sixth of December we set out, being very cold and hard weather,
we were a long while after we lunched from the ship, before we could get
clear of a sandy point, which lay within less then a fu^long of the same. In
which time, two were very sick, and Edward Tilley had like to have founded
with cold; the Gunner was also sick unto Death, (but hope of truking made him
to go) and so remained all that day, and the next night; at length we got
clear of the sandy point, and got up our sails, and within an hour or two we
got under the weather shore, and then had smoother water and better sailing,
but it was very cold, for the water frose on our clothes, and made them many
times like coats of Iron: we sailed six or seven leagues by the shore, but
saw neither river nor creek, at length we me^t with a tongue of Land, being
flat off from the shore, with a sandy point, we bore up to gain the point, and
found there a fair income or rode, of a Bay, being a league over at the
narrowest, and some two or three in length, but we made right over to the land
before us and left the discovery of this Income till the next day: as we drew
near to the shore, we espied some ten or twelve Indians, very busy about a
black thing, what it was we could not tell, till afterward they saw us, and
ran to and fro, as if they had been carrying some thing away, we landed a
league or two from them, and had much ado to put a shore any where, it lay so
full of flat sands, when we came to shore, we made us a Baricado, and got fire
wood, and set out our Sentinells, and betook us to our lodging, such as it
was; we saw the smoke of the fire which the Savages made that night, about
four or five miles from us, in the morning we divided our company, some eight
in the Shallop, and the rest on the shore went to discover this place, but we
found it only to be a Bay, without either river or creek coming into it, yet
we deemed it to be as good an harbor as Cape Cod, for they that ^ounded it,
found a ship might ride in five fathom water, we on the land found it to be a
levill soil, but none of the fruitfullest 5 we saw two beckes of fresh water,
which were the first running streams that we saw in the Country, but one might
stride over them: we found also a great fish, called a Grampus dead on the
sands, they in the Shallop found two of them also in the bottom of the bay,
dead in like sort, they were cast up at high water, and could not get off for
the frost and ice; they were some five or six paces long, and about two inches
thick of fat, and fleshed like a Swine, they would have yielded a great deal
of oil, if there had been time and means to have taken it, so we finding
nothing for our turn, both we and our Shallop returned. We then directed our
course along the Sea-sands, to the place where we first saw the Indians, when
we were there, we saw it was also a Grampus which they were cutting up, they
cut it into long rands or pieces, about an ell long, and two handful broad,
we found here and there a piece scattered by the way, as it seemed, for have:
this place the most were minded we should call, the Grampus Bay, because we
found so many of them there: we followed the tract of the Indians bare feet a
good way on the sands, as length we saw where they struck into the Woods by
the side of a Pond, as we went to view the place, one said, he thought he
saw an Indian-house among the trees, so went up to see: and here we and the
Shallop lost sight one of another till night, it being now about nine or ten a
clock, so we light on a path, but saw no house, and followed a great way into
the woods, at length we found where Corn had been set, but not that year,
anon we found a great burying place, one part whereof was encompassed with a
large Palazado, like a Churchyard, with young spires four or five yards long,
set as close one by another as they could two o^ three foot in the ground,
within it was full of Graves, some bigger, and some less, some were also paled
about and others had like an Indian-house made over them, but not matted those
Graves were more sumptuous then those at Corne-hill, yet we dug none of them
up, but only viewed them, and went our way; without the Palazado were graves
also, but not so costly: from this place we went and found more Corn ground,
but not of this year. As we ranged we light on four or five Indian-houses,
which had been lately dwelt in, but they were uncovered, and had no matts
about them, else they were like those we found at Corne-hill, but had not been
so lately dwelt in, there was nothing left but two or three pieces of old
matts, a little sedge, also a little further we found two Baskets full of
parched Acorns hid in the ground, which we supposed had been Corn when we
began to dig the same, we cast earth thereon again and went our way. All
this while we saw no people, we went ranging up and down till the Sun began
to draw low, and then we hasted out of the woods, that we might come to our
Shallop, which when we were out of the woods, we espied a great way off, and
called them to come unto us, the which they did as soon as they could, for it
was not yet high water, they were exceeding glad to see us, (for they feared
because they had not seen us in so long a time) thinking we would have kept by
the shore side, so being both weary and faint, for we had eaten nothing all
that day, we sell to make our Randevous and get ^ire wood, which always cost
us a great deal of labor, by that time we had done and our Shallop come to
us, it was within night, and we fed upon such victuals as we had, and betook
us to our rest, after we had set out our watch. About midnight we heard a great
and hideous cry, and our Sentinel called, Arm, Arm. So we bestirred our
selves and shot off a couple of Muskets, and noise ceased; we concluded, that
it was a company of Wolves or Foxes, for one told us, he had heard such a
noise in Newfound land. About five a clock in the morning we began to be
stirring, and two or three which doubted whether their Pieces would go off or
no made trial of them, and shot them off, but thought nothing at all, after
Prayer we prepared our selves for brek-fast, and for a journey, and it being
now the twilight in the morning, it was thought meet to carry the things down
to the Shallop: some said, it was not best to carry the Armor down, others
said, they would be readier, two or three said, they would not carry theirs,
till they went themselves, but mistrusting nothing at all: as it fel^ out, the
water not being high enough, they laid the things down upon the shore and came
up to brek fast. Anon, all upon a sudden, we heard a great and strange cry,
which we knew to be the same voices, though they varied their notes, one of our
company being abroad came running in, and cried, They are men, Indians,
Indians; and withal, their arrows came flying amongst us, our men ran out
with all speed to recover their arms, as by the good Providence of God they
did. Our first combat with the Indians.
In the mean time, Captain Miles Standish, having a snaphance ready, made a
shot, and after him another, after they two had shot, other two of us were
ready, but he wished us not to shoot, till we could take aim, for we knew not
what need we should have, and there were four only of us, which had their
arms there ready, and stood before the open side of our Baricado, which was
first assaulted, they thought it best to defend it, least the enemy should
take it and our stuff, and so have the more vantage against us, our care was
no less for the Shallop, but we hoped all the rest would defend it; we called
unto them to know how it was with them, and they answered, Well, Well every
one, and be of good courage: we heard three of their Pieces go off, and the
rest called for a firebrand to light their matches, one took a log out of the
fire on his shoulder and went and carried it unto them, which was thought did
not a little discourage our enemies. The cry of our enemies was dreadful,
especially, when our men ran out to recover their Arms, their note was after
this manner, Woath woach ha ha hach woach: our men were no sooner come to their
Arms, but the enemy was ready to assault them.

There was a lusty man and no whit less valiant, who was thought to be their
Captain, stood behind a tree within half a musket shot of us, and there let
his arrows fly at us; he was seen to shoot three arrows, which were all
avoided, for he at whom the first arrow was aimed, saw it, and stooped down
and it flew over him, the rest were avoided also: he stood three shots of a
Musket, at length one took as he said full aim at him, after which he gave an
extraordinary cry and away they went all, we followed them about a quarter of
a mile, but we left six to keep our Shallop, for we were careful of our
business: then we shouted all together two several times, and shot off a
couple of muskets and so returned: this we did that they might see we were
not afraid of them nor discouraged. Thus it pleased God to vanquish our Enemies
and give us deliverance, by their noise we could not guess that they were
less then thirty or forty, though some thought that they were many more yet in
the dark of the morning, we could not so well discern them among the trees,
as they could see us by our fire side, we took up 18. of their arrows which
we have sent to England by Master Io^es, some whereof were headed with brass,
others with Hearts horn, and others with Eagles claws many more no doubt were
shot, for these we found, were almost covered with leaves: yet by the especial
providence of God, none of them either hit or hurt us, though many came close
by us, and on every side of us, and some coats which hung up in our Baricado,
were shot through and through. So after we had given God thanks for our
deliverance, we took our Shallop and went on our Journey, and called this
place, The first Encounter, from hence we intended to have sailed to the
aforesaid theeuish Harbor, if we found no convenient Harbor by the way,
having the wind good, we sailed all that day along the Coast about 15. leagues,
but saw neither River nor Creek to put into, after we had sailed an hour or
two, it began to snow and rain, and to be bad weather; about the midst of the
afternoon, the wind increased and the Seas began to be very rough, and the
hinges of the rudder broke, so that we could steer no longer with it, but two
men with much ado were same to serve with a couple of Oars, the Seas were
grown so great, that we were much troubled and in great danger, and night
grew on: Anon Master Coppin bad us be of good cheer he saw the Harbor, as we
drew near, the gale being stiff, and we bearing great sail to get in, split
our Mast in 3. pieces, and were like to have cast away our Shallop, yet by Gods
mercy recovering our selves, we had the flood with us, and struck into the
Harbor.

Now he that thought that had been the place was deceived, it being a place
where not any of us had been before, and coming into the Harbor, he that was
our Pilot did bear up Northward, which if we had continued we had been cast
away, yet still the Lord kept us, and we bare up for an Island before us, and
recovering of that Island, being compassed about with many Rocks, and dark
night growing upon us, it pleased the Divine providence that we fell upon a
place of sandy ground, where our Shallop did ride safe and secure all that
night, and coming upon a strange Island kept our watch all night in the rain
upon that Island: and in the morning we marched about it, and found no
Inhabitants at all, and here we made our Randevous all that day being
Saturday, 10. of December, on the Sabbath day we rested, and on Monday we
sounded the Harbor, and found it a uery good Harbor for our shipping, we
marched also into the Land, and found diverse corn fields, and little running
brooks* a place very good for situation, so we returned to our Ship again
with good news to the rest of our people, which did much comfort their hearts.

On the fifteenth day, we waighed Anchor, to go to the place we had
discovered, and coming within two leagues of the Land, we could not fetch the
Harbor, but were feign to put room again toward Cape Cod, our course lying
West; and the wind was at North west, but it pleased God that the next day
being Saturday the 16. day, the wind came fair, and we put to Sea again,
and came safely into a safe Harbor; and within half an hour the wind
changed, so as if we had been let but a little, we had gone back to Cape
Cod. This Harbor is a Bay greater then Cape Cod, compassed with a goodly Land,
and in the Bay, 2. fine Islands uninhabited, wherein are nothing but wood, Oaks,
Pines, Wal-nut, Beech, Sasifras, Vines, and other trees which we know not;
This Bay is a most hopeful place, innumerable store of foul, and excellent
good, and cannot but be of fish in their seasons: Skote, Cod, Turbot, and
Herring, we have tasted of, abundance of Musles the greatest and best that
ever we saw; Crabs, and Lobsters, in their time infinite, It is in fashion like
a Cikle or Fish-hooke.

Monday the 13. day, we went a land, manned with the Master of the Ship, and
3. or 4. of the Sailors, we marched along the coast in the woods, some 7. or 8.
mile, but saw not an Indian nor an Indian house, only we found where formerly,
had been some Inhabitants, and where they had planted their corn: we found
not any Navigable River, but 4. or 5. small ^unning brooks of very sweet fresh
water, that all run into the Sea: The Land for the crust of the earth is a
spits depth, excellent black mold and fat in some places, 2. or 3. great Oaks
but not very thick, Pines, Wal-nuts Beech Ash, Birch, Hasell, Holley, Asp,
Sasifras, in abundance, and Vines every where, Cherry trees, Plum trees, and
many other which we know not; many kinds of herbs, we found here in Winter,
as Strawbery leaves innumerable, Sorrel, Yarow, Caruell, Brook-lime,
Liver-wort, Watercresses, great store of Leekes, and Onyons, and an excellent
strong kind of Flax, and Hemp; here is sand, gravel, and excellent clay no
better in the World, excellent for pots, and will wash like soap, and great
store of stone, though somewhat soft, and the best water that ever we drunk,
and the Brooks now begin to be full of fish; that night many being weary with
marching, we went abourd again.

The next morning being Tuesday the 19. of December, we went again to
discover further; some went on Land, and some in the Shallop, the Land we found
as the former day we did, and we found a Creek, and went up three English
miles, a very pleasant river at full Sea, a Bark of thirty tun may go up,
but at low water scarce our Shallop could pass: this place we had a great
liking to plant in, but that it was so far from our fishing our principal
profit, and so encompassed with woods, that we should be in much danger of the
Salvages, and our number being so little, and so much ground to clear, so as
we thought good to quit and clear that place, till we were of more strength;
some of us having a good mind for safety to plant in the greater I Will, we
crossed the Bay which there is five or six miles over, and found the I Will about
a mile and a half, or two miles about, all wooded, and no fresh water but 2.
or 3. pits, that we doubted of fresh water in Summer, and so full of wood, as
we could hardly clear so much as to serve us for Corn, besides we judged it
cold for our Corn, and some part very rockie, yet diverse thought of it as a
place defensible, and of great security.

That night we returned again a ship board, with resolution the next morning
to setle on some of those places, so in the morning, after we had called on God
for direction, we came to this resolution, to go presently ashore again, and
to take a better view of two places, which we thought most fitting for us, for
we could not now take time for further search or consideration, our victuals
being much spent, especially, our Beer, and it being now the 19. of December.
After our landing and viewing of the places, so well as we could we came to a
conclusion, by most voices, to set on the maine Land, on the first place, on an
high ground, where there is a great deal of Land cleared, and has been
planted with Corn three or four years ago, and there is a very sweet brook
runs under the hill side, and many delicate springs of as good water as can
be drunk, and where we may harbor our Shallops and Boats exceeding well, and
in this brook much good fish in their seasons: on the further side of the
river also much Corn ground cleared, in one field is a great hill, on which
we point to make a plat-forme, and plant our Ordinance, which will command all
round about, from thence we may see into the Bay, and far into the Sea, and
we may see thence Cape Cod: our greatest labor will be fetching of our wood,
which is half a quarter of an English mile, but there is enough so far off;
what people inhabit here we yet know not, for as yet we have seen none, so
there we made our Randevous, and a place for some of our people about twenty,
resolving in the morning to come all ashore, and to build houses, but the next
morning being Thursday the 21. of December, it was stormy and wett, that we
could not go ashore, and those that remained there all night could do
nothing, but were wet, not having dai-light enough to make them a sufficient
court of guard, to keep them dry. All that night it blew and rayned extremely*
it was so tempestuous, that the Shallop could not go on land so soon as was
meet, for they had no victuals on land. About ^^. a Clock the Shallop went off
with much ado with provision, but could not return it blew so strong, and was
such foul weather, that we were forced to let fall our Anchor, and ride with
three Anchors an head.

Friday the 22. the storm still continued, that we could not get a-land, nor
they come to us aboard: this morning Good wife Alderton was delivered of a
son, but dead borne.

Saturday the 23. so many of us as could, went on shore, felled and carried
timber, to provide themselves stuff for building.

Sunday the 24. our people on shore heard a cry of some Savages (as they
thought) which caused an Alarm, and to stand on their guard, expecting an
assault, but all was quiet.

Monday the 25. day, we went on shore, some to fell timber, some to saw, some
to ri^e, and some to carry, so no man rested all that day, but toward night
some as they were at work, heard a noise of some Indians, which caused us all
to go to our Muskets, but we heard no further, so we came aboard again, and
left some twenty to keep the court of guard; that night we had a sore storm
of wind and rain.

Monday the 25. being Christmas day, we began to drink water aboard, but at
night the Master caused us to have some Beer, and so on board we had diverse
times now and then some Beer, but on shore none at all.

Tuesday the 26. it was foul weather, that we could not go ashore.

Wednesday the 27. we went to work again.

Thursday the 28. of December, so many as could went to work on the hill,
where we purposed to build our platform for our Ordinance, and which does
command all the plain, and the B^y, and from whence we may see far into the
sea, and might he easier impayled, having two rows of houses and a fair
street. So in the afternoon we went to measure out the grounds, and first, we
took notice how many Families they were, willing all single men that had no
wives to join with some Family, as they thought fit, that so we might build
fewer houses, which was done, and we reduced them to 19. Families; to greater
Families we allotted larger plots, to every person half a pole in breadth, and
three in length, and so Lots were cast where every man should lie, which was
done, and staked out; we thought this proportion was large enough at the first,
for houses and gardens, to impale them round, considering the weakness of our
people, many of them growing ill with coldes, for our former Discoveries in
frost and storms, and the wading at Cape Cod had brought much weakness amongst
us, which increased so every day more and more, and after was the cause of many
of their deaths.

Friday and Saturday, we fitted our selves for our labor, but our people on
shore were much troubled and discouraged with rain and wett that day, being
very stormy and cold; we saw great smokes of fire made by the Indians about
six or seven miles from us as we coniectured.

Monday the first of January, we went betimes to work, we were much hundred in
lying so far off from the Land, and feign to go as the tide served, that we
lost much time, for our Ship drew so much water, that she lay a mile and almost
a half off, though a ship of seaventie or eighty tun as high water may come
to the shore.

Wednesday the third of January, some of our people being abroad, to get and
gather thatch, they saw great fires of the Indians, and were at then Corn
fields, yet saw none of the Savages, nor had seen any of them since we came
to th^s Bay.

Thursday the fourth of January, Captain Miles Standish with four or five
more, went to see if they could meet with any of the Savages in that place
where the fires were made, they went to some of their houses, but not lately
inhabited, yet could they not meet with any; as they came home, they shot at
an Eagle and killed her, which was excellent meat; It was hardly to be
discerned from Mutton.

Friday the fifth of January, one of the Sailors found alive upon the shore an
Hering, which the Master had to his supper, which put us in hope of fish, but
as yet we had got but (...) Cod; we wanted small hooks.

Saturday the sixth of January, Master Marten was very sick, and to our
judgment, no hope of life, so Master Carver was sent for to come abourd to
speak with him about his accounts, who came the next morning.

Monday the eight day of January, was a very fair day, and we went betimes to
work, master Jones sent the Shallop as he had formerly done, to see where fish
could be got, they had a great storm at Sea, and were in some danger, at night
they returned with three great Seals, and an excellent good Cod, which did
assure us that we should have plenty of fish shortly.

This day, Francis Billington, having the week before seen from the top of a
tree on an hie hill, a great sea as he thought, went with one of the Masters
mates to see it, they went three miles, and then came to a great water, divided
into two great Lakes, the bigger of them five or six miles in circuit, and in
it an I Will of a Cable length square, the other three miles in compass; in their
estimation they are fine fresh water, full of fish, and foul; a brook issues
from it, it will be an excellent help for us in time. They found seven or
eight Indian houses, but not lately inhabited, when they saw the houses they
were in some fear, for they were but two persons and one piece.

Tuesday the 9. January, was a reasonable fair day, and we went to labor
that day in the building of our Town, in two rows of houses for more safety:
we divided by lot the plot of ground whereon to build our Town: After the
proportion formerly allotted, we agreed that every man should build his own
house, thinking by that course, men would make more have then working in
common: the common house, in which for the first, we made our Rendevous, being
near finished wanted only covering, it being about 20. foot square, some
should make mortar, and some gather thatch, so that in four days half of it
was thatched, frost and foul weather hindered us much, this time of the year
seldom could we work half the week.

Thursday the eleventh, William Bradford being at work, (for it was a fair
day) was vehemently taken with a grief and pain, and so shot to his
huckle-bone; It was doubted that he would have instantly dyed, he got cold in
the former discoveries, especially the last, and felt some pain in his anckles
by times, but he grew a little better toward night and in time through Gods
mercy in the use of means recovered.

Friday the 12. we went to work, but about noone, it began to rain, that it
forced us to give over work.

This day, two of our people put us in great sorrow and care, there was 4. sent
to gather and cut thatch in the morning, and two of them, John Goodman and
Peter Brown, having cut thatch all the fore noone, went to a further place,
and willed the other two, to bind up that which was cut and to follow them; so
they did, being about a mile and an half from our Plantation: but when the two
came after, they could not find them, nor hear any thing of them at all,
though they hallowed and shouted as loud as they could, so they returned to the
Company and told them of it: whereupon Master Leaver and three or four more
went to seek them, but could hear nothing of them, so they returning, sent
more, but that night they could hear nothing at all of them: the next day they
armed 10. or 12. men out, verily thinking the Indians had surprised them, they
went seeking 7. or 8 miles, but could neither see nor hear any thing at all,
so they returned with much discomfort to us all. These two that were missed, at
dinner time took their mea^e in their hands, and would go walk and refresh
themselves, so going a little off they find a lake of water* and having a great
Mastiffe bitch with them and a Spannell; by the water side they found a great
Dear the Dogs chased him, and they followed so far as they lost themselves,
and could not find the^ way back, they wandered all that after noone being
wett, and at night it did freeze and snow, they were slenderly apparelled and
had no weapons but each one his Cicle, nor any victuals, they ranged up and
down and could find none of the Salvages habitation^; when it drew to night
they were much perplexed, for they could find neither harbor nor meat, but
in frost and snow, were forced to make the earth their bed, and the Element
their covering, and another thing did very much terrify them, they heard as
they thought two Lions roaring exceedingly for a long time together, and a
third, that they thought was very nere them, so not knowing what to do they
resolved to climb up into a tree as their safest refuge, though that would
prone an intolerable cold lodging; so they stood at the trees root, that
when the Lions came they might take their opportunity of climbing up, the
bitch they were feign to hold by the neck, for she would have been gone to
the Lion; but it pleased God so to dispose, that the wild Beasts came not: so
they walked up and down under the Tree all night, it was an extreme cold
night, so soon as it was light they travailed again, passing by many lakes
and brooks and woods, and in one place where the Salvages had burnt the space
of 5. miles in length, which is a fine Champion Country, and even. In the
afternoon, it pleased God from an high Hill they discovered the two Isles in
the Bay, and so that night got to the Plantation, being ready to faint with
travail and want of victuals, and almost famis^^ed with cold, John Goodman
was feign to have his shoes cut off his feet they were so swelled with cold,
and it was a long while after ere he was able to go* those on the shore were
much comforted at their return, but they on ship-boord were grieved as deeming
them lost; but the next day being the 14. of January, in the morning about six
of the clock the wind being very great, they on ship-boord spied their great
new R^ndevous on fire, which was to them a new discomfort, fearing because of
the supposed loss of the men, that the Salvages had fiered them, neither could
they presently go to them for want of water, but after 3. quarters of an hour
they went, as they had purposed the day before to keep the Sabbath on shore,
because now there was the greater number of people. At their landing they heard
good tidings of the return of the 2. men, and that the house was fiered
occasionally by a spark that flew into the thatch, which instantly burnt it
all up, but the roof stood and little hurt; the most loss was Master Carvers
and William Bradfords, who then lay sick in bed, and if they had not risen
with good speed, had been blown up with powder: but through Gods mercy they
had no harm, the house was as full of beds as they could lie one by another,
and their Muskets charged, but blessed be God there was no harm done.

Monday the 15. day, it rayned much all day, that they on ship-boord could not
go on shore, nor they on shore do any labor but were all wet.

Tuesday, wednesday, thursday, were very fair Sun-shinie days, as if it had
been in April, and our people so many as were in health ought chearefully.

The 19. day, we resolved to make a Shed, to put our common provision in, of
which some were already set on shore, but at noone it rayned, that we could
not work. This day in the evening, John Goodman went abroad to use his lame
feet, that were pitifully ill with the cold he had got, having a little
Spannell with him, a little way from the Plantation, two great Wolves ran after
the Dog, the Dog ran to him and betwixt his legs for succor, he had nothing
in his hand but took up a stick, and threw at one of them and hit him, and
they presently ran both away, but came again, he got a pai^e board in his hand,
and they sat both on their tails, grinning at him, a good while, and went
their way, and left him.

Saturday 20. we made up our Shed for our common goods.

Sunday the 21. we kept our meeting on Land.

Monday the 22. was a fair day, we wrought on our houses, and in the
afternoon carried up our hogsheads of meal to our common store house.

The rest of the week we followed our business likewise.

Monday the 29. in the morning cold frost and sleete, but after reasonable
fair* both the long Boat and the Shallop brought our common goods on shore.

Tuesday and wednesday 30. and 31. of January, cold frosty weather and sleete,
that we could not work: in the morning the Master and others saw two Savages,
that had been on the Island nere our Ship, what they came for we could not
tell, they were going so far back again before they were des^ried, that we
could not speak with them.

Sunday the 4. of February, was very wett and rainie, with the greatest gusts
of wind that ever we had since we came forth, that though we rid in a very
good harbor, yet we were in danger, because our Ship was light, the goods
taken out, and she vnballased; and it caused much daubing of our houses to fall
down.

Friday the 9. still the cold weather continued, that we could do little
work. That afternoon our little house for our sick people was set on fire
by a spark that kindled in the roof, but no great harm was done. That
evening the master going ashore, killed five Geese, which he friendly
distributed among the sick people; he found also a good Dear killed, the
Savages had cut off the horns, and a Wolf was eating of him, how he came
there we could not conceive.

Friday the 16. day, was a fair day, but the northerly wind continued, which
continued the frost, this day afternoon one of our people being a fouling,
and having taken a stand by a creek side in the Reeds, about a mile and an
half from our Plantation, there came by him twelve Indians, marching toward
our Plantation, and in the woods he heard the noise of many more* he lay close
till they were passed, and then with what speed he could he went home and gave
the Alarm, so the people abroad in the woods returned and armed themselves, but
say none of them, only toward the evening they made a great fire, about the
place where they were first discovered: Captain Miles Standish, and Francis
Cook, being at work in the Woods, coming home, left their tools behind
them, but before they returned, their tools were taken away by the Savages.
This coming of the Savages gave us occasion to keep more strict watch, and to
make our pieces and furniture ready, which by the moisture and rain were out
of temper.

Saturday the 17 day, in the morning we called a meeting for the establishing
of military Orders amongst our selves, and we chose Miles Standish our
Captain, and gave him authority of command in affairs: and as we were in
consultation here abouts, two Savages presented themselves upon the top of an
hill, over against our Plantation, about a quarter of a mile and less, and
made signs unto us to come unto them; we likewise made signs unto them to
come to us, whereupon we armed our selves, and stood ready, and sent two over
the brook toward them, to wit, Captain Standish and Steven Hopkins, who went
toward them, only one of them had a Musket, which they laid down on the
ground in their sight, in sign of peace, and to parley with them, but the
Savages would not tarry their coming: a noise of a great many more was heard
behind the hill, but no more came in sight. This caused us to plant our great
Ordinances in places most convenient.

Wednesday the 21. of February, the master came on shore with many of his
Sailors, and brought with him one of the great Pieces, called a Minion, and
helped us to draw it up the hill, with another Piece that lay on shore, and
mounted them, and a saller and two bases; he brought with him a very fat Goose
to eat with us, and we had a fat Crane, and a Mallerd, and a dried
neats-tongue, and so we were kindly and friendly together.

Saturday the third of March, the wind was South, the morning mistie, but
toward noone warm and fair weather; the Birds sang in the Woods most
pleasantly; at one of the Clock it thundered, which was the first we heard in
that Country, it was strong and great claps, but short, but after an hour it
rayned very sadly till midnight.

Wednesday the seventh of March, the wind was full East, cold, but fair, that
day Master Carver with five other went to the great Ponds, which seem to be
excellent fishing places; all the way they went they found it exceedingly
beaten and haunted with Dear, but they saw none; amongst other foul, they saw
one a milk white foul, with a very black ^^ad: this day some garden seeds
were sown.

Friday the 16. a fair warm day toward; this morning we determined to
conclude of the military Orders, which we had began to consider of before, but
were interrupted by the Savages, as we mentioned formerly; and whilst we were
bu^^ed here about, we were interrupted again, for there presented himself a
Savage, which caused an Alarm, he very boldly came all alone and along the
houses straight to the Randevous, where we intercepted him* not suffering him
to go in, as undoubtedly he would, out of his boldness, he saluted us in
English, and bad us well-come, for he had learned some broken English amongst
the English men that came to fish at Monchiggon, and knew by name the most of
the Captains, Commanders, and Masters, that usually come, he was a man free in
speech, so far as he could express his mind* and of a seemly carriage, we
questioned him of many things, he was the first Savage we could meet withal;
he said he was not of these parts, but of Morattiggon, and one of the Sagamores
or Lords thereof, and had been 8. months in these parts, it lying hence a
days sail with a great wind, and five days by land; he discoursed of the
whole Country, and of every Province, and of their Sagamores, and their number
of men, and strength* the wind beginning to rise a little, we cast a horsemans
coat about him, for he was stark naked, only a leather about his wast, with a
fringe about a span long, or little more; he had a bow and 2 arrows, the one
^eaded, and the other vnheaded; he was a tall straight man, the hair of his
head black, long behind, only short before, none on his face at all; he asked
some beer, but we gave him strong water, and biscuit, and butter, and cheese,
and pudding, and a piece of a mallerd, all which he liked well, and had bin
acquainted with such amongst the English; he told us the place where we now
live, is called, Patuxe^, and that about four years ago, all the Inhabitants
dyed of an extraordinary plague, and there is neither man, woman, nor child
remaining as indeed we have found none, so as there is none to hinder our
possession, or to lay claim unto it; all the afternoon we spent in
communication with him, we would gladly have been rid of him at night, but he
was not willing to go this night, then we thought to carry him on ship-boord,
wherewith he was well content, and went into the Shallop, but the wind was
high and water scant, that it could not return back: we lodged him that night
at Steven Hopkins house, and watched him; the next day he went away back to
the Masasoits, from whence he said he came, who are our next bordering
neighbors: they are sixty strong, as he says* the Nausites are as near
South-east of them, and are a hundred strong, and those were they of whom our
people were encountered, as we before related. They are much incensed and
provoked against the English, and about eight months ago slew three English
men and two more hardly escaped by flight to Monhiggon; they were Sir
Ferdinando Gorge his men, as this Savage told us, as he did likewise of the
Huggerie, that is, Fight, that our discoverers had with the Nausites, and of
our tools that were taken out of the woods, which we willed him should be
brought again, otherwise, we would right our selves. These people are ill
affected toward the English, by reason of one Hunt, a master of a ship, who
deceived the people, and got them under color of ^ruking with them, twenty
out of this very place where we inhabit, and seven men from the Nausites, and
carried them away, and sold them for slaves like a wretched man (for 20. pound
a man) that cares not what mischief he does for hi^ profit.

Saturday in the morning we dismissed the Salvage, and gave him a knife, a
bracelet, and a ring; he promised within a night or two to come again* and to
bring with him some of the Massasoyts our neighbors, with such Beuers skins as
they had to trucke with us.

Saturday and Sunday reasonable fair days. On this day came again the
Savage, and brought with him five other tall proper men, they had every man a
Deeres skin on him, and the principal of them had a wild Cats skin, or such
like on the one arm; they had most of them long hosen up to their groynes,
close made; and above their groynes to their wast another leather, they were
altogether like the Irish-trouses; they are of complexion like our English
Gipseys, no hair or very little on their faces, on their heads long hair to
their shoulders, only cut before some trussed up before with a feather, broad
wise, like a fan, another a fox tail hanging out: these left (according to
our charge given him before) their Bows and Arrows a quarter of a mile from
our Town, we gave them entertaynement as we thought was sitting them, they did
eat liberally of our English victuals, they made semblance unto us of
friendship and amity; they song and danced after their manner like Anticks;
they brought with them in a thing like a Bow-case (which the principal of them
had about his wast) a little of their Corn pownded to Powder, which put to a
little water they eat; he had a little Tobacco in a bag, but none of them
drunk but when he listed, some of them had their faces painted black, from
the forehead to the chin, four or five fingers broad; others after other
fashions, as they liked; they brought three or four skins, but we would not
trucke with them at all that day, but wished them to bring more, and we would
trucke for all, which they promised within a night or two, and would leave
these behind them, though we were not willing they should, and they brought us
all our tools again which were taken in the Woods, in our men's absence, so
because of the day we dismissed them so soon as we could. But Samoset our
first acquaintance, either was sick, or feigned himself so, and would not go
with them and stayed with us till Wednesday morning: Then we sent him to them,
to know the reason they came not according to their words, and we gave him an
hat, a pair of stockings and shoes, a shirt, and a piece of cloth to tie
about his wast.

The Sabbath day, when we sent them from us, we gave every one of them some
trifles, especially, the principal of them, we carried them along with our
Arms to the place where they left their Bows and Arrows, whereat they were
amazed, and two of them began to slinke away, but that the other called them,
when they took their Arrows, we bad them farewell, and they were glad, and so
with many thanks given us they departed, with promise they would come again.

Monday and tuesday proved fair days, we dug on^ grounds, and sowed our
garden seeds.

Wednesday a fine warm day, we sent away Samose^.

That day we had again a meeting, to conclude of laws and orders for our
selves, and to confirm those Military Orders that were formerly propounded,
and twice broken off by the Savages coming, but so we were again the third
time, for after we had been an hour together, on the top of the hill over
against us two or three Savages presented themselves, that made semblance of
daring us, as we thought, so Captain Standish with another, with their Muskets
went over to them, with two of the masters mates that follows them without
Arms, having two Muskets with them, they wherted and rubbed their Arrows and
Strings, and made show of defiance, but when our men drew nere them, they ran
away. Thus we were again interrupted by them; this day with much ado we got
our Carpenter that had been long sick of the scurvey, to fit our Shallop, to
fetch all from aboard.

Thursday the 22. of March, was a very fair warm day. About noone we met
again about our public business, but we had scarc^ been an hour together,
but Samoset came again, and Squanto. the only native of Patuxat, where we now
inhabit, who was one of the twenty Captives that by Hunt were carried away,
and had been in England and dwelt in Cornehill with master John Sla^ie a
Merchant, and could speak a little English, with three others, and they
brought with them some few skins to trucke, and some red Herrings newly taken
and dried, but not salted, and signified unto us, that their great Sagamore
Masasoyt was hard by, with Quadequina his brother, and all their men. They
could not well express in English what they would, but after an hour the King
came to the top of an hill over against us, and had in his train sixty men,
that we could well behold them* and they us: we were not willing to send our
governor to them, and they unwilling to come to us, so Squanto went again
unto him, who brought word that we should send one to parley with him, which
we did, which was Edward Winsloe, to know his mind, and to signify the mind
and will of our governor, which was to have trading and peace with him. We
sent to the King a pair of Knives, and a Copper Chain, with a Jewel at it.
To Quadequina we sent likewise a Knife and a Jewel to hang in his ear, and
withal a Pot of strong water, a good quantity of Biscuit, and some butter,
which were all willingly accepted: our Messenger made a speech unto him, that
King JAMES saluted him with words of love and Peace, and did accept of him as
his Friend and Alie, and that our Governor desired to see him and to trucke
with him, and to confirm a Peace with him, as his next neighbor: he liked
well of the speech and heard it attentively* though the Interpreters did not
well express it; after he had eaten and drunk himself, and given the rest to
his company, he looked upon our messengers sword and armor which he had on,
with intimation of his desire to buy it, but on the other side, our messenger
showed his unwillingness to part with it: In the end he left him in the custody
of Quadequina his brother, and came over the brook, and some twenty men
following him, leaving all their Bows and Arrows behind them. We kept six or
seven as hostages for our messenger; Captain Standish and master Williamson
met the King at the brook, with half a dosen Musketeers, they saluted him and
he them, so one going over, the one on the one side, and the other on the
other, conducted him to a^ house then in building, where we placed a green
Rugge, and three or four Cushions, then instantly came our Governor with
Drum and Trumpet after him, and some few Musketeers. After salutations, our
Governor kissing his hand, the King kissed him, and so they sat down. The
Governor called for some strong water, and drunk to him, and he drunk a
great draught that made him sweat all the while after, he called for a little
fresh meat, which the King did eat willingly, and did give his followers.
Then they treated of Peace, which was; 1. That neither he nor any of hi^ should
iniure or do hurt to any of our people. The agreements of peace between us
and Massasoy^*
2. And if any of his did hurt to any of ours, he should send the offender,
that we might punish him. 3. That if any of our Tools were taken away when our
people were at work, he should cause them to be restored, and if ours did any
harm to any of his, we would do the like to them. 4. If any did unjustly
war against him, we would aid him; If any did war against us, he should
aydeys. 5. He should send to his neighbor Confederates, to certify them of
this, that they might not wrong us, but might be likewise comprised in the
conditions of Peace. 6. That when their men came to us, they should leave their
Bows and Arrows behind them, as we should do our Pieces when we came to
them.


Lastly, that doing thu^, King JAMES would esteem of him as his friend and
Alie: all which the King seemed to like well, and it was applauded of his
followers, all the while he sat by the Governor he trembled for fear: In his
person he is a very lusty man, in his best years, an able body, grave of
countenance, and spare of speech: In his Attire little or nothing differing
from the rest of his followers, only in a great Chain of white bone Beads
about his neck, and at it behind his neck, hangs a little bagg of Tobacco,
which he drank and gave us to drink; his face was painted with a sad red like
murry, and oyled both head and face, that he looked greasily; All his
followers likewise, were in their faces, in part or in whole painted, some
black, some red, some yellow, and some white, some with crosses, and other
Antic works, some had skins on them, and some naked, all strong, tall, all
men in appearance: so after all was done, the Governor conducted him to the
Brook, and there they embraced each other and he departed: we diligently
keeping our hostages, we expected our messengers coming, but anon word was
brought us, that Quaddequina was coming, and our messenger was stayed till his
return, who presently came and a troop with him, so likewise we entertained
him, and convayed him to the place prepared; he was very fearful of our
pieces, and made signs of dislike, that they should be carried away, whereupon
Commandment was given, they should be laid away. He was a very proper tall
young man, of a very modest and seemly countenance, and he did kindly like of
our entertainment, so we convayed him likewise as we did the King, but diverse
of their people stayed still, when he was returned, then they dismissed our
messenger. Two of his people would have stayed all night, but we would not
suffer it: one thing I forgot, the King had in his bosom hanging in a string,
a great long knife, he marveiled much at our Trumpet, and some of ^^men would
sound it as well as they could, Samoset and Squanto, they stayed al night with
us, and the King and al his men lay all night in the woods, not above half an
English mile from us, and all their wives and women with them, they said that
within 8. or 9. days, they would come and set corn on the other side of the
Brook, and dwell there all Summer, which is hard by us: That night we kept
good watch, but there was no appearance of danger; the next morning diverse of
their people came over to us, hoping to get some victuales as we imagined, some
of them told us the King would have some of us come see him; Captain Standish
and Isaac Alderton went venterously, who were welcomed of him after their
manner: he gave them three or four ground Nuts, and some Tobacco. We cannot
yet conceive, but that he is willing to have peace with us, for they have seen
our people sometimes alone two or three in the woods at work and fowling, when
as they offered them no harm as they might easily have done, and especially
because he has a potent Adversary the N^^^h^g^^seis, that are at war with
him, against whom he thinks we may be some strength to him, for our pieces
are terrible unto them; this morning, they stayed till ten or eleven of the
Clock, and our Governor bid them send the Kings kettle, and filled it full of
pease, which pleased them well, and so they went their way.

Friday was a very fair day, Samoset and Squanto still remained with us,
Squanto went at noone to fish for Eeles, at night he came home with as many as
he could well lift in one hand, which our people were glad of, they were fat
and sweet, he trod them out with his feet, and so caught them with his hands
without any other Instrument,

This day we proceeded on with our common business, from which we had been so
often hindered by the Salvage^ coming, and concluded both of Military orders,
and of some Laws and Orders as we thought behoofefull for our present estate,
and condition, and did likewise choose our Governor for this year, which was
Master John Carver a man well approoved amongst us.

A IOVRNEY TO PACKANOKIK, The Habitation of the Great King MASSASOYT. As also
our Message, the Answer and intertainement we had of HIM.
IT seemed good to the Company for many considerations to send some amongst
them to Massasoyt, the greatest Commander amongst the Savages, bordering about
us; partly to know where to find them, if occasion served, as also to see their
strength, discover the Country, prevent abuses in their disorderly coming unto
us, make satisfaction for some conceived jniuries to be done on our parts, and
to continue the league of Peace and Friendship between them and us. For these,
and the like ends, it pleased the Governor to make choice of Steven Hopkins,
and Edward Winslo^ to go unto him, and having a fit opportunity, by reason of
a Savage, called Tisquantum (that could speak English) coming unto us; with
all expedition provided a Horse-mans coat, of red Cotton, and laced with a
slight lace for a present, that both they and their message might be the more
acceptable amongst them. The Message was as follows; That forasmuch as his
subjects came often and without fear, upon all occasions amongst us, so we
were now come unto him, and in witness of the love and good will the English
bear unto him, the Governor has sent him a coat, desiring that the Peace and
Amitte that was between them and us might be continued, not that we feared
them, but because we intended not to iniure any, desiring to live peaceably:
and as with all men, so especially with them our nearest neighbors. But
whereas his people came very often, and very many together unto us, bringing
for the most part their wives and children with them, they were well come; yet
we being but strangers as yet at Patuxet, alias New Plimmoth, and not knowing
how our Corn might prosper, we could no longer give them such entertainment as
we had done, and as we desired still to do: yet if he would be pleased to come
himself, or any special friend of his desired to see us, coming from him
they should be welcome; and to the end we might know them from others, our
Governor had sent him a copper Chain, desiring if any Messenger should come
from him to us, we might know him by bringing it with him, and hearken and give
credit to his Message accordingly. Also requesting him that such as have
^kin^, should bring them to us, and that he would hinder the multitude from
oppressing us with them. And whereas as our first arrival at Pao^i^t (called
by us Cape ^od) we found there Corn buried in the ground, and finding no
inhabitants but some graves of dead now buried, took the Corn, resolving if
ever we could hear of any that had right thereunto, to make satisfaction to
the full for it, yet since we understand the owners thereof were fled for fear
of us, our desire was either to pay them with the like quantity of corn,
English meal, or any other Commodities we had to pleasure them withal;
requesting him that some one of his men might signify so much unto them, and
we would content him for his pains. And last of all, our Governor requested
one favor of him, which was, that he would exchange some of their Corn for
seed with us, that we might make trial which best agreed with the foil where
we live.

With these presents and message we set forward the tenth June, about 9. a
clock in the Morning, our guide resolving that night to rest at Namasches, a
Town under Massasoyt, and conceived by us to be very near, because the
Inhabitants flocked so thick upon every slight occasion amongst us: but we
found it to be some fifteen English miles. On the way we found some ten or
twelve men women and children, which had pestered us, till we were weary of
them, perceiving that (as the manner of them all is) where victual is
easiliest to be got, there they live, especially in the Summer: by reason
whereof our ^ay affording many Lobsters, they resort every spring tide thither:
and now returned with us to Namaschet. Thither we came about 3. a clock after
noone* the Inhabitants entertaining us with joy, in the best manner they could,
giving us a kind of bread called by them Maixium, and the spawne of Shade,
which then they got in abundance, in so much as they gave us spoones to eat
them, with these they boiled mustie Acorns, but of the Shads we eat heartily.
After this they desired one of our men to shoot at a Crow, complaining what
damage they sustained in their Corn by them, who shooting some fourscore off
and killing, they much admired it, as other shots on other occasions. After
this Tisquantum told us we should hardly in one day reach Pakanokick, moving us
to go some 8. miles further, where we should find more store and better
victuals then there: Being willing to hasten our Journey we went, and came
thither at Sun setting, where we found many of the Namaschecks (they so
calling the men of Namaschet) fishing upon a Ware which they had made on a
River which belonged to them, where they caught abundance of Basse. These
welcomed us also, gave us of their fish, and we them of our victuals, not
doubting but w^ should have enough where ere we came. There we lodged in the
open fields: for houses they had none, though they spent the most of the
Summer there. The head of this River is reported to be not far from the
place of our abode, upon it are, and have been many Towns, it being a good
length. The ground (...) good on both sides, it being for the most part
cleared: Thousands of men have lived there, which dyed in a great plague not
long since: and pity it was and is to ^ee, so many goodly, fields, and so
well seated, without men to dress and manure the same. Upon this River
dwells Massasoyt: It comes into the Sea at the Narrohiganset Bay, where the
French men so much use. A shipp may go many miles up it, as the Salvages
report, and a shallop to the head of it: but so far as we saw, we are sure
a Shallop may.

But to return to our Journey: The next morning we brake our fast, took our
leave and departed, being then accompanied with some six Salvages, having gone
about six miles by the Riverside, at a known shole place, it being low
water, they spoke to us to put off our breeches, for we must wade through.
Here let me not forget the valor and courrage of some of the Salvage^, on
the opposite side of the river, for there were remaining alive only 2. men,
both aged, especially the one being above threescore; These two espying a
company of men entering the River, ran very swiftly and low in the grass to
meet us at the banck, where with shall voices and great courage standing
charged upon us with their bows, they demanded what we were, supposing us to
be enemies, and thinking to take advantage on us in the water: but seeing we
were friends, they welcomed us with such food as they had, and we bestowed a
small bracelet of Beads on them. Thus far we are sure the ^ide ^bs and
flows.

Having here again refreshed our selves we proceeded in our Journey, the
weather being very hot for travel, yet the Country so well watered that a man
could scarce be dry, but he should have a spring at hand to cool his thirst,
beside small Rivers in abundance: But the Salvages will not willingly drink,
but at a spring head. When we came to any small Brook where no bridge was,
two of them desired to carry us through of their own accords, also fearing we
were or would be weary, offered to carry our pieces, also if we would lay off
any of our clothes, we should have them carried: and as the one of them had
found more special kindness from one of the Messengers, and the other Salvage
from the other so they showed their thankfulness accordingly in affording v^
all help, and furtherance in the Journey.

As we passed along, we observed that there were few places by the River, but
had been inhabited, by reason whereof, much ground was clear, save of weeds
which grew higher then our heads. There is much good Timber both Oak,
Wallnut-tree, Fur, Beech, and exceeding great Chessnut-trees. The Country in
respect of the lying of it, is both Champani^ and hilly, like many places in
England. In some places its very rockie both above ground and in it: And though
the Country be wild and over-growne with woods, yet the trees stand not
thick, but a man may well ride a horse amongst them.

Passing on at length, one of the Company an Indian espied a man, and ^old the
rest of it, we asked them if they fea^ed any, they told us that if they were
Narrohigganset, men they would not trust them, whereat, we called for our
pieces and bid them not to fear; for though they were twenty, we two alone
would not care for them: but they hayling him, he prooved a friend, and had
only two women with him: their baskets were empty, but they fetched water in
their bottels, so that we drank with them and departed. After we met another
man with other two women, which had been at Rand^vow by the salt water, and
their baskets were full of roasted Crab fishes, and other dried shell fish, of
which they gave us, and we eat and drank with them: and gave each of the
women a string of Beads, and departed.

After we came to a Town of Massasoyts, where we eat Oysters and other fish.
From thence we went to Packanokick, but Massasoyt was not at home, there we
stayed he being sen^ for: when news was brought of his coming, our guide
Tisquantum requested that at our meeting, we would discharge our pieces, but
one of us going about to charge his piece, the women and children through fear
to see him take up his piece, ran away, and could not be p^cified, till he
laid it down again, who afterward were better informed by our Interpreter.

Massasoyt being come, we discharged our Pieces, and saluted him, who after
their manner kindly well commed us, and took us into his house, and set us
down by him, where having delivered our foresaid Message, and Presents, and
having put the Coat on his back, and the Chain about his neck, he was not a
little proud to behold himself, and his men also to see their King so bravely
attyred.

For answer to our Message, he told us we were well-come, and he would gladly
continue that Peace and Friendship which was between him and us: and for his
men they should no more pester us as they had done: Also, that he would send to
Paomet, and would help us with Corn for seed, according to our request.

This being done his men gathered near to him, to whom he turned himself, and
made a great Speech; they sometime interposing, and as it were, confirming and
applauding him in that he said. The meaning whereof was (as far as we could
learn) thus; Was not he Massasoyt Commander of the Country about them? Was
not such a Town his and the people of it? and should they not bring their
skins unto us? To which they answered, they were his and would be at peace with
us, and bring their skins to us. After this manner, he named at least thirty
places, and their answer was as aforesaid to every one: so that as it was
delightful, it was tedious unto us.

This being ended, he lighted Tobacco for us, and fell to discoursing of
England, and of the Kings Majesty, marvayling that he would live without a
wife. Also he talked of the Frenchmen, bidding us not to suffer them to come
to Narrohiganset, for it was King JAMES his Country, and he also was King
JAMES his man. Late it grew, but victuals he offered none; for indeed he had
not any, being he came so newly home. So we desired to go to rest: he laid us
on the bed with himself and his wife, they at the one end and we at the other,
it being only plancks laid a foot from the ground, and a thin Mat upon them.
Two more of his chief men for want of room pressed by and upon us; so that we
were worse weary of our lodging then of our journey.

The next day being Thursday, many of their Sachims, or petty Governors came
to see us, and many of their men also. There they went to their manner of Games
for skins and knives. There we challenged them to shoot with them for skins:
but they durst not: only they desired to see one of us shoot at a mark, who
shooting with Haile-shot, they wondered to see the mark so full of holes. About
one a clock, Massasoyt brought two fishes that he had shot, they were like
B^^ame but three times so big, and better meat. These being boiled there
were at lest forty looked for share in them, the most eat of them: This meal
only we had in two nights and a day, and had not one of us bought a Partridge,
we had taken our Journey fasting: Very importunate he was to have us stay with
them longer: But we desired to keep the Sabbath at home: and feared we should
either be lightheaded for want of sleep, for what with had lodging, the
Savages barbarous singing, (for they use to sing themselves asleep) lice and
^leas within doors, and Muskeetoes without, we could hardly sleep all the
time of our being there; we much fearing, that if we should stay any longer,
we should not be able to recover home for want of strength. So that on the
Friday morning before Sunrising, we took ou^ leave and departed, Massasoyt
being both grieved and ashamed, that he could no better entertain us: and
retaining Tisquantum to send from place to place to procure t^ucke for us: and
appointing another, called Tokamahamon in his place, whom we had found
faithful before and after upon all occasions.

At this town of Massasoyts, where we before eat, we were again refreshed
with a little fish; and bought about a handful of Meal of their parched
Corn, which was very precious at that time of the year, and a small string of
dried shellfish, as big as Oysters. The latter we gave to the six Savages
that accompanied us, keeping the Meal for our selves, when we drank we eat
each a spoonefull of it with a Pipe of Tobacco, in stead of other victuals; and
of this also we could not but give them so long as it lasted. Five miles they
led us to a house out of the way in hope of victuals: but we found no body
there, and so were but worse able to return home. That night we reached to the
wire where we lay before, but the Namascheusks were returned: so that we had no
hope of any thing there. One of the Savages had shot a Shad in the water, and a
small Squirrill as big as a Rat, called a Neuxis, the one half of either he
gave us, and after went to the wire to fish. From hence we wrote to Plymouth,
and sent Tokamahamon before to Namasket, willing him from thence to send
another, that he might meet us with food at Namasket. Two men now only
remained with us, and it pleased God to give them good store of fish, so that
we were well refreshed. After supper we went to rest, and they to fishing
again: more they gat and fell to eating a fresh, and retained sufficient
ready roast for all our break-fasts. About two a Clock in the morning, arose a
great storm of wind, rain, lightning, and thunder, in such violent manner,
that we could not keep in our fire; and had the Savages not roasted fish when
we were asleep, we had set forward fasting: for the rain still continued with
great violence, even the whole day through, till we came within two miles of
home.

Being wett and weary, at length we came to Namaschet, there we refreshed our
selves, giving gifts to all such as had showed us any kindness. Amongst others
one of the six that came with us from Packanokik having before this on the way
unkindly forsaken us, marvayled we gave him nothing, and told us what he had
done for us; we also told him of some discurtesies he offered us, whereby he
deserved nothing, yet we gave him a small trifle: whereupon he offered us
Tobacco: but the house being full of people, we told them he stole some by the
way, and if it were of that we would not take it: For we would not receive that
which was stolen upon any terms; if we did, our God would be angry with us,
and destroy us. This abashed him, and gave the rest great content: but at our
departure he would needs carry him on his back through a River, whom he had
formerly in some sort abused. Feign they would have had us to lodge there all
night: and wondered we would set forth again in such Weather: but GOD be
praised, we came safe home that night, though wett, weary, and surbated.

A VOYAGE MADE BY TEN of our Men to the Kingdom of NAVSET, to seek a Boy that
had lost himself in the WOODS; With such Accidents as befell us in that VOYAGE.
THe 11th of June we set forth, the weather being very fair: but ere we had
bin long at Sea, there arose a storm of wind and rain, with much lightning
and thunder, in so much that a spout arose not far from us: but God be praised,
it dured not long, and we put in that night for Harbor at a place, called
Cummaquid, where we had some hope to find the Boy. Two Savages were in the
Boat with us, the one was Tisquantum our Interpreter, the other Tokamahamon, a
special friend. It being night before we came in, we Anchored in the midst
of the Bay, where we were dry at a low water. In the morning we espied Savages
seeking Lobsters, and sent our two Interpreters to speak with them, the
channel being between them; where they told them what we were, and for what
we were come, willing them not at all to fear us, for we would not hurt them.
Their answer was, that the Boy was well, but he was at Nauset; yet since we
were there they desired us to come ashore and eat with them: which as soon as
our Boat floated we did: and went six ashore, having four pledges for them in
the Boat. They brought us to their Sachim or Governor, whom they call
Iyanough, a man not exceeding twentie-six years of age, but very personable,
gentle, courteous, and fair conditioned, indeed not like a Savage, save for
his attire; his entertainment was answerable to his parts, and his cheer
plentiful and various.

One thing was very grievous unto us at this place; There was an old woman,
whom we judged to be no less then an hundred years old, which came to see us
because she never saw English, yet could not behold us without breaking forth
into great passion, weeping and crying excessiuely. We demanding the reason of
it, they told us, she had three sons, who when master Hunt was in these parts
went aboard his Ship to trade with him, and he carried them Captives into
Spain (for Tisquantum at that time was carried away also) by which means she
was deprived of the comfort of her children in her old age. We told them we
were sorry that any English man should give them that offense, that Hunt was a
bad man, and that all the English that heard of it condemned him for the same:
but for us we would not offer them any such injury, though it would gain us
all the skins in the Country. So we gave her some small trifles, which
somewhat appeased her.

After dinner we took Boat for Nauset, Iyanough and two of his men
accompanying us. Ere we came to Nauset, the day and tide were almost spent, in
so much as we could not go in with our Shallop: but the Sachim or Governor of
Comm^quid went a shore and his men with him, we also sent Tisquantum to tell
Aspinet the Sachim of Nauset wherefore we came. The Savages here came very
thick amongst us, and were earnest with us to bring in our Boat. But we
neither well could, nor yet desired to do it, because we had lest cause to
trust them, being they only had formerly made an Assault upon us in the same
place, in time of our Winter Discovery for Habitation. And indeed it was no
maruayle they did so, for howsoever through snow or otherwise we saw no
houses, yet we were in the midst of them.

When our boat was a ground they came very thick, but we stood therein upon
our guard, not suffering any to enter except two: the one being of Maramoick
and one of those, whose Corn we had formerly found, we promised him
restitution, and desired him either to come to Patuxet for satisfaction, or
else we would bring them so much corn again, he promised to come, we used
him very kindly for the present. Some few skins we gate there but not many.

After Sunset, Aspinet came with a great train, and brought the boy with him,
one bearing him through the water: he had not less then an hundred with him,
the half whereof came to the Shallop side unarmed with him, the other stood
aloof with their bow and arrows. There he delivered us the boy, behung with
beads, and made peace with us, we bestowing a knife on him, and likewise on
another that first entertained the Boy and brought him thither. So they
departed from us.

Here we understood, that the Narrohigansets had spoiled some of Massasoyts
men, and taken him. This struck some fear in us, because the Colony was so
weakly guarded, the strength thereof being abroad: But we set forth with
resolution to make the best have home we could; yet the wind being contrary,
having scarce any fresh water least, and at least 16. leagues home, we put in
again for the shore. There we met again with Iyanough the Sachim of
Cu^maquid, and the most of his Town, both men women and children with him. He
being still willing to gratify us, took a runlet and led our men in the dark
a great way for water, but could find none good: yet brought such as there was
on his neck with them. In the mean time the women joined hand in hand,
singing and dancing before the Shallop, the men also showing all the kindness
they could, Iyanough himself taking a bracelet from about his neck, and
hanging it upon one of us.

Again we set out but to small purpose: for we gat but little homeward; Our
water also was very brackish, and not to be drunk.

The next morning, Iyanough espied us again and ran after us; we being
resolved to go to Cummaquid again to water, took him into the Shallop, whose
entertainment was not inferior unto the former.

The soil at Nauset and here is alike, even and sandy, not so good for corn
as where we are; Ships may safely ride in either harbor. In the Summer, they
abound with fish. Being now watered, we put forth again, and by Gods
providence, came safely home that night.

A IOVRNEY TO THE Kingdom of NAMASCHET in defense of the Great King MASSASOYT
against the Narrohiggansets, and to revenge the supposed Death of our
Interpreter Tisquantum.
AT our return from Nauset, we found it true, that Massasoyt was put from his
Country by the Narrohiggansets. Word also was brought unto us, that one
Coubatant a petty Sachim or Governor under Massasoyt (whom they ever feared to
be too conversant wi^h the Narrohiggansets) was at Namaschet, who sought to
draw the hearts of Massasoyts subjects from him, speaking also disdainfully of
us, storming at the Peace between Nauset, Cummaquid, and us, and at Tisqua^tum
the worker of it; also at Tokamahamon, and one Hobbamock (two Indians or Lemes,
one of which he would trecherously have murdered a little before, being a
special and trusty man of Massasoyts) Tokamahamon went to him, but the other
two would not; yet put their lives in their hands, privately went to see if
they could hear of their King, and lodging at Namaschet were discovered to
Coubatant, who set a guard to beset the house and took Ti^quantum (for he had
said, if he were dead, the English had lost their tongue) Hobbamock seeing that
Tisquantum was taken, and Coubatant held a knife at his breast, being a strong
and stout man, brake from them and came to New-Plimmouth, full of fear and
sorrow for Tisquantum, whom he thought to be slain.

Upon this News the Company assembled together, and resolved on the morrow to
send ten men armed to Namaschet and Hobbamock, for their guide, to revenge the
supposed death of Tisquantum on Coubatant our bitter Enemy, and to retain
N^pcof, another Sachim or Governor, who was of this confederacy, till we
heard, what was become of our friend Massasoyt.

On the morrow we set out ten men Armed, who took their journey as aforesaid,
but the day proved very wett. When we supposed we were within three or four
miles of Namaschet, we went out of the way and stayed there till night, because
we would not be discovered. There we consulted what to do, and thinking best
to beset the house at midnight, each was appointed his task by the Captain,
all men encouraging one another, to the utmost of their power.

By night our guide lost his way, which much discouraged our men, being we were
wet, and weary of our arms: but one of our men having been before at
Namasch^t brought us into the way again.

Before we came to the Town we sat down and ate such as our Knapsacke
affoorded, that being done, we threw them aside, and all such things as might
hinder us, and so went on and beset the house, according to our last
resolution. Those that entered, demanded if Coubatant were not there: but fear
had bereft the Savages of speech. We charged them not to stir, for if
Coubatant were not there, we would not meddle with them, if he were, we came
principally for him, to be avenged on him for the supposed death of Tisquantum,
and other matters: but howsoever we would not at all hurt their women, or
children. Notwithstanding some of them pressed out at a private door and
escaped, but with some wounds: At length perceiving our principal ends, they
told us Coubatant was returned with all his train, and that Tisquantum was yet
living, and in the town offering some Tobacco* other such as they had to eat.
In this hurley burley we discharged two Pieces at random, which much terrified
all the Inhabitants, except Tisquantum and Tokamahamon, who though they knew
not our end in coming, yet assured them of our honesty, that we would not hurt
them. Those boys that were in the house seeing our care of women, often cried
Neensqua^s, that is to say, I am a Woman: the Women also hanging upon
Hobbamock, calling him Towam, that is, Friend. But to be short, we kept them we
had, and made them make a fire that we might see to search the house. In the
mean time, Hobbamock gat on the top of the house, and called Tisquantum and
Tokamahamon, which came unto us accompanied with others, some armed and others
naked. Those that had Bows and Arrows we took them away, promising them
again when it was day. The house we took for our better safegar (...)
released those we had taken, manifesting whom we came for and wherefore.

On the next morning we marched into the midst of the Town, and went to the
house of Tisquantum to breakfast. Thither came all whose hearts were upright
toward us, but all Coubatants faction were fled away. There in the midst of
them we manifested again our intendment, assuring them, that although
Coubatant had now escaped us, yet there was no place should secure him and his
from us if he continued his threatening us, and provoking others against us, who
had kindly entertained him, and never intended evil toward him till he now so
justly deserved it. Moreover, if Massasoyt did not return in safety from
Narrohigganset, or if hereafter he should make any insurrection against him, or
offer violence to Tisquantum, Hobbamock, or any of Massasoyts Subjects, we
would revenge it upon him, to the ouer-throw of him and his. As for those were
wounded, we were sorry for it, though themselves procured it in not staying in
the house at our command: yet if they would return home with us, our Surgeon
should heal them.

At this offer, one man and a woman that were wounded went home with us,
Tisquantum and many other known friends accompanying us, and offering all
help that might be by carriage of any thing we had to ease us. So that by
Gods good Providence we safely returned home the morrow night after we set
forth.

A RELATION OF OUR Voyage to the MASSACHVSETS, And what happened there.
IT seemed good to the Company in general, that though the Massachusetts had
often threatened us (as we were informed) yet we should go amongst them, partly
to see the Country, partly to make Peace with them, and partly to procure
their trucke.

For these ends the Governors chose ten men, fit for the purpose, and sent
Tisquantum, and two other Salvages to bring us to speech with the people, and
interpret for us.

We set out about midnight, the tide then serving for us; we supposing it to
be nearer then it is, thought to be there the next morning betimes: but it
proved well near twenty Leagues from New Plimmouth.

We came into the bottom of the Bay, but being late we anchored and lay in
the Shallop, not having seen any of the people. The next morning we put in for
the shore. There we found many Lobsters that had been gathered together by the
Saluages, which we made ready under a cliffe. The Captain set two Sentinels
behind the cliffe to the landward to secure the Shallop, and taking a guide
with him, and four of our company, went to seek the Inhabitants, where they
met a woman coming for her Lobsters, they told her of them, and contented her
for them. She told them where the people were; Tisquantum went to them, the
rest returned, having direction which way to bring the Shallop to them.

The Sachim, or Governor of this place, is called Obbatinewat, and though he
live in the bottom of the Massachuset bay, yet he is under Massasoyt. He used
us very kindly, he told us, he durst not then remain in any settled place, for
fear of the Terentines. Also the Squa Sachim, or Massachusetts Queen was an
enemy to him.

We told him of diverse Sachims that had acknowledged themselves to be King
JAMES his men, and if he also would submit himself, we would be his safeguard
from his enemies; which he did, and went along with us to bring us to the Squa
Sachim. Again we crossed the Bay which is very large, and has at lest fifty
Islands in it: but the certain number is not known to the Inhabitants. Night
it was before we came to that side of the Bay where this people were. On shore
the Saluages went but found no body. That night also we ^id at Anchor aboard
the Shallop.

On the morrow we went ashore, all but two men and marched in Arms up in the
Country. Having gone three miles, we came to a place where Corn had been
newly gathered, a house pulled down, and the people gone. A mile from hence,
Nanepashemet their King in his life time had lived. His house was not like
others, but a scaffold was largely built, with pools and plancks some six foot
from ground, and the house upon that, being situated on the top of a hill.

Not far from hence in a bottom, we came to a Fort built by their deceased
King, the manner thus; There were pools some thirty or forty foot long,
stuck in the ground as thick as they could be set one by another, and with
these they enclosed a ring some forty or fifty foot over. A trench breast high
was dug on each side; one way there was to go into it with a bridge; in the
midst of this Palli^ado stood the frame of an house, wherein being dead he lay
buried.

About a mile from hence, we came to such another, but seated on the top of an
hill: here Nanepashemet was killed, none dwelling in it since the time of his
death. At this place we stayed, and sent two Saluages to look the Inhabitants,
and to inform them of our ends in coming, that they might not be fearful of
us: Within a mile of this place they found the women of the place together,
with their Corn on heaps, whither we supposed them to be sted for fear of
us, and the more, because in diverse places they had newly pulled down their
houses, and for have in one place had left some of their Corn covered with a
Mat, and no body with it.

With much fear they entertained us at first, but seeing our gentle carriage
toward them, they took heart and entertained us in the best manner they
could, boiling Cod and such other things as they had for us. At length with
much sending for came one of their men, shaking and trembling for fear. But
when he saw we intended them no hurt, but came to trucke, he promised us his
skins also. Of him we enquired for their Queen, but it seemed she was far
from thence, at lest we could not see her.

Here Tisquantum would have had us rifled the Saluage women, and taken their
skins, and all such things as might be serviceable for us, for (said he) they
are a bad people, and have often threatened you: But our answer was; Were they
never so bad, we would not wrong them, or give them any just occasion against
us: for their words we little weighed them, but if they once attempted any
thing against us, then we would deal far worse then he desired.

Having well spent the day, we returned to the Shallop, almost all the Women
accompanying us, to trucke, who sold their coats from their backs, and tied
boughs about them, but with great shamefastness (for indeed they are more
modest then some of our English women are) we promised them to come again to
them, and they us, to keep their skins.

Within this Bay, the Salvages say, there are two Rivers; the one whereof we
saw, having a fair entrance, but we had no time to discover it. Better
harbors for shipping cannot be then here are. At the entrance of the Bay are
many Rocks; and in all likelihood very good fishing ground. Many, yea, most of
the Islands have been inhabited, some being cleared from end to end, but the
people are all dead, or removed.

Our victual growing scarce, the Wind coming fair, and having a light
Moon, we set out at evening, and through the goodness of GOD, came safely
home before noone the day following.

A LETTER SENT FROM New England to a friend in these parts, setting forth a
brief and true Declaration of the worth of that Plantation; As also certain
useful Directions for such as intend a VOYAGE into those Parts.
Loving, and old Friend, although I received no Letter from you by this Ship,
yet forasmuch as I know you expect the performance of my promise, which was, to
write unto you truly and faithfully of all things. I have therefore at this
time sent unto you accordingly. Referring you for further satisfaction to our
more large Relations You shall understand, that in this little time, that a few
of us have been here, we have built seven dwelling houses, and four for the
use of the Plantation, and have made preparation for diverse others. We set the
last Spring some twenty Acres of Indian Corn, and sowed some six Acres of
Barley and Pease, and according to the manner of the Indians, we manured our
ground with Herings or rather Shadds, which we have in great abundance, and
take with great ease at our doors. Our Corn did prove well, and God be
praised, we had a good increase of Indian Corn, and our Barley indifferent
good, but our Pease not worth the gathering, for we feared they were too late
sown, they came up very well, and blossomed, but the Sun parched them in the
blossom* one harvest being gotten in, our Governor sent four men on fowlle^,
that so we might after a more special manner rejoice together, after we had
gathered the fruit of our labours^ they (...) in one day killed as much foul,
as with a (...) beside, served the Company almost a week, at which time
amongst (...) Recreations, we exercised our Arms, many of the Indians coming
amongst us, and amongst the rest their greatest King Massassoyt, with some
nintie men, whom for three days we entertained and feasted and they went out
and killed five Dear, which they brought to the Plantation and bestowed on our
Governor, and upon the Captain, and others. And although it be not always so
plentiful, as it was at this time with us, yet by the goodness of God, we are
so far from want, that we often wish you partakers of our plenty. We have
found the Indians very faithful in their Covenant of Peace with us; very
loving and ready to pleasure us: we often go to them, and they come to vs^
some of us have bin fi^tie miles by Land in the Country with whom, the
occasions and Relations whereof you shall understand by our general and
morefull Declaration of such things (...) are worth the noting, yea, it has
pleased God so to possess the Indians with a fear of us, and love unto us,
that not only the greatest King amongst them called Massasoyt, but also all
the Princes and people^ round about (...), have either made su^e unto us, or
been glad of any occasion to make peace with us, so that seven of them at
once have sent their messengers to us to that end, yea, an Fl^nt sea, which we
never saw has also together with the for^er yielded willingly to be under the
protection, and subjects to (...) sovereign Lord King JAMES, so that there is
now greatly (...) amongst the Indians themselves, which was not formerly
neither would have bin but for us* and we for our parts walks as peaceably and
safely in the wood, as in the hie ways in England, we entertain them
familiarly in our houses, and they as friendly bestowing their Venison on
(...). They are a people without any Religion, or knowledge of any God, yet
very trusty, quick of apprehe^sion, (...) witted, just the men and women go
naked, only (...) about their middles; for the traiper of the air, (...) it
agrees well with that in England, and if there be any different^ at all, this
is somewhat hotter in Summer, home (...) he deed bledolderin. Winter, but I
cannot out of experience so say, the air is very clear and not foggie, as
has been reported. I never in my life remember a more seasonable year, then
we have here enjoined: and if we have once but Kine, Horses, and Sheep, I make
no question, but men might live as contended here: as in any part of the world.
For fish and foul, we have great abundance, fresh Codd in the Summer is but
course meat with us, our Bay is full of Lobsters all the Summer, and affords
variety of other Fish; in September we can take a Hogshead of ^e^es in a
night, with small labor, and can dig them out of their beds, all the Winter we
have Mussells and Othus at our doors: Oysters we have ^^ noneere, but we can
have them brought by the Indians when we will; all the Spring time the earth
sends forth naturally very good Sallet Herbs: here are Grapes, white and red,
and very sweet and strong also. Strawberies, Goofeberies, Raspa^, etc. Plums
of three sorts, with black and red, being almost as good as a Damsen:
abundance of Roses, white; red, and damask: single, but very sweet indeed; the
Country wants only industrious men to employ, for it would grieve your
hearts (if as I) you had seen so many miles together by goodly Rivers
vnihabited, and withal to consider those parts of the world wherein you live*
to be even greatly burdened with abundance of people. These things I thought
good to let you understand, being the truth of things as new as I could
experimentally take knowledge of, and that you might on our behalf give God
thanks who has dealt so favorably with us.

Our supply of men from you came the ninth of November 1621. putting in at Cape
^od, some eight or ten leagues from us, the Indians that dwell there about were
they who were owners of the Corn which we found in Caves, for which we have
given them full content, and are in great league with them, they (...) us (...)
was a ship nere unto them, but though^ it to be (...) indeed for our selves,
we expected not a friend so soon. But when we perceived that she made for our
Bay, the Governor commanded a great (...) to beshoo^^, (...) all (...) were
abroad at work; whereupon (...) that could handle^ Gun were ready, with full
resolution that if she were an Enemy, we would stand (...) just defense, not
fearing them, but God provided better for us then we supposed; these came all
in health unto us, (...) being sick by the way (otherwise then by Sea
sickness) and so continue at this time, by the blessing of God, the good wife
lord was delivered of a son the first night she landed and both of them are
very well. When it pleases God, we are settled and sitted for the fishing
business, and other trading, I doubt not but by the blessing of God, the gain
will give content to all; in the mean time, that we have gotten we have sent
by this ship, and though it be not much, yet it will witness for us, that we
have not been idle, considering the smallness of our (...) all this Summer.
We hope the Merchants will accept of it, and be encouraged to furnish us with
things needful for further employment, which will also encourage us to put
forth our selves to the uttermost. Now because ^^ expect your coming unto us
with other of our friends, whose company we much desire, I thought good to
advertise you of a few things needful; be careful to have a very good
bread-roome to put your Biskets in, let your Cask for Beer and Water be
Iron-bound for the first tire if not more; let not your meat be dry salted,
none can better do it then the Sailors; let your meal be so hard trodd in
your Cask that you shall need an Ads or Hatchet to work it out with: Trust not
too much on us for Corn at this time, for by reason of this last company that
came, depending wholly upon us, we shall have little enough till harvest; be
careful to come by some of your meal to spend by the way, it will much
refresh you, build your Cabbins as open as you can, and bring good store of
clothes, and beding with you, bring every man a Musker or fowling Pe^ce, let
your Pe^ce be long in the barrel, and fear not the weight of it, for most of
our shooting is from Stands; bring juice of Lemons, and take it fasting, it is
of good use; for hot waters, Anni^seed water is the best, but use it sparingly:
if you bring a^y thing for comfort in the Country, Butter or Sallet oil or
both is very good; our Indian Corn even the coursest, makes as pleasant meat
as Rice, therefore spare that unless to spend by the way; bring Paper, and
Linced oil for your Windows, with Cotton yarne for your Lamps; let your shot
be most for big Fowls, and bring store of Powder and shot: I forbear
further to write for the present, hoping to see you by the next return, so I
take my lean, comm^nding you to the LORD for a safe conduct unto us. Resting
in him

Plimmouth in New England this 11. of December. 1621. Your loving Friend E. W.

Reason and considerations touching the lawfulness of removing out of England
into the parts of America.
FOrasmuch as many exceptions are daily made against the going into, The
Preamble.
and inhabiting of foreign desert places, to the hinderance of plantations
abroad, and the increase of distractions at home: It is not amiss that some
which have been care witnesses of the exceptions made, and are either Agents
or Abettors of such remouals and plantations, do seek to give content to the
world, in all things that possibly they can.

And although the most of the opposites are such as either dream of raising
their fortunes here, to that then which there is nothing more unlike, or such
as affecting their home-borne country so vehemently, as that they had rather
with all their friends beg, yea starve in it, the undergo a little
difficulty in seeking abroad, yet are there some who out of doubt in
tenderness of conscience, and fear to offend God by running before they be
called, are straightened and do straiten others, from going to foreign
plantations.

For whose cause especially, I have been drawn out of my good affection to
them, to publish some reasons that might give them content and satisfaction,
and also stay and stop the wilful and witty cauiller: and herein I trust I
shall not be blamed of any godly wise, though through my slender judgment I
should miss the mark, and not strike the nail on the head, considering it i^
the first attempt that has been made (that I know of) to defend those
enterprises. Reason would therefore, that if any man of deeper reach and better
judgment see further or otherwise, that he rather instruct me, then deride me.

And being studious or brevity, we must first consider, (...). Genesis 12. ^, ^
and 35.^.
that whereas God of old did call and summon our Fathers by predictions,
dreams, visions, and certain illuminations to go from their countries, Mat.
2. 19.
places and habitations, to reside and dwell here or there, Psalm. 105. 13.
and to wander up and down from city to city, and Land to Land, according to
his will and pleasure. Now there is no such calling to be expected for any
matter whatsoever, neither must any so much as imagine that there will now be
any such thing. Eseb. 1. 1, 2.
God did once so train up his people, but now he does not, but speaks in
another manner, and so we must apply our selves to Gods present dealing, and
not to his wonted dealing: and as the miracle of giving Man^^s ceased, Josh.
^.12.
when the fruit^ of the land became plenty, so God having such a plentiful
storehouse of directions in his holy word, there must not now any
extraordinary revelations be expected.

But now the ordinary examples and precepts of the Scriptures reasonably and
rightly understood and applied, must be the voice and word, that must call us,
press us, and direct us in every action.

Neither is there any land or possession now, like unto the possession which
the Jews had in Caanan, (...) 3.
being legally holy and appropriated unto a holy people the seed of Abraham, in
which they dwelt securely, and had their days prolonged, it being by an
immediate voice said, that he (the Lord) gave it them a^ a land of rest after
their weary travels, and a type of Eternal rest in heaven, but now there is
no land of that Sanctimanie, no land so appropriated; none typical: much less
any that can be said to be given of God to any nation a^ was Caanan, which they
and their seed must dwell in, till God sends upon them sword or captivity:
but now we are all in all places strangers and Pilgrims, travelers and
soiourners, most properly, having no dwelling but in this earthen Tab^rnacle; 2
Cor. 5 1, 2.3.
our dwelling is but a wandering, and our abiding but as a fleeting, So were the
Jews, but yet their temper all blessings and inheritances were more (...) then
(...)
and in a word our home is nowhere, but in the heavens: in that house not made
with hand^, whose maker and builder is God, and to which all ascend that (...)
the coming of our Lord Jesus.

Though then, there may be reasons to persuade a man to live in this or that
land, yet there cannot be the same reasons which the Jews had, but now as
natural, civil and Religious bands tie men, so they must be bound, and as
good reason^ for things terrene and heavenly appear, so they must be led. And
so here falls in our question, Object.
how a man that is here borne and bred, and has lived some years, may remove
himself into another country.

I answer, Answ.
a man must not respect only to live, and do good to himself, but he should
see where he can live to do most good to others: What persons may hence remove.
for as one says, He whose living is but for himself, it is time he were
dead. Some men there are who of necessity must here live, as being tied to
duties either to Church, Commonwealth, household, kindred, etc. but others, and
that many, who do no good in none of those nor can do none, as being not
able, or not in favor, or as wanting opportunity, and live as outcasts: no
bodies, eie-sores, eating but for themselves, teaching but themselves, and
doing good to none, either in soul or body, and so pass over days, years,
and months, yea so live and so die. Now such should life up their eyes and see
whether there be not some other place and country to which they may go to do
good and have use toward others of that knowledge, wisdom, humanity, reason,
strength, skill, faculty, Why they should remove.
etc. which God has given them for the service of others and his own glory.

But not to pass the bounds of modesty so far as to name any, though I
confess I know many, who sit here still with their talent in a napkin, having
notable endowments both of body and mind, Luke 19.20.
and might do great good if they were in some places, which here do none, nor
can do none, and yet through fleshly fear, niceness, straitness of heart,
etc. sit still and look on, and will not hazard a dram of health, nor a day of
pleasure, nor an hour of rest to further the knowledge and salvation of the
sons of Adam in that New world, Reas. ^.
where a drop of the knowledge of Christ is most precious, which is here not
set by. Now what shall we say to such a profession of Christ, to which is
joined no more denial of a man's self? Object.
But some will say, what right have I to go live in the heathens country?

Letting pass the ancient discouerie^, Answ.
contracts and agreements which our English men have long since made in those
parts, together with the acknowledgement of the histories and Chronicles of
other nations, who profess the land of America from the Cape De Florida unto
the Bay of Canad^ (which is South and North 300. leagues and upwards; and East
and West, further then yet has been discovered) is proper to the King of
England, yet letting that pass, lest I he thought to meddle further then it
concerns me, or further then I have discerning: I will mention such things as
are within my reach, knowledge, sight and practice, since I have travailed in
these affairs.

Reas. 2.
And first seeing we daily pray for the conversion of the heathens, we must
consider whether there be not some ordinary means, and course for us to take
to convert them, or whether prayer for them be only referred to Gods
extraordinary work from heaven. Now it seems unto me that we ought also to
endeavor and use the means to convert them, and the means cannot be used
unless we go to them or they come to us: to us they cannot come, our land is
full: to them we may go, their land is empty.

Reas. 3.
This then is a sufficient reason to prove our going thither to live, lawful
their land is spacious and void and there are few and do but run over the
grass, as do also the Foxes and wild beasts: they are not industrious,
neither have are, science, skill or faculty to use either the land or the
commodities of it, but all spoils, rots, and is marred for want of manuring,
gathering, ordering, etc. As the ancient Patriarchs therefore removed from
straiter places into more roomthy, where the Land lay idle and waste, and none
used it, though there dwelt inhabitants by them, as Genesis 13.6.11.12. and 34.21.
and 41.20. so is it lawful now to take a land which none uses, and make use
of it.

Reas. 4.
And as it is a common land or unused, and undressed country; This is to be
considered as respecting new England and the (...) the plantation.
so we have it by common consent, composition and agreement, which agreement is
double: First the Imperial Governor (...), whose circuits in likelihood are
larger then England and Scotland, has acknowledged the Kings Majesty of
England to be his Master and Commander, and that once in (...) and in writing,
under his hand to Captain Standish, both he and many other Kings which are
under him, as Pamet, Nauset, Cammaquid, Narrowhiggonset, Namaschet, etc. with
diverse others that dwell about the baies of Patuxet, and Massachuset: neither
has this been accomplished by threats and blows, or shaking of sword, and
sound of trumpet, for as our faculty that way is small, and our strength
less: so our warring with them is after another manner, namely by friendly
usage, love, peace, honest and just cariages, good counsel, etc. that so we
and they may not only live in peace in that land, Psalm. 110.3. and 48. ^.
and they yield subjection to an earthly Prince, but that as voluntaries they
may be persuaded at length to embrace the Prince of peace Christ Jesus, and
rest in peace with him for ever.

Secondly, this composition is also more particular and applicatorie, as
touching our selves there inhabiting: the Emperor by aioynt consent, has
promised and appointed us to live at peace, where we will in all his dominions,
taking what place we will, and as much land as we will, and bringing as many
people as we will, and that for these two causes. First, because we are the
servants of James King of England, whose the land (as he confesses) is, 2.
because he has found us just, honest, kind and peaceable, and so loves our
company, yea, and that in these things there is no dissimulation on his part,
nor fear of breach (except our security engender in them some unthought of
treachery, or our vnciuilitie provoke them to anger) is most plain in other
Relations, which show that the things they did were more out of love then out
of fear.

It being then first a vast and empty Chaos: Secondly acknowledged the right
of our Sovereign King: Thirdly, by a peaceable composition in part possessed
of diverse of his loving subjects, I see not who can doubt or call in question
the lawfulness of inhabiting or dwelling there, but that it may be as lawful
for such as are not tied upon some special occasion here, to line there as
well as here, yea, and as the enterprise is weighty and difficult, so the
honor is more worthy, to plant a rude wilderness, to enlarge the honor and
fame of our dread Sovereign, but chiefly to displaie the efficacy and power
of the Gospel both in zealous preaching, professing, and wise walking under
it, before the faces of these poor blind Infidels.

As for such as object the tediousness of the voyage thither, the danger of
Pirates robbery, of the savages treachery, etc. these are but Lions in the way,
Prou. 22.13.
and it were well for such men if they were in heaven, for who can show them a
place in this world where iniquity shall not compass them at the heels, and
where they shall have a day without grief, Psalm. 49.5. Mat. 6.34.
or a lease of life for a moment; and who can tell but God, what dangers may
lie at our doors, even in our native country, or what plots may be abroad, or
when God will cause our sun to go down at noone daie^, Amos 8.9.
and in the midst of our peace and security, lay upon us some lasting s^ourge
for our so long neglect and contempt of his most glorious Gospel.

Ob.
But we have here great peace, plenty of the Gospel, and many sweet delights
and variety of comforts.

Answ. 2. Chro. 32.25.
True indeed, and far be it from us to deny and diminish the least of these
mercies, but have we rendered unto God thankful obedience for this long peace,
whilst other peoples have been at wars? have we not rather murmured, repined,
and fallen at iars amongst our selves, whilst our peace has lasted with
foreign power? was there ever more suits in law, more envy, contempt and
reproach then now adays? Abraham and Lot departed asunder when there fell a
breach betwixt them, Genesis 13.9.10.
which was occasioned by the straightness of the land: and surely I am
persuaded, that howsoever the frailties of men are principal in all
contentions, yet the straitnes of the place is such, as each man is feign to
pluck his means as it were out of his neighbors throat, there is such
pressing and oppressing in town and country, about Farms, trades, traffic,
etc. so as a man can hardly any where set up a trade but he shall pull down
two of his neighbors.

The Towns abound with young tradesmen, and the Hospitals are full of the
Ancient, the country is replenished with new Farmers, and the Almes-houses are
filled with old Laborers, many there are who get their living with bearing
burdens, but more are feign to burden the land with their whole bodies:
multitudes get their means of life by prating, and so do numbers more by
begging. Neither come these straits upon men always through intemperancy, ill
husbandry, indiscretion, etc. as some think, but even the most wise, sober,
and discreet men, go often to the wall, when they have done their best,
wherein as Gods providence swaieth all, so it is easy to see, that the
straitness of the place having in it so many strait hearts, cannot but produce
such effects more and more, so as every indifferent minded man should be ready
to say with Father Abraham, Take thou the right hand, and I will take the left:
Let us not thus oppress, straiten, and afflict one another, but seeing there
is a spacious Land, the way to which is through the sea, we will end this
difference in a day.

That I speak nothing about the bitter contention that has been about
Religion, by writing, disputing, and inueighing earnestly one against another,
the heat of which zeal if it were turned against the rude barbarism of the
Heathens, it might do more good in a day, then it has done here in many
years. Neither of the little love to the Gospel and profit which is made by
the Preachers in most places, which might easily drive the zealous to the
Heathens who no doubt if they had but a drop of that knowledge which here
flies about the streets, would be filled with exceeding great joy and
gladness, as that they would even pluck the kingdom of heaven by violence,
and take it as it were by force.

The greatest let that is yet behind is the sweet fellowship of friends, The
last (...).
and the satietie of bodily delights.

But can there be two nearer friends almost then Abraham and Lot, or then Paul
and Barnabas, and yet upon as little occasions as we have here, they departed
asunder, two of them being Patriarchs of the Church of old; the other the
Apostles of the Church which is new, and their covenants were such as it
seems might bind as much as any covenant between men at this day, and yet
to avoid greater inconveniences they departed asunder.

Neither must men take so much thought for the flesh, as not to be pleased
except they can pamper (...) bodies (...) variety of dainties. Nature is
content with little, and health is much endangered, by mixtures upon the
stomach: The delights of the palate do often inflame the vital parts: as the
tongue sets a fire the whole body. James 3.6.
Secondly, varieties here are not common to all, but many good men are glad to
snap as a crust. The rent taker lives on sweet morsels, but the rent payer eats
a dry crust often with watery eyes: and it is nothing to say what some one of
a hundredth has, but what the bulk, body and cominalty has, which I warrant
you is short enough.

And they also which now live so sweetly, hardly will their children attain to
that privilege, but some circumuentor or other will outstrip them, and make
them sit in the dust, to which men are brought in one age, but cannot get out
of it again in 7. generations.

To conclude, without all partiality, the present consumption which grows
upon us here, whilst the land groaneth under so many close fisted and
unmerciful men, being compared with the easiness, plainness and
plentifulnesse in living in those remote places, may quickly persuade any man
to a liking of this course, and to practice a remoual, which being done by
honest, godly and industrious men, they shall there be right heartily welcome,
but for other of dissolute and profane life, their rooms are better then
their companies; for if here where the Gospel has been so long and
plentifully taught, they are yet frequent in such vices as the Heathen would
shame to speak of, what will they be when there is less restraint in word and
deed? My only suit to all men is, that whether they live there or here, they
would learn to use this world as they used it not, keeping faith and a good
conscience, both with God and men, that when the day of account shall come,
they may come forth as good and fruitful servants, and freely be received, and
enter into the joy of their master.

FINIS.

