A Sermon of gods fearful threatenings for Idolatrye, mixing of religion,
retayning of Idolatrous remnaunts, and other wickedness: with a Treatise
against Usury. Preached in Paul's Church the.xv. day of May.1570. being
Monday in Whitson week.

Written and dedicated to the Magistrates and all the Citizens of London: with
a brief table to find out the principal matters contained therein: by
Richard Porder.

Seen and allowed according to the Queens Injunctions.

EZECHIEL. 3. Thus the Lord God has spoken whether you hear or hear not.
Imprinted by Henry Denham.

ROMANS. 8. If God be on our side, who can be against us?

PSALM. 126. Except the Lord keep the City: the watchman vvaketh but in
vain. To the Right Honorable Lord Mayor, of the City of London, and to his
right worshipful brethren the Aldermen, with Merchants, and Commoners of the
same City. Richard Porder Person of Saint Peter's on Cornchill in London
aforesaid: wishes health and prosperity, with the fear of God, and eternal
salvation in Christ.
BEING THOrovvlye persuaded (Right Honorable, woorshipfull, and dearly
beloved in our Savior Christ) that other Citizens and folk of towns and
Countries thorovve this whole Realm, do take (as it were) light and
instructions at you of this honorable City: I have thought it most meet to
direct this my simple work to you, and you to be defenders thereof against
the adversary, to the end that those, who take ensample of you, may see,
that you do not allow of those things: which are condemned by this work,
whereof you are willing Patrones.

And I call you willing Patrones of this my work, because that (after I had
prepared the same for the Cross, and preached it to you in the Church, by
occasion of rain) I was importunatelye provoked by many worshipful Citizens
to write and put in print the same Sermon, specially that which I had said
concerning usury. Which earnest requests of theirs has drawn me (as it
were) to do that: for which the adversaries, perhaps will accuse me both of
superfluous folly and rash travail, because after so many great Clerks of
old time, and also of late days, has handled this matter of Usury at large:
I take in hand to write of the same, and make certain trades subject, to the
definition of forbidden Usury: which none of those godly and great learned
men, has once mentioned in their writings.

But to excuse my self from indiscreet follye, in calling that Usury, which
so many godly and learned writers make no mention of in their doings: I say
either men in their times, and in their countries, have not so openly showed
themselves to the world, to be Usurers, nor defended that vile trade to be
honest traffic, as men past all shame do at this time: and in this our
land. So that I being (as I think) further occasioned, have specially named
that: which these men have but in generality condemend.

And as many of great worship have required me thus to do: so were they
content, yea, and (that which is more) my Lord Mayor willingly to be patrons
hereof. And my hope is to have more defending members than adversaries in this
body pollitike, seeing I have spoken the truth.

I know that many have exclaymed and do exclayme against this City for
Usury, and I would there were no cause. But when those exclaymers are
themselves also Usurers, and will not see it, but color it by selling of time,
they may blushe with shame enough, and either first amend themselves, or else
cease exclamation. For it is shame for one to rebuke an other of that fault,
wherein the rebuker himself is guilty.

But I speak not this to quallifie any vice committed by Citizens, be it
Usury, or other: For my earnest desire is to have a redress of faults in
City and Country.

And therefore, as you of this City, are giuers of light or darkness to
others through this Realm, so I beseech you for Gods love, first to begin a
redress, and even with all speed shine forth light of good conversation, and
honest lawful trade, whereby others may follow your good example, and that
God may be glorified. Let every man put to his helping hand, the Magistrate
with power, and the inferior with prayer to God. There wants but only good
will. We have but a short race here to run, and how short god only knows,
happy is he that runs a good course to the end. Let us be moved while God
does yet call and beseech us, least he keep silence and scurge us.

And though the wicked, who regard not God, will giere, cavil, scoff,
slander, kick, and will not be moved with any thing to leave evil: yet I know
the godly and wise (for whose sake I have chiefly done it) will be content with
this my travail, and will gladly and thankfullye embrace the truth, and
endeavor to redress faults without delay. To whom God for Christ's sake give
strength: and persite his work in them, and deliver our Queen, this our
City and Realm, from plagues now imminent, and bless and defend the godly
inhabitants to the glory of his holy Majesty, and destruction of Satan's
kingdom.

Amen.
The Preface to the Reader.
ALBEIT, good Reader, that amongst other vices, I have in this Sermon (as also
heretofore in sundry other by me preached at Paul's Cross) inueyghed chiefly
against Usury: it was not for that I did or do account Usury in it self to
be the most horriblest vice beyond all other, but because the same vice in
this our time, is so universally committed, that not only money men, Merchant
men, and Citizens, be Usurers: but also Noblemen, Courtiers, Gentlemen,
Grasiers, Farmers, Plowmen and Artificers, yea, I would the Clergy were free.

So that the vice Usury, amongst the multitude, is accounted no vice, and
thought so necessary: that without it men (generally) cannot live. Therefore I
thought good (so specially) to reprove the same vice, and to show men (if
they willl see) this their fault.

For though Usury be but a part (yet a great part) of extortion and
oppression, and extortion and oppression, be but fruits of Covetousness, and
ambition, and all these do spring out of infidelity and distrusting God,
(which distrust is the root of every wicked act:) yet when such evil fruit
shall be so universally eaten, as Usury now is, even with greediness and
delight: it is more than time to show the peril thereof, yea, and that with
all diligence. And except we should be content willinglye to see (as it were)
the blind drown himself in the ditche, and the child to play with the
Serpent, or eat sweet Kattes bane to his own poisoning and destruction: we
cannot omit to show the general abuse in trades, by Usury, and so specially
to reprove it, and tell men the danger of it, namely, that Usury being a
fruit of infidelity: cannot but poison the receyuer.

Wherefore, that God forbids Usury, I have showed by the Law, by the
Prophets, and by the Gospel. Also I have showed how godly men and good
Magistrates both Christen and Heathen, have detested the same vice, and him
that committed it: and what punishments some people executed upon such
offenders. And partly, I have showed (for I think no man can fully declare it)
what hurt there grows by usury to the Church of God, and to the common
weal. I have also showed the abuse of trades by that they are generally
contracted with usury in this our time: and answered to some objections of the
adversaries. And then having given a taste of honest and lawful occupying: I
finish that matter.

But before I begin to speak of usury, I have according to my simple
knowledge made plain the text, and gathered thereon such notes, as I thought
apt and profitabe for this our time, plainly according to the plain speaking
of my Patron and example Sophonie without qualifications. For it is not time
to dallye or sooth men now in their doings: no more than it was in Sophonies
time. And in the latter end of my theme, where it is said, that God will
root out and destroy such, as neither seek after God nor regard him: there
I take occasion to examine by the doings of men, whether they at this day do
seek for God and regard him, or not, for by the fruit the tree is known.

And so amongst the manyfolde fruits of infidelity inerplicable: I speak
perticularly of few, but specially of Usury, for the reason before
alleged. Wherein though such method be not observed, as some may think
perhaps Art requires: yet I have kept that course therein, which I have
thought most profitable.

And though in respect of mine own weakness, and the subtlety of the
adversaries, I am not easilye drawn to set out my simple doings to the world
in print: yet by the earnest procurements of sundry worshipful men, with the
special requests of many my friends: I have been moved to print the same.
And the rather I have been moved so to do, because I would hereby either
stop the mouths of the adversaries, and of such as have privately made
childish objections to this doctrine, not worthy to be answered: or else
stir them to make stronger reasons against it, if they can. And also (if they
know another truth herein) to set out their minds in writing to the world, and
not mutter in corners. For I would willingly be found a liar: upon condition
that so many others might be proved just dooers. Which I am persuaded will not
be, with all the cunning the adversaries have: no, though they take the Devil
to help them.

Furthermore, though I have not kept the very same words in writing that I
used in speaking, because words uttered with iesture will not always fit so
well in writing: yet the matter and substance I have observed fullye and wholly.
With some things added in the former part, which through want of memory were
omitted when I preached: and in the latter part I have of purpose added some
things touching Usury, which I spoke in my former Sermons, to the end, that
my mind in this matter of usury might the more fully appear to them, that
are desirous to know it. And if my travail herein shall do any good: I shall
think it well bestowed. And the more good it does, the more shall be my
comfort. Let God have the glory for ever: and so good christen reader farewell.

Sophonias, cap. Primo.
I Will gather up all things in the land (says the Lord) I will gather up man
and beast, I The Text.
will gather up the fowls in the air, and the fish in the waters, and
destructions shall be to the wicked, and I will utterly root out the men from
of the land, says the Lord, I will stretch out my hand upon Judah, and upon
all the indwellers at Jerusalem. Thus will I root out the remnants of Baall
from this place, and the names of the Chemarims, with the Priests, yea, and
such as upon the house tops do woorship and bow themselves to the host of
heaven: which swear by the Lord, and by their Malchom also. Which start back
from the Lord, and neither seek after the Lord, nor regard him.

WE read in the fourth Book of Kings, and also in the second of the
Chronicles, that after the death of good 4. Reg. ca. 21. 2. Paral. ca. 33.
Ezechias: wicked Manasses succeeded king of Judah and Jerusalem, who did evil
in the sight of the Lord, as did the heathen whom the Lord cast out before the
children of Israeil, for he set up all the abominations which his father put
down, as hill aultars, Idol groves, and aultars unto Baall, as Ahab did, and
worshipped yt host of heaven. He offered his son in fire, brought an Idol
into ye Lords temple, and gave heed to witchcraft and sorcerie, and mainteyned
workers with spirits, and fortune tellers. Whereby he made Judah and the
indwellers of Jerusalem to err, and to do worse than the Heathen whom the
Lord destroyed before them.

Wherefore the Lord brought him into the hands of the Assirian Captains his
enemies, who bound him in chains, and led him prisoner to Babylon, where he
repented and humbled himself before the Lord God. And being restored to his
kingdom, he sought a reformation according to the will of Afflictions
profitable to Gods children.
God, whom he learned more exactlye to know, by chains and prison: than ever
he did before by his crown and scepter. And after Manasses death, his son
Amon was made king in his place, who walked in all the abominations of his
father, and did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord. He neither
regarded the commandment of God, nor the example of his fathers repentance.
Wherefore God punished his sin by sin, what time his servants conspired
and slew him in his own house.

After whose death (about. 3312. years from the making of the world, In that
wicked fathers have good children, and good fathers wicked children, it is seen
that goodness is not of nature, but of grace.
and. 658. years before the incarnation of Christ, the son of Amon, godly
Josias, at the age of eight years, was made king over Judah and Jerusalem. He
did that which was right in ye sight of the Lord, and walked in the ways of
his father David, and neither bowed to the right hand nor to the left. He
speedilye began to seek the Lord, and in the twelfth year of his reygne, he
began to purge Judah and Jerusalem from Idolatry, and so reformed Godly
Princes do help their neighbors to reform abuses in religion. 2. Paral. 34.
religion, not only in Judah and Jerusalem, but also amongst his neighbors that
were left in Israel, when the most part of them were led away captive by the
Assirians, he destroyed the hill aultars, Idol groves, and Images, and burnt
the bones of the Idolatrous sacrificers upon their own altars, as was
prophesied of him above. 350. years 3. Reg. 13. 2 Jeremy. 1.
before.

In the.xiij. year of his reign the Prophet Jeremy began to prophecy, and
the King in the.xviij. year of his reign, going about to repair the temple,
the book of Gods law was found, which long time before (through the 4. Re.
22. 23. 2. Paral. 34. Tirannie and negligence, darkners of truth.
tyranny and Idolatry of Princes, and negligence of the Priests) lay hid and
unknown. Now when this good King understood of this book, and had heard it
read: he rent his clothes through remembrance of his fathers offenses and his
own, and sent to ask council of the Lord what was to be done concerning that
book. He read this Book The godly cease not iceking: till they know Gods
will, and when they know it: they do not neglect to do it.
himself unto all the people when he had gathered them together, and made a
covenant with the Lord touching the same to govern according to the precise
rules thereof.

In the.xx. year of this Kings reign, Sophony the Prophet began to speak in
the name of the Lord. The beginning Sophonie. 1.
of whose prophecy are these words, which first I read unto you.

The same words do contain, an exceeding terrible or fearful threatening
Sophony begins his Prophecy with threats not as others do.
against the people of Judah and Jerusalem, for their sins, but specially for
Idolatry.

In handling whereof, I mean to use none other method: than that which the
Prophet has provided for me, who first threatens a rooting out of Idolaters,
and mixers of religion, with the remnauntes of Idolatry. And then Apostates,
and those that neither seek after the Lord nor regard him. And for these
offenses it is: that God also threatens to destroy the place, and the
provision. And that I may entreat hereof. etc.

Here the prayer was made.
I will gather up (or make an end The unreasonable creatures shall be
destroyed for man's sin, therefore great is Gods anger against sin.
of) all things from off the land, says the Lord, I will gather up (or make
an end of) men, and beasts, fowls and fishes. etc.

IN that God does threaten here to destroy, not only men, but also
unreasonable creatures: we may learn how detestable a thing sin is, in
the sight of God, and specially Idolatry, for as we read, though Josias had
now reformed many abuses, put down Idolatry, and brought in place thereof the
true service of God: it is said, that God was yet angrye for that peoples
Idolatry formerly committed, and still secretly maintained, notwithstanding
the public reformation. But here two things may seem strange at the first
vewe, the one, why now in the days of so good a King, who had reformed religion,
banished Idolatry, and Two things seem strange here.
executed the Idolaters to the uttermost of his power: God does thus threaten
more grievously: than he did in the days of Manasses or Amon, those wicked
Kings that had set up ydolatrie.

The other, why Sophonie begins not his Prophecy or preaching with doctrine
as commonly other Prophets and teachers do: but thundreth even at the first
these horrible threats.

Howbeit, by good consideration of that state and time, we shall without
difficulty perceive in the one and the other, the just and God does most
justly and wisely proceed in his judgments.
holy judgments of God, most wisely and orderly put in execution.

For though God had now sent these people so good a Prince as had banished
Idolatry, executed the Idolaters, and erected the true worship and service of
God publicly so much as was in his power both in his own dominions of Judah
and Jerusalem, and also amongst his neighbors the Israelites: yet those Causes
why God does threatten so sharply in this good kings reign.
people for the most part playde the hypocrites, and secret Idolatrers, and
kept remnantes or relics of Baal, Moloch, or Malchom, and other Idols, they
secretly worshipped the host of heaven, and gave heed to Witches and
spirits of error as may appear.

Yea though the Prophet Jeremy (by the space of seven years before Sophonie
began) had Causes why Sophony began his prophecy with threats.
preached to them, showed them their faults, and preached doctrine for their
learning (if they would have learned:) yet they neither regarded that great
good gift of god, namely so good a King, that truly worshipped God, and
defended true religion and justice: nor yet his holy word and calling, sent
them under the same king by the Prophet Jeremy. And therefore it was, that
now God raised up this prophet Sophonie, as it were sodeinly to thunder out
these threats, for this their great ingratitude and pestilent perseverance in
their Idolatry, superstition, and other wickednesses, continued in this time
of so gentle calling, good government, and clear light.

For the greater and better gifts and benifites that men do contemn Hebrews.
2.
or neglect, the greater plagues or punishments are deserved and procured by
such ingratitude. And certainelye amongst all thexternall gifts of God in this
life, there is none comparable to this, that GOD vouchsafes to let men have
his holy and eternal word preached Authority joined with truth, a most
excellent blessing in this life.
amongst them, and specially when he joins therewith the power of good
magistrates. And therefore when such treasure is by men neglected or contemned:
it is no marvel that GOD does threaten extreme punishment, as here he does by
this Sophonie.

And though I contend not with those that do think Sophonie did this by
advise and consultation with Jeremy: yet I am It was not by policy betwixt
Jeremy and Sophonie, that Sophonie began with threats, but Gods just working
upon most apt occasion.
not of their mind, but do feel otherwise of it, even that GOD who
ministers perfect medicine according to men's diseases: did stir up this
Prophet Sophonie to go amongst that people, even upon just and most apt
occasion, as it were sodeinlye, thereby, the more to quicken them that were in
their dead sleep of Idolatry and iniquity.

And though it is most true, that this was not a policy or practice between
Jeremy and Sophonie, but the work of God: yet it is certain that Jeremy did
Jeremy not offended with Sophony for beginning (...) thr^ates.
not blame Sophonie for using an other order than he had done before him. But
contrariwise did well like of his doing, knowing who had sent him. For they
could in no wise dissent or jar, being both messengers from God, and governed
by one spirit.

And hereof, those that now do preach the Gospel have a good A note for
Preachers.
rule, namely, that one blame not the other, though one use sharpness, and an
other use mildness in teaching, or that one teach that: which another has
not taught before him, except the doctrine be false and against the truth, or
that they preach placentia to the stubborn wicked, and threats and curses to
the penitent Discretion in doctrine must be observed.
and broken hearted, for therein discretion must be used, or else they are blame
worthy.

Now we may as I said, see by this text and consideration of that state and
time, how God does proceed with them in mercy and judgment, and he is still
one and the same God.

He first sends them his word and true service, by the ministry of a good
magistrate, and a holy Prophet, he shows them their God first calls men by
fair means.
faults and offreth them pardon, and prays them to forsake their lewd
ways, and to turn to him, and he will yet receive them.

When by these gentle callings and great benifits bestowed upon them, they will
not be won, but continue in their vices, and utterly thanklesse for those
great benifytes: then God does not yet sodeinly destroy them. But first
threatens that unless they do Secondly, God threatens, if me^ do not
regard gentle calling. Jonas. 3.
repent: he will scurge, as we read also that God said by Jonas yet forty
days and Niniue shall be destroyed, and before the flood Genesis. 6.
also: yet the days of man shall be a hundredth and twenty years, and I will
bring a flood upon the earth. etc.

If yet neither by gentle calling, nor by threats, they will be reclaymed,
then he cease speaking to them, and pulls away his word and good
magistrates, and for their sins he sets an hypocrite to rule over When men
regard not gentle calling nor threats: then God punishes, and keeps silence.
them, sends enemies in upon them, spoyleth them of their joy, brings
them into captivity, and so many ways scurgeth them, that he makes them know
by stripes yt which they would never know by fair means: so it came to pass
with these people of Judah and Jerusalem. For neither by gentle callinges, nor
benifites, nor threats, they would cease from their own ways, as appears
that within three or four months after the death of this good king Josias,
4. Reg. 23. G
which for their thanklesnesse was taken away, Idolatry and superstition was
erected again, and within less than. xxx. years after this prophecy was
fulfilled, 4. Reg. 25.
they were led away captive to Babylon, where they continued in captivity.
lxx. years.

But though the Lord rooted out from that land as well the people as the
provision, in such sort as they could not enjoy it: yet the destruction and
ruin was to the wicked, according to this Prophecy. For even in the
captivity, no doubt God had his beloved servants, as he said of Though God
punish generally: yet he looueth his children even in captivity. 2. Samuel.
7. Psalm. 89. Psalm. 132. Acts. 13.
David. If his children forsake my laws, and walk not in my covenant, I
will visit their sins with scurges, but I will not take my loving
kindness utterly from them, nor suffer my truth to fail. So that though this
people were carried captive, and the provision and place destroyed for their
sins, yet even herein God shows love to his servants, in that he brings
them home, though by stripes, and that he casts them not away. So that
though the punishment in this Psalm. 34.
life be general: yet the ruin and Though punishments be general, the
destruction and ruin is only to the wicked.
destruction is only to the wicked, as David says: The godly shall be
punished, but the wicked shall be destroyed.

And whereas this good king Josias, and the Prophet Jeremy, did know that
religion should decay, 4. Regum. 22 2. Paral. 34.
and that god would shortly after rote out the people, and destroy the place
and the provision, yet they ceased not each in his calling to do the uttermost
that lay in them to erect and teach the pure service and will of GOD, and
though they prevailed not, nor The godly will not omyt their industry in
doing good, though they look for small profit to ensue thereof.
had such success as they wished: yet they ceased not to the end they did
their duties, and endeavors, and left not God without his witness both to that
people, and to all ages after them, and so delivered their own souls, as
says Ezechiel, wherein Magistrates Ezechiel. 3.
are taught, and Preachers also, how they ought to deal in their several
charges, and if they mind to please God, and have regard to discharge Men may
not neglect their charge.
their duties, and so deliver their own souls, they will no doubt take
pattern and follow the examples of these.

We see also by that has been said, how fowly they are deceived, that in
reformation of religion, think it enough to remove gross ydolatrie, and
superstition, and for policies sake to retain certain (as they count A
perfect reformation required in gods law.
them) light abuses, which do serve for pleasure, or profit.

For if this good king with all his power and industry, together with the
vehement exhortations of the Prophet Jeremy, could not root out the
remnants of Idolatry: but that within four months after Josias death, all
Idolatry and superstition was up again publicly. What continuance may we
look for of Imperfect reformation causes the adversary to hang in hope.
our half reformation?

If Josias cast down all Idols and monumentes of Idolatry, and executed the
Idolatrers, as far as he could come by the If to reform religion all
endeavor be not enough: than half endeavor will be much short, but negligence
will be much shorter.
the knowledge of them, and yet after his death, Idolatrye up again in so
short space: what may we look for, that want so much of that perfection?
Nay, that maintain and defend openly such things as he destroyed. I would our
Jeremy also were not to slack in these days. But it is to be feared in yt he
is so slack: that our misery is the nearer at hand.

Our remnaunts of ydolatrie are not sought for to be destroyed, as Josias
sought for them in his time. But rather maynteyned, against his example: yet
let us mark diligently what God says by this Prophet Sophonie, to them of
Judah and Jerusalem, for retayning such remnants secretly.

I will, says God, root out from of this land, man and beast, foul and
fish. I will stretch out my hand upon Judah and upon Jerusalem, and so will I
root out from this place all the remnaunts of Baal. etc.

It is most like that this people was so stubbornelye addicted to Idolatry and
superstitions, that when they saw the king to overthrow the ydols, and to burn
their monuments: they hid from him as many thereof as they could, with this
mind, that though the King did what he could, yet he should never root out
all, but Idolatrous and rebellious stubborn minds.
that they would keep them secret, and worship them secretly. But, says God,
by the Prophet, now, I vvil. etc. as if God should have said. My servant
Josias has taken away (as much as lies in him) Idolatry and superstition,
with such monumentes thereof as he was able, even as I willed. My servant
Jeremy also has not ceased to call you from those offenses. But you against
Where men will not be well ruled by men, and yet can hyde their sin: there
my will, and against your public magistrate, without regard of my goodness,
and voice sent amongst you, will maintain God will take the matter in hand for
he sees the heart.
your ydolatries and superstitions, and retain the remnantes of them. My
servant Josias can not see your rebellious hearts, and secret practices of
Idolatry: But I see you thoroughly, and I God did fetch Broomes to sweep, or
rather fiery flames from Babylon to consume away those things that displeased
him when his servant Josias could not reform them.
will deal with you accordingly, you shall know that I am able to sweep away
your Idols and remnantes of Idolatrye, be they never so secret. For I will
sweep you clean from this place, yea, and all the provision of beasts,
fowls, and fishes will I gather up from you, and you from them. Thus will I
root out the remnantes of Baall. Do you think then that you can keep any
remnantes of Idolatry by you, when I shall thus root out you and all these
things from off this land?

I made beasts, fowls, and fishes to serve your turn, but for this your
great and continual ingratitude: I will gather them up from you, with all
other provision that I appointed for If God will save: none can destroy. If
God will destroy no power can save.
you in this land: yea, and I will root you out also, least you might say,
your Idols preserved you. Let see if Baall or your other Idols be able to feed,
help, or deliver you.

You wretched rebels that consider not from whence your help comes, but
ascribe the same to your Idols and Gods of your own making, and wish rather
to wallow in that error, than to Folowers of error, wicked Idolatrers, do call
light darcknesse. etc.
come into light, you esteem darkness more than light, error more than
truth, and evil more than goodness.

And this is ever proper to Idolatrers and Bellygods, that if they be bridled
of their wills, that they cannot have their pleasure, and Idols to worship
them. Properties of Idolatours.
Or that they be brought perforce to hear the true service of God: then they
murmour and swell, and this is their sentence commonly: it was merry with us
when we knew none of this gear.

As now in these days our Papists and irreligious bellials have the same
manner of grudging and saying: it was merry in England before this Bible and
English service came abroad, Papists are grudgers, murmurers, and speakers
against the truth.
men lived quietly when they had less preaching, when the Mass was up, we had
all things pleasant and plentiful.

But so said this people here under this good king Josias in Ieremies The
Idolatrers in Ieremies time murmured.
time, it was merye with us when we served the Queen of heaven. etc.

The like said the heathen in Cyprians time, which is about 1300. years
past, that the Christians by their religion brought in all unquietness and
miseries, and that it was well with them Idolatrous hethen in Cyprians time
murmured.
when they served their heathen Gods, and were not disturbed by the Christians,
and so laid all the cause of their miseryes to the Christian religion.

The children of Israel in like manner, murmured against Moses, saying: it was
well with them Idolatrous Israelytes in Moses time murmured.
when they were in Egypt and served Pharao. So thankful they were for their
deliverance.

But as Cyprian answered the Cypri. contra Demetrianu^.
heathen Bellials and Idolaters of his time: so Jeremy answered these people
under Josias, Jeremy. 44.
saying: did not al these mischiefs happen to you, because you sinned
Idolatry the cause of miseryes.
against the Lord in making such sacrifices to Idols?

And so does this Prophet Sophonie threaten, that for this same detestable
vice of ydolatry, these heavy plagues and miseries shall come upon them, and
their provision, eue^ rooting out. Leuitie. 26.


And Moses in Deuteronomiu^, shows also, that negligence, Deutero. 4.
Deutero. 17. ^7. and 28.
contempt, and Idolatry, is the cause of miseries, for that all the curses of
God, in that book, do follow, overtake, and root out such offenders. Whereby
is seen plainly, that these Papists and Gatherenites, or beastly Bellials
Papists and Bellials most pestilent traitors, for they procure God to plague
and destroy our land. etc.
in this our time: are no better than murmuring Rebels against God and his
doctrine, and traitors to their native Country, and to those noursing Fathers
and Mothers, whom God Esaias. 49.
has placed in authority, to reform abuses, and conserve his Church in
godly peace.

And for this murmuring rebellion and Idolatrous brood, God does, as I said,
by his Prophet, threaten a general rooting out, both of man and beast.

The Prophet does expreslye name Judah, and Jerusalem, to Judah and Jerusalem
expressly threatened.
be subject to this plague threatened, which was done by Gods providence, least
these people might have thought the prophet had not meant them, for they did
know, that Jerusalem was called The Jews trusted that place and parentage made
them honest, and should defend them. Psalm. 78.
the holy City: and that there was the Temple of the Lord, whose foundation
was laid to endure as the earth, and that they (being of Judah) could not
decay, what ever they did, for they had in memory what excellent promises both
Judah and Jerusalem had of safety, as of Judah it is said. Sceptrum non recedet
de Genesis. 49. Psalm. 89. Psalm. 132.
Judah. etc. The Scepter shall not be taken from Judah till Sylo come. And
again, God says. I have sworn by my holiness, I will not fail David, his
seed shall stand fast for ever. And this might be their minds and sayings
also, we see the reast of the trybes carried captive, and yet we see Judah and
Jerusalem remain safe, therefore these places cannot decay whatsoever we do,
we may do as we list.

But hereby let us Christian men note and beware, that we make not the
merciful promises God will surely punish the abusers of his clemency. Romans.
2.
of God, a defense for us to work iniquity by: for God above all things will
surely scourge that offense, because naturally Gods kindness leads men to
repentance, and not give boldness to sin, nor license to continue in sin.

As here we see the Prophet, (to frustrate the Jews of such vain trust)
does expressly name that GOD will stretch out his hand upon Judah and
Jerusalem, and root from those places by name both man and beast. etc.

And the Prophet Jeremy also before pulls them from that their vain trust,
saying. Trust not in lying words: saying, here Jeremy. 7.
is the temple of the Lord, here is the temple of the Lord, here is the temple
of the Lord. Let your deeds be amended, and cease from Idolatry, and so
you shall enjoy the place, otherwise do not think it to be my house, which is
your theeuish den, or that I will preserve a den of thieves, for Look upon
Silo: and se that place saves not.
by justice I must punish and root out both den and thieves. Look upon Silo
where my name 1. Reg. 3. 4.
was, and what I did thereto for the faults of the people there committed.
etc. but they gave no ear to Jeremy, who by doctrine called them, for they
perseuered in their Idolatry and unrighteousness, the public reformation
notwithstanding, and therefore God by this Prophet Sophonie does threate^ by
name, both Judah and Jerusalem, therefore holiness of place is no prerogative
for iniquity, Holiness of place is no prerogative for ye wicked.
but both the offenders and the place shall be destroyed, the place for the
offenders sakes, whereto Gregory agrees where he says. Si desit spiritus, non
adiuuat locus. If the spirit of God Gregory in Ezech. lib. 1. Homil. 9.
be absent: the place helps nothing, for Lot was holy amongst the
Sodomites, and a sinner in the Mountain.

And again, the same Gregory says. Si locus saluare potuisset: Satan de
Coelo non cecidisset. If the place could have saved: Satan should not have
fallen from heaven, nor our parents from Paradise.

And Cyrill does show that neither holiness of place does Cyril. in
Leuiticus.
purify or defend a sinner, nor vileness of place seclude the love of God
from the Saints. But you (says he) which follovvest Christ and do
immitate him. If thou abide in Gods word and meditate his law day and
night, semper in sanctis es: thou art alvvaies The holy ones: are always in
holy places. Yea, though in prison or exile.
in holy places, neither shall thou at any time depart thereout, for holiness
is not to be sought in places, but in life, acts, and purity, which if they
be according to the Lord, and consonant to gods commandments, although thou
be not in the house of God, yea, though thou be in the Markette^, nay,
though thou be in the Theater, thou art alvvayes in holy places.

Our Savior Christ tarried his fathers calling in Nazareth, which was a place
so ignominious amongst the Jews: that as John. 1.
we read, Nathaniell asked whether any good thing could come out of Nazareth.

Abraham was beloved of God amongst ye ydolatrous Chaldees, Genesis. 11. 3.
Regu^. 19. Exodus. 3. 1. Regu^. 16. Amos. 1. Math. 4.
Elizeus at ye plow, Moses, David, and Amos at the shepefoldes, and the
Apostles at their fisher botes. etc.

Which places and examples do show that place makes not Place does not make
men holy.
holy an ill doer, nor yet does condemn or defile a good man.

Whereby we see also the fond and doltishe opinion of the Papists touching
the holiness of Rome, and other places of pilgrimages, as they account Rome
caput mundi, and there is the Apostolical sea, the holy see of the holy
father, the seat of summus Pontifex. etc. The sum of divinity rests in his
breast because Papists affirm yt place ministers holiness, specially Rome.
of the place, the place has that prerogative, he has so much of the place,
for if he were Bishop many other place, he should want that excellency,
Ergo, place ministers holiness by their saying.

Yea, and they have an unreasonable strong reason for it, that is, it must
needs be so, because Peter's and Paul's (but specially Peter's) being present
there, did sanctifye the place. Well, if they both were there (whereof many
doubt) I am sure it was to their cost. For Eusebius says, they Eusebius. lib. 2.
Capit. 25. Dorothe^ Synopsis de vitis apostolorum.
suffered death there. And I am sure Rome is as much to be preferred or counted
holy for that matter: as Jerusalem is for crucifying of Christ, if they were
Saint Peter and Paul suffered death at Rome, if they were both there.
not further drowned in Idolatrye and superstition than ever these Jews were
that dwelt in Judah and Jerusalem, they would come out of their follies with
shame, specially seeing their neighbors round about them, can point at their
beastlye and palpable folly.

But the whore has made them so sleepy drunken with her Aquacomposita Papists
deadlye dronken with ye whore of Babilons Aquacomposita.
and glory, that they cannot awake, for if they could see a whit, they must
needs see that Christ's presence at Jerusalem was as holy as S. Peter's at
Rome, and that Jerusalem had more excellent elogies through the Scripture than
ever Jerusalem has far more excellent elogies, than ever Rome had.
Rome had. Nay, Jerusalem was a figure of Gods Church, and Rome being by the
learned called Babylon, is a figure of Satan's synagoge, and is in deed the
seat of Antichrist. And yet that synagoge or Church must hold the Papists
bound in chains, and they must count it holy: even like as they count the
Cross holy whereon Christ suffered, because an innocent was hanged thereon. And
in that, God The Cross holy, because an innocent was hanged thereon.
deferreth to plague Rome, it is a token that he has prepared the fullness of
punishment to be executed eternally upon them after death: Thus much for place.

These Jews also trusted in their parentage, as I noted, but Parentage.
as place did not help them, no more does parentage longer tha^ they continue
in their fathers steps of faith and honest doings, as Saint Paul notes, and
also our Savior Christ tells the Romans. 2. John. 8.
Jews they were of their father the devil, and that it help them, not that
they were of Abraham's seed after the flesh, unless they had the faith, and
thereof the deeds that were in Abraham.

No more does it help the Pope to brag of Peter's see, and Vain Pope.
that he is his successor, unless he followed Peter's steps, which he
abhors.

No more does it help these young Roysters and vain frizeled Noddies with
bumbasted Vain boasters and braggers, vain noddies.
breeches to brag of gentilitie, good parents, great houses and worthy
Countries, when they themselves have not a whitte of honest wit in their
heads, nor good conditions in their lives. But by these vain claims feed
with pride their own fond devises, and so hold up the noddy, and think they
may work with more boldness those evils which their naughty nature or lewd
affection does move and instigate them unto.

Like to Dionisius son that when his father blamed him for committing
adultery with one of his Citizens wives, affirming that he had no such example
of him, neither by knowledge nor A kings son blamed.
hearesay: answered his father in these words: Verum est pater A wicked
answer and ruffianlyke. Fulgosus. lib. 7. ca. 2. Children take pride in their
fathers riches and honor.
hoc abs te nunqua^ audiui. etc. True it is Father that I never knevv nor heard
so much by thee, but that came to pass, because thou had not a King to thy
father as I have.

To whom the fathers reply was, Nec tu quide^ mi fili. etc. Neither A sober
replication by Dionisius.
thou my son except thou cease from such villainies, shall ever have King to
thy son. Which came to pass, for shortly after when he came to succeed his
father, such were his wicked and unworthy acts that he was driven out of his
kingdom.

Macrobius recites an example Macrob. li. 2. Cap. 5. Satur.
to this purpose, of Iulia the Daughter of Augustus Caesar, which Damsel being
on a time Iulia the daughter of Augustus Caesar.
admonished of her pride and immoderation in apparel, by a friend which
wished her to follow the example of her father in moderation and sobriety,
answered, The answer of a vain and proud mind.
Pater meus obliuiscitur. etc. My father forgets that he A very fine mock
of a Gentlewoma^.
is Emperor of Rome, but I remember well that I am the Emperors Daughter.

These acts and answers are by all wise men's judgments noted for faults,
and thought blameworthie even in the children of Kings and Emperors, Vice and
vanity are to be blamed in the Children of Emperors and Kings.
and are noted for reproaches to them and that rightly.

How far then do these Cockescombes and Pumppets in this our time exceed
in fault?

If a Kings son be justly blamed for vice, and that his birth and countenance
was no excuse for his offense: how shall our lewd Ruffians by a bare name of
a baser estate, think themselves Vain roysters and puppers of far lower
estate are in no case tolerable in their excess.
lawless, or without reproach? And if it be a great shame for a King or an
Emperors daughter wantonlye and immoderately to deck her self, or to defend
the same by her estate and birth, with how much shame may our Puppets in these
days: declare their unconstant minds and variable delights, not only in
words: but also by showinge themselves in sundry speckled Unshamefastness and
variable delights showed by immoderation in apparel.
colors, and vain ostentations, without all womanlye shamefastness? and all
under color of the name of a Gentlewoman, when many of their coats with their
furniture, may happes be unpaid for.

These are of far baser estate than either Emperors or yet Earls daughters,
many honest That which is reproved in the greater cannot be allowed in the
inferior.
men do blushe in beholding such proud peuish puppets, though their flutish
frizled forheades do bear them through the matter with Ruffianlike boldness,
and have nothing to brag of, but place and parentage, nay many of them have
scarcely so much, None will sooner boast of worship and worshipful parentage,
tha^ they that be of an unknown house.
though they will brag thereof. And yet if they were of great parentage, that
were no excuse of immoderation, for we see it reproved in the Emperors
daughter, and that God regards not Judah nor yet Jerusalem for parentage
longer than those people continue in his fear and sobriety, for when they
thus offend and will not be reclaymed he threatens their plague and will
surely send it.

It is not place therefore nor Wicked children do augment their own shame by
boasting of their good parentage.
parentage yt can defend us, nay, there is nothing more shameful for wicked
successors and posterities, than to brag of godly predecessors and
progenitors.

Sophonie shows it shall not help them more to brag of parentage, than of
place, considering that God will stretche out his hands as well to root out
from Judah, as from Jerusalem, the people that there dwelt for their Idolatry
and wickedness.

God is said to stretch out his If God should speak spiritually of spiritual
things, we could not understand him.
hand, not that he has hands, feet or other parts of a visible body: but
this speech does express to our senses and reason, that as a man who has
his sword or rod in his hand, in By the hand of God is here meant, the
Instruments* whereby he punishes.
stretching out the same hand to strike, does put strength to his action: so
God having his instruments of punishment ready to scourge them for Idolatry,
and By stretching out his hand is meant power given to those instruments.
contempt of his clemency: will put strength to those weapons, against Judah
and Jerusalem, to root them out, therefore by this word hand, in this place
is meant, the instruments whereby God plagueth, and by stretching it out, is
meant power, and strength given unto them, and who is able to withstand gods
power and strength?

He that believes God to be true in his sayings, cannot choose He that
believes God will fear him.
but tremble, when he hears God to say. I will extend punishment upon thee
in my power and strength. Alas mortal caytyfe what will thou do, if God
extend his strength in punishing thee? to the wicked no doubt he does extend
this strength, and for iniquity it is that God extends it, and in this place
he threatens to extend it, specially for Idolatry, and secret worshipping
of Idolles, and secret retayning of Idolatrous priests and relics of
Idolatry: contrary to Gods word, and the public reformation, made by the
good Magistrate.

Thus, says God, will I root out the remnantes of Baall from this place,
thus, even by extending my strength against you, and sweeping you quite from
this place and land.

This Baall is thought to be the Idol of the Sidonians, as Ierom Baall the
Idol of the Sidonians.
in his Commentaries upon Osee does note, and the same that Bell was amongst
the Babilonians, which Idol was by decree of Semiramis Queen of Babylon,
worshipped for a God, from who^ Ierom. in Ose.
the kings of the Sidonians took their beginning, as appears in ancient
Hystories and Poets. Vergill writes that when Dido Virgil in Eneidos lib. 1.
received Aeneas into her Court, she poured wine for him into that cup,
whereof Belus and all that came of Bell were wont to drink.

The first that brought the worship of this Idol amongst gods people, was Ahab
king of Israel Ahab brought Baall into Israel.
(as it is thought) what time he married Iesabell, daughter to the king of
Sidon, and so from Israel 3. Regum. 16.
this Idolatry ouerflowed Judah and Jerusalem. Where we may briefly note by the
way, Ill success of ungodly maryages.
what good comes of those marriages that are made between the Christians and
the Heathen or Papists, or in respect of worldly dignity and against Gods
law, for by such a match 3. Regum. 11. 4. Re. 9. and. 10
this Achab became an Idolatrer, as also Solomon by the like, which tended to
the destruction of their houses.

Also we may note of what weight and uprightness their judgments are: that
would have us to agree with Rome and Spain. etc. and to have Masses again,
then say they we should We ought not bear the yoke with infidels.
be in quietness and saftie. But let us know that Except the Lord Psalm. 127.
build the house, their labor is lost that build it. They that will build
their safety by committing Joshua. 23. The law of God forbidding true
worshippers to look on strange gods.
Idolatry, may look to sit as safely as Ahab, or as these Idolatrers that God
threatens destruction unto by this Prophet.

Now concerning these remnaunts of Baall, they were no doubt retained
secretelye, by many that favored the Idol, who also worshipped him in
secret, the public reformation and preaching notwithstanding. Like as in
these days, we have a great sort of those that favor the Romish Baall, and
are secret reteyners of his remnantes, as Relikes of the Romish Baal retained.
Masses, Coapes, Vestmentes, Crosses, Images, Latin service, numbering of
prayers, Surplesses, Albes, Stoles, Superaltares, and infinite I know not what,
and not only these monuments, but also the Priests and worshippers, and
favorers or clokers of Baals religion: are here called remnants of Baal, al
which the Lord says, he will thus root out, even by stretching forth his
strength against those that retain them, which must needs be to their utter
ruin and destruction, for god is ever one and the same, his judgments are in
Psalm. 104.
all the world. He must needs smite us if our offenses concur with those
of Judah, and Jerusalem, as no doubt they do, and exceed them.

For although we have public reformation, and God has sent us a Queen that
is a nursing Esaias. 49.
mother to Gods people, so that public authority is joined with the truth:
yet we are so Our thankles hearts for benifites received: do show that we
shall not long enjoy them.
thankelesse to God for it, and so slack and negligent in the embracing of
such benifytes, that it cannot be thought we shall long enjoy them.

Yet I speak now of the better sort. But when I consider what The better sort
but a remnant in respect of Romish remnants.
a remnant of the romish Baall, there is amongst us, (in respect of whom the
better sort is but a remnant:) alas what is to be looked for?

The Prophet adds to these another sort by name, the Chemarims, which God
would also Chemarims.
sweep out. Some think these Chemarims, were an under sort of Nouices to the
Priests of Baall, and that they made hot the censors with fire, whereof it
Chamar, signifies too make hot, also to make black or to resounde.
is thought they took that name Chemarim, which comes of the verb Chamar,
to make hot. Others think they were so called in respect of their hot zeal,
and others think (because Chamar also signifies to make black) that they had
their name of the blackness of their weed, as our black Friars or Monks,
for else it is not like that they had it of blackness (unless they were
Negros, or like the black guard through smoke of the fire:) or it might be
because Chamar is to resounde, that these were Eccos to the Priests. But some
think they took that name Chemarim of the Idol Chamos, that was the Idol of
the Moabites, whose place and Altar this good king Josias destroyed as we
read, for 4. Regu^. 23.
in deed these people had many Idols amongst them, not being contented with
the true and only God almighty.

It is known that God did consecrate the Tribe of Levy to himself, wherout
his high priest should be taken, and bear chief rule in holy things, which
high Priests had always Ministers One God, one order of priests. Exodus 27.
28. 29. 30. 40. Leuit. 1. 8.
under them serving to the common exercise in religion, and what things soever
God appointed in sacrificing and teaching: the same he appointed to be done by
the children of Levy.

But this people not content with one God and his ordinances: would have many
gods, of which every one must have his several Many Gods, many orders of
Priests, with sundry names after their Idols.
service, and ministers accordinglye. And hereof it came that they needed, and
made for their new Gods, new Priests, with new names after the names of
their Idols, as Priests of Baall, Chemarims. etc. of which, God by his Prophet,
says. I will root out also the names of the Chemarims together with the
priests.

This peoples heart no doubt (as I have said) was altogyther rebellious, for
when they could not (for they durst not) openly Propertyes of Idolatrers and
Rebels.
have their Idolatrous services, yet secretly they would, as it were in dispite
of God and the king, and contrary to public reformation worship and retain
not only Baall and his relics: but also Chamos and his relics, yea,
Malchom and his relics, with many other more: as the hosts of heaven, the
sun, and Moon, and stars, as Jeremy the Prophet exclaymeth at this time
saying. O Judah, look Jeremy. 11.
how many Cities thou have and so many Gods have thou made thee also. etc.

But this styffenecked people would have it thus, let God and his magistrate
command what they would, they would do as Such as neither regard God, nor
good Magistrates.
they listed, they kept secret these Priests of Baal, and Chemarims, and by
them and those relics mayntayned their Idolatries, and superstitions.

Even as at this day amongst us, are maintained and kept secret many remnants
of Baall, and morrow Mass Chemarims of the Popes brood, who not content The
romish brood not content with one order of priesthood, will have many, as they
have many Gods.
with one God, far exceeded in erecting sundry sorts of Idolatry, and of
new orders to supply the abundaunt superstitions by him invented.

Saint Paul witnesses that Ephesians. 4. 1. Corin. 12.
our Savior Christ made some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some
Shepeheardes, and some teachers. And for this only purpose they were ordained
Those that our savior ordained: were to further the preaching of the Gospel,
and mainteyn one service of one God.
to serve for the edifying of the body of Christ, that the doctrine of the
Gospel might continually be retained, whereby alone the Church is gathered
together and conserned.

But when this one truth, namely, the everlasting Gospel of Christ was
neglected, and place given to Idolatry and superstitions: then new and
strange worshippings devised, did bring in a necessity of more ministers than
Christ did ordeyne to guide and instruct his Church.

And of these erections of new worshippings, sprung more orders of officers in
the Church, The romish orders were to darken the Gospel preached, and to
erect strange and sundry worshipings of sundry Idols.
namely, Ostiarij, Lectores, Exorciste, Acolithi, Subdiaconi, Diaconi, and
Sacrifici. Whereof though some names were in the primative Church and did then
office in Gods service, yet now they were drawn with the new invented ones
to do Idols service. Whereunto if you add Monks and Monials, Friars, Papists
have infinite orders: to serve infinite Idols, exceeding both Jews, and heathen
in Idolatry.
Beguts, Majors, Minors, Eremites, chaste Nuns, and unchaste Nuns (that is
common harlots gathered into an order of religion) and moreover the several
orders of Monks, And every one of these do prefer their own master above
christ, as though Christ had not dyed for them, but Barnarde, Benedict,
Francis, or some other of their masters.
Friars, and Channons, as Benedictes, Bernardines, Franciscanes, Dominickes,
Augustines, and such like. We shall perceive the Pope and his brood to have
far exceeded not only these Jews in sundry Idolatries and superstitions,
but also all other ydolatrous nations of heathen folk.

And in seeing these their abominable If the stews were up again and all
ruffianage and villanye practiced there, as in times past: yet being compared
with the life of these, it would appear purity and chastity, in respect
thereof. etc.
Idolatries, with also their idleness, whoredom, sodometrie, treasons,
conspiracies, and other their most horrible vilanies, wherein they do continue
by dispensation of their Malchom the Pope: if yet we will maintain them, and
seek to preserve them, either in corners or openly, we can not escape The
worse things that men do preserve: the worse or greater plague they do deserve.
4. Reg, 22. 23 2. Paral. 34.
greater plagues than are threatened to these Jews, by as much as we retain
more abominable enemies to GOD and to his truth than they did: for we do not
read in all Josias reygne which was. 31. year, that any of those remnauntes
of Baall and Chemarims did cause insurrection in Judah: but we have experience
The Rebellious and traiterous Baalites and Chemarims in Josias time: not so ill
nor so hurtful as our romish brood at this time.
of the Popes Chemarims pestilent practices in this behalf here in our Realm,
and dispensations and pardons granted by their means to Rebels, for the same
purpose.

And yet these are saved, and Rebellion and Popes pardon. Deutero. 13.
Perilous to laue or maintain such as ought to die.
maintained contrary to Gods law, for which no doubt God is displeased with
England. For by his law they ought to die, as also we see by this example of
execution done by Josias, who would not have spared any of them Chemarims, if
he could have found them, but would have served them as he served the
reast, and as our Chemarims and Baalites ought to be served. And if Gods law
were our rule, I mean, if we would be ruled thereby: it should not thus
continue. Gods law a most righteous rule to follow.
Alas, what fear of God or zeal in Gods religion have we? I say the great
Baalites and Chemarims need not to hyde themselves here amongst us, for almost
no man seeks for them, or Small redress sought.
if they once be talked withal: what comes thereof? is there any redress
of their minds and Idolatries? may they not use their secret service at their
will? God grant that as our Prince and Magistrates do allow of Josias doings
in this point, now in the twelfth year of his reign, even so they may
vouchsafe to The twelfth year of Josias reign, the.xij. year of our Queens
reign.
put in practice after his example with like severity, the like execution of
Idolatrers and Idolatrous remnants, now in the.xij. year of our Princes
reign, remembering the perpetual praise that remains to and for such an
act, as of Josias it is said: There was no King like unto 1. Regum. 23.
him, neither before nor after him, that so wholy turned to GOD with all his
heart. etc.

Surely, there is not this day a greater let of the increase of Gods Church,
than these Papists and morrow Mass priests are. For, where by preaching
abroad in Churches the flock of Christ should be increased and Retayning of
Papists and morrow Mass Priests, a great hinderaunce of the Churches increase.
instructed, look what the Preacher builds by his doctrine, these
domestical Papists do pervert and destroy in most places where they are
retained, whereby they draw after them many, and many they make lame in
religion, that in continuance they become wearye, and the Gospel is loathsome
to them, and so at length they grow to be haters of the truth. And though this
sentence be always true and infallible, namely, that God 2. Timot. 2.
knows his, and will preserve them: yet no man is thereby discharged of his
duty, but each in his office and charge must put to his helping hand to root
out No man may neglect his charge though Gods purpose and election is
immutable.
Idolatry and error, or else he shall dearly account for that he neglected
his charge.

For God does make men his instruments, that men shall call men to him, and
does make men ministers of his justice one to another. And therefore man must
God works by men, therefore men may not neglect Gods work in their charge
carefully and diligently look to his charge, yt he discharge his duty to ye
uttermost of his power, and let God work the success.

If Magistrates do not what they can to exterminate these things: they know
the peril. I leave them to God. But if they Men must do what they can and
leave the success to God.
do what they can, and yet cannot prevail: they shall deliver their own
souls, and God will fynish the work as he sees good, Ezechiel. 3.
like as here, he says, he will root out the remnants of Baall, and the
names of the Chemarims, with the Priests.

Furthermore, the Lord says, that he will root out all such as worship and
bovv on the house tops to the host of heaven. etc.

Hereby we see that such there were in Judah and Jerusalem Star worshippers in
Judah.
that did thus worship, we read that this good king Josias did put down the
horses of the Sun, that the kings of Judah had given Worshippers of the host
of heaven. 4. Reg. 23.
to the son, which shows that the Sun was worshipped, and it is also
written that he destroyed the aultars on the top of Ahas parlour, which the
kings of Judah had made, and the aultars that Manasses built in the courts 4.
Regu^. 23.
of the Lords house, to the host of heaven, which things were built in high
and open places, It may appear their houses were built with flat roofes that
served to walk upon, and for other uses also.
even in ye face of the firmament, of like, to the end, that this host of
Sun, and Moon, and Stars might see their service, and the higher they
could climb to do their services, so much the nearer their Gods they thought
themselves, and therefore their Why they offered in the open and high places.
service the more accepted, they used the same by night times also, that the
stars might vewe their actions the better as they thought.

The Plannettes and Stars are called the host of heaven either for the
continual and orderlye course which they have kept from the beginning, and in
respect of their multitude or number. Sun, Moan, and Stars, called the host
of heaven: for the multitude or for the continual course, or for power of
government thought to be in them.
Or else for that men did attribute to them the power of governance in earthly
things, as mighty Gods. And this error came first as it is thought from
amongst those of the East parts, and was now received amongst the Jews, which
caused them so to worship, and to build aultars to them.

The Astrologians of our time are not fullye so blockishe as to build aultars,
and to worship the same host of heaven as they did: though they strain a
vein out of course, in attributing to Astrologians of our time, to much
inclined to error this way.
them the power of government. I think them not much inferior in that point to
these Idolatrers, and therefore I council them, and others, that are to much
addicted unto them, and to their knowledges, to beware least they run over
the head into the mire. For I am in fear they are already over the shoes,
and up to the hammes.

We see yt our Astrologians will take upon them to know by a figure of our birth
time, who has a good fortune, and who contrary: also fortunate days, and
unfortunate: also to bring again a Bold confidence, predictions and attempts
of Astrologians in these days.
thing that is lost or stolen. How long one shall live, of conspiracies,
deaths of noble personages, and alterations of kingdoms and states, how
long Princes shall live, and religion These twirle the world upon their
thomme, to prevent Gods providence.
shall continue, and such others I cannot tell how many, as plentye and
scarsenesse, fair weather and foul. etc.

Now if they can do in deed these things which they take upon them (as I am
persuaded they cannot) their cunning is for the rareness strange.

But many godly and sober These practices esteemed of the godly, neither
godly nor profitable.
men, think it neither godly nor profitable.

And this is certain, that their calculations and demonstrations are
uncertain, what knowledge soever they have.

If any thing come to pass according Calculations of our Astrologians are
uncertain.
to their foretelling, I count it but an illusion to nouzell them, and such as
seek after If any thing chance: it is an illusion.
them, in that vain estimation which they have of their practice, and power of
the Stars and Planets, wherein they draw as near to the Jews superstition
and Idolatry here exclaymed against, as they can: excepting the external
offerings which these Jews made to them.

But admit their knowledge were certain, that they could tell how long a man
should live, and how fortunate or unfortunate he were: yet what of this? what
are they or any man else the better for it? The nature of man is such, that if
he did know his Man's nature perverse.
days certainly: he would live in all pleasure till he saw his end Knowledge
of destinies, not fit nor profitable.
at hand, if he knew him fortunate: he would be careless, and if
unfortunate: then desperate: for such are the fruits of man's affections
commonly by extreme motions.

Then forasmuch as this knowledge helps not, but rather Uncertainty spoken
for certainty, is deceyt.
hurts if it were certain: what does it avail, being altogether
uncertain? certainly it may be counted rightly, a vain travail Astrology
judicial a vain study, and irreligions.
of an irreligious brain.

David was well content, and affirmed that his time and fortune Psalm. 31.
were in the hands and knowledge of almighty God, and did not desire to know
his end by any other means than by Gods word. All the Godly and sober minded
have counted GOD the only knower of our days and Job. 7. 14.
destinies, and have had always this sentence: there is nothing more certain
than that we shall Godly men content to be ignorant of their days and
destinies.
die, nor more uncertain than when we shall die. Whereby we are warned to
watch throughout the scriptures: we have not one example that does allow of
these vain searches: but rather reproves them, and those that sought council
at them, for though the prediction fall out: yet it is but an illusion, even as
Moses says. God will prove his people to see if they love him. etc. Deutero.
13.


In the Prophecy of Mychea, we learn that the kingdom of Mich. 3. 5 6.
Christ, has no community with such things.

We read that wicked kings in Israel and Judah, did allow 3. Regum. 6. 4.
Regu^. 21.
of such fortune tellers, and such as consulted with Spirits, and that
worshipped the host of heaven, as Ahab and Manasses. etc. for which they were
said to have done that, which was evil in the sight of the Lord, and for
which God by this Prophet Sophonie here now threatens, plagues to come upon
the people that offended therein: and further upon such as swear by the Lord
and by their Malchom also.

These which swore by GOD Such as swear by God and by Malchom.
and by Malchom, were such amongst the Jews, as had not utterly rejected the
true GOD, but would seem to hold him still, for they gloried in the God of
their fathers, the God of Abraham, Isaac and Israel, and in their temple and
external sacrifices and services. But withal they had gotten and joined to
God: new Gods of their own, which were Idols of the heathen, and These coupled
God and Idols together, by one worship or service. 3. Reg. 18. Oseas. 8. 13.
so mixed religion. Against such, Elias and Osee the Prophets do exclayme,
saying, how long will you halt on both the sides, if God be God follow him,
or if Baall be God, then follow him.

Saint Paul says that the temple 2. Cor. 6.
of God does not agree with Images.

Our savior Christ says, you Luke. 16. Mark. 6.
cannot serve god and Mammon. The Ox and the Ass may not be coupled
together. A field may not be sowed with mingled seed. Deutr. 22.
Garments of Linsey woolsey are forbidden. All which sayings God cannot abide
a double heart nor mixture in religion. Ezechiel. 20. and. 14.
do plainly set before us, that God can not abide a double heart, nor mixture
in religion. For by Ezechiel he says to such haulters: go serve your Idolles
go, let me alone.

And let no man think that God likes or allows better of their service: that
in one Country or Of such as will hear sermons, and communicate in one
place, and will hear Mass, and kneel to Images in an other place.
place will hear sermons and be Communicantes: and when they come into other
Countries and places, will hear Masses, and kneel and offer candels thereto,
or to any other Idol. These are Vters, that can feyne voices: as the
Crocodile, and change coulors Vters of every religion compared to the
Dormouse, Crocodile, and Camelion.
with the Camelion, and like to the back or flitter mouse, that to deceive one
weazell, who loved to eat birds flesh, did show himself a mouse without
feathers, and to deceive an other weazell that loves to eat mise, did show
his wings and deny himself to be a mouse and affirmed that he was a Bird
as is fabled.

And while these Vters endeavor to be of all Religions, to please for
advantage, they are in Gods sight more detestable than Neuters, who are of
no religion, yea, while they endeavor to be more unlike themselves, than Vters
worse than Neuters and worse tha^ brute beasts.
beasts are to birds, or birds to beasts: they do show themselves to be
in deed worse than beasts, or birds, or any unreasonable creature: for
though the Lord do punish beasts. etc. as here is threatened: yet it is not
for the offense of the creature, but Beasts sin not: it is for man's sin
that God destroieth them.
for the wickedness of these hypocrites and such ungodly. God will not give his
glory to any other: God is a jealous God, and will not suffer any other to
have his honor with him, nor aparte Exodus. 20.
from him.

For as he alone, is altogether just and true, almighty and most God will not
suffer his honor to be given to others, nor others to be joined with him.
excellent: so is it right and meet that he alone have all and everlasting
praise, and thanksgiving. And no reason nor equity that any should be
accounted or named comparable to him, neither that his office or Godhead,
should be attributed or thought to be in any other, but only in himself.

While men do believe the almighty to be their god and king, and that their
whole help comes of him only, they are content with that god only, and to him
alone they will do worship and service. But those that do think their help
and While one god is thought able to help: so long one God is thought
sufficient of men.
preservation, or part thereof, to come of any other than of God only, those
do believe God to be, but apart worker of their health and safety, and therefore
they must have an other God to make up their help full, whom they account and
join equal (in their belief) with almighty God. In which their thoughts,
they draw so much trust from the almighty, as they give to any other, which
distrust in God, and trust in the other, is Distrust in God, is the root
whereof all Idolatry springs.
in deed the root whereof all external Idolatry springs, and wherein the
very worshippings of strange Gods do consist. For look in whom a man has
his chief trust, to him does that man, reverence and service, such as he
thinks shall please most.

These sort of Jews seemed to The Jews trusted in god and in Malchom,
therefore they swear by God and by Malchom.
trust, partly to God, and partly to Malchom, and therefore they worship GOD,
and Malchom, they swear by God and by Malchom, and so make Malchom equal with
God. But God will not suffer this mixture and Idolatry, he will root out
those that swear by him, and by Malchom also, God will not be cowpled. 4.
Regu^. 23. Malchom the Idol of the Ammonites, Moloch, Malchom, by
interpretation is their king.


Malchom was the Idol of the Ammonites, and the word Malchom is by
interpretation, their king, the Idol (as some think) is the same which in
other places is called Moloch, to whom the Prophet gives this name Malchom the
more to reproach them, in that they esteemed and called an Idol their king and
defender, as if he should say: God almighty is king over all, and yet your
king and preserver most specially: but you think (and will have) Moloch God
was their king, but they would
also to be your king, for you worship Moloch as God, and so have Malchom their
king also.
you call him your king, and swear by him even as by God, and thus you make
him equal with God, but God will not suffer your Idolatry unpunished.

It may be that the prophet named this special part of Idolatry, swearing:
because their swering by the Idol was then so Why the prophet names swearing
specially to be ydolatrie.
commonly known, that if any would have denied and dissembled their
Idolatry, and have answered the Prophet that they had been no Idolatrers:
their own voices would have condemned them, for all the multitude To swear
by Malehom then, was as common as swearing by the Mass is now.
could have borne witness of their swearing by Malchom.

Another cause why the Prophet threatens such swearing by name, may be: for
that otherwise those blind wretches would have thought themselves small or
none offenders, so long An other occasion why Sophony names this part of
Idolatry, namely swearing.
as they utterly rejected not the true God, though with him they worshipped
others, or though they swore by their Malcho^ also.

And here we are to note and well to consider, that to swear in in the name
and truth of god, in cases Esaias. 19. 45. 65.
of need, as to prefer right, and truth, and godly quietness, To swear a
truth by God, when need requires: that is a high honor to God.
is a high honor to God, and a chief part of his worship and service. Which we
cannot do in the name or truth of any other, without sacrylege and Idolatry To
swear by any other than God is to commit Idolatry.
committed.

Almighty God vouchsafes to let us serve our turns in truth joined with
necessity, by the use of his sacred name, and so does command us to swear by
his Exodus 3. Deuteronomy. 6. and. 10. Joshua. 23.
name, and when it is alleged in witness whereby justice takes place to extol
right and suppress Just swearing by God is a chief part of Gods honor and
service.
wrong: then no doubt God is highlye honored by that oath, and such swearing
is a chief part of Gods worship, and those that refuse so to swear, do
refuse Annabaptists refuse to honor God.
to honor God.

On the other side, whosoever would bring to pass the ministration of true
justice, the extolling To swear by any other is to transfer Gods worship to
that other.
of virtue, or suppressing of vice, by the credit of any other, whose name
they swear by: they do (so much as in them is) transfer Gods worship to
that thing whereby they swear, and so do commit ydolatrie.

And forasmuch as this swearinge by the Lord and by Malchom also, is here
showed plainlye to be ydolatrie: how can the Papists deny themselves to be
ydolatrers, yea, and much worse than these Jews? It is well known yt not only
in swearing, but also in praying, in mediatio^, and in redemption they either
put God quite out of his place, The Papists great Idolatrers by mixed oaths.
or else they joined with him one Malchom or other. He was not as they thought
able to help alone, nor true enough alone, nor merciful enough alone, nor our
redeemer alone. And therefore in every one of these things they joined fellow
helpers with him, and that no small number. They Papists thought not God
sufficient alone.
thought God to be over weak alone, and therefore they would put strength to
his strength to make him strong. He was and is beholding to them, as much and
more than to these Malchomites, and for their service let them look to be
rewarded, with such payment as they were, and that double and tryple, yea,
centuplum. etc.

Whereas Jesus Christ is our Matthew. 11. 1. John. 2. 1. Timo. 2. Esaias. 63.
Papists do couple others with Christ in mediation, and intercession, and
therefore Idolatrers.
only Mediator and advocate: they have placed with him in that office: as well
the saints of their own canonising, as also many of the holy Saints mentioned
in the Scripture. Whereof they feigned the blessed Virgin to be such a one that
they desired her to be (as it were) a stickler in mediation betwixt god the
father and the son for them. Where they besought her in these words, Roga
patrem, and iube natum. etc. Pray the father, and command the son. etc.

Likewise in redemption and John. 1. 2. Corin. 5. Colloslians. 1. Hebr. 1. 9.
10.
remission of sins, where God alone in Christ Jesus has fully accomplished
the same to our everlasting stay and comfort, and therefore only is to have
the praise for it: these endless Idolatrers do join with him in that Papists
join with Christ: other redeemers, and therein commit Idolatry.
work: the merits of dead Saints, the blood of Martirs, works of
Supererogation, merytes of prayers, fastings, alms deeds, Masses, and their
own good works, and others infinite.

Furthermore, where our help Psalm. 121. Psalm. 124. Esaias. 63. Jeremy. 29.
Ioell. 2.
and safety stands only in the Lord, that made both heaven and earth, and
he only, to be called upon for help in time of need: these Romanists teach
us to call upon saints departed both for help and safety. Sometime utterly
Papists call for help and safety of others than of God, and often join
others with God by invocation, and thereby commit ydolatrie.
forgetting and excluding God, as when they say, O Lady Queen of heaven help
me, speed me, and save me, and sometime joining them fellows with God, as
where they say, God and our Lady, God and S. Peter, God and S. Frauncis, God
and S. Anthony, God and S. Loye, save, speed, or help this or that.

And as in these rehearsed, so do they commit ydolatrie in this part of Gods
worship, namely swearing, either by pulling it wholly from God, as when
excluding God, they swear by the Mass, the Mattins, our Lady, Papists swear
by Masses. etc. and exclude God.
Saint John. etc. Or else by joining companions with God, as when they swear
by God and by the Mass, by God and by the Papists swear by God and by their
many Malchoms, and so couple the^ with god.
Mattens, God and our Lady, God and Saint John, by God and by the World, and
by God and the Devil. etc.

Thus in every part of Gods service, they have made their Mammets, Malchoms,
and toys equal with God, by transferring and attributing that glory and
praise that belongs only to God, in, and for these things: Papists rob God
of that honor, which they give unto their Malchoms.
to those whom they have made fellows and checkmates with God.

And the continuance of these abominations and filthy mixtures, Papists
Relics remain yet.
does not cease to this day, though by writing, preaching, and exhortations,
the same have been often reprehended.

God be thanked that many are reclaymed, and God send the rest knowledge and
feeling. But certainly, these remnantes stick so fast in a number, that it is
to be feared and looked for, that God by punishing according to this prophecy
(or more extreemely) must redress these things, and sweep them out. For they
be worse Romish remnants worse here, than Baals remnants in Judah and Jerusalem.
remnants of Idolatry here, than Baals remnants, or swearing by Malchom, were
amongst them of Judah and Jerusalem.

A more horrible vice than Idolatry there is not lightly in the sight of God:
but flat blasphemy does far exceed it. And that is Blasphemy exceeds
Idolatry.
committed when willingly and wittinglye men swear by the mighty name of God,
in denying of truth, or affirming of falsehoode. For in so doing, they make God
a witness to mainetayne Blasphemy is committed when God is called to witness
an untruth. John. 8.
and proppe up a lie. But Satan is the father of falsehoode, and the only
mainteyner of lies. Therefore whosoever thus offends: does (so much as in him
is) put God in Satan's place, and no more thank to that man, than if he had in
deed put God in that place, and what greater dishonor can man do to God, than
to make him most unlike himself? not only to spoil A most cursed crime.
him of his truth and godheade: but also to make him a Devil. Oh most horrible
and cursed crime.

An endelesse trembling fear, may that person have that so has endeavored
himself.

The commandment of god is, that we shall not name him To swear by God in
vain: is more than simply to take Gods name in vain. Exodus. 20. Deutero. 5.
in vain, but simply to name god, is not to swear by him, and if once to name
God in vain be forbidden, than to swear by him when no need is, must be a
greater fault.

To swear a truth when need To swear by God in truth when need requires: is
an honor to God.
is, by the name of god, is a true worship of God, but wittinglye and willingly
to swear an untruth by the name of God, is To swear wittingly and willingly
by God in untruth: that is blasphemy.
most horrible blasphemy against the spirit.

The horrible estate of these offenders our savior Christ has pronounced. O
let us beware of these mixtures, which are beginninges Beware of mixtures, the
beginning of Idolatry and blasphemy.
of Idolatry, for one mischief brings in another, with too too speedy
increase. Let us watch and look about us, for seeing that God will punish this
mixed swearing, as here he threatens by the Prophet. We cannot look to escape
greater punishments, being more guiltye, not only in mixtures of religion, and
oaths, but also in continual God is not only named in vain amongst us: but
sworn by in vain, and for trifles.
using of Gods sacred name in vain, yea, and swearing by it without need, in
buying, selling, and talk, both in matters of weight and trifles, even for the
gain of a halfepeny, god grant it be not untruly used also.

Some do think (whom I dislyke not) that these Jews Malchom is by
interpretation their king some therefore think yt these Jews swore by God,
and by their king.
who swear by the Lord and by their Malchom also, were such as did esteem
their king equal with God, and therefore they swore by God and by their king,
and because Malchom is by interpretation their king, it is so likely, like as
in Egypt where they knew not god: they esteemed In Egypt they used to swear
by the soul of Pharao their king.
their King most, and therefore they swear by the soul of Pharao. And if it
were so: I doubt not, that they have also numbers of cousin germans in England
at this day, that to flatter for their own advantage, will not stick to make
the King equal with (yea, and above) god, though Belials and Athistes, and
Gnatos in these days, do make their king equal with God, but that is
flattery only for their own advantage.
(if God should send another Prince afterward, that were contrary in
religion and all other dispositions) those same Gnatos and flatterers, would
yet have him equal with god to.

The same estimation and greater, have the Papists of their king with the
triple crown. For be he never so vicious and vile a thief, yet whatsoever he
commands, must be preferred to the commandments of God, and whatsoever
he speaks, must be esteemed equal with (or above) the scripture, and where
the Scripture speaks affirmatively: he has authority to expound The
Papists do not less esteem of their Malchom the Pope.
the same negatiuely, and contrary, if I should prosecute thoroughly ye
estimation that they have of their king, I should never The Pope may correct ye
Scriptures.
have done, let this serve for a taste: whereby may be felt that they make this
their King, not only equal with God, but greater than God, though not so
commonly in swearing by him, Papists thought the Pope to good to be joined
with God in this swering.
for they thought him to good, to be joined with God in that service, his trash
they thought worthy enough in this part, whereby the honor they gave him,
appears to be the greater, though subteller and more hidden.

The Prophet Sophonie proceeds, and says, that God will also root out
those, that dravv or Starters or drawers back threatened.
turn back behind the Lord, least they should learn to know him, and
follovv him.

Like as in an other place God says. If man withdraw himself: Psalm.
my soul shall have no pleasure in him. Whereby we are taught what peril it
is: to withdraw Perilous to draw backwarde. Hebre. 6.
our selves behind, to be slack, and to detract our coming to God: when by
his word he calls us. This unwilling mind of Unwilling minds a token of
hard success.
ours to follow God, is a token of hard fortune, and unlikely to have good
success, true it is, that no man comes to salvation unless God by his
spirit, dravv him. But John. 3. 14. 16
when God calls and men have begone a good way, and then start back, and
desire not further to know God nor to follow Negligence brings lothsomnesse:
and lothsomenesse, and all these bring contempt.
him: it is a shrowde token, and specially as I say, after they have once
begone in a good way, and then wax weary and sluggishe, when zeal dies in
them: for so at length the meditation and hearing of Gods word grows to be
loathsome to them, and afterward many such fall to contemn it, we are therefore
diligently to We must watch and omit no good occasion, for we are weak.
note this matter, and to stand at our watch, and omit none occasion that may
help us forward in following of God, knowing how worldly and weak wear of
our selves, and easy to be drawn backward from God, we see and have
experience of our selves: how soon we are weary of holy exercises, how small
occasions in our worldly affairs: do draw us from those exercises, we cannot
intend to hear or read gods We are soon weary of holy exercises.
word, if we have any thing else to do in the world, nay, loath to be long at
it, though it be Sunday, Exodus 20. 23. 24. 25. Ezechiel. 20.
wherein by the law we may not otherwise work, yet had we rather be occupied
in our playing and our own delights, than in meditation of Gods will.

And what does all this argue us to be? but drawers back, and not to be of
that company that desire to dvvell in the house of the Lord all the days of
their lives, Psalm. 23. Psalm. 26. Psalm. 27.
to behold the fair beauty of the Lord. etc. Also far unlike those that
have the fountaynes of all Psalm. 87.
their joy and delight in the church of God, or that esteem the prosperity of
the Saints and religion Psalm. 137.
to be the head of their mirth, nay, rather it shows us to be such as the
Prophet Esaias speaks Esaias. 53.
of, that see no beauty nor fayrenesse in the Lord, nor in his house, that
have no delight in the glory of Sion, and that we make the prosperity of the
Saints and religion, the tail of our mirth, or rather no part of our mirth,
but grief and lothsomnesse.

Well, forasmuch as the knowledge of God and his will is the Knowledge of Gods
will, a defense from Idolatry.
mean, to keep men from Idolatry, and to lead them after god: those that
start back least they should know God: are entered the way to Idolatry and
all kind To start back and to be ignorant, is to enter the gate of Idolatry.
of iniquity, and therefore Gods judgments are just, in rooting them out.

Now lastly he says. That God will also root out, those that neither Such as
neither seek for God nor regard him, are Athistes and wicked world lings.
seek God, nor regard him. By which sort, I think the Prophet means
generally the wicked, that without regard of God, or any religion, did wallow
in all worldly delights, let God and religion sink or swim, it was all one
with them, they would follow their veins and trades, they passed not for God,
and therefore they sought not for him, they sought only to serve their turns
for the time.

I would there were none occasion to reprove a foul number of this fault in
this our time. But if lives and trades of men Men's doings in these days: do
argue the multitude to be Athistes.
be noted: we shall perceive the like or worse Athisme, or Godlesnesse in the
multitude: let them set what face or visor ofreligio^ or ciuility they can: we
shall see it to be but policy and hypocrisy in the^.

It were an endless work to enter into all the perticularities, that would
prove them such hypocrites, neither is it my purpose nor in my power to touch
all.

Wherefore leaving the reast, I mind to speak at this time of a few abuses,
but specially of one general vice above the reast, One general vice amongst
many, namely Vsurye.
namely Usury, which is so commonly contracted in men's trades at this time,
that the practice thereof will prove the greatest number amongst us, to be as
ill as these Jews, that neither seek for, nor regard GOD, to which men this
Prophet threatens destruction.

But forasmuch as I have heretofore in two Sermons at the Cross, said my
mind partlye therein, according to my simple Somewhat said in two former
Sermons of usury
knowledge. And also that the learned fathers both of old time and in these
our days, have both spoken and written thereof, in much better wise, than I am
able, Learned have written against usury.
and yet the multitude do continue herein, rather increasing this vice, than
ceasing from it, yea, and do account it no vice: What profit may I look for
to What shall I profit?
come, of this my travail? what success? or what redress may I look for?

If I should herein take upon I shall be said to speak arogantly.
me to say more, than the learned have done: I might be counted arrogant and
void of discretion.

If I cannot say more than they have done: (as in deed I cannot say so much
by much) then what shall it avail that I speak I shall be said to speak in
vain.
thereof? seeing those learned, cannot persuade these Usurers that they be
faulty?

And if I shall now say no more, than heretofore I my self have I shall be said
to be still in one song.
said: I shall be counted like to the Cuckooe, or Stockdoue, for being always
in one song.

If I shall touch the quick by I shall get John Baptists reward, that is,
hatred.
examination: I am like to win hatred of the multitude, whose faults I
reprove.

And if I shall prove subject the trades of this time, to the definition or
corruption of forbidden I shall be said to speak I know not what.
Usury, then I shall be counted not to understand what is meant by the
definition, and to have spoken I know not what.

As some have traueyled with me, to make me believe, that I Friends of Usurers
do accuse them of ignorance, which reprove that vice. John. 20.
did not know what usury was, nor wherein it consisted: but I was Didimus
therein, as loath to believe them, as they were to be reformed.

So that all these things with the malice of men considered, and specially
seeing I shall speak against such contracts as are counted lawful, and
therefore honest: (for so some conclude.)

If I had not an eye to an other matter from all these things: I Sisyphus
travail.
might look to profit as much by mine industry: as Sisyphus, qui Cicero. lib.
1. Tusc. quest.
est versans saxum sudans nitendo neque proficit hylum, who (is feigned)
tumbling a stone up a Feigned to be his punishment in hell.
steep hill, and continually sweating through that labor: profits not the
black of a bean.

But when I consider that in all ages sin has been reproved, and so already
reproved that in substance more cannot be said against it, and yet that the
same is continued: also that this vice of usury in these days has more
ouerflowed and corrupted than Contynuall vice, must be contynually spoken
against, and that most, which is most practiced.
at any time heretofore, and still rather increases, than cease: and
herewithall remember mine own charge, being called to this office and place,
that I must not cease to reprove and speak against sin, and specially that
most: which I know to be most frequented: I am encouraged and partly driven
for discharge A Preachers charge to reprove sin.
of my duty, to go on, and proceed in this matter, though I come much short
of others that have gone before me, and short of my desire in the redress.

And though the wicked will Oseas. 14. D. Though the wicked will not regard:
yet the godly will.
not regard me: (for they regard not God) yet Gods children will give ear to
the truth and embrace it. For I am sure that the word of God is never without
effectutuall working, it falls ever on the edge, being more sharp than
Hebrews. 4. Gods word falls not without effect and fruit, it cutteth to or
from God. 2. Cor. 2.
any two edged svvorde, and either cutteth to God or from god, (as Saint Paul
says:) bona fragrantia sumus Christi deo. etc. We are a svvete savor of
Christ unto God, both in the^ that are saved, and also in them that perish.
Preachers are a sweets savor of Christ to God.
To the one part (are we) a savor of life unto life: and unto the other part a
savor of death unto death. Therefore I for my part mind not to leave God with
out his witness God is never without his witnesses. Romans. 1.
here, nor his children without instructions: but mind to discharge my soul of
this burden, The wicked without excuse.
and to leave these wicked Usurers without all excuse before God.

And though I might with less danger touch and shake a Hornets A Hornets
neast.
nest, than deal with them, (for so woluish and wise they are Usurers wise and
woluishe.
grown, that to them the reast are but lambs and fools) yet having the truth
on my side, I fear them not, but commit the success to God, and thus I say.

To lend corn, wine, oil, money, Definition of usury, and what an Usurer is.
or such like, with covenant to receive the like again, or just value thereof,
with overplus for the lone: that overplus, I say, is forbidden usury, and such
a lender is an Usurer.

This is proved by many places in the scriptures as well in the Law and
Prophets, as in the Gospel.

In the Law it is proved, where God says by Moses: thou shall not hurt thy
brother by usury of Money, nor by usury of Corn, nor by usury of any
Proof of the definition in the law. Deutr. 23. Leuit. 25. Exodus 22.
thing, whereby thy brother may be hurt: thou shall not take of thy pore
brother vauntage, or increase.

In the Prophets it is proved Ezech. 18. 22. Proof in the Prophets.
where God says by Ezechiel: The godly man lends nothing for usury, he
takes nothing over.

In the Gospel it is proved, where our savior Christ commands to lend
freely, or looking Proof in the Gospel. Luke. 6. Mark. 12. Math. 7. 22.
for nothing. Also, thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self, and what you
vvoulde that men should do to you, even so do you to them. etc.

By all which places is seen, that usury may be committed as Usury is in more
things the^ in money.
well in other things as in money (though some think it consist in money only)
and also, that whatsoever is taken for lone more Overplus taken for lone is
Vsurye.
than was lent, that overplus is usury.

If any man do yet think that I wrest ye scriptures by this collection, let
him understand that these learned fathers did so understand them as I do. For
no man of good and sound judgment can otherwise collect of those places
recited.

First Hierome, he says, Putant Hieron comentarijs in Ezecheilem. lib. 6.
quidam vsura^ esse tantu^ in pecunia. Quod praeuidens diuina scriptura, omni
rei aufert superabunda^tiam, vt plus non recipias quam dedisti. That is: Some
men think usury to be only in money, which thing the holy Scripture
Overplus in any thing (for lone) is usury.
foreseeing, does take away the overplus in all things, so that thou shall
receive no more than thou did deliver.

And the same Father further witnesses. Alij pro pecunia foenerata solent
munuscula diuersi generis accipere, and non intelligunt vsuram appellari and
superabundantiam. etc. That is: Others for Hieron in Ezechil. li. 6.
money lent upon usury, do use to take gifts of diverse kinds, and do not
understand that the scriptures call the same vsurye and overplus. etc.

Then Ambrose, he says, to the Ambrose de nabu.
same purpose, Plerique refugientes precepta legis, cum dederint pecuniam
negotiatoribus, non in pecunia vsuras exigu^t sed in mercibus, ideo audeant
quid lex dicat neque (inquit) vsuras escarum accipies neque omniu^ aliarum
reru^, igitur esca vsura est, and quicquid sorti accedit, vsura est, and quod
velis nomen ei imponas vsura est.

Many (says Ambrose) flying the precepts of the Law, when they have
delivered their monye For money delivered to Merchant men no overplus must be
taken for lone, for such overplus is usury.
unto Merchant men (or to occupiers) do not exact usury in monye, but in
vvares. Therefore let them hear what the law says, neither shall thou take
usury of meats, nor of any other thing, therefore meat so taken is usury:
Lend freely, or else your borowing and lending is turned into buying and
selling.
and vvhatsoeuet is above the principal is vsurye, yea, whatsoever name thou
give unto it: it is usury.

Thirdly Augustine, he says: Si foeneraueris homini, id est tuam August. in
Psalm. 36.
pecuniam mutuam dederis, a quo aliquid plusquam dedisti expectas accipere, non
pecuniam solam, sed aliquid plusquam dedisti, sieve illud triticum sit, sieve
vinum, sieve oleu^, sieve quodlibet aliud, si plusquam dedisti expectas accipere,
foenerator es, and in hoc improbandus non laudandus. That is: If thou lend for
advantage to a man (that is) thou lendest thy money to him of vvho^ thou
hopest to receive more than thou did deliver, not money only, but any thing
more tha^ thou did deliver, whether it be wheat He is an Usurer that takes
overplus for any thing that he lends.
or wine, or oil, or any other thing, if thou expect to receive more than
thou have delivered, thou art an Usurer, and in this not to be praised, but to
be dispraised.

Thus you see that these three learned Fathers do bear me witness that I do
not wrest the Scriptures, whereto might be added the judgment of many more
agreeable to these, but it needs not, or booteth not: the Scriptures are
plain herein, The scriptures are plain touching usury.
that usury is committed, not only in lending of money, but also in corn,
wine, oil and wares, if any thing be taken overplus, for or in respect of the
lone.

Which being true (as it is proved true) this must needs follow thereof, that
when there is In sale of (...) for time, if any greater price be exacted for
the lone: that which is couenaunted for (more) in respect of the time is usury
and that seller an usurer.
sold any victual, wares, or merchandise for days of payment, and in respect
of the time contracted and given, for the payment there be taken any more,
that more which is taken in consideration of the lone: is overplus and
forbidden usury, and that seller is an usurer.

And also when monye is delivered by exchau^ge betwixt place and place, as from
London to Hamborough. etc. to be paid two, three, or four months after That
which is taken for money delivered by exchange for any time more than for
sight: is usury, and that delyuerer is an usurer.
the deliuerye thereof, and in respect of that time contracted and given, any
greater or more price be taken upon the Pound, or hundredth Pounds, than the
price is at sight by the market, and more than the deliverer would have taken
to have had payment with all possible speed at sight (as they call it) that
overplus or greater price taken for ye times forbearance: is usury forbidden,
and that deliverer is an Usurer.

For by the order or nature of true and simple buying and selling, The nature
of simple buying and selling.
whosoever does simply buy a thing, ought forthwith to pay ready monye for the
same, as by the orderly course of the Law is understood.

Also when exchange is made Simple exchaunging betwixt Country and Country, no
time contracted.
betwixt Country and Country thus simply, that a price or quantities and
qualities, and a place of payment is agreed upon, and no time of payment spoken
of: than it is understood that the taker ought to pay (for that which he
has so taken) even with all possible speed.

But if in buying and selling or making exchange, any days of payment be
contracted for, and Days given for payment of things sold or exchaunged: is
lending of that which must be rereceyued.
granted to the buyer or taker: than that time contracted: is in deed
borowing and lending, not of the thing bought and sold, (I grant) but of that:
which the buyer or taker should have paid by the order of simple buying and
exchaunging.

For if sale of a thing be made for time, or days of payment, or that money
be delivered for days of payment: the property The property of a thing sold
or delivered by exchange: is in the buyer or taker.
of the thing sold and delivered, is immediately in the buyer or taker, and no
longer in the seller or deliverer, as also by ancient course of the law does
appear.

As for example, one sells a Example.
quarter of wheat for. xvj. shillings, and is content to give to the buyer a
month, or a years day, for payment thereof.

Now it is plain the seller can not justly, ask again this corn at the
day: but money he may ask, namely. xvj. shillings. Therefore he lent not
corn, but money, for that which a man lends, he may justly ask again,
either the thing it self that is lent, or else That which is lent may be asked
again: but yt which is sold or delivered by exchange, cannot be lawfully
asked again.
the like thing of the same name, kind, and equality.

Even so examine the exchange and it shall be found that when time of payment
is given: that thing is lent, which the creditor may by the same name and
equality demand at the day of payment, which is reasonable, and not absurd
in nature.

But if in respect, and by means of this lending and time given, the seller or
deliverer do exact more in the price of that they sell or deliver, than the
market is for ready money, and more than the seller or deliverer would take to
have ready money for it: that To exact more in sale of a thing in respect of
lone: that more is usury. Luke. 6. Ezechiel. 18.
more exacted for the loan, is as I said, usury, and forbidden, because it is
absurd in nature, and against this rule, lend freely, and it is not the act
of a Godly man, for the godly man lends nothing upon usury, nor takes any
thing over.

And albeit yt some writers who have seuerelye enueyed against Their
judgments not to be allowed that think usury may be taken of rich men.
this vice, are of this mind, that to take overplus of the rich for lone is not
usury: yet I see no warrant in Gods word to approve that their judgment and
distinction. For though the scripture whereon they build their opinion does
Leuit. 25.
specially forbid it to be exacted of poor men: yet in no place is it allowed
to be taken of rich men (except they be heathen rich me^.)

We find that God forbids Deutr. 24.
to defraude an hired servant that is poor. But if any man would collect
hereof: yt one might defraude Usury and fraud may be used neither by, nor
toward rich nor poor.
a rich servant: he should collect amiss, and even so of usury. for as god
does not allow fraud in any man, nor against any man: no more does he allow
of usury to be taken of poor nor of rich, (especially in the Kingdom of
Christ.)

Many in these days do think themselves well discharged (it should seem) in
that they can say they lend not to poor men upon Many think that they may
send to the rich for usury and allege colors of honesty.
usury, but to such as are able to pay for it. Whereby (say they) we live, and
they gain, and we have something to give to the poor thereby, which else we
should not long have, for we should spend all.

But if that, last before spoken, do not fully answer these men: then I
refer them to Saint Ambrose in the place before recited, Ambros. de nabu.
Ambrose condemns such as took usury of occupiers or merchants.
where he condemns such as did lend for usury, to occupiers generally
without exceptition. And if neither (the one answer nor the other) will
satisfy these men: it is not like that my answer shall satisfy them, but
yet to keep my promise, I will not omit mine answer.

I say (and not I only) that to To lend for usury is forbidden, to lend
freely commanded, as also to give alms.
lend for usury is forbidden. But to lend freely is not forbidden, but
commanded: even as to give alms is commanded, and to extort is forbidden.

To lend freely, and to give alms as we are commanded, are deeds of
charity and compassion: But to lend for usury, and to extort, are contrary and
forbidden, Usury nor extortion cannot be made honest by any color.
and cannot be committed without offense, nor made honest by any color.

To lend freely to the needy: To lend freely to the poor is charity.
that is compassion: but to lend freely to the rich, is no compassion, (though
not wicked) but to To lend to the rich, no charity.
lend for usury either to poor or rich is wicked.

And if we should look only upon the common wealth, we should find, that
lending to the rich for usury, is a more pestilent mischief: than is lending
to the poor, and then in this subterfuge of theyres: they do In respecting
the common wealth, it is worse to lend for usury to the rich:
more foolishlye than those that seeking to escape Sylla, do fall upon
Charybdis, and show themselves much like those that than to the poor.
flying the ship to escape danger, do drown themselves in the maine sea.
For, first they lend for usury, which is against the common laws, then they
lend to the rich man, who having the money, Sylla and Caribdis.
does ingrosse the Markets, brings heaps of commodities into his own
hands, and so makes Ritche men having money do engrosse markets, and the
more money they have: the more they engrosse.
a Monopolion, and dearth without need. The meaner sort are thereby prevented
of their markets, and must gleane after the Ingrosser, and take small leauings
or sit still, and so remain mean, or rather become poor: the common sort
weep through the dearth, for the rich will be sure to make his common weal to
bear out his loss, and pay for that usury, and when many are beggered for
ever, one is helped Common weal payth to the ingrosser not only gain: but
also yt which he has paid for usury.
with a halfepenny, which is the Usurers charity. Oh, I would a good Orator
had this matter in hand, to paint out this mischief to some purpose, for here
is matter enough, if a man did respect, as I said, but the commonwealth only.
But when we consider the commandment of god, and his compassion toward
men, and therewith remember how this Usurer regards it, or how he is moved
with compassion toward the poor thereby: we Gods mercy and kindness moves
not usurers, but a penny loss will move them.
shall see him not only a sleep, but starcke dead and senseless like a
block touching the one and the other. But in his own device and vain, we
shall find him awake, alive, stout, and strong, yea so sensible: that if he
lose but a penny: and that a hundred miles of: yet he feels that with
grief. God says, thou shall not oppress thy poor brother with Usury, mary
(says the Usurer) Usurers will lend nothing to the poor, because they will
not oppress them.
no more will I, for he gettes nothing of me, neither for Usury, nor without,
for seeing it is a fault, to take usury of the poor: I will lend him nothing.

But how then (I say) does he regard this commandment of our Savior? Lend
freely, or lend looking for nothing. Or how does he regard this saying? Love
thy neighbor as thy self. Surely to lend upon Usury we see is forbidden, but
not to lend at all when we see our poor brothers need: may seem to be a
greater fault, by the parable of the Talents, for he which hid his money was
the worst man. And They that will not lend at all, being able, worse men than
the usurer. John. 3.
Saint John says: If any man have this worlds good, and sees his brother to
want, and shuts up his compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in
him? can that man be said to love his neighbor as himself? If that man
himself were in need: he would be helped, so well he loves himself, and
if he so loved Usurers and mercylesse do not feel what charm is, nor how
they would be done to by others in their need.
his needy brother: he would even so help his brother. If he did as he would
be done too: he would relieve his poor brother, even as he himself would be
relieved in like case, for we must consider in doing as we would be done to:
what we should desire (lawfully) if we our selves were in necessity. And
surely whether we be rich or poor, we had rather (when we borrow) to borrow
freely: than to pay usury for that we borrowe, though Ritche and poor: desire
when they borow, rather to borow freely, than to pay usury.
some Usurers to cloak their conscience will say, that they would gladly give.
x. or. xij. pound in the hundredth when they need, and thereby they would
color their faults in taking usury, but they be hypocrites herein, for
their own conscience will still say, I had rather borrow freely, than for
Usury, yea though they be rich. And their need whereof they speak, is, when
they might have. xx. or. xxx. pound profit by The usurers need: is his
covetous affections in desire of gain.
loan of a hundredth pound. In deed then they would give ten pound in the
hundred, rather tha^ go without it: but yet still it is true that they would
rather borrow freely: yea, and if they were in such need as their poor
neighbors are: they would willingly be helped by loan, and yet loath to pay
any usury for it.

But as these are utterly void of compassion, and without regard, or feeling
of their poor Usurers without compassion or regard of gods law.
neighbors misery or want: so are they utterly without regard of God, or
good laws, except only for a face, and to live to serve their turns.

For if they lend to poor and rich upon usury, the poorer man If rich and
poor do take at usury: the poor shall pay the greater usury.
shall pay the dearer price. If they lend not upon Usury to the poor, they
will lend him nothing at all, and yet they will be still Usurers: for to the
rich they will lend for usury.

Whereby is seen that the express will of God is contemned in diverse points
by them. For Gods will expressly contempned by by usurers.
(as I say) if they lend to the poor, those shall pay dearer than the rich.
If they be blamed or reproved for that fault, they pull lending quite from
them, and give that which appertains to them unto the rich. Whereby Though
rich men be bound to help the poor: yet the poor cannot challenge nor take it
from them as of right.
those poorer sort are not only defrauded of that charity that belongs to
them: (though by the compassion and good will of men, for the poor cannot
challenge it) but also further oppressed by that dearth, which is purchased The
lender for usury, in lending to the rich: does thereby augment the miseries of
the poor.
through the greedy gatherings, of those rich that have the same credit and
money in occupying, which the poor should have had.

And surely even those rich The rich taker at usury: is worse man than the
lender at vsurye, or fully as ill.
men that be takers of credit, are not inferior to the Usurers in wickedness.

We have a common Proverb in English, if there were no receyuer, there would
be no thief, and it holds surer in usury, to If there were no taker at
usury, there could none deliver at usury.
say, if there were no taker at usury, there would be no usury committed.

But these takers at usury, and especially the rich, do take away all the
credit that appertains to such as need credit, and do maintain that
cursed trade of usury, not only in taking, but also in extreme delivering.
The rich taker at vsurye does it to engrosse and to make a Monopolion, and
dearth in the midst of plenty by taking all into one hand.
They make a dearth even in the midst of plenty, by their Monopolion, and so
vndooe, not only such from whom they take the common credit, but also many
other poor whom through dearth made by these takers are not able to live of
their labors, with other extreme hurts passing explication, to the great
decay of the common weal.

We read that the bread of the Bread of the poor, the life of the poor.
Ecclesiasti. 34.
poor, is the life of the poor, and he that defraudeth him thereof is a
murderer. Let these takers up of poor men's credit consider what they do in
this case. Some Many poorer do live only upon credit.
men have nothing else to live on, but by credit, and when he that has of his
own otherwise to live, will not only take away this credit simply, but also
will The rich taker at usury does not only take this credit from him: but
also buyeth it from him: a cruel act.
buy it away from the needy by usury: I cannot think him to be better than
a thief, and a murderer, and even as ill as an Usurer, or worse, if worse
may be: yea, surely I think rather worse man than that Usurer The rich taker
at usury a murderer, and worse than the plain usurer that lends but his
own stock.
who lends out but his own stock at usury. For this is a sure rule, the
rich man that takes things at usury: will, no doubt deliver for Usury at a
more cutting rate. For he will gain even by that he has taken The rich taker
at usury: will deliver for usury at a more cutting rate.
at usury. So then he maintayneth the Usurer of whom he takes: and is
himself an Usurer in lending, and a most pestilent spoyler of his common
wealth. A spoyler of the common wealth.
And such men are those that commit usury in sale of wares, Greatest cutting
in sale of wares, and other necessaries.
and in making exchange, yea, the Clothier and Stapler in wool and cloth, and
the Fermer in corn and other victuals, and Landlords in fines and extreme
raising of rentes (though fynes and rents raised, be not properly vsuries, but
rather extortions, or oppressions,) so that all these spoil the nedy, and so
generally the commonwealth. For though the plain money Usurer be iustlye
reproched of his unlawful The money usurer: ill, the ware seller usurer worse.
trade and gain: yet I think in judgment he may condemn many of these
colorable Usurers: which cut more depely under a cloak and name of lawful
trade. If God condemn him (as doubtless he does) that lends money for
usury, and takes but x. pound, or. xij. overplus: let no man be so mad, as
to think, that he shall be allowed of, (but much more condemned) that lends
for usury under color of a contract in sale: and takes. xx. xxx. or. xl.
pound in the hundredth. Neither he that under the name of exchange lends for
usury, and takes. xv. or. xx. pound in the hundredth. Gala. 6.


Be not deceived, God is not God cannot be mocked, though men can deceive men
and prevent laws, which yet god will punish.
mocked, men may bleare the eyes of men, and prevent by fraud the penal
laws (wherein yet they do offend) but God cannot be deceived, though this
vice be cloked and clothed with never so many honest names and things, as
sometime in buying and selling, sometime in borowing and lending, sometime in
exchau^ging, sometime in Wool, in Cloth, in Canuas, in a bale of Fustian, in
Silks and Mercery wares, Usury has change of apparel, and that costly and
diverse.
in Spices and Grocery ware, in Tapistrie. etc. And sometime drowned in Wine
and oil, sometime packed up with herringes and other victuals, many times eaten
up in bread and meat, Usury sometime is dronk up in drink, and eaten in
meat, to the poisoning of the receyuer.
and drunk up in drink: to the extreme infecting and utter poisoning of our
commonwealth.

He that most hurts, is the most unprofitable member in a common wealth, and
most noisome to the whole body, and the He that most hurts is the worse man,
the greatest doer in these vsurary contracts, does most hurt.
more is taken and delivered by these vsurarie contractes, the more hurt is
done: and he that most uses such trade, and therewith has greatest doings,
does most hurt, and so consequentlye the worst man. Even as he that kills two
men does worse than he that kills but one man, and he that kills three
men, does He that kylleth two men, does worse than he that kylleth but one. etc.
yet worse than he that killed two men, and so the more the worse.

I am not ignorant that these Usurers, have many objections and many colors to
paint out Usurers objections vain, and their colors deceytfull.
their trade in a fair shape, and to approve it necessary and commodious in a
commonwealth.

But as their objections are Usury turned out of his cote: is more ugly than an
Ape.
frivolous and vain, so their Idol being turned out of his fair cote: may
be seen to want the beauty of a most ugly Ape. And their commodities to be
most detestable The commodity of Usury is poison.
poisons to a common wealth.

Many of them cannot, nay, they will not be persuaded, that God forbids it
in this order, they imagine that GOD meant thereby some other thing which
Usurers do say that their trade is not forbidden in the ten commaundeme^ts.
men cannot understand. For (say they) if it had been of such weight, it would
have been forbidden in the law of ten Commandments.

And though this need no answer, it is so peevish and vain, that every
child may see their ignorance: yet I will still keep An answer.
promise with them, and let them see their folly if they will, but they will
not.

It is said in the last commandment, Thou shall not desire any Deu. 15.
thing that is thy neighbors: no though he be a rich man, and thou a poor
man.

If I may not desire ought that is my neighbors contrary to Man may not
desire any thing that is his neighbors
his will, much less may I take it against his will. But the Usurer spying
his neighbors need, does watch occasion to make a gain to himself of his
neighbors need: and so by a most subtle stealth windeth from him, his The
usurer spyeth his neighbors need, and thereof makes his gain most subtly
by a constrained, and not by a natural consent.
goods or part thereof by Usury, when he gets his neighbors Will tied to
an extremity, either of need or covetousness, and not naturally or charitably
bent to give that, which the Usurer takes of him. Then conclude: to desire my
neighbors goods is Deutr. 5. To desire my neighbors goods: is against Gods
law, but to take them, is a further fault, and to steal them by subtle
craft, or color of honestye: is most ill, therefore vsurye forbidden in the
last commandment.
against Gods law, and so a fault, but upon that desire to take them is a
further fault, and yet to take them by subtle craft, and under a color of
willing, contract, and honest trade, is more subtyltie and greater fault.
Wherefore, in as much as the lesser is forbidden, the greater is in no wise
tolerable. As in this commandment, thou shall not name god in vain, and if
to name God vainly, be breach of the law: much more is To name god in vain:
is breach of the law, to swear by him vainly is a greater fault: but to draw
his name for a false witness is blasphemy, and most heinous, and yet blasphemy
not named in the ten (...) commandments.
blasphemy breach thereof. As when men would call God to be a false witness,
and yet in that commandment blasphemy is not expressly named. But as is
aforesaid, the less offense being forbidden: the greater can in no wise be
allowed of.

Others object, they have no trade, but a stock left them, and if they should
not put it out for profit: it would soon be consumed, Usurers object that
they have none other trade.
and other thing they have not to live upon.

To answer this objection, I turn saint Augustine to them, who says. The
Usurer dares speak on this sort. Non habeo aliud August. in Psalm. 128.
vnde viuam, I have none other thing vvherby to live. So may the thief say
(says Augustine) Theefes, housrobbers, bawdes, wytches and sorcerers, may
excuse their trades as well as usurers.
being taken in the deed doing, or house robber, being found breaking up the
wall, or the Bavvde buying Maids for the Stevves, and also the VVitch and
Sorcerer, may say so unto me in the sale of their malicious inchauntmentes, to
the hurt of man and beast. etc.

Thus we se Augustines mind He that robs having no need: deserves more
punishment, than the thief that steals by mere necessity.
in aunswering them, whereunto this may be added, that he deserves much
greater punishment, who robs having no need: than he, that does it of
necessity. As for example, one man has a stock, and an other nothing at all:
Example.
if he that has no stock, should steal for his living, he should deserve
death by the law, but if he that has the stock should yet steal: he were a
much worse man. And such are the Usurers: so thankful they are, that they
never consider of Gods liberality toward them, in leaving to them: yt which
many a one wants. They remember not how many thousands are left without Many
have no stock, and yet they may not steal.
stock, and yet that they must not live by stelth. For betwixt a thief and an
Usurer, I know not any great difference, except in name, no more than Bernarde
did, when he said: Quid est vsura? venenum patrimonij. Quid est vsura legalis?
Barnardes difference between a thief and an usurer.
latro predicens quid inte^dit. That is. What thing is Usury? A poison of
patrimony. What is such usury as is permitted by law? A thief that before
hand gives warning what he minds to do.

I remember a tale concerning a thief, that was indyted of felony, for
robbing by the high ways side, and being indyted by the name of Latro, was
condemned The difference made by Skeleton between Fur and Latro.
by ye name of Fur, for which the thief quarrelled, and said the Judge had
done him wrong. And when he would not cease exclamation: Master Skeleton Latro
robs by the way side, but Fur a thief robbing in the town.
the Poet, being a master of words, and cunning in Grammar, was called to
declare the difference between fur and latro: whose answer was, that he saw
no great difference between fur and latro, saving this, that fur did Skeltons
difference may be scarcelye made between the thief and the usurer, for the
usurer is the worse man.
sit on the bench, and latro stood at the bar. Now if that Judge were a
briber: than Skeltons answer was to be allowed of: but if he were an upright
Judge: than Skeleton did rashely and wickedly, so to answer those: that
Psalm. 82. Exodus 22. Judges called Gods in the Scripture.
are called Gods, in respect that they have the execution of Gods office on
earth amongst men.

If such a distinction as this that master Skeleton made, may pleasure the
Usurers: I will not We can speak no more honesty of Usurers with honesty.
greatly strive for it, though in deed the Usurer be rather the worse man.
For the thief does rob and run away: but the Usurer Comparison of the
theefes acts, with the acts of usurers.
does rob and tarry by it. The thief robs but in part, and perhaps is cut
off spedily: the Usurer robs continually night Usurer robs continuallye.
and day, and cease not till he have all and more to. The thief is in
fear of true men, and of True men in fear yt thieves will put them in prison.
laws: the Usurer makes true men afraid of imprisonment after he has robbed
them, and is not in fear of the laws, for he Usurers study not to keep good
laws, but how by craft to prevent them.
subtillye preuenteth them. The thief lies in Newgate for his fault, and the
Usurer walks abroad with no small countenance Little thief in prison. Great
thief at liberty.
of honesty: therefore the Usurer the worse man. Yea the learned writers both
Christian men and Heathen, do compare them also with murderers. Saint Ambrose
Usurers compared to murderers, chokers and killers of men.
says, Vsuram pettere suffocare est. To take usury is to choke a man.

Cato a Heathen man, being asked Cato.
what it was to lend upon Usury: answered interogatiuely: Cicero. lib. 2.
officio. brus. lib. 2. cap. 47.
Quid homine^ occidere? what is it to kill a man? esteeming the Usurer to
commit no less fault than homicide.

Alphonsus King of Aragon a De reb. gest. Alphonsi, Alphonsus.
zealous lover of justice, considering the trappes and subtiltyes of Usurers:
was wont to say, Foenus nihil aliud mihi videtur: Vsurye the death of life.
quam fu nus animae. That is: Usury seems to me nothing else than the death
of life. Thus to be short, the Usurers are compared not only with thieves: but
also with murderers, and to many other odious things for their cruelty.

Basil says: Canes accipientes Basil. in Psalm. 15.
mansuescunt. etc. Dogs in receiving things do become gentle, but as for
Usurers: the more they receive: the more cruel they be. Usurers worse than
Dogs.
And therefore Ambrose for their ravening, compares them unto the Sea, and
worse, saying: Omnes torrentes vadunt in Mare, and Usurers worse and more
rauenus than the raging Sea.
Mare non adimpletur. That is, all rivers or brooks do fall into the Sea, and
yet the Sea is not filled. This Sea is Usury, which suppeth up (as a
devouring Gulf) the goods, lands, and large patrimonies Usury a devouring
gulf.
of many: and yet this Sea it self, cannot be filled. Many do use the Sea for
their profit, and thereby many find profit: but in this In usury is
shipwreck of all that a man has.
sea of Usury is shipwreck of all.

Most Nations have so much abhorred an Usurer, that what punishment they
esteemed a thief worthy of: they would lay twice Well ruled common welths
have executed upon usurers: double punishments, over that theefes had.
Licurgus. Alex ab Alex de diebus geni. Lucullus. Cato.
so much upon an Usurer.

Licurgus banished out of Sparta all Usury, and taking of overplus for lone.

Lucullus so infringed the libertyes of Usurers, that he purged Asia of this
wicked trade, which was almost drowned therein.

Cato drove them out of Cicilia.

Agesilaus Captain of the Lacedaemonians, persuaded Agis, (who before him was
king of the same people,) that the reconning books of the Usurers, might be
burnt. Which being granted: the said Agesilaus to declare his hatred against
the vice and Usurers, entered their houses, fette Usurers books burnt under
Agis king of Lacedemonia by Agesilaus, who was king afterward.
out their books, and heaping them together in the Markette place: set them on
fire before the Usurers faces, who departing in heavy cheer: were derided of
ye same Agesilaus: who laughing Agesilaus laughed the usurers to scorn in
their heaviness.
at their sorrow, said: that he never saw puriorem ignem, a more purer fire.

Claudius, and after him Vespasian, Claudius. Vespasian. Alexander Seuerus.
and after him Alexander Seuerus, made sharp and bitter laws against Usurers,
which were put in execution accordingly.

And besides these punishments executed by heathen men, (who had good
experience in commonweals, what was commodious, and what hurtful:) we are to
regard with great heed that the Punishments of usurers in the primative
Church.
primative Church did banishe, and excommunicate Usurers from the public
service in the Church: and also from perticipation of sacraments, and after
death, their bodies were cast out and not suffered to be laid with the dead
bodies of such as were esteemed Usurers not buried amongst christen men.
Christen men.

Whereby appears plain that Usurers and their practices, were esteemed by the
primative Church, worse than the eues and theft, and as ill as murderers and
murder.

And in deed it is no marnell, for besides the extreme mischiefs that they
bring upon the common wealth, (as before is partly showed) their usury is the
Usury the extreme pulling in sunder of unity in the Church.
extreme pulling in sunder of the unity of the Church. Chrysostom calls it
grauissimum ecclesiae morbum, the most pestilent disease of the Church: for
how can there be an unity and There is no love where one cutteth and scrapeth
from another.
love amongst men, when one cutteth another throat by this wicked trade?

If a man will take usury for lone, he is void of all true love and
compassion, and by his act procures hatred to himself: that as he loves no
man, so he makes that no man loves him: He that will take usury is void of
compassion.
but the one against the other, bears a warrelike and spoiling mind, though
it lie subtly hidden, and be not in open wrath and anger, Usury works hate,
and subtly hidden.
yet is it in desire to scrape one from another. And in this yt warlike hate
consists, that ye one, so he may have, though to the loss and hurt of the
other: he is pleased, 2. Timo. 3. Usury a fruit and seed of selfeloue, and a
choker of christen love, also a disolution of christen love and unity in the
Church. 2. Timo. 3. Jude.
and glad, whereby self love (but no Christen love) is maintained, and
therefore the unity of the Church torn a sunder hereby. For Christen love is
the perfect bond and knitting together of the Church, which usury desolueth,
and places selfeloue and common hatred.

Surely, if this point be noted, and this our time examined by No christen love
(almost) now: therefore usury playde his part.
this rule of Christen love, even by the unity of the Church, we shall find
that Usury has now playde this her part at full, and does still poison more
grievously Usury seedeth and poysoneth still.
than at any time heretofore. The want of this unity in the church, namely, of
Christen love in the Want of christen love: a proof of infidelity and usury.
etc.
multitude, will make men, if they consider their trades, to confess
themselves usurers, yea, and infidels, and void of no fault.

For what man is he, from the Prince to the prisoner, that of love or
compassion will sell any thing for days of payment, so No man will sell for
time so good cheap as for money.
good cheap as he would sell the same to have ready money for it? Nay, what
man will sell for ready money (except the needy) if No man will sell for money
except the nedy: when. etc.
he may raise a more gain to himself by selling for time? or what is he that
will deliver his money or other things by way of No man will exchange for time
so good cheap as for money.
exchange for a month, two or three, so good cheap: as he would to have
payment for the same, withal possible speed at sight? No man (except yt
needy) will exchange for sight unless. etc.
nay, what is he yt will deliver his money or other things at sight (except the
needy) if he can (by lone thereof for a month, two or three) make himself a
greater gainer and get overplus? Surely Argument that love and compassion are
extinct. 2. Tim. 3. Jude
very few. Rara auis in terris. Which argues men generally to be void of
christian love and compassion. And yet some there Some (though a small some)
have ceased selling of time.
be, that have left off dealing in that sale of time: God increase the number,
for it is a small number. Heathen men detested those that would witholde fire,
or the running stream from the Time more universal tha^ fire or water.
needy, or that would sell the same because fire and water are general. But the
time is more universal, and therefore the sale thereof more unnatural. But now
I know the multitude, who are faulty will cry out and say, this man means
to pull down all Exclamation of the multitude.
trade and occupying, why? take away the profit that men have by selling and
exchaunging of things for time: and take away all, for no man can live without
Pull away abuse and then the Devil is dead.
that benifite. Therefore surely this man must needs be deceived, and
understands not rightly of Usury. For to sell wares for days, and thereby to
advance the price is so general: that it cannot be Usury, but must needs be
honest trade, for all men occupy it. And for the exchange, that The unruly,
desperate, and infidels: think men cannot live, except they do evil to get
their living thereby.
is so uncertain a profit: that there may be disprofite therein. And
therefore these things cannot be Usury, for if they should, then al men in
manner were Usurers. Tushe, this is not possible, why how should men live? And
so they gather infinite absurdities (as they think) to follow of this
doctrine. etc.

Howbeit, I say that I am so far off, from condemning or hindering of all
trade and occupying: that without trades (as borrowing and lending, bying
Common wealths cannot stand, nor men live with men: without trade
and selling, and exchaunging) I say neither the common wealth can stand, nor
men live together one with an other.

But as I do allow and like well of borrowing, lending, buying, sellyng and
exchaunging, in Bying, selling. etc. allowed, yea to gain and to make of one
hundred two hundred: so it be lawfully done.
their own nature, and as they are well used, and of the gains that comes
thereby, ye though it be Centum pro cento: So do I dislike utterly, for God
forbids that such good trades should Usury and abuse of trades forbidden,
and every penny gotten that way wicked.
be abused: or that any penny should be gotten by abuse.

And yet it is to to lamentable, yt Satan has so much prevailed: as thus to
make men count abuse to be a right use, and Usury a lawful Right esteemed
wrong, and e contra: Satan's subtlety.
gain. As for the vncertaintye, that is alleged in the gain, had by the
exchange: that I will answer anon God willing, and Answer referred for the
exchange.
prove such a certain gain thereby as the same gain shall be usury.

And though there be sufficientlye said already to prove, that a greater price
taken of things sold for time, than else would have been made of them, is
Vsurye: Yet take one example more by the way, and so an end for that matter.

A man brings a horse to the Market, and would sell him for An example by a
horse that usury is committed when any thing is sold deerer for time than for
money.
five pound ready money, and so much the horse is worth by the Market. There
is an other man would have the horse, but wanting money to pay for him
presentlye: desires to have a months day of payment. The owner of the horse
is content to give a month for payment: but than he will have. ij. shillings
more for the horse: the buyer to serve his need, will not strive for two
shillinges, Horse seller will not forbear five pound for a month, but he
will have two shillings more for it.
but is content to give him at the day appointed five pound two shillings for
the horse. Then I say, that the same two shillings taken for the time: is
overplus, He lends not the horse but ye money, for he sells the horse.
and usury, for it is all one: as if the seller had taken five pound out of
his own purse, and said to the buyer, here is five pound take it, and give me
for the same, five pound two shillings a month hence, and buy this Horse
now of me for five pound, I have lent thee five pound in money to do it.

Let no man dallye or think a difference where none is, or allege variety
of Market, as Alteration of market no excuse for the time seller.
though perhaps some man would afterward have given five pound two shillings
ready money, for the same horse.

The variety of prises in one Market may chance diverse Varieties of prises
in one market, chau^ceth through the malice of men commonly.
ways, but commonly it chances through the malice of men, who spying their
neighbors need do make gain thereof to themselves.

But howsoever the markets do vary in price of things, if any man do take the
more for lone, The time seller an usurer, though he sell not so dear, as he
might have done for money.
and bearing the time, he is an Usurer: the variety of the market excuses him
nothing at all, though such an horse as he sold for five pound two
shillings, might within an hour after be worth by the same Market ten pound.
For he that lends and takes overplus in respect of his lending, is an Usurer.

Men that desire to cavil will Men need not to cavil in narow points, for
their acts are broad and manifest evil.
strive, and question in narrow points: but in their dealings and trades, no
such narrow points or difficulties need to be questioned of: they are so
apparently wicked. As he that lends forty shillings, and for the lone thereof
takes. v. shillings a weke. Or he that lends a Portiguise, and takes for
lone thereof ten shillings These cruel Serpentlike usurers: do most commonly
spend their unlawful gain, wastfully.
a month, (which being so evil gotten is often spent through Waste.) Or he
that sells for time, wares, or other, forty pound (admit but ten pound) in
the hundred above that he can make of the^ in money, (though he have assaid ye
market a month together and more:) such men need not to doubt or move
question, whether their gain be usury or not: and yet even those be most apt
to cavil, and to strive in narrow The cruellest usurers are most apt to cavil
in narrow points, and to pick quarrels. These are such as regard not god.
points, not to learn, but to drive their gaynesayers to the wall, and so
scoff at them. Which argues them to be such as the Prophet Sophonie here
threatens, namely, that neither seek for God, nor regard him.

Now for the exchange it is true, that to make exchaunges: is by nature good,
even as buying, To make exchange is in nature lawful.
selling, lending and borrowing, are necessary and good, of themselves being
rightly used. For one man, one town, and one country: has plenty of those
things, which an other lacks, and such may lawfully, buy and It is lawful
and necessary for countries and men to make exchange of moneys and co^modyties.
sell, borrowe and lend, and exchange one with another, either ware for ware,
or ware for money, or money for money: according as time, good occasion,
markets, and need requires for the commodity of each party. So that in
every of these things men deal: as they would be dealt In all lawful
exchaunges and bargains: vsurye and frawde must be excluded.
withal according to Gods law, and that Usury, be utterly excluded their
bargeins.

But as in buying, selling, borrowing, and lending, so in exchaunging it is to
too manifest: that this rule of Gods law and charity, In these days usury and
fraud are included, in exchaunges and bargaynes.
is in these days utterly excluded men's bargayns, and Usury with
uncharitableness included, to the great dishonor of GOD, slander of his
Gospel, The Ghospel slaundered by unlawful trade in this time.
grief of the Godly, hurt of the common weal, and confusion (in the end) to
the offenders.

And to prove that Usury is committed in exchange, I will first put an
example by exchaunging That usury is committed in exchange, a proof by an
example of corn.
of corn, as Rye for Wheat.

Admit two men meet together, A. and B. the.xxvij. day of March. Anno domini.
1570.

A. would deliver here in England. xx. bushels of Wheat, and for the same he
would have in Flaunders. xxiiij. Bushelles of Rye, delivered to him at sight,
which might be the first of April.

B. would take this Wheat, and give. xxiiij. Bushels of Rye for it in
Flaunders, but he cannot pay or make delivery of the same Rye, before the
first day of May.

A. Is content to give the time which is a Month longer, but than he will have
a pecke of Rye The delyuerer will have a peck more upon a score bushels: for a
months forbearaunce.
more for tarying so long, for so is the course of exchange, and after that
rate (says A.) if you will have it you may take longer time. Take if you will
the first day of June, and pay me then. xxiiij. and a half bushels of Rye,
for I will not give time, except I have allowance for loan.

B. Why sir, that were usury? The taker is grieved with his bargains before he
have concluded it, and thinks it usury.


A. No sir, not so, for Rye may be so plentiful there, within a Month or
two: that my. xxiiij. and half Bushelles of Rye, will not then be worth to be
delivered back into England. xix. bushels of English Wheat, and then I shall
lose more by giving of the The deliuerers excuse by uncertainty of gain.
time: than I take profit for the loan.

B. Yea sir, and it is even as likelye (and more likely) that by that time such
scarcity of Rye will be there: that for. xx. Bushels thereof, you shall find
men ynowe, The deliuerers objection of uncertain gain answered by the taker.
will exchange with you and give you here. xx. Bushelles of wheat, and then
you have a greater gain, than the overplus certain that you take for lone:
therefore yt is your hazard, by plenty or scarcity, to gain or lose.

A. Well, choose, whether you will take it or not, for I will have so much
certain onward, namely, Though the exchange usurer do know his gain to be
usury: yet he will have it.
a pecke of Rye upon the score, for every months forbearance, or else I will
not give time but be paid at sight.

Now, B. needing bread corn here, does take this. xx. bushels of Need makes
the old wife trot.
Wheat, to pay for the same in Andwarpe the first day of June: xxiiij. and a
half bushels of Rye.

A. desires to have his Rye delivered in Andwarp the first day of June. 1570.
according to bargein, being. xxiiij. bushels and half.

B. is disappoynted, and must therefore borrowe to pay. A. and so tells him,
and that he has The debtor disappointed or unable.
none other way of borowing but by exchange.

A. is content to deliver the same Rye to B. by exchange, and to take wheat
for it in England, as The creditor content to give longer credit for more usury.
the exchange goes the first day of July, which is a month after.

B. would take it according to the rate of exchange, and give The debtor
would take day of payment for his own advantage.
him Wheat for it in England the first of September.

A. No sir? I will deliver none for that time, for then I know harvest will be
had in, and a bushel The creditor foreseeth harvest as well as the debtor, and
therefore will deliver none for that time.
of Wheat will then be scarce worth in price, that a bushel of Rye is now
worth, every man will then have corn enough. etc. But pay me Wheat in England
The creditor will give a years day: to have usury according to the rate of
exchange.
this day twelve month, and allow me for the times forbearance after the
rate of exchau^ge, and you shall have it.

B. The exchange is now that for every. xxiij. Bushels and a A rate of
exchange for a month.
half of Rye here delivered: the taker should pay in England at a Month. xx.
bushels of Wheat.

A. And you know that for every months forbearing of a score of Wheat: the
rate of exchange yields a pecke of Rye. Now I shall forbear it a. xj.
Months above vzance, which is a. xj. pecks of Rye for the single score of
Wheat, which taken out The exchange creditor (by the need of the debtor)
buyeth with 83. pecks of Rye delivered before hand: so much Wheat as would
have cost him 94. pecks of Rye, if he had then presently received the same
Wheat.
of. xxiij. Bushels and a half, there will remain twenty Bushels, and three
peckes of Rye. And if xx. Bushelles and three pecks of Rye do yield me. xx.
Bushels of Wheat: than. xxiiij. Bushelles and a half of Rye, will yield me
(after that rate) xxiij. Bushels and almost three pecks of Wheat: which you
must pay to me in England this dya. xij. months.

B. It lacks more than half a pecke, but I will answer you Misreconing is
to be revewed.
at the day according to the exchange, although I had of you at the first,
but. xx. bare Bushels Wheat is increased and yet was never sown, but eaten
and consumed in the use, which must needs be a miracle.
of Wheat: and you must have of me above. xxiij. and a half bushels, which is
more than after xvij. pound ten shillings in the hundred that I lose by taking
it.

A. And for that, you have the The creditor sells. 14. months time for. 14.
pecks of wheat, he might with as good authority have soulde him 14. months
wind.
occupying thereof above. xiiij. months.

B. It was eaten in ten weeks, and so consumed in the use, and yielded me no
profit, neither should you have had any profit thereof: but that you take a
pecke upon the score for every months Wheat yielded the taker no increase:
for it was eaten up in ten weeks.
forbearaunce, and me thinks that is Usury.

Thus you see by this example, that a certain overplus is taken A certain
gain by exchange, namely a peck of corn taken for twenty bushels forborne a
month.
by exchange for lone, namely, a pecke of Rye upon every score Bushels of
wheat forborne for a month. And so you see that against nature it begets
usury, although in the use it be consumed as such like things be.

And this I have put here, not to approve that corn is in this sort
exchaunged, but only for an This, aforesaid, not in use: but an example and
lively Image of yt exchange corrupted with usury.
example to show a proportion of the exchange and certain gain thereby.

And least Merchants and such as frequent the exchange should be ignorant
what I mean Examination of the thing it self in use.
herein: I will also express it even in moneys, wherein their common trade
is, and will take for an example, the exchange passing betwixt London and
Andwarpe.

Suppose that the exchange on the Burse at London for Andwarpe Exchange.
this day is at. xxiij. shillings. iiij. pence sight, that is, for xx.
shillinges sterling delivered Exchange at London, for Andwarp at sight.
this day in London: the taker must pay. xxiij. shillings. iiij. pence
Flemish, at the arrival of his bill in Andwarpe, which commonly is within
four or five days after the taking at the farthest.

Now there is one that has a hundred pound to deliver, and A deliverer
meets with a taker, the taker requires vzance for payment.
there is another that desires to take the same, and will pay him Flemish
money for it at vzance, which is a just month after the taking.

The deliverer is content to let the taker have the time required The deliverer
content to grant time to the taker that will pay for it.
which is a Month, but for the same time he will have three pence, or four
pence Flemishe more, upon every pound sterling, which the taker knows to be a
custom, and agrees to take the hundred pound so, being glad if he can have
it for a month, paying but three pence more upon every pound: for the poorer
sort The poorer sort shall pay four pence for that which the rich shall have
for three pence.
do commonly pay four pence more upon every pound for a months time, and
three pence in a pound is. xxv. shillinges in the hundred pound, and if a
hundred Three pence for a months lone of twenty shillings: is after. xv. pound
in the hundred by the year.
pound gain. xxv. shillinges in one month, in will gain in. xij. Months
after that rate. xv. pound, and this is the easiest loss that commonly the
taker does Fiftene pound pro cento per annum is the easiest loss by exchange.
sustain by the exchange.

And if the taker will have two months day of payment (which is called double
vzance:) than he shall pay six pence Flemish more Double uzans is. ij. months,
and for that time the delyuerer will have sixth pence upon a pound.
upon every pound at the least. So that for the lone of a hundred pound for a
month: the deliverer will have. xxv. shillings Flemish at the least. And if he
deliver it for double uzance (that is A hundred pound at that rate, is. 25.
shillings a month, by certain covenant.
two months:) he will have for the lone thereof, at the least, fifty
shillings.

And I am sure he that knows what Usury is: cannot deny but this is Usury,
unless he deny yt Certain couenantings for certain gain for lone is usury.
which he knows to be true.

For, besides this, that it is against nature, to make money a Marchaundize:
yet when it is Against nature, that money should be made a Marchaundize to rise
and fall: as the pound sterling is bought and sold, sometime deerer, sometime
better cheap. etc. and also in respect of time, which is the certain
overplus: and usury.
made a marcha^dize, overplus is taken for the lone of it. For when by the
market a pound sterling is worth. xxiij. shillings four pence Flemishe, if any
man will borrow it for a months time: he must pay. xxiij. shillinges seven
pence Flemish for it at the least, and if he will borrow two months time for it:
he must pay. xxiij. shillinges ten pence at the least. So that a very certain
overplus is couenaunted for aforehande, and taken for the lone.

Now for their objection touching ye uncertainty of gain by exchaunging,
whereby exchaungers would excuse and deliver Exchaungers objection of
vncertaintye: is nothing but to prove them worse usurers: than the plain
money usurers.
themselves, and the exchange from the crime of Usury: it may be seen
already to be nothing: but yet further, I say, the same objection is either
nothing to purpose: or else such a thing as does prove this use, (I should
say abuse) of the exchange, to be worse than plain Usury, rather than in
any respect qualify the haynousnesse of the vice, as shall appear.

The objection is this, that the deliverer in giving of a month, or two
months time to the taker for payment, may haps lose Perhaps a blind manne may
catch a Hare.
more than that which he takes overplus for the same times lone: the reason
is, that the price Perhaps the sky may fall, and so we may have Larkes.
of money is so variable, through plenty or scarcity thereof, that when he
shall receive his. xxiij. shillings. x. pence Flemish at the two months end,
it is (by rate But in deed it is past perhaps that (if this exchange usurer
do not repent) he may go to the devil.
of exchange, as the price then may haps to be) not worth his principal,
namely the pound sterling which he delivered at the first, and then the
deliverer gets nothing but loses.

To this their objection I answer, that as there is hazard An answer to the
objection of uncertainty of gain in ye exchange.
to have the market better or worse for the deliuerers turn, when he shall
have given time for his money: so there is ever (or most commonly) more
likelyhode of profit to grow to the Commonly more gain by selling time over
and above the certain covenant, than by delivering at sight.
deliverer by giving of time, than by selling his money for ready money: I
mean hazard of more gain, over and above the certain overplus couenaunted
for, being three pence or four pence in the pound sterling for every months
forbearance. As partly is seen in this, that the deliverer will not deliver
his money The deliverer will not deliver for sight, which argues that to
deliver for time is his more profit.
at sight, but at vzance or double vzance (as they call it) except he spy a
more profit to grow thereby to him, and then the taker gettes no money of him
at double vza^ce. For note this, that Exchange usurer not less provident to
foresee his own gain, than the money usurer.
the exchaunging Usurer is not less provident to foresee his market: than the
plain money Usurer. And except they both foresee good markets to fall out on
their side, the taker may take If usurers do not foresee a gain by letting
their money by exchange, or other: the taker, may take his cap, and go take
Butterflyes, he gettes no money of them.
his Cap and go take Butterflies for any money he shall take of the^ how great
soever his need be.

And in deed the plain usurer may object this vncertaintye of gain, as well
as the exchaunging usurer, and as honestlye it serves his turn. For he may
say: I lend my money for six Months, be it an hundredth The plain usurer
may object the uncertainty as well as the craftye exchange usurer
pounds, and for the lone I take but five or six pound, and before that time
(perhaps) there may chance such an abasement of the coin, that for my ounce
of silver Perhaps an abasement of the coin: and so perhaps loss that way to
the usurer.
delivered, I shall receive perhaps but three quarters, or half an ounce, and
shall I not then lose? yea, and though this extremity happen not, yet he to
whom I lend my money may prove a bankrupt, and so I may May haps the usurers
debtor may be banckrupts, and then he loses that way.
lose the principal and all, and though I have lands bound in statute or
otherwise, yet there may prove such a jar in the May haps the usurers
assurance may be unsure and nothing worth, and then he may lose that way.
title, that when I think my self most surest of it, the right heirs may
keep me from it, for the world is full of starting holes. And though none of
these things happen, yet the Merchants may It is most likely and common that
Marchaunts may be full of money by sale of their commodity, when the usurer
shall receive his money of the debtor.
(in that time) have brought home, and made money of their commodities, and
then every man's hands may be full of money: and so shall I have no market for
my money, but must be forced to lend it for a trifle, or else let it lie
dead on my hand, This reason has most affinity with the exchange usurers
objection of uncertainty.
and therefore my gain is uncertain. So far the usurer.

But yet all these colors notwithstanding, besides a number But it is past
perhaps, that the usurer is not the less an usurer though he make these
objections or a thousand such like.
more which usurers have: he is not the less an usurer, for in the bargain
making he couenaunteth for a certain overplus for lone besides his principal,
be it after ten or twelve pound in the hundredth by the year.

And so does thexchaunger take a very certain overplus for lone, No more does
the exchange usurers objections excuse them, but is thereby proved ye worse
men, in that they take greater usury.
which he couenanteth for aforehand, even as the Usurer does, saving that where
the plain usurer lends for ten or twelve pound gaynes in the hundredth, this
subtle exchaunging usurer will have twenty pound, seuentene pound ten
shillings, or. xv. pound at the least in the hundredth for a years lone. And
it is further seen that there grows a certain gain to the deliverer, by
this, that the taker loses so much, if he do continue a taker, that he is
sure to become as pore as Codrus, though before he had The takers certain or
extreme loss: does prove that the deliverer has an extreme and sure gain by
exchange.
been as rich as Craessus. And so their objection of uncertainty (as I said)
proves them worse Usurers than the plain usurers, rather tha^ in any respect
quallify their crime in such exchaunging.

Therefore I council all the exchaunging Usurers (whereof the worst sort are
such as deliver their money to and fro, upon this exchange, and make it a
continual trade to gain by:) that they The worst usurers by exchange, be such
as deliver money to and fro, and make a trade thereof to gain by.
no longer flatter themselves in this unlawful and ungodly getting, under such
light colors of uncertainty. For whatsoever they say, to excuse them from
fault, and to bleare men's eyes, yet if they have herein any good Let not
usurers by exchange flatter (or think) themselves as none offenders, because
of these colors of uncertain gain. Psalm. 1.
judgment, their own consciences do yield them guilty, for they know they
walk in the path of sinners. And if they knowing their faults, will yet
continue the same: they stand in the way of sinners, and maintain sin. And
if they do not speedily give ear to God, and come out, they When men have
knowledge of their faults, and yet will continue therein: they may look for
ill success.
may look to become pestilent scorners of God, and deriders of his word, and
then woe worth them for ever: for they are such as neither seek for God, nor
yet regard him, to whom this Prophet Sophonie here threateneth destruction and
everlasting ruin.

And though fools (as Solomon Proverb. 12. Proverb. 15.
says) do hate to be reproved, and despise correction, and care not for
instruction, but in their foolish rage (as David witnesses) Psalm. 2. Though
fools and godless will not regard: yet the godly will cease from their
faults.
would break all honest bonds, and cast aside far from them the cords that
should bind them, in loving and christian obedience: yet the godly will
consider with regard of God, and will come out from amongst the^, by ceassinge
from such wicked trades. Knowing that it is better to be a door keeper in the
house Psalm. 84.
of GOD: than to dvvell in the glorious tents of the ungodly: and that God
loves the very gates Psalm. 87.
or entryes of Sion: more than he loves all the gorgious dvvellings of Jacob
besides. Knowing also that God cares for his children, God cares for the
righteous. Psalm. 84.
and that no good thing shall be vvithholden from them that live a godly life,
and that a small thing that the righteous has, is The godly shall have things
sufficient, and shall not want that which is good for them.
better than great riches of the ungodly.

Knowing on the other side, that those who draw backward from God, and will
continue in their wickedness: The Lord shall Psalm. 122. Psalm. 2. God shall
lead forth the wicked, with evil doers, and vex them in his wrath, and burst
them in pieces Psalm. 45.
lead them forth with evil doers, and that he shall speak to them in his
wrath, and vex them in his heavy anger: also that he has set his king upon
his holy hill, who has fullness of power with his righteous Scepter, to
burst the ungodly in pieces, even as a potter with an iron rod should burst
in pieces an earthen pot.

And though Towns, Cities, Countries, and Kingdoms, be No nation free from
usury at this time.
so universally drowned in this vice, that few or none are free, so that it
may seem a wonder past wonders, if this should be Usury: how so wicked a
thing should Though all the world were Usurers: yet that were no excuse
sufficient for any one to continue in taking usury.
so ouerflowe, that the vice should come to be accounted honest trade as now
it is thought to be: yet let the godly not marvel so much hereat, as to
consider how all Christendom was for a long Not so great a marvel that
usury is counted honest trade: as that Idolatry was counted the pure service of
God.
time drowned in Idolatry, and the same Idolatry thought and accounted to be
the pure service of God.

For if in religion, men were so deceived generally through christendom: it is
not so great marvel Heathen as great doings in trades: as christians have.
to see common trades corrupted, wherein the ungodly and heathen, have had as
great exercise and doing as Christians have.

The way is to come out from 2. Tessa. 3. Apocalips. 18. Numbers. 16.
amongst them by ceassing from their wicked trade, and to buy, sell, and
exchange, according as Gods law does allow, which the Godly will do, and
those that Those that will not cease from usury are wicked.
will not, but will continue in their Vsuries, and wickedness: are ungodly, and
so may they well be called, though all the cappes and Cappes or knees, or other
reverence done to usurers: cannot make them honest men.
knees in a kingdom should prop up their estimation.

And though they say that men cannot otherwise live by trade, and that unless
this be used all trade must cease, and that there shall The usurers think all
is marde, when they must leave their wickedness.
be nothing to do, yea, and though they ask how men shall live, and move
other questions infinite: yet I answer and say, that howsoever men shall live,
though they be never so poor, they may not Howsoever men live: they may not
break Gods law to live, no more than a man may steal for his living.
break Gods laws to live, as to murder, or steal for living. For as the
Judge may iustlye condemn the thief or murderer, because he got not his
living by labor truly: so the high Judge may say to those that break his
laws for their living, why did thou seek otherwise to live than I
commanded thee? Why have thou so wickedly aspired and set thy self aloft in
higher place, than I appointed thee, by dealing in trade which my law
forbids thee?

If fire had consumed all that Though all our goods were lost by fire or
water: yet might we not steal for living.
thou had, or waters ouerflowed thy dwelling and livings: yet were it not
lawful for thee to steal or to rob for thy living.

But if thou have any thing to When men have something and yet will steal or
commit usury: they are more guilty then ye needful thief.
live on, and yet to climb higher wylt use theft or Usury to maintain thee
aloft and at ease: thou art then a manifold offender.

And in deed while men are generally so disordred, that without regard of
Gods love or his law, they all run out of the Unlawful port and
countenance will have unlawful means to gain for the maintenance thereof.
way, and for the most part will climb up above their own places and
degrees, while they will have large houses, costlye provision, dainty diet, and
brave apparel, Chest filled with money, and servants ynowe to work while
they play, and take their ease, and so call that necessity, which is
superfluity, and call that reasonable spending, which is prodigality, call
that comeliness which is Lofty minds, and costlye provision: are forerunners
of man's desiruction.
totoo far costly and garish, and that to be moderate diet, which is excess,
and will maintain a countenance in the world as worldlings: in such a Chaos
and confusion Chaos.
(so long as it continues) there is no redress to be looked for. For such
ungodly and inordinate spending: must needs have ungodly and inordinate
getting to maintain it. For God The ungodly like not of gods blessing: and
therefore will bless themselves in the Devils name.
has not promised to bless men's labors: unless they keep them within the
limits of his law. But these ungodly like not of those limits, nor blessing:
and therefore they will bless themselves till Gods curse root them out.

And though the niggard be not such a countenance keeper, or so costly a
spender: yet he desires The niggard and the prodigal or vain man: will feed
their desires by hook and crook, and tushe for Gods law. etc.
as much to fill his Coffers, as these desire to maintain their port and
pleasure: so that they may go together. For the greediness of their desire is
such: that they will still feed the same desire with gain: be it by stelth,
extortion, oppression, usury, or any other mean, be it with Gods law or
against it: follow and feed their desire, they will not of necessity (let
them so conclude as long as they list:) but to fulfill their covetous
affections and Usury in common trade at this time the fittest, and greatest
maynteyner of vain ostentation and pride.
worldly pleasures. And amongst all things, that may serve their turn: there
is not one so common and general for them, at this time (trades being as they
are,) as is this vice of Usury. Wherein not only ye rich, but also the mean
man, yea and the pore Rich men and poor: faulty in usury.
(so far as he can) is a doer, either by lending or borrowing at Usury.

And surely though the poor man may allege need for his defense in borrowing
at Usury: yet I cannot account him clear of fault therein. For, besides this,
that he may be perhaps through The poor man does not well in taking at usury.
his own negligence or prodigality fallen into that need: when he is in that
need to go borrowe upon Usury: is to make himself more needy, and to
maintain a Usurer in his wicked trade. And if the needy be not excusable in
The rich manne does worse in taking at usury.
taking at Usury: much less are these excusable that having no need, will
take at usury. For, those do it (as before is showed) for a further mischief.

And for the better understanding Three sorts of takers, and three sorts of
deliuerers at usury.
hereof: admit three sorts of takers, and three sorts of deliuerers at
Usury.

Of deliuerers, one sort are such as lend their money or wares after the rate
of. x. or. xij. pound by the year, and so content themselves.

Another sort do think after. xv. xx. or. xxx. pound in the hundred to little,
which they will cut out by sale of wares and exchange.

The third sort are such as will lend money or wares, or both, and cut that
way as deeply as they can, and get lands and leases for assurance, or Plate
in pawn, double or treble the value of that they lend: and in the end scrape
all into their own hands, or else The worst usurer.
they will fail of their purpose, though in deliverance of their wares and
money: they pretended great friendship toward the Usurers friendship like the
Serpent Cerastes vait. Isidor. lib. 12.
taker. And these I do account the worst sort of Usurers or extorcioners. And
their friendship is much like the bayte of the serpent called Cerastes, which
serpent has so lothly a body: that every eye (but specially the Birds eye)
does abhor to behold him. And yet above all meat: his desire is to eat
birds flesh. But he The Serpent Cerastes horns: like two worms, baytes for
birds to their destruction.
cannot fly, for he is a creeper and has not wings, and therefore to obtain
his pray or desire, he covers himself in sand, al saving his two lyther
horns that grow in his forehead: which he lays above upon the sand, like
two worms that were coming out of the earth: when the birds espy ye same like
Worms, and suppose to have food thereon, they light down to take them, and
so are thereby made food to the Serpent, which they would never If ye pore
taker did know the venomous baytes of usurers: they would beware of their
biting.
have been: if they could have seen the lothly beast. No more think I would
such men as take of these worst Usurers: if they saw their foul and ravening
minds toward them.

And of takers at usury, one sort takes, having no need, but to engrosse
markets, and so to make a Monopolion of things, and consequently a dearth in
the midst of plenty, and free markets to This taker worse in a common weal
than he that runs away withal, and therefore a vengeance honest man.
be bound to his covetous desire: to what hurt of the common weal, a man of
mean judgment may partly see.

Another sort of takers at usury, are such as take with one hand, and deliver
it with the other hand out at usury to a more cutting rate, either money or
wares: and these are such as lack stock, and yet will be occupiers. And
though some of He that thryueth mosts after this sort: is the worst in a common
weal.
these thrive, yet is their stock accursed: being dishonest gain. And though
they thrive, yet it is to the great hurt of the common weal, and therefore
better than they and their trade were both cut off.

But for the most part, they thrive at the three terms (as they say) and
become bankruptes. The third sort of takers at usury The purse taker makes
speed. Psalm. 36.
are such as will take all, (and more to if they could come by it) with a
mind aforehande never to repay that they borrow.

And sometime this extreme taker does match with the extreme deliverer. And
being as craftye as the deliverer, does so Courtly curtisie, and gay greeting.
surely epsy his Cerasticall lither horns that he pulls them quite out of
his head. For the deliverer Like unto like quoth the devil to his derling.
seeing the takers need: minds to rake him even to the hard bones, yea, to
pull out his bowels, and to make him anotomie. But the taker gives him fair
words minding to requite his gentleness: by running away One friendship
asks an other.
with all, when he sees his most advantage. Surely if ever the One thief
robs an other.
Devil make good cheer, he is at dinner and daunceth for joy The Devil at
dinner with his guestes.
when these two clean minds are thus met together. Now in comparing these
sorts of Usurers Comparison of usurers.
one with another: the plain money Usurer who occupies but his own stock,
shall be found to do least hurt, and therefore the best of this brood. But
there be lack of Saints, Lack of saints where the devil bears the Cross.
where the Devil bears the Cross, and therefore a pure procession.

I know it will be said that a fault is easilye found, but to A fault more
easily found than amended.
bring a redress herein, may seem impossible, unless al trade should be
taken away.

Howbeit, I am not ignorant, that if mercy, or compassion, did possess rich
men's hearts, and If me^ would be honest: faults were soon amended.
truth and fidelity the hearts of the poorer: a redress were sone had of
these mischievous abuses.

And though some rich men will never regard God nor his law, Psalm. 28. Though
the ungodly, rich nor poor will never regard God: yet all men may not so
continue in evils with them.
nor compassion, nor though some poor men will never be trustye nor honest:
shall all rich and all poor men therefore go on still in evils with them? Nay,
Gods word must be regarded above life: much more then must it be Gods
word must be regarded above life.
regarded above our affections. God by his word does call men from their evils
to repentance and holy life. And though the hearts of the wicked be so
hardened that their ears be stopped Psalm. 81. Math. 3. Psalm. 58. God by his
word does call men from sin. Psalm. 11. 82. 74. and. 109. The wicked will not
turn. God prepares the hearts of the godly. Psalm. 33. 10.
like the deaf Adder, and that they will not turn nor fear God, as David
says, yea, though all the foundations of the earth be out of course, yet the
godly shall and will regard God, and sigh in detestation of their faults, and
call to GOD for redress, and they shall be heard. For as David in another
place, says: Thou Lord have prepared their hearts, and thine ear has harkened
thereto.

And once to begin a redress in trades, and to abolish this vice of usury:
let the rich give to the The amendment of abuses: in occupying.
poor liberallye, and lend to the needy freely. For therefore God made him
rich.

Let the rich buyer buy of the poor seller, and give him his Let rich men
lend to poor men, and yet freely.
money without cutting him.

Let the rich seller sell to the poor buyer, and give him time as good cheap
as if the buyer Men are made rich: to help the poor.
had paid ready money.

Let the needy that can get free Let poor men take no credit by gyuing usury.
credit take it, and use it in Gods fear, whether it be wares or money. And
if God bless his labors with increase: let him Let poor men pay their
creditours truly, and reward them if they be able.
thankfullye consider his creditor (though he look not for it) with some of
the gain, for he was Gods good steward in lending The rich man is Gods
steward.
to him and helping him in his need.

Let the rich delyuerer by exchange: deliver his money to Exchaunger must not
post his money to and fro like a hackney horse.
the needy for a month or two, as good cheap as for sight, and let no man
make a hackney horse of exchange. Let the rich men Rich ought to take no
credit, but live of their own.
take no credit from the poor: but let the rich live of their own stock.

Let no man, poor nor rich lend Rich nor poor ought not to lend upon usury.
either wares or money, or any thing else upon usury (that is) to have more
for it by the time, than he would take in ready money.

Let no man, poor nor rich, Rich nor poor ought not to take at usury.
take or borrow either money or wares, or ought else, upon usury, (that is) to
pay more for the time: then they might have the same for ready money. For
Barnarde says: Do any slavery rather Sell patrimony rather than borrow at
usury.
than sell thy patrimony: but yet rather sell thy patrimony: than to borrow
at usury.

Let not him that is minded to buy (or may buy) lands or other things (at
advantage) though he see to have them: borrowe at usury to compass such
bargeins. For I think such a bargeine is Though gain be seen aforehande:
yet that gain does not belong to him that without taking at usury: cannot
attain it.
not allotted to him by Gods allowance: unless he have of his own to buy
the same. For besides that, we see the hurt in breaking Gods law by usury: we
also see commonly, what civil discommoditie grows by such doing: If
patrymonye must be sold, rather than for need to take at usury: then men
ought not to take at usury to buy patrimony lands or other.
namely, that he who takes money upon usury, to buy and compass the same: is
forced to raise it upon his poor tenaunts by extortion, or upon the common
weal otherwise, or else undo himself at usury. Either else he has
craftilye caught from his neighbor Men that make a gain of their neighbors
need or folly: do not as they would be done to.
in spying his need: a thing that was much better than the money he paid for
it, and so done otherwise than he would be done to.

Thus by a taste you may consider Thus good trade, not destroyed, but
mainteyned.
how redress may be had: and yet no trade destroyed, but rightly maintained.
As the right Merchant men, will bear me witness. For only against
corruption of trades I speak, and Corruptions of trades only spoken against.
cannot do less, unless I should neglect my charge, and so leave to heavy a
burden upon mine own back.

Put away therefore this corruption Usury, and deal faithfully, truly, and
charitably one Gods law is our best rule, if that be not regarded, no goodness
can follow.
with another. Let each man do to others: as he would be done unto, according
as Gods law does limmit, for to such God has promised his blessing. And
rather Gods blessing follows them that regard his law,
than such should want things convenient: God will make Angels, and men, yea
enemies, and fowls Angels and fowls shall feed them before they shall want
things convenient.
of the air to minister to the^.

And this vprighte charitable dealing betwixt man and man: shall increase love
amongst the^. Men shall live with men quietly Upright dealing as Gods law
requires: does increase christen love and quietness.
and comfortably. Honest trade shall be augmented: and corrupt trade
diminished. The unity of the Church shall be restablished: It increases
unity in the Church and Christian obedience. etc.
and christen obedience and other spiritual virtues, shall be increased. The
rich shall have quiet consciences: and the poor shall It makes merry hearts
and quiet consciences.
have merry hearts. The peace of God shall possess men: and the mouths of the
wicked shall be It stops the mouths of slau^derers.
stopped. And so Gods glory. and praise shall be joyfully song out, It
prayseth and extolleth Gods goodness and increases all virtue.
and blown abroad: by the congregation of christen men, whose good
conversation as a light shall shine: to the conversion of many, and glory of God
also. Let us A small company of just dealers.
pray for this state, for of these we have yet but a small fellowship. Our
Savior has taught us to pray for the increase of this company. O let men
pray, and strive Men ought to strive for, and pray for, to be of the good
company.
to be free of this corporation. For all the rest are yet out of the way,
they are all become abhomynable, there is not one that Those yt are out of the
company of Gods children are out of the way and abominable. Psalm. 53.
does good: there is no fear of God before their eyes, they neither believe
God when he promises benifites, nor yet when he threatens plagues: they
neither seek for God nor regard him, as all their acts do bear witness.

The rich man of this wicked company, neither gives liberally nor lends
freely: but clean contrary. He scrapeth all that he can by right or wrong
into his The wicked rich man's greedy mind and covetous actions.
own hands, it grieueth him yt any man's cofers should fill so fast as his. He
regardes neither rich nor poor, King nor subject, kindred He regardes nothing
in respect of his gain.
nor common weal, no not God in respect or comparison of his own private
gain. Only he keeps an outward face of civility, If he keep any measure: it
is not willinglye but through hypocrisy.
(wherein yet he is holden by law, fear and corrupt affection) and through
hypocrisy perhaps to get him a good name, or to flatter himself, he gives a
mess of Fear, or corrupt affections.
pottage to a poor neighbor, or a penny to a vagabonde.

But if he lend to the rich, either He lends nothing, but sells time,
which he has no more right to sell: than to sell ye wind or the sun shine.
money or wares, or by exchange: he will cut that way for lone as far as
he can. If he lend to the poor needy or inferior, he will cut much deeper,
yea, cut his throat, (as it is termed) and he that is most needy, shall pay
most (if he trust him) or else he gettes no credit of him. For commonly he
will have good assurance, either lands or plate, The wicked rich man will be
sure: at lest he will think himself sure by pawn of greater valor: or else
he gives no credit.
or other pawn, wrapped in covenant so: that in the end he lightly wypeth
the debtors nose of all, and so gettes by extremity above his usury no small
valor as many times has been seen. And I do not say that usury and
oppression is all his fault. For either he is a niggard withal, or else a
belly god. And besides Usury is not all the fault, that wicked rich men have.
that, he wants no fault, as would appear if he might do as him listed.

The mean man of this fellowshippe, he will not be long mean, but he will
flourishe and have a countenance with the prowdest. And to maintain that The
mean man that is wicked: will not be long mean.
usurped countenance, he will borowe at usury other men's money and wares: (for
his own stock will not bear this) and taking in with the one hand at
usury: he must needs deliver out with the other hand at usury, He will
borrow at usury, and up aloft with other men's money, and will deliver at usury
to more cutting rate.
for a greater price: or else what shall his borrowing at usury profit him?
Now, if he thrive by such trade; who sees not that he has robbed his commonwealth? and taken from others If many such thrive, that common wealth wringeth.
by extreme occupying that which he counts lawful and honest gains? And
therefore the more that thrive by this trade: the The mo: the worse. Many of
these come down as Satan came from heaven.
worse it is to the commonwealth. But many such that climb so high do come
down tumbling (as Satan fell from heaven) These often fall with shame enough.
with broken necks. And many with shame enough. They may be compared to Icarus,
or to Esopus Icarus and Esopus crow and the winglesse foul.
Crow, and like to the winglesse foul, that in flight would contend with the
Eagle, and therefore they are justly punished. For besides their own shame and
harm: they give occasion of much slander to Gods people, Bankrupts give
occasion of slander by the enemies, of religion.
whereof they will seem to be. And further they waste, by loss, and
expenses: other men's goods and moneys, in maintenance of their inordinate
countenance. As by dainty diet, sumptuous Mean men that be wicked: will keep
countenance with the greatest worldlings.
apparel, prodigal spending, royal ventring, lofty dealing, and costlye
housekeeping, past their powers and degrees: and so past order and honesty.
Which God will punish either by shame Their shame and punishments are just
in this world: or else eternallye in the world to come, or perhaps both
(except they repent.)

If such men would soberlye have occupied their own stocks, and cut their
garments according Gods blessing preue^teth and follows those that regard
him.
to their cloth with regard of Gods law: the blessing of God should have
gone with the^ according to his promise.

But for that they will run out of rule, to maintain their wicked aspired state
and countenaunte: God has not promised to bless their travail: that travail
for glory, pleasures and bragging in this life.
they have no promise to be helped at Gods hand, but contrary, that is: to be
supplanted and rooted out. For GOD will not maintain superfluity: under the
name of necessity. Certainly God does not allow, that men should dissemble,
and show themselves otherwise than they are, one to God detesteth that men do
show themselves otherwise one to an other, tha^ they are in deed.
another. But these men care not for god, for they set more by their painted
sheath: than by Gods law. It is true, that he is a foolish man, who
unorderly or vainly spends all his own goods: He is a fool that wastes
his own goods: but he is wicked that wastes an other man's.
but he is a wicked manne that spends other men's goods: Which thing
Bankruptes do. Of which occupation (for so it is made in these days) the
worste are such as before hand take Banckrupts spend other men's goods, and
make an occupation of banckrupting
men's goods, or moneys, with mind to defraude the Creditor: and such a one
is worse than a thief, and ought to die as well as the thief. The better
sort, or Banckrupts ought to dye as well as the thief.
rather such, as are not so ill (for there are no degrees of goodness in evil
things:) are those that borrow men's money or goods, at hap hazard withal,
and so One sort of bankruptes, not so ill as an other, though never a good.
make their creditors to bear the adventure, though unknown to the Creditor:
till in the end, that it so proves. And then if the Borrowers ought to show
their creditors what adventure they bear by lending to them.
bankruptes do pay all, or almost all that is left, to their Creditors they
think themselves discharged.

And though these men be not so evil as the other: yet certainly Though the
bankrupt do pay all that is left: yet he is faulty, and ought to be a bond
man to his creditors.
they are greatly in fault, and worthy of sharp punishment, and to be bond
men to their creditor. But if the matter be well considered of: it will appear
that these vsurary contracts and bargains: are the chiefest maintayners of this
occupation of Usury and vsurarie, contractes are baytes to make bankrupts and
to maintain that occupation.
bankrupts. For every man will give credit now: even he that scarcely has
credit himself, because he would have gain by the lone. Whereby to much
credit is amongst men: though none lawfully.

And by this much unlawful No lawful credit, but to much unlawful credit
in these days.
crediting: the bankrupte has opportunity to take much, and play his part.
Yea, and the same taking (as before is said) at Usury does in continuance
eat Whereby bankrupts do breed.
out the taker, that of force he must be bankrupte.

And then he complayneth of the creditors lending at vsurye: for that he has
consumed him by dear peniworthes. And the Man's natural property in his
corruption is: for his own excuse to accuse an other.
creditor may haps cry out upon the Broker, as though the fault were there.
And the Broker exclaymeth against the straytnesse of the retaylor: that
commonly does buy in shifts for money. And so they play Adam and Eve, and
Genesis. 3.
the Serpent, in laying fault one upon the other. But that helps them not
more than it help our parents in Paradise, and the Adam, Eua, and the Serpent.
Serpent upon whom the curse of God came, as it will do upon these unless
they spedily repent. For they are all coacters in these mischiefs, that is:
usury and bankrupting.

The poor men of this company which neither seek for God The poor man that
is wicked lacks no fault: but ability to work his wickedness. Whereby
gods goodness and holy judgments are seen: in shortning by poverty the
power of such.
nor regard him: they murmur, they curse, they steal, they lie, they rebel,
they slander, and care not what they do against God or man: so they may live.
If they borrow they will never repay by their wills. And if they had ability:
they would exceed in usury, extortio^, oppression. etc.

These three fortes of men (by which understand all the wicked) that neither
seek for, nor regard God: do abound in every unlawful dealing. They lack no
fault, they will every one do their endeavor in his place: to apply Rich,
mean, and poor, being wicked, do endeavor to set up Satan's kingdom, and to
anoy, and pull down the kingdom of christ, though they will deny it.
Satan's pleasure, and to maintain his kingdom. Yea and say: that is the best
government. For what do they else: when they say it is better to take usury:
tha^ to lend freely? And it is better to scrape all into one hand: than to let
it be divided amongst many? And it is better to oppress: than to lack
provision? And better to maintain a port amongst worldlings: (yea though by
perjury and coloring of forreyners Conlouring of strangers goods and perjury.
and strangers goods) than to abate a jot of their iolitie.

But here let no man take me, as though I blamed any man for showing compassion
toward No compassion toward strangers spoken against but coloring and
perjury. etc.
strangers, that are here now for their conscience in religion: for then I
should not only do ill, but also be utterly against my self, having many
times exhorted men to extend compassion Exodus. 22. Leuit. 19.
that way, according as God commands. But I blame those that without regard
of their oath taken, and against the princes laws, do color forreyners or
strangers goods: who are Colourers of strangers goods, do hurt the
Citizens, deceive the prince, and periure themselves.
not here for religion: but rather are here to take away the livings of our
own Citizens and countrymen, and to eat by trade the bread out of their
months. I will not stand to show which way: least I should seem to be over
cunning in men's doyngs. But as with the rest of this wicked train, I place
such colourers, and blame them: so I wish a redress therein, and in all other
matters that are amiss. For god does threaten punishments to 3. Esdras. 8.
John. 3. Romans. 3.
men, even rooting out: for these and like offenses, and he is true, he cannot
deceive.

By the consideration whereof men have good cause to look about No obstinate
sinner shall continue unpunished, except he repent and cease from his wicked
ways.
them, and to bridle their own affections, to pull down their lofty looks,
and unlawful acts: seeing that such faults will be their destruction, if
the same be not left, and speedilye repented.

Pliny, notes that Cranes being naturallye bent to make a creaking as they
fly: will yet (when they shall fly over the Mountains of Phenitia) take
little stones in their mouths to The wisdom and policy of Cranes.
bridle their natural inclination, least by their noise: the Eagles should be
awaked, and take them for their pray. It is wonder that unreasonable fowls
should be In the creation man was the wysest of al Gods creatures, but as he
is corrupted, he may learn at the creatures.
more provident and careful for sauegarde of their bodies: than reasonable men
are for their souls, for men will not bridle their earthly affections to
escape damnation, so great is our corruption: and many men's hearts are seared or
marked with the hot Iron, whereof saint Paul to Timothe 1. Tim. 4.
speaks.

Well, to conclude: let us look about us, and not make a mock and a trifle
of our iniquities, and Gods threats.

Let not men trust their subtle brains to much, nor make light of their
vices. Let them not count vices to be virtues, nor usury to be honest trade.
Saint Augustine said in his time, I will not have you Usurers. And adds this
reason. Et ideo nolo: August. in Psalm. 36.
quia Deus non vult. That is, therefore I will not have you Usurers: because
GOD will not.

Even so say I, with saint Augustine: Usurers. Idolatrers. Recayners of Baals
remnants, or of ye Chemarims.
I will not have you usurers, I will not have you Idolatrers, I will not have
you retayners of Baals remnants, nor supporters, neither yet mainteyners of the
Chemarims, or rebellious Papists. I will not Mixers of religion. Mass and
Malchom.
have you minglers of religion, I will not have you swearers by the Lord, and
by the Mass your Malchom also, I will not have you to trust in places or
parentage, Stars, Planets, Fortune tellers, Witches, Coniurers regarded.
I will not have you to put confidence in Stars and Planets, nor to regard
fortune tellers, Witches, nor Coniurers. I will not have you starters back from
God, I will not have you Careless.
to be resisters of godly reformation made by the Magistrate: neither will I
have you to be neglecters and careless, nor such Apostates.
as neither seek for the Lord nor regard him.

And I will not have you to be God will not.
such, because (as Augustine said) God will not. And that God will not: this
Prophet Sophonie does plainelye prove by this: that God threatens a
destruction and rooting out of such offenders.

For Sophonie says: Thus says the Lord. Therefore God speaks and
forbids these things. And so I (having to do with such a people as Sophonie
preached unto) may justly say to you, thus says the Lord.

For he is ever one, and the same, and immutable. This doctrine Numeri. 23.
Malachi. 3. James. 1.
appertains to this our time: as well as to the Jews. For what things
soever are written: Romans. 15. 1. Cor. 10.
they are for our instruction. Almighty God does send his word God by man's
ministry has in all ages instructed men. Math. 1. 6. 7. etc.
to men by men. As before the law, and in the law, yea, he became man himself
to teach man. And left his Apostles in the world to teach men: and so Acts.
1.
does continue forth this order of man's ministerye throughout all ages. Saint
Paul was called Acts. 8.
by miracle: but instructed by man's ministry. The Enuche did read the
Prophet Esaias: but Acts. 9.
God provided Philip to teach him the meaning. And though God sent an Angel
to Cornelius the Centurion: yet the Angel did not instruct in doctrine, but
said, and nunc mitte viros Ioppen. Acts. 10.
etc. And now send men to Ioppa for Simon Peter: that Peter might instruct
him, and so by man's ministry be brought to the knowledge of GOD. And though
the ungodly do still deride and mock at the Preachers, and do despise and
resist both messengers and the message: yet Math. 10. Luke. 10. John. 13. 1.
Tessa. 4.
let them know that they resist not men, but God, who sends them.

Such mockers there were in the Apostles time, that would say, vbi est
policiatio aduentus eius. 2. Peter. 3.
etc. Where is the accomplishme^t of his coming as he has promised. etc. And
others said the Apostles were full of nevve Acts. 2.
wine. And here in Ieremies time they said: come on, let us imagine Jeremy.
12.
some thing against this Jeremy. etc. come let us smite him with the tongue,
and let us not mark all his words. etc. There has been no age without some
such, and no small some. As at this day, there are to many by a Blasphemous
mockers in these times.
foul sort, that blasphemouslye mock against the spirit of God in man's
ministry: despising ye ministry These grieved David more than all his
troubles: and grieved Christ more tha^ his cross.
because the ministers are men. As is seen by these their derisions, he is of
the spirit, he is current and of the right stamp, he is of the new cut, and
steel to the back: you may smell the smoke of the Gospel hanging These are
the most horriblest tyraunts of all, and shall not escape their punishments.
on his clothes: and he is inspired with the holy ghost, the devil is within
him: which is, most horrible to hear.

To these mockers and such Sweet meat require sour sauce.
wicked ones: Sophonie here threatens rooting out, ruin and destuction. And
uses (the more to terrify them) these words: Esaias. 1. Jeremy. 1. 2. Peter.
1.
thus says the Lord. The Prophets Esaias and Jeremy used the same words, or
like words.

Saint Peter says also: Non enim voluntate hominis allata est olim The holy
ghost is aucthor of ye holy scriptures.
prophesia. etc. That is: Prophecy in time past came not of the will of man: but holy men of GOD spoke, as they were moved by the holy ghost.
Math. 22. Mark. 12.


Our savior Christ affirms the same of David. Nam ipse David Psalm. 110.
dixit afflatus spiritu sa^cto. etc. For David himself inspired with the holy
ghost said: The Lord said unto my Lord. etc.

Saint Paul says, that the Scripture is given by inspiration 2. Tim. 3.
of God.

Saint Peter affirms that he and the other Apostles taught nothing, 2.
Peter. 1.
but that which they had learned of the Lord Christ, and out of the
Scriptures of the Prophets. etc.

And Paul in an other place 2. Cor. 4.
says: Habemus autem thesaurum istum in vasis fictilibus. etc. We have this
treasure in earthen vessels: that the excellency of the glory might be Gods,
and not ours. And now we are messengers, in the rovvme of Christ: even 2.
Cor. 5.
as if God did beseech you by us.

By all which places, it does planly appear that the ministry The
excellency of preaching ye word of God, is set forth by these places.
of the word of God: is the message sent from God, and the minister is Gods
Messenger, in the rowme of Christ.

Therefore whosoever dispiseth or derideth this ministry, does not despise
poor earthly men: but Wisdom. 5.
the almighty GOD, who sent them, and then woe worth such Galat. 6.
dispisers. For God will not be mocked, but will punish, whip, rote Men may
mock themselves, but God cannot be mocked because all things are naked and
bare before his eyes as in a Sea of Glass.
out, and destroy the wicked: for thus says the Lord here, by this Prophet
Sophonie.

And here to make an end for this time, having troubled you almost iij. hours,
I say with S. Paul, for that we have this excellent message to bring to you,
namely, that you have peace with God, and salvation by Christ, (if ye repent
Mark. 16. Acts. 3.
and believe) and that everlasting torments do abide the Math. 16. Romans. 2.
impenitent: we in Christ's stead, even as though GOD did beseech 2. Cor. 5.
you by us: do beseech you, to cease from, and detest all iniquity: and so
to be at one with GOD, by the means of Jesus Christ our Lord. To whom in
unity of the holy ghost, three persons and one almightye God: be all honor,
praise, and glory, world without end.

Amen.
A Table containing the chief and principal matters in this Book. And note
vvheras thou find this letter (a) it signifies the first side, and (b) the
second.
AFflictious profitable to Gods children. Fol. 1. b Josias did help to reform
religion among his neighbors, destroyed Idols, executed Idolaters, and
exactly followed the book of Gods law. 2. a Goodness comes not of nature,
but of grace. 2. b Godly Princes help their neighbors to reform abuses in
religion. 2. b Tiranie and negligence, darkners of yt truth. 2. b A note for
Preachers. 6. b The properties of Idolaters in all ages, how they slander the
truth, and how they may be answered. 12. b Judah and Jerusalem specially
threatened, that men should not trust to place or parentage. 14. a Papists
affirm, that place mynistreth holiness, but specially Rome. 17. b Vain men
and women of our time, no less boasters and braggers, of place and parentage,
than the Jews and Papists. 19. a What is meant by stretching out Gods hand,
and why he will stretch it out. 20. a What Baall was, and who brought him first
to be worshipped, among the lords people. 23. a Jews, and English Idolaters,
agree in retayning ye remnaunts of Idolatry, notwithstanding the reformation of
religion offered by godly princes. 24. b What the Chemarims were, and from what
Hebrew verb they were deryued. 25. b One God, one order of Priests, the
worshipping of many Gods, brought in many priests which the true God never
ordained. 26. b The Papists have infinite orders of priests, which Christ never
ordained: to supply the abundant superstitions by the^ invented. 27. b The
popish Chemarims of our time, more worthy to die, than ye Jews Chemarims,
because they are not only Idolaters: but also rebels. 29. a Star worshippers
in Judah. 31. b Astrologians of our time, and of their unlawful dealing, and
unprofitable practices. 33. a What they were that did swear by the Lord, and
by their Malchom also, and how thereby they mingled religion. 35. b They that
both hear mass and receive the communion, mingle religion, and so swear by
the Lord: and by their Malchom. 36. b Distrust in God, the root of Idolatry.
38. a What Malchom was. 38. b To swear rightly is to honor God. 39. b Papists
can not deny themselves to be Idolaters in coupling God and his Christ: with
so many Malchomes. 40. b Papists sometime seclude God, and sometime couple him
with other. 42. a Blasphemy exceeds Idolatry. 43. a Malchom by interpretation
their king. 44. b Starters back threatened. 46. a Those that neither seek
after the Lord nor regard him, are Atheistes and wicked worldlings. 48. a
Among infinite vices common at this time, none does more argue the multitude
to be Atheistes than Usury. 48. b The definition of usury, and what an Usurer
is. 51. b Usury is in more things than in money. 52. b He that sells wares
dearer for days, then ready money, is an Usurer. 54. b He that delyuereth
money by exchange dearer for vzance, or double vzance, than at sight, is an
Usurer, and the overplus taken in respect of time, is forbidden usury. 55. a By
the true nature of buying, selling, and exchaunging, men in lending do not
lend that which they deliver, but that which they shall receive, and may
lawfully ask at their day of payment. 55. b. Their judgments not to be
allowed, which think that usury may be taken of rich men. 57. a In respect
of the commonwealth, it is worse to lend for usury to the rich, than to the
poor. 58. b Usurers will lend nothing unto the poor, because they will not
oppress them. 60. a He that lends unto the rich for usury, augmenteth the
misery of the poor. 62. a The rich borower at usury, is worse than the
lender at usury. 62. a The rich taker at usury, robs the poor of his
bread. 63. a The greatest cutting is, in sale of wares. 63. b Usury has
change of apparel. 64. b Usurers objections vain, and their colors
deceytfull. 65. b The usurer makes his gain, when he gets his neighbors
Will tied to an extremity, either of need or of covetousness. 66. a Thieves,
houserobbers, bawdes, witches, and sorcerers, may excuse their trades as well
as usurers. 67. a Barnards difference between theft and usury. 68. a Skeltons
difference between fur and latro. 68. a A comparison of thieves to usurers.
69. a Usurers compared unto many extreme and cruel things. 69. b Usurers
abhorred and punished by Heathen men and Christians. 70. b Unity of the Church
torn a sunder by vsurye. 72. a All sellers will sell time, except the needy.
73. a Usurers will not be persuaded that their trade is ill, because it is so
general. 73. b Honest trade commended, and the gain lawful, though centum
pro cento. 74. b An example by the sale of a Horse, that usury is in sale of
things for time. 75. a The greatest Usurers, cauell in narowest points. 75. b
Exchange of things by nature lawful, honest, and necessary. 77. a An example
by Wheat exchaunged for Rye: yt usury is used in exchange at this time. 78. a
A proof that usury is committed in the exchange of moneys. 81. b The
exchange usurers objection of uncertain gain answered. 83. b The exchange
usurer, as prouydent to foresee his gain, as the plain usurer. 84. b The
plain usurer may allege uncertain gain: as well as the exchaunger. 85. a
The exchaunging usurer takes greater usury, (and that certain) than ye money
usurer, and therefore the worse man. 86. a The woorst exchaunger posteth his
money to and fro, and makes it a trade of gain, against the nature thereof.
86. b An admonition to usurers, that they leave their trades. 87. a Usury in
trades and exchange is not good, because it is so general: no more than
Idolatry was the true service of God, when it was much more general. 88. a All
that will continue usurers are wicked, what authority soever they have. 89. a
Men may not break Gods law to live. 89. a Unlawful port and countenance,
require unlawful means to gain by, for the maintenance thereof. 90 a The
niggard. 90. b The poor man to be blamed that boroweth at usury. 91. a Three
sorts of takers at vsurye, and three sorts of delyuerers at vsurye, consider
of them all, and consider which is worst. 93. b The Devil at dinner with his
guestes. 94. a Lack of Saints where the Devil bears the the Cross. 94. a If
men would be honest, a redress were soon had of usury. 94. b A redress of
abuses in occupying. 95. a Purchasers may not borow at usury to compass their
matters. 96. a Good trades maintained, corruption of trades spoken against. 97.
a The rich manne of the wicked company of usurers. 98. a The mean man of yt
company of usurers. 99. a The condition of banckrupts, and what they deserve.
100. b Borowers ought to show their creditours, what adventure they bear by
lending to them. 101. a Adam, Eua, and the Serpent dispute. 102. a The vngooly
poor. 102. a Coloring of strangers goods. 103. a No obstinate sinner shall
escape unpunished, except he repent. 104. a A worthy saying of saint Augustine.
105. a God in all ages has instructed men by man's ministry. 106. a The
mockers of our time worse Tyrants, and more blasphemous then those that
persecute to death. 107. a The holy ghost author of yt scriptures. 107. b The
dispisers, despise God: and not men. 108. b
FINIS.
Imprinted at London by Henry Denham, dwelling in Pater noster Row, at the
sign of the Star.



Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum. Anno Domini. 1570.


