A BLOW FOR THE POPE.

Touching the POPES prerogatives.

Extracted word for word out of the Book of MARTYRS

EDINBVRGH, Printed by John Wreittoune. 1631

The proud primacie of Popes painted out in Tables, in order of their rising up
by little and little, from faithful Bishops and Martyrs, to become Lords and
Governors over Kings and Kingdoms, exalting themselves in the Temple of GOD,
above all that is called God. 2 Thessalonians. chap. 2.
IN the Table of the primitive Church, has been (gentle Reader) set forth
and exhibited before thine eyes, the grievous aflictions and sorrowful
torments, which through GODS secreet sufferance, fell upon the true Saints and
members of CHRIST'S Church in that time, especially upon the good Bishops,
Ministers, and teachers of the flock: of whom, some were scourged, some
beheaded, some crucified, some burnt, some had their eyes put out, some one
way, and some another, miserably consumed: which days of woeful calamity
continued near the space of three hundredth years. During which time, the
dear spouse and Elect Church of GOD, being sharply assaulted on every side,
had small rest, no joy, nor outward safety in this present world, but in much
bitterness of heart, continual tears and mourning under the cross, passed
over their days being spoiled, imprisoned, contemned, revyled, famished,
tormented, and martyrde every where, who neither durst well tarry at home for
fear and dread, and much less durst come abroad for the enemies, but only
by night, when they assembled as they might, sometimes to sing Psalms and
hymns together. In all which their dreadful dangers, and sorrowful
afflictions, notwithstanding the goodness of the LORD left them not desolate:
but the more their outward tribulations did increase, the more their inward
consolations did abound: and the further off they seemed from the joys of this
life, the more present was the LORD with them with grace and fortitude, to
confirm and rejoice their souls: and though their possessions and riches in
this world were lost and spoiled, yet were they enriched with Heavenly gifts
and treasures from above an hundredth fold, then was true Religion truly felt
in heart. Then was Christianity not in outward appearance showed, but in
inward affection received, and the true image of the Church not in outward show
presented, but in her perfect state effectual. Then was the name and fear of
GOD true in heart, not in lips alone dwelling: faith then was fervent, zeal
ardent, prayer not swimming in the lips, but groaned out to GOD from the
bottom of the spirit: Then was no pride in the Church, nor lasoure to seek
riches, nor time to keep them. Contentions for triffiles was not then so far
from Christians, that well were they when they could meet to pray together
against the Devil, author of all dissension. Briefly the wholeChurch of CHRIST
JESUS, with all the members thereof, the further it was from the type and shape
of this world, the nearer it was to the blessed respect of GODS favor and
supportation.

The first rising of the Bishops of Rome.
AFter this long time of trouble, it pleased the LORD at length mercifully to
look upon the Saints and servants of his Son, to release their captivity,
to release their misery, and to bind up the old dragon the Devil, which so
long vexed them, whereby the Church began to aspyre to some more liberty: And
the Bishops which before were as abjects, utterly contemned of Emperors,
through the providence of GOD, (which disposes all things in his time after
his own will) began now of Emperors to be esteemed and had in price:
Furthermore, as Emperors grew more in devotion, so the Bishops more and more
were exalted, not only in favor, but also preferred unto honor, in so much
that in short space they became not quarter masters, but rather half Emperors
with Emperors.

After this in process of time, as riches and worldly wealth crept into the
Clergy, and that the Devil had poured his venom into the Church, (as the
voice was heard the same time over Constantinople) so true humility began to
decay, and pride to set in his foot, till at last they plaide as the Ivy with
the Oak tree, which first beginning with a goodly green show imbraceth him so
long, till at the length it overgroweth him, and so sucketh all his moisture
from him, setting his root fast in his bark, till at last it both stiffleth
the stock, and kills the branches, and so comes to be a nest of Owls,
and all unclean birds. Not untruly therefore it was said of Augustine.
Religio peperit divitias, and filia, devoravit matrem: religion begateriches,
and the daughter has devored the mother: The verity whereof notoriously may
appear above all other in the Church of Rome, and the Bishops of the same, for
after that the Church of Rome, through favor of Emperors, was endued with
lands, donations, possessions, and patrimonies, so that the Bishops thereof
feeling the smacke of wealth, ease, and prosperity, began to swell in pomp
and pride: the more they floorished in this world, the more GODS holy spirit
forsook them, till at last the said Bishops who at the first were poor,
creeping low upon the ground, and were persecuted long time, every man
treading upon them in this world: now of persecuted people, began to be
persecuters of others, and to tread upon the necks even of Emperors, and to
bring the heads of Kings and Princes under their girdle. And not that only
that, but furthermore through pride and riches, they were so far gone from
all religion, that in the very end they became the adversary of God (whom we
call Antichrist) prophesied of so long before by the Spirit of GOD to come,
sitting in the Temple of GOD. etc. Of whom we read thus in the Epistle of
Paul. 2 Thessalonians. 2. where he says, We beseech you brethren, by the coming of
our LORD JESUS CHRIST, and by our fellowship together in him That ye be not
suddenly moved in your mind, nor troubled, neither by spirit, nor by word,
nor by letter, as it were from us, as though the day of CHRIST were at hand.
Let no man in any ways deceive you, for that day shall not come, except there
come a departing first, and that that man of sin be revealed, even the son
of perdition, that adversary which exalts himself above all that is called
God, or that is worshipped: so that he shall sit in the Temple of GOD, as God,
and set forth himself as he were GOD,

BY which words of St. Paul, we have diverse things to understand: First that
the day of the LORDS coming was not then near at hand. Secondly, The Apostle
giving us a token before, to know when that day shall approach, bids us
look for an adversary first to be revealed. Thirdly to show what adversary
this shall be, he expresses him not to be as a common adversary, such as
were then in his time. For although Herod, Annas, and Cajaphas, the hie
Priests, and Pharisees, Tertullus, Alexander the Coppersmith, Elymas and Simon
Magus, and Nero the Emperor in Paul's time, were great adversaries, yet here
he means another besides these, greater then all the rest, not such a one as
should be like to Priest, King, or Emperor, but such as far exceeding the
estate of all Kings; Priests, and Emperors, should be the Prince of Priests,
and should make Kings to stoup, and should tread upon the neck of Emperors,
and make them to kiss his feet. Moreover, where the Apostle says, that he
shall sit in the Temple of GOD, thereby is meaned, not the personal sitting of
the Pope, in the City only of Rome, but the authority and jurisdiction of his
Sea exalted in the whole universal Church equal with GOD himself. For let
men give to the Pope, that which he in his laws, decrees, and in his
pontifical requires, and what difference is there betwixt GOD and the Pope?
If GOD set laws and ordinances, so does he: If GOD has his creatures, so
has he: If GOD require obedience so does he: If the breach of GODS
commandments be punished, much more be his. GOD has his religion, the Pope
also has his: Yea for GODS one Religion, he has an hundredth: GOD has set up
one Advocate, he has an hundredth: GOD has instituted but a few holy days:
for GODS one, he has instituted forty: And if the holy day that GOD has
appointed, be Simplex: The feast that the Pope appoynteth is duplex and
triplex. CHRIST is the head of the Church, so is the Pope: CHRIST gives
influence to his body, so does the Pope: CHRIST forgiveth sin, the Pope does
no less: CHRIST expels evil spirits by hispower; so pretends the Pope by
his holy water: Furthermore, where CHRIST went barefooted upon the bare ground,
he with his golden shoes is carried upon men's shoulders. And where CHRIST was
called, Sanctus Sanctorum: Heeis called Sanctorum Sanctissimus: CHRIST never
practiced but only the spiritual sword, he claims both spiritual and
temporal: CHRIST bought the Church: He both buyeth and sells the Church.
And if it be necessary to believe CHRIST to be the Savior of the world: so
is it necessary to beleeuethe Pope to be the head of the Church: CHRIST paid
tribute unto Caesar: he makes Caesar pay tribute unto him; Finally, the
Crown of CHRIST was of sharp thorns: The Pope has three crowns of gold
upon his head, so far exceeding CHRIST the Son of GOD in glory of this
world, as CHRIST exceeds him in the Glory of HEAVEN. The image and pattern
of whose intolerable pride and exaltation, according as St. Paul does descryue
him in his Epistle foresaid, we have here set forth, not only in these
tables to be seen, and by his own facts to be noted, but also by his own
words and Registers; Clementines, Extravagants and Pontificals, expressed as in
order (the LORD willing) shall follow.

The exaltation of Popes above Kings and Emperors out of Histories.
FIrst, after that Italy and the city of Rome were overrunne by the Goths and
Vandals, so that the seat of the Empire was remooved to Constantinople, then
began Ioannes Patriarch of Constantinople, to put forth himself, and would
needs be called universal Bishop of the world: but the Bishop of Rome in no
case would suffer that, and stopped it. After this came the Emperors deputy,
and Exarch of Ravenna to rule Italy: but the Bishop of Rome, through aid of
the King of Lombards sone quailed him. Not long after about the year of the
LORD five hundredth, came Phocas the murthrer, who slew the Emperor of
Constantinople his master Maureits and his children. By which Phocas, the
Bishops of old Rome aspyred first to their pre-eminence, to be counted the
head Bishops over the whole Church, and so together with the Lombardes began
to rule the City of Rome: Afterward when the Lombardes would not yield to
him, in accomplishing his ambitious desire, but would needs require of the
Bishop the said City of Rome: he stirred up Pipinus, but first deposed
Childericus the King of France, and so thrusting him into an Abbey, set up in
his place Pipinus and his son Carolus Magnus, to put down the said King of
Lombardes called Aistulphus: and so translated the Empire from Constantinople
to France, divyding the spoil between him and them: so that the Kings of
France, had all the possessions and lands which before belonged to the Empire,
and he to receive of them the quiet possession of the city of Rome, with such
donations and Lordships, which now they challenge unto them, under the name of
S. Peter's patrimony, which they falsely ascrybe to that donation of
Constantinus the great.

It followed then in process of time, after the days of Pipinus, Carolus, and
Lodovicus, (who had endued these Bishops of Rome, called now Popes, with large
possessions) when the King of France were not applyable to their beck, to aid
and maintain them against the Princes of Italy, who began then to push the
saides Bishops for their wrongful usurped goods, they practiced with the
Germans, to redact the Empire to Otho, first of that name Duke of Spain,
referring the election thereof to seven Princes electors of Germany, which was
about Anno 1002. Notwithstanding reserving still in his hands the negative
voice, thinking thereby to enjoy that they had, in quietness and security,
and so did for a good space.

At length when some of these Germane Emperors also, after Otho began a
little to spurn against the said Bishops and Popes of Rome, some of them they
accursed, some they subdued and brought to the kissing of their feet, some
they deposed, and placed others in their possessions.

So was Henricus 4. by these Bishops accursed, the Emperor himself forced
with his wife and child, to wait attendance upon the Popes pleasure three
days and three nights in Winter at the gates of Canossus. Besides all this the
said Pope raised up Rodolpus to be Emperor against him: who being slain in
war, then the said Pope Gregory 7. not resisting this, stirred up his own
son Henricus 5. to fight against his own natural father, to depose him,
which Henricus 5. was also himself accursed afterward, and excommunicated, and
the Saxons at last set up by the Bishops to fight against him.

After this the Emperors began to be somewhat calmed, and more quiet,
suffering the Bishops to reign as they listed, till Frederick the first
called Barbarossa came, and began to stir coals against them. Howbeit they
hampered both him and his son Henry in such sort, that they brought first the
neck of Frederick in the Church of Venice, under their feet to tread upon:
and after that the said Bishops crowning Henricus his son in the Church of S.
Peter, set his crown upon his head with their feet, and with their feet
spurned it off again, to make him know that the Popes of Rome had power both
to crown Emperors, and depose them again.

Then followed Philippus brother to Henry aforesaid, whom also the Popes
accursed, about the year of our LORD 1198. and set up Otho Duke of Saxon. But
when the said Otho began to be so saucie to dispossess the Bishops of their
cities and lands, which they had incrotched into their bands, they could not
bear that, but incontinent they put him besides the cusheon. The like also
fell upon Otho the 4. that followed after Philip, who was suffered no longer
then four years to reign, about the year of the LORD 1209.

At this time Fredericus 2. the son of Fredericus Barbarossa, was but young,
whom the Bishops of Rome supposing to find more mortified and tamed to their
hand, advanced to be Emperor after his father: But that fell out much
contrary to their expectation: for he perceiving the immoderate pomp and
pride of the Roman Bishops, which he could in no case abide, so netled them,
and cut their combs, and waxed so stout against them, intending to extirpe
their tyranie and to reduce their pompous riches to the state and condition of
the primitive Church again, putting some of them to flight, and prisoning some
of their Cardinals, that of three Popes, one after another he was accursed,
circumvented by tieason, at last deposed, and after that poisoned, and last
forsaken and died.

After this Frederick followed his son Conradus, whom the foresaid Bishops
for his disobedience soon dispatched, exciting against him in mortal war
the Lantgraue of Thuring, whereby at length he was driven into his Kingdom of
Naples, and there deceast.

This Conradus had a son called Conradinus, Duke and Prince of Swevill, where
this Conradinus after the decease of his father, came to enjoy the Kingdom of
Naples. The Bishops stirred up against him, Charles the French Kings brother in
such sort, that through crafty conveyance, both Conradinus which descended of
the blood of so many Emperors, and also Frederik Duke of Austria, were both
taken, and after much wretched handling in their miserable indurance unseeming
to their state, at length were both brought under the axe, by the Popes
procurement, and so both beheaded: and thus ended the imperial stock of
Frederik the first surnamed Barbarossa.

The like also happened to Frederik the Emperor, had almost fallen upon Philip
the French King, by Pope Boniface 8. who because he could not have his
commodities and revenewes out of France after his will, sent out his bills and
letters patents to displace King Philip aforesaid, and to possess Albertus
King of Romans in his rowme.

And this hitherto of foreign stories: Now touching our country Princes here
in England, so speak somewhat likewayes of them: did not Pope Alexander the
third presumptuously taking upon him where he had nothing to do to
intermeddle with the Kings subjects.

For the death of Becket the rebel, albeit the King fusficiently cleared
himself thereof, yet notwithstanding did he not wrongfully bring the said King
Henry 2. to such penance as it pleased him to enjoyne, and also violently
constrained him to swear obedience to the Sea of Rome. The like also was
showed before in this story to happen to King John his son, for when the
said King like a valiant Prince, had held out the tyrranie of those Bishops
eleven years together, was not all the Churches of England barred up, and his
inheritance with all his dominions given away by Pope Innocent the 3. to
Lodovicus the French King, and he afterward compelled to submit both himself,
and to make his whole Realm fedetary to the Bishops of Rome, and moreover, the
King himself driven also to surrander his Crown to Pandulphus the Popes
Legate: and so continued a private person, 5 days standing at the Popes
courtesy whether to receive it again or not? And when the Nobles of the
Realm rose afterward against the King for the same, was not he then glad to
seek and sue to the foresaid Pope for succor, as by his own letter, taken
out of the public rolls may appear.

King John's supplication to Pope Innocent the third.
REverendiss. domino suo and patri sanctiss. Innocentio, dei gratia Ioanni
eadem gratia. R. Angliae etc. Cum comites and Barons Angliae nobis devoti
essent, antequam nos and nostram terram dominio vestro subjacere curassemus, ex
tunc in nos specialiter ob hoc, sicut public dicunt, violenter insurgunt. Nos
vero preter Deum, vos specialem dominum and patronum habentes, defensionem
nostram and totius regni, quod vestrum esse credimus, vestrae paternitati
commissam, and nos quantum in nobis est, curam and solicitudinem istam vestrae
resignamus dominationi, devotius supplicantes quatenus in negotijs nostris, que
vestra sunt, consilium and auxilium efficax apponatis, prout melius videritis
expedire, latores praesentium etc. Test meipso apud Dour. 18. September. 6.

And yet notwithstanding that the said King John did so yield to the Pope, he
was both persewed by his Nobles, and also in the end w as poisoned, by asubject
of the Popes ownereligion, a Monk of Swinsted: as I have sufficiently to prove
not only by William Caxton, but also have testimony of the most part of
Chronicles for the same, (a few only excepted) as of Thomas Gray in his French
Chronicle, also of another French Chronicle in meeter, of Ranulphus Cestrenses,
Thomas Rudburne also does witness the same: So does Richard Rid in novo
Chronico ad tempora Hen. 6. the like also does the Chronicle called Eulogium
Monachi Cant. The words of Walter Gisborne an ancient Historiographer be
plain: No less is to be found in Joan. Major. de gestis Scotorum. lib. 4.
cap. 3. fol. 56. where he not only makes mention of the Monk and of the
poison, but also of the Abbot, of his absolution and of the 3. Monks every day
singing for the said Monks soul. To these I could also annex dyvers other
wrytters both English and Latin, without name, which witness that King John
was poisoned, one beginning thus, Here begins a book in the English
tongue, called Bruce. Another begins: Because this book is made to tell,
what time any thing notable. The third in English begins the reign of
Britain that now is called England, etc. Of Latin books which have no name,
one begins thus, Britannia quae and Anglia dicitur, ae Bruto nomen est
sortita. Another has this beginning, Adam pater gener is humani.

Besides this, King Henry 2 and King John his son, what Kings have here
reigned in England since their time, until the reign of King Henry the 8, who
although they were prudent Princes, and did what they could against the proud
dominion of those Bishops, were forced at length sore against their wills, for
fear to subject themselves together with their subjects, under their usurped
authority, in so much as some of them as M at. Paris. writes by King Henry
the third, were feign to stoup and kiss their Legates knee.

The image of Antichrist exalting himself in the Temple of GOD, above all that
is named God, out of his own decrees, decretals extravagants, pontificals,
word for word as it is out of the said books here alleged and quotted.
FOR as much as it stands upon necessity of salvation, for every bumane
creature to be subject to me the Pope of Rome. It shall be therefore
requisite nd necessary for all men that will be saved, to learn and know the
dignity of my Sea and excellency of my dominion, as here is set forth
according to the truth and very works of my own laws, in style as follows.
2. First my institution began in the old Testament, and was consummate and
finished in the New, in that my Preift-hood was prefigurated by Aaron: and
other Bishops under me were prefigured by the sons of Aaron, that were under
him. 3. Neither is it to be thought that my Church of Rome has been
preferred by any general Council, but obtained the Primacy only by the voice
of the Gospel, and the mouth of the Savior. 4. And has in it neither spot
nor wrinkle, nor any such like thing. 5. Wherefore as other seats be all
inferior to me, and as they cannot absolve me: so have they no power to bind
me or to stand against me, no more then the axe has power to stand or presume
above him that heweth with it, or the Saw to presume above him that rules it.
6. This is the holy and Apostolic mother Church of all other Churches of
CHRIST. 7. From whose rules it is not meet that any person or persons should
declyne, but like as the Son of GOD, came to do the will of his Father, so
much ye do the will of your mother the Church, the head whereof is the Church
of Rome. 8. And if any other person or persons shall err from the said Church,
either let them be admonished, or else their names taken, to be known who they
be that swerue from the customs of Rome. 9. Thus then for as much as the holy
Church of Rome, whereof I am governor, is set up to the whole world for a
glass or example, reason would what thing soever the said Church determines,
or ordains, that to be received of all men for a general and a perpetual
rule for ever. 10. Whereupon we see it now verified in this Church, that was
foreprophecied by Jeremy, Saying: Behold I have set thee vpover nations and
kingdoms, to pluck up and to break down, to build and to plant. 11. Who so
understands not the prerogative of this my Preist-hood, let him look up to
the firmament, where he may see two great lights, the Sun and Moon: one
ruling over the day, the other over the night: So in the firmament of the
universal Church. 12. GOD has set two great dignities, the authority of the
Pope and the Emperor: Of the which two, this our dignity is so much
weightier, as we have the greater charge to give accoumpt to GOD for Kings of
the earth, and the laws of men. 13. Wherefore be it known to you Emperors,
which know it also right well, that ye depend unto the judgment of us, we
must not be brought and reduced to your will. 14. For as I said, look what
difference there is betwixt the Sun and the Moon, so great is the power of
the Pope ruling over the day, that is, over the spirituality, above Emperors
and Kings, ruling over the the night: that is, over the Laytie. 15. Now seeing
the earth is seven times bigger then the Moon, and the Sun eight times
greater then the earth, it follows that the Popes dignity 56 times does
surmount the estate of the Emperors. 16. Upon consideration whereof, I say
therefore and pronunce that Constantine the Emperor did naught in setting the
Patriarch of Constantinople at his feet on his left hand. 17. And although the
said Emperor, wrote to me, alleging the words of S. Peter, commanding us to
submit our selves to every humane creature, as to Kings, Dukes, and other for
the cause of GOD. 1. Pet. 2. Yet in answering again in my decretall, I exponed
the minds and words of S. Pet. to pertain to his subjects, and not his
successors, willing the said Emperor to consider the person of the speaker, and
to whom it is spoken, for, if the mind of Peter had been there to debase the
order of Priesthood, and to make us underlings to every humane creature, then
every lack might have dominion over Prelates: which makes against the example
of CHRIST, setting up the order of Priesthood to bear domination over Kings:
According to the saying of Jeremy: Behold I have set thee up over Kings and
Nations: 18. And as I feared not then to write this boldly unto Constantine, so
now I say unto all other Emperors, that they receaving of me their
approbation, unction, consecration, and Crown Imperial, must not disdain to
submit their heads under me, and swear unto me their alleadgeance: 19. For
so you read in the decree of Pope John, how that Princes heretofore have
been wont to bow and submit their heads unto Bishops, and not to proceed in
judgment against the heads of Bishops. 20. If this reverence and submission was
wont to be given to Bishops, how much more ought they to submit their heads to
me, being superior, not only to Kings, but Emperors, and that for two causes:
first, for my title of succession, that I Pope of Rome have to the Empire, the
rowme standing vacant. Also for the fulness of power that CHRIST King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords, has given to me tho unworthy in the person of
Peter. 21. By reason whereof, seeing my power is not of man but of GOD, who by
his celestial providence has set me over his universal Church; master and
governor, it belongs therefore to my office to look upon every mortal
sin of every Christian man. 22. Whereby all criminal offenses als well of
Kings as all other be subject to my censure. 23. In such sort that in all
manner of pleading, if any manner of person at any time either before the
sentence given or after shall appeal to mce, it shall be lawful for him so
to do. 24. Neither must Kings and Princes think it much to submit themselves
to my judgment, for so did Valentinianus the worthy Emperor: so did
Theodosius, and also Carolus. 25. Thus ye see must be all judged by me, and
I of no man, yea, although I Pope of Rome, by my negligence or evil demanure
be found unprofitable, or hurtful, either to my self or others: Yea if I
should draw with me innumerable souls by heaps to hell, yet no mortal man be
so hardy, so bold, so presumptuous to reprove me. 26. Or to say to me,
Domine cur it a facis? Sir why do ye so? 27. For although ye read that
Balaam was rebuked of his Ass, by the which Afse our subjects, by Balaam we
Prelates are signified: Yet that ought to be no example to our subjects to
rebuke us. 28 And though we read in the Scripture, that Peter, who received
power of the Kingdom, and being chief of the Apostles, might by virtue of his
office, control all others, was content to come and give answer before his
inferiors, objecting to him his going to the Gentiles, yet other inferiors must
not learn by this example to be check-meat with their Prelates, because Peter
so took it at their hands, showing thereby rather a dispensation of humility,
then the power of his office: by the which power he might have said to them
again, It becomes not sheep, nor belongs to their osfice to accuse their
shepherd. 29. For else why was Dioscorus Patriarch of Alexandria condemned and
excommunicated at Chalcedon: not for any cause of his faith, but only that he
durst stand against the Pope Leo, and durst excommunicate the Bishope of Rome,
for who is he that has authority to accuse the seat of S. Peter. 30. Albeit
I am not ignorant what S. Jerome writes, that Paul would not have reprehended
Peter, unless he had thought himself equal unto him. 31. Yet Jeremy must
thus be exponed by my interpretation, that this equality betwixt Peter and
Paul, consists not in like osfice of dignity, but in pureness of
conversation. 32. For who gave Paul license to preach, but Peter, and that by
authority of GOD, saying, Separato mihi Paulum and Barnabam: Wherefore be it
known to al men, that my Church of Rome, is prince and head ofall Nations. 33.
The mother of the faith. 34. The foundation cardinal, whereupon all Churches
do depend, as the door does depend upon the hinges. 35. The first of all
other seats without all spot or blemish. 36. Lady mistress and instructor of all
Churches. 37. A glass and spectacle unto all men to be followed in all
whatsoever she observes. 38. Which was never found yet to slide, or declyne
from the path of Apostolic tradition, or to be entangled with any newness
of heresies. 39. Against which Church of Rome, whosoever speaks any evil, is
forthwith an heretic. 40. Yea a very Pagan, a witch, and an Idolater or
Infidel. 41. Having fullness of power only in her own hand in ruling. 42.
Decyding, absolving, condemning, casting out or receaving in. 43. Albeit I deny
not but other Churches be partakers with her in laboring and carrying. 44. To
the which Church of Rome it is lawful to appeal for remedy from the
Churches, although it was otherwise concluded in the general council of
Millevit an: that no man fhould appeal over the Sea under the pain of
excommunication, yet my Gloss comes in here with an exception: Nisi forte
Romanam sedem appellauerint. Id est: Except the appeal be to the Sea of Rome.
45. By the authority of which Church of Rome, all Synodes and decryes of
councils stand confirmed. 46. And has always full authority in his hands to
make new laws and decreements, and to alter statutes, privileges, rights or
documents of Churches, to separat things joined, and to join things separated,
upon right consideration, either in whole or in part, either personally or
generally. 47. Of the which Church of Rome I am head, as a King is over his
judges. 48. The vicar of S. Peter. 49. Yea not the vicar of S. Peter properly,
but the vicar of CHRIST properly, and successor of Peter. 50. Vicar of IE sus
CHRIST. 51. Rector of the universal Church, director of the LORDS universal
flock. 52. Chief magistrate of the whole world. 53. Caephas, i. caput, the
head and chief of the Apostolic Church. 54. Universal Pope, and Diocesan in
all places exempt, as well as every Bishop is in places not exempt. 55. Most
mighty Priest. 56. Lex animata in terris. i. 57. A living Law in the earth
judged to have all Laws in the chest of my breast. 58. Bearing the rowm of no
poor man. 59. Being neither God nor man, but the admiration of the world, and
a middle thing betwixt both. 60. Having both swords in my power, both of the
spiritual and temporal jurisdiction. 61. So far surmounting the authority
of the Emperor, that I of my own power alone without a Council, have
authority to depose him, or to trans-ferre his kingdom, and to give a new
election, as I did to Frederick, and diverse others. 62. What power then or
Protestat in all the world is comparable to me: who have authority to bind and
louse both in Heaven and earth. 63. That is, who have power both of heavenly
things, and also of temporal things. 64. To whom Emperors, and Kings are more
inferior, than Lead is inferior to Gold. 65. For do you not see the necks
of great Kings, and Princes bend under our knees, yea, and think themselves
happy and well defenced, if they may kiss our hands. 66. Wherefore the
sauciness of Honorius the Emperor is to be reprehended, and his constitution
abolished, who with his laytie would take upon him to intermeddle, not only
with the temporal order, but also with matters ecclesiastical, and election
of the Pope. 67. But here perchance some will object the examples and words
of Christ, saying, that his Kingdom is not of this world, and where he being
required to divide betwixt two brethren their heritage, did refuse it; but that
ought not to be no prejudice to my power. 68. For if Peter, and I in Peter, if
we say, have power to bind and louse in heaven, how much more then is it to
be thought, that we have power in earth to louse and to take away Empyres,
Kingdoms, Dukedomes, and what else so ever mortal men may have, and to give
them where we will? 69. And if we have authority over Angels, which be
governors over Princes, what then may we do upon their inferiors and
servants? 70. And for that you shall not marvel that I say; Angels be subject
unto us, you shall hear what my blessed Clerk Antonius writes of the matter,
saying, that our power, of Peter and me, is greater than the Angels in four
things. 1. In jurisdiction. 2. In administration of Sacraments. 3. In
knowledge. 4. and reward. 71. And again in bulla Clemen it is, do I not their
command in my Bull, the Angels of Paradise to absolve the soul of man out of
Purgatory, and to bring it into the glory of Paradise. 72. And now besides my
heavenly power, to speak of my earthly jurisdiction, who did first translate
the Empire from the Greeks to the Almanes, but I? 73. And not only in the
Empire am I Emperor, the place being empty, but in all ecclesiastical
benefices have full right and power to translate, and to depose after my
arbitriment. 74. Did not I Zacharias put down Childerick the old King of
France, and set up Pipinus? 75. Did not I Gregorius the seventh set up Robert
Wisard, and made him King of Sicilie, and Duke of Cappa etc. 76. Did not I the
same Gregorius also set up Rodulphus against Henry the 4 Em perour? 77. And
though that this Henricus was an Em perour of most stout courage, who stood 62
times in open field against his enemies. 78. Yet did not I Gregorius, coram
nobis, and made him stand at my gate, three days and three nights barefooted,
and bare-legged, with his wife and child, in the deep of winter, both in frost
and snow, entreating for his absolution, and after excommunicated him again,
so that he was twice excommunicated in my days? 79. And did not I Paschalis
after Gregory set up the son of the said Henricus against his father, in war
to possess the Empire, and to put down his father, and so he did. 80. Item,
did not I Pope Alexander bring unto Henry the second, King of England, for the
death of Thomas Becket, and to cause him go bare-foooted to his tomb at
Canturberrie with bleeding feet? 81. Did not I Innocentius the third, cause
King John to kneel down at the feet of Pandulphus my Legate, and offer up
his Crown to his hands: also to kiss the feet of Steven Langtoun, Bishop of
Canturberrie, and besides that merced him a thousand merks by year. 82. Did
not I Vrbanus the second, put down Hugo Earl in Italy, discharging his
subjects from their oath and obedience to him? 83. Did not I Paschalis
excommunicate also his son Henry the fifth, and got out of his hands all his
right, and title of elections, and donations of spiritual promotions? 84. Did
not I Gelasius the second bring the Captain Cnitius under, unto the kissing of
my feet, and after Gelasius? 85. Did not I Calixtus, quail the foresaid
Emperor Henricus, and also bring in subjection Gregory, whom the said
Emperor had set up against me to be Pope, bringing him into Rome upon a
Camel, his face to the horse tail, making him to hold the horse tail in his
hand in stead of a bridle? 86. Further, did not I Innocentius the second set up
and make Lotharius to be Emperor, for driving out Pope Anacletus out of Rome?
87. Did not I the said Innocentius take the Dukedom of Sicilie from the
Empire, and made Roger to be King thereof, whereby afterward the Kingdom
became the patrimony of S. Peter. 88. Did not I Alexander the third, suspend
all the Realm and Churches of England for the Kings marriage, 1159? 88. But
what do I speak of Kings? did not I the said Alexander bring the valiant
Emperor Frederick the first to Venice, by reason of his son Otho, their taken
prisoner, and there in S. Marks Church made him fall down flat upon the
ground, while I did set my feet upon his neck, saying the verse of the
TSALME, Super aspidem and basiliscum ambulabis: 89. Did not I Adrianus Pope, an
English man borne, excommunicate William King of Cicile and refuse his peace,
which he offered, and had he not overcome me in plain field, I would have
shaken him out of his kingdom of Cicile, and Dukedom of Apulia. 90. Also did
not I the said Adrianus, control and correct the foresaid Fredericus Emperor,
for holding the left stirruppe of my horse, when he should have holden the
right. 91. And afterward did not I excommunicate and curse him, for that he was
so sawsie to set his own name in wrytting mine. 92. And although a poor fly
afterward overcame and strangled me, yet I made Kings and Emperors to stoup.
93. Did not I Innocentius 3. deject Philippus, brother to Fredericus from the
imperial Crown, being elected without my leave, and after set him up again,
and also set up Otho of Brounswick, and after did excommunicate and also depose
the same four years, setting up the French King to war against him. 94.
Then was Fredericus 2. by me set up and reigned thirty seven years, and yet
five years before, he died. 95. Did not I Honorius interdict him, for not
restoring certain to their possessions at my request. 96. Whom also Gregorius
9. did excommunicate twyse together, and and raised up the Venetians against
him. 97. And at length Innocentius spoiled him of his Empire, after that he
caused him to be poisoned, at length to be strangled by one Manfredus, and
did excommunicate his son Conradus after him, not only depryving him of his
right inheritance, but also caused him with Frederick Duke of Austria to be
beheaded. 98. Thus then did not I excommunicate and depose all these Emperors
in order? Henricus 4. Henricus 5. Fredericus I. Philippus, Otho, Fredericus 2.
and Conradus his son. 99. Did not I interdict King Henry the eight. 100. And
all his kingdom of England. 101. And had not his prudence and power prevented
my practice, I had displaced him from his kingdom, also briefly who is able to
comprehend the greatness of my power, and of my seat. 102. For by me only
general Councills take their force and confirmation. 103. And the
interpretation of the said councils, and of all other causes hard and
doubtful ought to be referred and stand to my interpretation. 104. By me the
works of all wrytters, whatsoever they be, either be reprooved or allowed.
105. Then how much more ought my wryttings and decrees to be preferred before
all other? 106. In so much that my letters and epistles decretall be
equivalent, with the general councils. 107. And where GOD has ordained al
causes of men, to be judged by men, he has only reserved me, That is, The
Pope of Rome, without all question of men, unto his own judgment. 108. And
therefore where all other creatures be under their judge, only I who in earth
am the judge of all, can be judged of none, neither Emperor nor the whole
Clergy, nor Kings, nor of the people. 109. For who has power to judge upon
his judge? 110. This judge am I, and that alone, without any other assistance
of any counsel joined to me, for I have power upon counsels, counsels have no
power over me. But if the counsel determine amiss, it is my aurhoritie alone
to infring it, or to condemn who^ I list without any counsel. 111. And all
for the preheminene of my predecessor blessed S. Peter, which by the voice of
the LORD, he received, and ever shall retain. 112. Furthermore, and whereas
all other sentences and judgments, both of counsels, person or persons, may
and ought to be examined. 113. For that they may be corrupted four ways: by
fear, by gifts, by hatred, by favor: only my sentence and judgment must
stand. 114. As given out of Heaven by the mouth of Peter him self, which no
man must 115. Break nor retract. 116. No man must dispute or doubt of. 117.
Yea if my judgment, statute, or yoke, seem scarcely tolerable, yet for
remembrance of S. Peter it must be humbly obeyed. 118. Yea and moreover,
obedience is to be given not only to such decrees set forth by me in time
of my Popedom, but also to such as I do foresee and commit to wrytting before
I be Pope. 119. And although it be thought by some wrytters to be given to
all men to err, and deccaved. 120. Yet, neither am I a poor man. 121. And
again the sentence of my Apostolic seat is always conceaved with such
moderation is concoct and digested, with such patience and rypnesse, and
delivered out with such gravitie of delebiration, that nothing is thought in it
necessary to be altered or detracted 122. Wherefore it is manifest, and
testified by the voice of holy Bishops, that the dignity of this my seat is
to be reverenced through the whole world, in that all the faith full submit
themselves to it as to the head of the whole body. 123. Whereof it is spoken
to me by the Prophet, speaking of the Arc, if this be humbled whether shall
ye run for succor, and where shall your glory become? seeing then this is
so, that so holy Bishops and Scriptures do witness with me, what shall we
say then to such as will take upon them to judge of my doings, to reprehend my
proceedings, or to require homage and tribute of me, to whom all other are
subject. 124. Against the first sort the Scripture speaks. Deuternomie: Thou
ought not to put thy sith in another man's Corn. Which thing to attempt
against me, what is it but plain sacrilege? 125. According to my Canonists,
which thus defyne sacrilege to consist in three things: either when a man
judges of his Princes judgment: or when the holy day is prophained: or when
reverence is not given to Laws and Canons. 126. Against the second sort makes
the place of the book of Kings, where we read the Ark of GOD was brought
from Gaba to Jerusalem, and in the way the Arc inclining by reason of the
unruly oxen. Ozias the Levit put to his hand to help, and therefore was
stricken of the LORD: By this Arc is signified the Prelates, by the inclination
thereof, the fall of Prelates. 127. Which also be signified by the Angels, that
Jacob did see going up and down the ladder. 128. Also by the Prophet, where
he says, he bowed down the Heavens and came down: By Ozias and the
vnruelie oxen are meaned our subjects. 129. Then like as Ozias was stricken for
putting his hand to the Arc inclyning, no more must subjects rebuke their
Prelates going away. 130. Albeit here may be answered again, that all be not
Prelates, which be so called, for it is not the name that makes a Bishop, but
the life. 131. Against the third sort of such as would bring us under the
tribute and exactions of secular men, making the New Testament, where Peter was
bid to give the groate in the fishes mouth, but not the head nor body of the
fish: No more is the head or body of the Church subdued to Kings, but only
that which is in the mouth, that is, the extern things of the Church, and yet
not they neither. 132. For so we read in the book of Genesis, that Pharaoh in
the time, of derth, subdued all the land of the Egyptians, but yet he
ministered to the Priests, so that he neither took their possessions from
them, nor their liberty: If then the Prelates of the Church must be neither
judged, nor reprehended, nor exacted, how much more ought I to be free from
the same? 133 Which am the Bishop of Bishops, and head of Prelates. 134. For it
is not to be thought that the case betwixt me and other Prelates: betwixt my
Sea and other Churches be like. 135. Although the whole Catholic and
Apostolic Church make a brydechamber of Christ, yet the Catholic and
Apostolic Church of Rome, had the pre-eminence given over all other by the
mouth of the LORD himself, saying to Peter. Thou art Peter. 136. Thus a
discretion and difference must be had in the Church, as it was betwixt Aaron
and his children: 137. Betwixt the threescore and twelve Disciples, and the
twelve Apostles, betwixt the other Apostles and Peter. 138. Wherefore it is to
be concluded, an order and difference of degrees in the Church, betwixt
powers, rior and inferior, without which order the university of the whole
cannot consist. 139. For as amongst the Angelical creatures above in Heaven,
there is set a difference and inequalities of powers and orders, some to be
Angels, some Archangels, some Cherubins, some Seraphims, 140. So in the
Ecclesiastical hierarchy of the Church militant here on earth, Priests must
not be equal with Bishops, Bishops must not be like in order with
Archbishops, with Patriarchs, or Primats, 141. Who contain under them three
Archbishops, as a King contains three Dukes under him, in the which number
of Patriarchs, comes in the stare also of an hundredth forty two Cardinals or
principals, fo called, Because as the door turns by his hinges, so the
universal Church ought to be ruled by them. 142. The next and hiest order
above these, is mine, who am Pope, differing in power and majoritie, and honor
reverentiall, from these and all other decrees of men. 144. For the better
declaration on whereof, my Canonists make three kynds of power in the earth:
Immediato, which is mine immediately from GOD: Derivato, which belongs to
other inferior Prelates from me. 145. Ministralis belonging to Emperors and
Princes to minister for me, for the which cause the anointing of Princes and
my consecration does differ, for they are anointed only in the arms or
shoulders, and I in the head, to signify, the difference of power betwixt
Princes and me. 146. This order therefore of Priests, Bishops and
Archbishops, Patriarchs and others, as a thing most convenient: my Church of
Rome has set and instituted through all Churches following therein; not only
the example of the angelical army in Heaven, but also the Apostles. 147. For
amongst them also there was not an uniform equality or institution of a
degree. 148. But a diversity or distinction of authority and power, albeit
they were all Apostles together, yet it was granted notwithstanding to Peter
themselves also agreeing to the same that he should bear dominion and
superiority over all other Apostles. 149. And therefore had his name given
him, Cephas, that is, head or beginning of the Apostlehood. 150. Whereupon the
order of the Priesthood first in the New Testament began in Peter, to whom it
was said: Thou art Peter, and upon thee will I build my Church: 151. And I will
give thee the keys of Heaven: and thou being converted confirm thy brethren.
152. I have prayed for thee that thy faith shall not fail, wherefore seeing
such power is given to Peter. 153. And to me in Peter, being his successor.
154. Who is he then in all the world, that ought not to be subject to my
decrees, which has such power, in Heaven, in Hell, in Earth, with the quick
and also the dead: 155. Commanding and granting in my Bull sent to Vienna, unto
all such as dyed in their peregrination to Rome, that the pain of Hell should
not touch them. And also that all such as took the holy cross upon them,
should every one at his request not only be delivered himself, but also
deliver three or four souls, whomso ever he would have out of Purgatory.
156. Again having such promises and assurance, that my faith shall not fail,
who then will not believe in my doctrine: for did not CHRIST himself first
pray for Peter, that his faith should not fail. 157. Also have I not a sure
promise of Paul's own mouth, wrytting to my Church in these words: God is my
witness whom I serve in my spirit, in the Gospel of his Son, that without
ceasing I make mention of you always in my prayers: Romans I. 158. Where fore I
condemn all such worthily, which will not obey my decrees, to be despossessed
of all their honors, without restitution. 159. So all they that believe not my
doctrine, or stand against the privilege of the Church, especially of the
Church of Rome, I pronounce them Heretics. 160. And as the other before is
called unjust, so this man is to be called an heretic. 161. For why he goes
against the faith, which goes against her who is the mother of faith. 162. But
here may rise perchance a doubt or seruple, that if my faith and knowledge
stand so sure by the promise of CHRIST, and by the continual prayer of S.
Paul? whither is it true, or is it to be granted that any other should excel
men in knowledge or interpretation of holy Scripture. 163. For look whose
knowledge is grounded upon most reason his words should seem to be of more
authority. 164. Whereunto I answer, and grant, that many there be and has
been more abundantly endued with fuller grace of the holy Ghost, and greater
excellency of knowledge, and therefore that the tractations of Augustine,
Hierom, and others thought to be preferred before the constitutions of dyvers
Popes: yet I say in determination of cause, because they have not the virtue
and hight of their authority, which is given to me, therefore in exponing of
Scriptures they are to be preferred, but in decyding of matters they stand
inferror to my authority: by virtue of which authority, 165. Both they
themselves be allowed for doctors: and their works approved, and also al other
matters be ruled, through the power of the keys which is given to me
immediately of CHRIST: although I deny not, but the same keys be also
committed to other Prelates, as they were to other Apostles besides Peter. 166.
Yet it is a thing to have the keys, another thing to have the use of the
keys. 167. Wherefore here is to be noted a distinction of keys, after the
mind of my school doctors: one key which is called Clavis ordinis: Having
authority to bind and loose, but over the persons whom they bind and loose,
and this authority they take not immediately of CHRIST, but immediately by me
the viccar of CHRIST. The other is called Clavis Iurisdictionis, Which I the
viccar of CHRIST take immediately of him, having notonely authority to bind
and loose, but also dominion over them on whom this key is exercised, by the
jurisdiction of which key, the fullness of my power is so great, that whereas
all others are subjects. 168. Yea and Emperors themselves ought to subdue
their executions to me, only I am a subject to no creature. 169. No not to my
self except I list, In foro poenitentiae, to my Ghostly father submitting my
self as a sinner, but not as Pope: so that my papal majesty ever remains
vnminisched. Superior to all men 170. Whom all persons ought to obey, 171. and
follow. 172. Whom no man must judge nor accuse of crime, either of murder,
adultery, symony, or such like 173. No man depose but I my self. 174. No man
can excommunicate me, yea though I communicate with the excommunicat, for no
Canon binds me, whom no man must lie to. 175. For he that lies to me is a
Church robber. 176. And who obeys not me is an heretic, and an
excommunicat person. 177. For like as all the Jews were commanded to obey the
hie Priest, of the Leviticall order, of what state or condition soever they
were, so are all Christian men more and less bound to obey me CHRIST'S
Lievetennant on earth, concerning the obedience or disobedience, of whom ye
have in Deuteronomy. 17. 178. Where the common gloss says, that he who denies to
the hie Priest obedientiam, lies under the sentence of condemnation, as much
as he that denies to GOD his omnipotentiam. Thus then appears that the
greatness of my Priest hood, 179. Begun in Melchizedeck, solemnized in
Aaron, continued in the children of Aaron, perfectionated in Christ represented
in Peter, exalted in the universal jurisdiction, and manifested in Silvester:
so that through this pre-eminence of my Priesthood, having all things subject
to me. 180. It may seem well verified in me that was spoken of CHRIST: Psalm.
8. Omnia subjecisti sub pedibus ejus, oves and boves, and vniversa pecoracampi.
Volucres coeli, and pisces maris. That is to say, Thou have subdued all things
under his feet, sheep and oxen, and all cattle of the field, the birds of
Heaven, and fish of the sea. 181. Where it is to be noted, that by oxen, Jews
and Heretics, by cattle of the field, Paganes be signified, for although as
yet they be out of the use of my keys of binding and lowsing, yet they be
not out of jurisdiction of my keys, but if they return I may absolucthem.
182. By sheep and all Cattle are meaned all Christian men both great and
less, whither they be Emperors, Princes, Prelates, or other. By birds of the
air, ye may understand the Angels and potestars of Heaven, who be all
subject to me, in that I am greater then the Angels, and that in four things,
as is before declared, and has power to bind and louse in Heaven. 183. And to
give Heaven to them that fight in wars. 184. Lastly by the fishes of the sea,
are signified the souls departed in pain or purgatory, as Gregory by his
prayer delivered the soul of Traianus out of Hell, and I have power to deliver
out of Purgatory whom I please. 185. Lastly, by the fishes of the sea, are
signified such as be in purgatory: In so much that they stand in need and
necessity of other men's help, and yet be in their journey: Viatores and de
foro Papae: id est: Passengers, and belonging to the court of the Pope,
therefore they may be relieved out of the storehouse of the Church, by the
participation of indulgence. And for as much as some do object that my pardons
cannot extend to them, that be departed, for that it was said to Peter,
whatsoever thou shall lowse upon earth, and therefore seeing they are not upon
earth, they cannot be lowsed by me: here I answer again by my doctors,
that this word, Super terram: Upon the earth, may be referred two manner of
ways, first to him that is the lowser, so that who shall lowse, shall be upon
the earth, and so I grant, that the Pope being dead can lowse no man. Also it
may be referred to him that is lowsed, so that whosoever is lowsed must be
upon the earth or about the earth: And so the souls of Purgatory may be
lowsed, which albeit they are not upon the earth, yet they are about the earth,
at least they be not in Heaven: because often times, a question may arise upon
another, and the heads of me^ now a days are curious, a man hearing now, that I
can deliver out of Purgatory, will ask here a question, whether I be so to
empty all Purgatory at once or not, to whom my Canonist. August. de Ancho.
does answer by a triple distinction: Quantum ad absolutam meamjurisdictionem,
Quantum ad ordinatam executionem, Quantum addivinam acceptionem. First,
touching my absolute jurisdiction, he says, I am able to rid out all
Purgatory together, for as many as be under my jurisdiction, as all be,
except only infants unbaptized in limbo: and men departed only cum Baptismo
slaminis, that is, with the Baptism of the spirit: and such as have no friends
to do for them, that therefore pardons be given these only excepted: for all
other besides, the Pope he says, has power to release all Purgatory at once
as touching his absolute jurisdiction. Albeit Thomas Aquixas part. 4 denies
the same, for so much as CHRIST himself he says, when he came down did not
only utterly at once release all Purgatory. As touching my ordinary
execution, they hold, that I may if I will, but I ought not to do it. Thirdly,
as concerning the divyne acceptance, that is, how GOD would accept it, if I
did it, that they say is unknown to them, and to every creature, yea and to
the Pope himself.

And to the intent I would all men to see and understand that I lack not
witness besides these, if I list to bring them out, you shall hear the whole
quyre of my divine Clergy brought out, with a full voyoe testifying in my
behalf, in their books, tractations, distinctions, titles, glosses, and
summaryes, as by their own words here follows. The Pope say they being the
viccar of JESUS CHRIST through out the whole world, in the stead of the living
GOD, has that dominion and lordship, which CHRIST here in earth would not
have, although he had it in habitu, but gave it to Peter in actu: that is, the
universal jurisdiction both of spiritual things and also of temporal, which
double jurisdiction was signified by the two swords in the Gospel. And also
by offering of the wise men, who offered not only incense, but also gold: to
signify, not only the spiritual dominion, but also the temporal to belong
to CHRIST and to his viccar: For as we read the earth is the LORDS, and the
fullness thereof, and as CHRIST says, all power is given to him both in
Heaven and earth: So it is to be asfirmed inclusive. That the viccar of CHRIST
has power on things, celestial, terrestiall, and infernal, which he took
immediately of CHRIST, All other take it immediately by Peter and the Pope,
wherefore such as say that the Pope has dominion only in spiritual things in
the world, and not in temporal, may be likned to the councillers of the Kings
of Syria 2. Reg. 20. Which said that the gods of the mountains be their gods:
and therefore they have overcome us: but let us fight against them in the low
meadows and valleys where they have no power: and so we shall prevail over
them: so evil counselors now a days, through their pestiferous flattery
deceave Kings and Princes of the earth, saying, Popes, and Prelates, be gods of
mountains, that is, of spiritual things only, but they be not gods of
valleys, that is, they have no dominion over temporal things, and there fore
let us fight against them in the valleys, that is, in the power of the
temporal possessions, and so we shall prevale over them: But what says the
sentence of GOD unto them, let us hear, because says he the Sirians say that
the God of mountains is their god, and no the god of valleys, therefore I
will give all this multitude into your hand, and you shall know that I am the
Lord, what can be more effectual spoken to set forth the Majesty of my
jurisdiction, which I received immediately of the LORD, of the LORD I say, and
no man: For whereas Constantine the Emperor gave to Silvester, indowing him
with this possession and patrimony, that is, so to be exponed and taken not so
much for a donation, as to be counted for a restitution made of that, which
tyranously was taken from him before. And again, whereas I have given at
sundry times to Lodovicus and other Emperors, of my temporal lands and
possessions, yet that was done not so much for recognizing of homage to the^ as
for keeping peace with them, for I ow to Emperors no obediene that they can
clame, but they ow to me as their superior: And therefore for a deversitie
betwixt their degree and mine, in their consecration they take their unction in
their arm, I on the head, and as I am superior to them, so am I superior to
all laws, and free from all constitutions: Which am able of my self, and by
my interpretation, to prefer equity being not written, before the law written:
having all laws within the chest of my breast, as is aforesaid: and whatsoever
this my Sea shall enact, approve, or disprove, all men ought to approve and
reprove the same, with out either judging, disputing, doubting, or extracting.
Such is the priveledge given of CHRIST in the behalf of Peter to the Church of
Rome 186. That what kingdom soever, country or province, choosing to
themselves bishops and Ministers, although they agree with all other
Christsfaithfull people in the name of JESUS, that is, in faith and charity,
believing in the same GOD, and in CHRIST his true Son, and in the holy
Ghost, having also the same Creid. The same Evangelists and Scriptures of the
Apostles, yet notwithstanding unless that Bishops and Ministers take their
origin and ordination from this Apostolical state, they are to be counted
not of the Church: so that succession of faith only is not sufficient to make a
Church, exceptt he Ministers take their ordination by them which have their
succession from the Apostles, so their faith, supremacy, and chair of Peter,
keys of Heaven, power to bind and lowse, all these be inseparable to the
Church of Rome. So that it is to be presumed, that GOD always providing, and
S. Peter helping the Bishopric and dyocy of Rome, shall never fall from the
faith, and likewise is to be presumed and presupposed that the Bishop of that
Church is always good and holy: yea although he be not always good, or be
destitute of his ownemerits, yet the merits of S. Peter predecessor of that
place, be sufficient for him: who has bequeathed and left a perpetual dowry
of merits, with inheritance of innocence to his posterity. 187. Yea, though
he fall in homicide or adultery, he may sin but yet he cannot be
accused, but rather excused, by the murderers of Samson the shifts of the
Hebrews, the adultery of Jacob. 188. And likewise if any of his Clergy
should be found embracing a woman, it must be expounded and presupposed, that
he does it to bless her: furthermore, the Pope say they has all the dignities
and all powers of Patriarchs. In his primacy he is Abel in governament the
Arc of Noah, in Patriarchdome: Abraham: in order Melchizedeck, in dignity
Aaron: in authority Moses: in seat judicial; Samuel: in zeal Elias in
meekness David: in power Peter: in unction CHRIST: Nay thou art Antichrist,
my power they say is greater then all the Sancts: for whom I confirm, no man
may infirm, I may favor and spaire whom I please. 189. To take from one and
give to another, and if I beenemy to any man, all men ought to eshew that
person forthwith, and not tarry and look while I bid them do so: all the
earth is my dyocie, and I the ordinary of all men having the authority of the
King of all kings upon subjects, I am all in all and above all. 190. So that
God himself and I the viccar of God have both one consist orie. 191. And am
able almost to do that GOD can do Claue non errante. 192. Item it is said of
me, that I have an heavenly arbitriment, and therefore am able to change the
nature of things, Substantialia vnius applicando alteri: and of nothing to make
things to be, and of a sentence that is nothing, to makeit stand in effect, in
all things that I list, my will to stand for reason, for I am able by the law
to dispense above the Law, and of wrong to make justice, in correcting laws
and changing them, ye have hard hitherto susficiently out of my doctors: now
ye shall hear greater things out of my own decrees. 193. Read there Pist.
96. Satis. 194. Also 12. cause. 11. do you not find there expressed, how
Constantinus the Emperor fitting in the general counsel of Nice, called us
prelates of the Church, all Gods. 196. Again read my Canon decretall, do vee
not see there manifestly expressed, how not man but GOD alone separateth that
which the Bishops of Rome does dissolve and sep^rat: wherefore, if these things
which I do be said to be done not of man but of GOD? what can you make me,
but GOD? Again, if Prelates of the Church be called and counted of
Constantinus, for gods, I then being above all Prelates, seem by this reason to
be above all Gods: wherefore no marvel, if it be in my power, to change time
and times, to alter and abrogate laws, to dispense with all things, yea with
precepts of CHRIST for where CHRIST bids Peter put up his sword, monished
his disciples not to use any outward force in revenging themselves. 197. Do
not I Pope Nicolaus writing to the Bishops of France, exhort them to draw their
material swords in persewing their enemies, and recovering their possessions,
setting against the precept of CHRIST, the prophet saying, Item where CHRIST
was present himself at the marriage in Cana of Galilee. 198. Do not I Pope
Martinus in my distinction, inhibit the spiritual Clergy to be present at
marriage feasts, and also to marie themselves? Item where matrimony by CHRIST
cannot be lowsed, but only for whooredome. 199. Do not I Pope Gregorius
Junior writing ad Bonifacium: permit the same to be broken for impotencie or
infirmity of bodies. 200. Item against the express caution of the Gospel,
does not Innocentius the fourth, permit vim vi expellere. 201. Item against
the New Testament in swearing and that in these six causes. 202. Likewise
against the old Testament I do dispense in not giving tithes. 203. Wherein two
kinds of oaths are to be noted, whereof some be promissiora some be
assertoria. 204. Item in vows and that ex toto voto, whereas other Prelates
cannot dispense ex toto voto, I can deliver ex toto a voto, like as God
himself. 205. Item in perjurie I absolve, mv absolution stands 206. Where
also note, that in all swearing, always the authority of the superior is
excepted. 207. Moreover where CHRIST bids lend without hope of gain, do
not I Pope Martinus give dispensation for the same? and notwithstanding the
counsel of Thuring indicted the contrary, yet with the bulls I dissanulled
that decreement. 208. What should I speak of murder, making it no murder or
homicide to slay them that be excommunicate. 209. Likewise against the law of
nature. 210. Item against the Apostle. 211. Also against the Canon of the
Apostles: I can and do dispense, for where they in their Canon command a
Priest for fornication to be deposed, I through the authority of Silvester
do alter the rigor of that constitution. 212. Considering the minds and bodies
also of men now to be weaker then they were then: 213. Briefly against the
universal state of the Church, I have dispensation, and for marriage in the
second degree of consanguinitie and affinity that is betwixt brethrens
children although not, so that the uncle may not marry his Niece, unless for
urgent and weighty causes. As for all such contracts betwixt party and party,
were that matrimony is not yet consumat bv carnal copulation, it is but a
small matter for me to dispense withal: In summa if ye list briefly to
hear the whole number of all such causes as properlic do ppertaine to my
papal dispensation, which comes to the number of 51. points, that no man may
meddle withal, but only I my self alone, I will rehearse them in English as
they be set forth in my canonical doctors.

Cases papal to the number of one and fifty, wherein the Pope has power only
to dispense, and none else besides, except by special license from him.
FIrst the determination of doubts and questions belonging to faith.

Translation of a Bishop elected or confirmed.

Likewise of abbots exempted. Deposition of Bishops.

The taking of resignation of Bishops

Exemptions of Bishops, not to be under Archbishops.

Restitution of such as be deposed from their order.

The judicial definition or the interpretation of his own privileges.

Changing of Bishoprics: or demission of coventes.

New correction of Bioshps seats, or institution of new religions.

Subjection or division of a Bishopric under another.

Dispensation for vowing to go to the holy Land.

Dispensation for the vow of chastity, or of religion, or of holy orders.

Dispensation against a lawful oath, or vow made,

Dispensation against diverse irregularities, as in crimes greater then
adultery, and in such as be suspended in symony.

Dispensation in receaving into orders him that had two wives.

Dispensing with such as being with murders, that which is above their order,
as if a deacon should say Mass, being not Priest.

To receave unto orders such as be blamished or maimed in body.

Dispensation with marther, or with such as willingly cut off any member of
man's body.

Dispensation to give orders to such as have been under the sentence of the
great curse or excommunication.

Dispensation with such as being suspended, with the grea ter curse
doeminister in unholy order.

Dispensation with such as being unlawfully borne to receaveorder or benefices.

Dispensation for pluralities of benefices.

Dispensation to make a man Bishop, before he be 30. year old.

Dispensation to give orders under age.

The Pope has power to make and call a general council.

The Pope has only power to detriue an ecclesiastical person, and give away
his benefice being not vacant.

The Pope only is able to absolve him, who is excommunicat by name.

The Pope only is to absolve him, whom his Legate does excommunicat.

The Pope judges only in the causes of them, that appeall unto him, and where
he judges no mar must appeal from him.

Only he has authority to make Deacon Priest, whom he had made subdeacon
either upon Sundays, or upon other feasts.

Only the Pope and none else at all times, and in all places wears the Palle.

The Pope only dispensses with a man, either being not with murderers, or
being unworthy to be made Bishop.

He only either confirms or deposes the Emperor when he is chosen.

A man being excommunicat, and his absolution referred to the Pope, none may
absolve that man but the Pope alon

The same has authotitie in any election, before it be made to pronunce it non
when it is made.

He does Canonize Sancts, and none else but he.

Dispensation to how many dignities and personage in a Church, and without
charge and cure of the soul, belongs only to the Pope.

To make that effectual, which is of none effect, and contrarie-wayes
belongs only to the Pope.

To pluck out a Monk out of his cloister, both against his own will and the
Abbots, pertains only to the Pope. His sentence makes a law.

The same day in the which the Pope is consecrated, he may give orders.

He dispenses in degrees of consanguinity and affinity.

He is able to abolish laws, that is both civil and Canon, where danger is
of the soul.

It is in his dispensation to give indulgences general to certane places or
persons.

Item to legitimate what person soever he pleases, as touching spritualities,
in all places, as touching temporalities, as honors, inheritance.

To erect new religions, to approve or reprove rewles, ordinances, and
ceremonies in the Church.

Item to dispense and discharge and subject, from the band of alledgence, or
oath made to any manner of person.

No man may accuse him of any crime, unless of heresy, and that neither
except he be incorrigible.

The same is also free from all laws, so that he cannot incur into any
sentence of excommunication, suspension, irregularitie, or into penelty of any
crime, but into the note of cry me he may well.

Finally: He by his dispensation may grant, yeato a simple Priest, to minister
the sacraments of confirmation to infants, also to give lower orders, and to
hallow churches and Virgins.

These be the causes wherein I have power to dispense, and no man else, neither
Bishop, nor metrapolitan, nor legate, without license from me.

AFter that I now sufficiently declared my power in earth, in Heaven, and in
Purgatory, how great it is, and what is the fullness thereof, in binding, and
loosing, co^ma^ding, permitting, electing, co^firming, deposing dispe^sing
doing and undoing, I will entreat a little of my riches likewise, and great
possessions, that every man may see by my wealth, and abundance of all things,
rents, tyths, tribute, my silks, Purple myters, Crowns of gold and silver,
Pearls and gumes, lands and lordships, how God here prospers and magnifieth
his viccar in the earth: For to me pertains first the imperial city of
Rome, the Palace of Later an, the Kingdom of Cicile is proper to me, Aprilia
and Capua be mine, also the Kingdom of England and Ir land be they not
brought to be tributaries to me, 214. To these I admit also besides other
Provinces and countries, both in the occident and orient, from the North to the
South these dominions by name, and others more: 216. which Constantinus the
Emperor gave unto me, not that they were not mine of before, he did give
them. 217. For that I took them of him, I took them not as a gift, as is
aforementioned, but as restitution, and that I randred them again to Otho, I
did it not for my duty to him, but only for peace sake, what should I speak
here of my daily enemies, of my first fruits, annates, palles, indulgences,
Bulls, confessionals, indulgences and prescripts, testame^ts, dispensations,
privileges, elections, prebendes, religious houses, and such like, which came
to no small mass of money, in so much that for a palle to the Archbishop of
Mentz which was wont to be gotten for ten thousand 218 Florence, now is grown
to twenty seven thousand Florence which I received of Iacobus the Archbishop
not long before Basil counsel: besides the friuits of other Bishoprics in
Germany, coming to the number of fifty, whereby what advantage comes unto
my Coffers, it may partly be conjectured. But what shall I speak of Germany,
219. when the whole world is my dyocie, as my Cannonists do say, and all men
are bound to believe, 220. except they will imagine as the Maniches do two
beginnings which is false and heretical. Moses says. In the beginning GOD
made Heaven and earth, and not in the beginnings, 221. wherefore as I begin
so I conclude, commanding, declaring, and pronouncing, to stand upon the
necessity of salvation, for every humane creature to be subject to me.


