The art of Thriving. OR, The plain pathway to PREFERMENT. Together with The
Mystery and Misery of Lending and Borrowing. As also a Table of the expense of
Time and Money.

Consider it seriously. Examine it judiciously. Remember it punctually. And
thrive accordingly.
Published for the common good of all sorts, etc. by T. Powel.

LONDON, Printed by T. H. for Benjamin Fisher, and are to be sold at his shop
at the sign of the Talbot in Aldersgate street. 1635.

To the Reader.
THere is a method in all arts, and a mystery, but in none more then in the art
of thriving, being the very Center to which all the other arts do tend, and
for which they were invented. Magister artis venture, and what is that but
Thriving? Now in the study of this great art, you must make the world your
Liberary, and learn to read men as well as books: and yet not to discourage
you in the whole volume of this science, you are to turn over but three
leaves, only somewhat close writ, very hard to read, and when you are once
out, can hardly begin again: Times, Trades, and Debts, this is that screw of a
three fold twinding; for if you screw not your fortunes the right way, as it is
in all screwes, you may turn and work your heart out, remember but that first:
And let me tell you, Time is the hinge of all thriving, Trades are the doors
on which good hopes may turn, and stand long enough; if Debts those undermining
leavers of husbandry, fling not all off the hooks. Thus then think with your
self, to Time a business well, and to begin business in time, is the very
key to the door of preferment, and think the loss of a minute more dear than
the loss of a pound; for certainly of all expenses, the expense of Time ^s the
costliest: which, mindful reader, that thou may know now, learn to prize
and reckon ^hy time right: for as Seneca said ^o Lucilius, quem mihi dabis qui
aliquod pretium tempori ponat? qui diem estimet? qui intelligat se quotidie
mori: and therefore that made him say in the beginning of the same Epistle to
Lucilius, vindica te tibi, as if a man were to be revenged upon himself for
hasting his own death by ^osse of Time. Now therefore that thou may know how
to take and redeem thy Time. I have here set before thee, a table of each
minute of thy life, this is the first leaf, and now I pass to the next,
having not time to speak of Time.

2 All men are or would be rich; even the sluggard wishes, though he has not:
It Is easy indeed to covet the top of wit or preferment, but to get up the
hill, hic labor, hoc opus; there is a business indeed! the ways to thrive are
manifold, yet one good is worth all, and in effect is all: only all the Art is
finding and catching it: Could Archimedes but have found footing for his
Mathematical instrument, he would have done wonders.

Give me but footing where my self may stand,
From their fixed Base I Will hoyst both sea and land.
Boldly spoke, and bravely meant; and questionless, if you could have done the
one for him, he would have performed the other for you: Think not, thriftie
would be, that I by his example enjoin the impossibilities, or to build castles
in the air, but merely to show thee how out of nothing to produce something,
and thus I apply it. Could a young man once take hold or settling in preferment,
where he may but fix the instrument of his hopes, then may he easily drive the
world before him, and so mount up to wealth. Now who is able to level to a
beginner the shortest cut, or score him the very way to thrive, if he either
stand in his own light through wilfulness, or cut the throat as it were of
all his hopes, through despair of better; the fool thus concluding with
himself, He that is borne under a three-penny Planet, shall never be worth a
groat. To him, and to him I dedicate not. What should I talk to such of
Promotion? But to a forward spirit, and a manly heart, prepared for industry,
and resolved to stand to his curse in Paradise, I commend this my Grammar of
Trades. Nor think hopeful Reader I have prefixed a specious title to make the
sale more oily, I would I were dead if I care whether you buy or burn it,
only I would have thee read and be wise, labor and be rich.

The old Paradox is witry and true. Quisque suae fortunae, faber. Every man
sits at the very Anvile and forge of his own Fortune-making: now then if you
can see to strike the Iron, while it is hot, that is, while time and the hand
of Providence hold forth the opportunity, you may make your trade, but if you
linger till it be cold, it will cost you another Heat. Experto mihi credit.
Now therefore that no man may over-slip his Fortunes, or be pusled for want of
light, to see when it is offered, or to conduct him forward, when it is found,
Lo here a Torch held out before him, pointing the plain high way to
preferment, in all Professions, Trades, and Arts, found out by an old traveller
in the Sea of Experience, Longis erroribus actus, qui mores Hominum, etc. who
now stands after all his folly, and ruins, a Land-marke, to the general good
of others.

To the Father and his sons, to the Mother and every Mothers child, to the
Scholar, the Apprentice, the Navigator, the Husbandman, the Courtier, and the
Soldier, whether in hopes or in despair, standing, rising, or falling, I
bequeath this my Legacy, my Looking-glass to promotion, my Grammar of Trades.

3 And since in the voyage to Promotion, Lending is the Rock, and Borrowing is
the Gulf, I have discovered them both in the end, lest your tender endeavors
should tare against the one, or be swallowed up in the other. Farewell, and
where you see me, if you mean to Thrive, look to your self.

Thine living and dead, T. Powel.

The art of Thriving. The Contents.
1 AN Introduction to the following discourse with the occasion. 1 Direction
for a Scholar in his Education, Maintenance, and advancement in his minority.
2 In the University. 3 In the Ministry. 4 In Benefices abroad.
2 Promotions following by Law. 1 Civil. 2 Common.
3 For the Physician, and his means of Advancement. 4 The Apprentice with the
due Election of Trades, and following of Merchandise. 5 The Navigator his way
of Advancement and employment. 6 The Husbandman. 7 The Courtier. 8 The
Soldier. 1 By Sea. 2 By Land.
Directions for matching of daughters.
The Mystery, etc. Contents.
1 The scope of the following Treatise, first of the Borrower, secondly of the
Lender. 2 1 The Courtiers Method. 2 The Innes of Court man. 3 The Country
Gentleman.
3 Their several causes of Insolency. 4 The sundry ways and weapons wherewith
they fence with their Creditors. 1 The Innes of Court man's. 2 The Country
Gentleman. 3 The City borrower. 4 Their noted places of refuge. 5 Their days
of Iubile and privilege.
5 The marks of a Conscious debtor, with the discipline of the Mace. 6 The
Lenders or Creditors part. 1 The charitable extent of the Creditors courtesy. 2
The reasons thereof. 3 The mystery of Multiplication.
7 1 Certain signs fore-running and fore-shewing the Wonderful Crack. 2 The
Recovery. 3 A voyage to two new Plantations.

The art of Thriving: OR, The plain Pathway to Preferment.
TRINITY Term was now ended; For by description of the time it could be no
other parcel of the year. In that the Scriveners at Temple-barrr, had no
employment, but writing of blanke Bonds, and texting of Bills, for letting of
Chambers in Chancery Lane. The Vintners of Fleet Street discharged their
Iourney-men; A general humility more than usual possessed the Cookery of Ram
Alley. The Ostlers of Holborne had more than ordinary care to lay up their
Guests boots, rather for fear of their slipping out of Town, than for any
good observance toward them. And your Country Attorneyes would no longer by
any means endure the unwholesome air of an Eight-penny Ordinary. Every one that
had wherewith to discharge his Horse out of the stable, strove who should first
be gone. And amongst the rest, my self made shift for so much money as
wherewith to abate the fury of Mistrisse Overcount mine hostess, and so I
departed likewise.

At the top of Highgate hill I overtooke a Gentleman of Northamptonshire,
riding homeward, whom I well knew; Him I saluted cheerfully, and he received
me lovingly. But in traveling together (Me thought) he was not Master of that
mirthful disposition which he was wont to carry along with him to shorten the
way betwixt his house and London, I gave him to understand, how strange, and
notable this alteration appeared in him; And withal desired to know so much of
the occasion thereof as might be impartible to a friend of so small growth. To
which he answered thus; Sir, I come from London, (it is true) from the Term
(It is certain true) from London and Term, True and certain in nothing but
expenses in all things, yet I would have you know, that it is neither the
Thunderclap of dissolving an Iniunction, nor the Doomesday of a Decree, nor
Councellers Fees, nor Attorneys Bills in a language able to fright a man out of
his wits, can proscribe me my wonted mirth. It is something nearer and dearer
(my dear friend) that robs me of that cheer which used to lift me up into the
very Sphere, where Jove himself sits to bid al his guests welcome right
heartily.

I remember me of Children, six Sons, and three Daughters, of whom I am the
unhappy Father. In that, besides the scars which my unthriftinesse has dinted
upon their fortunes the wounds of unequal times, and a tempestuous age
approaching are like to take away from them all hope of out-living the low water
ebb of the evil day all means of thriving by honest pains, study or
industry are bereft them. The Common upon which industry should depasture is
overlaid, Numerousnesse spoils all, and poverty sels all at an under value.

In this case (Sir) what can be advised? Whereunto I thus replied.

Sir, I have heedfully attended you in the delivery of your perplexed thoughts,
concerning the care which you have of your children, taking the true, and even
level of the declention of arts, the distent of trades, and trading, the
poverty of all professions, and the distemper, not of ours only, but of all
Christian clymates at this present, tending rather to a more contagion in the
general air, then a calmer temperament (for ought that yet appears) as for
the storminesse of the sea of state foreign or domesticke, let us leave the
greater, and lesser vessels that be exposed to it, unto the proper Pylates,
Masters, and Mariners, who have the charge to attend the line, or plye at the
tackle, we are but poor passengers, and may assure our selves to partake in
their boon voyage, if they succeed well, as they may be certain to suffer in
the same Shipwreck with us, if we miscarry. I address me to give you the best
advise I can touching the preferment of your six sons and three daughters,
in manner following.

It is true in most Gentlemen, and very likely in you, as in others, living
only upon the revenue of lands. That the height of their Husbandry amounts to
no more than to clear the last half years booking, and borrowing at the rent
day. That their credit may hold up and keep reputation till the next ensuing
that again.

When you dye, the eldest Son claims the inheritance of what you leave, thank
God, and nature for it, your self least of all, and your fatherly providence
never a whit.

If you take some course in your life time to make the rest of your Children
some small portions or estates out of the whole of your lands. It is ten to
one but you destroy both him, and them by that means.

For the heir commonly striving to uphold the reputation of his Ancestors, He
abates nothing of his fathers accustomed expenses toward the raising of those
portions or estates so deducted. And they on the other side, presume so much
upon the hope thereof, that no profession will fit them. To be a Minister (with
them) is to be but a Pedant. A Lawyer, a mercenarie fellow. A Shopkeeper, a
man most subject to the most wonderful Crack, and a creature whose welfare
depends much upon his Wives well bearing, and fair carrriage. What is then to
be done?

Surely it would be wished, seeing God and nature has provided for the eldest,
your younger sons, and your daughters; especially, being worst able to shift,
should be by you provided for in the first place, while your Land is of virgin
reputation, while it is chaste, and undishonested by committing of single
fornication with Country Creditors, that trade without sheets (that is) by Pole
deed, only for saving of costs; or at least, before it have defiled the bed of
its reputation by prostituting to the adulterous imbracings of a City
Scrivener: But especially, before it grow so impudent, as to lie down in the
Market place, and to suffer every petty Clarke to bring its good name upon
Record, and charge it that it was taken in the very fact between other men's
sheets. As in this Statute, or in that Judgment: Take heed of that by any
means. And be sure to match your eldest son, when your credit is cried up to
the highest, while your heir is yet in your power to dispose, and will bend to
your will, before his blood begin to feel the heat of any affections kindling
about him, or before he can tell what difference is betwixt a black wrought
Wastcoate, with a white apron and a loose bodied gown without an apron. Put
him off in his best clothes (I mean) in the assurance of your lands, sell him
at the highest rate. Then dicotomize the whole portion of his wife into
several shares betwixt your other children. Not share and share like, but to
every each one the more according to their defects: Let impotencie,
decreptnesse, ill favourdnesse and incapacitie, rob the other of so much money
as they have done them of comeliness, activity, beauty, and wit.

Put them not into any course of living according to any prescript order, or
method of your own election. But according to their inclination and addition,
seeing that every one by instinct of nature, delights in that wherein he is
like to be most excellent. And delight, and pride in any thing undertaken,
makes all obstacles in the way of attaining to perfection of no difficulty.

Now in the next place take heed that you put off those your sons whom you
find fit and addicted to be bred in the Ministry, or made up to the law, or
to be apprentized betimes, and before they take the taynt of too much liberty
at home.

And when they be put forth, call them not home speedily to revisit their
fathers house, no not so much as Hospitably by any means.

In the first place take your direction for the SCHOLAR.
His Education. His Maintenance. His Advancement.
FOr his Education. The Free-Schooles generally afford the best breeding in
good letters.

So many of them also afford some reasonable means in aid of young Scholars,
for their diet, lodging, and teaching, given to them by the Founders or
Benefactors of such Schools.

Some of them be of the foundation of some Kings and Queens of this Land, and
they are commonly in the gift of the King, or his Provost, or Substitute in
that behalf. Others be of the foundation of some Bodies or Societies
incorporate. And they are commonly in the gift of such Masters, Wardens,
Presidents, and their Senior fellows, such chief officers of any other title,
or such Master Wardens, and Assistants, or such Opposers, Visitants, or
Committees of such bodies respectively as be appointed thereunto. Others be of
the foundation of some private persons: And they are for the most part in the
gift of the Executor, Heir, or Feoffees of such Donor, according to the
purport of his Will, or Grant, or both.

Of every of which several kinds respectively are: Eaton. Westminster.
Winchester. The Merchantaylors School London. The Skynners at Tunbridge.
Suttons Hospital. St. Bartholomews. And very many other the like.


Briefly, few or no Counties of this Kingdom are unfurnisht of such Schools.
And some have so many, that it is disputable whether the Universities with the
Innes of Court, and Chancerie have where to receive them or no.

Some of such free-Schooles again, have Schollerships appendant unto them, in
one of the Universities or both.

To which upon Election yearly, they are removeable, As,

From Eaton, to Kings College Cambridge. From Westminster, to Trinity College
Cambridge, or Christ-Church Oxon: From Winchester, to New College Oxon. From
the Merchantaylors, to St. John's Oxon. And the like, from many the like.
Some other Free-Schooles have pensions for preferment of their Scholars, and
for their maintenance in the University.

Some Companies Incorporate (especially of London,) having no such pensions in
certain, do usually out of the Stock of their Hall allow maintenance in this
kind.

Besides that, there be many other private persons (upon my knowledge) who do
voluntarily allow yearly exhibition of this nature.

Now if you would know how to find what is given to any such Free-Schooles,
and in whose disposing they now be.

Search

In the Tower of London, till the end of Rich. the 3.

For Grants and for License of Mortmaine, inde.

And in the Chapel of the Rolls.

From thence till the present,

And for the like.

In the Register of the Prerogative Court, for such things devised by Will, by
King, Queen, or Subject,

For such Grants given by Will.

And sometimes you shall find such things both in the Tower, and the
Prerogative, and in the Rolls, and Prerogative respectively.

For the time since our reformed Church of England began here.

Search

Doctor Willets Synopsis,

For all from the King, or from any other.

Search

In diverse of our Chronicles For the like.

Next add certain helps for discovery and attaining thereof.
FIrst (if it may be) procure a sight of the Liedger Books, of such as in whom
the disposition of such things rests, which they keep for their own use.

Next be acquainted with some of the Disposers themselves.

Next take the directions of the Master or Teacher of such Free-Schooles.

Especially, to be interessed in the Clerks or Registers of such Societies as
have the disposing of any such things.

Also to use means by Letters of persons powerful, and useful to such
disposers.

For (indeed) it is not the sound of a great man's name to a Letter in these
days, wherein they are grown so common, and familiar to our Societies (of
London especially) can prevail so soon as the Letter subscribed by the Lord
Mayor, or other eminent Officer of the City, to whose commandment they be
immediately subjugate.

Lastly, if you use the means least seen, most used, and best allowed,
together with these: For discovery and attaining of any such thing, it will not
be besides the purpose as I take it.

Now suppose your son is brought to the University by Election, or as
Pensioner.
THe first thing you must take to your care is. In case he come not by
election, but as a Pensioner, to live for the present upon your own charge,
how to procure him a Schollership in the College where you bestow him.

Or in case he come elected into one, how to procure a farther addition of
maintenance to him.

To bring him into a Schollership, place him with a Senior fellow of the house
(as Tutor) though you allow to some Iunion fellow somewhat yearly for reading
unto him.

This Senior fellow if the number of places void will bear it, may nominate
your son for one in his own right, if it will not bear it, he may call to
his aid some and so many suffrages of the rest as with the speaking merit of
your son may work your desire.

Then how to procure a pension for addytament of means.

The chief skill is to find it out, being either in the gift of some body
Incorporate, or of some private person. Wherein the discovery is to be made (as
aforesaid.)

If you sue to a Company consisting of many persons Tradesmen, you must enquire
who be the most potent Patritians, and best reputed Vestrie wits amongst them,
such as carry their gloves in their hands, not on their hands.

Amongst an Assistance of many, only two or three strike the stroke, and hold
the rest in a wonderful admiration of their extraordinary endowments. And how
to speak sensibly to these two or three is no Mystery. You know they are
faithful fiduciaries in the election. And therefore, you must not presume to
offer any thing by any means. Only you may desire them to accept this poor
piece of plate, with your name and Arms upon it, and bind you unto their
love, in keeping the memory of you hereafter. Do but try them in this kind,
and attend the success. I tell you, this with a Bucke at the Renter Wardens
feast, may come somewhat near to the matter.

But for the pension to be obtained of a private person, the way is not the
same. It proceeds of the givers mere charity, and must be taken by the hand
of a desertfull receiver. Though withal it may sometimes fall out, that merit
is made by mediation, especially of some such reverend Divine, as he does most
respect and frequent. For other, letters can little prevail with such persons.

The best note to discover a man inclinable to allow such a pension, is to
examine how wealth and charity are equally and temperately mingled in him. And
be sure withal that he be a man of some reasonable understanding in what he
does in this kind. For a fools pension is like a new fashion eagerly pursued
at the beginning, but as scurvily left off in the proceeding.

Your next care is, in his due time to put on a fellowship, when he shall put
off his Schollership, seeing the Schollership keeps him company no farther
than to the degree of Master of Arts, and a quarter of a year after, in those
Colleges, where Schollerships are longest lived. And in some not so long.

In some Colleges, The Fellowship follows the Schollership of course, and as
the one leaves him, the other entertaines him. But in the most it is not so,
but comes by Election. Which Election passes by the Master and Senior
Fellows, whereof every one does name one, if the number to be Elected will
bear it: or if not, then they pass by most voices.

Where note, that the Master has a double voice, and in some places he has
the nomination of one, if there be two places void, yea if there be but one at
sometimes.

In Colleges the letters of great persons, especially of the Lords grace of
Canterbury, and the University Chancellor have been of great prevailance. But
it is not so now in these days.

There be beneficial gradations of preferment likewise, for Fellows in their
Colleges; as Lecturer, Deane, Bowser, Vice-master, and Master. But for my
part, I better like and commend those who when they find themselves fit to put
forth into the world, take the first preferment that is offered unto them,
rather than such who live cloystered like Votaries: who have Sacraments to fill
up their places be it but to keep out others, such as use no exercise, but
wiping the dust off their books, and have an excellent activity in handling
the fox tail, such as hold no honor like to Supplicat reverentijs vestris.
And to be had Bowser of the College, as good as to be Chief Butler of England.

These preferments of the College all but that of the Master comes of course
by order, and antiquity. Therefore no means but patient abiding needs for the
acquiring of them in their due time.

I hasten to send your son out of the Cloister into the Commonwealth, and to
show you how many ways of Advancement are open unto him abroad, with the
means to discover, and attain.

And first for the Ministry.
FIrst for his ease, let him look no farther than next to hand, and enquire
what benefices belong to their own College, and are in the gift of their
Master and Senior fellows (as most Colleges have diverse such) and amongst them
which are void at the present, or whose incumbent is not like to live long. And
if he find out any such; than if he know not after so long continuance among
them to speak in his Seniors own Dialect, let him never travail beyond
Trumpington for me.

More indigitly, For attaining of such a Benefice, let him enquire where the
Mattens are read with Spectacles, or where the good old man is lifted up into
the Pulpit, or the like, and make a way for Succession accordingly.

Where note, that many times a fellow of the house may hold such a Benefice
together with his fellowship, or a Pension for increment of livelihood. And
such ties as these, are commonly the bond of matrimony whereby they are so
wedded to the College.

Next, he must climb up to the maine top of Speculation, and there look about
him to discover what Benefices are empty abroad where the Incumbent lives
only upon the Alms of Confectio Alchermi: Or where one is ready to take his
rise out of Sierge into Satin, out of Parsonadge and a Prebendarie, into a
Deanarie and a Donative, let him not be slow of footmanship in that case by any
means.

For Benefices abroad.
Benefices abroad are in the gift of

The King immediately.

Or the Lord Keeper for the King.

Some Lord Bishop, Some Deane and Chapter: Some Body incorporate: Some Parish:
Some Private Patron:
You shall find in the Tower a collection of the Patent Rolls gathered of all
Presentations made by the King in those days to any Church Prebendarie or
Chapel. In right of the Crown or otherwise from 1. of Edward the first,
till the midst of Edward the third.

The King himself only and immediately presented in his own right to such
Benefices as belong to him, and are above twenty pounds value in the first
Fruit Books.

For attayning of any which I can advise you of no better course, than to
learn the way to the back stayres.

The Lord Keeper presents for the King to all such benefifices as belong to his
Majesty, and are under twenty pounds value in the books.

Now to know which of these are full, and who are Incumbents in any of these.

Search,

The first Fruits Office.

The Clarke, who has the writing of the Presentations.

The Lord Keepers Secretary being.

Where note that the King has used very seldom to grant any such living in
Reversion.

And the Lord Keeper now being. His care is so great in this, as in all cases
of common good to provide for man's merit, and cherish industry in the growing
plants, that no one can offer unto him a request of this kind, without
trespass to his good disposition.

In the next place concerning Benefices in the Presentation of any of the Lords
Bishops.

Note that most Bishoprics in England, have presentation to diverse Benefices
belonging to their Seas.

For the number and present estate of these.

Search

Their own Leidgers.

Their Registers.

Enquire of

Their Auditors.

Their Stewards of their Courts.

And sometimes you shall light upon some of their books of this kind, in the
hands of the heirs or Executors of such as have borne such offices under them.

He that is Chaplain to such a Lord Bishop, has for the most part the best
means, access, and opportunity, to attain to such a Benefice.

The commendations of such a great personage as to whom this Patron owes
greatest respect, especially for his affairing in Court, may do some good in
the matter.

The like ways of discovery, and the like means of attaining any Benefice in
the Presentation of any Deane, and Chapter, are to be used with them
respectively, as with the Bishops.

With every Deane and Chapter, are likewise diverse Prebendaries to be obtained
of their gift after the same manner, and by the same means also.

The other bodies Incorporate, besides those of Colleges, and Deanes and
Chapters have many of them especially of London, and some subordinate Societies
thereof) right of the presentation to diverse Benefices.

Also some Parishes by prescription do present to their own perochiall
Benefices. And many Patrons are content to present, according to the
approbation of the Parishioners upon their hearing, and allowing, and due
exclamation of the integrity of the life of such suitors, and no otherwise,
diverse governors, and gradations of the lands of diverse Hospitals, and Mesons
de dien have like right of presentation to Benefices, as have other bodies
Incorporate. And the means of discovery and attaining are likewise the like.

In Parishes, and Companies of Tradesmen Incorporate, some very few rule the
roast.

Your Alderman of the Ward his Deputy, your Common Councell-man. Yea sometime
that petty Epitomie of Warde-mote Enquerst, that little busy morsel of
Justice (the Beadle of the Ward) will make a strong party in the election, if
he be put to it. The Probotory Sermon, that must be made upon such trial
before such an Auditorie, would be according to the capacity in general. But
more especially, according to the humor and addiction of those whose wits the
rest have in singular reverence. As Mr. Francis Fiat, a good understanding
Fishmonger (I assure you) you may give the style of right worshipful to them,
though the best man of the company be but a Wine Cooper, and his judgment
better in Claret, than in Concioclerum a great deal.

If your son upon his trial can but fit their pallats smoothly which is hard
to do; In regard that they are so hollow mouthed, let him be sure though he
miss the Benefice for want of preperation, yet ten to one but they will
strain themselves, to bring him in as a Lecturer, which is a thing they
reverence far beyond the Person of the Parish by many degrees.

Lastly, to private Patrons, and the Benefices in their gifts;

Search,

The Bishops Register: for Institution, and Presentation.

The Archdeacons Register: for Induction.

The Archbishops Register: if it be a peculiar.

It was my chance lately to see a book of all the Benefices within the
Diocese of Canterbury, with the manner of their tything in every each one
respectively. In which I find, that there are, or should be with the Register
of every Lord Bishop seven Books kept for Entry of the matters, and business
of their Diocese, of which this of Benefice in the chief.

The like I saw formerly of the Diocese of St. David's, which confirms me in
the institution, and custom of keeping the said books also in other Diocese.

And seeing that several private patrons are of several dispositions, some
more Lucrative and Covetous: Others more charitable, and religious, I can give
you no other rule of attaining the Benefice than this, viz.

That your son bring with him ability of learning, Integrity of life, and
conformity of behavior, according to the order of the Church established
amongst us, and these shall make his way, with the good and generous Patron.
But for the other patron it makes no matter at all for learning, and a very
little for manners, or whether he be a man conformable or no. Truly he is
indifferent, for his part very indifferent.

To such a Patron your son must present himself: thus (if he mean to be
presented) according to present necessity. He must both speak and prove
himself a man endued with good gifts. For he shall have to deal with a Patron
of a quick Capacity, more dexterous in apprehension than your son or you can
be in delivery.

Be this Patron what he will, your comfort is, the Benefice must be filled, and
that within a limited time, howsoever it is dangerous to attend the ending of
the day in this case, (For seldom does the Clarke of the market get any thing
by their standing too long and above their accustomed hour.)

Lapse by reason of Simony, and Lapse for not presenting, in due time, Both
offer advancement to learning. But the first is at hand to discover as a witch:
And the second as rare to find out as a faithful fiduciarie or a fast Friend.

The degrees of rising in the Ministry are not easier known than practiced by
the industrious man.

Briefly if all Church livings in England were equally distributed, There is no
one of the Ministry if he want not learning, or good manners, needs want
maintenance, or good Livelihood.

Here I could wish to God; That it might please the right reverend Fathers of
the Church the Lord Bishops, That they would once in every of their times cause
a true Catalogue of all the Benefices within their several Diocese with the
names of the patrons thereof according to the last presentation to be sent into
the office of the first fruits for the better information of al such as
deserve, and would gladly attain to some means of maintenance, which they may
the better do by having recourse thither, there to take notice of all things
of this nature. For I know that many sit down in their wants, having good
means to many private Patrons, only for lack of knowledge of the same.

Note that it is an usual thing in private Patrons to grant reversion, and
Advowson of such livings.

My self intended heretofore to collect all such Benefices with their Patrons,
into a certain Callender for such direction (as aforesaid) and made some
passage into it. But the farther I went, the more impossible I found it. And I
am now resolved that without the Bishops assistance it cannot be done.

And so much for the Ministry.

The Laws promotions follow BY Civil Law, and Common Law.
FOr breeding of your youth in the Civil Law, there are two Colleges of
especial note in our Universities: the one is Trinity-hall in Cambridge; the
other is New-Colledge in Oxford.

I remember me not of any Free-Schoole in England, that have any place
appendant in Trinitie-Hall in Cambridge. But in new College of Oxford, the
Free-Schoole of Winchester, has claim both of Schollerships, and Fellowships;
the whole College consisting of none other, as I take it.

It is to be confessed, the charge of breeding a man to the Civil Law, is more
expensive, and the way more painful, and the books of greater number, and
price than the Common Law requires. But after the Civil Lawyer is once grown
to Maturity. His way of Advancement is more beneficial, more certain, and
more easy to attain, than is the Common Lawyers, and all because their number
is less, their learning more intricate. And they admit few or no Sollicitors
to trample between them and the Clyent. So that the Fee comes to them
immediately, and with the more advantage.

The Preferments at which they arrive, are these:
Chancellor to the Bishop. Archdeacon. Commissarie, where they have
Commissarie. Official. Judge, and Surrogate. Advocate for the King. Mr. of the
Chancerie. The Kings Proctor. Advocate, and Proctor at large. In these Courts,
viz. The High Commission. The Delegates. The Prerogative. The Consistory. The
Arches. The Bishops Courts. The Archdeacons Courts. Chancellors, Commissaries
and Officials Courts. The Admiraltie Courts. The Court of the Kings Requests.
In times past.

The countenance of some Bishop, especially of the L. Archbishop upon a
Civilian, will much advance his practice as an Advocate, and give him promotion
as a Judge.

There are under the greater Officers aforenamed, diverse other inferior
Officers: as

Register. Arctuarie. Examiner.
The number of the Doctors (though I find them never to have been limited,)
Yet it is certain that the time was within memory of man, when the house of
their Commons did commonly give them all sufficient lodging, and diet. And as
for the number of Proctors, they were of late times limited. How it is now I
know not.

For the Common Law.
FOr breeding of Students at the Common Law, take directions for their method
of study out of that Tractate which Mr. Justice Dodridge did in his time pen
for the purpose. Only (for my part) I do much commend the ancient custom of
breeding of the younger Students. First, in the Innes of Chancery; there to be
the better prepared for the Innes of Court. And this must needs be the better
way, seeing too much liberty at the first proves very fatal, to many of the
younger sort. I have observed, and much commend also the breeding of some
Common Lawyers in this kind, viz.

That when they have been admitted first into an Inn of the Chancery, they
have been withal entered as Clerks in the office of some Prothonotarie of the
Common Pleas to add the skill of the Practicke to their speculation. And if a
Student be thus bred, by his foundation in the one, and his experience in the
other, he shall with more facility than others, who step into the Inn of
Court at first, attain to an ability of practice.

Besides other ordinary requisite parts and Arts in a Common Lawyer. Skill in
the Records of all Courts of Record, and in other antiquities of President.
With some Reading in the Civil Law, also will much enable him.

The Common Lawyer is to be bred only upon the purse. The charge most at the
first. For after he has spent some few years effectually, he may attain to
the employment of some private friends, for advising with, and instructing of
greater Counsel, whereby he shall add both to his means, and knowledge.

It is true, that I have known some Attorneyes and Sollicitors, put on a
Counsailors gown, without treading the same usual path to the bar (as
aforesaid.) But indeed, I never look upon them, but I think of the Tailor,
who in one of his Customers cast suits had thrust himself in amongst the
Nobility at a Court Mask, where pulling out his Handkercher, he let fall his
Thimble, and was so discovered, and handled, and dandled from hand to foot,
till the Guard delivered him at the great Chamber door, and cried, farewell
good feeble.

If the Common Lawyer be sufficiently able in his profession, he shall want no
practice, if no practice no profit.

The time was that the younger Counsel had some such help, as

To be a Favorite. A kindred. To marry a Niece, Cousin, or a Chambermaid.
But those days be past, and better supply their rooms.

As fellows of Colleges in the Universities get Pensions, or Benefices, to
add to their lively hood: So Barresters and Counsailors of the Innes of Court,
advance their means by keeping of

Courts of Manors. Leets, and Barrons: Swannimootes of Forests. Stannaries.
Cinque Ports, etc.
By places of

Judges of Inferior Courts. As London, and other like Corporations. The Virdg.
The Tower of London. St. Katherines near the Tower. Borough of Southwarke. The
Clinke. Wentwort and like Liberties.
By office of

Recorder of some Corporate Town. Feodarie of some Counties: The Kings
Counsel in the Marches of Wales, or at York, or Judge, or Counsel of some
County Pallatine:
The greater places of preferment for Common Lawyers are

The Judges at Westminster, and elsewhere:

The next, are all the several

Officers of the Courts of Westminster and elsewhere:

All which you shall find set forth briefly in Smiths Commonwealth of England,
and part in mine own Search of Records. And all these, together afford
sufficient maintenance for thousands of persons who may be here well provided
for.

Here I should and here I could for better direction of younger brothers, show
what meniall Clarkeships of large exhibition, are under the great Officers of
the Land, the Judges, the Kings Counsel, and other Officers which are not
elsewhere published. And I know it would open a door to many a proper man's
preferment especially; under the Lord Keeper: as Secretaries for Chancery
business, and Spiritual promotions the Commission of the Peace, Injunctions,
the Dockquets. And other the like under the Lord Treasurer, as Secretaries for
the business of the Realm, and the Custom House besides the Inlets to so
many preferments about the Customs, and Escheators: places, under the Lord
Treasurer, under the Chancellor of the Exchequer Duchy, and Principality of
Wales, and Duchy of Cornwall, as Seal keeper, Secretary, etc.

Under the Master of the Court of Wards, as Secretary; under the Judges, as
Marshall, Clarke of the Bailes, etc. Under the Barons of the Exchequer, as
Examiner; Clarke of the Bailes and other Clerks.

Under the Kings Attorney General, as Clarke of the Pattens, Clarke of the
Confessions and entries, Clarke of the References, Book bearer. Under the
Solicitor General, Clarke of the Patents, Book bearer. Besides many other
Clerks under the white staves of the Court, and in the Counting house, and
many several offices. Al which with hundreds more that I could name, with a
plainer and more large deduction, were it not for fear that what I well intend
for general good, would be taken in offense for private prejudice. But for the
Clarkeship of the Kings household, examine farther the Black book in the
Exchequer.

The Physician follows.
ANd here I remember me of an old tale following, viz.

At the beginning of the happy reign of our late good Queen Elizabeth, diverse
Commissioners of great place being authorized to enquire of, and to displace
all such of the Clergy as would not conform to the reformed Church, one
amongst others was Convented before them, who being asked whether he would
subscribe or no, denied it, and so consequently was adjudged to lose his
benefice, and to be deprived his function, whereupon in his impatience he said;

That if they (meaning the Commissioners) held the course it would cost many a
man's life. For which the Commissioners called him back again, and charged him
that he had spoke treasonable, and seditious words tending to the raising of a
rebellion, or some tumult in the Land, for which he should receive the reward
of a Traitor. And being asked whether he spoke those words or no, he
acknowledged it, and took upon him the Justification thereof; for said he, ye
have taken from me my living, and profession of the Ministry, Schollership is
all my portion, and I have no other means now left for my maintenance, but to
turn Physician, and before I shall be absolute Master of that Mystery (God he
knows) how many men's lives it will cost. For few Physicians use to try
experiments upon their own bodies.

With us it is a Profession can maintain but a few. And diverse of those more
indebted to opinion, than learning, and (for the most part) better qualified in
discoursing their travailes, than in discerning their Patients maladies. For it
is grown to be a very huswives trade, where fortune prevails more than skill.
Their best benefactor the Neapolitan, Their grand Seignieur. The Sorpego, their
Gonfollinere. The Sciaticke, their great Marshall that calls the Muster Roll
of them all together at every Spring and Fall, are all as familiar to her as
the Cuckoo at Cank-wood in May. And the cure of them is the skill of every good
old Ladies cast Gentlewoman, when she gives over painting, she falls to
plastering, and shall have as good practice as the best of them, for those
kind of diseases.

Marry for Women's griefs amongst Physicians, the Masculine is more worthy than
the Feminine.

Secrecy is the chief skill, and virility the best learning that is required
in a Woman's Physician. But I never read of many of those to be long lived, or
honestly wived hitherto in all my reading.

Hitherto I speak nothing in disrepute of the more reverend, and learned sort
of Physicians, who are to be had in singular reverence, and be useful to
mankind next to the Divine. Indeed, I rather pity them, and pitying smile to
see how prettily these young gamesters Male and Female lay about them, and
engrosse the greater part of Patientrie in all places wheresoever.

And here I may more fitly say (God knows) how many men's lives this abused
opinion had of such Gamesters costs. Because they be not Masters of that
Mystery, and that science which requires the Greek tongue, exactly, all the
learning, and skill of Philosophy, History of all sorts (especially natural)
knowledge of all vegetatives and Minerals, and whatsoever dwells within the
four elements. Also skill in Astronomy, Astrology. And so much of the
Judicials upon all manner of Calculations as may be well warranted with much
other kind of learning, art and skill, whereof my young travailing Physician,
and trading waiting woman never heard.

Their means of Advancement are in these ways, viz.
To be Physician of some College in one of the Universities, (as diverse
Colleges have such places)

Physician to the King or Queens person.

Physician to either of their households.

Or to some Hospital, (as most have such.)

Or to some great persons, who may prefer them hereafter, and be somewhat
helpful in the mean time.

To a good old Usurer, or one that has got his great estate together
unconscionably: For they fear nothing but death, and will buy life at any rate:
There is no coward to an ill Conscience.

It is not amiss, to make way of acquaintance with Gallants given, to deep
drinking, and surfeiting: For they are patients at all times of the year.

Or, a Gentlewoman that would feign use the means to be pregnant.

Or, your Lascivious Lady, and your man in the Perriwig will help to furnish
with a foot-cloth.

A Citizens wife of a weak stomach, will supply the fringe to it.

And if all fail. And the Bathe will afford no room: Let them find out some
strange water, some unheard of Spring. It is an easy matter to discolor or
alter the taste of it in some measure, (it makes no matter how little.) Report
strange cures that it has done. Beget a Superstitious opinion in it.
Goodfellowship shall uphold it. And the neighboring Towns shall all swear
for it.

The Apprentice follows.
THe first question is, to what Trade you will put your Son, and which is
most worthy of choice.

For the Merchant it requires great stock, great experience in Foreign
estates. And great hazard, and adventure at the best.

And this is not all. For it depends upon the Peace of our State with foreign
Princes, especially those with whom we hold mutual traffic, Or, who lie in
our way to intercept, or impediment our Trade abroad. Besides that, in time of
War they can hold no certainty of dealing, or supplying their Factory in
parts beyond the Seas. Shipping is subject ever at the let go, to be stayed.
Mariners to be pressed, and many other inconveniences attend them in such times.
Besides the burden of Custom and Imposition which all States impose more or
less. So that unless we have peace with such Neighbors, there is little hope
in that profession in the ordinary and lawful way of trading.

Happily you will allege that some Merchants thrive well enough, when the
wars most rage, and when the stream of State is most troubled. Some then
hold it to be the best fishing; they that gain then (Sir) if they gain
justifiably: gain not as Merchants, but as men of War, which occupation a
man may learn without serving seven years apprentiship unto it.

And if they gain justifiably as Merchants, it must be in some general stock
of a Society incorporated, who have purse to pass to and fro with sufficient
power, in the most dangerous times. And if such Societies are tolerable at any
time; it is at such times. How they be otherwise allowable, I leave to
consideration.

For the Shopkeeper, his welfare for the most part, depends upon the prosperity
of the Merchant. For if the Merchant sit still, the most of them may shut up
their Shop windows. Little Skill, Art, or Mystery, shall a man learn in
Shop-keeping. A man shall never in foreign parts, being put to his shifts out
of his own Meridian, live by the skill of weighing and measuring. The most use
of advantage he can make of it, is to benefit between the Mart and the Market,
than which nothing is more uncertain, seeing there is no true judicial of the
falling, and rising of commodities. And the casualties that they are subject
unto, especially) in time of War.

Take this for a general rule, that those Trades which ask most with an
Apprentice, are incertainest of thriving, and require greatest stocks of
setting up. Amongst Trades, give me those that have in them some Art, Craft, or
Science, by which a man may live, and be a welcome guest to all Countries
abroad, and have employment in the most stormy times at home, when Merchants
and Shopkeepers are out of use: (as,) An Apothecarie. A Druggist. A
Surgeon. A Lapidarie. A Ieweller. A Printer. An Ingraver in stones and
metal. One that has skill in seasoning of shipwood. A Carpenter of all sorts,
especially of shipping. A Smith of all sorts, especially of Clockes, Watches,
Guns, etc. A Planter, and Gardner of all sorts. An Enginere for making of
Patars, and the like Engines of War. And Hot Presses for cloth, etc. And
Engines to weigh any Ship, or Guns that are drowned, etc. Skrues, etc. A maker
of all sorts of Instruments, for Navigation, Co^passes, Globes, Astrolabes. A
Drainer of grounds Surmounded. A Sale-maker, and A maker of Cordage, Tackle,
etc. A Lymner. A Clothier, a Clothworker, and a Dyer. A Tailor, Shoemaker,
Glover, Perfumer, and trimmer of gloves An Imbroyderer. A Feltmaker, a Glasier,
and one that can paint in Glass. Briefly, any Manufacture or trade, wherein is
any Science, or craft.


Only those Trades are of least use and benefit, which are called Huswives
Trades (as Brewer, Baker, Cook, and the like.) Because they be the skill of
women as well as of men, and common to both.

I would have you know, that the Maker was before the Retaylor, and most
Shopkeepers are but of a sublimated Trade and retayle, but as Attorneyes to the
maker. But if the Maker (without dispute of Freedom in any Corporation, might
set up Shop and sell his commodity immediately) it would be a great deal
better for the Commonwealth, than now it is.

Besides, it is no matter of difficulty, burden, or disgrace, for a
Shopkeeper, yea a Merchant, or a Gentleman, to have the skill of some one of
these Manufactures, besides his Revenew, or profession, to accompany him, what
fortune soever may carry him into Countries unknown.

To my knowledge, a great Earl lately of this Land, did think it no scorn to
endeavor the attaining of the Craft, and trade of a Farrior, wherein he grew
excellent.

And when our acquaintance took first life with those of the Low Counrries,
upon a Treaty wherein our Ambassador strove to set forth the worthiness of
our King and Kingdom, with the Native commodities thereof. The Dutch
(ignorantly conceiving that no man could attain to wealth, without some good
occupation, or manufacture) asked him, what handicraft our King was brought up
unto, or what trade he had used to get so much wealth withal.

I admit the Merchant Royal, that comes to his Profession by travail and
Factory, full fraught, and free adventure to be a profession worthy the seeking.
But not the hedg-creeper, that goes to seek custom from shop to shop, with a
Cryll under his arm, that leaps from his Shop-boord to the Exchange, and after
he is fame-falne and credit cracked, in two or three other professions, shall
wriggle into this and that, when he comes upon the Exchange, in stead of
enquiring after such a good ship, spends the whole hour in disputing, whether
is the more profitable housekeeping, either powder Beef and brewes, or with
fresh Beef and Porridge: though (God wot) the black Pot at home be guilty of
neither. And so he departs when the Bell rings, and his guts rumble, both to one
tune, and the same purpose.

The Merchant Royal might grow prosperous, were it not for such poor patching
interloping Lapwings, that have an adventure of two Chaldron of Coals at
New Castle; As much oil in the Greeneland fishing, as will serve two Cobblers
for the whole year ensuing. And another at Rowsie, for as many Fox-skins, as
will fur his Long-lane gown, when he is called to the Livory.

The Shopkeeper is a cleanly Trades; especially, your Linnen-Draper, which
company has the greatest Commonalty, and the largest privileges of all other;
and yet they maintain nothing by Charter, for (indeed) they have none.

But a manufacture for my money; especially, if he sell to the wearer
immediately.

Now for the better encouragement of men of Trade. Know that in most Companies
of Tradesmen incorporate (especially in London) there is provision made by
diverse benefactors of their Societies deceased, for the enabling and setting up
of young beginners, by stocks of money remaining in the hands of some few of the
chief of their Company, (how faithfully disposed, I leave to their own
consideration). But surely the poorer sort complain much of the misimployment
of it generally.

There is but one little Crevis to peep in at their dealings. And that is
between their Masters conscience, and the Clarks connivence, which is so
narrow, that you may sooner discern the South Pole through the maine Center,
than discover their mystery.

Indeed in times past, the Clearkship of the Company has been bestowed upon
some ancient decayed member of the Company, for his livelihood. But the
Attorney and Scrivener; and some petty Clerks of the City, by the Letters of,
etc. preoccupy those places.

And here I could wish for righting of the dead, and releeving of the poorer
members of such Companies, who are kept in ignorance. That some pains were
taken in the Prerogative Office, for the collating of all gifts of this nature,
to be published in print, that the meanest might thereby be able to call their
Grand Masters to account, if they abuse the trust in them reposited in this
behalf. I acknowledge the youth of mine age to be determined. And (God knows)
how poor a remain of life is left in my Glass, yet if it may please those in
whom the power rests, to give me leave to search (gratis) for all Grants and
gifts of pious use in all kinds whatsoever. I could willingly bestow that
little of my Lamp, in collection of these things, and publish them to
posterity. Provided always, that I and mine may have the privilege of
imprinting the same for some sitting number of years to come.

The Navigator.
NExt to the man of Trade, or rather equally with him I must give the Navigator
his due for that his profession is as full of science; as useful to the
Commonwealth, and as profitable to himself as any trade whatsoever. If he
attain the skill of knowing, and handling the tackle, the certain art of his
Compass, the knowledge of languages, and dispositions of foreign Nations
where he travailes and trades, he may rise from a Squabler to a Master, from a
Master to be a General honestly, and with good reputation in a short time.

The Navigator his way of Advancement, and employment is, by The Lords of his
Majesty's privy Council.
The High Admiral:
Commissioners for the Kings Navy:
Chief of ficers of the Navyes of Societies incorporate:
Private Merchants, and the like.


With the Trinity house.

But if he get to be an Owner, he may trade as free as bird in air, as a man
of war or a man of trade, and Commerce. If he take heed that he entrench not
upon the incorporated Companies, especially the minotaur. He cannot do amiss
(with Gods assistance.) He may live merrily, and contentedly, be it but in
trading as a mere Carryer of home commodities. Imported from one port to
another within the kingdom.

The Husbandman.
THe Husbandman may likewise for the happy content of the life, and the honest
gain which it brings with it, be worthy to invite a right good man's son to
undergo the profession.

Your son whom you intend for a Husbandman, must be of a disposition part
gentile, and rusticke equally mixed together. For if the Gentleman be
predominant: his running Nagge will outrun the Constable. His extraordinary
strong Beer will be too headstrong in office of Churchwarden. And his well
mouthed dogs will make him out-mouth all the Vestry. But if the clown be
predominant, he will smell all brown bread and garlic. Besides, he must be
of a hardier temper than the rest of his brethren, because the unhealthfullest
corners of the Kingdom are the most profitable for Farmers. He must especially
aim at a Tenancy under the Crown, or some Bishops Sea, Deane and Chapter,
some College, some Company, some Hospital, or some other body incorporate.
Wherein the Auditor or Receiver, must be his best Intelligencer, and Director.
Young unthrifts acquaintance when they first arrive at the age of one and
twenty. And good old conscionable Landlords that hold it a deadly sin to
raise the rents of their Grandfathers, or hope to be delivered out of Purgatory
by their Tenants prayers will do well.

These professions before mentioned, be (as it were) the orbs to receive all
fixed stars, and such dispositions as may be put into any certain frame.

But for a more libertine disposition,

Fit it with the profession of a Courtier.

For an overflowing, and Ranker disposition, make him a Soldier.

But beyond this he is a lost man, not worthy a fathers remembrance, or
providence.

The Courtiers ways of advancement be these.
BY the general and most ancient rule of Court, if you would have him to be
preferred unto the Kings service in the end. And in the mean time to have
sufficient means of maintenance, Place him with one of the White Staves of the
Household.

By the more particular rule, (if you can) put him unto the Lord High Steward
his Service (who amongst the white Staves) has the chiefest hand in preferring
to any office beneath stayrs

If the High Steward be full, seek to the Lord Chamberlain, who has the chief
power to prefer to the places above stayrs, and to the Wardrobe.

And if there be no entrance there, then seek to the Treasurer of the
Household, and next to the Controller. The Master of the Household. The Coferer,
and the rest of the green Cloth.

The Master of the Horse prefers the Avenanarie and other Clarkeships offices,
and places about the Stable.

The principal Secretary has heretofore had a great hand in preferring to the
Clarkeships in the office of the Signet, and the Lord privy Seal into the
privy Seal office.

The Master of the great Wardrobe into the Clarkships, and offices there. The
Master of the Robes. The Master of the Iewell-house, the Keeper of the privy
Purse. The Master of the Toils and Tents with some other the like have whilome
bin the means of preferring diverse their followers into the service of the
King, in diverse beneficial places, and Clarkeships, in their several offices
respectively.

The Lord Treasurer without the house, prefers to his Majesty's service, in
most places in or about the Custome-houses, in all the parts of England.

And besides these, I find no means used of old, for preferment into the
Kings service for these kind of places.

The yeomen of the Guard were wont to come in for their personage, and activity
by their Captains allowance.

And the Bedchamber men's fervants ever were in way to be preferred for Pages
of the privy Chamber, or Grooms, or placed at the back stairs, not of right,
but of custom.

For the Clerks of the Household, they were wont anciently to rise by certain
degrees, according to the prescription of the Black Book, but how it is now I
know not.

For your better satisfaction of Court Offices, their order and Fee, Search the
Black Book in the Exchequer, and in the Court. And for all Offices whatsoever
under the King, throughout the whole Kingdom; Either in Castle, Park, Chase,
Court, or house of the Kings royalty or place soever, with the then Fees of the
same, I refer you to a book, Whereof many hundred Copies are extant, which
was collected by the Lord Treasurer Burleigh, and by him delivered to the late
Queen Elizabeth of famous memory. And so much for the Courtier.

The Soldier follows.
ANd the question is first.

Whether the better way of thriving, is to be a Sea Soldier, or a Land Soldier.

Questionless the better way of thriving is to be a Sea Soldier, In this
Kingdom of England, being an Island, for that he is more useful to his
Country. More learning is required to be a Sea Soldier than to be a Land
Soldier. A Sea Soldier is certain of victuals, and wages; where the Land
Soldiers pay will hardly find him sustenance. A Sea Soldier may now and then
chance to have a snap at a booty or a prize which may in an instant make him a
fortune for ever; where the Land Soldier may in an age come to the ransacking
of a poor fisher Town at the most.

More valor is required in a Sea Soldier than in a Land Soldier; because the
extremity of the place requires it. The Sea Captain is exposed to as much
danger during the whole fight, as the poorest man in the Ship, where the land
Captain uses but to offer his men to the face of the enemy, and then
retreateth.

The way to rise to preferment at Sea, is by the Admirals countenance, and the
Vice Admirals in the Kings service, or in other service by the favor of great
traded Merchants, and especially of your bodies incorporate: and their chief
Officers; and more especially their President, and Treasurer for the time being.

His breeding is a matter of more moment than his age regards.

If he be true bred, he should be first made a perfect Navigator able to direct
the Sterage of their course, able to know the tackle, and appoint every Saylor
to his charge. He should know what number of Saylors, what Ordinance, and what
munition should be requisite for a Ship of such a burden.

He should be a skillful Caneere, and able to direct the Gunner, to say what
quantity of powder a Piece of such bore and depth requires, and of what weight
the bullet should be where such a quantity of powder is used, whether the Piece
be sound or hony-combed. He should be able to know and direct what quantity of
victual should be required for so many men, for such a voyage. And what
quantity of powder and shot.

Also, to oversee and direct the Purser and Steward, in the expense of their
victual without profuseness, or too much parsimony.

Likewise skillful in all manner of Fire-workes, and fitting Engines for sea
fight.

Briefly, he should be so complete, as that none should be able to teach him in
his place, and he skillful to control every other in their places. He should
be courteous and loving to his men. Above all things he should be zealous of
the honor of God. See that the divine service be duly read on board Evening
and Morning, and that swearing be severely punished. A Sea Captain, is not a
place for a young man to leap into instantly, and immediately out of a Ladies
Vshership; a Great man's bed chamber, or a Littletons discipleship.

It is not your feathered Gallant of the Court, nor your Tavern Roarer of the
City, becomes this place I assure you.

I find not any Meson de dieu, for relieving of mayned Mariners only, but
that erected at Chattam by Sir John Hawkins Knight, Treasurer of the Navy of
the late Queen Elizabeth; wherein it was provided, that there should be a
deduction of Sixpence by the Month, out of every man and boy their wages in
every voyage toward the same. Which I could wish were as well employed as
collected.

The Land Soldier follows.
IF the Land-Soldier think to thrive and rise by degrees of service, from a
Common Soldier to a Captain in this age, (alas) he is much deceived.

That custom is obsolete, and grown out of use. Do what he can do in
Land-service, he shall hardly rise by his single merit.

His happiness shall be but to fill his hungry belly, and satiate himself
upon a Pay day.

But if he be of kin, or a favorite to some great Officer, he may carry the
Colors the first day, be a Lieutenant the second, and a Captain before he
knows how many days go to the week in the Regiment.

The Land-service where a man may learn most experience of War discipline, is
in the Low Countries, by reason of the long exercise of wars and variety of
Stratagems there.

Beyond that Northward, the service is both more unprofitable and more
dangerous, and less experience is to be there learned.

The more your Son turns his face to the South, the more profitable the
Land-service is.

Lastly, if he have no friend or kindred to raise in the Land-service, I assure
you that there is no Law against buying and selling of Offices in the
Low Countries, for ought that I have redd. Neither is it markable amongst them.

After the Soldier returns home, it makes no matter what number of wounds he
can reckon about him.

All the ways of relief for him that I can number are these:

A poor Knights place of Windsor; If the Herald report him a Gentleman, And
the Knights of the Honorable Order of the Garter will accept him

A Brother of Suttons Hospital; If the Feoffes have not servants of their own
to prefer before him.

A Pensioner of the County; if the Justices find him worthy. And that he was
pressed forth of the same County. S. Thomas in Southwarke, and S. Bartholomews
Smithfield; only til their wounds or diseases be cured and no longer. And that
if the Masters of the said Hospitals please to receive them.

For the Savoy where Soldiers had a foundation, I know none now.

And other Houses appropriated for relief of Soldiers now in use I remember
none.

For the chief are long since demolished. The Templarij are gone. The Knights
of S. John of Jerusalem forgotten. That famous House upon Lincoln green is
rac'd to the ground. And many the like now better known by the Records than the
remains of their ruins with their Revenue, are all diuerted from the uses of
their first foundation to private and peculiar Inheritances, which I pity more
than the dissolution of all the Monasteries that ever were.

Here you see is preferment enough for your six Sons though you bestow every
one upon a several Profession. Only take this general Rule for all, viz.

To what course soever your Sons shall betake them. Be sure that they al have
Grammar learning at the least. So shall they be able to receive and retain the
impression of any the said Professions. And otherwise, shall scarce possibly
become Masters in the same, or any one of them. Or if they do, It will be with
more than ordinary pains and difficulty.

Your three Daughters challenge the next place.
FOr their Portions, I showed you before; how and when to raise them. That is,
by the Marriage of your eldest Son, or out of that part of your personal
estate which you may spare without prejudice of your self.

For their breeding.
I Would have their breeding like to the Dutch Woman's clothing, tending to
profit only and comeliness.

And though she never have a dancing schoolmaster, a french Tutor, nor a
Scotch tailor, to make her shoulders of the full breath of Bristow Cow-say. It
makes no matter. For working in curious Italian purles, or French borders, it
is not worth the while. Let them learn plain works of all kind, so they take
heed of too open seaming. In stead of Song and Music, let them learn Cookery
and Laundry, And in stead of Reading Sir Philip Sidney's Arcadia, let them
read the grounds of good Huswifery. I like not a Female Poetresse at any hand:
let greater personages glory their skill in Music, the posture of their
bodies, their knowledge in languages, the greatness, and freedom of their
Spirits; and their arts in arraigning of men's affections, at their flattering
Faces: this is not the Way to breed a private Gentleman's daughter.

If the mother of them be a good Huswife, and Religiously disposed, let her
have the bringing up of one of them. Place the other two forth betimes, and
before they can judge of a good manly Leg.

The one in the house of some good Merchant, or Citizen of civil and Religious
government: the other in the house of some Lawyer, some Judge, or well reported
Justice or Gentleman of the Country, where the Servingman is not too
predominant. In any of these she may learn what belongs to her improvement,
for Sempstry, Confectionary, and all requisits of Huswifery. She shall be sure
to be restrained of all rank company, and unfitting Liberty, which are the
overthrow of too many of their Sex: there is a pretty way of breeding young
maids in an Exchange shop, or S. Martins le grand. But many of them get such a
Cricke with carrying the Band-boxe under their Apron unto Gentlemen's chambers,
that in the end it is hard to distinguish whither it be their belly or their
band-boxe makes such a goodly show and in a trade where a woman is sole
chapman, she claims such a pre-eminence over her Husband, that she will not be
held to give him an account of her dealings, either in retaile, or whole sale.
A Merchants Factor, and a Citizens servant of the better sort, cannot disparage
your daughters with their society. And the Judges, Lawyers, and Justices
followers, are not ordinary Serving-men, but of good breed, and their
educatio^, for the most part Clarkely, whose service promises farther and
future benefit.

Your daughter at home will make a good wife for some Yeomans eldest son,
whose father will be glad to crown his sweating frugality, with alliance to
such a house of Gentry.

Likewise the youngmans singers will itch to be handling of taffata, and to be
placed at the table, and to be carved unto by Mistress Dorothy, it will make him
and the good plain old Ione his mother, to pass over al respect of portion or
patrimony.

For your Daughter at the Merchants, and her sister if they can carry it
wittily, the City affords them variety.

The young Factor being fancy caught in his days of Innocence, and before he
travail so far into experience as into foreign Countries, may lay such a
foundation of first love in her bosom, as no alteration of Climate can alter.

So likewise may Thomas the fore man of the Shop, when beard comes to him, as
Apprentiship goes from him, be entangled and belymed with the like springs.
For the better is as easily surprised as the worse.

Some of our Clarkly men complain the moisture of their palms. Others the
Sorpego in their wrists, both moving means.

With a little patience your daughter may light upon some Counsailor at Law,
who may be willing to take the young Wench, in hope of favor with the old
Judge. An Attorney will be glad to give all his profit of a Michaelmas Term,
Fees and all, but to woo her through a Crevice. And the Parson of the Parish
being her Ladies Chaplain, will forsware eating of tithe Pig, for a whole
year, for such a parcel of Gleb Land at all times. And so much for your Sons
and Daughters.

I now espy mine Host of the Bull here in S. Albons standing at his door
upon his left leg, like to the old Drummer of Parish-garden, ready to
entertain us: therefore I will here conclude with that of the Poet -- Navibus
atque
Quadragis petimus benevivere, quod petis hic est,
Est ang lis, animus si te, non deficit equais.


FINIS.
THE MYSTERY AND MISERY OF LENDING AND BORROWING.

BY THO: POWEL, Gent.

LONDON: Printed by Thomas Harper for Benjamin Fisher, and are to be sold at
his shop in Aldersgate street at the sign of the Talbot. 1636.

THE MYSTERY and misery of Lending and Borrowing.
SETTING aside the contemplation of such Lending and Borrowing, as whereby the
soul of Traffic is breathed into the body of a Commonwealth; I descend
lower to that practice of mutuation, whereby we accommodate one another for
our present necessity in moneys and other requisites.

First, for the Borrower.
I Will first show who be the most notable sort of Borrowers and Booke-men.

Next, what method every one holds in his several way of Borrowing and Booking.

Then their several cause of failing and insolvency.

Next their sundry ways and weapons; with which they fence with their
Creditors.

Next, their noted places of refuge and retirement.

Then their Jubilies and days of privilege.

Lastly, the certain marks of a conscious cautious Debtor, with the Marshall
discipline of the Mace, according to the Modern practice of these days.

Next for the Creditor.
I Will first show the charitable extent of the Creditors courtesy.

Then his Mystery of Multiplication.

Next, how the Oyster caught the Crow. The hand in the book bred the
wind-collicke in the warehouse.

And then how that wind being not able to force a passage through the cavernes
of his credit, shakt the very foundation of his shop-boord, threatening a most
sudden, strange, and stormy eruption.

Next, the signs fore-running the wonderful crack.

Then the Reparation of the decayed man.

And lastly, the singular comfort which the Commonwealth received by him, when
he was sent forth for current out of his Creditors mint, with a new impression
and a second edition.

And of these in order.

The chief and most notable Borrowers are,

The Courtier, that neither cares for the call of the Counting house, nor the
Check of the Chamber.

The Innes of Court-men that never was studient.

The Country Gentleman no Hospital housekeeper.

The City Gallant that never arrived at his freedom by service.

The Courtiours method follows.
FIrst he invites his Creditor to a dish of Court-Ling, with Masculine Mustard
plenty.

Then he shows him the privy Lodgings, and the new banqueting house.

Perhaps the Robes next.

Then the great Magolls tent in the Wardrope: And so much serves for the first
meeting, and to procure an appetite to the second.

To the second meeting our Creditor is summoned, and brings behind him his
Wife, like to a broken wicker glass bottle hanging at his tail, and enters
into the Masking room.

Whereat the Courtiers skill in delivering of the Maskers names, under their
several disguises, did purchase an everlasting and indissoluble
City-consanguinity with his female charge, over whom the more sleepy her
spouse, the more vigilant was my Cosen Courtier.

And now he has made his party strong enough to visit my Citizen, and to
borrow and take up of him at his own home, in the most familiar phrase that
can be devised for such like use and purpose.

Then for the quickening, continuing, and enlargeing of of his credit, our
Courtier pretends how he has received news that his faign'd kindred is very
sick: and thereupon a takes occasion (in stead of venison) to send her bottle
of that famous and far fetched Frontineack: He bids himself to dinner the
same day, and there in a cursory way of commending the excellent art of man, in
matter of Manufacture, he falls by chance upon the remembrance of an
extraordinary stuff which he saw a great personage wear lately in Court, not
doubting but that his couzens shop did afford the like: His purpose was to have
a suit of the same very shortly, if they would but lay it by till his moneys
come in: Yet with a very little entreaty so cleanly exprompted, he was
persuaded to take it along with him, but only for fear lest the whole piece
might be sold by the foolish foreman unawares before his return.

Give us old Ale and book it,
O give us old Ale and book it:
And when you would have your money for all
My cousen may chance to look it.
The Innes of Court-man, and his method.
FIrst he makes himself acquainted with the Creditor, by going to him in
company with one who is a known customer there, and an approved good
play master.

Then he procures this known customer to take the man of credence (as it
were) modestly apart, and at his back while he is walking down the shop and
aversed, to whisper: That this gentleman whom you see here, is son and heir
to that worthy Knight so potent in the Peake, or that most markable Malster of
much Marlborne: or the great Grasier of Grims borow, or the like. Then he
returns to the upper end of the shop, and the Master takes an occasion to call
to Thomas to give the Gentleman a stool, and tells him that he knows his
friends very well: The ancient Manor house, and the Mill, and goodly meadows a
little beneath in the bottom: adding further, that no doubt but if he please
the good old Gentleman, he may in time be owner of them all himself.

Be owner; says my Innes court man. Why I tell you, that Water-mill came by
my mother, with all the Meddowes of that Level: And my Father would hang
himself he cannot give them away from me.

And whereas you say I may be owner in time, I think the old man has held them
long enough: unless you would make his time endless, and him a very wandering
Jew. I wis my Grandfather served not him so, he knew what he did when he dyed.
He did it out of true judgment, in fullness of understanding, able to pen
his own will himself, when he was no longer serviceable to his Country, he
would not live only to mend the fire, or preserve it by applying every
circumstant cinder within his reach: but though I pinch for it awhile, a time
(I hope) may come.

Whereat my Creditor interrupting him, says, alas you pinch for it? That shall
not need) God be thanked) your credit it worthy to be rankt in a shop book,
cheek by jowle with any debitory disposed Gentleman of this town whatsoever.
Besides, if you would be loath to have your name extant in so public a
Repertory, you are able by such estate as is inseparably annexed to your
person, to give farther assurance (I do but speak it if need were) by
otherways, and otherwise at your pleasure.

Further assurance (replies my Gallant) A pox on it For assurance they shall
have what they will: And for price of any thing, it is my desire they should
gain by me, yea they shall gain by me: For otherwise how should you be able
to live by it?

Now sir, you speak like an honest gentleman (says he again) gain) I would
al our customers were of your mind, there be too few such as you are; if you
have need of any thing here, either for your wearing, or else for conversion,
wherein I hope you conceive me sir, it is at your command.

Hereupon the man of the sword swears that he shall not out-doe him in
nobleness: Had he robbed the Statuaes of the new Standard of all their royal
resolutions. He vows to return thither again, and that speedily to bring
his Tailor with him advisedly: to take up for diverse uses with much facility,
and to give assurance according to the direction of his own Scriviner, a Bow
lane most legally.

And so leave we him like a horse put up to diet, whereby to be prepared to
run his train sents on the deepest ground of assurance, that City counsel
can find out or devise.

Puppy runs well, but who shall win the day.
Puppy? or Noddy? It Is an even lay.
The Country Gentleman his Mothod
THe Country Gentleman, he is by this time come up to London; and has brought
his Attorney with him, one that professes the taking up of money by writ of
right. His Atturny brings him to the Ship behind the Exchange, and leaves him
there while he goes to fetch the only Noverint in in those parts, whom he
prepares at his shop with the purpose, advising him withal in his ear, so to
handle the matter in hall, that beards may wag all, which he delivered with a
most familiar wringing of him by the hand, to insinuate his meaning as unto his
share: He then brings the Scrivener unto the tavern, good compliance is in
all parties, and the Scrivener according to the true practice of most of them,
at the first meeting, especially while they are with the borrower in the
tavern, was more easy in promising, then they in proposing.

The Attorney then softly tells the Gentleman apart, that he should do well to
bespeake supper instantly, assuring him that if he could but fasten that
courtesy upon the Scrivener for the present, he were their own for ever
after, neither the sum nor the security could be matter of any difficulty.

The counsel was held wholesome as unto the supper, the Attorney was forthwith
preferred to the Bar, where he spoke so learnedly in the cause, that upon the
same hearing they recovered three full dishes on their side, the boys drew the
proceeding of the business very Clarke-like, the Kirchinmaid supplied with the
Tales. The Mistress called earnestly for the Postea, and the Master he rated
and allowed the bill of costs.

At the execution whereof, my Scrivener fearing lest the shot should disperse
and scatter it self amongst them, while the Gentleman was feeling for money to
discharge it; he to facilitate that hand, asks him softly in his care; What is
the sum that he would have? Then suspecting the long dwelling of his hand in
his pocket, he tells him, He shall have what sum he will: Let me see, faies
the Scrivener, there comes in this night of Sir Samvan Skynkers money, five
hundred, and to morrow as much more I can supply you from one hundred to ten
out of that as your occasions require: how say you?

We will have no dry reckoning replies the Gentleman: Here Is the full sum of
the bil and and a pottle over; though we be Leichestershire fed, yet we be not
Brackly bred, I assure you.

And for the sum which I should (or at least would have) for especial
occasions, Let me see: there is a horse-race at Northampton on Monday come
sevenight: I must needs have new furniture for Cropcare, which I will send
down by Leicester Wagon.

I will have that Hawke which I saw in Southwarke this afternoon: clothes would
do well: but that's my least care of a thousand. A pox a pride I say.

Howsoever I must see the party I told you of by the way, before I go out of
town, by any means if she keep the same lodging and the same name that she
was wont to do: that's all now. Lets see, a matter of some three hundred will
do it so far forth as my present and most urgent occasions do press me at this
instant:

As for payment,
And for raiment,
For hedges and mounds,
And stocking of grounds,
For Corn for seed,
Or Cattle to breed,
Or the Wolf at the door,
And a thousand things more.
They are nothing so important and concerning as the least of these: I would
not miss Monday come sevenight for three such sums, I tell you Sir: Monday
come sevenight! That were a jest indeed.

For that and what you please beside, says the Scrivener, you shall find no
default on my party: This honest Gentleman that is with you knows the course
of these kind of businesses: He and I shall take my leave at this time.

The Scrivener departs, and the Gentleman stays behind, only to hug and
endeare the endowments of him that procured this meeting: He praises the
prosperity of their journey, commands the comely carriage of the Scrivener, and
vows everlasting acknowledgment of his Atturnies activity. And so they betake
themselves to their lodging likewise for that night.

The next morning my gentleman sends his Attorney to see that the money which
he spoke for, be told out and made ready for him against his coming, which
should be when and where it shall please the honest Scrivener. (For by this
time he had attained so much of reputation among them.

The same day and the next were both spent in continual quest of the
Scrivener. But the Boys in the Shop according to their masters direction made
answer, one while that he was gone to Sir Sam for moneys: Another while that
he was at the sealing of writings at such a place: Then that he was at the
speeding of a Commission of Bankeruptisme at Guild Hall, God bless the place,
and every good man of the Grand Jury: And then shortly after, that he was but
even now gone forth, and that it was impossible but that he should meet him,
unless the dust of Pope's Head Alley had put out his eyes by the way.

The time wears out, and the horse-race comes onward, the apprhension whereof
puts our Gentleman into such a perpassion, that on the next day early in the
morning he goes to the Scriveners shop, where suddenly and unawares he finds
him saying his prayers, while he was withal cross gartering of himself: and
had he not known him better by his crosse-garters then by his prayers,
questionless he had lost his labor.

Good morrow (says the Gentleman) perhaps I do disturb your devotion?

You Rascal, how chance you do not hang out the Labells? (says the Scrivener
to his boy) Then he proceeds with his prayers, and suddenly bespeaks the
Gentleman, asking, What is your will with me Sir? Have you any business with
me I pay now?

O Lord Sir, (says he) I hope you remember what past between us at the Ship
on wednesday night last, touching the three hundred which I was indeed to have
the next morning, parcel of the thousand which was to come in then

Hum (says the Scrivener) I think there was some such matter: I remember we
talked of it: But what were the names of your security which you did then give
me.

For names (replies he) why I gave you none, for I conceived it should not
need: Or if it do, you shall have lands and that for seat and site, value, and
Virgin title, shall bear and balance your morgage down to the center.

Now you come to me (says the Scrivener) go you to the Antwarp, but only to
prepare me a particular of this land, and I will be with you presently.

They go before the particular is made ready. The wine is burnt, the Scrivener
with much pain has past through his prayers, and recovers the Tavern door,
by that time he was come to (Amen.) He returns to his old complement, pockets
the Particular which they deliver him, and puts all unkindnesse into this cup;
He drinks freely, and promises nobly: So that now there was no doubt made but
we might be at Northampton most opportunely. And so much for that meeting.

After dinner they came both again to the shop; where they found my Scrivener
wrapped warm in his gown about him, fast asleep (good man.) For if ever he
were good, he was then good: Or (at least) I am sure he was then and there at
the very best of Scriveners goodness; the height of their holiness, and the
perfection of their punctuality.

They must by no means trouble him before he be fully recovered and enabled
for a second meeting at the Mermaid after Exchange time. They attend the while:
the clouds of Claret shortly spend themselves: he wakens, they salute him.

At length with much a do he calls them to remembrance, and asks them for
their particular: they show the error in his pocket, and so he promises their
dispatch the next morning without any fail, and they are gone to be speak
furniture for Cropeare in the mean time. At the appointed hour my Attorney
comes to know if the writings were ready to seal, and the money proportioned
into several hundreds, in so many several bags or no.

The Scrivener replies, that it should be forth with prepared accordingly, so
as they should bring good City security with them, but only to undertake for
the property and transparancy of the title of the Lands so tendered, and that
was all should need for the matter, procuration being over provided for, and
writing taken to estimation according to the repute of the place where it was
to be written, and that was all that was now remaining to be considered of on
the Gentleman's behalf. This new task required more time in possessing and
persuading some Citizens his Countrymen, who knew him and his Lands so well,
that it was disputable, whether was more dear and desired unto them.

They join with him in the security, and become immediately bound with him by
bond for the payment of the money at a certain day to come, and to the great
amazement of the Scrivener, thank him for this counsel in advising and
directing them to the cautionary cause-way of security both latterally and
collaterally, by direct and oblique lines which he most methamatically had
imagined and contrived in his head, as well for his own commodity as for their
indemnity, without demanding of any other assurance as yet, and so my
Gentleman is dispatched without further tie upon Lands or person hitherto,
saving what is mentally reserved upon the growth of this sum; by these his
loving friends and countrymen.

Friendship for countries sake I do commend
But not to sell my country for a friend.
The Citizen, a Redemptionary Freeman, his Method.
THe last, but not the least of these, is our City borrower, a hopeful yongman
(though I say it:)

A man of wisdom, for he is the best
That ere was of our Ward-moot inquest:
Of sweet behavior, for this very year,
He has discharged the place of Scavenger.
At an arbitrament he is a Cutter,
As ere concluded in a Tavern supper.
If Females for their linen do contend,
He takes up all, and makes a friendly end.
And if our Vestry brethren do dissent,
he makes the elder head most eminent
Grow up thou man of justice, and of hope,
My pen gives thee thy due, give thou it scope.
Now this youth, not altogether free by Patrimony, but partly by Matrization,
is wonderful cautious of being a borrower upon Record, or in the eye of the
World. He will not have his name tendered unto a Scrivener by any means, while
he is yet but easily declining upon the stream of ready moneys, and not in
stock, like the water which though it fall and sink by the sides, yet runs
up in the midst with a manifest current long after.

He now studies how to take up without expression to be a principal for
himself, or to be too promptly drawn into security for others. He finds out
for property for this purpose a young heir, who for a third share of the
sum, was content to bear the only name and blam of Borrower, and to yield to
the ensafing of my Citizen, by such Counter-bonds, sales, and assignements, as
by the Scrivener and himself, could be devised to uphold the Reputation of a
wonderful wary man.

Can you now call this man a Borrower for doing his friend a courtesy? Or is
this man in a declension, when it appears by the book, that he is in the way
of purchasing? No such matter, this cries up his credit: And howsoever these
moneys be repayd, yet he is sure of the Land, which before any insolvency
shall appear on his party, he does intend to convey over in trust secretly,
to the uses of his livelihood for the time of restraint to come, and like one
that prepares his tomb while he is yet living, he resolves what lodging to
take up on the Masters-side, when his credit shall depart this Mortal life.

Besides, he had another way of borrowing, he finds out an old Usurer of the
same Parish, Father to diverse daughters, who caught at Espousall preferment,
only by their Fathers countenance, and their concise carriage.

The one of these he singles out from the Heard, and pretends most pure and
unfaigned love unto her: He visites her in his gown at Midsummer, where at the
old man conceives great joy and comfort, glories in his gravity, and delights
in his decency. He on the other side perceives the powle-cat in the purse-net,
makes present use of it. He shows him the conveiance which the Heir made the
other day unto him of all the houses in Conny-hoope-lane a one side; and
desires to be furnished by him with so much as might bring the other side into
his property likewise: for that it was now offered unto him upon reasonable
conditions, so should he reduce all (as it were) into a circle, and his
daughter should hold that for her joynter and have the Evidence in her own
custody.

The old man liked this passing well, and for fear least the bargain should
be snatched out of his hand, he takes him into his closet, tells out the Money,
and sends him away instantly.

The old man turns him about, and (poynting at her sweet heart) bespeaks his
daughter thus:

There goes he that labors for you most industerously, studious your good
right carefully, I pray God make you thankful for him accordingly: For you
shall have an Husband (be it not vainly spoken) that for thrift and Husbandry
may be the very browch of of all the City.

In stead of going forthwith unto his Chapman, for the housing and candle
rents, he is housed presently at a widows in the way, where he spends his
time till candlelight.

Here he likewise protests and professes love by wholesale; he shows her the
moneys, and tells her what a bargine he could now have, if she would join
stock with him in such a commodity come lately into the Downs with the last
East-Indian ships. It might please God that this might be a happy occasion of
uniting their persons as well as their parcels together.

The Widow was hereupon taken with such a Sorpego in her wrists, that her
fingers ends itcht to be testing out of her part, and to take issue upon his
promise of the union, which she performed with much dexterity.

Then he puts altogether, and assures her that he will be gone the next tide
to Gravesend,

When he comes home, he dispatches letters speedily to the old usurer,
certifying him of his good progression in Conyhoope-lane, and desiring his
patience for certain days, which the contriving of his assurance by good and
sufficient counsel would take up.

The time pretended for the Downs, and to draw down a good estate for his
young Mistress, is upon better consideration bestowed at Rumford, where
whosoever had seen him in the lift of his liberality* would little think him
to be so little a thing as might be contained within the compass of a
Counting House, or be confined within the prospection of a false light.

Expect anon the sequel of his story.
Let Rumford now be famous for John Dory.
Their several cause of insolvency follows.
THe Courtiers cause is in his conscience: For he neither can, nor cares to pay.

The Innes of Court man's cause is in his Coercence, for he would if he could
pay.

The Country Gentleman's cause is in his confidence, for he trusts to his
Country men of the City, and had rather they then he should pay.

But the Citizens cause is in his complacence.

It pleases him so to pay, and he sees no reason why he should go beyond the
rule of deformity.

He finds good grand Jury Presidents of five shillings in the pound, and it
is fair too and sufficient soder for the first flaw (by my faith.)

Some would and if they could:
Some can, and yet they care not:
The least pay what they should:
The most spend all and spare not.
The sundry ways and weapons with which they fence with their Creditors,
challenge the next place.
THe longest weapons with which my Courtier keeps his creditor farthest off,
are the winters journeyes, and the summers progress.

And when he is nearer hand, he does keep them at staves length, by
challenging of a privacy for indisposition of body, conference with great and
honorable personages, or employment in the States wonderful weighty affairs,
when (God wot) the indisposition is for want of clean linen.

The conference is with his boy, how to pay the Landresse which detaines it.

And his employment is in and about the taking of a pipe of Tobacco.

The privy watergate, and the garden outlet do well.

And when he finds no remedy, but that his Creditor will close and come into
him within his weapons length, then he swears that he was even now about to
send for him, had he not prevented him.

He tells him in great secrecy how he is in possibility to pass a suit of
great worth, only he wants some money to scatter in fees by the way: For it
is to be understood, that with great Officers the Chamber men wear good
clothes, and the doorkeeper has a precious faculty: he shall only supply with
so much as will even the old sum, and pay himself, tot, talia, and tantaa,
at his own pleasure, yea he shall be a Patentee himself, for argument of
honest purpose and honorable dealing.

What shift so ere we make, he needs must do it.
For profit and preferment prick him to it.
The Innes of Courts man's weapons
HIs first weapon is a welpen'd Letter, excusing his delay by incompetency of
exhibition.

Or by the necessity of attending the revolution of their tenants six months
day of payment, according to the custom of the country.

But especially by occasion of his fathers great and dangerous sickness
(though there were no such matter) for that he knew was the only viscouse
matter to belime his Creditor that could be devised or applied.

The next weapon, when the former way is stale of assiduity, is his good sword,
a watchful eye and a ready hand.

The last is the deviation and avoiding of the most frequented passages and
streets, and to hold compass at the half point, through the Let-goes of
Allies, Tavernes, with backe-doores, or by water, as stands wit most
accommodation.

His fencing in the night I most commend,
When he may safely drab, and drink, and spend.
The Country Gentleman his weapons.
THis youth (alas) has neither occasion at the first to practice his defense,
or knows the use of the weapon, nor will he be brought to it of a long time;
when payment is prefixed to be made to him the said Solomon set in silver
street London, he in his better wisdom is betting of all his white money at
the Cockpit in Coventry.

And when all comes to all, when farther occasion has drawn him into a farther
respectuality with his undertakers in London; so that he must either stand upon
his guard; or lose the Bleane, with all meadows, pastures, feedings, woods,
underwoods, and other the appurtenances worth ten times the money borrowed.

Then, O then, he looks out his manly munition.

The ancient sleeping entaile.

The old mother joyncture.

The endowment of his wife, ad ostium Ecclesiae.

Al these he brings to his Cutler of Chancery Lane, and bestows so much upon
the oil of equity, and will scour them up cleanly, and make them fit weapons
of defense against all the cossaques of the City.

Petitions be the postures of thy guard,
And may thy motions be like Canons heard;
Set field, or skirmish, Chamber, or the Bars,
It Is like to prove a very lingering war.
The City borrower his fence.
HE handles his weapon with the best grace of them all, his Creditor dares
scarce come within his reach, but only ask how he does as he goes by. And
if he do presume to leave word with the apprentice boy, that he would have him
tell his master that he was here to speak with him about the other business, it
is a very bold adventure, and a saucy presumption taken very censoriously by my
young master, at his coming home, especially if he have bin at the
Renterwardens feast, the Cities occasion the Companies convention, and the
parochical provision: these be the things that challenge propriety and priority
in a comely Citizen, before all other respects whatsoever. He will not
discontent the first, nor disapoynt the second, nor disfurnish the last for
observance of whomsoever.

For the money taken up of the Scrivener, the interest only needs to be paid in
as yet: and the Scrivener (to stop his mouth) he shall have the employment and
benefit to eject the Tenants of Cony-hooplane, and withal he will have the
Scrivener sue the bond both against the heir and himself, upon which he will
appear to suffer judgments against both right willingly. (Marry) he shall take
execution against the heir only.

For the old Usurers money, he found that the assurance could not be perfected
til the next Michalmas term, for it required the ceremony of the bar, and
before he would debar his wife of any ceremony belonging to her, he would
be reputed the unperfectest member that ever ministered in the Cities mysteries.

And for the Widows money bestowed in the Downs, he found the commodity not
so vendible here as beyond the seas, therefore he thought it best to send it
into Holland, where it attends the next market, and would not so much as suffer
it to touch at our cost.

This cannot cure but lengthen thy disease,
It may defer the pain, but not release.
Their noted places of refuge and retirement follows.
Ram-Alley.
I Will not so much as look in to the Court, or any the standing houses; the
Housekeepers lodging, nor the Gardiners receipt, neither the Mewes. Nor prye
into the meniall precincts of any of the Innes of Court, farther then they
stand for refuge and relief of the neighboring privileges about them.

The first and chiefest of all which, for advantage of the ground, for
Fortifications, for water-workes, posternes and passages, supplies, and
provision by Land or otherwise, is that so far famed, and so fitly named
Ram-alley, or the Ramy-kins, according unto the Dutch translation.

In it is a garrison of old soldiers, every one of the which is able to lead
a whole arwy of younger debtors.

They call their Muster-role in the round Church: they drill them in the
Garden, and they make their set battles under the trees in the new walks,
which piece of ground was listed in, and levelled for the same purpose.

For the works within Ram-Ally, there be 2 most notable: the one is raised and
contrived in the form of a Ram, which Rams were used in the old Jewish
Discipline, as appears by the History it self more at large.

This work is of a reasonable strength, having a watchtower in the similitude
of a Cobblers shop, adjoining, from whence all the forces about are called
together upon the least approach of the enemy.

But the other is a fort most impregnable, where the enemy dares not so much as
come within shot, to take the least view of it.

There is none but this only one so invincible, far and near: and therefore
our latter writers have styled it the Phoenix. There be other pretty contrived
platformes in the fashion of the Cookes-shops two or three, where if a Setter
or Spy do but peep in at them, they will make him pay for the Roast before
he depart (I Will warrant him.)

To the Rammy kins do belong a very great fleet, consisting of many sail
well manned, and these are only for the service by water.

This place according to the Geographicall map, and the report of our modern
Authors, cannot possible be so besieged, but that they within may go in and out
at their pleasure without impeachment.

At the Middle Temple gate they issue in spite of the Devil.

At the Inner temple gate they fear no colors in the Rainbow.

And at Ram-Alley Postern, in case they cannot fetch Fetterlane, but discover
ambushment, they need only draw their bodies within guard of pike, turn faces
about, and retreat through the Miter.

Or admit they stand for Fleetstreet, and be so intercepted, that they can
neither recover the Miter, nor Ram-Alley, it is no more but only to mend their
march, fall downward as if they gave way, suddenly discharge their right hand
file, and fall easily into Sergeants Inn, where by ancient treaty had between
these two houses, it was agreed that the parties in such distress might,
paying the welsh Gentle man porters Fee; have convoy and conveyance thorough
the Garden into the temple without re-hazzard of his person.

Likewise when they would Forage, they are no sooner out of the
Middle-temple-gate, but there be three several places of defense to friend
them: (viz.) The Bell Inn: the Bar-gate, and Shire lane. And the passage
through the Kings bench office is a most excellent safe way for close
contriving and retriving.

The Gardners war fage as the tide may serve, will serve the turn too.

But the new door by the Bochards, though it be none of the sweetest way, yet
it is the safest of all the rest, for at the sight of the pomp the setter
starts back, and will by no means pursue him any further.

Fulwoods Rents.
THe next place of refuge is is commonly called Fulwoods Rents, which lies so
in the maine and plain continent, that it requires the stricter watch, and
stronger court of guard to be kept about it.

Besides, the General of the enemy has planted very near it, and lately cast
up a mount in the fashion of a Shriefes Office just in the face of them. In
Fulwoods Fort, otherwise yekleeped Skink-skonce, besides Robinhood and his
out-lawes, like a regiment of Tailors, the one half with red beards, and the
other having no beards at all.

Captain Swanne was a very tall man,
So was not Francis Drake a^;
When Srypp does swear in single Beer,
The Bailiffes use to quake a.
At the upper end of these rents and at the very portall of Purpoole-palace
westward, was lately begun a most excellent piece of work, which had it not
been interrupted by those that played upon them from above, (questionless) it
had bin the very strongest and surest hold that ever was raised within the
contine^t for this purpose.

The back gate into Graies Inn lane, with the benefit of the little Alley, ex
opposito, is of good use, but not at all times.

The passages through certain Innes on the field-side, are attempted with some
hazard by reason of the straggling troops of the enemy who lie pardue in every
Alehouse thereabouts.

The only safe way of Sally, is that through the walks, from whence the red
Lion in Graies-Inne-lane receives them with good quartering, and passes them
through the back way in-the maine land: And so much for Skinke-Skonce.

Milford Lane.
THe next is Milford lane, to which certain Captains and their companies
being long since eashired, betook themselves, and liking the situation of it
did there erect diverse diverse works, both to the landside and the water for
their ensaving.

As they came in by conquest, so they hold it by the sword; and howsoever their
title has bin much disputed heretofore, yet they have now commuted the matter,
proud plantation, pretended the first discovery: and withal have reduced it, to
a most absolute Hance and free town of it self without dependency.

The chief benefit they have for securing of their persons is that of the
water, for to the land there is little safety, when you are once without their
works, and therefore I will abide here no longer, but hold my course onward to
the Savoy.

The Savoy.
IF the Savoy should not be sufficiently defended every way and in every
respect, it were a great shame to the discipline of the place, and the troops
that are there billited, the rather for they consist for the most part of
Engyners and Projectors: and in memory of them have builded there certain
tenements which shall bear the name of Projector-Ally for ever.

Duke Humfrey.
FRom hence you must give me leave to pass by boat to Duke Humfries, which was
a very strong fortress in former times, when the Megazine of munition, viz.
the treasury of To bacco-pipes was there established.

But the Megazine is removed, and the place much weakened, their Commanders
dispersed about Budge-row, and scattered in Warwicke-lane, where they are the
only upholders of the three-penny ordinary (a strange alteration)

The poor remainder of this Garrison, unless they be speedily relieved by
them of the College, to re-enforce the daily assaults of the enemy, must of
necessity yield up all with much dishonor.

I can stay no longer here with good name and fame, and therefore I return to
my watermen attending all this while, who is to set me over to Southwark, and
land me at an excellent hold indeed, commonly called Montague-close, sometimes
the Seen or the Monastery of Saint Saviors near the bridge.

Montague-close.
AND though the Garrision here consist not of so many old Soldiers, yet their
number is no whit inferior to that of Ram-Ally, and some of them serve on bo h
sides, and are in both rolls ever attending where the service most requires,
and the most of them are men of much activity.

The eldest company within it, are and have been directly diers in grain,
descended from from the race of the old blew Britains.

In Lent when other Garrisons are most thin and worst victualled, these do
most exceed in both, for then whole troops of Butchers from the Cantons
adjoining, offer themselves like so many Switzers unto them: and convey by land
and water to that place, such abundance of cattle fetched firm the Kentish
Kernes, and the Sorry Yonkry about them, as makes themselves plumpe and
paliable for any enterprise of all the year after, and also draws very great
store of Wascoterians and handsome Basketerians unto them from all parts of the
City and suburbs, and al for mere carnality

Ely Rents,
THe last is that everlasting liberty of Ely Rents in Holborne, which is so
advantagiously mounted, that it commands all the level beneath it. It is a
work of small receipt for it may be made good with -- good, with three
Brokers, two Cobblers, a Baker, and a Tapster, against all invasions and
invaders whatsoever.

I cite not that priveledge of S. Mertins le grand, with many other adjoining,
which have proper officers for return of writs within themselves; because
though they be not under command of the City, yet they admit no Sanctuary or
refuge to the borrower, unto whom the fire and the drying pan are both alike.

These forementioned Garrisons, Forts, and Fortresses, stand still in such
state as is before expressed.

But I cannot forget the present state of others upon which the enemy has
entered, either by conquest or composition: Namely,

Cold Harbor.
THat of Cold Harbor, where was and excellent Blocke-house, to correspond with
that of the close on the other side. Both which together cleared the passage of
the river between them, so that no water Bay liffe durst come within their
reachat point blanke.

And this (as they write) was taken in by the sword in time of their security.

The Friars.
THe Friars, Augustine and Cruciate, Black, White, and Gray great and less,
and those of the Trinity. The Spitle and Saint Graces, had all their Cooles
pulled over their heads, and so were all for the most part led into the City
captive, where they remain to this day.

It Is said that they were most lost by this means, that they suffered those of
the freedom not only to dwell among them, but likewise to increase and
multiply, to plant and supplant, the Nobility and the Gentry which upheld their
liberties; and in the end when they got and engrossed all the power of office,
trust and authority, into their hands; they set open the gates and suffered the
Military men of the Mace to enter and surprise all.

The Commanders of the City were only content upon treaty to article and agree
with those of the Black Friars; that notwithstanding they so entered by
conquest, yet the old companions, especially the English Feather-makers, the
Dutch Jewellers, the Scotch Tailers, and the French Shoomakers, with some
foreign forces, should have and enjoy their ancient privileges, without
molestation or interruption of any kind.

Great Saint Bartholmewes
BUt the greatest blow that ever was given to the borrower, was the taking of
Great S. Bartholmewes, upon wose plat-forme a whole Army of Borrowers and
Booke-men might have been mustred and drawn out in length, or into what form
or figure it had pleased them to cast themselves.

What works, yea what variety of art and workmanship was within it?

What an excellent half Moon was there cast up without it for defense, toward
Aldersgatestreet?

What Sconces in the fashion of tobacco-shops and tap-houses, in all parts of
it. What art was in the Silke-weavers there, who in twisting of their silk,
made it serve like so many Opticke lines to convey and receive intelligence too
and fro in an instant, and laugh to scorn asinissimum illum nuntium inanimatu^.

But alas, these are demolisht, the old soldiers discharged, and all delivered
and yielded up, upon composition and consent of the Commander.

But the last packet we receive news, that there are daily assaults made upon
S. John of Jerusalem. It is said likewise that they are in a sore Mutiny within
themselves; which if it be so, the band of Borrowers there billetted, will be
shortly dis-banded and dismissed utterly.

The Jubilees and days of privilege follow.
THe unparaleld Parliament is the first, and of all others the best: the very
tunc temporis wherein Jupiter has the full effects of his influence, when he
is in his Masculine House, and in a full aspect (hor a optima.)

The next is a time of a raging pestilence: for if the Sergeants do not then
fear the plague of God hanging over their heads, I know not what the Devil
will fear them.

The next is the time wherein my Lord Mayor takes his oath: For then the
Sergeants and their Yeomen are all at Westminster (hor a hona.)

The next is that wherein the Sheriffs are sworn: For in the fore-noone the
Mace-men attend their Masters. At noone they have enough to do to wait upon M.
Mayor of Oxfords cups: and in the afternoon, it is as much as they can do to
get home.

Other days of privilege are all such wherein they are al generally tied for
to attend their Sheriffs to Paul's, as that of Christmas day, All Saints day,
Candlemas day, the Coronation day, the Powder Plot, and the 5. of August, (hor
ae mediocres,) Only take heed how you touch at any Tavern near unto Paul's
after the Sherifes are once set, and until they be ready to depart, for fear
of Free-booters.

I cannot say what hope there is in the privilege of the Sabbath, but there is
great presumption upon the benefit of those times, wherein the Serieants we
are their best apparel, for I have observed that they will make bold with
their zeal, when they place much matter of conscience in their clothes.

The days of their Spittle-sermons are special good ones: for their Masters
and Mistresses being then in Conjunction, it requires that they should be
double diligent the while.

The days wherein the great Lords come down to ociate, or negotiate, cate, or
treat with their Masters, are very good.

Whitsunday at the New-Church-yard does well, but I am afraid that they will
not be altogether so mad, as to be all comprised within the perambulation
bulation of Bedlam, where I will leave them at this time: and proceed unto

The marks of a conscious cautious Debtor, with the discipline of the Mace.
These be the marks.

1 Uncertainty of meeting. 2 Obscurity of walking. 3 Uariety of lodging. 4
Inconstancy of abiding.
The particular marks follow.

At the lanes end he ever looks behind him. And after he is once turned out
of sight, he mends his pace in an extraordinary degree of Foot-man-ship, til
he have gained some ground ^f the followers. And then he makes another stand to
take notice whether any of them have arrived thither with more then ordinary
speed, or precipitate himself at the coming about the lanes end, which is the
certain sign of a Setter or a Sergeant. He never keeps the proponticke
passage. He has a catalogue of of al Tavernes with back doors, especially
to the waters side. Difference of attire (if he have it) stands him in great
stead. He envies the increase of the Moon more then he pitties the decrease of
his own fortunes. He knows there is little got by running, and less by
rising at the Sergeants hands. Therefore when he has business to do on the
next day, he commonly removes himself over night, to the end he may have a
safe mornings flight. His meetings (when he does say and hold) are in places
where he may stand as much upon his reputation as his Tailor may upon his
credit. With the Italian he does much mislike the overhasty manner of peace used
by our nation in the City, (a place of civility, and that in the following of
their ordinary affairs. He is better at retriving then at contriving. He is a
great enemy to idleness, for he loves not to see one leaning at a stall, or
looking about him, where he claims no property, nor owes any service, He
learned of his Grandmother to hate whistling after candlelight above all
things. He prays not in common form, but that the Commons may meet in form
(as aforesaid.) And no sin sticks so impassively in his conscience, or
disperses it self through is whole heart, as that he ever paid any thing to
his Creditors in part.

The Discipline now offers it self, and the Mace is lifted up, in Terrorem
populi
WIthin London there are two regiments of Macemen. The one is encamped in the
Poultry: The other in Woodstreet: The great number of them attend their colors
where they are ever ready to sally upon the Alarm or signal given. Other of
them guard their Colonels person by turns.

And the rest are appointed and exposed (as follows.) So many of the best
able and most trusty in their Cavallerie, as their service requires, especially
in term time, are planted at Chancery Lane end, to make good that place, and
to cut off such as issue out of the works on the other side, or come down from
other parts to put themselves under the protection of them.

Of these Chancery Lane end men, if the design do deserve it, some one or two
are drawn out of them, to defeat the passage between the middle Temple and
the Bell, or the Bar-gate, but this is upon especial occasion, and therefore
seldom attempted, but when they have intelligence of some extraordinary booty,
or good pillage coming that way.

Others of them are quartered in Smithfield, where every monday, wednesday and
friday, they stand charged with cock up, ready to give fire at every poor
Butcher in the grasiers quarrel, and these are of their Infantry.

Others are on every market day commanded for Leadenhal, where they serve one
day under the Tanner, against the Shoemaker, another day under the Butcher
against the Tanner, and sometimes the Scrivener, against both. Others are
appointed to other several markets, where rather then they will want
entertainment, they will bear arms against the very butterwives (enough to
make their hearts to melt with the very thought on it) the eldest sort of them,
such as hold charge, rather for their advice then their ability, are laid at
the Exchange, where though the service be daily, and the Nation against whom
they serve are all people of great stomach, meeting ever at dinner and supper
times only, yet the danger is but small in regard they have the Country round
about to friend.

The only Despervieos among them are severally appointed to the several
gates; where they scour and keep clear the passage to the Bars, being the
utmost extent of their works. They are all right perfect at their Postures: As,

Bear your Musket under your left arm, id est, Be sure to touch the prisoner
on the sword side. Pull out your scourer, id est, Draw your warrant. Advance
your Pike, id est, Exalt your Mace. cock your Match, id est, Enter your Action.

And so for every posture, punctually and particularly in his order. Then for
Strategems of war, they ride the ancient discipline, quite dagger out of sheath

The best that Roman Histories afford us, is of that one noble resolution, who
to gain belief and credit of the enemy, mangled himself, running out of the
gates into their Camp to complain of his own misery and his Countries tyranny,
with offer of giving them up into the enemies hand, only for actuation of his
own revenge.

But give me the plot that conquers at far less price.

A Porters Frocke (a Project of excellent carriage.)

A Lawyers gown, (Latet quod non patet.)

A Scriveners Pen and Inkehorne (a design of deeper reach than you are aware
on.)

These shall make his passage, sine sanguine and sudore.

This is your only Projector indeed, whose first ancestor was begot between
the man in the Moon, and Tom Lancasters Laundresse, upon a fair faggot pile,
from whom are descended the only Choristers of our counter-quire.

It would do you good to hear the whole pack of these together, they are so
excellent for sent and cry.

But the best mouthed among them in truth, and for my money, the only mouth is
without Bishopsgate.

And the best sented at the upper end of red-crosse street, just at the
entrance into Goldinglane, into whose sweet bosom I commit them all, and there
leave them.

It may be expected that I should say somewhat of the Discipline of the
Bailiffes, but especially of those of the Vierge and the Clinkonians.

But some of them have no Discipline or order at all, and the rest very little.

The poor Pichard cannot out pilfer them in the plain pathway of their
practice, they hold no good quartering with any man, but are more desirous of
prey then of lawful conquest.

The better sort of them go in boots without spurs, and they for the most
part are bought in Turning-stile lane in Holborne: the Author holds them not
worthy his pen, or to be rank't with the men of the mace before mentioned,
and therefore by his good will he will have nothing to do with them at any
hand.

The Creditors part.
FOr the Debtors part, I am persuaded that our Author has performed it
reasonable well.

But for the other of the Creditor (to say the truth) he has practiced that
part very little hitherto, and therefore is very diffident of his ability
therein.

Yet howsoere, he will stand upon his credit,
And justify his word, because he sed it.
For the charitable extent of the Creditors courtesy.
VErily this man of Credence does observe these principles in all his
proceeding of this nature.

First, that he may lend or trust upon such conditions as may tend to the
benefit of the Borrower or Debtor chiefly.

Then, that his own gain may be moderate.

Then, that there may be Record thereof kept for testimony of his sincere
intention, in two or three several books at the least.

And lastly, he does not only lend or trust, but farther gives it a blessing,
that it may yield much increase to the borrower and debtor.

The reasons hereof are all as pregnant as pious.
1 For it is better for him to build than to pull down.

2 He will not grind the forehead of his poor brother.

3 His book cannot err, for it admits no tradition, but the pure and
uncorrupted text it self, as it was delivered in the primitive register, while
Thomas his foreman was yet living, and did bear record as a faithful
witness of these proceedings.

And though the blessing be bestowed upon a dead commodity, yet I hope it
argues no superstition in him that gives it.

And all this is apparently good till we come to

The mystery of Multiplication.
TRadition, it is not tolerable but an abomination, and yet our Creditor
holds that Addition in the secret of shop-booke may be very well allowable.

For so long as he does only make up in credits what he has lost in stock,
or what is decaid in necessary expenses, and not riotously or vainly, seeing
the wicked are but usurpers of the riches of this world, it is lawful for him
with an equal hand to be carried among his Debtors by way of apportionment, to
rate and assesse them at his discretion.

He will take no interest, nor wrong his conscience for any good, his
shop-booke has hitherto held good name and fame. Heresies may creep into the
Church daily, but never into his shop-book in any wife: there is nothing there
but what has been delivered, and his servants (especially one amongst the
rest) will as boldly as any Brewers desperate Clarke maintain and justify it:
shall he not maintain his masters mystery, when they are both to be saved by
the same faith? Why, he shall put the debtor in mind of the delivery of every
parcel, with all the circumstances to it, for he remembers it as perfectly, as
if it had been done but yesterday. Now the Debtor begins to quarrel the
Shop-booke, my Creditor is most justly incensed: And therefore now in the next
place,

The Crow looks to eat the Oyster alive, but is caught in the attempt, and the
hand in the Shop-booke breeds the winde-collique in the warehouse, which
shook the Fabrique and foundation of all his factory as follows:

Suppose the tide is now coming in, and the poor Oyster gapes for some
refection in the moisture of it. The Birds of prey (scilicet) the shopkeeper
the Crow, and the Usurer the Cormorant: these hover about it, each of them
hoping to pull it out of the little tenement where it dwells, and to devour it
alive. Hereupon the Cormorant and the Crow contend for the prize: The Crow
claims it as a Stray lost, and left without the bounds of any watery coverture
on the dry land at a low ebb, The Cormorant challenges it nevertheless, as
being still within his high water-marke; Then the Crow alleges that it is so
wasted (wanting water) that it is become no better than Carrion, and therefore
it does properly belong unto him. The Cormorant denies that, and assures him
that the Oyster is yet alive, and therefore no carrion. But the Crow had given
so much credit formerly, that he would now scarce believe his own eyes
(especially in his wifes case) he would by no means believe this to be true,
and therefore in hope to cosen the Cormorant, he desires that he may only
feel with his bill whether it were so or no: Leave is given by the Cormorant,
who thought it was enough for the Crow to smell upon the prey, intending that
never any more should come to his share: Then the Crow who knew how to ticle a
Trout at his pleasure, did without assistance of Constable or advice of
Counsel, make a most violent entry upon the Oyster, which presently claps to
his door, shuts the Crow within, and caught him so fast by his bill of entry,
that all Colchester and the custom house can testify to this day, with what
uncustomed and uncourteous entertainment he was there received.

Well might the Crow cry and call for his companion the Cormorant to redeem
him from captivity, but all was in vain. The doors were shut up, he could not
so much as belch at the keyhole, or let out the wind which troubled the
warehouse by any means forward or backward, the very foundation of the shop
and shopbord were shaken with the violence thereof.

Being in this extremity, and so taken with the wind, that nothing applied
inwardly could possibly help him, he calls for the shop-booke, and begins to
conjure the collicke with such terrible charms and incantations, as the like
were never devised nor put into any pentacle: Then he raised the great Prince,
In primis, out of his Eastern Emperie, with a legion of Items attending him.

These two he sets to task, and enjoynes them to distinguish his Debtors in
Spero, from those in Despero, and to deal more plainly with him herein, than
Widows use to do by their Husbands estates in the Court of Orphans, and
elsewhere: They perform his design instantly, and the greater number appeared
to be perdues directly desperate and debilitate, amongst the which my cousin
Courtier and my Innes of Court-man were of the number.

The Courtiers suit did long languish and was palliated and upheld with letters
commendatory, it complained much of the disease called the reference, it was a
little lightened by a Cordial certificat laterly, yet in the end no means nor
medicine could serve the turn, but of a stopping and obstruction at the great
seal it died.

The Innes of Court man was neither heir nor aged sufficiently, for the
enabling of any such act as he had undertaken publicly by deed, or privately
in the shop-booke. The Scriver, the City counsel, himself, and all were
fatally infatuated, betrayed with a beard, and foold with formality.

The wind rises more and more, the storm increases, strange stitches on
every side of the shop, wonderful weakness in the warehouse, and
convulsions in the Counterboord and box, complain and cry out upon the
Collicke, at whose mercy we leave him, expecting the eruption thereof very
speedily.

The Signs fore-running the wonderful Crack.
THe certain Signs in a Citizen are these:

He strives to be called into such office, especially as whereby he may have
the stock of the Parish or Company in his custody.

He gives ground in matter of payment, the longer he deals, the more he leaves
in the remainder upon every payment.

He leaves the plain path of his profession, and places more faith in a
Project, then in all the probabilities of his own Trading: and when a Citizen
turns Projector, he has the very tokens of the wonderful Crack upon him.

His Country house is too little for him, and it wants a gatehouse for his Wife
and Coach to come in at, and therefore there must be laid out in building
thrice as much as the Feesimple of all when it is finished will afford.

He takes up at interest to make good the building: all his good debts he sets
over to the immediate accountant in trust, and with an intention to prevent his
Creditors.

All his purchases are either in the name of his son, or some trusty Kinsman
of his wives.

The nearer the Crack, the faster he lays about him, to take up in any kind,
and upon any conditions, then he conveyes all things of value out of his house.

And at last he gives fire with a report of his great losses at or beyond the
seas, where he (God wot) had never any factory or dealing in all his life time.

Then he sends his Wife to her Mothers, where she must live a while, that she
may not be troubled with the noise and clamor of the Creditor.

He betakes himself to his Chamber, keeps the shop windows shut, and
provides a Catalogue of all his desperate credits only to deliver to his
Creditors, when they shall come to treat upon the subject of satisfaction.

The news reaches to the Exchange by noone, where they that have given credit
to him, look so prettily and pitifully one upon another, as you might know
and challenge them by their faces.

Then they gather together, and confer their notes, and cast up the whole
sum what all their credits may come unto, only some of the more pragmaticall
sort, who fear to publish their losses lest their own estates should come
likewise in question, do dissemble the matter, and speak with the least.
Others that suspect, it may be their own case very shortly, pity the man's
misfortune, blame the hardness of the times, deadness of trade, and scarcity
of coin, recounting what he is out for foreign plantations abroad, and other
contributions at home, and with what charge he has gone through so many
offices in so short time, whereat every man relents and lets slack his more
strict purposes, agreeing all to go to his house to confer with him after
dinner.

And so dismiss we them till then.
IT may be you look I should have spoken somewhat of the Crack of my
City-gallant, but it is improper to place him amongst Creditors that has been
bred a borrower from his Cradle, and that according to the custom of the
City: let it only suffice, that though he had not his country house, yet he
had his country Hostess, and though he dealt not in Court Projection, yet he
kept a vile coile for court Protection.

His Hostess she paid the old Widows and his young Mistress their debts in
the same coin that he tendered to them.

And at last when his insolvency appeared upon every post, she preferred any
Justice of peace his Clarke thereabouts to her respectuality before him, so
that there was neither abiding at Rumford, nor return to London, but he must
of necessity make a voyage, be it but to Britlesey, where he lies close under a
borrowed name, which was the last commodity that ever he took up, till his
friends shall have rectified his credit, and restored him to the estate from
which he was so lately collapsed and fallen.

The recovery of the old man, with the common comfort which it did beget, hold
the next place.
AFter dinner all the Creditors met again on the Exchange, where they hold
full three hours conference, during which time not any one of them did believe
one word which another spoke unto him, for they were too wise and learned in
the use and exercise of conformity, to speak the simple truth, because they
were to deal in a matter mixed and compounded of many ingredient credits
commedled and put together.

From hence they go to the house of their Debtor, in number as many as a whole
college of Physicians to enquire for their Patient: they are forthwith brought
up unto him into his Chamber, where they found him in an old suit only fit for
garbling or eating of green-fish, with as many nightcaps upon his head, as
there be cups in a nest of Court dishes, and the old gown which was always
wont to lie at the Hall for ordinary days: in stead of plate there were only
two full Vrinals standing upon the Court-cubbord, by which they might discern
the great disability and weakness, which the winde-collick had wrought within
him.

And in stead of accounts, bonds and bills, and other evidences, there lay only
open before him, the foresaid Catalogue consisting of desperate debts and
debtors (as aforesaid)

They salute him as if they did in a manner partly remember him, and then all
together, as well the man of ten, as he of two and twenty hundred in credits,
without difference, put forward for the first delivery of his mind unto him.

This disorder was much blamed by the graver sort, and upon better advice,
select men were drawn out of them to compound, for so many as would
voluntarily conform themselves, which was to be done according to the
Catalogue, and as the ability would bear it.

In the mean time a letter of license is sealed for his liberty, to call in
and recover what was due unto himself.

This Letter of license begat a commission of conformity, and then to work
they go full roundly: some of the chief who had taken other and better
conditions of satisfaction of him in private, then the rest, showed much
forwardness in the public way of composition, and in the end did so
strengthen their party, that they prevailed against the other.

The whole debt was cried down to six and eight pence in the pound, the
windows were opened, the servants in the shop flung up their caps, the Curse
was removed from their house, their Master was a recovered man, and none but a
banquerupt would say to the contrary.

Their Mistress was sent for home with all the speed that might be, and this
night all her kindred and their masters friends were to solemnize this happy
recovery of the decayed man, where they meant to drink to the health of six
and eight pence, from six in the evening till eight next morning.

The common Comfort only remains.
NOw the recovered man makes a most strickt scruteny and review into his
shopbookes, as well for debtors solvent as insolvent; he confers his Registers
all together, and where he finds a debt uncrost in any one of them, though it
be discharged in the other two it makes no matter, this is it by which he must
stand charged, and unless he can discharge himself by this also, he is like
to perish and receive condemnation by the very letter without tradition.

He will spare no man whom the Law puts into his hands, lest he become a
partaker in his iniquity. He calls home all things which he had formerly
conveyed out of doors. And sets forward his building in the country.

He flourishes as he never did before, and will give 1000. pound with his lame
daughter now, more he then offered with her at the last swan-hopping.

He Will out-bid all the town for the great and lesser forms.

Briefly, he vows:

To redeem the time past.

To prevent the evil day to come.

To run the course, and tread in the footsteps of some of the right
worshipful, and in reverence of conformity to convert his old composition
gown into a fair and comfortable foot-cloth.

But three rich wives, and such another Crack,
Will make thee scorn to cry (What do you lack?)
By the Counsel of Ram Ally.
Non nobis nati sumus.
Whereas in these latter times it concerns us in civil policy, to be so
much the more industrious as we are become numerous above former ages, and no
endeavor can be so beneficial and honorable as the enlarging of our
territory by discovery and plantation in parts habitable and agreeable with our
debitory disposition, where we may disperse our Colonies with more convenience
and advantage than at this present: for which purpose we have lately employed
and set forth the good ship, called (The least in sight) accompanied with that
approved and well appointed Pinace (The pay naught) the charge and command of
both which, we conferd upon Sir Oliver Owemuch, who manned the same with persons
best qualified in the Art of Insolvency, the greater part whereof, himself had
known and tried to be men of much trust, being his own Creditors, and
creatures of his own discretion, whose loving kindenesses he required in
manner of employment following, viz.

His Mercer he made Master of (The least in sight) and his Baker Boat-swaine.

And because his Vintner had bestowed many a shot upon him in prosperity, he
made him Master Gunner in his adversity.

His Tobacco-man desired to be the Gunners mate, because he would make all
smoke again.

A Purser they needed not: for besides that, they had all bad memories in
calling of things past to remembrance, they held it a foolish thing to keep
accounts where there was no purpose of payment.

His Haberdasher came somewhat with the latest, but his Laundresse by the power
of her Letters commendatory, preferred her husband to be Controller of the Coile,
Remembrancer of the Bilbowes, and Yeoman Squabber of (The pay naught.)

And his Tailor last of all, because he had the best stomach to the action, he
was made Steward, and had charge of the victual for the voyage.

Being thus provided on Monday the first of March, the wind blew fair from
the East, when they left the Templestaires; And the same day being Saint David's
day, the air grew thick and very foggy, insomuch that the Pinace had lost the
Admiral, had it not in stead of a light in her Lantern, hung up a Leeke in
the maine top, by the sent whereof it recovered sight of her again the next
morning by break of day.

On the second, third, and fourth day, the weather was very variable and
stormy, howsoever they still spoon'd onward for most advantage.

About eight of the clock on friday the fifth of May, their Pylot who had
been a Spectacle-maker and a Prospectuary without Temple bar, descried a
sail making toward them, which they suspected by his flag to be the
water-bailiffe of London.

Hereupon a Council was called aboard, the Captain to consider what was to be
done in this imminent extremity.

Some advised that it were fit to make to the land, if they knew where to touch
without hazard.

Others of higher resolution advised to stand the fortune of a Sea Fight, and
to draw their number out of sight into the hold, whereby to encourage the enemy
to a nearer approach, which opinion was generally received and allowed.

Presently, as the occasion required, it was agreed that for the sublimation of
every spark Spirit amongst them, there should be an extraordinary allowance
made instantly (that was) the full proportion of one pipe of Tobacco, and a
Temple-pot of six to every two of them, which when they had cheerfully past
about; the Tailor whose conscience was more tender than his stomach, would
needs be resolved in two points concerning his souls health before the fight
should begin. The first was, whether the cause and quarrel which they were to
undertake were justifyable orno, for that he ever held Ludgate more worthy than
Newgate in diverse respects: and the next was in case he should miscarry in the
action, whether Limbus patrum and infantum, were not under his own shop-boord
or no.

Before my Tailor could have opinion herein of their Captains Chaplain, who
had been a Vineger-man formerly, and a fellow of excellent sharp
apprehension: the supposed enemy came within shot, whereupon every one of them
began to apply him to his charge.

But just as Master Gunner was ready to let fly, (not for fear I hope) they
perceived no other assailants but the Churchwardens of new Brainford, who were
bound for London to buy bells, not for the Church but their morris dance
against the ensuing Whitson-ale. Hereupon for their better recovery, the
allowance was again doubled to every one of them. And on they pass bravely
till on Saturday the sixth, they discerned firm land, lying upon the Savoyans
Eastward. Here the Captain drew out the one half of his forces, and with his
long boat put them to land, where they found a most spacious continent fit for
plantation at four degrees beyond the Temple, the climate exceeding temperate
so long as you pay the Tennis-court keeper for your lodging, the accommodations
most excellent, either through the white Heart into the Covent Garden, and so
into the Country round about; or from the great house through the Swanne into
Drury Lane, and so forth free as bird in the air: The Lacedemonian women
supply them with fish and fruit of all sorts, which they bring down in
abundance from the upland countries: insomuch as there is neither fear of want
of victuals, so long as they have money; Nor of security while they do put
themselves under the protection of Denmarke-house: Here they left the
Haberdasher and certain other to winter it, and the rest returned aboard the
ninth day of May, bearing their course still West and by North: On the twelfth
day, Cape Virde, or Greenes wharfe, did show it self unto them, where they
likewise put in, and forraged clean through it on both sides. This place
(besides other goodly beasts of all sorts) is most famous for Hearts, whose
horns are of the comeliest branch and spreading, as also of dimension and
extension that can be; so that in memory of them, the Captain named the place
Harts-horne-Ally: Then the which no place hitherto discovered, is of a more
capable continent, or more rich in Minerals, Vegitatives or Victuals, or more
agreeable with the constitution of our countrymen, especially if they be
married. The several commodities and merchandises whereof you shall receive
more at large upon return of the Least in sight, from thence.

In the mean time we exhort you that both with cheerful contribution, and
otherwise with your advice, you do not only uphold the old ones, but also
further and advance the said two new plantations so happily discovered, and so
prosperously pursued hitherto, by you the Council and Adventurers of the said
company, and at your only charge and expense.

So ye that see it may wish, but never shall ye
Perform the like adventures as Ram-Ally.
FINIS.

