THE MYSTERY OF Redemption.

OR THE PARTICVLAR manner how Man is Redeemed from Sin, Justified before God,
and made partaker of everlasting Life.

DESCRIBING THE Nature, Causes, Parts, Properties and Effects of Justification.

WITH DIVERSE SWEET AND comfortable Prayers interposed between every Chapter.

AT LONDON Imprinted by Felix Kyngston, for William Cotton. 1607.

TO THE WORSHIPFVLL, MY euer-honored Mother Mris ELIZABETH POVVEL, all
Prosperity and Happiness external, internal, eternal.
IT is a special point of the duty of Children toward their Parents, as in
presence by serviceable offices, so in absence by other effectual
significations, to yield proof of their tha^kful minds: which neither any
Child can omit, without touch of ingratitude; nor any Parent forbear,
without just reproof. Wherefore (most loving and dear Mother) lest I should
seem to neglect the root, out of which I bra^ched, to forget the secondary
Auctor of my being, or not to remember her, to who^ I owe my self; after a
long pursuit in a painful chase, I now return you such a pray, as you were
wont to love, desiring thereby, to procure your Blessing. You are not ignorant,
that these many years past I have studied and practiced spiritual Physic,
traveling in the Scrutinie of the maladies and medicines incident and proper
to Souls: and here I offer unto you a present of my profession. I have
prepared abundance of the bread of Angels, for the repast of your Soul, that
your kindness in some part my be counteruailed, and my duty in some sort not
left unperformed. Hitherto I have principally labored for others: but who has
more interestin the grape, then she that planted the vine? and who more right
unto the crop, then she that sowed the corn? Despise not the te^dernes of my
years, neither deem that God measures his indowments by number of days.
Hoarie senses are often couched under green locks; and some are riper in the
Spring, then others in the Autumn of their age: a little cloud may cast a large
shower, and oftentimes GOD reuealeth that to Babes, which he co^cealeth from
the VVisest: which I allege not to claim any prerogative surmounting the rate
of usual habilities, but to avoid all touch of presumption, in aduising my
Elders. You have the pre-eminence in carnal consanguinity; but in spiritual
alliance, we are of equal proximitie to our heavenly Father. And he may be
a Father to the Soul, that is a Son to the Body, and requite the benefit of
his temporary life, by teaching his Parent how to eschew eternal death.
Neither do I speak this, as if I were ignorant you were already impathed in
your voyage toward the Celestial Jerusalem, the first steps whereunto your
self taught me, but that there may be some rubbes in the way, which I happily,
by reason of my more dilligent search therein, being a professed Guide, may sooner
descry, and without dishonor to your age, or disparagme^t to your person, give
you warning to avoid the^. Thus, dear Mother, reco^mending unto you my most
bounden duty, and humbly desiring that my sincere affection may find excuse of
my boldness, I take my leave.

From LONDON-HOVSE, this 18. day of November, 1606. Your most obedient and
affectionate Son, Gabriel Powel.

TO THE CHRIstian Reader.
CHristian Reader, Jf thou do seriously desire, to learn the Mystery of
thy Redemption, to understand the holy Scriptures, to be cleansed from thy
sins, to be filled with graces, to be enriched with virtues, to govern thy
self in prosperity, to be comforted in adversity, to triumph over thine
enemies, to be enflamed in meditation, to persevere in devotion; briefly, to
dye happily, and to live eternally: Exercise thy self in this small Manual,
wherein is the direct way unto Heaven plainly discovered, the passage evidently
cleared, the lets perfectly removed, and the Trauailer exceedingly comforted.
Farewell.

THE CONTENTS of this Book.
A Prayer for Grace and Wisdom, to understand the Mystery of our Redemption.
page 3 CHAP. I. What Justification is. page 8 Confession of Sins with Prayer
for Remission. page 19 CHAP. II. The manner and order of Justification. where
also is handled of Vocation. page 29 The Sinners Resignation of himself into
the hands of his Redeemer. page 42 CHAP. III. Of the Causes of Justification;
and first, of the Efficient Cause. page 48 A Prayer for Faith. p. 85 CHAP. IV.
Of the Material Cause of Justification. page 88 A Prayer for lively sense and
assurance of our Justification. page 96 CHAP. V. Of the Formal Cause of our
Justification. page 100 A Thanksgiving for our Justification intermixed with
Confession and Prayer. page 106 CHAP. VI. Of the Final Cause of Justification.
page 112 A Prayer for eternal life. page 114 CHAP. VII. Of the Parts of
Justification. page 120 A patheticall Prayer against the temptations of Satan.
page 152 CHAP. VIII. Of the Properties of Justification. page 157 A Prayer for
Sanctification. page 173 CHAP. IX. Of the Effects of Justification. page 180 A
Thanksgiving for our Redemption joined with Prayer. page 193 A Morning Prayer
for a private Family. p. 204 An Evening Prayer for a private Family. p. 212 A
Prayer to be said for a Sicke-man, or by the Sicke-man himself, altering but
only the person. page 221
THE MYSTERY of Redemption.
QVESTION.

Seeing all men by nature are sinners, (Romans 3.24.) destitute of the glory of
God, and consequently subject unto temporal and eternal death: how may we
escape this fearful and heavy Judgment?

ANSWER.

We cannot escape Gods Judgments against us for our sins, except we be
reconciled unto him and justified in his sight.

Which that we may the better apprehe^d and attain unto; it is necessary
that we consider both the Nature and Properties of Justification, and also the
means and manner how it is wrought in us.

A PRAYER FOR Grace and Wisdom to understand the Mystery of our Redemption.
ALmighty and everlasting God, and in Christ Jesus our most gracious and
merciful Father, I thy poor servant, miserable and wretched sinner, do humbly
prostrate my self before the heavenly throne of thy divine Majesty, entirely
beseeching thy Fatherly goodness graciously to grant unto me thy heavenly grace
and wisdom, whereby I may truly learn to know thee rightly, and be diligent
to perform all thy precepts effectually. Enlarge my understanding and increase
my knowledge. Give me a lively sense to discern sweet from sour and sour
from sweet, good from evil and evil from good, that sin and superstition
deceive me not under the cloak of Religion and virtue. O Lord, this must be
thy work; for I confess that my reason is blind, by will is froward, my wit
crafty to deceive my self, my understanding and all my natural powers, quite
alienated and enstra^ged from thee. But, good Father, dispell thou these
clouds and confusions of perverse ignorance, and endue me with thy holy Spirit
of grace and wisdom, that I may have my heart cleansed from the corrupt
affections of this deceitful world, and the eyes of my understanding opened, to
see and embrace thine everlasting truth, especially the admirable Mystery of
our Redemption by the obedience and passion of thy dear Son our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ. Endue me O Lord, with the purity of this heavenly
knowledge, and let me be able to discern between truth and error, that I may
be always free from heresy, and not be entangled with false doctrine, nor
defiled with the loathsome pitch of man's inventions: but that I may safely
walk the right way into thy kingdom, and faithfully apprehe^d and take hold of
the riches and righteousness of thy Son Christ Jesus, so that my whole life
and conversation may be hereafter directed to the honor and glory of thy
name, and peace of my conscience, through Christ our only Mediator and
Advocate; in whose name I farther pray unto thee as himself has taught me,
Our Father which art in heaven, etc.

What Justification is. CHAP. I.
THE whole course and order of our salvation is absolved, as it were, in two
degrees, 1. In the knowledge of our own misery. 2. In confidence of the
Divine mercy.

Our misery threefold.
2 Of our misery there are three parts, 1. The Fault. 2. The Guilte. 3. The
Punishment.

Divine mercy threefold.
3 Of the Divine Mercy there are three parts in the like manner, oppositive
unto these 1. Remission of the fault. 2. Absolution from the guilte. 3.
Deliverance from the punishment.

4 The whole process from our misery, unto the Divine mercy is termed
Justification.

5 Justification is taken two ways, Justification twofold.
1. Physically or Naturally. 2. Politically or Iudicially.

6 Justification Physically or Naturally taken, Physical.
signifies an actual tra^smutation or change from inherent quality of
unrighteousness, unto inherent quality of righteousness; from evil to good.

7 Thus must that place ( Apoc. 22.11.) be understood, He that is righteous,
let him be righteous still.

8 And certainly a man is denominated righteous, from inhere^t righteousness,
(1. Ioh. 3.17.) He that does righteousness, is righteous.

9 Justification being taken in this fense, is indeed Iachoatiue
glorification, or Sanctification, which is a certain change between inherent
contrary terms or qualities.

10 Justification Politically or Iudicially taken, 2. Political.
signifies the pronunciation of a sentence of Absolution or righteousness upon
a man, by some Judge out of a tribunal or Judgment seat. ( Romans 8.33.) Who
shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? It is God that justifies.

11 And this sense is common, both to such as have Inherent proper
righteousness, and also to such as be not so qualified, but have the
Righteousness of another applied unto them.

12 For he that is Righteous in himself, may by a Judge be pronounced so to
be, by his own inherent righteousness.

13 So are the blessed Angels justified by God.

14 So also should Man have bin justified, if he had continued in his
original righteousness.

15 Also, a man may be said to be justified, that is, pronounced just or
righteous, by that righteousness which is not inherent in himself, but is
properly another Man's, but made his by covenant.

16 After this manner any Debtor may be said to be justified by the
righteousness of his surety, who in his name satisfies the creditour and
pays the debt.

17 And in this sense only, is Justification used in the argument we have to
treat of, which is thus defined.

18 Justification is the Sentence of GOD, Justification defined.
sitting as judge in his tribunal seat, whereby for the satisfaction and
obedience of Christ he freely remitteth the sins of the beleeuing-sinner and
imputes the righteousness of Christ unto him, for his glory, and the sinners
everlasting salvation.

That Justification is a judicial Act.
19 Now that Justification is a judicial act, it is manifest by sundry reasons.

20 I. Because it is plainly described so in Scripture, Psalm. 143.2. Job.
9.2.3.

21 II. Because in this Act there are, Debt, that is, Sin, ( Mat. 6.12.) a law
accusing, ( Romans 3.19.20.) conscience witnessing, ( Romans 2.15.) an Advocate
pleading, (1. Ioh. 2.1.) and a final Sentence, Romans 3.23.24.25.28.

22 III. Because such words as be equivalent unto Justification, are judicial,
as to remit sins, ( Psalm. 32.1. Romans 3.25. Romans 4.7.) to loose sins, ( Matthew.
16.19. Matthew. 18.18.) to forgive, ( Coloss. 2.13.) not to impute sins, (2.
Cor. 5.19.) to put out the handwriting, Col. 2.14.

23 IV. Because the words which are opposite unto Justification, are Judicial,
as Accusation, ( Romans 8.33.) Condemnation, ( Matthew. 12.37. Romans 5.16. Romans
8.34.) Binding, ( Matthew. 16.19. Mat. 18.18.) Retayning of sins, Ioh. 20.23.

24 Even as the word Justification, so is the word Imputation also common: Of
Imputation.
For Righteousness is said to be IMPVTED, both unto him who is inherently
just in himself; and also unto him that has not his own inherent, but the
righteousness of another, namely Christ's righteousness applied unto him.

25 That Justification is common, appears by that speech of the Apostle, (
Romans 3.28. Gal. 2.16.) where he says, that Man is justified, not by the works
of the Law, but by faith in Jesus Christ.

26 Whereby he manifestly declares, that a man may be justified, that is,
pronounced just and righteous, as well by his own works or righteousness of the
Law (if any had such works indeed) as a man may by faith, that is, by the
righteousness of Christ apprehended by faith.

27 So also that Imputation is common, it is evident out of these words of the
Apostle, ( Romans 4.4.) To him that works the wages is not imputed by favor,
but by debt.

28 In which words he shows, that the righteousness of works, that is
inherent righteousness, may be said to be imputed to a man (if any were so well
qualified) as well as the righteousness of faith.

29 But our speech is of the Imputation of another righteousness.

CONFESSION OF sins, with prayer for Remission.
I Have sinned, o Lord, I have sinned. The infinite and euer-crying guilte of
my sins continually calls for infinite and never dying punishment. Oh, I have
sinned, and therefore am ashamed to appear before thee, much more to crave any
good thing at thy hands. I am a weak and wretched creature, and thou art a GOD
of infinite power and Majesty. I am a guilty and grievous offendour, thou a
most just and severe Judge. Sin has left no good thing in me, al is wounded,
al is poisoned, and how shall I appear before thee, into whose presence shall
enter no unclean thing. Alas! I am sick with sin. Sick? yea dead; twice
dead, subject to mortality, and subject to eternal damnation. I was conceived
and borne in sin, and hitherto have continually lived therein; the greatness
of my disease has almost quite extinguished the sense thereof, and my
continual custom in sinning confirms my impudency, and takes from me the
opinion of sin. But now the only glimpse of felicity causes me to acknowledge
my own misery, therefore I am constrained to confess with David, I have
sinned grievously, and there stop, because I cannot reckon them. My heart is
the root and fountain of corruption, my eyes the eyes of vanity, my ears the
ears of folly, my mouth the mouth of deceit, my hands the hands of iniquity,
and every part of my body does dishonor thee, which thou have created for thy
glory, and would be glorified of thee. My understanding apprehends nothing
but sin, my will affects nothing but wickedness, my memory retains
nothing but evil things. As for thy holy precepts and heavenly ordinances, O
Lord, so far have I been from observing or keeping any part thereof as I
ought, that I have added transgression unto blindness, malice to ignorance, and
rebellion to sin. What now shall I say? To whom shall I go? or whither shall I
fly? Oh, I sink in sin. O Death! O Grave! Yours is the victory. Thou see,
O Lord, what I have been from the beginning, and what now I am. Neither do I
marvel so much at my wickedness, as I admire thy goodness, that thou have
suffered me, with unspeakable patience, thus long to run on in my sins.
Because thou art so good, I imagined I might be so evil. Because thou did
bestow such great benefits upon me, I thought I might commit so great offenses
against thee. So that the same medicine yt thou have ordained against sin, I
have made a provocation unto sin. Who but thou would suffer these contempts,
and yet be contemned still? Notwithstanding, O most gracious Father, seeing
thou have sworn thou desire not the death of a penitent sinner, if I repent,
wilt not thou be pleased? if I return unto thee, will thou be offended? No,
no, I know thou do long until I come unto thee. Why then, most merciful
Savior, I come, I come quickly. Reject not thy poor creature, that deiecteth
himself and wholly relyeth upon thee. If I come full of scabbes and wounds,
thou can heal me again. If I be blind, thou can restore me to my sight
again. If I be dead, thou can raise me up again. Thou shall sprinckle me, O
Lord, with Isope, and I shall be clean; thou shall wash me, and I shall be
whiter then snow. Thy mercies are greater the^ mine offenses. Thy pity is more
then mine iniquity: and thou art able to pardon more sins then I am able to
commit. If thou refuse me, who shall receive and comfort me? If thou forsake
me, who shall embrace and defend me? Here I am, do with me as seems good in
thy eyes. If thou will, I shall see thy face and rejoice: if thou will
persecute me, glorify thy self. But will thou enter into judgment with thy
servant? thou art just to all. But will thou be extreme to mark what is done
amiss? Lord, who may abide it? But will thou be terrible unto me? Where then
is thy mercy? Have mercy therefore upon me, whose property is always to have
mercy; have mercy upon me, O Father, neither look unto the multitude of my
sins, but unto the multitude of thy mercies, for thy only Son Jesus Christ
his sake, to whom with thee and the holy Ghost, be all honor and glory, both
now and for ever. Amen.

CHAP. II. The manner and order of Justification, where also is handled of
vocation.
NOw in this Justification of Man, whereby he is pronounced righteous, by the
righteousness of another, to wit, of Christ, God proceeds in this manner and
order.

2 First, there is an Effectual Vocation, or Calling, whereby God offers
Christ and his righteousness, and the sinner apprehends him being offered by
faith.

Effectual Calling what it is.
3 Effectual Vocation, or Calling, is that whereby God calls out of
darkness into light, from the power of Satan unto God in Christ Jesus, those
who^ he elected of his mere grace, by the promulgation of the covenant of
grace, or preaching of the Gospel.

4 The Called also, by the same grace of God, answer and believe in him
through Jesus Christ. This answer is of Faith, which indeed is the condition
of the promise in the Covenant of grace.

Effectual Calling has two parts. 1 Outward calling.
5 Wherefore our Effectual calling consists of two parts. 1. The Outward
calling of such as be elect by the publication of the Covenant under the
condition of faith, and that of Gods mere grace. 2. Inward faith.
2. Inward Faith wrought in them by ye same grace, which is nothing else but
the fulfilling of the condition.

Note well.
6 The former grace may be termed the Grace of vocation, and is common to all
that are called, Elect and Reprobate.

7 The latter grace may be called, the Grace of faith, appertaining only to the
Elect.

A twofold application in effectual calling.
8 So then in Effectual Calling there is a twofold application: the one of
GOD, offering Christ and his righteousness: the other of a sinner, apprehending
Christ being offered by faith, and applying him unto himself.

9 If it be demanded, Question.
Whether the will of man in his calling or conversion be merely passive, or
active also?

Answer. How the will of manstandeth in his conversion.
10 I answer: In respect of the grace of God which preue^teth man, the will
(seeing it is not yet begun to be regenerate) is merely Passive: as may be
proved.

11 I. Because al Man's strength and ability concerning spiritual and heavenly
things is altogether exstinct, so as he can neither prepare himself to grace,
nor receive it being offered, nor turn unto God, nor will, desire or follow
after that which is good and acceptable unto to God. Romans 9.21.

12 II. Because we are all dead in sin ( Ephesians. 2.1. C^loss. 3.12.) but a
dead man is only passive in respect of his quickening.

13 III. Because the will is not only dead, but also stubborn of it self, and
cannot choose but resist, being not moved and kindled by God. Act. 9.1.2. etc.

14 But In respect of the Time in which the conversion is wrought, Note.
the will is not like a stock, but whilst it is healed and cured by God, it
is Active, that is, it is not idle and void of all sense and motion, but
follows the holy Ghost who draws it.

15 For in the very act of Conversion or Calling God causes us by grace to
will, he moves and inclines our wills, but yet so as the whole efficacy of the
action depends upon Gods spirit ( Philip. 2.13.) It is God who works in us
both the will and the deed: where Will is not understood of the substance of
the will, but of a new quality.

Justification follows effectual calling.
16 After this effectual Calling follows Justification, whereby God imputes
that righteousness of Christ, being apprehended by faith in Vocation, unto the
sinner, as if it were his own proper righteousness. Or, whereby he pronounces
him just in that righteousness of Christ, and the sinner receives it being
imputed unto him by God.

A twofold Application in Justification.
17 In Justification likewise there is a twofold application; the first is the
Imputation of GOD; the second is the sinners apprehension and application by
faith, of that other righteousness being imputed by God unto him.

18 These two applications which are in Justification, do differ from those
two which were in effectual Calling or Vocation.

19 For in Vocation, the application of God is called Oblation, or simply
Calling: In Justification it is termed Imputation.

20 II. In Vocation the application of Man is called, Apprehension of offered
righteousness by faith; or, Faith in the offered righteousness: In
Justification, it is termed Faith in imputed righteousness.

A twofold office of faith.
21 Hence we must observe a twofold office of Faith: One in Effectual Calling,
when it receives Christ with his righteousness being offered: the Other in
Justification, when it receives Christ and his righteousness being imputed unto
him.

22 We must also note, that when it is said, Man is justified by faith, that
Faith is meant which went before in Effectual calling; Note.
namely which apprehends Christ and his righteousness being offered.

23 As for that Faith in Justification, which apprehends the imputed
righteousness of Christ, by it we are rather said to be saved, the^ justified.
( Ephesians. 2.8.) By grace you are saved through faith. Eternal salvation follows
Justification.

24 If it be demanded. Whether when the righteousness of Christ is
apprehended by faith in Effectual Calling, Question.
a man may be said to be justified by that righteousness?

25 I answer. Answer.
Not so: For Justification is the pronunciation of a Sentence: In Vocation
there is no Sentence pronounced; wherefore a man cannot be justified by sole
Vocation.

26 Again, Question.
if any will ask: Whether seeing the righteousness of Christ is by faith in
him that is called, a man may not be denominated righteous by that righteousness?

27 I answer. Answer.
I will not plainly deny this after a sort: namely, that he is righteous by
faith; but that he may be termed and called righteous, I would not so affirm:
seeing the Judge has not yet pronounced sentence upon him; to wit, that
Sentence that is of a certain new grace.

28 For it is not but by grace that such as are just by faith in effectual
calling, God pronounces them so to be, and imputes the righteousness of
another unto them, as if it were their own.

29 And thus much for the order whereby God proceeds in the Justification of
a sinner.

THE SINNERS REsignation of himself into the hands of his Redeemer.
O Lord God, which art the highest and the lowest, the farthest off and the
nearest to, the longest angry and the soonest pleased: wherefore should I be
afraid to speak unto thee? Thou have made all things for me, and me for thy
self. Thou have given me al things, that I should give my self wholly unto
thee; But I have taken the commodity of all thy benefits, and yet I never gave
thee the glory and tribute, which of duty I was bound to give thee. Thy
creatures were always obedient at my commandment, because thou had given
them so in charge; and I always atte^ded to offend thee, for whose sake each
thing was ready to do me service. Thou have given me health, but sin and
rebellion was the fruit thereof. Thou have given me strength, but I have
employed it in the service of thine enemy. Notwithstanding all which, thou
have still sought by all means to draw me unto thee. Thou have looked and
tarried for my conversion, and I have abused thy patience. Thou have called
me, and I have stopped my ears at thy calling. Thou have given me a long
time to repent, and I have consumed it in vanity and farther tra^sgression.
Thou have stricken me, and I have not felt it. Thou have corrected me, and I
would not receive thy correction. Yea the more I have been chastised and
cherished by thee, the more has mine heart bin hardened, showing my self
unthankful for the one, and rebellious toward the other. Yet for all this, O
most merciful and loving Father, sithence thou have hitherto been so gracious
unto me, and bast commanded me that I should never despair, nor mistrust thy
goodness: I therefore refer my self wholly to thy mercy, and do beseech thee
to grant me grace to amend my life, that from this time forwards I may ever
please thee, and serve thee in such sort, that I never separate my self from
thee any more, but may continually remain in thy grace and favor world
without end. O sweet Savior, did not thou say, Draw near unto me, and I
will draw near unto you? I challenge my Lord. Bear witness with me, o ye
heaven and earth, and all ye blessed Angels, and thou holy of Holies, the holy
Ghost, bear witness with me in this hour, that I give my self wholly unto my
Redeemer. Take me sweet JESUS unto thee, and give me not over unto my self
again. I am thine, not mine, temper me as thou would have me. I am thy
Image, I will be like thee. Oh, that my ways were so directed, that I might
keep thy statutes! what pleasure is it for me, to walk in darkness? Try
me O Lord, and search my heart, if there be any way of rebellion in me; and
lead me home, and I will follow my Lord whither soever goes.

CHAP. III. Of the Causes of Justification; and first, of the Efficient Cause.
Causes of Justification diversely considered.
THe CAUSES of Justification, are to be considered diversely, to wit, as
Justification it self is taken, either Actiuely, in respect of God who
justifies: or Passiuely, in respect of man which is justified.

The efficient cause Actiuely taken.
2 The EFFICIENT cause of Justification, as it is Actiuely taken, is either
Principal, or Organicall.

The Principal efficient.
3 The Principal Efficient, is GOD ( Romans 8.33.) the Father, in the Son, by
the Holy Ghost, (2. Cor. 5.19. 1. Cor. 6.19) The Father Imperant, the Son
Obseque^t, and the Holy Ghost Co^summant. Psa. 40.9. Tit. 3.5. 2. Cor. 1.22.

4 For it is his part to absolve from guilt, by whose justice a man is made
guilty. It is he that pronounces a man righteous, whose will is the rule and
square of all righteousness. And it is he that gives Judgment of life or death,
who by nature, right and office is the supreme Judge.

5 The Impellent cause of this Efficient, is twofold, Internal, or External.

The Internal efficient.
6 The Internal cause, is the Grace or Mercy of the Father, ( Romans 3.24.) as
well by reason of the good pleasure of his will in predestinating into the
adoption of Sons ( Ephesians. 1.5.) as also by reason of his oeconomie and
dispensation, both in ordaining his Son for this end, and in applying unto us
the benefit of Christ. Romans 3.25. Coloss. 1.12.

7 And this Grace (which in Scriptures is termed (...), and in Schools, Gratia
gratum faciens, and Gratis dans) is perpetually opposed against Works, (which
are the gifts of Grace, termed in Schools Gratiae gratis datae) because God
took the first cause of our Justification not from us or our works, but in
himself, and from himself, according to the unsearchable riches of the glory
of his grace. Ephesians. 2.8.9. Tit. 3.5.

No Preparation in us to Justification.
8 Whereupon it is manifest, that there can be no Disposition of our selves or
Preparation by us to induce this form of Justification.

9 For albeit there are two principal degrees of Preparation that go before
Justification, if not in time, yet in nature, to wit, the sense of our own
Misery, and a confused knowledge of the Mercy of God; yet all this makes
nothing for the Efficient Cause, not only of condignity (as the Schoolmen
speak) but not of congruence.

The External Efficient.
10 The External impellent Cause of this Efficient is Christ as well in respect
of his Merit, as also of his Efficacy and operation.

11 Of his Merit: Because he acquired the benefit of Justification unto us,
both by his Active and Passive obedience; by his life and death. 1. Tim. 2.6.
1. Ioh. 1.7.

12 Of his Efficacy: Because he applies effectually the acquired benefit of
Justification unto us, both by offering it in the preaching of his Word, and
also by conferring the same by the inward effectual operation of his holy
Spirit. Romans 1.16. 2. Cor. 5.19.

13 But that we may more plainly declare, how God is the Efficient Cause of
our Justification: How God is said to Justify.
we must diligently observe that the Manner of Effecting, whereby God is said to
justify is diverse and sundry.

1. By works.
14 I. God is said to Justify by Works and inherent Righteousness. So he
justifies the blessed Angels. So also he should have Justified Man, if he had
not fallen. And thus the Israelites sought Justification, by the works of the
Law. Romans 9.31.32.

2. By Faith.
15 II. God is said to Justify of Faith, or by Faith. By Faith I understand
Christ and his righteousness, or Satisfaction, or Obedience, or Merits being
apprehended by Faith.

Note well.
16 In this manner of Justifying are comprehended two things. 1. Christ, or the
Merits of Christ. 2. Our Faith, without which the Merits of Christ cannot be
applied unto us effectually for our Justification.

17 This Merit of Christ is the cause of all Spiritual blessings (in the
execution of the decree of Election) which God bestows upon us; though after
a diverse manner.

18 I say, in the Execution of the decree of Election, The merit of Christ
cannot be the cause of Election.
because the Merit of Christ cannot be the cause of Election it self, but only
Gods good pleasure proceeding of his mere love and mercy. Luke 12.32. Romans
11.5. Ephesians. 1.5. 1. Deuteronomy. 7.7.8. Deuteronomy. 10.15.

19 I. Because the Merit of Christ was not from all eternity.

20 II. Because Christ himself, as he is the Mediator, was elected from before
the foundation of the world. Esa. 42.1. Mat. 12.18. 1. Pet. 1.20. 1. Pet. 2.5.

21 III. Because the Merit of Christ is an effect of our eternal Election: for
therefore Christ merited for us, because we were Elected.

22 But Christ may well be said to be the Material Cause of our Election,
Note.
if we take the matter for the Subject, or Matter in which ( Ephesians. 1.4.) He
elected us in him, that is, in Christ; for Christ is the head, in which is
grounded the election of the members.

The merit of Christ the efficient cause of Vocation.
23 To return to our purpose. Christ and his merit, is the Efficient Cause of
our Effectual vocation or Calling, which is not from all eternity, but in
time; yet without respect unto Faith; seeing Faith is but then given, and is
the second part of our calling.

Of Justification.
24 Again, Christ and his Merit is the cause of our Justification, but not
without Faith, wherewith in Effectual calling we have apprehended and laid hold
on him.

And of Glorification.
25 Lastly, Christ and his merit, is the cause of our Glorification; but with
Faith apprehending the imputed righteousness of Christ in Justification.

26 Hereby we see that Man is Justified by the Merits of Christ, as it were by
a manner or way whereby God justifies him; but not without Faith apprehending
that Merit being offered in Effectual Calling.

27 Whereupon the Apostle unto the Romans and Gal. expresses this manner (which
is a certain compou^d thing) by the only name of Faith, whereunto sometimes he
joins Jesus Christ, as ( Romans 3.22.) The righteousness of God by the faith of
Jesus Christ. So ( Gal. 2.16.) Man is justified by the faith of Jesus Christ.
And ( Romans 3.25.) Through Faith in his blood.

28 III. God is said to justify by his Grace and Mercy. 3. By grace.
And certainly this Grace does excellently well agree with Faith, but not at
all with Works. ( Romans 11.6. Ephesians. 2.8.9.) These speeches do well agree
together, God justifies by Faith; and, God justifies by Grace: which cannot
be affirmed of Works.

29 But here Question may be moved concerning the Order of these two.
Question.
Whether Faith or Grace go before: Whether Faith be the cause of Grace; or
contrariwise, whether Grace be the cause of Faith?

Answer. Faith goes before the grace of Justification.
30 I Answer. Faith goes before, and Grace follows after. Faith, that is,
Christ and his merits being apprehended by Faith in Effectual Calling, is the
cause of ye new Grace whereby GOD justifies a man.

31 And to speak more plainly hereof, Note well.
All spiritual blessings in the execution of Gods decree of Election, as
Vocation, Justification and Glorification, do proceed from Gods Grace. For
example;

32 In Effectual Calling the first thing is the Merit of Christ, then
follows the Grace of GOD, after comes Vocation.

33 So also in Justification, first is the Merit of Christ, which was
apprehended in Vocation, then there is the Grace of God, whereof proceeds
Justification.

34 And likewise in Glorification, the first is the Merit of Christ being
imputed in Justification and apprehended by Faith, next follows the Grace of
God, and then Glorification.

35 Herein stands the difference, that in Effectual Vocation or Calling, the
only Merit of Christ without our faith, is the cause of Grace.

36 But in Justification and Glorification the Merit of Christ being
apprehended by Faith, is the cause of Grace.

37 Out of these things which we have said, it is evident, that Faith, or
Christ and his merit apprehended by faith, is the cause of that Grace whereby
God justifies man.

38 Whereupon after that the Apostle had said ( Romans 3.24.) We are justified
freely (that is) by his grace, presently he adds, through the redemption
that is in Christ Jesus: noting thereby the cause of that Grace whereby we are
justified, namely the Redemption of Christ apprehended by faith in Effectual
calling.

39 And ( Romans 4.16.) Therefore is the inheritance by Faith, that it might come
by Grace: in which words the Apostle in mateth that life eternal is therefore
of Faith, that there might be place for Grace, which is the Effect of Faith
apprehe^ding the imputed righteousness of Christ in Justification.

40 If it be demanded, How the Merit of Christ and the Grace of God, Question.
which is contrary unto merit, may consist together?

41 I Answer. Answer.
The Merit of Christ (not our own merits) may well stand together with the
Grace of GOD. For Christ's satisfaction whereby he satisfied the Justice of his
Father, is that thing that meriteth the Grace of God for us.

42 But if you speak of our own merits, the^ certainly they cannot stand
together with the Grace of God, but are quite contrary unto it.

The Organicall. Efficient two fold.
43 The Organicall Efficient Cause of Justification is twofold, Isntrumental
or Administeriall.

44 The Instrumental Cause which exhibiteth the benefit of Justification unto
us, 1. Isntrumental.
is the Gospel and Sacraments, whereby the benefits of Christ are offered,
conferred and sealed unto us.

45 The Gospel is called, the Gospel of Grace ( Act. 20.24.) because it
declares and offers the Grace of God unto us: also, the Word of Grace ( Act.
20.32.) the Word of Salvation ( Act. 13.26) the Word of Life ( Phil. 2.16.) And
Paul says, The Gospel of Christ is the power of God unto salvation to every
one that believes. Romans 1.16.

46 Of Baptism the Apostle speaks, Christ sanctifies and cleanses his
Church by the washing of water through the Word. ( Ephesians. 5.26.) Also, He
saved us by the washing of the new birth, and the renewing of the holy Ghost.
And Peter says, Baptism saves us by the resurrection of Jesus Christ. 1.
Pet. 3.21.

47 And of the Lords Supper, Christ testifies that we receive his body, which
was given for us ( Luke 22.19.) and drink his blood, that is shed for many for
the remission of sins. Mat. 26.27.28.

48 If it be demanded, How the Sacraments are instruments to confer grace?

49 I Answer. The Sacraments confer grace, Answer. How the Sacraments
confer Grace.
because they are a means to give and exhibit to the believing mind Christ
with his benefits: and this they do by their signification.

50 For they serve as a particular and infallible certificate to assure such as
be partakers thereof, of the forgiveness of their sins and of everlasting
salvation.

51 Also, they confer grace, as the Kings letters are said to save the life
of a malefactor, when they do but signify to him and others, that the Kings
pleasure is to show favor.

52 Again, they may be said to confer grace, because they are a toke^ or
pledge of the Grace of GOD; and by this pledge Faith is confirmed, which is an
instrument to apprehend or receive grace.

53 A King says unto his Subjects. Note.
He that brings the head of such a Traitor shall have a thousand pounds. He
that has the head, may say, Here is a thousand pounds: because it is unto him
a pledge upon the Kings word of the receipt of so much.

54 Lastly, the Word of God conferres grace (for it is the power of God unto
salvation to them that believe) which it does by signifying the will of God by
the ear to the mind: Now every Sacrament is the Word of GOD made visible to
the eye: the Sacraments therefore confer grace by virtue of their
signification, and by reason they are a pledge by the appointment of GOD of his
mercy and goodness.

55 If it be said, Object.
The Sacraments are not only signs and seals, but also instruments to convey
the grace of God to us.

56 I Answer: Ans.
The Sacraments are not Instruments having the grace of God tied unto them, or
shut up in them: but instruments to which grace is present by assistance in the
right use thereof.

57 Because in and with the right use of the Sacraments, God conferres grace:
and thus they are instruments and no otherwise, that is, moral, not physical
instruments.

58 The Administeriall Cause of Justification, 2. Administeriall.
are as well the Ministers of the Word (1 Cor. 3.9. 1. Tim. 4.16. Ioh. 20.23.)
as also the Martyrs of Christ ( Dan. 12.3.) who by their testimony and example
teach, that there is no righteousness which may consist before the tribunal of
GOD, but only the righteousness of Jesus Christ.

59 And so much for the Efficient Cause of Justification Actiuelie taken on
Gods part.

The Efficient Cause on Man's part is, Faith.
60 Now on Man's part, Justification Passiuelie taken, the Efficient cause of it
is altogether Isntrumental: and this is Faith, by which (not for which) we
are said to be justified, as well in regard of the Correlatiue thereof, as also
of the Contrary the Law and good works.

61 In regard of the Correlatiue, to wit, Christ and his Merits, because the
whole form of Justifying Faith is sited in Relation, not in the quality or
nature thereof; seeing we are justified by Faith, as it is relatiuely applied
unto his correlatiue.

62 In regard of the Contrary, because those good works and conformity unto
the Law, required in the person of a justified Man, are worthily excluded from
the merit and act of Justification.

63 But to speak more plainly of this point. Faith what it is.
Faith is a confident apprehension of the mercy of GOD through the redemption
of Jesus Christ in the promise of the Gospel.

The parts of Faith.
64 The parts of Faith are three. 1. Knowledge in the mind and understanding. 2.
Assent in the will. 3. Confidence in the heart.

65 These three acts may be considered distinctly; seeing a man may know a
thing and yet not assent thereunto, and believe the same to be true, and yet
not make it his own by special application and confidence, which cannot
consist without knowledge and assent.

66 These three parts are excellently well laid down in the 14. chap. of S.
John. Beleeuest thou that I am in the Father, and the Father is in me? this
belongs unto the first part. Believe me that I am in the Father, and the
Father in me: this unto the second. Believe you in God, believe also in me: and
this unto the third.

67 So then Faith in Christ, is not to know, or believe there is a Christ, nor
yet to believe Christ, but to believe in Christ. The wicked believe there is a
Christ, Hypocrites believe Christ, But the Elect only believe in Christ, that
is, put their whole trust and confidence in him.

68 Wherefore it is manifest that justifying faith is not a bare knowledge and
assent, but that the chiefest part thereof is Confidence, whereby the sinner
apprehe^deth and particularly applies unto himself the promises of the Gospel.

Note well.
69 Hence is that Theological Axiom: Some things are spoken of Faith, in
respect of knowledge and assent; and some things in respect of Confidence.

70 In respect of Assent, Faith has for the Object thereof all the holy
Scriptures, the Law and the Gospel, which faith firmly believes to be most
true.

The proper Object of Faith.
71 In respect of Confidence, the proper Object of faith, is the gra^ and mercy
of G^^ ^xhibited in Christ the Redeemer, and offered by the Gospel.

Sole faith justifies.
72 Hereupon it is, that we constantly affirm, that Sole Faith justifies; or,
Faith only justifies: in which speech the particle Sole or Only, determines
the predicate, but is not referred unto the Subject, that is, it declares that
this effect (Justification) is attributed only to faith, and to no other
apprehending instrument or means.

73 Or, it shows, that Faith is the only instrument that apprehe^deth the
righteousness of Christ.

Note well.
74 As if a man should say, The sole eye sees, or The eye only sees: he
means not, the sole eye, or the eye only, that is, the solitary eye, separate
from the soul, brain, ears, nose, mouth, cheeks etc. but the eye is the
only instrument of seeing, and no other member of the body.

75 Wherefore the particle Sole or Only, does not exclude the grace and mercy
of God, the merit and satisfaction of Christ, the preaching of the Gospel, nor
the use of the Sacraments: for all these are required in faith, which in ye
Gospel and right use of the Sacraments, beholds and apprehends the grace of
God and righteousness of Christ.

76 Neither does it exclude Works and the habit of Charity, but only from
the act of justifying.

77 Hitherto of the Efficient Cause of Justification. Now follows the
Material.

A PRAYER FOR Faith.
OH, sweet Jesus, most glorious and most gracious Lord. As the Heart brayeth
after the rivers of water, so pants my soul, whilst mine eyes look after
thee, which art ascended up to heaven to prepare a place for us: Leave not thy
children desolate. Prepare my going out and my coming in. Compass me with thy
mercy. Let thy holy Angel pitch his tent round about me. Set a watch before
my mouth; Keep the door of my lips; turn mine eyes from vanity; incline not
mine heart to evil, but prepare my soul to thy service, and deliver me from
every evil work. Show me the way, wherein I should walk; let thy light go
before me; teach me by thy word; give me understanding by thy Spirit; frame my
heart by thy grace. I am flesh, quicke^ me. I have need of Faith, Hope and
Love; Let me not want the things without which I cannot serve thee. Indue me
with the grace of thy holy spirit, which is sufficient to direct my soul, to
inform my understanding and conform my will. Work in me a certain and
steadfast faith in thee, assured Hope in thy promises, earnest love of thy truth
and Gospel, and sincere affection toward thy Children. Thou have gone before
me, O Savior, make me to follow mine example. Thou have begun, therefore thou will not leave off the work thou have in hand. See me, O Lord, and not only
so, but come to thy servant, come and dwell with me, and all shall be thine;
only make me thine, sweet Jesus, as thou art mine. Amen.

CHAP. IV. Of the Material Cause of Justification.
The Material cause of Justification, Actiuely taken.
THe MATERIAL cause of our Justification, Actiuelie considered on Gods part, is
the Righteousness of CHRIST ( Romans 4.6.) called also, the Righteousness of
God ( Romans 3.22.) the gift of Righteousness ( Romans 5.17.) that Righteousness
which is of God, ( Phil. 3.9.) the Righteousness of Faith, and the
Righteousness of the Gospel.

2 It is termed the Righteousness of Christ, Note.
because Christ is the Efficient cause thereof: the Righteousness of God,
because GOD gives the same freely, and imputes it unto us, and approves it
in his judgment: the Righteousness of Faith, because we attain unto it, or
apprehend it by Faith only: and the Righteousness of the Gospel, because it is
made manifest and revealed in the Gospel.

The Righteousness of Christ has two parts.
3 This Righteousness, being but one in number, has two parts: 1. The Perfect
fulfilling of the law of God. 2. The Voluntary payment of the punishment for
our disobedience.

I. Fulfilling of the Law; which is twofold.
4 THe Perfect fulfilling of the law, is the full and exact conformity of
Christ's humane nature and actions with the will of God revealed in both tables
of the Decalogue.

5 And of this Perfect Conformity there are two members: 1. Innocence. 2.
Sanctity or holiness.

6 The Innocence of Christ, 1. Innocence.
is that immunity or freedom from Sin, either Original or Actual: For Christ
neither had, nor committed any sin, for he was both conceived and borne
without sin; and all his life time he never transgressed against the law of
God, either by fact, or word, or will, or cogitation, or by any evil
concupiscence. Ioh. 8.46.2. Corinth. 5.21. 1. Pet. 1.19. 1. Pet. 2.22. Heb.
4.15.

7 The Sanctity of Christ, 2. Sanctity.
is that integrity or purity which Christ had from the first moment of his
conceptio^, and retained in all his cogitatio^s, words, deeds and desires,
until his very death upon the Cross. Luke 1.35. Act. 3.14. Act. 4.27.30. 1.
Ioh. 2.20. Apoc. 3.7.

II. Bearing of the punishment.
8 The Voluntary payment of the punishment for our disobedience, is the whole
humiliation of Christ, from the beginning of his Conceptio^, until his
Glorification. Philip. 2.7.8. Romans 8.3. Galath. 3.13. and alibi passim.

Note well.
9 Of these two members, consists that perfect, and every way absolute
Righteousness whereby we are justified: which both the Justice of God, the
Office of a Mediator, and Salvation of Man necessarily required.

10 I. The Justice of God. Because the Justice of GOD could not otherwise have
been satisfied, but by perfect fulfilling the Law, and bearing the punishment,
which we had deserved for the breach thereof.

11. II. The Office of a Mediator: Because our Surety was reallie to pay the
full price of our Redemption; both actiuely by doing, and passiuely by suffering
those things which we ought to have performed.

12 III. The Salvation of Man: Because we could never have been redeemed
otherwise, than by satisfying the law and justice of God, by the perfect
obedience and death of our Surety and Mediator.

The Material cause Passiuely taken.
13 The Material Cause of our Justification Passiuely taken, are all the Elect
( Romans 8.33) being first in the state of Nature ungodly: ( Romans 4.5.) God
justifies the ungodly; and then in the state of supernatural Grace believing.
( Romans 3.22.) The righteousness of God by the faith of Jesus Christ (is
manifested) unto all and upon all that believe.

14 So much for the Material Cause of our Justification: Now of the Formal:

A PRAYER FOR lively sense and assurance of Justification.
O Most merciful Lord Jesus Christ, which shall judge al my words and works,
or rather answer both for me and them, so direct, and order, and appoint my
heart, my thought, tongue and labors to thy honor and glory, that as thou art
the Way, the Truth, and the Life, so I do nothing but walk in thy way, think
of thy truth, and aim at thy life; that by a godly way, I may come to the
heavenly truth, and truth may lead me to eternal life. And because flesh and
blood would turn thy Image to the image of Satan, my foes are thy foes, O
Lord, let not thine enemies prevail against thee, to take me from thee: but
let the assurance of my peace be sealed in my conscience, that I never be left
comfortless. Make thy Word unto me, like the Star which lead unto thee: make
thy benefits and graces, like the pillar which brought unto the land of
promise. Kindle thy love so in my heart, as in respect of thee and thy service,
I may despise and utterly detest whatsoever is against thee and thy truth, that
I may always find in my self assured testimonies of the presence of thy holy
Spirit. O sweet Savior, confirm my faith, which I feel oftentimes very weak
and troubled with many doubts; increase it in me, O Lord, that thorough thy
holy Spirit I may be assured that thou have fully discharged the punishment of
my sins. Cause me, O my God, to feel in my soul and conscience, that thou
art mine and all that thou have done; that I am grafted into thy body and made
one with thee, and therefore that I am fellow-heire with thee of everlasting
life. Let me not only have these words in my mouth, but thorough thy Spirit,
let me feel the comfort of the^ in my heart fully sealed and settled in me;
that I, feeling my self inwardly before thy judgment seat discharged, and my
conscience toward thee appeased, may be swallowed up with an unfeigned love
toward thy heavenly Majesty, and toward my Brethren also for thy sake, sweet
Jesus. Amen.

CHAP. V. Of the Formal Cause of Justification.
The Formal cause of Justification Actiuely taken.
THe FORMAL cause of Justification Actiuely taken, is the gracious Imputation of
Christ's Righteousness, whereby the merits and obedience of Christ are applied
unto us, by force of that near Communion of Christ with us and ours with him.

2 So that the Form of Justification does altogether consist in Relation:
where in that Union which arises between both terms, is indeed the form,
and consists rather in emanation than in hesion.

3 This Righteousness is ours by Right of Donation and acceptance of Christ's
merits and obedience, Note.
seeing imputed Righteousness is of Grace not of Nature, a Communicatio^ of a
benefit not real and habitual Possession; and Imputation not a patible
Quality inherent in us.

Of Imputation.
4 In this Imputation we must consider two things: 1. The Truth of it in it
self. 2. The Manner of the truth of it in us.

5 Of the Truth of it in it self there are two terms: 1. Righteousness. 2.
Imputation thereof. Between these two consists a Relation: for neither has
Christ his perfect Righteousness for any other end, but to impute it; neither
does he impute any thing, but his Righteousness; neither is that
Righteousness otherwise ours, but by imputation.

6 The Manner of the truth of it in us, in Scriptures is circumscribed by a
twofold reason. The first teaches us that we are Righteous, not in our
selves, or by our own righteousness, but by the Righteousness of Christ, which is
made ours by Right of Donation, (2. Cor. 5.21) We are made the righteousness of
God in him. The second teaches us that we have Righteousness, as Christ has
our Sins.

As Christ has our Sins: so we have his Righteousness.
7 Christ has our Sins, not subiectiuely inherent in himself, but by
imputation: so we have Christ's Righteousness, not subiectiuely inherent in our
selves, but by imputation.

8 Hereupon the Apostle makes that Opposition (2. Cor. 5.21.) between Christ,
whom God made Sin for us; and us, who are made the Righteousness of God in
him.

9 According unto this Form, the Justification of all men is one and the same,
and equal unto all men; for one man cannot be more justified than another.
Albeit in diverse me^, according unto the measure of the apprehension of their
Faith, the manner of it may well be said to be diverse.

The form of Justification Passiuely taken.
10 The Form of Justification Passiuely understood in regard of us, is the
Application of Faith: whereupon we are said to be justified through Faith, of
Faith, and by Faith: whereof we have spoken in the Isntrumental Cause.

11 After the Formal, follows the Final cause of Justification.

A THANKESGIVING for our Justification intermixed with Confession and Prayer.
O Eternal GOD, in Christ Jesus most gracious and merciful, I thy poor
servant do yield most possible and hearty thanks unto thy divine Majesty, for
all thy blessings and mercies bestowed upon me, both spiritual and temporal;
especially for the singular benefit of my Justification, and the admirable gift
of eternal Salvation, purchased by the righteousness and dearest life of thy
beloved Son. My lot is fallen in a pleasant place; I am in honor, and
understand it not. Has every one found such favor in thy sight? or have not
thou passed over others, and chosen me? o Lord, why should thou bestow thy
health and wealth, thy rest and liberty upon me, more then other? I can give no
reason for it, but that thou art merciful. And if thou should draw all
back again, I have nothing to say, but that thou art just. Has not thy
Joseph deserved liberty? Has not thy David deserved rest? Has not thy
Lazarus deserved food? or has not thy Job deserved health, more then I have?
Job is sick, Lazarus pines without, David is troubled on his bed, Joseph
groans in the prison: I have their portion, and they do stand at reward. Why
art thou so well, my soul? Mercy, mercy. Why art thou so ill, my soul? o
Mercy. For notwithstanding all these gracious and excellent benefits, yet have
I hitherto led my life so coldly in my profession, and wrought so contrary
unto my vocation, in neglecting and despising thy sacred Commandments, that I
have more then provoked thee, to extend thy furious wrath against me, to
encounter and recompense my leude desert with the sharpenes of thy revenging
fury. But when I think upon thy Son, all my fear is turned into joy, because
his righteousness for me, is more then my wickedness against my self. O settle
my faith in thy Beloved, and it suffices for all my iniquity, necessity and
infirmity. He has told us, O Lord, and we believe it to be true, that if
we ask thee any thing in his name, thou will grant it unto us; now therefore
in his name do I most earnestly crave at thy hands, that thou will settle me
in a constant form of obedience, that I may ever serve thee from this hour,
with those duties which the world, the flesh and the devil would have me
defer until the point of death. Good Father, grant that I may love
righteousness and piety, with as great good will, as ever I loved wickedness
anvanity; and that I may go before other in tha^kfulnes toward thee, as far
as thou go in mercy toward me before them. O teach me to seek thee in all
things, and all things in thee; even for thy name sake, for thy promise sake,
for thy Sons sake, our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus. Amen.

CHAP. VI. Of the Final Cause of Justification.
The Final cause of Justification Actiuely taken.
THe FINAL Cause of Justification Actiuely taken, is the Glory of God, in the
admirable temperature of his Justice and Mercy: Ephesians. 1.6. Romans 3.26.

2 Of his Justice: Because he would his Son should make full satisfaction.

3 Of his Mercy: Because he would impute his Sons satisfaction unto us.

The Final cause Passiuely taken.
4 The Final Cause of Justification Passiuelie taken, is that we might have
peace of Conscience ( Romans 5.1.) eternal life ( Tit 3.7.) and be
everlastingly glorified, Romans 8.30. Romans 6.22.

5 Hitherto of the Causes of Justification. Now of the Parts thereof.

A PRAYER FOR eternal life.
OMnipotent and eternal God, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, we miserable
and wretched Sinners, do wa^der in this earth, as pilgrims and strangers,
ready to depart hence every hour. We see daily with what violence and rage
Death strikes and choaketh now one, now another for their grievous sins. But I
give thee most hearty thanks, O Lord, for thy infinite mercy toward me, that
thou have not suffered me to be oppressed with palpable ignorance and
heathenish blindness, to perish and die like other men: but have graciously
enlightened me with the pure light of thy Grace, and showed unto me the Cause
of all calamities and of death, and manifested also the heavenly and
inestimable comfort of eternal life, which does wonderfully recreate and
cheer my heart. And whereas we feel, not without great grief with what
cruelty and fury the wicked fiends, burning in hatred against thee, do in
these last dregs of the world oppugn mankind, and raise up sundry detestable
scandals and other damnable enormities amongst us; we being full of idleness,
of sloth and weakness, altogether corrupted and defiled with carnal
concupiscence, unable to make resistance: o have mercy upon me, according unto
thy great mercy. Touch, move and purify my heart, that loving and fearing
thee, I may seriously and truly bewail my great and so often iterated sins;
that I may steadfastly believe thy holy word, and lead the residue of my life
in holiness and righteousness before thee. And seeing the greatest part of
mankind, being drowned in Sodomiticall pleasures, and drunken with Epicurean
security, do not think or care for thee, not make any reckoning of eternal
life; O Father give me, and all the rest of thy children, a devout and humble
heart desirous of eternal life and happiness. Guide us by thy holy Spirit,
that we may oftentimes meditate and speak of those everlasting and celestial
joys, that thereby we may daily comfort our own hearts, and so rejoice, that
like courageous Soldiers, we may steadfastly believe in Christ, and
cheerfully march after him through crosses, tribulations, dangers and death
it self, until we safely ariue at thy heavenly palace, to be partakers of
that eternal glory and magnifice^ce which thou have prepared for us, and
evermore to praise thee, O omnipotent and immortal God, for thy infinite
goodness and mercy, who with the Son and Holy Ghost live and raignest, one
God, for ever and ever. Amen.

CHAP. VII. Of the Parts of Justification.
The parts of Justification two.
THe PARTS of Justification are two; Remission of Sins, and Imputation of
Righteousness.

Note well.
2 But we must understand, that these two parts are not diverse and different
motions, but one really and in number, which in respect of the diversity of
the terms whereabouts it is employed has diverse names.

3 In respect of the Term from which it flows, it is called Remission of sin,
or Absolution from sin, or Not-Imputation of sin.

4 And in regard of the Term unto which it is applied, it is called,
Imputation of Righteousness.

5 For otherwise it is the very same motion whereby Sin is abolished and
Righteousness procured: as appears out of ye place ( Romans 4.6.7.) where the
Apostle terms ye very same thing, Imputation of Righteousness, which David
called before ( Psalm. 32.1.) Remission of Sins. Even as David (says he)
declares the blessedness of man, unto whom God imputes righteousness
without works, saying; Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and
whose sins are covered. But we will speak of both these parts of
Justification severally and apart.

1. Remission of sins.
6 Remission of Sins, is the Absolutio^ or pardoning of a Believing man from
the obligation of eternal death and damnation for his sin.

7 Or, a not-imputing, not-punishing or covering of the Believers sin, and
accounting him no sinner.

8 In Remission of sin God takes away three things: 1. Sin it self, while he
does not impute it. 2. The guilt of sin. 3. The punishment due unto it.

9 The taking away of the two latter, to wit, of the Guilt and Punishment,
necessarily follows the taking away of the former, namely Sin.

10 But this part of Justification is denominated of Sin, Remission of
sins, which properly is the term from which proceeds the motion, and of
which is first pronounced the sentence of absolution: albeit the sentence be
pronounced also of the guilt and punishment, but in the second place.

11 The sentence of Remission of sins being once pronounced by God, Note.
is never frustrated or recalled: that is, Those sins that are once remitted
and forgiven, are never again imputed. Ezec. 18.21.22 Esa. 44.22. Mich.
7.18.19. Ierem. 31.34.

12 If it be demanded: Question.
Whether by Remission of sins, the sin be so abolished, that it remains
no more in man?

Answer. How sin is abolished in Man.
13 I Answer: In Sin there are two things to be considered, the Defect, and
the Guilt.

14 The Defect is not utterly taken away, or abolished out of the Subject
wherein it resideth; but is daily diminished in the Regenerate by mortification
of the old man, etc.

15 For as long as we carry this mass and body about with us, all Defects
cannot be utterly abolished, seeing we shall daily endure and feel the
combat of the flesh and the spirit. Galat. 5.17.

16 But the Guilt is so abolished and utterly extinguished in ye godly, as that
God absolutely affirms, that he will never remember our sins any more. ( Esa.
43.25.) I, even I am he that puts away thine iniquities for mine own sake,
and will not remember thy sins.

17 I will speak more Logically. Note well.
Sin is both in the Predicament of Quality, as it is a Vitiositie: And also
in the Predicament of Relation; as it obliges unto damnation.

18 Remission of sins, is not the deletion of the Vitiositie, or perverse
quality, as it is sin: that is, it is not the utter abolishing and taking away
of the Vitiositie, that it remains not in the Believer any more.

19 But sin is taken away, abolished, remitted, not marked by God, not seen,
cast behind his back, put away from us, cast into the bottom of the Sea etc.
not simply but in two respects.

20 First, in respect of the Obligation to damnation, or Imputation: Because
God does not impute sin to them that are in Christ.

21 Secondly, in respect of Dominion: Because sin reigns not in them that
are regenerate.

22 And thus our sins are said to be covered, namely by the blood of Christ,
lest they should make us guilty of eternell damnation.

23 For otherwise, Note.
if Remission of sin were a total deletion and utter exstinction of al sin,
so that no sin remained in the Regenerate; then it would follow that all that
were justified were wholly and altogether spiritual, without flesh, that is,
fleshly affections, without concupiscence, without combat against the flesh,
equal unto the Angels, freed from all misery, trouble, diseases, and from
bodily death. They should not rightly pray, Forgive us our trespasses. Neither
were that saying of Saint John true (1. Ioh. 1.8.) If we say that we have no
sin, we deceive our selves and truth is not in us. Nor that of Saint Paul of
himself ( Romans 7.17.) Sin dwells in me. Which were absurd and impious to
affirm. For where the proper affections and effects of sin be, quetionlesse
there is also sin it self.

24 But I boldly say with the Apostle; that howsoever sin dwells in the
godly, yet There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. Romans 8.1.

25 Thus far of the first part of Justification, Remission of sins: Now
follows the second, Imputatio^ of Righteousness.

11. Imputation of Righteousness.
26 Imputatio^ of Righteousness, is the second part of Justification, whereby
God gives, or ascribes CHRIST'S Righteousness unto us freely, as if we our
selves had performed ye same, whereby we attain the Right of eternal life.

27 This is that Justification of life ( Romans 5.18) and that Grace that
reigns by righteousness (of CHRIST imputed unto us) unto eternal life. Romans
5.21.

28 Of this the Apostle speaks unto the Philippians ( Philip. 3.7.8.9.) But
the things that were vantage unto me, the same I counted loss for Christ's
sake. Yea, doubtless I think al things but loss for the excellent knowledge
sake of Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I have counted all things loss, and do
judge them to be dung, that I might win Christ. And might be found in him,
that is, not having mine own righteousness, which is of the Law, but that
which is through the faith of Christ, even the righteousness which is of God
through faith.

What righteousness of Christ is imputed unto us.
29 But that we may understand what Righteousness of Christ is imputed unto us:
we are to note that the righteousness of Christ is twofold; Uncreated, and
Created. Christ's Essential righteousness not imputed.


30 His Uncreated Righteousness is his Essential Justice whereby he is God; and
this is incommunicable: for the Essence of God cannot be the Accident of Man.

Christ's created righteousness is imputed.
31 His Created Righteousness, is two-folde: 1. His Native and Habitual
Sanctity. 2. His Actual obedience. Or (which is the same in Effect) the
Sanctity of his Nature, and the Sanctity of his Actions.

32 Both these are imputed unto us: the former Improperly, and the latter
Properly.

1. His Native Sanctity.
33 1. His Native and habitual Sanctity from the first moment of his
Conception by the holy Ghost, was without measure, most perfect, most sincere,
most pure, free from al spot or blemish.

34 For such an high Priest it became us to have which is holy, harmless,
undefiled, separate from sins ( Heb. 7.26.) Now Christ was not made thus by
fulfilling the Law, but was so indeed from the first Article of his Conception.

35 And yt by the free benefit and gift of God.

36 Neither has he by any his own deeds merited this great honor, to become
our high Priest and Mediator, but was elected to that end by ye free grace of
God, before the foundation of the world. 1. Pet. 1.20.

37 By this his holy Conception he sanctified ours, who ought to have been so
conceived by the law of our first creation. Genesis 1.28.

38 Therefore was Christ conceived holy without sin for us, that he might
derive unto us, that which Adam could not do; that he might supply the defect
of holiness in our conception, and present our holy nature before God in
himself: that so God might account our conception, as if we had been conceived
without sin or blemish.

39 So also CHRIST was borne holy for our sakes: for when we ought to have bin
born holy, but could not, he abundantly supplied that defect of holiness in
our birth, and by his holy nativity covered the impuritie of ours before the
face of his Father.

40 He was borne holy for us, because he was not borne as other private men
be, but as the head of his members. Even as Adam was not created a private
man, but as the head, the stock and root of his posterity.

Comparion of Christ with Adam.
Wherefore in this both of them are equal, that neither of them were conceived of
ma^s seed, nor had any Father in earth.

42 Even as Ada^ was created holy though mutably, not only for himself, but
also for his whole seed: so Christ was borne holy and that immutably, not
only for himself, but also for all his members.

43 Adam by reason of his fall could not communicate the Sanctity of his
creation (which was mutable, and so should have continued still) with his seed:
But Christ being stronger and more divine than the first Adam, actually
co^municateth the sanctity of his Nativity, which is immutable, with all his
members and consorts.

44 Wherefore the benefit that we have received by Christ, Note.
is far more excellent, then that which we should have received by Adam.

45 II. Christ's Actual Obedience, 2. His Actual Obedience.
was the fulfilling of the will of his Father, and satisfying his Justice:
as well Passiuely, by his voluntary suffering the punishment due unto our sins:
( Philip. 2.8.) as also Actiuely, by perfect fulfilling all the Commandments
of the Divine Law.

46 The Apostle faith ( Romans 5.19.) As by one man's disobedience many were made
sinners: So by the Obedience of one, shall many also be made righteous.

47 If the Disobedience of Adam, whereby we became sinners, be the
tra^sgression of the Law: then certainly the Obedience of Christ, whereby we are
made righteous, is the fulfilling of the Law.

48 And indeed a man cannot imagine any Obedience, but in respect of the Law
whereunto it is performed.

49 Thus much of the Obedience of Christ's humane Nature which is imputed unto
us for righteousness.

50 Now that this Righteousness is imputed unto us, appears by evident
testimonies of Scripture. ( To. 4.6.) David declares the blessedness of man,
unto whom God IMPVTETH Righteousness without works. Also ( Romans 4.11.) After he
had received the sign of Circumcision, as the seal of the righteousness of
faith, which he had when he was uncircumcised, that he should be the Father of
them that believe, not being circumcised, that righteousness might be IMPVTED
unto them also.

Imputation twofold.
51 Imputation is twofold (as we have noted before) one Legal by debt; the
other Evangelical by grace.

52 Legal Imputation, 1. Legal.
is that whose foundation is in him that works, to whom the imputation is
made. ( Romans 4.4.) To him that works the wages is counted by debt. Where
there is a Relation between Wages and Works; and the wages is imputed for the
work.

53 Or, it is when God wills and adiudgeth the reward to him that fulfilleth
the Law in his own person. Romans 4.4.

54 Evangelical Imputation, 2. Evangelical.
is that whose foundation is not in him to whom the imputation is made, but in
the grace and mercy of God who justifies the wicked. ( Romans 4.5.) To him that
believes in him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted for
righteousness. Whereupon it is called the imputation of faith.

55 Or, it is when God accepts the Satisfaction of Christ our Suertie, as a
payment for our sins. In this sense the word IMPVTE is repeated ten times in
the 4. chapter to the Romans

56 Note well.
Neither is this Imputation a phantastique speculation, or idle conceit:
Seeing that even as our sins were really imputed unto Christ ( Esa. 53.5. and
12) as is manifest by his Passion and Death the wages of sin. So is Christ's
Righteousness imputed unto us really, and with effect, that is, with the
participation of divine grace, and life eternal. 2. Cor. 5.21.

That we are not justified by works, or inherent Righteousness.
57 Hence appears that we are not justified by inherent Justice, by good
works, or infused habit of Charity. Because we are justified only by the
Righteousness of Christ, which being inherent in him, is by grace imputed unto
us.

58 Again, Inherent Justice and Justification, are distinct gifts of God. (1.
Cor. 1.30.) Christ is made unto us of God, Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification. Also (1. Cor. 6.11.) But ye are washed, but ye are
sanctified, But ye are justified.

59 Also, the Righteousness whereby a sinner is justified is revealed without
the law ( Romans 3.21.) But inherent Justice and habit of Charity is revealed
by the law: and the obedience of Christ is the sole Righteousness revealed
without the law.

60 Lastly, the Apostle says ( Galat. 5.4.) Ye are abolished from Christ,
whosouer are justified by the law, ye are fallen from grace.

Whosoever will be justified by works cannot be saved.
61 Here it is evident that the doctrine of Justification by works, is an error
ouerturning the foundation of Religion: which whosoever obstinately and finally
maintains cannot be saved.

62 For if me^ put confidence in their works, and make the^ the meritorious
cause of their salvation, it is certain, as the Apostle says, ( Galat. 5.2.)
Christ shall profit them nothing.

63 If it be objected: Object.
This is true of Ceremonial works, but not of Moral works.

64 I answer: Ans.
Yea even of Moral also: for the Apostle speaks of the whole law ( Galat.
5.4.) Ye are abolished from Christ, whosoever are justified by the law.

65 If any will except: Object.
This is true of the works of Nature, but not of works of Grace.

66 I answer: Answer.
Yea even of Works of Grace. And the Apostle expressly testifies, that by
the Righteousness of a good conscience we cannot be justified. 1. Cor. 4.4.
See also, Ephesians. 2.10. Tit. 3.5.

67 To add any thing to the obedience of Christ, Note well.
as a meritorious cause of our Justification and Salvation, is to make Christ
unprofitable.

68 For he must be a perfect Savior, or no Savior: he admits neither partner
nor deputy in the work of our Redemption.

69 And the Grace of God admits no mixture or composition with any thing that
is of us. Grace is no grace, unless it be every way freely given.

70 Hitherto of the Parts of Justification: Now of the Properties thereof.

A PATHETICAL Prayer against the temptations of Satan.
IF I consider my sins past, why should I live to sin any more? If I lo^^e
back to my life (...) why should I (...) suffer any more? I ha^^ sinned
enough, but have not yet suffered enough. Seize upon my heart, O my Redeemer
(...) is thine, I have given it unto thee, that gave ^hy self wholly for ^^ee:
take it, O Savior; and look not upon the deformity thereof, thou have bought
it with thy dearest blood; bathe it therein, scourge it, crucify it, kill it
and revive it, that being purified, it may be worthy to remain with thee.
Oh, who shall deliver me from this body of sin! I have lived long, yet but a
while; I have lived a while, yet very long; long for my Soul to stay so long
from her Father, her Brother, and her only Comforter. Mean while, I fight
with my enemies, blind, naked, weak, unprovided: And who^ have I with me? a
Traitor; even this Body of Sin. Consider, O Lord, thy servant is but flesh,
consider Satan, my enemy, consider the World, my fained friend: whose part
will thou take against thy self? Will thou give the soul of thy Turtle dove
to the beast? If thou will, thou can make me overcome. Can my Lord forsake
his own? For the Spirit tells me, I am thine, and I believe it, o Jesus help
my unbelief. Come therefore, sweet Jesus, come now, Satan stands knocking at
the door of my youth, come quickly, and we will keep him out. Avoid Satan,
crouch flesh, be still, my Soul: The Lord is on my side, I will not fear what
any can do unto me. There wanted a Tempter, and thou, O Lord, wast the cause
that he was wanting; there wanted time and place, and thou wast the cause that
they wanted. The Tempter was present, and there wanted neither time nor place,
but thou heldest me back, that I should not consent. Who has trod upon thy
head, O Satan? Thou wast armed, but the Lord put thee down; thou wast masked,
but the Lord discovered thee; thou wast like an Angel, but the Lord took away
thy vizard. Go, take thy farewell, the net is broken, and I am escaped.
Blessed be thy name, my Lord, my Savior and my Redeemer. Amen.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Properties of Justification.
The Properties of Justification.
THE PROPERTIES of Justification consist specially in three things 1. That
Justification is Free. 2. That it is Perfect. 3. That it is Everlasting.

2 I. Justification is Free: I. Justification is free.
Because Remission of Sins is not given for any merits of man; but is a mere
grace and undeserved mercy promised for Christ his sake alone.

3 For God finds nothing in man whom he justifies but impuritie of sin and
extreme misery.

4 And the Scripture every where affirms, that Christ only is the author of
all grace: and the whole hope of our salvation consists in his blood alone.

5 Without the merit of Christ there can be no justification, for he has
purchased that Righteousness which GOD freely imputes unto us.

6 They therefore that will be accounted righteous without the merit of Christ,
are profane Atheists.

7 And they which dream they are justified, partly by grace, and partly by
their own merits, are Pelagian Heretics.

8 But they that believe they are justified freely by the only merits of
Christ, are true Christians.

9 Again, the Cause of Justification, to wit, eternal Election in Christ is
free: wherefore Justification it self must needs be free: for there cannot be
more in the Effect, than there is in the Cause thereof.

10 If it be objected: Object.
If GOD remitteth our sins for the satisfaction of Christ, then does he not
justify us freely.

11 I answer: Answer.
Yes freely, in respect of our selves, that is, without any satisfaction of
ours, but not without another satisfaction.

12 Again, if any will object: But he that justifies in this manner,
justifies not freely; For what a man does by another, he may be said to do
by himself: Therefore we our selves have paid the price by Christ.

13 I answer: God freely gives unto us this price, that is Christ our
Satisfactor and Mediator, which was not bought by us ( Ioh. 3.16.) So God
loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son etc.

14 II. Justification is every way perfect and most absolute: II Justification
is perfect and absolute.
for God does not pardon one or two sins only, but forgiueth all and every
sin.

15 Neither does he only forgive sins that are already committed and past;
but remitteth the daily falls of his children, if they repent. John says,
(1. Ioh. 1.7.) The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin. And Paul (
Coloss. 2.13.) God pardons all our trespasses. See Esa. 44.22. Esa. 43.25.
Psalm. 103.12. Micah 7.19. Apoc. 1.5. Esa. 1.18.

16 If it be demanded: Question.
Whether Justification be absolutely perfect and finished in this life?

17 I answer: Ans.
There are two sorts of Benefits which we receive of God in Christ: One of
such as be not inherent in us, as Election and Justification. The other of
such as do inhere, as Vocation, Glorification.

18 Both these kinds of Benefits have this common, that before the full
manifestation of Jesus Christ, they cannot be fully and perfectly declared; I
mean, neither Election, nor Justification, nor Vocation, nor Glorification.

19 All these Benefits began to be declared in the first manifestation and
appearance of Christ ( Romans 3.21.) Now is the Righteousness of God made
manifest; but are not fully declared in this life; as John says (1. Ioh. 3.2.)
Now are we the sons of God, but yet it does not appear what we shall be.

20 But they differ herein, that those Benefits which are not inherent, are
indeed perfected and really absolved in this life. (1. Ioh. 3.2.) Now we are
the sons of God. So also, Now we are elected. Now we are justified.

21 Those Benefits which are inherent in us, are not perfected in all their
degrees, but only inchoated or begun in this life.

22 Hence it is evident that justification is indeed perfected and absolved in
this life, but not plainly manifested and declared.

23 Question may be made: Quest.
Whether Christ will not Justify such as believed here, in the day of
Judgment: which if it be so, shall not Justification be perfect then at length
in that other life?

24. I Answer. Ans.
In that day of Judgment, Christ will not so much Justify the Believers; as
declare, by their works, that they believed and were justified even in this
life.

25 For so also the word, Justification, may be taken, and so James uses it,
where he says, that Man is justified by his works. ( Iac. 2.21.) He is
justified, that is, declared to be justified.

Again. Quest.
Again. It is demanded: Seeing we daily pray unto God for the Remission of our
sins, that is, Justification; how shall we say then, that Justification is an
vndiuidable act, perfected even at one and the same time in this life?

27 I Answer. When we pray for Remission of sins, we pray not, as for a
Benefit not yet given us; but we pray for the increase of our confidence and
application of the Benefit by faith, and for the increase of our Faith.

28 Lastly, it is objected. If Justification be the Sentence of life; and if
that life cannot be perfected until the coming of Christ: then certainly
Justification cannot be perfected until the last coming of Christ.

29 I Answer. It is one thing to perfect the Sentence of life, and another
thing to perfect life it self.

30 The Sentence of life is perfected in this life; but Life it self is not
perfected until the coming of Christ.

31 III. III. Justification is everlasting.
Justification is Everlasting: in as much as sin ought not to be imputed unto
the^ that are Justified any more for ever.

32 For whom God has once received into favor, having blotted out all their
sins and offenses, those does he still preserve in his favor as righteous.

33 So that such cannot utterly fall from grace and perish by no manner of
sins, they being and remaining pardoned in the^. For God will never remember
those sins, to which the Regenerate are as yet subject.

34 This the Scripture expressly and diligently affirms in many places (
Esa. 43.12.) I will remember thine iniquities no more. ( Ierem. 31.34.) I will
be merciful unto their iniquities, and remember their sins and transgressions
no more. See Hebr. 8.12.

35 These and such like places of Scripture promise the Grace of God and
forgiveness of sins, not for a day or two only; but signify and affirm that
it shall always be of force, and continue while life lasts, so that the
forgiveness of sins is quotidian and continual al our life long.

36 Because Christ has made a full and sufficient satisfaction for them once
for all, ( Heb. 10.14.) And God is so just that he will not have payment and
satisfaction for one thing twice. But is so well pleased with the satisfaction
of Christ, that he requires no other satisfaction.

37 Neither must we imagine, that therefore God is not displeased with sin in
the Regenerate. For the sins even of his own dearest children do highly
displease him; albeit he will not punish them in his Saints, because he has
punished them in Christ.

38 For GOD does not so remit sins as if he accounted sin no sin, or were
not angry at it: but because he does not impute them unto us, nor punish the^
in us; but accounts us holy and righteous for the satisfaction of Christ
apprehended by Faith.

39 Hitherto we have spoken of the Properties of Justification. It follows
that we speak of the Effects thereof.

A PRAYER FOR Sanctification.
O Most glorious and most gracious Lord, in goodness infinite, in power
almighty, in wisdom wonderful, in judgment just, in promise true, in mercy
rich, patient toward sinners that call upon thy name, and sparing, when they
do repent: what shall I be afraid to ask thee? Rule my paths, O Lord, enlarge
my heart. When I go, let my gate be straight; when I run, let me not fall,
for I am a stranger upon earth, and understand not mine own way. I would walk
at liberty, like thy servant David. What says my Lord? speak now, for thy
servant hears? My Son, walk simply after my word, for this is the plain
way, this is the sure way: Here thou shall have no lets, to stay thee; no
encombrances, to entangle thee. Go forward straight, and turn not: liberty
is in thy way, and Life is in the end. But if thou look back, or stay, or
turn to the right hand, or to the left; then thou fallest into a hedge of
thorns, nets and snares take hold upon thee. A double heart, and a man that
goes two ways shall not prosper, I am worshipped of the simple and open
hearted. Martha is troubled with much business, but Marie has all things at my
feet: therefore have I separated thee (if thou will) because thou can not
serve two masters. It is true, Lord, for I am never distracted in mind, but
when I am careful about many things: For so long as thou art with me, I am
thine; but when I bring in sin, then am I straight dispossessed of my soul. If
I love any thing besides thee, it vpbraideth me: if I speak, or do any thing
without thy counsel, straight I am trapt in some error, weary of my self
and unapt for thee. It is wonderful to think how my heart is hardened, my
understanding blinded, my tears dried up, when thou turnest thy face but from
me, and Sin prevails against me. Had I the spirit to discern every thing
at his value, I should love God before all, which is best of all, and Man after
GOD, which is next to GOD. How is my Soul troubled for this? and my heart rent
in twain, until my flesh consent, and all my members agree together, to choose
that which he has commanded, and to forgo that which he has forbidden?
Before I was afflicted, I went astray, like a thing untamed: it is good for me
that I have bin touched, that I may learn thy Statutes. Save me now, O Lord, I
pray thee. Now, Lord, I pray thee give me understanding. I have sinned, I am
sorry, forgive me. Away from me, all you that work vanity, for the Lord is
my GOD; if I regard wickedness in my heart, he will not hear me. O thou
eternal Goodness, which art good to all, which guidest those that seek thee,
which enlightenest those that see thee, and which sauest those that love thee;
endue me with thy gracious and holy Spirit, which may subdue all my carnal
affections; which may rectify my reason, regenerate my will, and purify my
nature, that at all times, when thou shall call upon me, I may be ready with
David to answer, Lo I come: Praised be God. Amen, Amen.

CHAP. IX. Of the Effects of Justification.
The Effects of Justification.
THe Effects of Justification, are Peace of Conscience ( Romans 5.1.) Access unto
God ( Romans 5.2. Ephesians. 3.12.) Adoption into the sons of God ( Romans
8.15.16.17. Galat. 3.26. Ephesians. 1.5. Ioh. 1.12.) Regeneration ( Ioh. 5.11.)
External life etc. ( Romans 6.22.23.) al which may be reduced unto this one,
Glorification.

Of Glorification.
2 Glorification, is the execution of the sentence of life pronounced by God in
Justification. 1. Pet. 1.2.2. Pet. 1.4.

3 In Glorification we must consider a twofold Application; the one of God; the
other of such as are to be Glorified.

4 The Application of God, is that whereby God ioineth Christ unto us, as the
Head to the rest of the body, whereby he also gives us his holy Spirit.

5 In this Application God ioineth Christ unto us, being first Dead, for
mortification of our flesh or old man; secondly quickened or raised from Death,
for vivification of our Spirit or new man.

6 The Application of such as are to be Glorified, is that whereby we apprehend
Christ being joined unto us in his Death and in his Life, by faith, wrought by
the holy Ghost.

7 And in this Application, both of God and of our selves, whereby Christ is
joined unto us, as Head unto the Body, is manifestly deprehended our
Glorification or renewing.

8 For by the same act (as it were) and at the same instance, as soon as ever
Christ is joined unto us, as Head, we are presently made his Members, and so
renewed by Regeneration or new birth.

Glorificatition twofold.
9 Glorificatio^ is twofold: Inchoatiue Glorification, ( Ioh. 3.3.) and
Consummatiue Glorification. Matthew. 19.28.

1. Inchoatiue.
10 Inchoatiue Glorification, is that whereby (we being united unto Christ) our
corrupt Nature, even in this life, begins to be renewed by the holy Ghost,
according unto the Image of God. 1. Pet. 1.2.2. Pet. 1.4. Tit. 3.5. Ephesians.
4.23.24.

11 The same is also termed, Regeneration and Sanctification. But Paul simply
calls it, Glorification ( Romans 8.30.) that is, a glorious renewing of our
Nature, an abolishing of our corrupt Nature, and making of us fit for eternal
Glory.

Regeneration has two parts.
12 Of this Inchoatiue Glorificatio^ or Regeneration, there are two parts, 1.
Mortification or killing of the Old Man, that is, Hatred of sin. 2.
Vivification or quickening of the New Man, that is, Love of Righteousness.

Old Man what.
13 By Old Man, I mean, the whole Nature of man, as well soul as body, addicted
unto sin and death: or the unregenerated part and corrupt nature of man;
termed also the Outward Man, and Flesh ( Ioh. 3.6. Romans 8.6.) also the Body of
sin ( Romans 6.6.) and the sinful body of flesh, Coloss. 2.11.

14 Mortification of the Olde-Man, 1. Mortification.
is that whereby the holy Ghost by little and little works in us a detestation
and hatred of sin, and exstinguisheth the vigor of our corrupt nature in us,
that it might not bring forth most bitter fruits to condemnation.

New Man what?
15 By New-Man, is meant the Nature of man, that begins to cease from sin,
or that part of man, that is regenerate and restored according unto ye Image of
God: termed also, the Inward man ( Romans 7.22.) and the hidden man of the heart
(1. Pet. 3.4.) also Spirit, Ioh. 3.6.

The Vivification of the New-Man, 2. Vivification.
is when we are raised up into a new and spiritual life (having the habit of
Charity infused into us) that we might live unto righteousness, Ephesians. 2.4.5.
Ioh. 5.11.

17 Again, Regeneration, is as well of the Soul, as of the Body, 1 Thessalonians.
5.23.1. Cor. 6.20.

Regeneration of the Soul.
18 Regeneration of the Soul, is that whereby the faculties of the soul are
renewed.

19 Of the Regeneration of the Soul there are two parts, 1. Illumination. 2.
The gift of Repentance.

20 For as there are two parts of the Soul, the Understanding and the Will: so
in both Regeneration is required. Illumination is of the Understanding (
Coloss. 3.10.) and Repentance of the Will, Ephesians. 4.5.

21 Illumination, 1. Illumination.
is that whereby God dispelleth the natural darkness, blindness and ignorance
of our minds, and enlightneth it with the saving knowledge of himself ( Psalm.
16.11. Coloss. 3.10. Romans 12.2. Romans 7.23.2. Cor. 1.21.) which is Eternal Life,
Ioh. 17.3.

22 It is also termed, Note.
the Unction, or anointing of the holy Ghost. 1. Ioh. 2.27. Psalm. 89.20. Esa.
61.1. Dan. 9.24.

23 The gift of Repentance, 2. Repentance.
is that whereby our Will is renewed and wills not evil any more, but only
good, Act. 11.18. 2. Tim. 2.25. Romans 6.4.5.6. Ephesians. 4.22.23.24. 2. Cor. 5.7.
Philip. 2.13.

Repentance has two parts.
24 Repentance has two parts, 1. Auersion from the Devil and all evil. 2.
Conversion unto God and all good, Ps. 34.15. Psalm. 37.27. Esaias 1.16. Romans 6.4.
1. Cor. 5.7. Ephesians. 4.22.23.24. Col. 3.9.10. 1. Pet. 3.11.

25 So much for the Regeneration of the Soul: Now follows the Regeneration
of the Body.

Regeneration of the Body.
26 Regeneration of the Body, is that whereby the Body is made obedient unto the
renewed Spirit, so that it attempteth nothing, but what is conformable unto the
will of God. Romans 12.1. 1 Thessalonians. 5.23.

27 Of the Regeneration of the Body, there are two parts. 1. Bridling of the
Affections. 2. Governing of the moveable Members.

28 The Bridling of the Affections, is the subduing of them unto the
regenerated or renewed Reason.

29 The Governing of the moveable Members, is when all the Members are so
guided, that they commit nothing being ruled by disordred passion or evil
lust, against the consent of the regenerated Mind and Will.

30 The infallible token, and certain mark of Regeneration, is a Holy and
just life.

31 And thus much of Inchoatiue Glorification: It follows to speak of that
which is Consummate.

32 Consummatiue Glorification, 2. Consummatiue.
is that most perfect and every way happy fruitio^ of GOD, which all the Elect
shall eternally enjoy in Heaven after this life, where they shall see God face
to face, and know, as they are known, having full fellowshippe with JESUS
CHRIST, and reigning with him for ever. Whereof (God willing) according to our
mediocritie, we purpose to entreat in a several Treatise hereafter.

A THANKS GIVING for our Redemption, joined with Prayer.
WHat? Can Man say, that he has any thing, that he has not received? Who has
elected? who has created? who has called? who has justified? who has
sanctified? who has preserved you from day to day, O Soul, O Body? The Lord
has made all things for you, and you for himself. O most gracious and loving
Father, which art loved for thy goodness, honored for thy greatness, rejoiced
in for thy happiness, praised for thy merits, and prayed unto for thy mercies!
I acknowledge I cannot worthily praise thee, nor thank thee, as I ought: my
tongue faultreth, my heart fails, my Spirit languisheth. I want words to
express and power out my mind; I want a mind to conceive and apprehend thy
benefits. My words are short of my understanding; and my understanding far
under the dignity of thy deserts. By thy love I was elected, by thy goodness I
was created, by thy Spirit I was called, by thy mercy I was justified, by thy
grace I was sanctified, and by thy power I am preserved. When I had no being
thou did elect me, when I was nothing thing thou did create me, when I
was worse than nothing thou did call me, when I was thine enemy thou
did justify me, when I was habitually evil thou did sanctify me, and now
being unthankful for all thy mercies thou do preserve me still. O exceeding
bou^tie, proceeding from unspeakable goodness! O inestimable mercy flowing from
surpassing love! What thanks? what praise shall I render unto thee for this
thy undeserved kindness? If I had the tongue and knowledge of Angels, yet could
I not sufficiently laud thee, seeing thy incomprehensible goodness infinitely
exceeds all bounds both of utterance and understanding? Well therefore may I
admire thy mercies in silence, but speak of them as is meet, I cannot, I am
not able. Yet, O sweet Savior, let me not be unthankfully silent for these
thy benefits, but teach my heart how with reverence it should think of thee;
give my tongue some power to lispe and stammer out thy praises, seeing it can
not speak and power them forth with such volubilitie and freedom it ought,
and grant that in some measure I may love thee, though not so much as thou
deseruest, yet so much as I am able to perform. O good Lord, did not thou
elect me, that I should love thee? did not thou create me, that I should love
thee? did not thou call me, that I should love thee? did not thou justify
me, that I should love thee? did not thou sanctify me, that I should love
thee? and do not thou still preserve me, that I should love thee? It is
true, Lord, that I have not deserved what I crave; but will thou therefore lose
thy due? for I can neither thank, nor praise, nor think of thee as I ought,
except I love thee. Accept therefore, O blessed Redeemer, accept of my base and
bare love. I have no other thing to give thee for all thy mercies, but even my
love, my self, which yet is already thine own: But I am so soiled and defiled
with sin, that it is a point of extraordinary favor, if in compassion thou will now accept, that which in right has been always thine. But if I be full
of wickedness, art thou therefore not full of goodness? If I be blameworthie
for my impiety, art thou therefore not praise-worthie for thy mercy? If I
confess my iniquity, will thou therefore deny thy pity? I am a sinner, but
yet thy creature. I am a Sinner, but yet redeemed with thy precious blood. I am
a Sinner, but remember, Lord, thou came into the world to save Sinners,
whereof I am chief. Thou came to save Sinners, and will thou reject me? Thou
came to seek that which was lost, and will thou see me perish? Thou came
to seek those which straied, and will thou refuse them which cry after thee?
Thou came to call Sinners to repentance, and will thou not hear them when
they do repent? Why the^, sweet Jesus, I am a sinner, I am lost, I have
straied, I repent, I am he for whose sake thou came into the world: help me
now, or tell me who shall help me? Save thy servant, or tell me who shall
save me? I know, Lord, I know there is no Redeemer, there is no Savior besides
thee. If thou refusest a poor captive, that condemns himself, and calls
upon thee; o Redeemer who^ have thou then redeemed? If that sinner shall be
drowned in hell, that despaireth in himself, and trusts in thee; O Savior
who^ will thou then save? Have mercy therefore upon me, O Savior, O Redeemer,
assuage my grief, heal my diseases, purge my sins. Thou that have called me,
before I called upon thee, hearken now unto my prayer, and let my cry come
unto thee, even for thy mercies sake, for thy loves sake, for thy own sake,
sweet Jesus. Amen.

A MORNING PRAYer, for a private Family.
It is vain to rise early, and to lie down late, except the Lord be with us:
so vain a thing is Man. Therefore we will not attempt any thing, before we
have taken counsel and strength from the Lord, that he may deliver us from
every evil work. If we ask that thing which is evil, deny our ignor^ace;
If we ask that thing which is good, O Lord, remember thy promise.

WE slept and rose again, O Father, for thou did watch for us that we
might take our rest. The heavens declare thy glory, and the earth is full of
thy goodness. Yet have thou not dealt so with all Nations, as thou have loved
Sion thy little hill; a corner of the world far separated from the Serpent,
and fenced from the wild beast. Yet who considers that our peril is gone
into other lands, because their Gods be not like unto our God? We have seen
thy works, and yet we prove (...) ^^^ue thee (...) we see thy w^^ (...) Thou
have separa^^ us from the Turk, and delivered us from the Pope: and why have
thou separated us from them, but that we should be joined to thee? even a new
Creature come out of darkness to light, according to ye working of knowledge.
O bind our hearts with thy fear, that we part not from thy love! For our
selves and for our Brethren, we are prostrate here before thee, o Prince most
excellent. For the name of thy only Son, one drop of mercy to cool this fire
of sin. Nothing, good Lord, to change thy mercy? yet the whelps do eat the
crummes that fall from their masters table. First we yield thee hearty
thanks for all at once. Next, we humbly beseech thee for the general
quittance which thy Son has sealed for our sins. Then, for all graces, we
pray thee let us not want the thing without which we cannot serve thee. Plant
in our hearts true fear of thy name, obedience to our Prince, and love to our
Neighbors. Give power, good Father, to our prayers: grant us true humility
in prosperity, perfect patience in aduer sitie, peace in Christ, and joy in the
holy Ghost. This is our desire, to live godly, righteously and soberly: so
bless us and keep us, good Father, unto the end of our lives. Turn us, O God
of our salvation, grant that we may grow from strength to strength, that thy
Church Militant may be like thy Triumpha^t in heavenly Charity and all
Communion of Saints. Send thy laborers into thy vineyard, purge thy Church of
idle and ignorant Ministers; write thy laws in ye tables of our hearts, and
power thy grace upon the hearers. Bless them which bless us; look upon this
Realm in thy mercy. Preserve our King; let not the eye of Great Britain lose
his sight. Be gracious and merciful unto our friends [and Parents] according
unto the flesh: comfort thine afflicted Saints. Confou^d the power of
Antichrist, send thy fear amongst them, make their time short, defend thine
own cause: As thou art sanctified in us before them, so be thou magnified in
them before us; that all the world may turn and say, Great art thou, O Lord God
of the Christians, and there is none besides thee mighty, just and merciful,
rewarding righteousness, and revenging iniquity, the same now, and ever, and
every where. Grant these things, o heavenly Father, and whatsoever else thou
know to be needful for us, even for his sake, who died for sin and sinned
not; in whose name we farther pray unto thee, as he has taught us, saying, O
our Father which art in heaven etc.

God the Father which has made us, bless us; God the Son, which has
redeemed us, preserve us; God the holy Ghost, which has sanctified us,
confirm our says, to the end, and in the end. Oh God, Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost save us, Amen.

AN EVENING Prayer for a private Family.
We have sinned: we repent. O Father have mercy upon us. Amen.

O Lord God, which have created us of nothing, which have delivered us from
Death and damnation, if we do not wilfully run unto it; that have been good
and gracious unto us in continuing thy te^porall blessings both at home and in
the field, even as thou see most expedient for our estate, and have drawn
out the thread of our life unto this present time. These are thy great mercies,
O Lord, given unto us freely without any deserving of ours. And for all these
thou requirest nothing else of us, but that we know thee, and acknowledge thee
to be the giver thereof, and to obey thee, and to walk in the paths of thy
commandments, that so we might become thy children, and be partakers of thine
everlasting kingdom, dome, and reign with thee for ever. O Lord, we confess
against our selves our wonderful foolishnes and unthankfulness: For we have,
even as much as in us lies, stopped ye stream of thy mercies, that they
should not come near us, we have not hearkened unto ye voice of thy word,
neither took we any delight in keeping thy laws and thy statutes: And
therefore if thou had long before this cut us short, as thou have done many,
and that suddenly and fearfully, and summoned us to appear, and to hold up our
hands at the bar, before thy judgment seat, and have the fearful sentence
of eternal condemnation speedily given forth against us: who is there could
say, What do thou? Nay our own consciences would acquit thee, and say thou
have done justly. For seeing thou calledst after us, and we refused to hear
thee, it was good reason we should cry and find no mercy. But, O Lord, as
our sins are mighty, and cannot be numbered, so thy mercy far exceeds and
strives against our lewdness. Thou have spared us long, and given us a large
time of repentance. Thou have driven off thy vengeance from day to day,
waiting and watching for our turning again unto thee. Thou have called us by
signs in Heaven, by shaking the earth, by drowning us with waters, by
threatening us war, samine and pestilo^ce, besides the fearful threatenings of
thy word. Even so, O Lord, le^ these have their working in our hearts together
with thy mercies in time to repent, and turn from our wicked ways, to abuse
thy patience no longer, but even with all our heart to turn unto thee, if so
we may be saved in the day of thy wrath. So work thou in us, O heavenly Father,
that we delay no longer to ask counsel at thee, and thy word, what we
ought to do, what we ought not to do, and how we may live soberly in
prosperity, and how we may be comforted in sickness and adversity, that we
may go out of our selves and look for all things at thy goodness, that we
may trust no further to these transitory things, but wholly rely upon thee.
Bless, O Lord, we beseech thee thy whole universal Church, the Kings
Majesty, the Queen and Prince, the privy Counsel, Magistrates and Commo^s
of this land; specially have mercy as upon this family and every member of
the same, so also upon all our friends [and Parents] according unto the flesh,
and continue thy Gospel unto us and to our posterity after us, even for thy
dear Son Jesus Christ his sake, in whose name we further pray unto thee as
he has taught us, saying, O our Father which art in heaven etc.

Let thy mighty hand, and out stretched arm, O Lord, be still our defense, thy
mercy and loving kindness in Jesus Christ thy dear Son our salvation, thy
true and holy word our instruction, thy grace and holy Spirit our comfort and
consolation, unto the end and in the end. Amen.

The Lord bless us and save us, the Lord make his face to shine upon us, and
be merciful unto us; The Lord turn his favorable ^^untenance toward us, and
this night and evermore vouchsafe to send us thy everlasting peace. Amen.

The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the fellowship of
the holy Ghost be with us all evermore. Amen.

A PRAYER TO BE said for a sick man: or by the sick man himself, altring but
the person.
O Most merciful God and gracious Father, which through corporal diseases
put us in mind of our mortality, and also call to repentance; we
acknowledge, that unto thee belongs health and salvation, thou raisest up and
castest down, thou make sick and make whole, thou restorest to life and
take away by death: We, thy unworthy servants, do here present our selves
before thy heavenly Majesty, in the name and mediation of thy dearest Son
Jesus Christ, humbly praying thee in the behalf of this thy poor servant,
that lies visited under thy hand, that thou would not rebuke him in thine
anger, nor chasten him in thy wrath. Have mercy on him, O Lord, for he is
weak, O Lord heal him, for his bones are vexed. We know, O Lord, and
himself acknowledges, that being of the same mould that we are, and descended
from the same loins, he must needs be infected with the same corruption of
original sin that we are, and also subject to ye same death and damnation.
But, O gracious and loving Father, we beseech thee, seal in his heart by thy
holy Spirit the forgiveness of all his sins, lay not to his charge what he
has said or done amiss throughout the whole course of his life, but rear him
up in hope, and let thy holy Spirit lead him unto the throne of thy mercy. Let
the sweet feeling and taste of a lively faith, distaste al corruptions that are
in him, yt his sinful body and soul may be cleared and washed by the blood of
thy Son. And if this his sickness be not unto the death, may it please thee, O
Lord, to help him, upon the bed of his sorrow: turn the whole palate of his
weakness into joy. Heal him and he shall be whole, save thou him and he shall
be saved. Deliver him from the pit of corruption; for ye grave will not
acknowledge thee nor death confess thee; but the living, we say, the living
will extol thee for evermore. But if it be more expedient for him to die then
to live, the^ deal with him according to thy will, O Lord, and co^ma^d his soul
to be received in peace, which we commend into thy hands that have redeemed it.
Take from him all the fear and sorrows of death, and give him a through
strength against all the assaults of the devil, that he may have a perfect
victory. Raise the siege of his spiritual enemies that are round about him, and
let thy gracious defense and protection be over him to keep him fast to thee
and thy truth to ye end. And, good Lord, show this mercy upon him that the
knowledge of thy Gospel, which he has learned since thou have called him
thereby, may now stand him in steed, and relieve his faith, yt in the knowledge
of thee and of himself, he may have true repentance, that he may yield unto
thee true obedience; and be tha^kfull, whatsoever thou shall do unto him, and
in regard of thy glory, and of those joys which thou have prepared for him,
he may willingly forsake this present evil world, and come unto thee fighting a
good fight, and fighting with joy, and so receiving an incorruptible crown,
may live with thee for ever and ever. And now, good Father, for us yt are about
him, teach us to know our own weakness, that we may worthily think of the
frailties of our vain and transitory life, that we may prepare our selves
unto death, always to be in a readiness looking up to that everlasting kingdom
which thou have purchased for us. Grant these things we humbly beseech thee,
both for him and for us, for Christ Jesus sake our only Savior and Mediator,
Amen.

Revel. 7.12. Amen. Praise, and Glory, and VVisdome, and Thanks, and Honor,
and Power, and Might, be unto our God for evermore, Amen.

FINIS.

