A DISPVTATION against the Adoration of the relics of Saints departed.
WHEREIN NINE PALPAble abuses are discouvered, committed by the popish Priests
in tbe veneration thereof. Together with, The refutation of a Jesuitical
Epistle, and an Index of the relics, which every seventh year, are shovvne
at Avvcon in Germany unto the superstitious people and pilgrims, compiled by
the Canons of S. Mary's Church An. 1608.

By John Polyander Professor of Divinity in the University of Leyden in
Holland, and translated by Henry Hexham, out of French into English.

At Dordrecht. Printed by George Walters, Anno. 1611.

TO THE TRVEly religious and honorable Lady, The Lady Vere, spouse unto my
honorable Lord, Sir Horace Vere knight, Lord Gouvernour of his Majesty's
cautionarie town of Briell, and chief Commander under his Excellency of the
English forces in the service of the most illustrate Lords the States of the
United Provinces.
MAdame: it were in vain for me to seek to embelish your christian graces by
a dead letter: Seeing they are most lively, and give a far greater luster in
your self, where God has planted them, then can be expressed by the blunt and
unlearned Pen of a Soldier. But seeing God has made them so transparent, and
has kindled in you so holy a flame of love and zeal unto the true and only
worship of his name: Me thinks this plain translation of mine, not for any
worth that is in me, but for the subjects sake, has found out a fit
Patroness, whose person and practice affordetth a real confutation of that
superstition which is here unmasked,

And so much the more presuming upon your Ladyships favor and gentle
acceptance: in regard I dedicated this same Authors former refutation upon the
invocation of Saints, unto my honorable Lord your husband; so that now, as God
has made you one, I may make you both equally interressed in this one subject
(though diversely handled) striving for that honor, which is due unto his name.

These Popish iuglings cannot be unknown to your Ladyship, seeing the unholy
blood of Hales (which did clear and thicken as the Pilgrims purse was light or
heavy) is of your own house, and of so fresh remembrance, whereby your
honorable Ancestors did learn to detest such divelish cousenage, as the
burned bones of your most worthy Granfather did long ago witness, to all the
world.

Moreover, (Madame) there are also some abhomiations in this disputation, which
I know made my Authors pen to tremble in copying of them out, and mine to quake
in translating them: others again, which may draw from your Ladyship a chaste
smile and a modest blush: but let the shame light upon their heads, who are the
authors thereof: and the more they blaspheme and dishonor our blessed God and
Savior, the more let us worship and honor him, and learn as Bees to suck
honey from banefull weeds, or as cunning Physicians to extract Antidotes from
poison, since God turns the very abominations and execrations of the wicked,
as exsamples for the good and edification of his children.

Here with (Madame) as with the chief end of this labor I end, beseeching
God to bless my honorable Lord and you, with all happiness and joy in this
world, and everlasting felicity and bliss in the world to come. From our
Garnison of Dordrecht this 18. of October. 1611.

Your ladyships in all dutiful respect. Henry Hexham.

To the Christian Reader.
Worthy Reader, for variety sake, to employ my idle time to some use, and to
offer my mite unto the Church of God, that the grave and learned men of our
nation may see, that the Ministers of other reformed churches, march pouldron
to pouldron with them unto the Lords combat: I have undertaken this
translation, free from ostentation: only my ambition is (in tracing after the
stepps of my Author) to have one flurt at Antichrist, and one push at the fall
of the great whore of Babylon, and so much the rather, because mine eyes have
seen some of her fornicatio^s, which some others have but heard.

But it may seem strange to some, that a soldier should undertake such a
task, as not appertaining to his profession: as that man judges me a soldier,
so I entreat him to esteem me a Christian, and then both he and I shall be
consonant.

Well then, into whose hands soever this poor translation of mine shall come,
who^ God has already enlightened, let us sing an everlasting Halleluiah, and
give praise unto that great God, which has translated us out of the kingdom
of darkness into his merveilous light. And if it fall into the hands of any
that are infected with this deadly contagion, I entreat them to read it, not
to refute it, for alas they are not able: because it is grounded and bounded
upon and within the sacred word of God, and seconded by the opinions of the
most holy Fathers. That were as if they should run in upon Gods two-edged
sword. That were as if a falling and a running ennemy, beaten on all sides
should turn back upon a stand of charged pikes, which are ready to receive
the^. Therefore, it were better for them to suffer it to graze upon their
stony hearts then to resist. And for my part, I will daily pray unto the
Father of lights, to illuminate and water their souls with the beams and
streams of his Sun of righteousness, that as Eagles we may soar up only
unto him with the wings of our faith, in whom alone is found the wel-spring of
living waters and noewhere else.

As concerning the grave and learned Author of this little treatise, it were
mere presumption in me, to make an attestatio^ of his worth, when the noe
less wise the^ H. Lords of this state, have abundantly testified the same to
all, by resolving on him, as the sit they did know to re-establish the
truth by his public profession at Leyde^. This I will only day, that if a
few spare hours cold bring forth this, we may well expect and promise our
selves noe small fruit of those holy labors, which shall hereafter be
undertaken. Thus I beseech God to accept of my weak performance, and give a
blessing unto this and them.

Thy loving Countryman H. Hexham.

To the most noble and virtuous Lord, MONSIEUR ARNHOVLT DE GROENEVELT, Lord of
the Lands and Lordships of F^llignies, Godimont, and Ramegnies in Neufville
lez Sorgnies etc. And ancient Coronell unto the most illustrate and mighty
Lords, the States of the united Provinces.
MONSIEUR: IT is more then two years past, since a merchant of this city, one
of the members of our French Church, came to show me in my lodging two
coppies of an Epistle, published by the Canons of Awcon in Germany, touching
the veneration due unto their relics: which a friend of his, a zealous lover
of the truth had sent him, with express charge to present it unto me in his
behalf, and earnestly to request me, to return some answer upon it.
Whereunto, considering that I could not so suddenly accomplish his desire,
because of my other employements, he thought good not to limit me any
prefixed time: but that I should undertake and finish this work at my leisure.
This is the cause, that I have made noe great have in composing this treatise,
which I have distributed into three parts: In the scope there of, I have
followed the order and the example of the ancient Prophets and Apostles, as
also their true Successors, and Imitatours, who have all maintained with one
common accord, that God only ought to be worshipped by his people, and will
not have this service given to any other, by the authentic, and
irreprehensible testimonies of holy Scripture, the which God has armed with an
inviolable authority, to the end, that those which fear him, might make noe
scruple to receive it wholly, and to give full belief thereunto.

True it is, that I have annexed unto it some attestations of the ancient
Fathers, not to approve the foolish imagination of the Romanists, but that the
holy Scripture may take more force and credit: seeing she has received it
already from God, who is the author thereof: or that the truth of it, which
is infalliable, should depend upon the advice and jugement of our ancestors
and predecessors, which might err: but rather to show the Doctors of the
Roman church, who rely more upon the authority of men, then upon Gods in the
poincts which concern our controversies, that their comdemnation is not only
found in the decrees of divine Law: but also in the records of the pastors of
the primitive Church: yea even in theirs whom they choose for their Judges and
defendaunts.

I call the Epistle of these Canons Jesuitical in the beginning of my
disputation: because after I had conferred it with Bellarmins book, the first
tutour of these Jesuits upon this subject, I find it is but a patching
together of his arguments, whereby he sought to prove the worshipping of the
relics of Saints.

I meant not to use in the resutation of their Epistle any elegant speech, or
any circumlocution and readiousnesse in words: because the truth (without
borrowing else where) has ornaments enough in her self: and when she is
simple, and in her naked robes, she takes the more delight in such as fetts
her forth, and represents her before the view of al men, in roundnesse and
simplicity.

Forasmuch then, as we cannot resist to much, nor too often the heresies which
daily multiply in this wicked world: especially the foolish superstition of
those which would attribute to the relics of mortal man, the honor
belonging unto the sole majesty of the immortal God: although that Calvin,
Chemnicius and some other excellent Divines, have taken penn in hand to oppose
themselves against the first inventours and advancers of this Idolatry: yet I
have also thought it my duty, to give forth this disputation against the new
protecters of this superstition, and in particular against the Canons of Awco^:
because it may be availeable to the Christian church (as S. Augustine says)
that many books be written upon one subject: provided that they be made in
diversity of style, but not in diversity of belief, seeing that by this means
heretics are the more convicted, and on the otherside, we open the more
passages for the Children of God, to escape from the call, and out of the
snares of these fowlers, and offer them sundry sorts of counterpoysons to
preserve their brains from the venoume of their Sophistry.

As for the rest, there are many considerations, which moved me to dedicate
this treatise unto you: For I will not here speak of that holy zeal, which
made you expose your person and goods, from your youth, as well in the defense of
our just cause at S, Amands, and in some other places adjoining thereunto,
wherein you bore the brunt of the first persecution: as for the preservation of
our Churches here in these United Provinces: so long as it pleased the Lord of
Hosts to maintain you in the gouvernement of the Town of Sluice, and so long as
your age would permit you to continue in that of Nemegen, and to follow his
Excellency with your foot Regiment in many feiges, assaults, and admirable
recouverings of many Towns and fortes, brought under the obedience of our
Superiors in the face of our enemies. Neither, will I speak of that zeal,
and your other virtues which recommendes you among the gentlemen of our
Commonweal, and in particular among us: for which I must acknowledge my self
indebted, to testify the same publikly in the name of the members of our
Church, that for this respect we honor you and your like, who loves true
godliness with their hearts, and seek to worship with us our only God and
heavenly Father in spirit and truth. Beside, having known in sundry sorts
your singular favor and benevolence toward me and mine, for which I feel
my self obliged to present you with this small gift in acknowledgement thereof.

Whereunto also, your comendable resolution has moved me, in consecrating the
rest of your aged days in the lecture of ecclesiastical books, and your
capacity in judging well of our disputations against the traditions of the
papisticall Doctors, and chiefly in this, upon the relics of the Saints
departed.

For as in the days of your ignorance, you have seen the abuse of this
superstition, and quickly after your conversion manifested unto the world,
that you had it in abhominatio^: so having as it were this small treatise
already printed your heart: I assure my self that you will approve it, and
will find that whatsoever I have alleged therein, is grounded upon the
experience of truth, the instruction of the Orthodoxe Fathers, and the
authority of the holy Scripture.

In confidence whereof, I offer unto you this memorial as a token of the
affection I bear to your L. beseeching the Lord, who after the trial of a
dangerous prison, noe less courageous, the^ a long resistance against the
allarmes and pernicious enterprises of our adversaries, has at last
tra^sported you from your gouvernme^t of the City of Nemege^ (in which our
most illustrate LL. would willingly have held you still) into this City of
Dordrecht, to live here among us, for the more tranquillity and ease of your
agednesse, overworn and weakened through the travels and wearisomenesse of the
wars, It will please him.

MONSIEUR, To establish your heart in the assurance of his grace, toward those
which reverence him, by the remembrance of so many notable deliverances and
victories which he has given in our time to our Churches, and to fortify you
with constancy, to persevere with us in the sole invocation of his blessed
name, for the repose of your soul, and the advanceme^t of his glory. From my
study, this 2. of Septem. 1611.

Your most humble servant, and most affectionate brother in Christ our
Souveraine Lord. John Polyander.

The Second part of the fifth Psalm, put into French meeter by Cl. M.
6 Ta fureurperd and extermine
Finalementious les menteurs,
Quant'aux meurtriers and decepteurs,
Celui qui terre and Ciel domine
Les abomine.
7 Mais moien la grand' bonte mainte,
Laquelle m'as fait sauourer,
Ira^encores t'ado^er
En ton temple, en ta maison saint,
Dessous ta crainte,
8 Mon Dieu guide moi and connoye
Par ta bonte, que ne soys mis
Sous la main de mes ennemis,
Er dress deuant moi ta voye,
Que ne fouruoye.
9 Leut bouche rien de vrain'ame ne,
Leur coeur est, feint faux and couuert,
leur gosier vnsepulchre ouuert,
De flattery fausse and vain
leur langue est pleine.
10 O Dieu, monstre leur qu'ils mesprenent,
Ce qu'ils pensent fair, desfaits,
Chasse les pour leurs grands mesfaits,
Carc'est contre toiqu'tfs se prennent,
Tant entreprennent.
11 Et que tous ceux se resiousissent
Quien toi ontespoir and foi,
Joy autont sans fin deffcus toi,
Aucc eeux qui ton Nom che^issent,
Et te benissent.
12 Car de bien fair tu es large
Al'homme just, o Vrai Sauueur,
Etle couures de ta faueur,
Tout ainsi commed vne targe
Espesse and large.
A DISPVTATION against the worshipping of the Relics of Saints departed.
OF all the Idolatries in the world, there is none more displeasing to God, nor
more hurtful to a superstitious man, then that which he commits by the
religious worshipping of the bones and relics of the dead. For, if God would
never suffer, that we should worship his living creatures, created after his
own image and likeness; noe not his Angels themselves, which are pure and
immortal, and have noe participation with our humane corruption: how much
less will he permit us to attribute that honor due unto his only Majesty, to
the bones and garments of rotten bodies returned into ashes? Moreover if the
worshippers of the false Gods have estranged themselves from our Creator, Ier.
13. 17. 13.
who is the fountain of living waters, to digg them pitts that can contain
noe water: how much more are all those gone astray out of the right way of
salvation, which run after I know not what pieces of old rags, in-uented at
their pleasure, and seek for the light of life, among the shadows of death.

Now whereas the Canons of Awcon in Germany, have not long since put forth an
index of their relickes, with a Iesu-iticall Epistel stuffed with false gloses
and sophistical reasons, to stirt-vp thereby the poor abused people of this
age unto the visitation of their said relics, and to change at an instant,
their natural stupiditie into a self-obstinacie, by preferring the deceitful
shows of religion, before he service which God prescribs us in his holy word.
So I desiring to accomplish the earnest request of some of my freindes, and
also my vocation which binds me to pre-advertise the ignorant to take heed of
these blind-leaders, which leads them unto perdition, have spent some hours in
composing of this Treatise, that may serve as a preseruative to the weak,
against the venomous errors eontained in the said writing, as a morning-watch
to awaken and rouse up the sluggish, as a Guide to such as are gone astray out
of the path of truth, and as a spur to the dull to convert them to God, and
to divert them from the pernicious adoration of things dead and corruptible,
unto the wholesome worship of our heavenly Father the only God living and
incorruptible, who is a spirit, and loves such as worship him in spirit and
truth.

Whereunto I will endeavor to bring them by three degrees. First, The
deputation divided into three parts.
I will lay down to them the principal causes for which Christians are not
permitted to do any religious service unto the relics of the dead.

Afterward, I will refute the arguments of the Canons of Awcon, whereby they
seek to prove the contrary.

Finally, I will advertise the Reader of the falsities of those relics
specified in their index.

I will confirm this my proposition ( that Christians are not permitted to do
any religious service to the relics of the dead) by three reasons: whereof
the first shall be, that the tradition of visiting and reuerencing religiously
the relics of the departed Saints, has no foundation in the holy Scripturs,
nor from the example of those which have followed invariably their pattern.

The second, how some Christians inconsta^t in their ways, having learned this
superstitious ceremony in the School of the Gentiles, have brought it into the
Primitive Church about four hundred years after Christ.

The third, that the consideration of the sundry abuses, sprung from this
wicked custom, nourished and maintained yet unto this present in the Idolaters
Synagogue, ought to move and stir up the true worshippers of God, wholly to
banish it from out of the christian Church.

Touching the first point of my admonition, surely we find in the Bible, The
second part.
that the holy Patriarckes and their children have buried honorably their
dead, according to the ordinance of the Lord, Genesis 3. 19
Thou art dust, and to dust shall thou return; but we read not in any place of
it, that they have torn their bodies, and tra^sported them by peece-meal after
their deceasse: placed their bones in sundry places, shown their garments to
the vulgar people with command to worship them, and promise that in calling
upon the^ they should be heard, Neither read we also in it, that God has
commanded us by his ancient prophets, to go on pilgrimage to those parts
where their inheritours had carried the^, to offer up there unto them burning
tapers and holy candles, to touch, salute and kiss their bones with great
devotion: Much less read we in it, that God has prescribed them to sole^nize
the memory of their relics by certain convocations of the people and
publicatio^s of solemn fests, nor yet to load the Churches and Altars with
them, nor to carry them upon their necks and shoulders, nor to walk up and
down with the^ in processions; to the intent to move every one to reverence
them, with confidence to obtain succor from God and his Saints by
worshipping them.

And albeit that the Patriarch Jacob, and Joseph his son, grounding themselves
upon the truth of Gods promise, that he would give for an inheritance to their
posterity the land of Canaan, enjoined their children to transport them forth
of Egypt, when the hour of their deliverance should come into the country
which God had promissed them: and that Moses took their bones alonge with him
when the children of Israel came forth of Egypt: notwithstanding he never
showed the^ unto the people of God in his greatest distresses, either in his
passage through the redd sea, or in the wilderness: much less did he lift
them up into the air, and set them upon a Perch (as he did the brazen
serpent) or ordained that any should behold them, with sted fast assurance that
every of them should be delivered from their evils by contemplating them: but
contrary wise he kept them secret, and close in their coffins: and the Elders
of the people that surviued Moses and Joshua, caused the^ to be buried so soon
as they arrived in the land of Canaan, Ios. 24. 32
in a field which Abraham and Jacob had bought before time of the sonns of
Hamor the father of Sechem.

Also the Prophet Samuel shows us, 2 Samuel 21 13. 14.
that K. David having taken the bones of Saul and Jonathan from the inhabitants
of Gabish Gilead which had taken them up from the street of Beth-shan, brought
them from thence into the country of Benjamin, caused the^ to be buried in the
sepulcher of Kis the father of Saul, and that in the Solemnizatio^ of their
funerals his subjects did all that the King commanded them: but there is no
mention made of any pilgrimage, or any religious service: which they should do
in honor of the^ about their Sepulcher.

Likewise, 2 Kings. 23. 17.
in the second book of kings, the Author of this History writes, that King
Josiah willing to profane the Altar which King Ieroboham had caused to be
built in Bethel, and to dishonor eternally the Priests and other Idolaters,
which he had maintained there; caused the bones of the false priests and other
their confederates to be dug up, commanding them to burn the^ upon the
same Altar: But on the contrary espying an other Tomb in the same City,
demanded of the cittize^s thereof, What title is that which I see? and having
understood by their answer, that it was the sepulcher of the man of God, which
before prophesied the things which the said King came then to do upon that
very Altar, to show the public reverence he bore unto that man of God even
after his burial, bad the inhabitants of Bethel Let him alone, let none remove
his bones, whereto this Historia^ adds, that the citizens of the said city
obeyed therein king Iosiahs commandment.

Although the holy Scriptures gives us to understand, that among all that are
borne of woeme^, God has not raised up more excellent servants of his house,
then Moses and John Baptist: nor a more faithful Martyr of his son Christ
Jesus then S. Stephen, one of the seven deacons of the Apostolic Church, and
one of the first witnesses of Christ persecuted in Jerusalem: Neueverthelesse
their bodies were presently interred after their departure, that of Moses by
God himself after a miraculous manner, Deuteronomy. 34. 6.
in the country of Moab, in a place unknown unto the children of Israel, and
inaccessible for the devil, to the end, they might not abuse it by Idolatry:
that of S. John Baptists by his disciples, and S. Stephens by some men that
feared God, Marc. 6. 29. Act. 8. 2. Iud. ver. 5
as appears by the History of Moses, the Gospel according to S. Mark, the
book of the Acts of the Apostles and the Epistle of S. Jude.

Among all the ancient Prophets, there is none whose burial is more memorable
then that of the Prophet Elishas; in regard it pleased God to raise up
miraculously by touching of his dead and buried body: a man which in great
have for fear of their enemies they had cast into the grave of this prophet,
as we read in the second book of Kings and 2. Chap, howbeit the Author of
this history adds not for all that, that the Priests of the old Testament,
have commanded the people of God to resort unto that tomb, to offer up their
prayers and sacrifices, or that they instituted any Feasts upon certain days
in memory of this miracle, or enclosed the bones of this Prophet into a
shrine, or chose out any express place to raise up some altar in his honor,
or did persuade any to resort thither from all parts, to offer up there their
prayers and sacrifices in the name of the vulgar people, as if it were before
the face of God himself.

Morover the prophet Isaiah, having respect unto the ancient custom of
interring the dead, and hiding them in their graves, compares the sepulchers
of the righteous unto bedds, to show by this similitude, that we can do noe
greater pleasure to God, nor a greater honor to his wel-beloved Saints after
their departure, then to wrap up their bodies in the beds of the Earth, to
rest there from their labors until the day of their resurrection, in which
Christ will come to awaken and call them unto him, and bring them into the
possession of life eternal.

I say moreover, that the greatest hypocrites among the last Doctors of Israel,
to wit, the Scribes and Pharisees, who through hypocrisy and vain glory buylt
up the sepulchers of the prophets, and repaired the tombles of the righteous,
stoned and massacred to death by their ancestors did not deter their corpses
to dismember them, and show their bones unto the meaner sort of people, or to
adorn the Altars of the Tempel of Jerusalem with them, but suffered the^ to
rest in their graves, as Christ himself witnesses in the 23. Chap. of S.
Mathews Gospel, the 27. verse and the next following.

Touching the Apostles and disciples of our Savior Christ, the history of his
burial shows us, that S. Peter and S. John approaching near unto his sepulcher,
to see whether he was truly risen or not, found there his kerchief with his
linen clothes laid aside, but the Evangelist S. John notes more expressly,
that they came thither one after another, to behold the more earnestly his
hand-kerchief and linne^ which he had left behind him after his resurrection,
adds not (which nevertheless would have been so much the more remarkable)
that they either handled the^, or bore away those relics with them, to show
them unto their con-disciples, or put them into any shrine or box, which with
out all doubt they would have done, if they had receued any such charg from
there Mr. or if they could have gathered by any of his familliar speeches he had
with the^ before, that such a collection and transportatio^ of his relics
would have pleased him after his resurrection, and have been as a fit means,
to confirm their brethren in the Christian faith.

As for S. Luke who discribs unto us all the memorable acts of the Apostles,
since the assention of Christ, until the second year of S. Paul's imprisonment
at Rome, to the intent they might serve as a miror and exsample to all our
actions, he makes no recital, nor reckons up in his second book any of
Christ's relics, his Parents or faithful Martyrs, collected by his Apostles,
or given into the custody of their friends: but he shows that the christians
of his time perseuered with the Apostles in the sincere doctrine of the H.
Gospel, and in breaking of bread, the true reliquaries and memorialls of the
instructions and Act. 2. 42
suffrances of our sole Redeemer Jesus Christ.

In like manner the Apostle S. Peter while he was living, would not promise
the faithful dispersed throughout Pontus, Galatia, Capadocia, Asia, and
Bithynia, to leave after his death any other relics behind him, the^ his
Epistles which he wrote unto them, as him self declares by these words, that
he would endeavor always (to wit, 2 Pet. 1. 15.
by his writings) that they also might be able to have rememberance of those
things after his departure.

I could here alleadg for this purpose many excellent admonitions, and notable
examples of the ancient Fathers, and true successors of the Apostles: by
which they show us, that they understood right well, that the last degree of
honor, and charitable office which survivours are bound to yield unto the
dead, according to the rule of holy Scripture, and the custom of the chiefest
fathers, as well of the old, as of the niew Testament, consists in burying of
their corpses: but for this present I will only recite that which Origin
writes thereof in his disputations against Celsus, S. Augustine in his first
book of the City of God, S. Athan. in the life of S. Anthony, Eusebius in
his history of Policarpus martyrdom, and what Prudentius the Poet says
thereof in his verses upon the death of one of his friends.

Humane bodies ( says Origin) having once ben the souls mansion, Origin.
ought not to be cast away after their death: Cont.
considering that through the permission of good Laws, Celsus lib. 5. and 8
we must do them that honor, as is befitting them in laying them into the
Earth. We have learned to honor the reasonable soul, and to bury honorably
the Corpse, which is the instrument thereof.

According to which S. Augustine says, that we ought not to dishonor and
reject the bodies of the departed, especially those of the faithful, which the
H. Ghost used as vessels and instruments unto all good works. For if our
affection has been great toward our Parents, the more pleasing is their
garment or ringe unto posterity, their corpse which touch us more nearly; and
with whom we have more familiarity, ought in noe wise to be despised, since
they serve not only for an aid and ornament, but also partly unto humane
Nature. From hence it proceeds that through a serviceable piety they have
heretofore taken care for the burial of the righteous, solemnized their
funerals, and provided for their interring. Tob. 12. 13.
As for Tobie he obtained that special grace of God to bury the dead, as the
Angel witnesses. Ioh. 12. 3
Moreover, our Lord which was to rise again, commends the good work of the
religious woeman that had cast the costly ointment upon his body, commands to
divulge it abroad because she had done it for the preparation of his sepulcher.
Matt. 27. 57.
The like honorable mention is made of those which took down his body from
the Cross, and were careful to bury it honorably. Marc. 15. 42.
So then all thiese testimonies teach us, Luke 23. 50.
though there be noe sense in the dead bodies; yet they fortify us in the
belief of our refurrection, Ioh. 19. 38.
and shows us that these bodies appertains also unto the providence of God,
and that such Godly offices are pleasing unto him.

S. Athanasius reports, that S. Anthony told his friends a while before his
death, Athana. in the life of S. Anthony.
let none (says he) carry my relics into Egypt: least my body be honored
with a false honor, and least the solenities and obsequies, which so many
times I have condemned (as you know) should be practiced upon me. For the
shuning thereof am I chiefly come hiether. Couuer then with earth this poor
corpse of your Father, and hide him, forgetting not this commandment from me
your aged Father. Eusebe lib. 4. 15. and 5. 1.


Eusebius having in his history commended the zeal of the Christians of his
time, which with the danger of their lives had gathered up the most precious
ashes of Policarpus the Martyr, to bury them: complains afterward of the
Tyrants of that age, which commanded their hang-men to cast the bodies of those
holy maryrs to their rave^ous curres, appoynting besides certain guardes to
restrain and keep back the faithful from taking up the torn pieces of their
corpses, gnawne by the dogs, and from laying the^ into the earth.

Prudentius comparing the Church-yeard wherein they went to bury one of his
friends unto a Mother that imbraceth her child, Prudent.
and fouldeth him up in her arms. as if she would put him again in to her
belly, cries out.

Nunc suscipe, terra fovendu^
Gremioque hunc suspice molli:
Hominis tibi me^bra sequestro
Generosa and fragmina credo.
That is.

O earth receive and wrappe,
Within thy gentle lap
The members of this man:
To the bequeath I than,
And to thy imbracements
These generous remnants.
We must not forgett also how Bellarmin himself confesses, Rob. Bellarmin li.
2. de Eccl. trium. c. 3 and lib. 2. de purgat c. 19.
that God being willing to honor the body of Moses his faithful servant,
buried it with his own hands, and that to lay abroad dead corpses in the
air and before the view of the world, is the way to dishonor them: whereas
on the contrary to interr them, is to use them honestly and to do them
honor. Prima vtilitas (says he) quae mortuis accedit ex sepultura, est quod
consulitur honori eornm adhuc in hominum memorijs viventium. Non enim caret
ignomina quadam, quod faeditas nostri corporis aliorum conspectibus pateat,
that is to say, The first benefit that befalls the dead from their burial.
is, that we have respect unto their honors which are yet living in the
memories of men. For it is not without some shame that the foulness of our
bodies should stincke before the sight of others. A most true saying where by
this Cardinal conde^neth the impudency of these Porters of relics. and
imitatours of Ham, who vncouver before their brethren the nakedness and shame
of their fathers, and are not ashamed in some places to show the navel and
fore-skinne of our blessed Savior, and at Rheimes in Campania the print of his
buttockes. True it is, that in those days some of the imitatours of the
Gentiles, begann (as we shall understand hereafter) to attribute more honor
unto the Martyrs the^ in times past, and to solemnize the constancy of their
faith and other christian virtues, with the like pomp and solemnity, as the
Athenians did, which yearly assembled about the graves of the Grecians to call
there to mind, and to extol to the Heavens the valor of those which had
resisted courageously the army of Xerxes, and who for the good of their country
had lost their lives in the battle of Marathon. Nevertheless, their
principal advocate S. Ierom alleges for their excuse, that the ceremonies
which they did about the tombs of the Martyrs, was neither superstitious nor
contrary to that only adoration due to the name of God. Hierone in his
dispute against Vigilantius.
Who is he (says he in his dispute against Vigilantius) which has ever
worshipped the Martyrs? who ever has thoguht man to be God? O brainelesse head
Paul and Barnabas did they not ren^ their cloths, and said they were even men,
when the Lyconians hold them for Jupiter and Mercurius, and would have offered
the^ sacrifices? So far is it the^, that the Chistians of his time should be
so debauched, as to transfer the worship due unto God, unto the ashes of
their Martyrs, that contrari-wise he denies, that they did not once think to
worship any other creature, which he prefers before the relics of Saints,
by this manner of speech following. We neither serve nor worship, I say not
only the relics of Saints, but also the Son and Moon, neither Angels nor
Archangels, neither Cherubines, nor Seraphins, nor any name which is named,
either in this world, or in that which is to come: Least we should rather serve
the creature, then God, who is blessed for evermore. Now we honor the relics
of the Martyrs, to worship him whose Martyrs they are. From whence it appears
plainly, that the collection and religious service which those of the Papacy
do unto the relics of such as God has with-drawne long since out of this
world, being not grounded upon any command of the Lord, nor from the' exsample
of any of the true worshippers of his divine Majesty, Col. 2. 23
can neither be acceptable to God, nor available unto those superstitious men
which give themselves to this Idolatry through a voluntary devotion, without
faith or assurance that God does approove it in his holy word, which is the
light of our faith, the rule of our religion, the measure of all our devotion,
the guide of our conversation, and a law for all our works, Romans 14 23 He.
11. 6 1. Sam. 15. 22.
without which all our actions and intentions are but sin, displeasing to our
Souveraigne Lord, who had rather that we should obey, and be attentive to his
voice, then to offer sacrifice. Now if there were noe other consideration, then
this which I have expressed, it were sufficient enough to make them renounce
this error: but the perversity and obstinacy of such, as take for a light
their foollish imaginations, for a rule their false traditions, for a law their
absolute will, for a guide their old customs, and for a pattern the exsample of
their predecessors, constraines me to proceed forward unto the second point of
my discourse, and to prove that the Christians in time past have learned this
superstitious veneration of the relics of the departed, in the Gentiles
schole, and since have followed it, and brought it into the primative Church by
certain steps and degrees, to the great heart break of their faithful
teachers, and lawful successors of the sacred and holy Apostles.

I say, that this corruption is entered into the Christian Church by certain
stepps; The second part.
because that heretofore the source and beginning thereof was but small and
simple: whereof Eusebius and some other Historians propounds us a clear
exsample in the life of Constantine the Emperor: For they all confess with
one accord, that this Emperor thought good to counsel the Christians to
immitate many sumptuous ceremonies, which the gentiles used in solemnizing the
funerals of their ancestors, especially in tansporting the dead corpse of
illustrate personnages, and men of great renoume in their Country, out of base
and unknown places into Church-yeards, and others that were more public, to
make the memory of the Martyrs and other faithful servants of God the more
come^dable, and the Christian religion so much the more pleasing unto all sorts
of men.

But they witness in noe place, that he commanded his Bishops to lock them up
in their Church-Coffers, niether to transport them by mamockes into diverse
places, to represent them upon feastiuall days unto the vulgar sort of people,
with an exhortation that they should salute and kiss them: but on the
contrary enjoined his subjects to bury them honorably, and lay them in the
Earth. Notwithstand^ng the Devil taking hold and making use of the Carnal
wisdom of this Emperor turned it little by little into a ce^surable
superstition. For since that time many Christians have suffered themselves to
be carried away through there in considerate Zeal from one vanity unto
another, imagining with themselves, that the bodies of the faithful deserved
more, or as much service after their departure as the infidels: were not only
contented to remove them from far and remote places of their countreies, into
there Church-yardes, wherein they ordinarily assembled in those days to watch
and pray, and to do therein some others rites of religion, because then they
had no Churches. And even thus sought to eternize the memory of their virtues,
by building them Sumptuous tombs, and solemnising, their funerals with too
excessive praises.

To show then to every man, that Satan the Athenians Law giver and other
Idolaters, instituted this Ceremony, I will only alledg without reciting the
testimonies of other Historians, what Plutarke writes thereof in his discourse
upon the interring of Theseus and Cimon. His words are these, that when Cimon
by fore of arms had conquered the I Will of Scycros, be remembered with himself,
that the ancient Theseus son unto Ageus, flying from Athens came into that
Ileland, where Lycomedes for some bad suspicion he had of him, caused him to
be slain by tresaon. Now by all means he labored to find out his grave, in
regard the Athenians had received before an or Oracle or prophecy from Apollo
( or to speak more properly from the Devil,) by which he commanded them to
bring back to Athens the bones and ashes of Theseus, and to honor him as a
Demy-God: but he knew not where they had enterred him, because the inhabitants
of that I Will kept his grave secret and unknown, and would suffer no man to
seek it out: Howbeit; Cimon using all expedition to search it out, espied by
chance an Aegle, which struck the ground with her beak and talents, in a place
some what higher then the rest, whereupon it came into his mind, (as it were
by divine inspiration) to cause that place to be dug, where they found the
grave of some great corpse, and the point of a brazen lance with a sword. In
such sort, that having at last found the tomb, he took forth Theseus bones,
and brought them into the Admirall-Galley somptuously adorned, and transported
them presently into his Country four hundred years after Thesius had departed
from thence. For this service the people received him with great joy and he
got thereby the good will of the Athenians, which received these relics
with great Applause, with somptuous sacrifices, and processions, as if Thesius
himself had been living, and had returned back again into the City. And his
relics are in the midst of the Town, yet unto this day, near unto the
Parcke where the young me^ resort together for the excercising of their bodies,
and where is freedom both for slaves and all poor a^flicted ones.

More-ouer, the Sepulchers which yet unto this day are called Cimonia testefie
that Cimon^ bones and ashes were brought back again into Attica.
Notwithstanding the inhabitants of the town of Citium honor still a certain
Tomb which they affirm should be Cimons, because that in the time of a great
dearth and famine they had an oracle ( that is an answer from the Devil)
which commanded them to have a care unto Cimon, and not to neglect him, but to
honor and reverence him as a God, as Nancicrates the Orator has recorded it
in writting. The like he says also of Demetrius and Phocyon in the story of
their death whereunto for brevity sake I will send the Reader.

Now al-be it that the Christians and members of the primitive Church, were
borne away with the torrent of this heathenish custom, whereunto the Emperor
Constantine had opened the sluices, passing beyond the bounds of Christian
puretie and simplicity: yet the honor which they did about the graves and bons
of their Martyrs, was in noe wise comparable, nor so superstitious as that was
of the Athenians, and other pagans, nor like to that which at this day is
committed amongst the Idolaters of the Roman Church. For let us consider what
S. Augustine says thereof in his 8. book of the cittye of God. We neither
(says he) build Temples, August. 1. 8. ciuitat. Dei. c. 27
nor make priesthood nor sacrifies, nor any other divine service, as a religion
to the Martyrs. For they are not our Gods, but their God is ours. Truth it is,
that we honor their memory, as the holy men of God. Which have fought
valiantly for the truth even unto the death of their bodies, to the end, that
true religion might be known and the false convicted. What man is it among
the faithful that ever heard a priest say standing before an Altar, built
upon the corpse of Some Martyr to the honor and service of God, Peter, Paul
or Cyprian I offer thee Sacrifice, seeing that in memory of them we offer up
unto God who has made them both men and martyrs, and has conjoined them
through a celestial glory unto his angels, that in the assembly of the
people, we might give thanks unto the true God for their victories, and by
the remembrance of their crowns and palms, might exhort others unto the
imitation of their virtues. The funerals then which the religious solemnize by
the momuments of the Martyrs, are noe other-wise then ornaments of their
memorialls, and noe sacrifices which they do offer unto the dead as unto Gods.
These are S. Augustins words, by which he testifies, that notwith-standing
the ouverture, which the Christians of his time made unto this paganish
superstition, in solemnising the Martyrs feasts: yet true piety and the right
invocation of the name of God bore some sway and aucthority among them. But if
S. August. and his fellow soldiers, could have been able to have prevented the
evils and mischiefs that this superstition drew after her tail, they would
then have redoubled their forces and fell upon her with all their might, to
have hindered her from winning so many countries in Christendom.

So then it is my duty to excuse them, considering they opposed the^selfs
against her, both by word and writing.

To begin with S. Ambrose, S. Augustine gives him this testimony, Aug. li. 6.
de co^fess. cap. 2.
that he did dissuade his Mother, and some other of his friends, from
frequenting of those public feasts, which the Christians solemnized yearly
in praise of their Martyrs, and that for sundry reasons, among others, Quia
illa quasi parentalia superstitioni Gentilium essent simillima, (that is to
say) because that these funeral banquets, and solemn feasts, held in honor
of their nearest kindred, was almost like unto the superstition of the Gentiles.

As for S. Augustine himself, he plainly co^demns it in his eight book of the
City of God, wherein he does not color it, but says that such as brought
their victuals unto the sepulchers of the Martyrs, to solemnize there their
feasts, were not of the better sort of Christians.

The same author returning an answer unto the reproach which the Manicheans
made against him, to wit, that those which vaunt themselves so much at the name
of Christians, worshipped notwithstanding the Tombs of Martyrs, following
therein the exsample of the Heathen, says ( Pick me not out from among the
Christian name; those which neither know, nor follow the virtue of their
profession? seek me not out the troops of ignorant men which are
superstitious, even in the true religion, and so much given over unto their
pleasures, that they have forgotten what they promised unto God. I know (says
he) that there are many which adore the monuments and pictures. etc. and among
so great a multitude of people it is no wonder. Cease then I pray you at last
from slandering the Catholic Church, in blaming the fashion of those, which
her self condemns and has evermore sought to correct as wicked childeren.

Also he complains in his Epistle he wrote unto Ianuarius. That they had
overlade^ men's consciences with seruil burdens, and adds thereunto, that the
condition of the Jews was more tolerable then that of the Christians, because
men had made them subject only to the burdens of the Law: but Christians unto
humane presumptio^s, that is, according to the opinions taken among
themselves, obstinatly to maintain them to prejudice the truth. He confesses
likewise therein, that the church of God being planted among much chafe and
daernell tolerated many things which neuer-the-lese her self did niether doc,
approve, nor conceal. Also he plainly signifies in that Epistle, that he
could not allow of diverse things which they had instituted in the Church of
God, over and besides the ancient custom of the fathers, of the old
Testament, as if it were the observation of a Sacrement, which yet
not-with-standing he confesses, on the other side, he durst not so freely
reject for avoiding the scandal of some persons, whereof some were holy and
others seditious, where upon he opens his mind more clearly by the
distinction which he propoundes against Faustus saying, One thing is that
which we support, August. contra Faustus. Lib. 20. cap. 21.
another that which we are commanded to teach, and another that which we are
commanded to amend; and constrained to bear with, until we have amended it.

If S. Augustine having conceived some hope, sought to cure his auditorie of
this contagious malady, rather by gentleness then by severity.
Not-with-standing called them wicked Children, superstitious even in the true
religion, given over to their delights, forgetful of that which they had
promissed to God, and finally that they were not of the better sort of
Christians, would he not cry out with greater vehemency, against the
Idolaters of the Romish Church, who scornefully and obstinately, refuse the fit
remedies which should purge them of their bad humors, being laden with so many
corruptions almost incurable? would he not cry out louder, and tell them that
they are not of the better sort of Christians, but of the wickedest? would he
not call them with the Prophet Esaye a sinful nation: Esa. 1.
a people lade^ with iniquity, a seed of the wicked, corrupt children: which
have forsaken the Lord, and have provoked the holy one of Israel to anger?

I could here produce many other testimonies to the like effect, were not these
sufficient to convict all contradictours, and to show the ignorant, that S.
Augustine and his fellow laborers (which lived four hun dred years after
Christ) perceived noe sooner the bitter fruit of this dangerous plant, which
Satan the wicked spirit had brought from the Athenian Schole into their
churches, but they labored with all their power to root it up; and hew down
the branches thereof. From whence necessarely we may infer, that these
Canons of Awcon, which anon we will refute more perticularly, bragg of the
antiquity of this tradition with false brauadoes, since God who is the ancient
of days, has never taught it to our Fathers, in the first days of his grace,
by his ancient Prophets, nor in the beginning of the latter by his Son
Christ Jesus and his Apostles, nor for some hundred years after their time by
their true successors: but on the contrary, raised up holy and faithful
Doctors to resist and contradict it. So that the title of Heretics which they
so usually give us in all occurre^ces, may by a good consequence be returned
upon them. And here-upon I entreat the unpassionate Reader, to censure whether
this reproach which S. Tertullian made heretofore unto their predecessors, who
always had antiquety in their mouths and noveltie in their brains, may not
justly be appropriated to them. Tertul. in Apog. cap. 6.
Where is the religion? where is the reverence you owe unto your ancestors?
you have renounced the custom of your Graundsirs in education, in apparel, in
sense and in speech it self: You evermore praise anti quity and live from day
to day after nouelty, whereby it is evident, seeing that of your selves you
forsake the good institutions of your predecessors, you remember and keep the
things which you ought not, and observe not those which you should.

Now rests the lait part of our disputation, The discovery of nine several
abuses.
that this law and custom of going to salute the relics of the dead, ought
to be abolished and banished out of the Christian church, because of the
manie-fold abuses which heretofore have been committed, and which they yet
committ unto this day in Christendom by observing them. The first abuse.
The first is, It withdraws the hearts and spirits of men, from the right
way by which it has pleased God to draw us to the knowledge, and enjoying the
benefits of his son Christ Jesus. For in stead that God commands us to seek
his son in his word and sacraments, and in the assemly of the living, which
worship him in spirit and truth, amongst whom he is found. It persuades us the
contrary to seek him among the shrines and relics of the dead, and in the
compagny of those which dwell in the dust of the earth, Luc. 24. 5.
where he forbids them by his Angel to seek him. Again, instead that the
Apostle exhorts us to seek Christ in Heaven where he sits at the right
hand 2 Cor. 5. 7. 16. Col. 3. 1. 2.
of God his Father, and learnes us to know him after the spirit and to assend
up unto him in the high Places with the feet of our faith, it councels us the
contrary, to seek him and know him after the flesh, to seek him now here,
and now there, sometimes by pilgrimages from one Country into an other, and
sometimes to descend into the caves of the earth, Mat. 24. 23. 24.
to contemplate there the relics of his body, directly against his own
express prohibition quoted by S. Matthew in the 24. Chap. of his Gospel.

The second abuse is, that they have transported the relics of Saints into
diverse places, and admonished every one to resort thither upon feastiuall
days dedicated to their memory, and so they intoxicate the simple with this
false opinion, that not only the saints but God himself takes delight in such
pilgrimages, and that their prayers made near to the these religious
relics, are sooner heard of the Saints, and of God himself, then when they
are made else where, as appears by the decree of the Council of Trent, and
the prayers which are forged by the Priests of the Roman Church, according to
the tenor thereof.

The decree of the Trent Counsel is this. The decree of the Council of Trent
touching relics.
Mandat sancta Synodus omnibus Episcopis and caeteris docendi munus curamque
sustinentibus, ut iuxta Catholicae and Apostolicae Ecclesiae usum a primaevis
Christianae Religionis temporibus receptum, sanctorumque Patrum consensionem
and sacrorum Conciliorum decreta de sanctorum inter cessione, invecatione,
reliquarum honor and legitimo imaginu^ usu fidelis diligenter instruant,
docentes eos sanctorum Martyrum and aliorum cum Christo vive^tium sancta
corpora, quae viva membra fuerunt Christi and templa Spiritus sancti, ab ipso
ad vitam aeternam suscitanda and glorificanda, a fidelibus veneranda esse, per
quae multa beneficia a Deo ^ominibus praestantur: ita ut affirmantes Sanctorum
reliquijs venerationem atque honorem non deberi, vel eas aliaque sacra
monumenta a fidelibus inutiliter honorari, atque cornm opis impetrandae causa,
Sanctorum memorias frustra frequentari, omnino damnandos esse, prout jampridem
eos da^navit and nu^cetia^ da^nat Ecc. that is, The holy Counsel enioyneth all
Bishops and others, to whom the charge and care of teaching is committed, that
(according to the use of the Catholic and Apostolic Church, received from
the first age of Christian Religion, the consent of holy Fathers, and the
decrees of sacred Counsels) they diligently instruct the faithful in the
Doctrine of the interecssion and invocation of Saints, in honoring their
relics, and in the Lawful use of images, admonishing them touching the
relics, that the holy Boddies of the Martyrs and other Saints living with
Christ, who while they lived in this world were his lively members and temples
of the holy Ghost, whom one day he will raise up and glorify unto eternal
life, ought to be reverenced by the faithful, because GOD bestows many
benefits one men through those relics. So that those which maintain that
their relics are neither to be reverenced, nor honored, and that the
faithful reverence them, and other holy memorials to noe end. More-ouer that
they in vain frequent the places, wherein such relics are, to obtain
succor from the Saints, ought expressly to be comdemned, as for a long time
the Church has condemned them, and condemns them yet unto this present.

The first prayer consormable to this decree made by their Presbiters is this.

Domine, nerespicias piccatanostra, sed respice ad deprecationem genitricis
tuae Mariae, and perejus sancta merita, and perintercessionem sanctorum tuorum
Apostolorum Petri and Pauli, atque omnium Sanctorum tuorum, quorum reliquiae
sunt in isto loco, adiuva nos, sicut tuvides necessitatem nostram.

That is to say,

Behold not our Sins o Lord, but behold the Prayer of thy mother Marie, and
through her holy Merits, and through the mediation of thy holy Apostles Peter
and Paul, and of all thy Saints, whose relics are in this place, help us
according to our necessity.

The second is.

Deus, qui ex omni coaptatione Sanctorum aeternum tibi condis habitaculum, da
aedificationi tuae incrementa caelestia, vt quorum hic reliquias pio amore
complectimur, eorum semper meritis adiuvemur.

That is to say.

O God! which through the Sainets that thou have appropriated to thy self,
buildest thee an everlasting Tabernacle, give celestial augmentations to thy
building, that always we may be succored by the merrits of those, whose
relics we here embrase with a holy affection.

The third is,

Propitiare nobis, quaesumus Domine, famulis tuis per horum sanctorum tuoru^ N.
and N. atque aliorum, qui in praesentirequiescunt Ecclesia, merita gloriosa, vt
eorum pia intercessione ab omnibus semper protegamur adversis.

That is to say.

O Lord, be favorable unto us thy servants, for the glorio us merits of these
Saints. N. and N. and of all others which rest here in this Church, to the
end, that through their Godly intercession, we may evermore be preserved in
all our adversities.

I maintain that this opinion is false, that God hears sooner our Prayers
near unto the relics of the dead, then else where; because it is grounded on
principles directly contrary to the infallible instructions of holy Scripture,
where of the first is. That Christians are permitted to invocate the departed
Saints, and to honor religiously their relics. The second, that the
deceased Saints know whatsoever is done under the Sun, and consequently
understand the Prayers of those which cry unto them in this world. The third,
that the Saints after their departure, should regard the service of such as
salute, kiss, and honor their relics, by way of religion. Fourthly, that
God has instituted the pilgrimages which they observe in the Roman Church,
and had rather be worshipped in a place, wherein there is some relics, or
memorials of the Saints, the^ where there is none.

Now inregard they have not long ago reimprinted at Sedan my refutation
against the invocation of Saints, by which I have represented unto the reader
the falshoode of the three first principles, I will send the Reader unto it.
But for the latter, I will set down before him, that which S. Gregory Nyssene
judges thereof in his Epistle against the pilgrims, that went to Jerusalem, to
see the sepulcher of Christ, and the most remarkable memorial of our Redeemer.

When the Lord ( says Gregory Nyssene) Gregory Nyssene.
calls the blessed into the inheritance of the kingdom of Heaven, he places
not among the number of their works which brings them thither, the pilgrimage
unto Jerusalem, neither makes he any mention of such a work, among the
number of the Blessed. And why should men employ their time then, in doing that
which neither makes them happy, nor is available unto the Kingdom of Heaven?
Wherein cann that man advantage himself, which should come into those parts, as
if more abundance of the holy Ghost were there, and that his grace were more
ample in that place? If Grace were more abounding in Jerusalem, then sin
would not be so rife among those that inhabit there: but at this present,
there is noe manner of wickedness which is left vncommitted among them. Let
our exsample offend noe man, but let rather our persuasion find belief, seeing
we diswade them from that which we have seen with our eyes. As for us,
before and after we came thither, we always confessed that Christ is true
God, and our faith was neither impaired, nor engmented thereby. This good I have
gathered by it, that by the conference I have had thereof, I must always
acknowledge, that there is more sanctity in us, which dwell fardest from it.
You then which fear God, praise him at home in the places were you make your
abode, for the alteration of the place makes not God to come the nearer unto
you: But wheresoever thou shall be, he will come unto the, if he finds the
Lodging of thy soul ready to entertain him. But if the inward man be laden
with wicked thoughts, thou shall not receive Christ, though thou were in
Golgotha, in mount olivers, or in the tomb of his resurrection. Persuade the
Brethren then, that they go on pilgrimage out of their Bodies unto the Lord,
and not out of Cappadocia into Palestina. If that which was done there in the
beginning did last still, the holy Ghost dispensing his gifts in the likeness
of fire, then would it behooue us all to be present there, where he makes such
distribution to all: But if the Spirit blows where it pleases him, those
which have believed there, are made partakers of his divine gift, according to
the proportion of their faith, and not according to their pilgrimage unto
Jerusalem.

I could here likewise coppie out S. Chrisost. admonition, Chrysostom. ad Philem.
hom. 1.
that to obtain pardon for his sins, he needed not to make any long iourneis
into far Countries, neither to spend his money. August. sermon. 3. de ^art.
Also that of S. Aug. that God commands us not to go into the East, nor to
sail into the West to seek out righteousness: likewise that of S. Bernards,
Bernard. sermon. 1. de adve^t.
that to find the Lord it behooues us not to pass the Seas, and Alps, but
that every man should go unto God within himself: and many other instructions
of the true Doctors and Fathers of the primitive Church, conformable to those
of Christ and his Apostle S. Paul, that God will be worshipped by us in all
places, in Spirit and truth; if I feared not to abuse the Readers patience, and
knew moreover, that our adversaires makes no account of the Doctrine of the
Orthodoxe Fathers, whensoever it refelleth their inventions, and is repugnant
unto the authority of their Pope, whom they prefer, as we can prove by
their writtings, before a thousand Chrysostomes, Augustins, Bernards, and
Gregory's.

The third abuse is, that through the visiting of these relics, the hearts of
superstitious men are moved, to transfer that worship which is due only unto
the living and incorruptible God, to dead and corruptible things. For as in the
time of S. Ierom S. Christostom, and S. Augustine, the Christians were adicted
unto this ceremony, of going to visit the sepulchers and monuments of the
Martyrs, and other holy men, and to solemnize yearly certain solemn feasts
in memory of them. So ever since, their foolish Imitatours, have buylt Temples
and Altars in honor of their relics, lighted up Candles about them, and have
craved succor and help by their prayers, not only of God himself and his
saints, but also from these dead an insensible things, which never had any
communion with humane life, neither could in any wise understand them, nor
never shall be capable of having participation in the knowledge of our God, and of
that eternal life, which he has promised unto his children.

For confirmation whereof, I will not here speak of the Monks, which in time
past worshipped the arm of S. Maurus, nor of some other Idolaters which prayed
to the bones of their Saints; nor of those which adore our Saviors cross
unto this day, only for the present, I will but re^ite the prayer, which the
Monks of the Abbey of Fons make ordinarily unto the table-cloth upon which,
and according to their tradition, they say our Savior and Lord Jesus Christ
has celebrated the holy Sacrament with his disciples. And those which the
Monks of Cahors sing usually going in procession, in honor of his kerchiefe,
and to the great dishonor of the person of our blessed Savior, and only
mediator Jesus Christ.

The Monks of Fons, esteeming more of an old and false table-cloth, then of
our Lord Jesus Christ, the author of truth and niewnesse of life, call upon it
for aid in this manner, Sanctissima Dei mappa ora pro nobis, O most holy
table-cloth of God pray for us.

The Monks of Cahors addressing themselves rather unto the Napkin or kerchief,
which our Redeemer left behind him to rot in his sepulcher, the^ unto this
high Priest who shortly after his resurrection was taken up by his Father into
Heaven, to make there continual intercession for us, cries unto it singing in
this manner Sancte Sudari ora pro nobis that is, O holy handkerchiefe pray for
us. again, Sudarium Christi liberet nos a peste and morte tristi. that is, O
kerchiefe of Christ deliver us from plague and a heavy death. Moreover, they
cr^ue that for his kerchiefes sake representing the face of Christ by picture,
it would please him to let them behold his face above in Heaven.

Omnipotens sempiterne Deus, qui in memoriam passionis vnigeniti Filij tui,
sanctam eius sindonem, cum expressaipsius effigy venerandam reliquistiin
terris, tribue, quaesumus, vt per virtutem eius sanctae sindonis faciem tuam
contemplari mereamur in coelis:

That is to say.

O Almighty and Eternal God, which in memory of the passion of thy only
begotten son, have left behind him on earth his holy Sindon with his shape
printed upon it, grant that through the virtue of this holy lunen we may
merit to contemplate thy face in Heaven.

O Lord how long will thou endure this idolatry? Ier. 4. 13.
o poor Superstitious men, how long will ye continue on, in seeking our Lord
Jesus Christ, who is all in all of us, in things that are nothing worth?

The fourth abuse consists, THE fourth abuse.
in the adoration of false relics, so artifcially counterfeited and invented
by the one, as foolishly believed and received by the other. The cause why S.
Augustine complains in his treatise, Augus. de Labor Mon. c. 28.
touching the traveling Monks, that Satan had dispersed throwout
Christendom, many Hypocrites under the habit of vagabond Monks, straggling up
and down through countries not sent, never still, nor never settled, whereof
some of them made Merchandise of the members of the Martyrs, which made him to
doubt and suspect, that they were not the right members of the Martyrs.

To this purpose Socrates reports in the 14. Chap. and 7. book of his
History, Socrates l. 7. c. 14.
that the Christians for some time honored through ignorance, the dead
carkiese of a seditious Monk called Ammomus, thinking it had been the body of
some holy Martyr.

Also, Erasmus of Rotterdam reports in his Conferences, Eras. coll. de pilgri.
that two Pilgrims arriving at Canterbury, the one of them was so amazed, at
the impudency and deceit of those, which presented before them al sorts of
relics to be worshipped, and among the rest an Arm bleeding with the flesh
upon it, that they seemed thereat to be horribly affrighted, and flying back
would not kiss it.

Gregory surnamed Turonensis, and diverse other Historians affirm, Gregory
Turonensis.
that in the shrine of a departed Saint, they found the roots of sundry
plants, the teeth of Moses, the bones of Mice, and the feet of foxes, in
stead of the true relics of his body.

It is most manifest, that presently after the reformation of the Churches in
France, Helvetia, Germany, and some other adjoining places, they found in the
shrines and chestes of the papal relics, the bones of diverse Beasts, pieces
of brickes, spriggs of trees, cords, and many other trifles, and small trash,
which these superstitious men had worshipped, during the night of their
ignorance, and the thick darkness of their idolatries.

Calvin notes in his admonition against the relics of the Romish Church,
Calvin.
that they found at Geneve the tail of a Heart, which these Superstitious
people had often times kissed, imagining that it had been S. Anthonies Arm: and
a pumeise stone saluted by these Doltes besotted with this opinion, that it was
S. Peter's brains.

Theodorus Besa proves by the testimony of more then fifty eyewitnesses,
Theodorus Bela.
in his Apology against the calumnies of a certain Apostate, by name Francis
Bauldwin, that at Bourges they found a wheel turning about upon a staff
adorned with this laciuious and magical verse written upon a scrole of
parchment. Quand ceste roue tournera,
Celle que saime, m'aimera.


That is to say,

When this wheel shall turn about, She whom I love, shall love me. And at
Tours a Card which gamesters call the knave of Dyamants, with a bawdie and
villennous song written upon it by some whoremonger, and put into a silver
Arm. And after that a silver cross besett with many precious perles, and with
an Agath, whereupon was engrave^ the picture of Venus bewailing the death of
Adonis her Lover lying by her, which the vulgar sort of people adored upon the
day of the death and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Rodulphus Hospania^ attesteth likewise, Rodolphus Hospinian.
in his recital of the original of Relics, that in the shrines and
treasuries of the Catholic Church at Zurich, they found some of the ribs of a
Cat, or some such like creature with a cord twelve else long, which before the
reformation of the said Church, was worshipped by the blind people there
persuaded thereunto by the guilfull gloses of their pastors, that they were
the relics of Felix, and of some other holy Martyr.

Although these Testimonies are worthy of belief, and approved by every man
without contradiction: yet I assure myself, that our adversaries will take a
small occasion, at the very name of these Authors, to quarrel at the Title of
their books, and to call them in question and reject them.

I fear I shall not get much more, by inserting here the words of George
Cassander one of their chiefest writers, Cassander.
whereby he admonishes the Emperors Ferdinand and Maximilian, that this abuse
began to thrust up her head little by little through the often visiting of the
monuments of the renownedst Martyrs, that in S. Augustins and S. Ambroses time,
the custom of bringing victuals in memory of the martyrs, was forbidden by
S. Ambrose himself: that in the ages ensuing, they have attributed too much
honor unto the memory of the Saints, that some men of noe note, had
persuaded the simple, to place a false confidence in a superfluous and fond
service, and had added many other evils unto it, to wit, that the priests and
monks coveteous of dishonest gain, have counterfeited relics, and preached
false miracles, to nourish superstition in the hearts of men, and drew them,
rather unto the admiration of their miracles, then unto the imitation of the
Saints. Finally, that the Devil making use of the superstition of these men,
revealed every day new relics, when he saw that the Bishops of the Romish
church, were so earnestly given to enquire forth the inventers and promoters
of those relics, and they should find therein (as he says) abuses, and
deceits, as great and as abominable, as that was which S. Martyn discouvered,
who passing by the sepulcher and reliquaire of a Martyr greatly renowned in his
Country, and having understood (after he was thoroughly and seriously informed
thereof) that it was the tomb of a Murderer, caused it to be demolished, and
cast down, that noe more mention might be made thereof, nor that they might
use it any more after that superstitious manner. I say, I shall not get much
more, by repeating Cassanders words upon this matter, because the Jesuits who
dommineere at this present in the Roman Church, approve not all what this
Catholic Doctor has writ, but according to the authority which was given
them by the Council of Trent, commands al Readers to cancel and deface the
best sentences in his writtings, extracted from the holy Scripture, and from
the true fathers and successors of the Apostles. As for example, they command
in their index which they term purgative, printed at Antwerp by Chrystopher
Plantine Anno. 1521. to purge his writtings of that, which he teaches in
the^, of the true and natural signification of the word Merit, and of the
ancient custom of the Fathers and Apostolic Doctors, concerning the
administration of the holy Sacrament of the Lords supper, under the two signs
of bread and wine, used for more then a thousand years after the coming of
Christ. Likewise they condemn therein his book entitled Preces
ecclesiasticae, that is ecclesiastical Prayers; and his exhortation touching
the extenuation of the invocation of Saints, and al his Disputations upon
their merits. Now if these Physicians make noe conscience, to prescribe unto
Christians, that they should apply their expurgatorie index unto Cassander
books, to draw from them the pure blood and vital sap, and leave nothing in
them but the corrupt and badd humors: have not I then just occasion to suspect
the like answer upon the allegation of his testimony, and that they will say
Cassander passed the limits of their rules and traditions in his discourse
abouesaid, and so consequently they ought to cut of what-soever they judge
therein vicious and superfluous? Not-with-standing, there is the body of a
whole Council, called the Council of the ancient Bishops, which their chiefest
Doctors hold for perfectly found, and can in no manner be stained with any
corruption, and wherein they can find nothing that is worthy of purging and
correcting, whereby we can show them, that many ages ago, the relics of
Saints have be^ suspected by their predecessors, assembled in the ancient
Councils.

We read then in the 14. Canon of the 5. Council of Carthage, that Aurelius
Bishop of the Carthagian Church, accompanied with two and seventy Bishops of
the neighboring Churches, reprooved therein certain relics, counterfeited
by some falsifiers, and privily brought into the primitive Church, for lo, the
Contents of the Canon rune thus.

Placuit vt altaria quae passim per agros aut vias tanquam memoriae Martyrum
constituuntur, in quibus nullum corpusaut reliquae Martyrum conditae probantur,
ab Episcopis qui cisdem locis praesunt (si fieri potest) evertantur. Si autem
hoc propter tumultus popularis non sinitur, plebis tamen admoneantur ne illa
loca frequentent, vt qui recta sapiunt, nulla tibi supestitione devincti
teneantur: Et omnino nulla tibi memoria Martyrum probabiliter acceptetur, nisi
aut ibi corpus, aut aliquae certae reliquiae sint, aut vbi origo alicuius
habitationis, vel possessionis, vel passionis fidelissima origin traditur. Nam
quae per somnia and per manes quasi revelationes quorum libet hominum vbique
constituntur altaria, omnino reprobent^r.

That is to say.

It has pleased us ( to decree in this Council) that the Altars which are
built up and down in feilds, and by the way sides, as in memory of the
Martyrs, In which one cannot find, that there has been enclossed the Bodies or
relics of the Martyrs, should be cast down if it be possible by the Bishops
of those places. But if they cannot do it because of the popular tumult, Let
them never-the-lesse admonish the people, not to frequent such places, to the
end, that those which be wise, may not be carried away with superstition. And
let them receive nowhere, any memory of the Martyrs, but in those places
wherein their is some corpse, and certain relics, or some tradition of the
sure original, of the abode of some Martyr, or of his suffering: For we have
thought it good, that they wholly cast down the Altars, established by the
dreams and revelations of all sort of persons.

By these words it appears then, that we are not the first which have
warned the superstitious, first, that the simplicity of their ancestors, and
their natural inclination in giving ear unto the dreams and lies of all sort
of Doters, has opened the way unto many false relics. Secondly, that their
foolish devotion made them lay them under, and afterward near unto Altars.
Thirdly, that their obstinacy has by all force, withheld the good Bishops
from purging the Churches of them, mentioned in the Canon already cited.

More-over, we could here copy out the decrees of some other Counsels,
especially that of Lions, whereby their Pries^s in former times have been
advertised of this abuse, and exhorted to seek remedy for it. We could also
produce many sentences of the Fathers, conformable to them: But in doing it, we
should offend the Romanists, who believe that Counsels cannot err, to allege
the^ for a proof unto the said Cannon, approved long ago by their
predecessors, and which they hold still for authentic.

The fifth abuse testifies, THE fifth abuse.
that one superstition has drawn many others after her. For as the Prelates of
the Roman Church make noe conscience to allure the silly people unto the
adoration of their relics: So to induce them the more, to put their
confidence therein, they promise indulgences and pardons, to such as will
kiss them, and permits their Idolaters to carry them upon their necks, and
to swear by them, trampling underfoot by this means, the second and third
commandment of the divine Law, and maliciously contradicting the Doctrine of
the ancient Prophets and Apostles, who teach us all with one common accord,
that no man ought not to underprop his faith upon any other, then upon God
himself, nor to swear by any other, then by him, nor to seek the remission of
his sins in any other, then in our only Savior Jesus Christ. Therefore,
these Sacrilegious persons, will be so much the more inexcusable before God, at
the day of judgment, because they are not ignorant, that God threatens with a
Curse, by his Prophet Jeremiah the man that trusts in man, and makes flesh
his arm. Ier. 17. 5.
For if the Lord, which in his word permits us, to crave the assistance of
living me^, as those whom he has ordained dispensators of his blessings, to
relieve us in our necessities, condemns not-with-standing those which assure
themselves of the help which they expect from mortal men, has he not far
greater reason to curse those Idolaters, which put their confidence in the
bones and garments of the dead, Deuteronomy. 18. 11.
to whom he forbids us to go to enquire, or to have any recourse unto them,
to ask their Counsel or help in our distresses?

Also, they have read for the most part, that the mark whereby God discerns
the way of his people from strangers, who are not yet co^verted unto him, is,
according as the same Prophet Jeremiah propounds it, that the people of God
swear by his name, to wit, Ier. 12. 16.
The Lord lives: but the idolatrous people which have noe communior. with him,
swear by Baal.

Beside, they are not ignorant that the Apostle. S. Paul (according to the
translation of the two and seauentie interpretours) translateth in his Epistle
the word swearing which the Prophet Isaiah uses in the 45. Chapter of his
prophecy, for a Confession, from which exposition of the Apostles, every man
of a sound judgment may discern by a necessary consequence, that as the
Apostle, calls the swearing, made by the name of God, a confession, and an
acknowledgment of his divine Majesty, and of the Souveraine authority he has
over all his Creatures: So on the contrary, we may term a denial, and
abiuration from his name, every oath which is sworn in the name of the
departed Saints, or of their relics.

But this is not all. For even by their own consciences they are convicted.
First, by that testimony which S. Peter gives us, in the book of the Acts of
the Apostles, that there is noe salvation in any other the^ in Christ, Act. 4.
12.
neither is there any other name under Heaven given unto men, whereby we must
be saved. Secondly, by that of S. Paul's in his Epistle to the Hebrews, that
by the only Sacrifice of Christ, Heb. 9. 12.
we have full deliverance, and remission of our sins. Thirdly, Iam. 4. 12
by that of S. James in the fourth Chapter of his Epistle, that there is but
one Law giver, (to wit God) which is able to save, and to destroy. Who can then
excuse the malice and impiety of these Doctors, which with holding the truth
in unrighteousness, attribute to their Pope this divine aucthority, of
forgiving and binding the sins of men, according to his Law and will, and to
the rotten relics of dead boddies, the incommunicable power, only proper to
Christ, who is able perfectly to save them, that come unto God by him, seeing
he euer-liveth, to make intercession for them? And how is it possible, that God
should be so gentle and full of long suffrance, as to endure these sacriledges
so long?

The sixth abuse is, that the Monks and Priests of the papacy, more zealous in
keeping a good fire in their kitchen, then the ashes of the Martyrs and other
deceased Saints to make their relics the more to be respected, have
attributed to them the power of doing many miracles, after the manner and
imitation of the Sorcerers, and false Prophets of the Heathen. For, as S.
Augustine reports in the one and twentieth, and two and twentieth book of the
city of God, that the Heathenish Sorcerers, maintained heretofore night and
day (throw a diabolical slight, admirable to the eyes of the ignorant) the
light of Venus lamp, and bragged because they had the relics of Hercules,
Romulus, and Bacchus, which had done some miracles in the temples dedicated to
their memory: so before that the ancient pagans, went oftentimes on pilgrimage
out of Egypt (witness Epiphanus) unto the Prophet Ieremias sepulcher, because
their Diviners made them believe, that their Gods had revealed, that the bones
of this Prophet could preserve them from the stinging of Aspes, and Crocodils.
And that Ptolomeus their king, was persuaded to have the corpse of Alexander the
great transported into Egypt, through the prediction of Aristander, who told
them, that the Country wherein the body of king Alexander rested, should
abound in all riches, and should be preserved from the oppression of their
ennemies, as Aelian gives us to understand in the 12. book of his sundry
Histories.

If the Priests of the Roman Church used but this in common with the abouesaid
Sorcerers and sooth sayers, that many miracles have been done, by touching and
worshipping the relics of some great personnages, renowned in their
Countries: then they would not be so much offended with us; because we make
noe reckoning of them. But they proceed further: for some of their Sorcerers
have also done miracles and cured many diseases with the brains of a Cat, the
head of a Raven, and such like relics of dead beasts, as Bodin proves in
his third book of Sorcerers, by the testimony of Idocus Damhouder of Bruges,
and other credible Historians. So that there is noe more likelihood of truth,
in the one sort of miracles, the^ in the other, seeing that the former have been
done with as much show of devotion toward the departed Saints, and their
relics, as those which at this present are so much esteemed in the papacy.
For Bodin reports in the same book, and second Chapter, how a Sorceresse of
Bruges cured an infinite number of diseases, and that she told such as came
unto her, that they must steadfastly believe, that she had the power to help
them of their sicknesses. Afterward, she commanded them to fast, and then to
repeat over certain times a Paternoster, or that they should go on
pilgrimage to S. James or to S. Arnoult.

What an impudency is it then, in these Boasters of relics, to bragg and
vaunt themselves, at there miracles, wherein often times has been discouuered
many deceits and illusions. For behold how S. Augustine answered the miraclers
of his time, especially the disciples of Donat, August. l, de Unit. Eccl. cap.
16.
Let not the Donatist ( says he) tell me that this or that is true, because
that Donat, Pontius, or some other, has done such and such like miracles, or
because some men, which pray unto the memory of our dead, are heard, or because
that upon it, there comes to pass such and such like things, or that this our
sister has seen waking such a vission, or dreaming has dreamed such a
dream. Away with all these fictions of lying men, or shewers of guilfull
Spirits. For either that which they say is false, or if the Heretics do some
wonders, so much the more ought we to take heed of the^, because the Lord
after he had said, that there should come many deceivers, which in showing
great signs and wonders, should deceive the Elect, If it were possible, adds
thereunto worthy of great commandations, Behold, I have told you before.

It were an endless labor then, to utter all the falacy and guiles, whereby
they deceive the people, yea, which their own Doctors have found out and
among others, that which Nicolas Lyra, heretofore perceived in the miracles,
which the Priests of his age feigned (as this writter speaks) for temporal
gain.

Now these juggling tricks of the ministers of Antichrist, are so much the more
detestable; in regard they attribute not only the power of doing miracles to
the relics of Christ, of the virgin Mary, of the Apostles, of the holy
Martyrs, and other excellent personnages, renowned for their good life and
pureness in doctrine, but also to the relics of the greatest deceivers of
the world.

To begin then with the relics of S. Francis, (who for his impiety was
condemned by Pope John the 22. as a pervertour of the Christian religion,) it
is written in the book of Conformities, that a woman troubled with the bloody
flix for the space of thirteen years, was cured thereof by touching the hemme
of his gown, and that a blind man recouvered his sight by touching of his
hoode.

S. Gregory also rehearses in the first book of his Dialogues, and second
Chapter, That a provost of the monastery of Funda in Italy called Libertinus,
having drawn on a stocking of the Abbot S. Honorats, met a woeman that went
to bury her Son, who importuned him with many prayers to raise him from the
dead, and this good provost granting her her request, laid the stocking over
her said son, and put life into him again through the virtue thereof.

He likewise reports in the third book of his Dialogues, that in the time of
a drought, the Citizens of Spoleta made great store of rain to fall upon their
Soil, by lifting up toward heaven the gown of S. Eutychus.

We know also that some woeme^ with Child, following the Counsel of their
Monks, have kissed S. Ioostlings breeches in Flaunders, others lifted up S.
Arnoults --, others have stradled over S. Guerchilous image, hoping by this
means to be the more safely delivered of their children.

We are not ignorant likewise, that many Idiots of the Roman Church, believe,
that there is in the city of Orleans some residue of the marriage wine, of
Cana in Galile, which never diminishes although they drink oftentimes
thereof. And in our Ladies Church at Rome, and at S. Salvader in Spain, some
of the morcells of those Loaves, wherewith Christ fed five thousand persons in
the wilderness, which never lesseneth, although they oftentimes eat their
bellies full thereof.

Moreover they believe, that the Prelates of Rome have in some of their
Churches, diverse relics of a wonderful force and virtue, as at S. John
Latrans, the wastcoate of the Apostle S. John, which being heretofore laid over
three dead bodies, made them to rise up a live in the field.

At S. Paul's, that crucifix which spoke unto S. Brigit, Queen of Sweethland,
when she came to pray in that place.

At S. John del' Isle, that image of the virgin Mary's, which at the
overflowing of the Tiber, could not be spoiled, nor her lamp put out with the
water.

At S. Francis the body of S. Lodovica, a a Roman lady, which does many
miracles.

At S. Mary's Tra^spontina a cruci^ix, which spoke heretofore to S. Peter and
S. Paul.

To S. Mary en voy large, a small picture of the virgin Mary's, which has
wrought many miracles.

At S. Mary's laneufve, an other small picture of the virgin Mary's, which was
miraculously preserved in the midst of a great fire, which burned the other
ornaments of this Church.

At S. Augustins, an image of the virgin Mary's, painted by S. Luke, which did
also many miracles in the time of pope Innocent the eight.

At S. Martins, a gown which the virgin Mary made for her son Christ Jesus
in his minority, which miraculously grows to the same stature as himself grew.

In S. Pontials Church-yeard an host consecrated by a Priest, singing mass in
the Chapel, which because he doubted, whether it was the body of Christ,
sprung out of his hand in a wonderful manner; and falling upon the ground
made a mark of blood which is to be seen within a little grate of iron yet
unto this day. A jest not unlike to that of the Jesuits, and advocats of that
horrible conspiracy of Garnet, and of his accomplices, against the Crown of the
King of great Britanie, who were so impudent (as this wise King accuses them,
thereof, in the preface of his Apology dedicated to the Emperor, and all
other Princes in Christendo^) that thy were not ashamed to say and write, that
after the execution of that Traitor, quartered with his co^federats in London,
a woman found a straw tinctured with a dropp of blood which sprunge from the
body of of this traitor, and was miraculously metamorphosed into the
resemblance of his head chopped off, with a crown set upon it. But as this
deceit was soon after discouvered, and manifested to the world, as well by the
penn of this King and Solomon of our age, as by the art of his painters, who
according to his Majesty's desire, drew a picture upon a straw and a drop of
blood taken from some other body like unto the same in all things: So, I
beseech God, that it will please him by this exsample and advertisment, to
awaken all other Christian Kings, to sift out and examine more deligentlie then
they have done in times past, the other juggling tricks of the forgers of
relics, and lying wonders.

This is that (Gentle Reader,) which our Josiah my dread Souverain (upon whose
sacred person, the Lord has experimented his preservations from their damnable
treasons: because he dwells in the secret of the most hie, Psalm. 91.
and shall abide in the shadow of the Almighty; he will cover thee under his
wings, and thou shall be sure under his feathers: A thousand shall fall at thy
side, and tenn thousand at thy right hand, but it shall not come near thee,)
touches in his premonition as in a passage, having reference to that straw,
which the fathers the Jesuits would have fathered upon Garnet their
auricular-traitour, but as my Author says, his Majesty ingeniously found out
as cunning a Parrahsius in his great I Will of Britanie, as a Zeuxes in Italy.

At S. Mary's de la consolation an image of the virgin Mary's, which has done
many miracles.

In S. Vitus Church an oil drawn from the relics of that Saint, which
being mixed with them, heals the biting of madd dogs.

At S. Sabinaes a huge black stone, chained to the great Altar, which the
Devil threw at S. Dominicus to overwhelme him while he prayed in that place:
but it chanced, that this stone burst miraculously, and that S. Dominicus was
not hurt therewith.

At S. Iulians a water distilled with the relics of S. Julian which helps
al manner of-fevers and diseases.

In the same Church an Image of the virgin Mary's, brought from the city of
Edessa, which upon a day, seeing the holy man S. Alexis coming toward her,
after his wonted manner to say his prayers, and hearing him knock at one of the
Church-doores spoke twice together unto the Sexten, Open, and let in that holy
man of God S. Alexis, for he has merited Heaven.

In S. B^bians Church-yeard an herb which she herself planted, thar cures
the falling sickness.

At S. Anastases a pillar whereupon they cut of S. Paul's head, which being
fallen from his body, gave three jumpes, and at every jump sprang forth three
fountains a miraculous- lie, which (if you will believe it) are to be seen
there yet unto this day.

At S. Mary's de la voy, an Image of the virgin Mary's, which has done diverse
miracles.

By the Church of the Abbey of Save, a fountain, which cures many diseases,
but especially the bloody flix.

Also they approve the fallacy of the parisian Priests, who say, that the
Crucifix, which they keep in S. Denis Church, spoke in time past to testify
that this Church was dedicated unto him: and other Deceivers which maintain
that their Crucifixes have wept heretofore, and that they still have of their
tears.

They approve also that palpable jest of their Doctors, that the spear of
Pilates soldier called Lonche, was tra^sformed into a blind man, which they
call Longin, and that being advanced from a soldier to a Captain, recouvered
his sight after he had washed his eyes with the water and blood, which issued
forth of Christ's side, which himself had wounded, and through this miracle,
was moved to make profession of the Christian religion, and to seal it with
his own martyredome.

But who is able to reckon up all the false miracles, which the Quacksalvers of
the Roman Church, attribute to the gowns, dubblets, hose, jackets, shirts,
smocks, girdles, and other rags of the departed? And who dares make any
question of it, but that the Pope, who at this present lives in Rome, and
makes himself to be worshipped as a God, 2 These. 2
has received this power of doing signs and lying wonders, seeing it is found
in the relics of the dead, and especially in theirs, who while they lived in
this world, would not suffer none to worship the^, Act. 10. 25. 26.
but acknowledged themselves always to be but dust and putrefaction? Who would
not wonder at their Priests, which no sooner swallow down their little God,
which to their thinking is the very body of Christ, but presently after it
they do some new sign or wonder to solace and ^ase those which daily frequent
them, seeing those which at some times do only behold but his garments, which
is of a far lesser price the^ his body: and also diverse others, which salute
his Mothers image, or touch the hoode of some Monk, or the gown of some
departed Nune, receive some ease for their grevances.

The seaue^th abuse is worthier of laughing then of refuting. The 7. abuse.
For these Gypsians rancks in the number of their relics one of the feathers
of Gabriel the Archangel, as though he had appeared to the virgin Mary in the
likeness of foul. An another of the H. Ghosts, as if the holy Ghost
descending upon Christ in the likeness of a dove, had let fallen one of his
feathers in Jorden, to be taken up, and to be enclossed into a reliquarie in
memory of his lighting upon our Savior, and of his apparition to S. John
Baptist.

They also put among the pieces of their relics, things invisible and
imposible to be shown, as the sound of the bells in the Temple of Jerusalem,
the puffing of Joseph when he cloue wood, which they keep al Court-cheverni.

They give likewise to the Angels and invisible Spirits, corporal and visible
arms. As for example, they glory at Carcassonnae and at S. Julian de Tours for
having S. Michels buckler and poinyard.

Also they show with them the tail of that ass that carried out Lord Jesus
Christ into Jerusalem when he made his royal entry therein: The feathers of
the chickins pro^reated by the Cock which crew when S. Peter denied his master:
and a morcell of the broiled fish which S. P^ter presented to Christ after his
resurrection, when he appeared unto them by the Zea side, which has lasted
ever since without rotting, and cann be better preserved from corruption, then
Christ's flesh, which notwithstanding the Consecration of the host, which
s^rueth him as a couver^ed, spoileth if the priest keep it too long in his
box.

Beside all this, they show at Rome the impression of Christ's feet, which is
to be seen in S. Laurences Church, where our Savior meeting with S. Peter
after his ascension, told him that he should suffer at Rome.

And who would not mock at these and such like relics of these
co^nicatchers, when they themselves mock at one another, and take delight in
deceiving each other, and sporting some crafty devise or another upon the
poor ignorant people, which attend and wait with great devotion for the
representation and sight of them? Whereof we find sundry examples in our
modern Histories, of which I will only, allege two, which are so abominable
that noe man that fears God and is pure in heart, cann consider them, without
disdain and horror.

So then, Martinus Chemnicius reports in his treatise of relics, made
against the decree of the Counsel of Trent, touching the veneration of them,
That a certain Orator and porter of the popes bulls, vaunted upon a day, that
among other of his relics, he had some of the feathers of the holy Ghost,
now a chief companion of his consort, over hearing him, picked cuningly his
box and taking away his feathers, laid coals into it in stead of the^. On the
morrow this Orator was to make a long Sermon and discourse upon the feathers
of the holy Ghost, and seeing the people fallen down upon their mariebones to
behold and worship them, opening his box to pull forth his feathers, found
coals in it, whereat he neither blushed nor was put out of countenance, but
presently changing his discourse, was so expect in his art of lying, that he
told them he had mistaken his box, and that those were the coals taken up
from under the gridyron, whereupon S. Laurence had been carbinadood.

Another German Divine named Iacobus Herbrandus, avouches in his disputation
de Sceloatriae, that a certain priest of Rotenborough near unto Nicre, called
Pfaff Isele, having been at Rome and created the popes Indulgentiar, returned
from thence into his Country furnished with diverse relics, among others
one of the wings of Michael the Archangel: Now to make it the more beneficial
unto him, he extolled the virtues thereof in all his Sermons. But upon a
Sunday, being loged in an Inn, within the village of Altingue, and being
overcome with wine, he kept not his box of relics so carefully as he had
done before. So that through this mischance, his relics were stolen: On the
morrow being got up, and perceiving the theft, spoke not a word thereof to his
Hostis, because he suspected that she knew it: but went and fott a handful
of hay out of the next cratch in the stable, and laying it in his box, called
his Hostis and told her. See, here are my relics, whereat she begann to
laugh, notwithstanding he told her, that when she came to church, to be an
assistant in the holy service, she should also kiss those relics, she
replied upon it she would not, but he wagered that she should. After this
coming to Church, this priest begann to preach of the admirable virtues of his
relics, and to declare unto the people, that he had a handful of the hay of
the stable in Bethelem, whereupon our Redeemer Jesus Christ had oftentimes
slept, when he was a babe, which had the power to preserve from the plague
(wherewith Germany was then infected) all those which did but kiss it, and to
drive away all Adulterers and Adulteresses which came near unto it: Now his
Hostis that knew full well the deceit of this shameless Priest, seeking on
the side to spare her money, and fearing on the other side to lose wholly her
good name, because her chastity was called into question before, choose rather
at last after long deliberation, to cast away her money, then to bring her
reputation into a further danger, so that she was the very last that came to
kiss the relics of her own stable, and the priest told her in her ear,
What, art thou come too?

The same Doctor annexeth unto this story, that many Germanies having heard
say of the virtue of his relics, ran in all have unto this Priest to kiss
them, but for all that, they were not preserved from the plague, but miserable
a^^icted therewith.

Beside, that Duke Everhard being advertised of the cossenning tricks of this
Priest, commanded the Divines of Tubinque to call him in question before them
into their University, to reprove him therefore: but he too well
understanding his craft, answered them impudentlie, that he neither had lied,
nor beguiled any man. In fine, after a serious warning, which these Divines
gave him, that it was more then mainfest to all the world, that many which had
kissed his relics, were notwithstanding dead of the plague, he replied in a
flouting manner at those poor superstitious people, that they had not kissed
his relics; but the glass only wherein he had putt them.

The eight abuse is noted in that they place in the Catalogue of their
religious relics, as worthy of Adoration the instruments and means which the
ennemies of our Lord used to intrapp, crucify, and perce him, as the lantern
which Judas carried to lighten the Sergeants that sought his Master: the money
which he had received of the hie-Priest to betray him: The Crown of thorns
which they put upon his head, and the nails and spear of Pilates hangman,
unto which they pray in this manner.

Felix hasta, nos amore per te fixi sauciae, That is,

Happy spear, wound us with his love, whom thou have pierced. To which also
they add the Cross, where unto Pilates soldiers had nailed the body of our
Lord Jesus Christ, which they bless and call upon in this manner.

O crux, lignum triumphale!
Mundi vera salus, vale,
Inter ligna nullum tale
Fronde, flore, germine.
Medicina Christiana,
Sanes salva, aegros sana,
Quodnon valet vis humana,
Fit ^n tuo nomine.
Assistentes crucis laudi;
Consecrator crucis audi.
Atque servos tuae crucis,
Post hanc vitam, verae lucis
Transfer ad palatia.
Quos tormento vis servire
Fac tormenta non sentire,
Sed cum dies erit irae,
Nobis confer and largire
Sempiterna gaudia. Amen.
That is,

O cross triumphant wood! Al hail worlds true health! among all the trees in
the wood, there is not thy like for blossom, bough, and budd. Christians
Physic, save the sound and heal the sick. That which no humane power can
do, is done in thy name. O consecrator of thy cross! hearken unto the
assistants thereof, and transport after this life, the servants of thy Cross
into the palace of thy true light. Grant that those whom thou have commanded
should suffer torment, may feel noe torments, but when the day of thy wrath
shall come, grant us eternal joy. Amen.

Again.

O crux ave! spes unica
Hoc passionis tempore
Qua carne, carnis conditor
Suspensus est patibulo,
Auge pijs iustitiam
Reijsque dona veniam.
That is to say.

Al hail o Cross our only hope in the time of this passion, on which gibit
the Creator of all flesh, according to his flesh was hung. Increase
righteousness in the Devote, and pardon the guilty.

And again,

Dulce lignum, dulces clavos
Dulcia ferens pondera,
Quae sola fuisti digna sustinere
Regem coelorum and Dominium,
That is to say.

O sweet wood, bearing the nails and sweet burdens, which alone have been
worthy to bear the King and Lord of Heaven.

And although at some time they address their prayers to God himself, or to
his son our Redeemer; yet they attribute not only to the cross, whereto
Christ was nailed, but also to the sign thereof, made by the hand of man, the
virtue of purchasing us his grace, and maintaining us therein, which cannot be
attributed to any other (without Idolatry) then to the very person of our
Savior, heretofore crucified, and now sits at the right hand of God his
father, to make intercession for us, and to entreat him to be merciful and
favorable unto us.

First they crave of Christ by this prayer.

Concede nobis, Domine, vt qui ad sanctam crucem tuam adorandam vemunt, nexibus
peccatorum liberentur.

That is to say.

O Lord grant, that they which come to worship thy holy Cross, may be
delivered from the bands of their sins.

By the Second,

O crux gloriosa! o crux adorandi! o lignum pretiosum! and admirabile signum!
Christ, Rex pijssime, huius crucis signaculo, horis and momentis omnibus
munire nos non abnuas.

That is to say,

O glorious cross! o cross worthy of adoration! o most precious wood and
admirable sign! Christ! most godly King, refuse not to preserve us at all
hours and moments, by the sign of this cross.

The third.

Redemptor mundi, signo crucis ab omni adversitate custodi, qui salvasti Petrum
in mari, miserere nobis,

That is to say,

Redeemer of the world, preserve us in all adversity by the sign of this
cross, and thou which sauedst Peter in the Sea, have mercy on us.

The first prayer they address to God the Father is,

Deus qui vnigeniti Filij tui pretioso sanguine vivificae crueis vexillum
sanctificare voluisti, concede, quaesumus, eos qui eiusdem sanctae crucis
gaudent honor, tua quoque vbique protectione gaudere.

That is to say.

O God which was willing to sanctify the sign of the cross, quickening it by
the precious blood of thy only begotten son, grant us we pray thee, that
those which rejoice in the honor of the sign of this holy cross, may rejoice
in all places with thy protection.

The Second.

Protege, Domine, plebem tuam par signum sanctae crucis ab omnibus in^idijs
inimicorum omnium, vt tibi gratam exhibeamus servitutem, and acceptabile
tibifiat sacrificium nostrum.

That is,

Lord protect thy people by the sign of this cross, from all ambushments of
their ennemies, that we may yield the acceptable service, and that our
sacrifice may please thee,

But yet this is worse, For they attribute more honor to the cross, then to
Christ's resurrection, saying in their prayer to Christ, Crucem tuam adoramus,
Domine, resurrectionem tuam sanctam glorificamus.

That is,

Lord we worship thy cross, and glorify thy resurrection. And to the one,
and to the other: Ecce lignum crucis in quo salus pependit, venite, adoremus.

That is,

Behold the wood of the cross, whereon salvation has hunge, come, let us
worship it.

Is not this then to seek in rotten wood which serves christians for no use
that which cannot be found; but in that immaculate Lamb Christ Jesus, which
is without blemish, who was taught unto us by our Fathers, who has redeemed us
from our vain conversation, not with corruptible things, as silver and gold,
or by the wood of the cross, but with his most precious blood, 1 Pet. 1. 18.
19.
as the Apostle S. Peter witnesses in the first Chapter of his first Epistle?
Is not this to attribute as much honor to a creature dead and insensible,
whereunto none of us would willingly resemble, as to the living God the creator
of heaven and earth?

The last abuse is daily seen, in the sundry opinions, The 9. abuse.
and disputes, which the one hold directly contrary to the other, touching the
right place, and the true Gardians, and keepers of these relics, whereby one
lie overthrows another: For it is not possible for them, to agree without
giving each other the lie, and without giving to the Saints, more bodies and
members, after their departure, then they had while they were living.

Which is easy to be shown by their own writings, and the inventories of
their relics.

To begin with the relics of Christ, as our aduersaires are not ashamed to
maintain, that the body of Christ, (which is assended up into Heaven, to
remain there, until the restoration of all things, Act 3. 21
which God has spoken by the mouth of his holy Prophets) is also here beneath
on earth, in all the hosts consecrated by their Priests, which administer the
sacrifice of the mass: so they make no conscience to affrme, that they have
the foreskinn and navell of Christ in diverse places, which they keep and
adorn with this fine verse,

Circumcisa caro Christi, sandalia clera
Atque vmbilici viget hic praecisio clara.
That is to say.

The foreskinne of Christ, his pantofles also With his Navill, are inclossed
within this place.

For they have shown heretofore the first foreskinn of our Lord Jesus Christ
in our Ladies Church at Awcon, which we shall come to speak of more amply in
the third part of our disputation. The second, in our Ladies Church at Anwerpe.
The third at Hildesham in Germany. The fourth is to be seen yet according to
their saying at Rome in S. John Latrans church. The fifth in the city of
Byzanson in the free-Countie: and the sixth in the Abbey of Charroux in France.
So that by this reckoning, they would make Christ Jesus not a man, like unto us
in all things, save in sin, but in stead of a small skinn of his
circumcision, he should have six, and consequently as many bodies.

Also S. John Baptist, according to their tradition has had many heads and
visages: For notwithstanding that the Monks of Rome, glory in that they have
his whole head in the Cloister of S. Sylvester, those of Malta vaunt that they
have the hinderpart, and they of Amiens with those of S. John Angelique for
having the forepart with the gash of a knife, which Herodias should give him
overthwart the eye, as the hangman brought her his head, to present it by her
daughter in a platter to Herod and his friends, invited to the feast of his
nativity But who would not think it strange and incredible, that the
Evangelists, which have represented unto us in their history, all the marks,
which could be perceived in this incestuous strumpet of a cruel heart,
thirsting after the innocent blood of S. John Baptist, should have forgotten
to show us this last, which if it had been true, would have been more
remarkable then all the rest.

And although that Eusebius, and some other Historians attest, that the body of
this Forerunner of Christ, was burned to ashes, yet: these forgers of
relics, would make the Idolaters of the papacy believe, that the finger
wherewith Saint John Baptist showed our LORD Jesus Christ unto his Disciples,
in saying: Behold the Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the world,
was miraculously preserved by the providence of the Lord, and multiplied into
so many fingers, that their at least six of them found, to wit, one at Lions,
another at Bourges, the third at Bezanson in S. John the greats Church, The
fourth at S. Fortuits, the fifth at Thoulouse, and the sixth at Florence.

As for the Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul. Albeit the Prelates of Rome say,
that they keep in S. John Latrans church their whole heads, and their bodies
parted in the midst, weighed, and divided in to equal shares by S. Sylvester
in S. Paul's Church: yet those of Poitiers seek to persuade the common people,
that they have S. Peter's chinn and his beard, those of Argenton in Berri, that
they have one of S. Paul's shoulders, those of Trier that they have many of the
bones of these two Disciples of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Likewise those of Thoulouse show one body of S. Andrews, and those of melphe
another.

The Priests of Rome also wrangle with those of Trier and Padoua for S.
Matthias body; because every one of these three towns, think they have his
corpse in his own Church.

The same presbiters strive for the body of S. James the younger, S. Phillips,
S. Symons, and S. Iudes, with those of Thoulouse, which maintain as well on the
one side, as on the other, that they have in their Churches the same bodies of
these Apostles above said.

The Romanists show besides, two several bodies of two other Saints in two
other places, as the body of S. Anne mother unto the virgin Marie, and
Magdalenes sister unto Lazarus, the wise men of the East, S. Denises, S.
Anthonies S. Petronelles, S. Susannas, S. Hilaries, S. Honorats, S. Gilses, S.
Williams, and S. Ferreols. For they show one of S. Anns bodies at Apt in
Provence, and another at our Ladies de ^isle at Lions. Then one of Magdalenes
corpse at Vezele by Auxerna, and another at S. Maximnis in Provence. Likewise
the bodies of the three wise men of the East, both at Milan, and Cologne S.
Denises at S. Denis in France, and at Regesbourgh in Almaine, S. Anthonies at
Arles and at Vienna, S. Petronels daughter unto S. Peter at Rome, and at Man's
in the Iacobins Covent: S. Susannas at Rome and at Tholose: S. Hilaires at
Poitiers, and in two other churches* the one in that which the Canons of that
place dedicated unto him, and the other in the Monks Church at Sella:
moreover, S. Honorats body at Arles, and in the I Will of Lyrnis nere unto
Anti^ou: S. Gilses in a town in Languedoc, which bears his name, and at
Tholose: S. Williams at an Abbey in Languedoc called S. William upon the
desert, and in a town in Anssoy called Ecrichen: S. Ferrcels at Uses in
Languedoc and al Breienda in Auvergne: and S. Longins transformed from a spear
by a monstrous meta morphesie into a blind man, both in our Ladies church de
l'isle by Lions, and at Mantoua in Italy.

Upon others they bestow three bodies, as to S. Matthias, to Lazarus, to S.
Gervis, to S. Protis, and to S. Wolf. For they show the corpse of S. Matthias
at Rome, at Padova and at Trier. S. Lazuruses, at Marseille, at Authun, and at
Avalon: S. Gervises and S. Protises at Milan, at Brisac, and at Bysanson: S.
Wolfes at Lions, at Senes and at Ausserre.

To some others they attribute four, as to S. Sebastian whereof the one is
nigh unto Narbonna, in the place of his nativitie, the second at Rome in S.
Laurences Church, the third at Soissons, and the fourth at Piligni near unto
Nantes.

They attribute to Matthias four heads, whereof one is to be seen at Padoua,
an other at Tryer, and the other two at Rome: and also seven arms, three at
Rome, two at Tryer, and two at Padoua.

To S. Andrew, three heads, one at Thoulouse, and other at Melphe, and the
third at Rome: and five arms, two at Thoulouse, two at Melphe, and one at
Rome: then five feet, one at Awcon in Provence, two at Thoulouse and the other
two at Melphe.

To S. Barthelmew five hands, one at Pisa, two at Rome, and two in the
kingdom of Naples.

To S. Phillip three feet, one at Rome, and two at Thoulouse.

To S. Stephen two heads, one at Arles, an other in his own Church at Rome.

To S. Laurence three arms, two at Rome in his own church another in the
church surnamed Palisperna.

To S. Anthony five knees, one in S. Augustins Church of Albi, two at Arles,
and two at Vienna.

To S. Sebastian twelve arms, one at Mombrison in Forest, an other at S.
Servins de Tholose, an other at Case-Dieu in Auvergne an other at Angers, two
at Soissons, two at Piligni, two in the place where he was borne, and two at
Rome.

To S. Lambert two heads, one at Tryer, and an other at Liege.

To S. Anne five heads, one at Lions, an other at Apt in Provence, the third at
S. Annes in Turingue, the fourth at Duran in Iuilliers, and the fifth at Trier.

To S. Vrsell two, one at S. John Angeliques, an other at Cologne.

Likewise to S. Hilarie two, one with his Corpse at Venise, the other separated
from his body at Cologne.

Moreover, they show the blood of Christ in so many places, and in so many
goble^s, that on may plainly see, they mock at the effusion of the most
precious blood of our Redeemer, and willingly are ignorant, that the blood of
Christ could not be sheade in such an abundance, as they show, in diverse of
their Chur^hes, neither was it taken up so fluently, by some of the Apostles,
or friends of Christ, when his hands and fe^te were nailed, and his breast
wounded with the push of the spear.

To conclude, I could hear speak of the multiplication of the virgin Mary's
milk, through the craft of these Alcumists, of her smockes, kerchiefes,
phillits, girdles, gowns, pantofles, combs, Needles, Des kes, Linen,
pictures, and jewels: Likewise, of the garments of Christ, of his tears, of
the Cupp, out of which he dran ke with his Disciples, of the linen girdle,
wherewith he girded himself when he washed their feet, of his purple
garment, of his spear, which wounded his side, of the dice which in those
days were not in request, of the stone pichers of Cana in Galile: of the
miraculous Loanes wherewith our Savior fed five thousand persons, of his
garment without seame, of the reed which they put into his hands in stead of
a Scepter, of the sponge wherewith they put gal into his mouth, of the Crown of
Thorns they set upon his head, of the pillar whereunto (according to their
tradition) they bound him to scourg him, of the Stairs of the Sessions House
of Pontius Pilate, besprinckled with the drops of the blood which fell from
his body. In like manner, of the bones, ashes, garments, chains, and other
relics of the Apostles and Martyrs of Christ: but who is able to number up
all the inventions of the old rags found out in the shopps of the brocards of
the Roman church? For albeit Calvin has made a book expressly against them,
yet he confesses therein, that the number of them is innumerable.

I entreat therefore the Reader to content himself at this present with the
proofs of these brasen-fac'd inventors of relics, which I have uttered, and
to consider the^ without passion.

By means whereof, I assure my self he will judge, that we have just
reason, to have in abomination these deceivers of the ignorant, and to hold
the adoration of their relics for a heathenish superstition and Idolatry,
condemned and forbidden by the Lord, and not to be tolerated by those whose
eyes God has opened to see the abuses thereof.

FINIS.
A Jesuitical Epistle TOUCHING THE SAINTS RELIQVES, WHICH OF late they have
shown at Awcon unto the Superstitious people, from the 10. of July, until the
24. of the same Month, Anno. 1608.

Published by the Canons of Awcon: translated out of Latin into French and
briefly refuted,

By John Polyander, Professor in the University of Leyden.

And since Turned out of French into English, by Henry Hexham, 1611.

S. Augustine in the preface of his Hypognostiques against the ^^elagians.
WHen the Adversaires of the Catholic faith, seek to impugn the rule of
truth, through diabolical arms, they make us the more vigilant and careful
to answer them: and when they lurk in hypocrisy to annoy us, they a waken
us, as it were out of a Slumber, to the intent that taking the buckler of
truth, we may watch with hearts, resisting their falsehood: the Trumpet of
God sounding in our Ears, Watch, and pray, that ye enter not into tentation.

THE INSCRIPTION AND PREFACE OF THIS IESVITICALL EPISTLE, touching the
visitation of the holy relics which are to be seen in our Ladies Church at
Awcon, put forth by the Canons of the said Church.
The Provest, Deane, and Chapter, of the royal Church of our B. V. Marie at
AW^on, wish all health and happiness unto the godly and Benevolent Reader.
IT was ordained in holy writ, (benevole^t reader) that the devote and lovers
of religion, should spend their limited weeks, not only for a certain number
of days, but of years, and tha^ during the same time, as well those of their
own country as strangers, should rest from their labors and keep a feast,
watching afte^ an extraordinary fashion to the praises of the Lord The which
our an cestor^ here at Awco^, and in some other places throw a godly ceremony
have brogh^ into a custom, and many years ago, began to open every seventh
year the sacred and most preciou^ treasury of their holy Relics, and to lay
the^ abroad for certain days unto the view of all sorts of people, to move
the^ by the conte^plation thereof to revere^ce them. In which times, but
especially before the wars and dangeros ways, people resorted not only from
adjoining places, but also from far, as out of Hungary, Germany, France and
the Lowcontries, in such ^n abundance, that this seemed not an ( obscure) city,
but rather an assembli^ of many provinces an^ kingdoms together.

Refutation.
The inscription of this Epistle shewe^ that these Canons are of the same hum^^
and complexion, as the Scribes and Phari^ were in the time of Christ, and his
Apost^^ who gloried in them-selves for being (...) pillars of the church. There
is this difere^ betwee^ the swelling Titles, which the Scr^^ and Pharisees
attributed to themselves, to rep^^sent their dignity to the common people* (...)
they were some what Ecclesiastical; in (...) of these, that the Canons of the
Sy^gogue of Awcon assume to themselve which are rather politic.

The preface of this Epistle demons^teth, that these new Scribes and Phari^
would feign constrain the Christians our age to judaisme, and observe the
customs of the ceremonial law, long (...) abolished by our Lord Jesus Christ,
(...) has purchased us the freedom, to ass^^ble our selves every day in his
name, and worship him in all places, after the example of his Apostles, and
other Christians well instructed in the faith, which accounted all days a
like, Romans 14. 5.
and the one as the other, and reproved the Superstition of those which
condemned their brethren in the distinction of a holy day, Col 2. 16.
of the new Moon, or of the Sabbath. Hier. in Com. ad Gal. 2. 4.
Whereunto, S. Hierome having respect, acknowledged every day was alike, and
that Christ was crucified, not only upon the day of the preparation, or rise
again upon the Sunday: but ads that his resurrection is always, and that
always we may live by the flesh of Christ. He adds morover, that after the
decease of the Apostles, some wise men instituted certain days, for fasting
and convocation, to the intent, that such as waited more upon the world, then
upon God, who could not, or at least would not assemble them-selves so much as
one day in their lives, to come and offer up unto God the sacrifices of their
prayers and humane actions, might watch and pray upon those days if they would.

Whereby it appears painely, that the observation of the Judicial feasts
were not instituted by our Lord Jesus Christ, or his Apostles, but by the
Doctors of the primitive Church, to express and record more clearly unto the
common sort of people, the principal benefits of our Redeemer Jesus Christ, and
to accustom them, to employ some extraordinary days in meditating upon them.
Whereunto this testimony of Socrates may serve, as a sufficient proof,
whereby he declares, that neither Christ nor his Apostles was of meaning, to
suspend their judgments touching Easterday, or any other feast: nor instituted
any laws for them, that they should be kept, nor yet denounced any
condemnation against such as did not observe them, or did lay any curse or
penalty upon them, as the law of Moses usually did: but the mark whereat they
aimed, was to recommend to every one that virtue and life, which was pleasing
to God.

And what an impudency is it, in these Canons of Awcon, to appropriate their
abuse unto the feasts of the old Testament: seeing there is as much difference,
between their seventh years Sabbath, and that of the Jews, as is between
light and darknesse^* For, that of the Jews was neither consecrated nor
employed but only to the glory of God: whereas that of the Canons of Awcon
and their pilgrims, is dedicated to the honor of the bones and rags of
mortal men.

Touching their pilgrimages unto the relics of the departed Saints, they are
in noe wise grounded upon any institution of our Lord: neither from any example
of the aue Jews: nor from the doctrine of the Apostles, and first Doctors of
the primitive Church. For Jesus Christ our Redeemer was so far from
commanding his disciples to transport themselves from one place to another, to
adore the ashes of their predecessors, that on the contrary, speaking unto
the Samaritanish woeman, he told her that the hour immediately should come,
when strangers should not come any more unto the temple of Jerusalem, John. 4.
23.
to worship God his Father: but that the true worshippers should worship him in
Spirit and truth at home in their own Country.

As for the Jews the true Children of Abraham, as it cannot be proved by holy
Scripture, that God enjoined them to go into any foreign Country, to visit
the relics of the Saints departed: so they never resorted any whether, but
where God only was invocated in all puretie: shuning all other places into
which they had transferred the honor of God to his creatures ^ead and
insensible, following therein the ^ropher Hoseas exhortation, Though thou
playest the Harlot ^ Israel, at the least let not Judah sin: come not ye
unto Gilgal, neither go (...) up to Beth-avan. Hosea. 4. 15.


I acknowledge that some of the ancient^ Fathers, traveled to Jerusalem to
behold^ the sepulcher of our Redeemer Jesus Christ, and some other monuments of
the Saints departed: but I add thereto, that in the beginning they went not
thither to worship their relics, but God only, neither had they any such,
foolish imagination, as once to think, that the grace of God, was tied more to
one place then to an other, but their only desire was, to consider the
remarkable signs of Christ's redemption, and the place of his abode with his
disciples* Hereupon S. Hierom speaking of S. Hilarions, journey to Jerusalem,
rebukes such: thought that any thing was wanting in the faith, who had not
seen Jerusalem, and ^^steemed others that had been there, mo^^ holy then they
which had not. The kingdom of God (says he) is among you, The pal^^ of God is
as accessible in Britainie, as in Jerusalem. Anthony and the Monks of ^gipt
saw not Jerusalem, and yet notwithstand^^^ found the gate open. While S.
Hilario^ ^^^in Palestina, he went and saw Jerusalem, ^^^cause he would not
despise the holy places in su^^^ a journey: nevertheless, he remained there
but for a day, because it should not seem he meant to shutt up the Lord into a
certain place From hence it follows, that these Canons of Awcon and their
predecessors, takes for an example the Jewish ceremonies, and ancient customs
which some Christians through a superstitious imitation, introduced into the
primitive church by some of their hirelings only to increase their dishonest
gain, but let us proceed to the first part of their Epistle, whereby they show
the reasons, where fore many superstitious men in times past have visited the
Relics, which are to be seen in their Church.

The first part of this Jesuitical Epistle.
They perceived what great benefits God has imparted to mortal men, through
those holy Relics, and how many sundry sorts of miracles have been wrought by
them, through a supernatural force. For, not only the words of the Saints
(as S. Chrysostom says) but al so the garments of their bodies, Hom 8. ^d
popul. and ^6. de virt and vir.
are more manificent then any other possession. 2 King. 2 8.
For the cloak of Eliah made of the skinn of a Lion divided the waters of
Jorden heither and thither. Dan. 3. 25.
The shoes of the three young men marched through the midest of the fire, the
wood of Elisha, was able to change the nature of the water, 2 King. ^
and force it to bear the iron of the Axe upon the face thereof, as if it had
been upon their back. Exo. 14
Moses divided the Sea with his rodd, Nom. 20
and brake assu^der the rock. The garments of S. Paul, Act. 19. 12.
chased away diseases, S. Peter's shadow drove the^ away. The ashes of Martirs
have cast out Devils, Yea, God himself did a singular honor to Moses when he
buried him with his own hands, as S. Hierom says, Christ comendeth the womans
faith who was trobled with an issue of blood, whereby she believed she should
recover her health, if she did but touch the hemme of his garment.

Refutation.
I have already proved by the sixth abuse of relics, that the miracles done by
the^, are noe otherwise, then the illusions of Satan and the juggling tricks
of the hireling^ of Antichrist, which tend to this evil end to provoke their
Idolaters, to the adoration of bones and rotten garments: which are o^ afar
basser rank, then the desceased Saints, which God nevertheless forbids us
to invocate.

I say moreover, that if our fathers have not adored the true things, wherewith
our Lord Jesus Christ, and some other holy men of God have wrought true signs
and miracles: much less are Christians bound to worship those, by which the
Romish priests feign to do their lying wonders?

So then, the holy Scripture makes noe mention of any adoration, which our
Fathers should do in honor of Moses rodd, of Elias cloak, of Elishas wood, of
S. Peter's shadow, or of S. Paul's garments. For these holy men, were so far
from suffering the vulgar people to worship their garments, or shadows, Act.
10. 26.
that contrariwise even S. Peter himself, for bad Cornelius the Captain to
worship his person. S. Paul and Barnabas would not suffer the Priest of Lystra
to offer them Sacrifices. S. Peter by commanding Cornelius, who was fallen done
at his feet, to stand up, and showing him that he was b^t a man as he was.
S. Paul and Barnabas by renting their clothes, and crying out in the midest of
the throng, O men why do ye these things? Act. 14. 14. 15.
we are men subject to the like passions that ye be, and preach unto you, that
ye should turn from these vain things unto the living God, which made Heaven
and Earth, and the Sea, and all things that in them are.

Then their power of doing miracles, proceeded not from their garments, or
shadows, nor from their human nature, but only from the divine might which
really was in Christ, and accompanied in old time his faithful servants after
an extraordinary manner. For as the three first Evangelists aver, that
Christ of himself di^^ acknowledge that virtue that issued forth of him, to
cure the woman that was troubled with the issue of blood, by touching the hemme
of his garment: So we read also in the third Chapter of the Acts of the
Apostles, that S. Peter and S. John, seeing the people astonished and amazed,
because* they had healed a man which had been a creep^^ from his mothers womb,
S. Peter shows the^, that this miracle was not done through their own power
or sanctity, but through faith in the name of Jesus Christ.

As for S. Chrysostom, though at some^times he extolleth (through the art of
his Rethorique) the relics of the departed Saints too excessiuelie: yet
notwithstanding the Canons of Awcon, or rather their Schoolmasters which have
dictated them this Epistle falsify his words, and wrest them into a sense
contrary to his meaning: For in the text which they cite of S. Chrysostomes,
he speaks not there of any miracles, which it pleased God to work by the
garments of any of the holy Fathers after their departure, but whilst they were
living, to show by this argument, that their very garments which to the outward
appearance of men, were base and contemtible, were more precious in the sight
of God, then all the sumptuous raiment of Achab and other infidel kings.

Touching the honor which it pleased God to do vno Moses his servant, by
interring him, (as S. Hierom says) with his own hands, whosoever has but
any jott of judgment or reason, will conclude from this interrment of Moses
corpse, the clean contrary to that, which the Canons of Awcon here infer, to
wit, that God himself intended to hide his bones in a place unknown unto the
children of Israel, to hinder them from taking them up, and least they should
abuse them with Idolatry, even as the superstitious men of the Romish church
do, who worship the bones, which in times past have been taken out of the
graves of their ancestors.

Concerning that which they allege of our Lord Jesus Christ, for commending
the faith of the woeman which was troubled with the issue of blood, because
she said to her self, If I may touch but his garment only, I shall be whole:
I answer that although her faith was so weak, that she quaked for fear when
she came near unto Christ, to confess that she had touched the hemme of his
garment, and by that means was comforted by our Savior who commanded her to
be of a good courage, yet nevertheless her faith was not defiled with such a
superstition as that of the Romanists is. For when she came trembling toward
our Savior, she fell not done before him to kiss the hemme of his garment,
but to worship his person, and to show him before all the people, for what
cause she had touched him, and how she was made whole immeadiately upon it.

Now rests the second part of this Epistle, by which they rebuke the censours
of the Superstitious veneration of their relics, and applaude the Adorers
thereof.

The second part of this Epistle abovesaid.
From the reasons above said we may gather, with what spirit as well the old
Heretics (namely, Eunomius, Vigilantius and Eustachius, as many other new
Innovators of Religion in France) have been inspired, who have heretofore
burned the precious Relics of the Apostles of that Kingdom, to wit, S.
Hilaries at Poitiers, S. Ireneus at Lions, and S. Martins at Tours, giving
hereby sufficiently to understand that they were not of that rank, nor of that
Religion, as they were whom they detested with so great a hatred and ill will,
nor so worthy as their holy ashes, and some other holy memorialls of faith and
piety, which rested there. The first founders of the Catholic Church did not
so, neither those doctors tha^ delivered as it were from hand to hand, unto
their posterity the Catholic faith: as they received it from Christ, much
more pure, more sincere, and less corrupted then it is at this present, as
most evidently is seen in the books of the Eastern Doctors, and Historians,
that he which would go about, to prove it by any other testimonies, should
seem to add brightness unto the Sun at noone day.

Charles truly great for his piety, and eminent deeds or rather thrice most
great Emperor and excellent Founder of this Church, imitating herein the steps
of those holy personages, was amongst other his graces and virtues, worthy a
Christian Emperor endued with this, that his only desire was, to gather from
all parts whatsoever, a^ sorts of holy Relics (...) our Lord Jesus Christ,
of his holy mothers, and of the other Saints: and after he had made them to
be transported from all countries, caused them al so to be honored and adored
religiously, as we may conclude from his Acts, the signs whereof are yet to be
seen.

Now the notablest and remarkeablest of them all is, the privilege which is
found in the ancient monuments of our Church, by which he ordained in a
general assembly of the whole Empire, that this City of Awcon should be
enriched with many immunities, and established for his royal Seat on this side
the Alps. The privilege contains these words. I have in this place built
the monastery of S. Marie, the mother of our Lord Jesus Christ: with as much
labor and expense as I could, and have adorned it with many precious stones
and with marble. etc. Therefore the ^^^^^lent workmanship of this great royal
church, being fully finished, not only according to my wished desire, but also
through divine grace, I have collected together (from diverse Countries and
kingdoms, but especial out of Greece) sundry signs and marks, of the
Apostles, of the Martyrs, of the Confessors, of the virgins, and have brought
them into this holy place, that the Kingdom might be established thereby and
the remission of sins be granted through their sufferings.

The same care and desire flowed downward upon and with his paternall
inheritance, and posteretie, until the glory of the French (who had taken
their Source and growth through Godliness, being distitute of his
vnderprop^ping and foundation) begann to decay little by little as S. Sigebert
Gemblacensis testifies, by the very words of the french history it self in
his treatise and translation of S. Vit, and Modestia. For this cause, all the
most famous Cities, all Kingdoms and principallities, endeavored by all means
to obtain some body of some one Saint or another, as their principal Patron
and Protector, or at least some small relics from some whole corpse to assure
and confirm their commonwealth through help thereof, trusting to the great
liberallity of the great miracles which God had wont to work, for the love he
bore unto those holy relics.

Refutation.
I find in this discourse many faults, the first is, that in accusing the
Condemners of this superstitious adoration of Relics, they place in the first
rank of them Eumonius, Vigilantius and Eustachius, who were not so well
grounded in the reprehension of this Idolatry, as we are in ours. For proof
whereof, because I will not be too teadious, I only will allege Vigilantius
censure upon it, and S. Hieromes answer unto it. Vigilantius censure then, as
S. Hierome propounds it was this. What needs this, not only to honor with
such a reverence, but also to worship I know not what, carried up and down and
enclossed within a small vessel? We may se, that the pagans custom is almost
brought into the Church, under the color of religion, and that while the sun
shines, they still light up a great number of Candells, and that some of them
kiss and worship a little dust, wrapped up in a costly sheet, and putt into a
little vessel.

Let us see on the other side, what answer S. Hierome gave him, Who has ever
worshipped the Martyrs? Who has ever thought man to be God, o brainelesse
head! If the Romanists should answer us in that manner, at this day, Who has
ever worshipped the Martyrs? Who has ever thought man to be God? may not we
justly reply, they are even your Doctors, who have seduced you, not only to
adore the Martyrs themselves, but also their bones and relics.

The second fault is, they rank Vigilantius in the catalogue of their
Heretics, who by S. Hierome his own adversairy, was called Holy Father, who
feeling himself moved with the same zeal, as S. Chrysostom was, condemned
the unprofitable expense, which was employed about the garnishing of tombs and
the relics of Saints departed. Epist ad Paulin
For as Vigilantius terms, this ceremony of kissing the relics of the
Saints, and lighting up of Candells about them, a heathenish custom
introduced into the Church under a falsse pretext of religion: So S. Chrysostom
calls it in his 12. Setmon upon the first Epistle to the Corinthians, Chris.
Hom. 12 1. Cor.
a foolish devotion, a devilish observation, maintained by the corrupt
iugments of senseless men that did but suck, therefore, to turn them from
this superstition he shows them, that the Martyrs take no delight to be
honored with their money, for which the poor cry out, in that they did not
rather employ it for their relief, and that the consideration of our Lords
resurrection, who rise naked from death, ought to learn the^ to leave of from
the foolish expense of funerals. For whereto is it good (says he) seeing it
brings but loss to such as do it, Chrysostom. Hom. 84 in Euang. John.
and noe benefit to the dead, but rather harm.

The third fault is, they liken our Doctors unto Eunomius, Vigilantius, and
Eustachius, wherein they are in noe wise to be compared. For the Eunomians
were by the holy fathers taxed of Heresy, because they made it a difficult
matter to enter into the Churches of the Apostles and Martyrs, who have taught
in time past, that Christ is true God and equal to the Father: whereof they
cannot reprove our Doctors, seeing they preach in the Churches, adorned with
the names of S. Peter and S. Stephen, and other of the Apostles and Martyrs,
and seeing besides, that they maintain the doctrine of the Godhead of our Lord
Jesus Christ, against the disciples of Eunomius.

Neither cann they charge our Divines (unless wronfully) with that Crime where
with S. Hierome attached Vigilantius, (to wit,) because he held unclean the
bones of the Saints departed, and would have had their ashes ignominiously
cast upon a dunghill, to the end that he alone (though drunck and a sleep)
might be adored, but ours teach the clean contrary, that their bodies ought
to be buried honorably.

The fourth fault is, they accuse our Predecessors for having burned in France
the relics of some departed Saints, as those of S. Ireneus, S. Hilaires, and
S. Martins: yet they cite not so much as one witness, herein they do not
imitate their Cardinal Bellarmin, who to give some color and show of truth upon
this false calumniation, alleges in his treatise of Relics, the A^estation
of a certain Monk, called Surius, which many Papists themselves believe not,
because another gray Friar, named Feu-ardant, speaking of the boddie of S.
Ireneus in his preface unto his latin Irenea, denies that S. Ireneues corpse
was burned at Lyon^, or that his ashes were cast into the Rosne.

I say again, that this accusation of theirs it false; because they impute to
the first Reformers of our age (whom wronfully they term Innovators of
religion) the insolences committed by some indiscreet soldiers, in the
beginning of the troubles without their council or avouchment. For they were so
far from exhorting the^ to burn the bodies of the Saints, or to throw their
ashes into rivers, that contrariwise, they preached against such outrages, and
admonished their anditorie, therein to follow the example of the ancient
Fathers, and that every man was obliged to lay them into the Earth, and
honorably to bury the bones and ashes of those whom God had taken out of this
world.

The fifth fault is, they rank among the number of the first founders of their
Catholic religion, the Emperor Charles the great, who approved not all the
point^ thereof. For sundty Historians, yea, and his book which he wrote,
against the second Council of Nice, shows evidently, that he condemned the
decree of that Council for the worshipping of images, calling it, a most
impudent tradition, and a foolish and profane invention, coming near unto
that infidelity, which always keeps her Adorers in error.

Touching their allegation of the double diligence, which many towns and
provinces used in searching out, and in honoring the relics of the deceased
Saints, we reply, that we are not bound to follow the customs of men, but
only the rule of divine law, which neither has enjoined us, nor our fathers
unto any such superstitious worshipping of relics.

Let us now proceed forward to see what these Canons of Awcon cann say unto us
in the third part of their Epistle.

The third part of this Jesuitical Epistle.
This abundant liberality of God ( say they) seems noe new thing to those
that are read in holy writ, and History: because they know, that by S. Peter's
shadow (though nothing seems more vain) and by the kerchiefs and hand
kerchiefs, which they brought from S. Paul's body all sorts of griefs presently
and most happily have be^ driven from diseased boddies, and the infernal
Spirit^ cast forth of their Souls* From which example, the Godly custom of
our ancestors proceeded, tha^ in immitating Joseph of ^^rimathea, and
Nicodemu^* represented by the bodies of our Lord Jesus Christ, and S. Stephen:
they usually wrapped up the most precious relics of their Church in silken
clothes, which they called ( Sa^ctuaires) of holy coverleds as ecclesiastical
historia^s write the which they have since distributed, and sent abroad
according to the ancient custom of the church, to such as through piety and
love unto religion desired the^, in such sort, that the Roman church, has not
bestowed noe other relics upon Emperors, or any other great personnages,
whatsoever, tha^ such sanctuaires and Couverleds, as appears by the letters
pope ( Hormisda) wrote unto his Ambassadors, and unto Justinian the Emperor.
And to the end, those Sanctuaires might be in the greater request, among us,
it pleased the divine goodness (as it evident to ma^y of our church) to
illustrate and manifest the^ through the operation of many great miracles, and
so much the more, because that without this means, they could not satiate the
piety, which was kindled in many. Now this custo^e of going on pilgrimage,
toward thee places renowned for their relics, and other memorialls of the
Saints, was brought up in Christe^do^, from the first age of the Catholic
church, and in that time, when she had some rest from the oppression of
Tyrants, and other perverse Ennemies of the faith. And because we will not here
speak of the Ceremonies of the ancient law whereby every one was enjoined to
go yearly on pilgrimage to the feasts, as God himself had comanded it, and
many other most religious personages, yea Christ himself and his most holy
parents, accomplished it with so great a zeal of going on pilgrimage,
principally unto the holy places of the land of Judea, which zeal was kindled
also in the hearts of me^ after Christ's death, in immitating their ancestors,
as the testimony of divine write, and S. Hierome also speaking upon this
matter does auouche, that all the words in the holy Scripture recommend to us
this godly work. And in another place they run hither: ( says he) from all the corners of the Earth, the city is full of all sorts of people etc. But
chiefly with those which hold the highest degrees of honor in this world meet
here with one accord. And verily our Patron Charles of most holy and famous
memory, withour producing any other examples at this present, of any other
Emperors, and most noble parsonages, who were so much given unto the exercise
of these holy pilgrimmages, that oftentimes they went a foot to Rome, only to
exercise themselves in this godly work. And have attributed so* great honor
unto S. Peter's Cathedral church at Rome, as they have kissed the very stares
thereof one after another. So that one may say of him, and these Emperors,
that which Austin heretofore objected against the Idolaters of Madaure, ye se
that the highest dignity of the most noble Empire, supplicates with an humble
crown by the Sepulcher of S. Peter the fisher.

The like also have been found in England, De^marke, France and Splayne, who
being touched with this desire of pilgrimages, discharging the^selfs for the
present from all the affairs of their earthly kingdoms, transported themselfes
thither-wards through a long, dangerous, and weary some way* to honor there
their hevenly King after the example of the three Kings* which came to honor
the cradell of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Also many other Christians have done the same, whose ordinary custom was,
eftsoons to visit the places, which were destined for the holy memorials and
sepuleres, to the end (that as it is written of the virgin marie) their inward
love might be nourished by holy signs, and inflamed with the more love of
devotion, through the most joyful contemplation of the Saints tombs, and
relics. For this has always ben found by experience, and confirmed by the
testimony of all antiquity, that through these pilgrimages, through this great
flocking and godlynes of the people, a new zeal began to kindle in our
spirits, together with the piety and revere^ce we bore to these holy things,
and also new desires to live well, and to immitate the Saints in our life and
manners.

And lo, next unto the glory of God, the chiefest end of our pilgrimages,
which God so specially dema^deth of us, was, because as S. Augustine says, the
bodies of the Martirs have been given us, to awaken us unto the exercise of
devotion, through the admonition of the places, and by the presence of these
holy pledgs. For the holy place (as this Father exhorts us) renews and
increases our former affections, when as through the advertisment of the
places, it is manifested, and raises it self up by wheating our charity,
as well toward those whom we are to imitate, as toward those, through whose
assistance we do it.

And therefore it happened perchance (as it were by divine disposition and
providence) that almost all the holy bodies of the holy Apostles, and
principal Doctors of the East, have been transported into the West, before the
Turks tyranny: which sought to abolish and wholly root out the memory of the
Christian religion. And indeed, we must acknowledge, that whatsoever is most
precious and of the greatest importance in our treasury of Relics, was
brought from beyond sea, out of those countries, through the great piety,
industry, and deligence of Charles the great, as has been showen before, by
the ancient charter of our Church, and shall hereafter appear by our Index.

Refutation.
This third part of their Epistle, stuffed with vain repetitions and
insufficient proofs, needs noe long refutation. As for th^^ which they alledg
again, concerning the miracles done by S. Peter's shadow, and by the kerchiefs
and hand kerchiefs they brought from S. Paul's body, it has been sufficiently
answered in the first part of their Epistle as also that which they rehearse
again touching the pilgrimages which our F^^thers did to the holy places of
Judea, into refuting of their preface: by which we ha^^ refuted all those,
which through a foo^ devotion seek to tie the service of G^^ more to one place
tha^ to another. Where upon S. Chrysostomes admonition may se^^ that to obtain
pardon for our transgressions, (...) need not spend any money, neither is it
necessaire to do any such thing, only the integretie of a good will
suffices. It is in vain to take any iourneys into farre-countries, or to
seek unto other nations far from us, or to endure dangers and perils, only
the will is enough. In like manner that of S. Augustins, God commands us not
to go into the East, to seek out righteousness, nor to sail into the West
to obtain pardon, forgive thy ennemy, and it shall be forgiven thee, seek
nothing of thy self out of thy self. Likewise S. Bernards, Oman thou need
not pass the seas, nor penetrate the Clouds, thou behoouest not to pass the
Alps, neither have thou need, that any should show the any long way, Go
before God into thy self.

As for their proofs of the ancient custom of their fathers, in wrapping up in
clothes the relics of the departed Saints, of the donation of those clothes,
to al sorts of people (but especially to Emperors, and great parsonnages) of
the miracles done by touching them, I call them insufficent because this
custom is not grounded upon the word of God, nor from the example of the
Disciples of our Lord Jesus Christ. For so far was Joseph of Aremathia, and
Nicodemus, who wrapped up the body of Christ in a sheet (whom they make
me^tio^ of in their fine discourse) from showing it, or giving it to some
religious men, that on the contrary, they buried it with Christ's body and
sought to keep it from the sight of men. And suppose that some miracles have
been done, by the touching of such like clothes of the dead, we are not to
wonder at it, seeing Satan, when it pleases God to let loose his reigns,
and permit him to deceive men with strong illusions and errors, has
oftentimes done the like miracles by touching the relics of dead beasts, as
we have amply declared in our disputation, in the discouvering it the sixth
abuse of relics.

I could here convict the Canons of Awcon by the testimony of holy Scripture,
(...) that the wise men of the East, which ca^^ out of their own Countries
into the La^^ of Bethlem to worship our Savior Christ and to present him their
gifts specified by the Evangelist S. Matthew in his second Chapter, were no
Kings but Philosophers Secondly, that this deed was extraordin^ry, and ought
not to be brought into* law and Custom in Christenstome, b^ cause our true
Josiah and forerunner Jesus Christ is not, as he was then here beneath on
Earth: but sits now above in Heaven on the right hand of the Majesty of God
his Father: but my desire is not to surpass the limitts of our disputation,
therefore, I will at this present rest contented with that I have already said,
touching the pilgrimages of the ancient Fathers.

Yet rests the refutation of the index of the relics of their Saints
departed, but before I enter into it, I will conclude my former refutation with
the same exhortation which the Apostle S. Peter gave unto all Christians upon
the end of his second Epistle general, who had obtained faith at the same
price with us through he righteousness of our God and Savior Jesus Christ.

My Beloved, seeing ye know these things before by the discouverie of the
falsifications of so many texts of the Bible, contained in the above said
Epistle of the Canons of Awcon, that these unlearned and unstable pervert the
holy Scriptures unto their own destruction, beware, lest ye be also plucked
away with the error of the wicked, and fall from your own steadfastness. But
grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, to him be glory
both now and for evermore

Amen.
The Refutation OF AN INDEX OF THE RELIQVES, WHICH EVERY SEVENTH year ae
shown at Awcon, unto the poor and ignorant pilgrims of the Roman Church.

By John Polyander.

Tertullian in the book of his praescriptions against Heretics.
THe Doctrine of Heritiques ( says he) compared with that of the Apostles,
will show by the diversity and contrariety thereof, that it has for author,
neither any Apostle, nor Apostolic Doctor: because that as the Apostles have
not taught sundry Doctrines, repugnant one to another: So the Apostolic
Doctors have not uttered Doctrines, contrary unto that of the Apostles, but
those which are fallen away from the institutions of the Apostles, and have
taught after another manner.

AN INDEX OF THE VIRGIN MARY'S RELIQVES, OF CHRIST'S of S. John Baptists, and
some other Saints departed, composed and published by the Canons of Awcon,
Anno. 1608.
1THE smock which the most bless virgin Ma^^ wore, when she was deliuere^ of
our Savior Jesus Christ. 2 Two swaddling bands wherewith the Son of Go^ was
swadled, presently aft^^ he was borne. 3 The linen cloth which couvered the
most holy boddie of Christ, and which was besprinkled with his saving blood. 4
The sheet whereupon Saint John Baptist kneeled in the prison, when his head
was cut of by the commandment of the adulterous King. 5 The girdle wherewith
our Lord Jesus Christ trussed up his garment. 6 The Cord with which they bound
his sacred hands, when they led him as an innocent Lamb before many judges. 7
A piece of one of the nails, wherewith they nailed him to the cross. 8 Two
great pieces of the holy cross. 9 Some of the pieces of the Sponge, and
Christ's kerchiefe. 10 The most blessed virgin Maryes girdle, with some of her
hair, and her picture painted by the Evangelist S Luke. 11 A piece of the
chain whereunto Saint Peter was bound, while he was in prison. 12 One of
Simions arms wherewith he imbrassed the babe Jesus Christ in the temple,
being but forty days old. 13 The bones and blood of the first Martyr S.
Stephen, whereupon the king of the Romans ordinarily does take his oath in our
Chapter. 14 S. Leoparts Corpse. 15 The head and arm of the Emperor S. Charles
the great, and his whole corpse. 16 The celestial manna, and S. Catherins oil.
The Refutation of this Index.
If the poor ignorant people of the Romish Church, were but permitted to read
the holy Scriptures in their mother tongue; they would quickly perceive with us,
th^^ the relics, which the Canons of Awcon attribute in their Index to Jesus
Christ, (...) his Mother, to S. John Baptist, to Simion^ S. Peter and to S.
Stephen are falsely invente^ by some juglars, and in noe wise grounde^ upon the
History of the holy Evangelists For the Evangelists and Authentic witnesses
of Christ, elected by God his Father, to record unto us all the memorable (...)
of our Saviors Conversation, and of (...) friends in this world, and to leave
behind them a faithful Index unto posterity, mak^^ no mention therein of any
smock of (...) virgin Mary's, of any of her hair, or of (...) image painted
by S. Luke, who was noe p^^^ter, but rather a Phycisian as Eusebius and some
other Historians affirm, Col. 4. 14.
and prove it by the fourth Chapter of S. Paul's Epistle written to the
Colossians.

Neither speak they therein of any girdle of Christ's, nor of any cloth within
which his body was wrapped, when they nailed him to the Cross: but one the
contrary, all of them witness, that he was crucified stark naked, and that
four soldiers snared his garments among them.

Nor speak they word of any sheet which Herod should command his Sariant to
lay under John Baptists knees, before he beheaded him, nor of any chopping of,
or any separation (which should be done unto Simeens arm wherewith he had
imbrased our Savior Jesus Christ in the temple of Jerusalem) from his other
members, or that it should be kept as a reliquaire by the Christians.

Neither find we in the description of S. Stephens stoneing and burial, that
S. Luke should report, that those Godly men which buried him, took up any of
this Martyrs blood, Act. 8. 2.
to deliver it to the church, but carried it away with his body to be buried.

The hirelings of Awcon cannot prove by their History, nor any other author
worthy of belief, that the Virgin Marie was so curious as to keep her ragged
swaddling ba^ds, where with she had bound up the body of her little babe Jesus
Christ, or that she gave them to the Evangelist S. John to keep the well
beloved Disciple of her son Jesus Christ, with exhortation to recommend them
after her departure to the doctors of the primitive Church, or that she did
command, that they should be locked up in any place, to be shown at some
times to the vulgar sort of people in memory of the nativity of our Redeemer.

Much less can they prove, that the Soldiers of Po^tius Pilate sold to the
Apostles, or any of their Successors, the cord where with they bound the
hands of our Savior Jesus Christ, or any of his garment they parted among
them, or the cross whereunto they nailed him, or any pieces of the sponge they
filled with vinegar when as he cried I thirst: But all these old rags have
been gathered, and patched together by the Fathers of these botchers, and
polished with the name of Antiquity, to transform the lively simplicity of
the Sacraments, and true memorialls of Christ, into a motley religion,
disguised with a million of crafty devises.

And whosoever will but confer the Index of these Canons of Awcon, with some
other registers of the Roman Church: they shall soon perceive how they
contradict one another. For those of Charters maintain, that they have the
same smock which the virgin Marie had on, when she was delivered of our
savior Jesus Christ, which (according as men report that have seen it) is
too long for a woman of a middle stature as the Virgin Marie was, and as
Nicephorus witnesses, that the hose of Joseph her husband, were too short for
a man of the same shape. For the Virgin Mary's smock, which they show at Awcon
unto the ignorant and credulous people, is so long and wide, that if she had
been a Gyantesse (as Calvin notes in his treatise of relikes) she could
scarcely have worn it. One the contrary, Joseph's hose (which the Cannons of
Awcon have forgott to put into their Index) are so short and straight that they
will not serve a dwarf, or a little boy.

Besides these Chap-men of Rome, and Salvadour in Spain wrangle obstinately
with those of Awcon, which of them should have the Swadling-bande wherewith the
Virgin Marie swadled up her little Babe Jesus Christ.

But yet there is a far greater contention between the Huckstars of the
Roman church for the pieces of Christ's cross. For there is almost not one
Abbey or Cloister in the world, which makes not a bravado and a superstitious
show therewith: albeit that Eusebius shows us, in the life of Constantin the
Emperor, that Helena his mother having found the same cross, sent one piece
of it unto the Bishop of Jerusalem, and the other unto her son Constatine, who
adorned his caske with the second, and with the third, made a bitt for his
horse, the hire^ings of Antichrist have forged and multiplied them into so
many, that they show a great number of whole ones, besides many pieces in
diverse Countries of Christendom.

Morover, there are sundry Towns which affirm, that they have the whole
Sweating cloth of our Lord Jesus Christ: But especially they of Rome,
Byzanzon, and Cadoin in Lymos. Is it not then a great impudence in these Canons
of Awcon, to maintain against the^, that they have some of the pieces of it?
And if other Towns have likewise some pieces of this Swearing cloth (as they
vant they have) what and audaciousnesse is it in those towns which I have
named to maintain at this day, that they have his whole Sweating-cloth with
the impression of all the parts of Christ's body sta^ped into the same cloth
from the crown of his head, unto the sole of his foot: seeing we cann prove
the contrary by the ceremony which the jews used in burying of their dead,
and also by a text of the Evangelist S. John's in his 20. Chapter and sixth and
seventh verses, that this sweating cloth, was but the kerchief which Joseph of
Aremathea and Nicodemus had bound about his head, and lay in a place by it
felfe, from the other linne^ clothes, wherewith his body had been wrapped up by
his two difciples John and Peter.

As for the rest, if the Prelates of Rome have the whole chain whereunto S.
Peter was chained in his prison, do not those canons of Awcon bragg falsely*
that they have a piece of it.

If they of Rome have also the whole body of S. Stephen, with all his bones,
what an impudency is it in those of Awcon and some Canons of other churches to
say, as it were in dispite of one another, that every one of them have in his
own church, the bones and blood of this first Martyr of of Christ's.

Concerning the Emperor Charles the great, we confess that the Historians of
his time witness, that he was buried at Awcon in Germany: howbeit we wonder
much, because they mingle the relics of a politic man, who was given to
whoredom (as the Apostate John de Serres withnesseth in his Inve^torie) with
those of Christ's, the Vngin Mary's, and other holy personages which led a
blameless life in this world.

Furthermore, If the most holy place be at Rome in S. John Laterans church, and
if the Byshope of Room keeps there-in Aarons rod and the Heavenly Manna, do
not the Canons of Awcon deserve to be controled, in that they attribute the
propriety of these relics, and call their shop furnished with all manner of
false merchandise, the most holy place of the Virgin Mary's Temple? For like as
under the old Testament, there was but one Tabernacle, one Temple, and
consequently one most holy place, until the first coming of Jesus Christ. So
could it not represent unto our Fathers but one Temple of the Godhead of
Christ, which is his body, and one most holy place, which is the Heaven into
which this Souveraine and only sacrificer has tansported his body by his
assention. Now suppose that that should be false (as it is not) which the
Apostle declares in his Epistle to the Ebrewes, to wit, that the Tabernacle
and Sanctuary of the old Testament were but figures of the true Tabernacle,
and of the true holy places, which are not made with men's hands (but is the
body of Christ and the Kingdom of Heaven) and that these figures ought not to
last but until the time of their corectio^ and accomplishme^t, through the death
and passion of our Redeemer Jesus Christ: yet notwithstanding, to show the
correspondence between the shadows and the body which is found in Christ,
the Doctors of the Roman church, ought but to name unto us one Temple, and one
most holy place, heretofore figured unto our Fathers, first by the Tabernacle,
and afterward by the Temple of Jerusalem: in lieu of so many Temples and most
holy places, which in these later days they show to the poor ignorant
people, to learn them to Iudaisme and observe the Ceremonies abolish^d long
since through he sacrifice of Christ Jesus, and condemned by the doctrine of
his Apostles.

As for the rest, either there is noe likelihood of truth, that the ancestors
of these Canons of Awcon, have had and shown heretofore unto the common people
the true fore-skinne of Jesus Christ, or that these canons their successors
having received it from them, have not kept it so faithfully as the garments of
our Savior Christ, and the instruments wherewith Pilates soldiers served
their turns to crucify him, seeing that they dare not name his foreskinne in
their Index, nor place it in the rank of his other relics before mentioned.

And that which they make up their tale withal, concerning S. Catherins Oil,
and S. Leopards corpse, it is of the same coigning as their inventoire is of the
bones of the ten thousand Martyrs, which may not be touched but only seen
under the altar of the Church at Rome, called the Heavens Ladder: and the
eleven thousand virgins whereof they of Coullen gathered up more then a hundred
carte loades. For every man of understanding having regard to that which these
churchmen of Awcon report of their S. Catherine, and compare it with that which
those of Rome say (who maintain they have one of her fingers in the temple of
the holy Ghost, and in the temple dedicated unto her the milk which gushed
forth of her neck, when she was beheaded, and the oil which sprang forth
of her grave) will find as much fraud and deceit therein, as in that which
they recite of their Idol S. Christopher, to wit, that this Giant having been a
these in his youth, at last forsook that wicked course of life, and to do a
public penance for his sins, un dertooke to carry such as was desiours to
pass over a great water, from one banck side to the other: Now upon this
occasion Jesus being willing to try his faith and obedience, came and presented
himself with the rest (as he was ready to take them up) in the likeness of a
little boy, and talking with him, prayed him to carry him over as he did the
others, the which this thief presently agreed unto, but after he had set him
upon his shoulders he found him so heavy, that being in the midst of the
river he told him that he never had borne so heavy a burden: and that he
should sink under him, if he did not presently ease him: Now ever since they
have called Christofle, or rather Christophorus that is, Christ bearer, from
which fable every man may gather, that these fine Doctors feed their wreched
disciples, but with lies and illusions, where of I have discovered a great
number in these three little Treatises, with assurance that the unpassionate
Reader, and lover of the truth, opening his eyes and ears to see and hear
them, will not only be moved through this my advertisement to reject them,
but also to assist me on his behalf, to persuade these silly superstitious me^,
to take heed unto the service of Idols invented by these latter priests of
Ball, full of all deceit, and to worship with us our only God and heavenly
Father in spirit and truth.

FINIS.

