A REFVTATION OF AN EPISTLE Apologeticall written by a Puritan-Papist to
persuade the Permission of the promiscuous Use and Profession of all Sects and
Heresies:

Wherein the unlawfulness and danger of such wicked License is fully declared
by authority of Scriptures, Canons, Councels, Fathers, Laws of Christian
Emperors, and judgment of Reason.

Together With the Punishment of Heretics and Idolaters.

LONDON Printed by Arnold Hatfield for Thomas Man Junior dwelling in
Paternoster Row at the sign of the Talbot. 1605.

To the Christian Reader.
AS the famous City of TROY stood invincible by any external power of Grecke
assaults, until by Sinons crafty and deceitful sleights the Trojans were
persuaded to break their walls, the rock of their defense, to receive the
Epean Horse, out of which issued the destruction of their city. The Sinonian
praectises of Papists to subuerts the State.
So the Ecclesiastique and Civil estate of Great BRITAIN, being inexpugnable
by any force of outward violence; many subtle and pernicious Sinons
deceitfully labor to persuade our dread Sovereign to break unity of
Religion, the bond of our security, to receive into his Dominions the Epean
monster of Popish Heresy, which would be the utter overthrow and ruin both of
Church and Commonwealth, of his royal Person and State.

To this end these cunning Work-masters have bent all their wits and forces for
their best advantage: for they have omitted no means, refused no labor,
spared no cost, soliciting their Friends abroad, and Favorers at home,
earnestly to importune his sacred Majesty in their behalf. And Camelcon or
Proteus-like, they have transformed themselves into all forms and colors,
writing unto his Highness Petitions, Supplications, Books, Dedicatories,
Apologies and Epistles, under the mask and vizour sometimes of Catholic
Noblemen and worthy Gentlemen of England; sometimes of Spiritual, sometimes
of Lay-Catholiques; and now lastly (because they would leave no means
unattempted) of True and Charitable Brothers of the Reformed Church: Wherein I
can but marvel at their behavior and carriage toward his Majesty.

The Papists hypocritical dealings toward the Kings Majesty.
For one while, Serpent-like to insinuate into his Highness favor, thus they
sycophantize; Papists 1. Supplication unto his Majesty.
Puisant Prince and orient Monarch. Pap. 1. Supply.
Your rare perfections and admirable gifts of wisdom, prudence, valor and
justice. Pap. 2. Supply.
Such a King to whom that may be applied; Misericordia and Veritas obuiarunt
sibi, Iustitia and Pax osculatae sunt. Ibidem.
A Prince of mercy and justice. Pap. 3. Supplic.
Your rarest clemency. Ibidem.
Your singular and rarest wisdom. Pap. 3. Supplic.
Your Princely power and pietic. Pap. 4. Supplic.
Your Highness sit years to govern, and your long and successful
experience in the affair, being the Art of Arts, and the Office of God. Ibidem.
Your Majesty's reguardfull love: the good trial of prowess, wisdom,
judgment, clemency, beauty, compassion, the edification of your exemplar life.
Papist. 3. Supplicat. cap. 1.
Your Majesty's Candor and Clemency is known unto us, and by us blazed
throughout the Christian world. Ibidem.
Your heroical virtues are made notoriout by our tongues and pens. Papist.
5. Supplicat. cap. 7.
So magnanimious a Monarch as your Majesty is. Doctor Bishop against M.
Perkins in the Ep. Ded.
Your excellency, your high clemency, your exceeding clemency, mildness
and rare modesty. Ibidem.
So loving and affable a Sovereign, so learned. Epistle of the charitable
brother. fol. 9.
So profound, so mature in judgment. Papist. 4. Sup. Kellison in the Epist.
Dedic. to his Surucy
Your Majesty's direct title. Page 4. Supplic.
Your undoubted right. Bishop against Perkins in the Epist. Dedicat.
Your Majesty's deep wisdom and judgment. N. D. in his 3. Conuers. part. 1.
in the Dedicatorie Addition to the Catholics.
A Prince most like unto Constantine.

Again, Pap. 1. Suppl.
Your Majesty's peerless Mother. Pap. 2. Suppl.
The good Queen you Mother. Bishop against Perkins in the Epistie Dedicat.
toward the latter end.
Your most sacred and dear Mother. Pap. 2. Suppl.
Her title, her religion, her Princely virtues.

Pap. 4. Supplic.
Your blessed and renowned Mother. N.D. in his 3. Conuers. in the Dedicat.
Addition.
Such a Mother and such a Cause. Ibidem.
A Princess most like unto the Empress S. Helena.

Also, Pap. 4. Suppl. The Papists reproaching and re^^tling his Majesty.
The noblest disposition of our young Prince and his Brother; the rare virtues
of their Queen Mother, our most respected Princess. All which it is apparent
how hypocritically they are auerred by the Papists: seeing

Another while, full like themselves, they rail, and revile his Highness,
wishing him not Bishop against Perkins in the Dedicatorie Epi.
so heavily to persecute the Papists.

Yea and sometimes they plainly threaten and terrify his Grace. The Papists
threatening of the State;
These unjust courses of theirs (the Protestants) have bred deepest
discontentments and very mortal injuries within the Realm, which certainly
had now broke forth to the destruction of many, if hope conceived of your
gracious Clemency and redress had not made the stay. Here, by the way, the
wise Reader may consider what it was, that detained the Papists from their
intended tumults and rebellion against his Majesty at his first entrance,
notwithstanding their great show of applause and joy: was it not Hope of
redres? etc. and when this Hope is taken from them, they will fall to their old
plots and practices again against the State and his Highness Person, for all
their pretense of Loyalty and Submission. And of his Highness.
And indeed so much they seem to insinuate in express terms, saying. Bishop
against Perkins in the Dedicatorie Epist. not far from the end.
And when they (the Papists) shall see No HOPE of remedy, the state being now
settled, and a continual posterity like to ensue of one nature and condition:
God knows what that forceable weapon of necessity may constrain and drive
men unto at length. Behold the loyalty and fidelity of Papists! But (God be
praised) his Majesty need not fear these pyrgopolinizing Champions, for all
their desperate threats and big looks. He that has more then ordinarily
preserved his Highness, His Majesty's strange preservation and deliverance.
and delivered him from manifold imminent dangers ever from his infancy
hitherto (which great effects are commonly never wrought but to great ends) and
now has settled the Crown upon his head, will doubtless defend and keep him
hereafter, for effecting those ends wherefore he was so strangely preserved,
which (I hope) are Civil and Ecclesiastical Unity amongst his Subjects, The
Ends wherefore his Ma. was so preserved.
the establishing of the British Monarchy, and the razing (at least) the
deadly wounding of Popish Idolatry. The one whereof, by Gods great blessing,
his Majesty has in manner already performed: The other, by Gods grace, using
the ordinary means he is shortly to effect.

The increase of Papists in this Kingdom.
In the mean time, it is certain that Papists, upon what false grounds I know
not, (considering his Majesty's heroical and constant Resolution to maintain
the purity of the Gospel) brag much of their number and multitudes within
this Kingdom, whereby they have increased their malicious zeal, in so much as
they seem to be even almost ready to break forth into actual Rebellion. I
will not speak of the multitude of pestilent Books, which they have lately
brought into the Realm, to move Sedition; nor of the flocking hither from
beyond the Sea of whole swarms of Jesuits and Priests, besides two
Benedictine Prouincialls, with their fellow Locustes, who are said to have
shared the Kingdom betwixt them, to prepare the people for their purpose; nor
of their laboring to alienate the common peoples affection from their loyalty
toward his Majesty; nor of their pernicious Libelling against the State; nor
yet of their Insolency and Rage toward the persons of some particular
Ministers and others that stood in their way: Only their fury and malice may
be partly gathered by their outrageous and enormous fact lately committed at
Enborne in Barkeshire, Ontragious parts plated by the Papists as Enborne in
Barkeshire.
as may appear by this parcel of the Libell they left behind them, in the
Church; which in perpetual detestation of their insolent Libelling-spirit I
thought good here to insert, as follows. A fragment of a Papish Libell.


And now what we be, if any would know,
Catholics we are, and so do auow.
The Seruice-Booke here scattered all,
Is not divine, but heretical.
So is the Bible of false translation,
To cut and mangle it, is no damnation.
The Register also if so we do serve,
We serve it no other, then it does deserve.
For why should new Heretics be thus enrold,
Enrole good Catholics long dead of old.
Out with new Heretics, hence let them go,
Register Catholics, and register no mo.
For Catholics only are worthy record,
Into Church-register to be restord.
The Papists violent carriage an argument of their imminent ruin.
This violent carriage of the Papists in time of their restraint, as it does
sufficiently declare their more then Diabolical audacitie, if they had
liberty granted them: so unto me, it is an evident argument of their imminent
ruin; For in deadly diseases, it is commonly seen, that before the period of
death, the patient is wont to receive some small strength, which unto the
unskillful gives hope of perfect recovery, but unto the learned Physician, as
the extremest endeavor of Nature, is an infallible token of certain death.

To this end, at the commandment of such whom in the Lord I am bound to obey
in all things, I have penned this subsequent Tractate, wherein I have proved
the Vnlawfullnesse and Danger of Toleration of promiscuous profession of diverse
Religions, as well by Laws, Divine and Humane; as also by Reason and the
woeful Experience of such as ever found themselves deluded by human
Prudence, or Policy.

Of Toleration of Heretics.
If any man shall ask, whether I think it altogether unlawful for a Christian
Prince in any case to tolerate Heretics, within his dominions, where true
Religion is settled: I answer, that I think I have manifestly proved in this
Treatise, that the exercise of a contrary Religion ought not to be admitted;
because it provoke the indignation and wrath of GOD against the whole Land,
exposes orthodoxe Christians unto the danger of Gods revenging fury, and
breeds contempt of Religion.

Of Heretics cohabitatio^ amongst true Christians.
But if Question be made concerning the cohabitation only of such with us: I
answer, that submitting my self, I willingly commit that unto the grauer
judgment of such as have experience of public affairs, and exact knowledge
of all Antiquity: albeit I am persuaded, that all Christian Princes ought
carefully to labor, as much as in them lies, that Heretics do not inhabit
together with Orthodoxe Christians: they should weigh whether Religion, the
Church, and Commonwealth by mutual exchange receive any thing which may more
benefit them. So that I think, Note will.
only Civil and Politic Reasons, as the profit of some City or Province,
greater gain in traffic, enlargement of buildings, or increase of revenues,
are not to be regarded in this case; if they be compared with the mischievous
and wilful contempt of Ecclesiastique and Civil Magistrates, and with the
certain danger of corrupting good Citizens, who can hardly touch pitch, and
not be defiled therewith: especially by such as are wholly bent to pervert and
infect as well their own children and friends, as their fellow-citizens and
neighbors. Almighty God, Lord of Heaven and Earth, of his infinite mercy and
love in Jesus Christ, give his Church rest, and deliver us from this great
plague of Popish Heresy. Amen. Farewell good Reader.

London-House, this 18. of May. 1605. Thine ever in the Lord JESUS CHRIST,
Gabriel Powel.

The unlawfulness and danger of Toleration of diverse Religions, and Conniuency
to contrary Worship in one Monarchy or Kingdom.
CHAP. I. Of the diversity of Opinions concerning Pacification.
Diverse opinions concerning Pacification.
DIVERSE have been the proiects, devises and practices of sundry men, to
redress the difference in Religion and disparitie of worship, which now for
many ages have vexed the Christian world.

Some have thought it necessary that the common Cause were debated in a free,
I A general Council.
lawful and general Council. Which would to God we might see so assembled
and ordered by Christian Princes, as the WORD OF GOD prevailing, and all our
Controversies taken away; there might be but one flock and one fold, as there
is but one Shepherd Christ Jesus. But this cannot be obtained of the adverse
party, without most unjust and unequal conditions, of appointing him to be
the judge of our cause, whom we are to charge before Almighty GOD, No man ought
to be Judge in his own cause.
his holy Angels, and his whole Parliament of Saints, to be the very same great
ANTICHRIST, whom the Scriptures foretold should come for just punishment of the
wicked, who have not received the love of the truth; and the very head of that
great Whore, which has made all kingdoms drunk with the cup of her
fornications. Wherefore seeing such a free and lawful assembly cannot be had,
we must remitte our selves to the Great Day of trial, when Christ shall come
with thousands of his mighty Angels to judge the quick and the dead, and
before Saints and Angels, before Heaven and Earth (all Creatures bearing
witness of his Justice) give sentence according to his written-word on our
side against our adversaries.

Others imagined that the difference between both Religions is not so great,
but that there might be a Reconciliation made between them without any great
difficulty: II. Reconciliation.
that we dissent but only in sophistical captions of words and terms: and
that but for the humors of the Divines of both side, all things might be
composed very easily. But these drones and dreamers, because they think there
may be an agreement between Christ and Antichrist, light and darkness, truth
and falsehood, God and the Devil, I will remit until some other day of
hearing, as being unworthy in this place (where breuity is intended, and other
more necessary points to be handled) to receive their answer.

III. Toleration.
A third sort there are, who to take away all contrary profession, to extirpate
heresies, to repress schisms, to restrain sects, and to procure unity in
Religion, judge this the only means, to wit, to permit the promiscuous use of
all Religions, to tolerate all Sects, to abandon no Heretic or profession
whatsoever. Which wicked devise how contrary it is unto the Word of GOD, and
the rule of reason; how abhorrent from all examples of former ages and states;
and how pernicious unto the Commonwealth, I will (God willing) declare in as
few words and with as much perspicuitie as may be.

CHAP. II. Reasons against Toleration and Permission of diverse Religions, out
of the Old Testament.
Toleration wicked and unlawful proved out of the Old Test. Moses.
1 IN the Old Testament, all communion and society with Idolaters, heretics
and schismatiques is utterly forbidden and prohibited. Hence it is that Moses
spoke unto the Congregation, Depart from the tents of these wicked men (Korah,
Dathan and Abiram) and touch nothing of theirs, least you perish in all their
sins. Numb. 16.26.

2 It is commanded in the Law, that the false Prophet and the seducing
Idolater, whether he be our brother, or son, or daughter, or wife, or friend;
should be taken away from amongst us and slain, that all Israel may hear, and
see, and fear, and not dare to commit the like. Thou shall not consent unto
him (says the Text) nor hear him, neither shall thine eye pity him, nor
show mercy, nor keep him secret: But thou shall even kill him: thine hand
shall be first upon him to put him to death, and then the hands of all the
people, etc. Deuteronomy. 13.1. and seqq.

3 Again, There shall not be amongst you man nor woman, nor family, nor tribe
which shall turn his heart away this day from the Lord our God, to go and serve
the gods of these Nations: there shall not be amongst you any root that
brings forth Gall and Wormwood. Deuteronomy. 29.18.

4 Hitherto appertains that for the fact of Achan who took of the
excommunicate things being sacrificed unto Idols, the Children of Israel could
not stand before the face of their enemies. Josh. 7.1.5. And God threatened he
would be no more with them except they would destroy the peccant and guilty
person from amongst them. Josh. 7.12.

5 This anger of God the Israelites feared, in so much as when the Reubenites,
the Gadites and the half tribe of Manasses, whose lot fell beyond the river,
built themselves an Altar upon the borders of Jordan; they came to war
against them with this exprobration: Have we too little wickedness of Peor,
whereof we are not cleansed unto this day, though a Plague came upon the
congregation of the Lord? Ye also are turned away this day from the Lord: and
seeing ye rebel this day against the Lord, even to morrow he will be wroth
with all the Congregation of Israel. Notwithstanding if the land of your
possession be unclean, come ye over unto the Land of the possession of the
Lord, wherein the Lords Tabernacle dwells, and take possession among us; but
rebel not against the Lord, nor rebel against us in building you an Altar,
besides the Altar of the Lord our God. Josh. 22.17.18.19. But when the other
excused themselves, that they built the Altar, not for sacrifices and
offerings, but only for a witness, then were the Israelites contented and
their anger appeased.

6 Neither do the Scriptures forbid us only the company and society of our
Brethren which were Idolaters and Heretics, but also of any Stranger
dwelling among us, and of our Neighbors about us. Take good heed unto your
selves that you love the Lord you God: Else, if you go back and cleave unto
the rest of these Nations, that is, of them which remain with you, and shall
make marriages with them, and go to them and they to you: Know you for
certain, that the Lord your God will cast out no more of these Nations from
before you, but they shall be a snare and destruction unto you, and a whip on
your sides and thorns in your eyes, until you perishout of this good Land,
which the Lord your God has given you. Josh. 23.11.12.13.

7 Hereupon after the death of Joshua, The Book of Judges.
when the Israelites had made a league with the Cananites, an Angel of the
Lord came up from Gilgal to Bochim, saying in the person of God, I promised
that I would never break my covenant with you; so that you made no covenant
with the Inhabitants of this Land, but break down their Altars: But you have
not obeyed my voice. Why have you done this? Wherefore I will not cast them out
before you, but they shall be as thorns unto your sides, and their gods shall
be your destruction. Judge. 2.2.3.

By the example of Kings.
8 Diverse was the estate of the Kings of Israel and Judah, according as they
walked with God, prospering when they trusted in God and worshipped him purely
and sincerely: and decaying when they forsook him, and corrupted the
sincerity of Gods worship and Religion. The Kingly Prophet David exhorts
Kings to be wise, David.
and Judges to be well advised that they worship GOD and his Anointed,
denouncing to the Adversaries the Almighty power of Christ, to the confusion
of all that set themselves against him. Psalm. 2.10.11.12.

9 And for himself, speaking of Idolaters, he protests saying: Their
offerings of blood will I not offer, neither make mention of their names with
my lips. Psalm. 16.4. Wherefore this godly King had a very prosperous reign,
and good success in all things, as himself often acknowledges. 1. Sam. 15.
Psalm. 18.2. Sam. 22.

10 King Solomon, Solomon.
his Son, because he fully established the service of God according to all
that had been commanded by the Prophets, the Lord also established his seat,
and increased his glory above all the Kings of the earth: till he began to
decline from the Lord his God, and brought the abominable Idols of the Strange
women whom he loved into his Kingdom and houses. 1. King. 10. Then the Lord
raised up his Servant against him; who also in the days of his Son, so rent
away the ten tribes of Israel from the house of David, that they never returned
unto it again.

11 Rehoboam, Salomons Son, Rehoboam.
because he permitted Judah to corrupt true Religion, to make them high places
and Images, and groves on every high hill and under every green tree;
therefore Shishak King of Egypt came up against Jerusalem, and took the
treasures of the house of the Lord, and the treasures of the Kings house, and
took away all. etc. 1. King. 14.23.25.

12 Abiiah the Son of Rehoboam because he walked in his Fathers sins,
Abiiah.
and was polluted with Idols had continual war with Jeroboam King of Israel.
1. King. 15.3.7.

13 But this Abiiah objected against Jeroboam that he could not prosper,
because he had erected Idols in his kingdom, and had made him Priests
contrary to the Law, and assured himself of Gods assistance against him; for
this reason, because they had the Lord for their God, who was their Captain,
and his lawful Priests the Sons of Aaron sounding the Lords trumpets in the
field before them. Therefore says he, O ye children of Israel, fight not
against the Lord God of your Fathers; for ye shall not prosper. And accordingly
it is added that the Israelites were overcome, having five hundred thousand men
of war slain: and the Jews were strengthened, because they rested upon the
Lord God of their Fathers. 2. Chron. 13. throughout.

14 Asa, Asa.
his Son, one while prospered, when he put away all the Idols that his Father
had made; and then decayed, when he followed the vain discourse of flesh and
blood, and sought unto the Assyrians for help. 1. King. 15.10. 2. Chron. 14.1.
etc.

15 Iehoshaphat the Son of Asa prospered and grew up on high, Ichoshaphat.
because he lifted up his heart unto the ways of the Lord, and took away the
high mountains and groves out of Judah. 2. Chron. 17.6.12. Notwithstanding he
is reproved for his affinity and society with wicked Achab King of Israel.
2. Chron. 19.2.

16 Amasiah, Amasiah.
because he obeyed not the Prophet, but defiled himself with Idolatry, heard
this saying, I know that the Lord has determined to destroy thee, because thou
have done this. 2. Chron. 35.16.

17 The same thing also caused Azariah or Vzziah first to fall into sin,
Azariah.
and then to become a leper. 2. King. 15.4.5. 2. Chron. 26.

18 It was an objection against Iotham the son of Azariah, Iotham.
and a great fault laid to his charge, 2. King. 15.35. Ahaz.
as also unto Ahaz, his son, 2. King. 16.4. and to Manasses after his
repentance, 2 Chronicles. 33.17. that they took not away the high places.

19 Ezechiah, Ezechiah.
because he took away the high places, and brake the images, and cut down the
groves, and brake in pieces the brazen Serpent, and trusted in the Lord God of
Israel; deserved this commendation, that after him there was none like him
among all the Kings of Judah, neither were there any such before him. 2. King.
18.4.5.

20 Manasses, Manasses.
his Son, falling into Idolatry, was carried away prisoner into Babylon: but
humbling himself, and praying unto GOD, he was restored again to his
kingdom, which he purged from Idolatrous worship. 2. Chron. 23.11.12.15.
Albeit it was a blemish unto him that he took not away the high places, as we
have noted before.

21 Notable is the history of King Josiah, Josiah.
who did uprightly in the sight of the Lord, walked in all the ways of David,
and bowed neither to the right hand nor to the left, who read the law before
the people, put down the Idols, killed their Priests, destroyed the Coniurers,
and at last was mercifully taken away, that his eyes should not see all the
evil which the Lord was to bring upon Jerusalem. 2. King. 22. and 23.
throughout. also 2. Chron. 34. and 35.

22 Nebuchadnezzar when he had seen the power of God in the delivery of
Shadrach, Nebuchadnezzar.
Meshach, and Abednago, made this decree, saying: I make a decree that every
nation, people and language which speak any blasphemy against the God of
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednago, shall be drawn in pieces, and their houses
shall be made a iakes. Dan. 3.29.

23 King Darius seeing Daniel strangely delivered from the Lions den, Darius.
made this decree, that all people, nations and languages in the world, should
reverence and fear the God of Daniel. Dan. 6.25.26.

24 The King of Nineveh compelled the whole City to humble themselves before
God, King of Niniuth.
to turn from their evil way, and from the wickedness that was in their
hands. Jonah. 3.6. and seqq.

25 Jeroboam King of Israel, Jeroboam.
knowing that unity in Religion would turn the hearts of the people to the
obedience of Rehoboam; brought in new worship, and caused them to commit
Idolatry. And Jeroboam thought in his heart, (says the text) Now shall the
kingdom return to the house of David. If this people go up and do sacrifice
in the house of the Lord at Jerusalem, then shall the heart of this people
turn again unto their Lord, even to Rehoboam King of Judah: so shall they
kill me and go again to Rehoboam King of Judah: Whereupon the king took
counsel, and made two calves of gold, and said unto them, It is too much for
you to go up to Jerusalem, Behold, o Israel, thy gods which brought thee up
out of the land of Egypt; and he set the one in Bethel, and the other in Dan.
1. King. 12.26.27.28.29. Whereupon the Children of Judah were interdicted their
company.

26 And of the Prophets. A man of God.
And when a Prophet sent from Judah, did but go in unto another Prophet sent
from Judah, did but go in unto another Prophet in Bethel to eat bread, he was
slain by a Lion as he returned homeward. 1. King. 13.24.

27 The Prophet Elias could not endure mixture of Religion, but exhorted the
people to one Religion, saying; How long halt you between two opinions? If the
Lord be God, follow him; but if Baal be he, then go after him. 1. King. 18.21.

28 The Lord says by the Prophet Zephaniah; Zephaniah.
I will stretch out mine hand upon them that worship, and swear by the Lord,
and swear by Malcham. Zephan. 1.5.

Hosea, Amos and Micah.
29 Hoseah, Amos, and Micah, directed their Prophecies against the tribe of
Ephraim, or Samaria, with whom Judah had made a league.

30 I will add this one out of the Apocrypha, that Judas Macchabeus being
always a Conqueror, as soon as he had made a league with the Romans, was
presently overcome and perished; and his Brethren, when they had renewed their
friendship with them and with the Spartanes, never prospered in batraile. 1.
Macch. cap. 1. and 9. and 12. and 14. and 16.

These and infinite such like auctorities and examples, declare that purity of
Religion and true piety are the foundation of all true wisdom and policy,
and the cause of all happy success and prosperity: and that impiety,
idolatry, heresy, corruption and mixture of diverse Religions, what show so
ever it has of outward commodity and profit for a season; yet indeed and in
the end to be the very cause of ruin and overthrow to all estates and
kingdoms.

CHAP. III. Reasons against Toleration and Permission of diverse Religions out
of the New Testament.
Toleration unlawful by the New Test.
Neither is the New Testament any thing more favorable herein, then the Old;
for GOD is jealous of his honor as well in the one as in the other, and cannot
endure any corruption, or false worship.

1 That saying is well known, Christ.
The Jews meddle not with the Samaritanes, Ioh. 4.9. Wherefore Christ
commanded his Disciples saying; Into the cities of the Samaritanes enter ye
not. Matthew. 10.5.

2 Christ will have all obstinate Heretics and Idolaters to be solemnly
excommunicated out of the Church; If he refuse to hear the Church, let him be
unto thee as an heathen man and a Publican. Matt. 18.17.

3 Again, Christ says; Beware of false Prophets, which come unto you in
sheep clothing, Matthew. 7.15. Take heed and beware of the leaven of the
Pharisees and Sadduces, Matt. 16.6. Take heed that no man deceive you, for many
shall come in my name. Matthew. 24.4. Many false Prophets shall arise and shall
deceive many, Matthew. 24.11.

4 The Apostles in like manner, diligently inculcate the same doctrine. Paul.
I beseech you, brethren, (says Paul) mark them diligently which cause
division and offenses contrary to the doctrine which you have learned, and
avoid them. For they that are such serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their
own bellies, and with fair speech and flattering deceive the hearts of the
simple. Romans 16.17.18.

5 Again, I beseech you, brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that
you all speak one thing, and that there be no dissentions among you: but be ye
knit together in one mind, and in one judgment etc. 1. Cor. 10. Where he
reproves the schism of such as term themselves of Paul's side, or of
Apollos, or of Cephas.

6 Furthermore, Purge the old leven, 1. Cor. 5.7. What fellowship has
righteousness with unrighteousness? And what communion has light with
darkness? And what concord has Christ with Belial? Or what part has the
believer with the Infidel? And what agreement has the Temple of God with
Idols? 2. Cor. 6.14.15.16.

7 Also, If an Angel from heaven preach unto you otherwise than that which we
have preached, let him be accursed. If any man preach unto you otherwise then
you have received, let him be accursed. Gal. 1.8.9.

8 And, Be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage. Would to God they
were even cut off, which do disquiet you. Galat. 5.1.12.

9 To the Philippians he writes, Beware of dogs, beware of evil workers,
beware of the concision. For many walk, of whom I have told you often, and
now tell you weeping, that they are the enemies of the cross of Christ.
Philip. 3.2.18.

10 Likewise to the Thessalonians, We warn you, brethren, in the name of our
lord Jesus Christ, that you withdraw your selves from every Brother that
walks inordinately, and not after the instruction which he received of us. 2 Thessalonians. 3.6. How can such be avoided if they be promiscuously permitted in the
same society?

11 And to Timothy, Stay profane and vain bablings, for they shall increase
unto more ungodliness: And their word shall fret as a Canker: of which sort is
Hymineus and Philetus, which as concerning the truth have erred from the mark.
2. Tim. 2.16.17.18. And, Alexander the Copper-smith has done me much evil,
the Lord reward him according to his works: Of whom be thou ware also, for he
withstood our preaching sore. 2. Tim. 4.14.15.

12 But most plainly to Titus, Reject him that is an Heretic after once or
twice admonition: Knowing that he that is such is perverted and sins, being
damned of his own self. Tit. 3.10.11.

13 The Apostle Peter says. Peter.
Ye therefore, beloved, seeing you know these things before, beware least ye
be also plucked away with the error of the wicked, and fall from your own
steadfastness. 2. Pet. 3.17.

14 John wills us: John.
If there come any unto you, and bring not this doctrine, receive him not to
house, neither bid him God-speed. For he that bids him God-speed, is
partaker of his evil deeds. 2. John. 10.11.

15 In the Apocalypse the Lord writing unto the Angels or Bishops of the seven
Churches of Greece; commends the first, of Ephesus, because he could not
bear with them which are evil, and had examined them which said they were
Apostles and were not, and had found them liars; also, because he hated the
works of the Nicolaitans. Apoc. 2.2.6.

16 But he reproves the third, of Pergamus, because he suffered them which
taught the doctrine of Baalam, which taught Balac to put a stumbling block
before the children of Israel, that they should eat of things sacrificed unto
Idols, and commit fornication; to wit, which maintained the doctrine of the
Nicolaitans. Apoc. 2.14.15.

17 And the fourth likewise, of Thyatyra, because he permitted the woman
Iezabel to teach and to deceive his Servants, to make them commit fornication,
and to eat meats sacrificed unto Idols. Apoc. 2.20.

18 Finally, he reproves the seventh, of Laodicea, because he was Lukewarm,
neither hoate nor cold. This Bishop was a true picture of Neutralitie: Such
also are they who permit toleration of diverse Religions, and seriously embrace
none at all, whom God will spue out of his mouth. Apocal. 3.15.16.

CHAP. IIII. Reasons against Toleration and Permission of diverse Religions,
out of the Ancient Canons, Councels and writings of the Fathers of the
Primitive Church.
Toleration unlawful, proved by
SO far are the Ancient Canons, the Decrees of Councels, and the primitive
Pastors of Gods Church from admitting any mixture in Religion, any communion
or collusion with Heretics and Idolaters, that they seriously condemn the
same, accursing all Heretics, their abettours and favorers: as may be
obuious and plain unto any man that will vouchsafe to peruse these places,
which, to avoid prolixitie, we will but only point at.

1 That which is more obscurely intimated in those Canons, which are termed,
Canons.
the Canons of the Apostles, Can. 11. and 45. Clement Bishop of Rome does
plainly set down, in his Apostolical Constitutions, alleging diverse places
of Scriptures, which we have cited before. Clem. lib. 6. cap. 13.18. and 26.

2 Hereunto add the Canons of the Eliberine Council, Can. 6. of Chalcedon,
Councels.
Can. 14. and of the sixth Synod, Can. 72. also of the Laodicean Council, Can.
31.32.33. of the fourth a Carthage, Can. 71.72. and of the sift Synod at
Constantinople, Sub finemsess. 3.

3 Now let us hear the ancient Fathers speak. Fathers.
Tertullian says, Tertullian.
Heretics must be compelled, not prayed to do their duty: for Heresy is
not to be persuaded, but to be over come by rigor. Tertul. Scorpiac. aduers.
Gnost. Cap. 2.

4 Athanasius has these words. Athanssius.
Arius, Eudoxius, and Patrophilus, when they write such things (Heresies) How,
I pray you, are they not worthy of all punishments? Athanas. de Syn. Arim.
Seleuc. and alijs. Vide Apolog. 11. and Epist. ad Solitarios.

5 Augustine has very excellent sayings to this purpose. Augustine.
Think thou (says he to Vincentius) No man ought to be forced to
righteousness, when as thou read that the Master said to his Servants,
COMPEL ALL THAT YOU FIND TO COME IN? And also that Paul was forced to receive
and embrace the truth by the great and violent compulsion of Christ, except
thou judge goods and lands dearer unto men than their eyes? August. Epist. 48.
Again, Where is now (says he to Bonifacius) that, which these [Donatistes]
harp at so much? It is free for a Man to believe, or not to believe: what
violence did Christ use? whom did he compel? Behold Paul, let them note in him
Christ first compelling, afterward teaching; first striking, then comforting.
Let them not mislike that they be forced, but examine whereto they be forced.
August. Epist. 50. And citing that part of the 2. Psalm. Be wise ye Kings,
understand ye that judge the earth, serve the Lord in fear. But how do Kings
serve the Lord? (says he) They serve him one way as they are men, and another
way as they are Kings: as they be men, they serve him by living faithfully; and
as they be Kings, when they forbid and punish with religious severity those
things which are done against the Commandments of God. As Ezechiah did serve
him, by destroying the groves and temples of Idols; as Josiah did, in doing the
same things; as the King of Nineveh did, forcing the whole City to please God;
as Darius did, by delivering the Idol into the power of Daniel to be broken;
as Nabuchodonozor did, restraining all his subjects from blaspheming God, by a
terrible and dreadful decree. August. Epist. 50. And a little after he adds;
What man in his right mind will say unto Kings; Care not you how in your
Kingdoms the Church of God be either magnified or impugned, for it
appertains not unto you, who be either religious, or sacrilegious; seeing he
cannot say unto him, It appertains not unto you, who within your kingdom be
either honest or dishonest. Aug. Ibid. Furthermore, Gaudentius his reason, that
the peace of Christ invited such as were willing, but forced no man unwilling,
Augustine refuteth in this wise: Where you think that none must be forced
against their wills, you are deceived, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the
power of God, which makes those willing at last, which were unwilling at
first. Did the Ninevites repent against their wills, because they did it at the
compulsion of their King? What needed the Kings commandment, that all men
should humbly submit themselves to God, but that there were some amongst them,
which neither would have regarded nor believed Gods message, had they not been
terrified by the Kings edict? This Princely power and authority gives many
men occasion to be saved, which though they were violently brought to the feast
of the great house-holder, yet being once compelled to come in, they find
there good cause to rejoice that they did enter against their wills. August:
contr. 2 Gaudentij Epist. lib. 2. cap. 17. And against Cresconius he says,
Kings serve God in this as it is commanded them, if within their dominions they
command that good be done, and forbid evil to be done, not only in those
things which appertain to humane society, but also in those things which
appertain to Divine Religion. Aug. lib. 4. contr. Crescon. Grammat. lib. 2.
And when Petilian objected that no man must be forced by laws to do well, or
to believe; Augustine replieth; To Faith indeed may no man unwilling be
forced, but yet by Gods justice or rather mercy, the breath of Faith is
chastened with the rod of affliction. Because the best things are freely
chosen with good liking; must not therefore ill deeds be punished by sincere
laws? You are not forced to do well by those Laws that are made against you,
but forbidden to do evil. Preposterous were discipline to revenge your evil
living; but when you first contemn the doctrine that teaches you to do well.
And even they which make laws to bridle your headdines, are they not those,
which bear the sword, as Paul speaks, not without cause, being Gods
Ministers and executors of wrath on him that does ill? August. contra liter as
Petiliani, lib. 2. cap. 83. Who list to be farther satisfied that Christian
Princes may and ought to compel their Subjects to the worship of God
prescribed in his word, and punish the refusers, let him read at large the
places above quoted in this Father.

6 Jerome treating upon that place of the Apostle, Jerome.
A little leven leueneth the whole lump, says; Leven is but a small thing, a
thing of nothing, but when it has corrupted the whole lump, by his vigor
whatsoever it be mingled with, is converted into the nature of it. Even so
perverse doctrine having his beginning from one, at first finds scarce two or
three admirers, but by little and little the canker creeps into the body,
according to the vulgar proverb, One scabbed sheep infecteth a whole flock:
Wherefore as soon as the spark appears, it must presently be extinguished;
the leven must be removed from the whole lump, the rotten flesh must be cut
off, and the scabbed sheep chased away from the fold; least the whole house,
lump, body and sheep, do burn, corrupt, putrify, perish. Arius in
Alexandria was but one little spark, but because he was not presently
oppressed, the flame thereof consumed the whole world. Hieronym. Comm. in Cap.
5, ad Galat.

7 Gregory Nazianzene says, Greg. Nazianzene.
When impiety begins to show it self openly, we must resist it as much as
we may, by sword, fire, or any other means, least we be partakers of the evil
leven, or consent unto such as be infected with pernicious doctrine. Greg.
Nazianzen. in Orat. propace. Again in another place, Cut off the Arian
impiety, cut off the pernicious error of Sabellius. This I say unto the
laymen, this I say unto the Clergy; and this I say unto the Magistrates. My
words fighting for the holy Trinity shall not have as much efficacy, as thy
Edict shall, if thou will repress such as are infected with pernicious
opinions. Nazian. Homil. in dict. Euang. vide etiam Epist. ad Nectar.

8 I can not stand upon particulars; Ambrose.
The Reader may peruse these places. Ambros. Epist. 32. ad Valent. Imp. Idem
Orat. ad Auxentium de Basilicis non tradendis. Chrysostom
Item in Cap. 10. Lucae. Chrysostom. Homil. de Auarit. Optatus Mileuit.
Irenaeus. Cyprian.
sub finem Tom. 5. Optat. Mileuit. contra Parm. lib. 3. Iren. aduers. Haeres.
lib. 3. Cap. 3. quem citat Eusebius lib. 4. cap. 13. and Niceph. lib. 3. cap.
30. Cyprian. Epist. 55.64.73.74. and 76. Item lib. de lapsis, de Unit Eccles.
tribus locis, ac Test. ad Quir. lib. Origin. And Cyrill. Alexandr.
3. cap. 78. Orig. in Apolog. Pamphili, and contra Celsum. Cyrill. Alexandr.
lib. 1. Quod vnus est Christus.

CHAP. V. Reasons against Toleration and Permission of diverse Religions, from
the ancient Fathers practice and carriage in their examplar lives.
Toleration unlawful by the Fathers practice. John the Euang.
1 WORTHY the noting is that saying of S. John the Evangelist, when he found
Cerinthus in the bath: Let us fly hence, least the Bath wherein is Cerinthus
the Adversary of the truth, do presently fall down upon us, and we perish: as
Irenaeus testifies, who says that he heard it of the mouth of Poly carpus S.
John's disciple. Iren. aduers. Haeres. lib. 3. cap. 3.

2 Who adds also, Polycarpus.
that Polycarpus, when Marcion the Heretic met him and said, Do thou know
me? answered; I know thee to be the first begotten Son of Satan. So much
(says Irenaeus) did the Apostles and their Disciples fear, that they would
not communicate, no not in words and speech only, with those that adulterated
the truth. Iren. ibid. vide Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. lib. 3. cap. 22. and lib. 4.
cap. 17. Niceph. lib. 3. cap. 3. and Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 19.

3 Furthermore, Irenaeus says, that when Polycarpus heard any heretical
speeches, he presently exclaimed, O good God, into what times have thou
reserved me, that I should endure these things! and so with all speed would
fly away from the place where he sat or stood hearing such things. Epist. ad
Florinum.

Some Orthodox Christians.
4 Apollinaris reports, that in the times of persecution, when some Orthodoxe
and catholic Christians were conuented together with some other infected with
the heresy of the Cataphrygians, to give testimony unto the faith; they
dissented from them very much, and least they should any way seem to give
consent unto the mad and furious Spirit of Montanus and of those women his
consorts, they could never be induced to communicate with them, no not unto the
last gasp. Apud Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 15.

5 Origin utterly refused to come to prayers together with Paul the Heretic
(as I think Samosatenus) and that because from his childehoode he had
religiously and diligently observed that Canon of the Church against
Heretics, Origin.
and always detested the doctrine of error. Apud Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 3.

6 Dionysius Alexandrinus says, Dionys. Alexandr. and Heraclas.
that he received a Canon of Heraclas the Bishop, that such as were accused and
convicted to converse much with Heretics defending strange and erroneous
opinions, were excommunicated out of the Church. Apud Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 6.

7 According unto this Canon, Marcellus.
Marcellus Bishop of Ancyra, being as yet Catholic and Orthodoxe, would by no
means be present at the Councels of Tire and Jerusalem; nor at the
consecration of the great Temple at Jerusalem built by Constantine; because he
would avoid the society and communion of the Arian Bishops. Zozom. lib. 2.
cap. 31.

8 So also Liberius Bishop of Rome, Liberius.
in an Epistle unto the Eastern Bishops, excludes from the communion of the
Church, all such as refused to curse Arius. Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 3.

9 Neither was Felix, Felix.
Liberius his successor, reprehended for any other cause, but because he used
the company and society of the Arians. Zozom. lib. 4. cap. 10.

The people of Alexandria.
10 Athanasius testifies of the people of Alexandria, that they chose to be
sick and endangered without visitation, rather than they would the Arians
should come and visit them. Athanas. ad Orthodox. depers. Also that some of
the vulgar sort, when they were whipped and scourged by the Arians for not
receiving their heresy, said; We communicate not with heretics, whip as long
as thou please, but God will judge thee for these things. Athanas. in Epist.
ad Solitar.

11 Placilla the Empress, Placilla.
when the Emperor Theodosius senior desired to confer with Eunomius,
dissuaded her husband very earnestly, least being perverted by his speeches he
might fall into heresy. Zozom. lib. 7. cap. 7.

The inhabitants of Samosetum.
10 Lastly, the Zeal of the Samosatenians is worthy commendation, who when
Eunomius the Arian, being their Bishop, was washing himself in the Bath,
notwithstanding he invited them to come in, yet would they not, but stood still
speaking never a word, which the Bishop took as if it had been done in honor
of him: But as soon as he arose, and came out of the Bath, the Samosatenians
thinking that the water was infected with heretical poison, let it all run
out into the sink, and commanded fresh water to be powered for them. Theod.
lib. 4. cap. 14. Cassiodor. Hist. Tripart. lib. 7. cap. 16.

CHAP. VI. Reasons against Toleration and Permission of diverse Religions, from
the Acts, Laws, Constitutions, Rescripts, Decrees and Edicts of Christian
Emperors.
Toleration improued by the law of Christian Emperors.
THe first Christian Emperors being persuaded that diverse Religions could not
be exercised and professed in a Monarchy, without tumults and commotions in
the Commonwealth, without certain detriment to their Empire, and great
prejudice to their government, enacted many severe and wholesome laws whereby
they abolished all discrepant worship and contrary religions.

1 Constantine the Great, Constantine.
as soon as he had embraced the Christian Profession, presently interdicted
Sacrifices to be offered unto Idols: and commanded that in every City and
region, the Idols should be pulled down and burned. Which Decree he afterward
ratified with many good Laws against all sorts and kinds of Idolatry:
whereupon many, even in those times began to pull down the Temples of the
Idols. Eusebius. de Vita Constant. lib. 2. cap. 44. and lib. 3. cap. 52. and seq.
and lib. 4. cap. 25. and 39. Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 14. Optat. Mileuit. lib. 2.
contr. Parmen.

2 In like manner, Constantine used no less severity against the several
Sects of Heretics: for having enfranchised the Christians, and made them free
by a public Decree; least the Heretics should think that the same freedom
appertained unto them also, for that they usurped the name of Christians, the
Emperor wrote unto Caecilianus Bishop of Carthage, that he had taken order
with Anylinus the Proconsull and Patritius his Vicegerent to restrain and
punish such insolent and obstinate refractaries. Eusebius. lib. 10. cap. 6.
Niceph. lib. 7. cap. 72. Unto this Law Augustine seems to allude, saying, The
same thing happened unto the Donatistes, which happened unto the Accusers of
Daniel; Lions devoured these, and laws them, by which they would have
oppressed the Innocent, (Caecilianus) unless through the mercies of Christ we
say that those laws are rather for them, which seem to be against them,
because by them many are corrected and healed. August. Epist. 50. ad Bonifac.
Again, Constantine was the first that ordained, that all their goods, that
should be convicted of heresy and obstinately resisted unity, should be
confiscate and sold. August. Epist. 48. ad Vincent. Yea, that the places of
their assemblies and meetings should be confiscate. August. Epist. 168. ad
Ianuar.

3 Again, Constantine disabled all Heretics to make a will of their goods,
or any way to bestow any thing upon any man: yea he made them incapable of any
legacies, or to enjoy any thing any way bestowed upon them. August. lib. 1.
contr. Parm. cap. 7. vlt. and contra. Petil. lib. 2. cap. 92.

4 Against the Arians he made this Edict; That for as much as Arius had chosen
the wicked whom he would imitate, it was good reason that he also should bear
ignominy and shame with the wicked: Wherefore, as Porphyrius for his impious
books against Religion, had received his reward, to be obnoxious unto eternal
reproach, and his writings burnt and buried in oblivion; Even so it pleases us
(says this good Emperor) that Arius and all his accomplices be termed
Porphyrians; and whatsoever books any of them have or shall compose, that they
be presently burned, and that if any man be deprehended to save or hide any of
Arius his books, he be immediately put to death. Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 6. Zozo.
lib. 1. cap. 20. Niceph. lib. 8. cap. 25.

5 Eusebius cites a prolixe Constitution of Constantine against all Sectaries
and Heretics whatsoever; wherein he utterly prohibiteth the exercise of their
religion, either in public or private places; commands their books to be
burnt, their goods to be sold, their houses to be pulled down, and
proscribeth them as Traitors to his person, and enemies to the Truth. Eusebius. de
Vit. Constant. lib. 3. cap. 62. and 63. Whereupon ensued the conversion of many
Heretics and Schismatiques, as Eusebius, Zozomenus, and Nicephorus testify.

Constantine, Constantius and Constans.
6 Constantine, Constantius and Constans, the Sons of Constantine the Great,
decreed that no Sect should have liberty to exercise or profess their
heresy; as Augustine records. August. Epist. 166.

Valentinian I.
7 Of Valentinianus I. Augustine speaking unto the Donatistes, says; Read what
Valentinianus has commanded and decreed against you. August. Epist. 166.

Gratian, Valentinian II. and Theodosius.
8 Gratianus, Valentinianus II. and Theodosius Mayor, enacted, that all people
within their dominions and jurisdiction, should unfeignedly embrace one
Religion, even the very same which Peter the Apostle taught the Romans, which
Damasus did then teach at Rome, and Peter at Alexandria: branding the contrary
professors with the odious name of heretics. Theodoret. lib. 5. cap. 2.
Zozom. lib. 7. cap. 4. Cod. Justin. lib. 1. tit. 1. de sum. Trin. l. 1. And in
the next law in this title, they ordain, That no Heretic shall in any place
bear office, to the end there might be given them no occasion to exercise the
madness of their obstinate minds. Also they antiquate and annihilate any
privilege or indulgence that they had by any special rescript fraudulently
extorted before. Cod. Justin. lib. 1. tit. 1. de sum. Trinit. l. 2.

9 Again, it is manifest out of Augustine, that Gratianus and Theodosius
enacted some decrees against the Donatistes. August. Epist. 166. And Sulpitius
Seuerus testifies that for Priscillianus his sake only, an Edict was granted
by Gratianus that all Heretics should be banished not only out of all
Churches, but also out of the confines of the Empire. Whereupon the Gnostique
Bishops, distrusting their estates, gave over willingly and departed, the
residue being dispersed for fear. Sulpit. Hist. sacrae lib. 2. n. 69. Also,
Theodosius banished Demophitus the Arian Bishop out of the Constantinopolitan
Churches. Zozom. lib. 7. cap. 5. Niceph. lib. 10. cap. 8. Vide etiam Cod.
Justin. lib. 1. tit. 5. de Haereticis. l. 2. Omnes vetitae.

10 Arcadius and Honorius the Sons of Theodosius, as also Constantius his
son in law, Arcadius, Honorius and Constantius.
persuading themselves, as Nicephorus witnesses, that Theodosius got all his
victories and other good success, because of his care for the Church, and
severity against Heretics, decreed as follows: We also by this our
Constitution do establish and ratify all pains, punishments and mulcts which
our noble Progenitor of worthy memory has ordained and decreed against the
pertinacious and obstinate Spirit of the Heretics. Niceph. lib. 13. cap. 1.
Cod. Theodos. l. 15. August. Epist. 166.

Theodosius Junior.
11 Theodosius Junior son of Arcadius, and Valentinianus III. Constantius his
Son, established the like decrees: Concerning all Heretics (whose errors
and names we execrate) that is, concerning the Eunomians, Arians, Macedonians,
and all others, whose sects we are ashamed to insert in our holy Sanction, who
have diverse names, but one perfidiousnesse: we command that those things be
ratified, observed and kept, which our happy Grandfather and Fathers have
ordained and decreed. Cod. Theodos. l. 51. Vide Ll. 35.36.43.46.56. Again,
There can be no cure adhibited unto desperate diseases: wherefore least these
damnable sects do spread further, we ordain by this our euer-during Sanction,
that their goods be confiscated, and that whosoever shall seduce any other man
by his perverse doctrine, Note well.
he be destinated to the punishment of blood. Cod. Theod. l. 46. Novel.
Theodos. de Iud. Haeret. and Page Lastly, they conclude their general Laws
against Heretics thus; We will and command all these laws to be so
straightly executed, that it shall not be lawful for any Judge to punish the
crimes delated unto him, either with no punishment at all, or with a less then
we have ordained, except he himself will suffer those things from which he
saved others. Cod. Theodos. l. 56.

12 Martianus the Emperor decreed that all Heretics should be repressed with
capital punishment, Martianus.
and their books and writings burned. Cod. Justin. lib. 1. cap. 5. de
Haereticis, lib. 8. Quicunque. 4. Nullum praeterea. Who list to read more of
his penal laws against Heretics, I refer them to these places. Euagr.
Hist. Eccles. lib. 2. cap. 1. Niceph. lib. 15. cap. 1. and 5. Concilior. tom.
2. page 215.

Leo I.
13 Leo I. as witness the Bishops of Egypt, ratified all the decrees of his
holy Predecessors for the Church against Heretics. Epist. ad Leon. Imp. lib.
1. T. 2. page 215.

Justin Senior.
14 So also did Justinius Senior; who besides cut out the tongue of Seuerus the
Heretic (who usurped the seat of Antioch) for his blasphemous heresy, and
caused him to save his life by flight. Niceph. lib. 17. cap. 2.

15 Justinian no sooner enjoyed the Empire, Justinian.
but presently composed matters touching Religion and banished all Sectaries.
And although Theodoricus King of the Gotthes, an Arian, earnestly solicited
the Emperor to grant the Arians liberty of their profession, and added
threats in case of refusal: yet notwithstanding the good Emperor nothing
appalled, continued still in his constant resolution. Paulus Diaconus lib. 18.
Niceph. lib. 17. cap. 9. Vide Justin. Novel. 42.

Justin Junior.
16 Justinius Junior held the same resolution and constancy, as appears by his
Epistle, registered by Nicephorus Callistus. Hist. Eccles. lib. 17. cap. 35.

Constantinus Pogonatus.
17 Constantinus Pogonatus confirming the Decrees of the sixth Synod, added
grievous penalties against the refractarie Heteroclites. Synod. 6. sess. 18.

18 Alexius the Emperor, Alexius.
is said to cause one Basilius, either a Physician or a Monk, to be burned for
Heresy at Constantinople.

King Edward the sixth.
19 Unto these I will add one memorable example of the worthy and famous Prince
King Edward the Sixth, of whom it is noted, to his great commendation, that few
or no Sermons were preached at his Court, but he would be at them; and again,
that he was never present at any commonly, but he would excerp or note them
with his own hand. This godly King being dealt with by his Counselors, that
the Lady Mary, his own Sister, which succeeded in the Kingdom, might be
tolerated to use her conscience in Religion; his Answer and resolution was
negative: So does Master Fox report in the Acts and Monuments in these words.
In the days of King EDWARD the VI. Carolus the Emperor made request to the
said King and his Counsel to permit Lady Mary to have Mass in her house
without prejudice of the Law. And the Counsel on a time, sitting upon matters,
of policy, having that in question, sent Cranmer then Archbishop of
Canterbury, and Ridley then Bishop of London, to entreat the King for the
same: Who coming to his Grace alleged their reasons and persuasions for the
accomplishing thereof. So the King hearing what they could say, replied his
answer again out of the Scriptures, so groundedly, gravely, and fully, that
they were enforced to give place to his replication, and grant the same to be
true. Then they after long debating in this manner with his Majesty, labored
politiquely in an other sort, and alleged what danger the denying thereof
might bring to his Grace, what breach of amity of the Emperors part, what
troubles, what unkindness, and what occasions sundry ways it would enforce,
etc. Unto whom the King answered, willing them to content themselves, for he
would (he said) spend his life and all he had, rather then to agree and grant
to that he knew certainly to be against the truth. The which when the Bishops
heard, notwithstanding they urged him still to grant, and would by no means
have his nay. Then the good King seeing their importunate suite, that needs
they would have his Majesty grant thereto, in the end his tender heart bursting
out in bitter weeping and sobbing, desired them to be content. Whereat the
Bishops themselves seeing his zeal and constancy, wept as fast as he, and
took their leave of his Grace: and coming from him, the Archbishop took
Master Cheke his Schoolmaster by the hand and said. Ah Master Cheke, you may
be glad all the days of your life, that you have such a Schooler, for he has
more Divinity in his little finger, then all we have in all our bodies. Thus
far Master Fox. Acts and Mon. Tom. 2. page 1295. Col. 2. edit. Anni 1583.

CHAP. VII. That most of these Laws against Toleration and mixture of diverse
Religions, were promulgated at the instance and request of the Ancient
Fathers. And that when the Emperors began to slack the execution of Justice,
to be indulgent and to collude with Heretics, they were either greatly
blamed, or, at least, admonished by them. Also the Cause wherefore some
Emperors were more conniuent and indulgent toward Heretics.
The Fathers procured Laws to be enacted against Toleration.
THESE Laws and Edicts against Heretics, were not only approved by the
Ancient Fathers: but, for the most part, enacted and decreed at their suite
and entreatie; as may be manifestly gathered, for that after every General
Synod new Laws were published by the Emperors against the new Heretics, no
doubt at the request of the said holy Fathers.

1 Aurelianus a heathen Emperor made a decree against Paulus Samosatenus, at
the request of the Fathers of the Synod at Antioch. Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. lib.
7. cap. 24. Niceph. lib. 6. cap. 29.

2 Constantine the Great, seeing he executed the sentence of the Nicene Synod
concerning the burning of Arius his books, at the instance of Alexander Bishop
of Alexandria, as Socrates, Zozomenus and Nicephorus do testify; Who doubts
but that by the instinct of the Fathers of the same Synod, he published that
Constitution against Arius, which he sent to all Bishops throughout the world?
Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 6. Zozom. lib. 1. cap. 20. Niceph. lib. 8. cap. 18. and 25.

3 Theodosius Mayor after that the Arian and Macedonian Heresies were condemned
in the second Oecumenicall Synod, and in the first at Constantinople, made a
Constitution, that the Arians should be expelled out of the Churches, and
whosoever did not acknowledge Christ to be equal with God his Father; and that
the Catholics should be substituted in their places, at the entreatie of the
Fathers of those assemblies. Niceph. lib. 12. cap. 13. and 15.

4 The same Emperor, at the request of the Ephesine Synod, published many
Edicts against Nestorius, whereby he banished him, caused his followers to be
termed Eunomian Heretics, decreed that his books should be burned: as is
manifest by the Councels Epistle unto the Emperors Theodosius and
Valentinianus. Ex actis Council. Ephesini ab Ant. Contio editis.

5 The 7. Council of Chalcedon, in their very Acts, exclaimed, Let Dioscorus
the Egyptian Heretic be banished: and wrote letters unto the Emperors
Valentinianus and Martianus, saying: This verily we teach your godly Empirie,
that you might consider both his (Dioscorus) malice, and the sincerity of the
just sentence (we take God to record) pronounced against him. For our parts, we
have done our duty, and we believe that you are most godly, and most
Christian Emperors, knowing the horror of your venerable authority against
evil men, and what care you have of Ecclesiastical peace. Upon the receipt of
which letters, those severe laws were decreed against the Heretics, which
are registered among the acts of the said Council. Act. 2. Council. Chalced.
Tom. 2. Council. Act. 3. and 16.

6 But if at any time the holy Fathers saw the Emperors minds changed, or any
thing inclined to remissness toward. Heretics, or any way to collude or
favor them, they presently dissuaded them, sometimes by mild admonitions, and
sometimes by seuerer increpations and censures. The Emperors admonished by the
Fathers.
So at the counsel of Ascholius Bishop of Thessalonica, who affirmed that the
East swarmed with Heresies, partly through the lenity of Constantius, and
partly through the improbitie of Valens, Theodosius sent his edict against.
Heretics from Thessalonica to Constantinople, whereby Demophilus was
expelled, and Gregory Nazianzen surrogated into his office. Zozom. lib. 7.
cap. 4. Niceph. lib. 12. cap. 6. 7. and 8.

7 When the Arians by diverse deceipts labored to alienate the Emperor
Theodosius his mind from favoring the Catholics, to think better of their
faction; and had prevailed so far, that unless the Empress Placilla (as we
have noted before) had dissuaded her husband, he had admitted the crafty,
cloquent and learned Eunomius to confer with him: A memorable fact of
Amphilochius.
Amphilochius Bishop of Iconium, a venerable Olde-man, went unto the Emperor,
and beseeched him to expel the Arians out of his territories; which when the
Emperor differred to do, as a thing too rigorous and severe, and had put off
that business until some other time, the Reverend Amphilochius departing
quietly, invented this memorable stratageme. Being called into the Court
together with some other Bishops, he saluted the Emperor with all awful
respect and dutiful reverence; but drawing near unto Arcadius, the Emperors
Son, who then also was newly chosen Emperor, he spoke very familiatly unto
him, and stroaking his head, said; Good morrow thou also, my Boy. The Emperor
perceiving his rusticall carriage and rude salutation, would have taught the
Bishop how to salute his Son in better sort; but Amphilochius replied. No,
no, the honor that I have done him is good enough for him. Whereat the
Emperor falling into a rage, commanded with many reproachful terms, to have
away the old doting fool. Then the reverend Father, as he was carried away,
said; See thou, o Emperor, how thou can not endure any injury done unto
thy Son, but art enraged because we have not honored him sufficiently: Even
so it behooves thee to consider that the celestial Emperor, the Father of the
only Begotten, is angry at those which will not give his Son the same honor
with himself, but presume to rob him of his glory, affirming that he is
inferior and less then the Father. The Emperor considering whereto the fact
tended, and admiring his grave and wise speeches, commanded him to be brought
again, fell down at his feet and craved pardon. And being thoroughly
confirmed by Amphilochius his sayings, he enacted new laws against the Arians,
whereof we have spoken before. Zozom. lib. 7. cap. 6. Niceph. lib. 12. cap. 9.

8 Also, when Valentinianus II. being seduced by his mother, an Arian, had
published a decree, wherein he commanded that the Churches might be delivered
up unto the Arians, The courage of Ambrose.
Ambrose resisted the Emperor to his face at Millan, and refused to deliver up
his Church, saying: We give unto Caesar that which is Caesar's, and to God that
which is Gods. Tribute is due unto Caesar, we deny it not; But the Church is
Gods: wherefore we may not yield it unto Caesar, because the Temple of God
cannot be Caesar's right. Ambros. Epist. 32. ad Valent. Imp. and Orat. in
Auxent. de Basilicis non tradendis. Et Epist. 33. ad Marcellam. The places are
worthy the reading.

9 What shall I speak of Chrysostom? The Arians were permitted to hold a
Synod within his City: wherefore he having gotten fit opportunity, when the
Emperor Arcadius was come to the Church: Tell me, says he, o Emperor,
whether if any man would insert base and abject stones into that fair and
specious Crown, which thou wearest upon thy head, would thou not be
offended with him? The Emperor yielding, Chrysostom replied; Well, do thou
not think that the Emperor of heaven will be offended, if in a godly city,
which is sincere and sound, a scabbed and infectious member be permitted to
inhabit, seeing it is required of every one, either that he be converted, or
that he be banished? When the Emperor heard these things, he sent for the
chief of the Arians, and commanded them, if they would not relinquish and
abandon their wicked opinions, to depart and begone presently. Symeon
Metaphrast. in Vita Chrysostom. The same Father resisted Gainas, a barbarous
Arian captain, in the Emperors presence. Niceph. lib. 13. cap. 5. and 6. and
Chrysostom. Homil. de Auarit. sub finem Tom. 5.

10 I omit, for breuities sake, to relate how Athanasius resisted Constantine,
in the same quarrel, as appears out of his 2 Apology.

But let us consider what it was that sometimes caused the Emperors to be
negligent and remiss in executing their Office, and how they were either
induced or seduced to favor Heretics, or to collude with them. The causes
wherefore some Emperors were remiss and indulgent toward Heretics.
The causes in many were.

I The goodness of their nature and mildness of their disposition and
clemency. But Magistrates must either do justice, or cease to be magistrates.
II Improuidence, for they thought that Heresies would vanish and fall of
themselves; and that at length Heretics would cease and return unto the
Church by the examples of Godly men, especially of the Prince. III The
Scythicall immanitie of their predecessors against the Catholics; which that
they might avoid, they fell into dissolute clemency; whereof many have
repented themselves afterward. IIII The wicked advise and counsel of corrupt
Courtiours caused others to offend, who rashly believed them in all things. So
Constantia, Constantines Sister, and Eusebius the Bishop of Nicomedia deceived
the Emperor, aduising him to restore Arius and his Accomplices, that were
banished by the Nicene Council; which he did. Socrat. lib. 10. cap. 25. V
Fear of greater mischief and shame hindered some of them from proceeding
against Sectaries. So Arcadius was about to grant the Arians a Church, at the
entreatie of Gainas a barbarous Captain, had not Chrysostom confounded that
ruffian before the Emperors face. Niceph. lib. 13. cap. 5. and 6. VI.
Heraclius Caesar, being imprudently carried away by some Bishops into the
opinion of the Monothelites, when that Heresy was afterward condemned in the
Council of Jerusalem, the Emperor, because he would avoid the opinion of
inconstancy, being ashamed to recant, became a mere Neutrall, and held
neither one way nor other.
Herein may our Christian Kings behold, as in a glass, the rocks of offense,
whereat some of the ancient Emperors impinged, that they may beware and avoid
them, and take heed least they in like manner, by licentious impunitie, seem to
favor Sectaries and Heretics.

CHAP. VIII. Of the certain danger, mischief, inconveniences and confusions,
which Toleration and mixture of diverse Religions brings unto the
Commonwealth. And how the judgments of God prosecuted such Magistrates as
permitted licencious profession, and also the Commonweals wherein such
dissoluteness has been exercised.
THAT Toleration and mixture of diverse Religions is very dangerous unto any
established Commonwealth, Toleration very dangerous.
may be proved, as well by the example of all well-ordered States, which could
not endure innovation in Religion, because every thing naturally abhors from
that which is pernicious and hurtful unto it: as also by many impregnable
reasons.

Ethnikes could not endure it.
1 The Pagans could not abide to alter their ancient received Religion: because,
as Cicero testifies, Religion being once changed, the confusion of Civil life
will soon follow. Cic. Act. 6. in Verrem. Hereupon was that law enacted, No
man must worship strange gods. Inter Leg. 12. Tab. And the enemies of Socrates
seeking any calumny to put him to death, invented no other, than that he
seemed to disturb their ancient Religion, and to bring in new gods.

Persecution from Toleration.
2 Hence arose the persecutions against Christ, his Apostles, and the primitive
Christians: because the Adversaries persuaded themselves that diversity of
worships could not be admitted without great commotions, and detriment unto the
Empire. The Pharisees say of Christ; This man does many miracles, If we let him
alone, all men will believe in him, and the Romans will come and take away
both our place and the nation. Ioh. 11.48. Again, they calumniate him saying;
We have found this man perverting the nation, etc. Luc. 23.2. So also after
Christ's ascension, the Gentiles accused the Apostles saying; These men trouble
our city, And preach ordinances which are not lawful for us to receive, nor to
observe, seeing we are Romans. Act. 16.20.21.

Civil government cannot continue long without purity of Religion.
3 Again, as the Soul governs the Body, and the body yields obedience and
defense unto the Soul, as unto his governor; So Religion is as it were the
soul unto politic regiment, which should guide the same; and politic
Regiment ought to yield the duties of obedience and defense unto Religion.
Wherefore if Religion be endangered or corrupted with the foul contagion of
licencious profession; what hope can there be that the civil government can
long continue inuiolate?

Toleration dissolueth the bonds of obedience.
4 Diversity and dissension in Religion dissolueth the bonds of obedience, of
love and amity amongst Subjects; for it breeds exacerbation of mind, and
causes diuulsion and distraction of affections; and consequently prepares way
to tumults, vproares, seditions, massacres and civil wars, whereby the state
of the commonwealth is utterly overthrown.

It was the forerunner of the overthrow of the Empire.
5 Toleration of diverse Religions and immunitie of profession has been the
forerunner of the confusion and ruin of the greatest states, as appears in
the Empire.

Of Jury.
6 So also God permitted Jury to abound with diversity of Sects in the days
of Herod; as the Sadduces, the Essenes, the Pharisees, the Herodians, that is,
Courtiers which were of all Religions, or rather of no Religion, wholly
depending of their Princes pleasure; when he purposed to destroy the Jewish
Commonwealth, and to bring all in subjection to Christ.

Heathen Emperors permitted toleration, to root out Christian Religion.
7 It has been the cause also of the confusion, defection and ruin of the
most famous and floorishing Churches, and a supplanter of Religion. For the
Pagan and Apostata Emperors, because they would supplant the true Christian
Profession, granted liberty and immunitie unto all Sects of Heretics.

8 So Iustine Martyr complaining unto Antoninus Pius writes: All they who
proceed from these (Simon, Menander and Marcion) are indeed called
Christians, as all Sects of Philosophers are termed by one general name. And
whether they be infamed with those odious lies, of putting out the lights,
promiscuous company, and devouring of humane flesh, we know not; but this we
certainly know, that not one of them is put to death by you. Justin. Mart.
Apolog. 2.

9 So Apollinarius the Hieropolitan speaking against the Cataphrygians, says:
Is there any one of the disciples of Montanus and of those foolish women his
accomplices, who ever suffered persecution at the hands of either Jew or Gentill?
Certainly not one. Apud Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 15.

10 So Cyprian speaks; What says the Nouatian Heretic to these things? Do
you acknowledge which is the Church, who is the Minister of God and of the
house of Christ, who be those Servants of God whom the Devil vexes, who be
those Christians whom Antichrist impugneth? He seeks not to over come those
whom he has already conquered, nor cares to foil whom he knows are his
own; etc. Cypr. Epist. 57. ad Corn. And in another place, The enemy of Christ
impugneth and persecuteth none but the Soldiers of Christ; he contemns and
passes by the Heretics who are foiled and become his Champions. Cypr. Epist.
58. ad Lucium.

11 So Constantius the Arian Emperor tolerated other small Heresies, as his
Sisters, Constantius.
to vomit their blasphemies against Christ, but persecuted only the
Christians, as Athanasius testifies. Athanas. Epist. ad Solitar. Zozom. lib.
4. cap. 19. and 26.

12 So Julian the Apostata, Julian.
at the request of Rogatianus and Pontius granted liberty of perdition (these
be Augustines words out of Optatus Mileuitanus) unto the Sect of Donatus; and
then gave up the Churches unto Heretics, when he restored the Temples to
Devils; thinking by that means to root out the Christian name from the earth,
if envying the unity of the Church, from which he fell, he freely permitted
all sacrilegious dissension. August. Epist. 166. Optat. Mileuit. contra Parm.
lib. 2.

13 So Basiliscus freely tolerated whomsoever he thought would resist the
Orthodoxe and Ecclesiastical doctrine. Basiliscus.
Niceph. lib. 16. cap. 2.

Constantinus Copronymus.
14 So Constantinus Copronymus persecuted Christians only, and tolerated Jews,
Magicians, Pagans, and all sorts of Heretics. Zonar. Annal. lib. 3.

15 Nicephorus.
So the Emperor Nicephorus, to the end he might spare the Maniches, gave
freedom of profession unto all Sectaries, and vexed only the Catholics.
Paul. Diacon. lib. 24.

16 Theodoricus.
So Theodoricus King of the Gotthes granted the Arians a toleration, putting
Symmachus, Patritius, John Bishop of Rome to death, and banishing Boethius, and
afterward killing him also. Sigebert. in Chron.

17 Toleration rooteth out all Religion.
Furthermore, if Shepherds did suffer their sheep to wander up and down the
mountains; would they not become a pray unto Wolves? If a ship be carried
with every wave and puff of wind, without direction of the Pilotte, should it
escape shipwreck? If the Magistrate permitted his Subjects to govern every
man himself and his family; could such a divided regiment long endure? So, if
every Sect be tolerated to profess what they list without restraint; who sees
not that such wicked license tended to abolish all Religion?

18 Besides, Nothing can be more unsafe and dangerous to Kingly State,
Toleration dangerous to Kingly estate.
then to use Ministers of diverse affections in Religion: as well because they
can hardly live peaceably among themselves without simultation; as also because
his fidelity that is contrarily affected in Religion may justly be suspected;
seeing he reputeth the King an enemy to God and all godliness.

Pernicious to Subjects.
19 Also, Nothing can be more intolerable and pernicious unto the Subject, then
toleration; partly because that Justice cannot be sincerely and duly
administered by Officers of contrary Religion; and partly because of the
continual danger wherein they stand to be infected with heresy: for it is
hard to touch pitch, and not to be defiled therewith.

Toleration provoke Gods plagues.
20 Toleration causes a division between God and us, it provoke Gods curses,
his plagues and judgments upon that King or Prince, who being careless of
Religion, tolerateth Heretics and Idolaters; and also upon that kingdom or
Commonwealth, where Heresy and Idolatry is exercised.

Emperors plagued for toleration. Constantius.
21 Theodoret, and after him Nicephorus, speaking of Constantius, say: At that
time when he heard that Julian, whom he had declared Caesar of all Europe,
began to conspire and move sedition against him, that had extolled him to so
great honor; departing from Syria into Cilicia, he fell into an Apoplexy and
died. Because he kept not the heritage of his Fathers piety whole, he was
destitute of that helper which his Father had ordained for him: wherefore he
grieuouslie and bitterly lamented that he had changed Religion. Theodoret. lib.
2. cap. 31. Niceph. lib. 9. cap. 50. and lib. 10. cap. 1. For he repented of
three things, although all too late, as Greg. Nazianzen testifies. 1. That he
had elected Julian to be Caesar. 2. That he had banished Athanasius. 3. That he
had changed Religion. Naz. in vita Atha. and apud Nice priori loco.

22 Julian.
Also, The death of wicked Julian (as Theodoret speaks) declared his
temeritie and impiety in granting toleration to the Gentiles and to all
Heretics. For going over into Persia to war against the Christians, upon
the sudden he was wounded with an arrow, which he took out of his body, and
filling his hand full of blood, he threw it up into the air crying out, Thou
have overcome o Galilean, (so this blasphemous dog termed our blessed
Savior) thou have over come; and so died presently. Theodor. lib. 3. cap. 20.
Niceph. lib. 10. cap. 34.

23 Likewise Valens, Valens.
that great favorer of Heretics, being in great distress, was forsaken of
his brother Valentinian, who sent him answer, that it was not lawful to aid
him that fought against God; and refusing the council of Terentius and Traiane
his Captains, and of Isaac Bishop of Bretanioa, who told him that fighting
against God, he must needs be dest tute of Gods help, would notwithstanding
desperately fight against the Barbarians; and sending his army to the
battle, he withdrew himself into a village hard by expecting the event of
the field. But his Soldiers being not able to stand in the Barbarians face,
turned their backs and fled: the Barbarians pursuing after them made a great
slaughter, and coming upon the village where Valens was, they burned it
together with the Emperor. Theod. l. 4. cap. 28. Niceph. lib. 11. c. 49. and
50.

24 Basiliscus the Tyrant being by Gods judgments betrayed by his own
Captains, Basiliscus.
and delivered into the hands of Zeno the Emperor, was sent into Cappadocia,
and there murdered with his wife and children. Niceph. lib. 16. cap. 8.

25 Having spoken of the Emperors on whom God showed his judgments, for
wicked toleration and collusion with Heretics; it remains to speak a word
or two of commonwealths, which in like manner were punished by divine wrath.

Commonwealthes and cities plagued for Toleration. Nicomedia.
26 Constantius in favor of the Arians calling diverse Synods; at Nicomedia when
there was a Synod congregated, a sudden earthquake overthrew almost all the
buildings in the city, together with the temple that had been but lately
built, and the city walls; wherewith infinite numbers were slain; and the
timber taking fire by reason of the furnaces, baths, and shops of artificers,
the whole City seemed as it had been but one bonefire. Nice. lib. 9. cap. 39.

The Roman Empire.
27 During the reign of Julian the Apostata, God sent diverse calamities into
the Roman Empire: insomuch that it was not safe for men to tarry within doors,
by reason of earthquakes, nor to walk abroad by reason of great tempests of
thunders, lightnings, hail etc. Alexandria.
The city of Alexandria was overflowed and drowned with the sea. Also at other
times the drought was so great, that it killed all fruits, and infected the
air, whereupon ensued such a famine, that men were feign to feed on beasts
food; which ended with a pestilence and very great mortality.

28 Of Valens his times thus writes Nicephorus. After the war against
Procopius, there fell hail, as big as great stones, and there were such
earthquakes in diverse places, which did very great harm in many countries,
Nicea.
but quite overthrew Nicca a city in Bithynia. This was the twelfth year
after the Subversion of Nicomedia. And not long after by another earthquake
Seruia a city in Hellespont, Seruia.
was utterly destroyed. And a little after, showing the cause of these
calamities, he adds; This hail and earthquakes, as most men think, Note
well.
proceeded from the anger of God against the Emperor, because he banished many
Bishops, and was about to put to death, whosoever did not subscribe unto the
opinions of Eudoxius. Nicep. li. 11. c. 5.

CHAP. IX. A Consideration of an Epistle apologeticall written by a
Puritane-Papist, in favor of Protestants, Papists, and those of the
Reformation.
HAVING laid down such Reasons, as (in my simple opinion) may move any
reasonable, moderate and sober man fearing God, to derest factious Toleration:
it remains to answer the arguments of the contrary Paradox, which because
they are couched together in a small Pamphlet lately cast abroad to move
sedition, I will briefly examine that whole Tractate ab ouo admalum, as they
say.

It is a little book in 8o. conterning 3. sheets of paper: the number of every
folio shall be set in the margin in his due place; the former side or face
shall be distinguished by the letter (a) and the latter by (b). The Title is this;

(a) AN EPISTLE, OR APOLOGY Yea rather, of a false, idolatrous and
uncharitable Papist.
of a true and charitable brother of the reformed Church in favor of
Protestants, Papists, and those of the Reformation, for a As if the proceedings
against Papists hitherto were immoderate.
more moderat course of proceeding in matters of Religion, by searching the
Scriptures, and examining their Spirits for the sense, and true meaning of them
by a peaceable conference, and such easy means as were practiced in the
Apostolical, and Primitive Church for planting the faith, and rooting out of
error, tending to He speaks by contraries.
unity of Religion, loyalty to the Kings Majesty, increase of honor to him
and his posterity, and good of the Commonwealth. ANSWER.

A CERTAIN Stranger coming on Embassage unto the Senators of Rome, and
coloring his hoarie hair and pale cheeks with vermillion hiew: a grave
Senator espying the deceit, stood up and said: What synceritie are we to
expect for at this man's hands, whose locks and looks and lips do lie? So the
Libeller counterfeiting a sweet voice as Jacobs, but having rough hands as
Esaus, The auctor of the Epistle, a dissembling Hypocrite.
styling himself a true and charitable Brother of the Reformed Church, being
indeed an old Idolatrous Papist that hates to be reformed, what synceritie are
we to look for at his hands that so notably dissembleth his religion, even at
the first entrance? But for all his cunning, as Sibboleth bewraied an
Ephraimite. Judge. 2.6. so the Libellers style, his words and phrases, among
many other evident reasons, descrie that he is an admirer of the Decretall
doctrine; which appears as well out of this very Title, as out of the Book
it self.

Arguments that the Auctor is a Papist.
I Out of the Title, 1. By those words, true and charitable Brother of the
Reformed Church; which it is not likely that any man would affirm of himself.
2. Out of these words, by searching the Scriptures, and examining their Spirits
for the sense etc. which is not the usual style of any Protestant. 3. Because
he distinguishes between Protestants, and them of the Reformed Church; which
no Reformer ever did.

II Out of the Book it self. To omit his style, words, or phrase of speech;
it appears he is a Papist. 1. Because he cites the Scriptures in Latin
after the vulgar Translation; as fol. 1. b. 2. a. 3. a. 4. b. 5. b. 11. a. etc.
2. Because he braggeth of the number and multitudes of Papists. fol. 2. b. 5.
b. 3. Because he speaks of the late Queen without any reverence, fol. 3. b.
6. a. 21. a. 22. b. and sometimes with contempt and reproach fol. 9.6.22. b. 4.
Because he speaks promiscuously, sometimes in the person of a Puritan, fol.
2. b. etc. sometimes in the person of a Protestant, fol. 4. a. 8. b. 19. b. 23.
a. and sometimes discloseth himself a plain Papist. fol. 13. a. 20. a. 5.
Because he urges the division between Protestants and Puritanes, to be not in
ceremonies only, but insubstantiall points of faith. fol. 4. a. which the
Puritanes do not affirm. 6. Because he terms the Kings coronation and
unction, Papisticall ceremonies, fol. 4. b. which Puritanes do not. 7. Because
he slandreth and belieth his Majesty to take upon him the title of Supremacy
(he means Supreme head of the Church, for otherwise the Puritanes never
denied his Majesty's lawful Supremacy in all causes Ecclesiastical and
Civil) in matters of Religion. fol. 5. a. 8. Because he slandereth the
kingdom to contain all Sects of Religion. fol. 6. a. 9. a. 10. b. 19. b. 9.
Because he slandereth the Queens government, and says that Papists are
faithful to God in their Religion. fol. 6. a. 11. a. etc. Which Puritanes
cannot endure. 10. Because he makes the Puritan to speak phanaticallie, and
to contemn the Book of articles. fol. 8. b. 9. a. yea and sometimes falsely to
accuse himself of sedition and treason. fol. 14. b. 11. Because he speaks
disgracefully of Bishop Jewel and favorably of his Adversaries, fol. 13. a.
12. Because he prays that Jewels Challenge may be prosecuted in all points;
which no Puritan doubts of. fol. 13. a.b. 13. Because he glanceth at the
Queen for protecting the Netherlanders. fol. 18. a.b. 14. Because he belieth
Luther, to have dealt with the Germans, to call in the Turk. fol. 20. a. 15.
Because he wishes the Kings Majesty to keep friendship with the Pope
himself. fol. 21. b. 16. Because he desires marriage with Spain. fol. 23. a.

But to leave the Auctor as he is, a Machiauellian Hypocrite, let us come to
the Libell, and examine how Toleration tends to unity of Religion, Loyalty
to the Kings Majesty, etc. as is pretended in the Title.

Worshipful and my loving brother in the Lord, I have received your loving
aduertisements by writing, and I honor you the more as well for that I see
thereby your sincere affection continued toward me, as also for your singular
zeal ever to maintain the Gospel. In which respects I take in good part your
severe reprehension and distaste of the advice I lately gave for a milder course
in matters of (b) Religion, then has been for many years in this Realm
followed. Whereas you protest to rem^in still my friend (notwithstanding our
difference in opinion touching this point) therein appears your well grounded
affection and love toward me, and I could wish that all our brethren would
keep the same course of charity toward all men, howsoever they differ from
us in sense or opinion. So should we bear the mark of true Religion, and by
this badge be known to be Christ's disciples if we love our Enemies. Christ
commannded us to love our neighbor, and declared, as you know, that the
Samaritan was neighbor to the Jew, and therefore not to be excluded from his
love, howbeit otherwise he could not communicate with him in divine affairs.
Your zeal is commendable in that you say with Paul: Vtinam abscindantur qui
vos conturbant, for with him you may so pray that they which withstand and
hinder the course of the Gospel were cut off and rooted out: But in that you
wish them to be cut off by the sword, and I contrariwise by the force of Gods
word, in this our opinions are different. Wherefore my drift is in this
Apology and defense, first to set down plainly my opinion, and then to lay
open the reasons that moved me thereto. And so to come to the matter. I wish
with you and pray as Christ himself did, that all the Kings Majesty's subjects
may be made one in Christ, to acknowledge all one God, to embrace all one
Faith, to live under the rules of one Law, and so to agree, if it may be, in
will and affection that we may be all, Cor vnum, and anima vna, One heart and
one Soul, and this we both agree to be best not only in regard of the Souls
health, and eternal salvation, but also for the civil policy and temporal
government of his Majesty's Dominions. For whosoever would wish or seek to By
this Reason the Libeller is neither of God. nor a good Poluician, for in the
whole course and scope of this Epistle he aymeth at nothing so much, as to
nourish division.
nourish division in any sort, as he cannot be of God, so is he not to be
accounted a good governor, or right politician. In our last assembly at London
it was our prayer, as you may well remember, that the Kings Majesty (exalted
to so great a Monarchy and government of so many All his Majesty's Kingdoms,
through Gods special blessing, profess the Gosell: only some few particular
members in the same are diversely affected in Religion, which are neither so
great nor so many in number (God be thanked) that any of his Highness
Kingdoms should be denominated of them.
kingdoms diversely sorted, and affected in Religion) might have that gracious
virtue of the Adamant stone to draw unto him, and (b) win to unity in Faith
the people of diverse nations so committed to his charge. For who of us all
does not desire from his heart that the As who would say the Protestants walked
in darkness as well as Papists.
Protestants, and Papists of England, which are many in number, and the Papists
of Ireland, where there are The whole kingdom of Ireland man festly selandred.
few or none other, and the Nobility of Scotland, of the which Two or three
among ad the Nobles of Scotland the Libelles reckons no small number. But
indeed this libelling Papist se emes to be melancholique, that imagins all the
world to be his
no small number incline that way, would come with us to the pure light of the
Gospel, and to our reformed Churches. You remember the Profession of Faith,
which to this intent and purpose we procured to be set forth in Print at his
Majesty's first ingresse into this Realm, but it prevailed not, and had it not
been the respect was borne his Majesty, it had been controuled as it was
misliked both by the Here all Protestants are included within the number of
one or two.
Protestant, and Papist. And since that to further and advance our cause, and
to proceed in the same purpose, we have in peaceable manner done what in us
lies. Let us hold on the same moderate course, and strive to prevail, not by
the temporal sword of his Majesty's power, but endeavor to overcome by the
eternal sword of Gods holy word. Which though it be sweets, and not violent,
yet is it a two edged sword (a) that cutteth on every side and pierces more
deeply to win the heart of man and alter his understanding for planting the
Gospel, then any humane force whatsoever. I agree further with you, that as it
is a point of good husbandry to weed the Corne-fielde before the weeds have
ouergrowen the corn, so likewise Note the Libellers Andabatismus. For all this
is against himself.
may his Majesty employ his temporal sword that no Cockle be sown or rise in
the field of the Lords Church under his protection, and that such as begin to
spring up may betimes be cut off; In matutino interficiebam omnes peccatores
terrae. So did that holy King David, and pleased God highly therewith. Thus
much your arguments do prove sufficiently. For in this sense the King bears
the sword to destroy all sin, and sinners in matutino, that is to say betimes
while sin and sinful errors are newly budding, and may be cut off without
hurt, and damage to the state of the good and faithful. And it is our part to
be watchful to discover them betimes, least if we The Parable be alludeth
unto, is expounded afterward in his due place.
sleep too long they spring so high, and spread so far that whosoever
should then attempt to pull them up, should destroy much corn (b) withal, and
do more harm than good. This then is the point wherein we jar. You think
it needful that the Kings Majesty proceed to authorize, and establish our
Religion by the To compel obstinate Heretics and Idolaters to the outward
discipline is not is establish Religion by the sward.
sword, to repress al other sects by severity of Laws, such as were
practiced in the days of the late Queen against us, and against the Papists:
And I contrariwise am of opinion that such laws, and severity are in our case
unprofitable, and will-hurt rather then help the advancement of our case; and
I A manifest mistaking.
take this my advise to be He speaks all by contraries.
better grounded then yours in the written word, to approach nearer to the
wisdom and course of Gods divine providence, to be more conformable to
Christian humanity, to beseem better our Prince for the assurance of his
estate and the advancement of his noble issue, and finally to agree best with
true civil policy for the sweet peace, rest, and repose of this our Republike
and increase thereof, as shall appear by the experience we have seen with our
own eyes and in these our days, as well in his Majesty's Dominions, as in all
Nations round about us.

That we have Lucianicall scorning and Sardoicall laughter of the Libeller.
slept too long all writers agree, and that for many hundred years: for who of
us does not see that the weeds have ouergrowen the good corn, taken so deep
root and so far spread, that amongst his Majesty's subjects there are two for
one of a contrary Faith and opposite to ours, and that not in ceremonies only
(for then we need not stir so much as we have done) but in And yet this
fellow would be thought to be no Papist. But he lies stoutly like a Papist,
and an Ass may be discerned by his cares.
substantial points of Faith yea as we esteem in damnable errors, which we
have notified in our books as well against D. Whitguift and other Protestants
as against the Papists.

To destroy It were hard indeed to destroy all: but the wise Magistrate knows
that there are diverse sorts of Offenders, some weak, others wilful etc.
all these that are in faith opposite unto us were overmuch cruelty; to
compel them to an external worship against their conscience were no less
Nothing less then dangerous.
dangerous and damnable for us then for them; to impouerish them by statute
laws were to impouerish our selves being so linked to them as many ways we
are, yea it were a great The disabling of Papists is rather a great
strengthening of the state.
weakening to the whole body of the estate to the detriment of our sovereign
Prince, and of the Common wealth: for the wealth of the True, of the loyal and
obedient subject, but not of the contrary.
subject is the treasure (b) of the king, and the multitude of his people is
his strength and glory: Gloria Regis multitudo populorum.

These be the grounds that have moved me to approve and persuade a more
temperat course in matters of Religion, of which opinion though I have It is
shameful and ignominious indeed to change from better to worse as the Libeller
did. Augustine changed his opinion in the same question, but quite contrary to
the Libeller: His words are these. I was once so munded that I thought no man
ought to be forced to Christian unity, but that we should deal by persuading,
strive by disputing, conquer by reasoning, least they proved dissembling
Catholics, whom we knew professed Heretics. But this my opinion was
overcome, not by words of contradiction, but by evidence of demonstration. For
amongst many examples and instances my own City was brought against me, which
being altogether of Donatus his part, was converted to Catholic unity by the
rigor and terror of Imperial laws, whom now we see so to detest the
perniciousnes of your animositie, (he speaks to Vincentius the Donatist) as
if it had never received and professed the same. So also many others were
showed unto me by name, that out of the things themselves, I might acknowledge
that even in this case, that which is written might be understood, Prou. 9.
Give occasion unto the wise man, and he will be wiser. Thus far Augustine. In
Epist. 48. ad Vincens.
not always been, and you (as you suppose) note to my shame, yet I hold it
not ignominious to change for the better upon these and others so grave
considerations as in this Treatise I shall set down for your and others
satisfaction.

Saul when he stoned Stephan and the other Martyrs, had zeal but without
knowledge, so had I while I was of your opinion and confess with Paul, But the
libeller iam sapit us pravus, for he glories in vomiting his own shame.
Sapiebam vt paruulus, my indiscreet zeal blinded my understanding, and in my
judgment there wanted ripeness and maturitie.

As you do now, so did I then storm within my self to see his Majesty As
though his Highness were not able to rule himself.
ruled by the Protestants not only in those A Machauellian pract se to bring
the Puritans in detestation with his Majesty, who never accounted thus of his
Coronation and Unction,
Papisticall ceremonies of his coronation and unction, but also in the whole
course and practice of the Communion Book, and administration of sacraments;
that he should leave the whole state of the Church of England in the same sort
as (a) he found it, and take upon him the title of Good Sir, there is
difference between Supremacy and Supreme head: this latter Calvin says that
some attributed unto K. Henry. 8. of indiscreet. zeal
supremacy in matters of Religion, a point highly blamed in K. Henry 8. by
Master Calvin, (who without all controversy was one of the chief^st
instruments of the Gospel) and therefore never as yet received by any of our
reformed Churches. At his Majesty's first coming to the Crown we expected
nothing less then this sudden Soft and fair, the weath^r is not so calm
not the reason still as you would make the world believe.
calm toward the Papists. They live in peace and pay no more the Statute and
that by commandment from the King. Some that lost their lands and country
are now restored to both with grace, which made me wonder at the first, and
enter into due consideration of the fact, when (conferring with some of known
wisdom and zeal) I understood that the Marquis Rosne Lord Treasurer of
France sent hither as Ambassador did amongst other points very mainly Whether
this be true or no, his Majesty best knows and I think i^ is extreme
presumption and arrogance for a^y ^ubiect to disclose the secrets of his
Sovereign: But what do not disloyal Papists dare to* It may be that Marquis
de Rosne persuaded the K not to force any (...) Protestans Subjects to the
business of Religion: but it is not likely he spoke any thing in favor of
Papists: and if he did, his Majesty knows what he has to do well enough.
persuade his Majesty not to force any of his subjects in the business of
Religion, himself being (as you know) a very good Christian. And further
understanding how Great Britain has no cause (God be thanked) to e uie them
this quietness.
quietly our brethren in France live together with the Papists under laws
provided for that purpose, I find that this (b) Nobleman has dealt honorably
with his Majesty, and given the same advise by which the King his Master won
France and established his Because the Papists would never acknowledge him to
be their lawful King until he had made profession of their Religion.
Crown in peace.

I will not follow the Libeller in his immethodicall and idle Digressions, sit
to prevail with worldly minds, that never tasted the truth, which if I should
labor to repel with such a discoursing style, I should but waste paper and
weary the Reader; wherefore I will join issue with him in as few terms as
may be.

The Libellers Proposition.
His Proposition briefly is this; No man is to be compelled to embrace Religion,
by the temporal sword of the Magistrates power, but is to be persuaded by the
eternal sword of Gods holy word. In the mean time, he would have every man
left to himself, to embrace what Religion he pleases; as he professes, fol.
23. b.

What we are to judge of this Proposition, is fully declared in the former part
of this Treatise. But to speak yet more plainly upon the present occasion; I
can but wonder with what face the Papists dare frame such a Proposition, as is
directly contrary unto the doctrine and practice of their Church! Why, for
shame, rebuke they that in others, which they allow in themselves? Wherefore do
they daily compel infinite numbers with extreme violence to recant and
foresweare the persuasion of their faith? The Papists would compel; but not
be compelled to Religion.
Or can they yield any reason that they may compel others, but none must
compel them? Their inquiring, their burning, their murdering of thousands,
without any respect of innocent, guilty; learned, unlearned; old, young; men,
women, is indeed very lamentable; This kind of compulsion, The Popish
Compulsion.
whereby their Prelates make it their occupation to persecute to death all
sorts, ages, and sexes which refuse their school tricks and diuell^sh
Decretals, we detest with our heart, and dissuade with our tongue; affirming
that they ought rather with mildness and patience seek to recover such as
they think lost. Yet in Christian Kings and Princes, How Christian Princes may
compel.
who bear the Sword, as the Apostle says, not in vain, and are Gods
Lieutenants not only to procure peace between men, but also by laws to
maintain Religion toward God, we do not dispraise moderate correction when
need so requires, who with convenient sharpness of positive Laws ought to
amerce, banish and diuersely punish Heretics. Which Christian justice
tempered with equity exercised by his most excellent Majesty, neither can
their friends deny to be charitable, nor themselves gainesay to be suitable to
that coaction, which the Scriptures commend in Josiah and other godly Kings,
which the virtuous Emperors followed in the Primitive Church, and which the
ancient Fathers upon deep Consideration found allowed by God himself, as the
chief point which he requires at the hands of Christian Princes.

True it is, that Religion uses rather to persuade, then to compel; that GOD
did rather show, then exact the true knowledge of himself; and that true
Bishops and Pastors ought rather teach, then torment their flock. Yet are the
obstinate and stubborn refractaries, Papists may be compelled to abandon
their Heresy.
who refuse instruction, to be compelled by the Magistrates, for dread of
punishment tempered with good instruction, to forsake their heresies and
forbear their Idolatries, wherewith Christ is dishonored, and his truth
defaced. Otherwise, questionless, the Lord will enter into judgment with his
Deputies and Vicegerents, and exact a strict account for his name blasphemed,
his Son refused, his truth scorned, his Sacraments profaned, his word
exiled: and then what answer must be made for the ruin and shipwrake of
faith, the harvest of sin, and murder of Souls, consequent always to the
free profession of heresies, I leave to be fully considered and wisely
prevented by Christian Magistrates, who must think that silence provoke,
conniuence and toleration enboldeneth their Subjects to forsake God and his
Church, even as in civil affairs the slacking of justice does maintain
disorder.

But let us hear the Reasons which the Libeller urges to maintain the
contrary paradoxe.

Let us then examine whether this advise agree with the word, and may stand
with the true zeal of the gospel.

It seems to me that without all reply the case is already ouerruled and
resolved by Christ's express sentence. Matthew. 12.

In the parable of the seedesman who sowed good seed in his field, and none
but true Good seed does not signify true doctrine, but the Children of the
kingdom, see Matthew. 13 38.
doctrine: but whilst men were a sleep the enemy of truth came and ouersowed
the Cockle of Tares (or Cockle, seeing the Libeller, following the Rhemists,
will have it so) do not signify error, but the Children of that wicked one.
Matthew. 13.38.
error: his servants had slept so long that the blade shot up and ouertopt the
wheat before it was espied: the zealous This restriction is not warrantable.
ministers of the truth awaking, and seeing the field in this case, offered to
go and root out the tares. Vis imus and colligimus ea, say they. This is the
question between us.

Your answer would have been to those laborers in the lords harvest, Go
pull them up by the roots, but the lords answer was far otherwise: Let
them alone (says he) and let them grow togeither until the harvest, Sinite
vtraque crescere vsque ad messem. Which by his own (a) interpretation is the
end of the world. and he gives this reason thereof. Least in pulling up the
Cockle ye root up also the wheat.

If Christ will have it thus why do you blame my The ease is unlike; Read the
Answer.
advise that a Christian king should do the same rather then use the sword of
force and violence upon any the like occasions.

The reason that our Savior alleges is in our case most pregnant and
weighty. For whereas in all his Majesty's Dominions men of A manifest slander.
all Religions are so lincked together with us in blood, alliance, friendship,
and otherwise that in pulling up the one Popery is not so deeply rooted, God
be praised.
root the other combined therewith must necessarily follow or take some harm,
in wishing his Majesty to take that course of violence we should not only
wound many that are near unto us, but also greatly But the wisdom of the
Magistrate may provide that no innocent be prejudiced by the punishment of
guilty persons.
preiudise our selves as has appeared by the attempt to root out the Papists
in the late Queens days, when many of our own brethren were brought with
them to extreme calamity. The father being a Papist was thrown out of his
house, and spoiled of all his goods: his wife and children undone and (b)
pressed with misery although they wear most zealous in the Lord; and we that
had matched in their families were by these means defrauded of our expected
succession to their goods and liuinges. When for the This reason is of force
as well against suppressing of Traitors and other malefactors, as the matter in
question.
same cause any one of calling lost his Not one was put to death for Popish
Religion in the late Queens days.
life or his goods or otherwise was but in disgrace, did not all such loose
their support as were linked unto him or depended upon him for their service,
and advancement whereof great numbers were no weeds but very good Corn?

Wherefore I cannot like the reviving of such a course again, since as you see
it proceeds Begging of the Question.
not from the spirit of our Savior but rather from passion, or at the least
from indiscreet zeal.

The Case indeed is ouerruled and resolved by Christ our Savior in the
Gospel, but not so as is here pretended by the Libeller: who boldly presumes
to ouerrule Christ's own exposition of the Tares; Tares what they signify.
which do not signify false worship, false doctrine or error, as the
Libeller imagines; but the children of that wicked one, Heretics,
Schismatiques and all malefactors, as Christ himself interprets them, Math
13.38. Good seed, what it signifies.
So also the good seed signify, not true Doctrine, as the Libeller dreameth,
but the Children of the kingdom, as Christ speaks.

Neither can there be any such collection made out of this Text, that all
Sectaries, schismatiques, heretics should profess what they list without
restraint: no more then from hence may be proved that all Thiefes, murderers
and other malefactors should be permitted to rob and sley without punishment
or contradiction.

Christ protests that he came not to abrogate the Law, but to fulfill it.
Matthew. 5. But God in his Law commands that the False-Prophet, and the
seducing Idolater should be put to death; as we have declared before.

Also, Christ manfully opposed himself against the Scribes and Pharisees, and
willed every man to beware of them. And Paul commands to purge the old leven.
1. Cor. 5. and wills that the mouths of them who contradict the truth should
be stopped. Tit. 1.

Again, the sword is therefore delivered unto the Magistrate, that he should
execute Gods wrath and vengeance upon all evil doers.

Moreover in this Parable Christ speaks not simply, that the Tares are not to
be rooted out, but adds the reason, Least while you go to gather the tares,
you pluck up also with them the wheat. Matthew. 13.29. Whereby he declares
that the Tares are to be tolerated so far as they do not annoy or hurt the
wheat; and that he will bear with them, How far the Tares are to be
tolerated.
not for the spoil, but for the good of the wheat: for the House-holder
loves the wheat. Therefore whatsoever destroys or hurts the wheat, that
is to be plucked up, and removed from the wheat, because it is hurtful unto
it. As if any Beast entering into the field should tread and spoil the corn;
it is not likely and house-holder would bear with such outrage.

Christ suffers the Goats in his fold together with his Sheep, but has
special care they do not hurt them. If a Wolf should come among the flock
into the sheepe-coate, ought not a good Shepherd to chase him away and to
keep the Sheep from being worried?

Christ speaks to private persons.
Briefly then, Christ speaks not here unto any Magistrate, that is, unto any
that has either Civil or Ecclesiastical authority, (as Calvin well
observes, and after him Alphonsus Salmeron the Jesuit) whose duty it is, to
punish offenders, and to pluck up the Tares; to whom it is said, Thou shall
not suffer a witch to live. He bears not the sword in vain. I would they
were cut off that trouble you. Being ready to take vengeance on all
disobedience. He that hears not the Church, let him be unto thee as an
heathen and publicane, etc. Otherwise neither murderers, nor witches, nor
traitors, nor thiefes, etc. ought to be punished before the end of the world,
for they also are tares, as is manifest. But the words of Christ are directed
unto the Servants of the House-holder, that is, unto private men endued with
peculiar zeal, who being not able patiently to bear the injuries and outrages
committed against God, would presently take revenge: such as James and John
were, who would have the Samaritans that refused to receive Christ, presently
burned, Lord shall we command that fire come from heaven, and consume them.
Luke 9. Unto these Christ says, No, least you also pluck up the wheat with
the tares; but suffer ye both to grow together until the harvest.

The weeds I confess do hinder the growth of the good corn, and are there
with no less damage, then was the fruitless figtree in the vineyard of the
Lord. and yet the Lord of the vineyard was easily entreated to deal not by
threatenings to cut it down, but rather to dig about it and to dung it in
hope of Yea but when it would bear no fruit being dug and dunged, it was to
be cut down and thrown into the fire.
fruit thereafter, Luc. 13.

Have we not seen many such trees changed with I know it is the common error
of many, to think that there is no place left to repentance, where the
punishment is capital: as if the thief on the cross found no remedy of
salvation.
time and patience? What (a) a loss had it been then to have cut them off in
their unfruitful season? We should rather in the spirit of meekness heartily
pray for their conversion and entreat delay of their confusion were they as
sinnfull as So should no malefactor be punished.
Sodom, that so doing we might be known to be the true seed of faithful
Abraham would not have the good perish with the bad, no more would we.
Abraham.

If you say the trees in question are not only fruitelesse but hurtful in the
vineyard and in his Majesty's Dominions most dangerous; I answer that all
weeds are hurtful in the corn yet not in all God be thanked his Majesty's
kingdoms are not in the extremity of some cases.
cases to be rooted out. Were not the Iebusites hurtful when they annoyed the
people of the Lord with their continual wars and scandalous idolatry? yet
for God permitted the Iebusites for a plague and punishment of the Israe^lites.
other respects the Lord would have them remain in the Land of promise with
the Jews. Yea the Jews (although they crucified the Son of God) are But by
what right?
suffered to live in Christian countries according to their Law. We read that
the Samaritans were so unkind to our Savior, that they would neither receive
him in their towns, nor yet give him bread for his money. Whereat James and
John (as they thought of a good zeal) could have (b) found in their hearts to
have seen them consumed with fire from heaven: But the Lord rebuked This case
is not alike with that in question.
them saying. You know not of what manner spirit you are. The Son of man came
not to destroy men's lives but to save the^. Luc. 9.

This meek spirit of the Lord I wish were followed of all in heart, word, and
deed, and not the overthrow of our adversaries in faith sought by the arm of
flesh. For they being with us all Vain shows, not sound proofs.
members of one body, and subject to one Sovereign, we must account them as
brethren and love them as our friends, but much more because we are all
children of one heavenly father, who indifferently lets fall upon us from
day to day the fruitful showers of his blessing, and suffers his Son to
shine upon them also whilst they live in this world, and may by this his
favor in time be won, and converted.

God permits the Devil, to draw from thence some good, and therein shines
more his wisdom and goodness, then if he suffered no bad at all in the
world. The spouse of God is Lilium inter spinas and the lily is more grateful
among the brambles: and who would cut off the (a) pricking thorn to destroy
and loose the pleasant and sweete-smelling Rose? Since then there must be
heresies and errors in the world as Paul foretells us, and that God is
glorified by drawing much good from them for the purifying of his elect,
(though it were to be wished that no errors were at all) let us in destroying
them use such sweet means as approach nearest to his divine wisdom and
providence.

Here are many reasons hudled up together, but I will answer distinctly unto
every one.

The parable of the Fig Tree.
1 The fruitless fig tree having been barren three years; the Landlord
would have cut down and thrown into the fire, but that at the Gardiners
entreaty, he was contented to suffer it to be dug and dongued, and to
expect yet one year longer. But the Papists have been fruitelesse and
barren, not only three, but threescore years, they have stopped their ears
at the voice of the charmer, and wilfully refused the grace of the Gospel. And
his Highness has already borne with them more then a year and a year
longer; and yet, lo, they bring forth but the fruits of heresy and
giddiness, to wit, insolency, disloyalty and sedition; for they are grown
to that height of boldness and presumption, that they are almost ready to
break forth into actual rebellion. What remains therefore but that as wild
thistles and tares they be gathered, tied in a bundle? etc.

The good are not be destroyed with the bad.
2 It is not the manner of true Christians to destroy whole cities, the good
with the bad, as the Papists have done in their general Massacres, and
Butcheries at Merindoll and Cabriers, Lucerne, Angrogne, S. Mart. Perous,
Paris, Lions, etc. but only to destroy the Sodomites out of the land, as Josiah
did, and to cull out the handful of thieues from among honest Subjects.

3 As for the Iebusites; Because the Israelites did not according unto Gods
commandment, The Iebusites wherefore tolerated among the Israelites.
utterly destroy them, Deuteronomy. 20.17. the Lord for a curse and punishment unto
his people, suffered them and other profane nations to be as whips on their
sides, and thorns in their eyes. Josh. 23.13. Iud. 2.2. So questionless for
our great and heinous sins of unthankfulness and security, the Lord
suffers insolent and blood-thirstie Papists to be as whips and thorns unto
us: But, I hope, GOD will give us grace to repent, The Pope tolerateth Jews,
no Christian Princes.
and speedily deliver us from that viperous and bloody generation.

4 The Pope (who, being the great Antichrist, is to exercise all his malice
against Christians, not Jews and Infidels) for a sum of money impiously
tolerateth cursed Jews to erect Synagogues and openly to exercise their
blasphemies against Christ Jesus our blessed Savior, to the disgrace and high
contempt of Christian Religion, as appears in the Penitentiarie Tax. But his
example can be no warrant for Christian Princes in such manner to tolerate
Heresy and Idolatry.

The zeal of James and John exorbitant.
5 The desire of James and John proceeded from exorbitant and preposterous
zeal; for the Gospel had not been yet preached unto the Samaritans. But the
case of Papists is far otherwise.

The Papists what members, Subjects, and Children they be.
6 The Papists are members of the same body with us, but rotten members that
must be cut off, least the whole be infected. They are Subjects to one
Sovereign with us, but disloyal Subjects, who acknowledge an other Superior,
the Pope. They are Children of one heavenly Father with us, but bastardly and
rebellious Children, that have forsaken the Lord, and gone a whoring after
strange gods.

There follow four Reasons more, but I see not how they conclude.

Unreasonable Reasons.
I God permits the Devil, to draw from thence some good.

Ergo, Papists ought to be tolerated: who (belike) are the Devils children.

II The spouse of Christ, is Lilium inter spinas.

Ergo, the spinie Papists are to be tolerated to prick and vex the Church.

III The Rose smells sweetly.

Ergo, The thornie pricking Papists are to be tolerated.

IV Heresies and error must necessarily be in the world.

Ergo, Papists must be tolerated to broach and teach them.

I see not what coherence there is between the Antecedent and Consequence of
these Enthymems, no more between the Antecedent and Consequence of them who
said, Why dowe not evil, that good may come thereof, whose damnation is most
just; as the Apostle speaks. Romans 3.8. But let us proceed.

Faith is the So is repentance the gift of God, as well as faith; and yet a
thief may be hanged well enough.
gift of God alone, and is not to be beaten with hammers into the head or heart
of man. It depends not of man, but of the election and free praedestination.
None comes to me (says Christ) but whom my Father draws: who therefore Was
not Paul violently draws unto Christ; and did not he say, Compel them to come
in?
never used violence, but by his word and meekness drew at length all the
world to him and his faith. Upon these grounds of Scripture and Christ's
example, the first and most learned of our profession have taught, that none
may be So do we teach likewise: we compel not to the faith, but to cease from
broaching errors, and to use the means to obtain says.
compelled to the faith, and therefore have written bitterly against those who
at our first appearing sought by sword and fire to root us out. And can we for
shame This is the very practice of Papists.
put in execution our selves what we condemn in others, or (b) is doctrine to
be altered with the exchange of our state and condition? What may his Majesty
think of us, if now we recall the doctrine which we have heretofore taught to
be well warranted by Gods word? Christ his words are infallible, it is the
heavenly Father alone that can draw souls to Christianity, and it is the
internal unction of his spirit that teaches it, and planteth it in man's
heart. And therefore in this case let us lay force aside, and But we must not
neglect the means: otherwise it will be required at our hands.
leave it to Gods goodness, to draw those whom he has elected: and in the
mean time not to repine at the prudence of our Prince, if he use and employ
all his subjects, As if the prince were not to care for the establishing of
Gods true and sincere worship within his dominions.
howsoever affected in Religion, to the strengthening of his state and benefit
of the Commonwealth.

Faith is the gift of God, and what follows thereof.
I know Faith is the gift of God, and that none may compel the hearts and wills
of men. But yet God does ordinarily kindle faith in our hearts by the preaching
of the word: for Paul says, Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word
of God. Romans 10. Wherefore Christian Princes ought to have special care that
the preaching of the word be pure and sincere, that it be not adulterated or
corrupted by the inventions of men.

Men should be compelled, not to the faith, but to the places where Faith is
taught.
Again, albeit no man may be compelled to faith, and that it is not the work
of humane strength to frame new hearts and new wills in men: yet may they be
restrained and kept in obedience by good Laws and affliction, that they do not
broach and teach false and heretical opinions, that they be not carried into
all licencious wickedness, and that by their evil examples they give no
scandal unto others.

Besides, Repentance and Sanctification are also the gifts of God: and yet
ought the Magistrate to execute vengeance upon all malefactors according to
the quality of their offense. So ought he in this case compel men to the
outward discipline.

Moreover, if faith, because it is the gift of God, ought to be permitted free
unto every man; Wherefore did Paul strike the false Prophet, which would have
drawn the Proconsull from the faith, with blindness? Act. 13. Why do the
Scriptures command that the seducing Idolater be slain without any mercy?
Why do they command us to avoid an Heretic after once or twice admonition?

Concerning our first Teachers and Professors, their purpose was to move the
Popish Clergy to delight rather in teaching then in tormenting poor souls:
How the Protestants spoke against compulsion.
for they thought it a strange kind of preaching, to drive men to believe by
whipping, as Boner and others did. Or else they detested their violent and
furious manner of compulsion, who neither took pains to persuade, nor allowed
men time to learn those things which they forced them to believe.

But if some of our first Professors were of the contrary opinion, it cannot
prejudice us, half so much as this suite and defense for toleration does the
papists, the great braggers of unity, who now for some private respects
maintain this paradoxe directly against the doctrine and practice of their
Church.

I deny not, but that he must labor to draw all his subjects to the truth;
but we differ in the means, which I hold to be Gods holy word.

We Lucian-like scoffing of the Libeller.
have taught to this effect, that every man may read the Scriptures and search
the truth of himself as God shall inspire him, and we hoped that by this
means all might find the truth, and come to the unity of the same faith.
But (a) we see it has not succeeded so well as we expected: and I fear the
cause has been for that in times past the rigor of statute laws has as it
were fettered the Gospel: and the book of Articles set down by a And yet the
Libeller would not be deemed a Papist.
few heads without conference with their brethren, has hindered our Christian
liberty in the interpretation thereof, with less show of truth Jgnoratio
Elenchi.
than did before the decrees of General Councels, and the uniform consent of
ancient Fathers. For A phanaticall Proposition of the Libeller.
in vain does a man read and search the truth, if he may not as freely
interpret scripture as read it. And why should we forbid any to be heard in
his interpretation whereas in this time of so many sects and Religions both
within the Realm, and abroad, we may, as Paul says, better judge of the
truth, when we have heard with patience what every man can say and allege in
his cause?

He that commands us to try and examine the spirits whether they be of God or
no, would never give advice to extinguish them, or forbid us to Popery has
been many times examined, and always deprehended to be, as it is indeed,
Antichristianisme.
know them, and upon what ground they rely. Some laws forbidding men to
expound the word, otherwise than it seemed good to the Church established by
the late (b) Queen, were And are still, although it be to your great grief.
once in force: which laws howsoever they might seem tolerable in respest of
The Libellers inueterate malice against the late Queen.
her, (whom the Apostle would not permit to speak in the Congregation, for
that she was a woman, and not fit to judge in such matters, if a conference had
been granted, she being less grounded in the knowledge of Gods law than our
selves) yet now in the reign of his Majesty, who is profound in learning, and
mature in judgment, free conference may be permitted for the liberty of the
Gospel, as well in the free interpretation as in free reading of it, and the
contrary laws repealed as over violent in such a cause, and prejudicial to
the bolting out of the truth, or at the least suspended until a just trial
be made by a learned and amiable conference through all the points of our
controversies.

This were a sweet way to come to Unity is a rare effect of Conferences.
unity, or if any force at all were to be used in matters of faith, it should
be rather to compel such as seem to be in error to be present at such
conference, than to force them without As if Popery had been nerer tried.
trial to show outwardly to be of another profession than in heart they are.
Which (a) how fruitless a thing it is, and might be Nothing less.
prejudicial to the King and State, the wise Governor Constantius, father to
our Constantine the great, may teach us. Who desirous to know what sort of
Christians he might best trust, set forth an Edict, that whosoever should
refuse to do sacrifice to the Idols, should be disarmed, dishonored,
displaced, and suffer further punishment at the Emperors pleasure. Whereupon
some of his Christian Captains and Soldiers did sacrifice to the Idols:
others standing constant in the faith wherein they were baptized, would neither
change in heart, nor yet in outward show seem other than true and faithful
Christians.

The wisdom of this Constantius (though then a Pagan) was such, as he judged
those Christians, that denied their faith by this outward act of Idolatry, most
unworthy to serve him, who of a base and servile fear had forsaken the God
they served: but cherished and highly honored the other, as men that by their
But Popish Religion teaches that all saithfulnesse is subordinate unto the
Popes will.
Religion had learned to be faithful to whomsoever they had given their troth.
This point of so deep (b) consideration in a Pagan seems admirable, as it is
exceeding comfortable to us all to see how the Lord has given the like measure
of understanding to our King, who among many instructions given the Prince his
son, observed the same ground for trial of his subjects, and confessed
himself, that he never found any more faithful to him in all his distresses,
than such as had been Well applied, Constantius makes true Religion and faith
in God to be the ground of sincere obedience: and the Libeller makes faithful
obedience toward an earthly Prince to be the ground of Religion.
faithful to the Queen his mother, who were not all (you know) of his
Religion.

How certain a trial this is to discern loyal hearts, he will easily
perceive, that looks into the state of our days, wherein as we see more
sects, and more inconstancy in belief, than in any other age since Christ, so
withal we find less fidelity in friend, less trust in servants, and more
dissembling in all states, than ever heretofore was heard or practiced. This
place is 1 Timothy 4. where the Papists are very evidently described.
In the latter days (says Christ) many shall fall away from the faith: and
think you that in those days he shall find faith and fidelity of one man to
another? In the same measure that faith is broken toward God in heaven, it will
break and fail assuredly toward man in earth. In matter of faith (says
Paul) the heart and (a) tongue should agree together: And shall we advise our
Prince, who has be^ne so well brought up in the school of Gods word, to use
such means with his subjects in matters of their faith. as may separate their
outward Both behavior and conscience ought to be rec^^^ie^ accor^ing unto the
rule of truth.
behavior from their inward conscience, or teach the^ to be d^sloyall to
himself, by forcing them to be false to God in their Religion? By violence of
laws he may make many dissemble their faith with repining heart and grudge of
mind, to their assured His Majesty laboreth to bring such as are in the state
of damnation, unto the state of Grace and salvation: not of the contrary.
damnation, because therein they sin against their own consciences: yet sure
it is, that as no man can alter his opinion as he list or at his pleasure, so
force can never change his faith, until his grounds and arguments shall be by
better reasons convinced.

The Libeller being almost out of breath in reckoning up of his Reasons for
promiscuous toleration of all Sects and professions of Religion whatsoever, The
Libellers Digressions.
to recreate and solace himself a little, makes two Digressions; The former
whereof is a Lucianicall discourse concerning reading and interpreting of
Scripture, without any means, rule, or limitation to the analogy of faith,
which because it is but a giddie speech of a malicious Machiauelist, and lying
Papist to disgrace Religion, it needs no further refutation, then a bare
denial.

The Later is of trial by conference, concerning which, because the Libeller
proposes the same again a little after, I will forbear to speak any thing
until we come to that place.

Then he produces an argument to prove how fruitless a thing it is, how
prejudicial to the King and State, to cause men to show themselves outwardly
to be of another profession, then in heart they are; which he labors to
prove by the example of Constantius the father of Constantine the Great, who
would admit none to be about him that were unfaithful in their religion
toward God. If this be true, then would he never admit Papists, whose
perfidiousnesse toward God, in iustling Christ out of his throne, in denying
him to be our perfect and alone Savior, in adulterating his word, and mangling
Religion, is notoriously known.

Obedience to God the ground of obedience to the Magistrate.
And indeed obedience and fidelity toward the Prince, must needs flow and
proceed from conscience in Religion toward God, grounded upon the written
word. But Papists that embrace a Religion patched, like a Beggars cloak, and
compiled of all Heresies, and prefer their own devises and traditions before
the will of God revealed in his word, cannot possibly carry themselves
faithfully toward any Prince: which thing also is evidently seen by their
daily practice; their obedience and faithfulness being pinned upon the Popes
sleeue, to be disposed where he lists.

The Princes security and greatest force lies in the faithful hearts of his
subjects, and the heart or affection of man is never won by violence, and if
we will bring all to the course of the Primitive Church, we must note that then
no But heresies were 1. strained by severity of laws even in the Primitive
Church.
violence was used to establish the Gospel. The Scriptures were searched, but
the The foolish Libeller knows not what interpretation signifies: otherwise
he can not be ignorant that in the place he quoteth all interpretations were
limited according to the analogy faith.
interpretations were not restrained as (b) you may see. 1, Cor. 14. and shall
we now stop men's mouths and tie them with statute laws to the judgment of a
few and make their opinions as a Popish Decree, and that too, before due
examination and trial?

In the Primitive Church there arose a controversy whether the Law of Moises
were still to be observed together with the Law of Christ, for appeasing
whereof the Jews took one way not much unlike to yours, the Apostles an other
way such as I now persuade. The course of the Apostles was conuenerunt Apostoli
and seniores: the learned in both Laws held a council and conference and
resolved the question to the contentment of all the Christians which were
before of different opinion in the matter. This course was then taken, and A
sound Popish Consequence, Christ promised to be there where two or three should
be assembled together in his name. Ergo Councels cannot err.
because Christ promised to be where Christians in his name should thus
assemble and confer together to find out the truth, the Christians from that
time in like case have taken the same course.

Pastors and Bishops of the whole world were called together in the first
council of Nice where that blasphemous Arrius (who denied Christ to be God)
was (a) yet invited to the trial of his Doctrine, and was heard, what he could
say for defense thereof; and so from age to age as heresies have risen in the
Church like course of conference has been taken to confirm the faithful and
convert the misbeleeuers, even until these late days as appears by those
conferences which have been in Germany not only among the But what likeness
is there between the Popish conuenticles and the anncient Councels?
Papists, but also among the followers of those notable reformers M. Luther and
M. Calvin by reason of the diversities of their opinions in matters of The
Libeller is very industrious to note this.
Faith. The Jews thought by whippes and threatenings to stop the mouths of
Christ's Disciples, that they should not persuade nor speak in the name of
Jesus: but the more they were forbid the more they spoke as it has also fallen
out among us of late years in As if the Papists in England spoke in the name
of Jesus, and not in the name of the Pope.
England. Such Constitutions therefore in my opinion are not convenient. and as
for my self, as I do not misdoubt the truth of my belief or No doubt the
Libeller has more courage then strength.
fear any conference or disputation with any contrary sect, so am I not
wedded in such sort to mine own sense, that I altogether Popish pretense.
disdain other men's judgments in the true meaning of the Scriptures,
especially of (b) those most ancient and therefore most reverend assemblies
from all coasts of the earth where Christians lived, which being near to the
time of the Apostles could not but give great light what doctrine the Apostles
had taught in those Countries, and in what sense the Scriptures were
delivered. In this sort did M. Iuell openly at Paul's Cross confidently
challendge the Papists, and in case that they should disagree from him in the
sense and interpretation of the Scriptures, he was content to refer himself
to the uniform Faith of the Fathers in the first six hundred years. For it
was not likely that Who of us ever affirmed that Gods Church was overthrown?
we know the Gates of hell cannot prevail against it.
Gods Church was in so few years overthrown or that any but the Apostles
could have that privilege to plant Christian doctrine in all nations of the
earth as notes Tertullian. lib. de praescriptionibus.

This Challenge of M. Iuells was accepted by his adversaries, and many a good
Soul that had care of salvation and desire of the truth was much edified
thereby, hoping that by this means the truth would come to light, and which
were the primitive faith and doctrine of the Apostles be easily discerned. And
(a) when some violent heads persuaded that M. Iuells challendge should
proceed no further, but that the answeares of his adversaries should be This
was done because the wise Magistrates saw that the Papists were solemnly
sworn that they would neither read, not hear B. Jewels book read: but
greedily embraced the poisoned writings of his Adversaries.
by Proclamation repressed, many began to stagger and think that the truth was
rather on their side, for otherwise (said they) why should not the answers be
seen and read, especially where M. Iuells replies were rife in every man's
hands. For most certain it is that the truth fears no trial, and flies not
the open pulpits and public disputations. The learned writers took it then
for a disgrace to their writings to be quitte by Proclamation which thing once
(my self Note well, Ergo, the Libeller is a man both of years, and place or
quality amongst us. Which causes me to suspect that he can be no Seminary
locust, nor Apocalypticall frog, or Jesuit.
being in company at a dinner) was cast in M. Iuells dish, and hence it
proceed that the answers of the adversaries the more they were forbid the
better they were esteemed to the disuniting of many that were most earnest
before with M. Iuell in his challendge, as the Lord Copley (so they termed him)
D. Steeuens, and others. And if it shall please his Majesty, that the said
challendge be But that challenge was never yet wholly answered by the Papists.
Is it likely that the Libeller is a Puritan, seeing he doubts of the truth
of Jewels challenges.
prosecuted and trial made for the truth, especially among the learned in the
public Schools and Universities, and that not in one point only (b) but in
all, he shall give great satisfaction to every one that in this time of so many
sects has care to find the truth. they that have the truth shall be
confirmed, and such as know it not shall more easily find it by such a free
search and inquisition.

Of trial by Disputation. The Papists ever foiled in Disputation.
Now the Libeller mainely labors to persuade trial by disputation, wherein I
can but wonder at his impudency, considering always in every conference the
Papists fled before us. Martin Luther and Philip Melancthon maintained the
cause of the Gospel by disputation before the greatest States of Germany,
against as subtle instruments of Satan, as ever since have risen up to oppugn
the truth. Theodore Beza, a man of rare knowledge and utterance, assisted with
Peter Martyr disputed this cause at Poyssie, with the choice of the Sorbone and
of all the Papists of France; that the Cardinal of Lorraine wished that Beza
that day had been dumb, or the chief of his Auditors deaf. I will not
mention the disputation of Zuinglius, Oecolampadius, and others at Bearne,
Basile, Strasborough, Zurich, and other free Cities, in all which the truth was
ever found among the Protestants.

But to speak here of the like at home: So it was also in the disputation in
King Edwards time. And in Queen Mary's, albeit they brought those worthy
Martyrs of Christ, Cranmer, Ridley and Latimer to dispute at Oxford with most
unreasonable inequality and conditions, yet they so foiled and wounded their
enemies, that both those that were present, and whosoever shall yet read it to
this day, may easily see that they fought valiantly with the sword of the
Spirit, to the confusion of those that strove against them.

In the beginning of Queen Elizabeth her most blessed and happy reign, the
Popish Bishops and greatest Clerks were provoked and appointed by authority to
dispute, if they were able to maintain their doctrine against the Ministers of
the Gospel; But after a few impertinent words, they gave over their cause in
the plain field, and so ridiculously handled the matter, that it is marvel
that the remembrance of the confusion and shame of that day, does not terrify
the Papists from once daring again to move the matter of disputation with us.
But as the Proverb says, He that runs away may fight again.

So Campian the Jesuit, came with open defiance to provoke the Protestants to
fight with him, boasting to maintain his cause by Scripture, Councels,
Fathers; by all Laws, Civil, Canon, and Common; and by all Histories and
monuments of former ages. But what the issue was, and how his glory was turned
into shame, the Acts of those disputations in public print do manifestly
declare.

So this Puritan-Papist, as also some others of the same crew, crake much of
disputation and conference: But if it pleased his Highness and the State, if
necessity or conueniencie did so require; questionless the rottenness of
their cause should soon appear. For we have the Ark of the Lord among us, we
have his silver Trumpets sounding continually in our camps. Though they came
about us like Bees, yet should they be quenched as a fire of thorns: they put
confidence in themselves, but in the name of the Lord of Hosts we should
prevail against them.

Concerning the challenge of that worthy and learned Bishop Jewel of reverend
memory; B. Jewels challenge.
he undertook and performed against the Papists those seven and twenty
points wherein they differ from us and the Primitive Church; which remain
unanswered unto this day, saving that D. Harding prated a little in the first
point only, which yet was so defended against him and some one or two others
that took his part, that they quite left the field, and fled.

And as hitherto by writing to the glory of GOD, to the gathering and edifying
of his Church, we have defended and maintained the truth against them: So by
the grace and assistance of GOD many of us will be always ready to do the same
hereafter.

Restraint of Heretical Books.
But if they will have their Books pass freely without restraint, and all men
to be allowed to read them: Let them first assure us, that they will leave it
free for all such as are abused by them to read ours. For we are not ignorant
of their discipline to the keeping of the poor and ignorant people in that
captivity, that they may not once dare to read our writings, least they
should be converted and repent, that the Lord might save their souls. For a
few only excepted, whom they think desperate of being converted by any means
unto the truth, they restrain all under their jurisdiction from reading our
works.

If they so straightly provide to hinder the truth, and to keep Captive simple
souls in their blind kingdom of darkness; much more reason have our
Magistrates to provide that the children of light be not led into darkness by
them.

Gamaliell is noted by Luke for a man of Mutuo muli scabunt. One Pharisie
commends another.
deep judgment and worthy Doctor in the Law of Moises, and commended much for
his It was a very foolish counsel.
politic advise given the high Priest, and body of the Council to take heed
to themselves what they intended to do touching the Apostles who seemed to
them to teach a new doctrine. For, said he, If this counsel or this work be
of men, it will come to naught, but if it be of God ye cannot destroy it,
least ye be found even fighters against God. And in this kind he gave certain
instances in Theodas and Judas of Galiley. For as the truth cannot be overcome,
so error and heresies cannot long stand but will at length of them selves
perish, and it is certain that heresies, which arise among Christians, are, as
Augustine well notes, like the little brooks which by great showers swell up
for a time so mightily, as they seem to be great rivers, and run with such
violence that (a) they bear away or shake very maine foundations. To pass
over these torrents in their But if they be restrained at first, they can never
attain to such height of pride.
pride, it were too dangerous and rash an attempt, to seek to hinder their
current were no less folly, In patience these waters are with pleasure seen
to fall, because they proceed not from any true spring as rivers do. So
fares it with all heresies, and teachers of error. They destroy themselves at
length though no force for the time can tame them, the reason whereof is truly
delivered by Christ in those words. Every plant which my heavenly Father has
not planted shall be rooted up.

By this then But you have proved nothing, save your self a fool.
you see that violence is not the best means to plant or conserve the truth,
not to destroy error. I could therefore wish that an easier hand were carried
toward all of what Religion soever, and the rest left to God who knows best
the season and means to compass that which may be most for his glory.

And if foreign examples may persuade aught, we see how the French King
although he be now no The more he has to answer for. But I hope the Lord will
yet open his eyes to behold the glory he fell from, and give him grace to
return from his evil ways. Amen.
more of the Reformed Religion finds himself (b) bound in As if he had no
greater bond to stay him from persecuting the Protestants.
common humanity not to persecute them of the Religion, because he found them
A good testimony out of an Adversaries mouth: But this condemns Papists who
have been very often treacherous unto him.
always faithful unto him and ready to maintain his title to the Crown. If
this course of proceeding be esteemed By whom has it been so esteemed.
honorable in him, how can any man justly dislike that The case is far
different. Read the Answer.
our King should maintain in their estate and dignity such of this realm of
England, as, notwithstanding diversity of Religion, were always ready to make
good his Right, and when time served Because they could not otherwise choose.
received him with all joy and gladness? And if for the fault of a few the
whole number were to be condemned, our party might exspect but small favor at
his Majesty's hand, among whom Name but one.
some have been found more forward against him then among them, as may appear
by the late conspiracy, wherein their error was rather to change some
proceedings then the King. besides that the danger thereof was by some of the
Papist first discovered to the state.

Of Gamaliels Counsel.
It is not the Evangelist Luke that commends Gamaliel, but the Libeller. Luke
says only, that Gamaliel was 1. a Pharisie. 2. a Doctor of the law. 3.
honored of the people. Act. 5.34. The Libeller says he was a man, 1. of deep
judgment. 2. a worthy Doctor in the law of Moses. 3. commended much for his
politic advise. Whereas indeed the advice which he gave was very foolish and
imperfect, unfit to be given by a man of deep judgment. For it is not likely
that Gamaliel spoke so because he approved or favored the doctrine of the
Gospel; or for that he purposed to undertake the defense of the Apostles: But
because he saw the Jews furious and mad, he being a humane and moderate man,
by a middle and gentle speech moderated and assuaged the excess of their rage.

But if we should subscribe to Gamaliels judgment; then were every man to
abstain from all punishment, and so no malefactor should be corrected for any
offense whatsoever.

I confess both these sayings be true in themselves, 1. If it be of man, it
will come to naught. 2. If it be of God, you cannot destroy it. Gamaliels
advise foolish.
But Gamaliel infers from these Propositions a false illation or Conclusion;
that in the mean time we ought to stay and expect the dissolution or vanishing
of wickedness of it own accord: this is no consequence. Yea rather we ought
to consider and execute what God commands, who wills that all wickedness
be punished. And to this end he ordained Magistrates and armed them with the
sword of Justice, to take vengeance of evil doers. If that Theodas and Judas
of Galiley, whom Gamaliel speaks of, had been restrained and curbde at
first, their impiety had never ascended to that height it did afterward.
Wherefore Jerome says, as we have noted before, If that little spark Arius,
had been extinguished at first, the flame thereof had not consumed the whole
world. Hieronym. in Cap. 5. ad Galat.

The Libellers insta^ce of the French King.
To the Libellers instance in the French King, I answer, I That his doings can
be no discharge unto his Majesty. We may not imitate the vices, but the
virtues of others. Let the Libeller first prove that the French King does well
in tolerating Popish heresy, and then urge his example. The Kings Highness
perceiving by Gods law, what every Prince ought to do, regards not what
other Princes please to do; deserving thereby the more thanks with God and
praise with men, for that in guiding his people, he rather embraces religious
piety, then sacrilegious policy.

II The French King professing himself a Papist, grants toleration to
Protestants, who, as the Libeller acknowledges, were ever loyal and faithful
Subjects unto him, who maintain no opinions prejudicial unto his royal
estate, and of conscience do and will always obey him. Whereas his Majesty of
Great Britain being indeed of the Reformed Religion, is solicited to grant
toleration unto Papists who defend positions contrary unto the lawful and
sovereign authority of Kings, and who, it is certain, I speak of the
greatest number of them, are never loyal Subjects unto any, save the Pope only.

III Popery was never yet expelled out of France: and it is more then the
Papists there can do to ruin and expugne the Protestants, peace being granted
unto the Religion for above 40. years, confirmed by the Kings, Princes, Nobles
and Parliaments of that kingdom. But our case is otherwise, for Popery has
been and is still expelled out of Great Britain.

IV In the kingdom of France the divisions are so many, and so intricate of
Protestants and Papists: Royallists and Leaguers; Patriots and Spanish; yea the
Nobility divided from the third state, and the towns from the fields; as it
seems God has some great work to bring to pass upon that nation. Wherefore
it can be no safe president for Great Britain to imitate.

And now that this mild dealing is The Libeller has only sufficiently proved
himself a pragmaticall dissembling fool, and nothing else.
sufficiently proved not to be contrary to the word, let us see awhile what
course is best in humane and civil policy.

The wisest Princes and greatest statesmen endure within their dominions in the
We understand not what case this is.
case proposed, diverse sects and sorts of Religion contrary to their own,
let us behold the experience as well of those that endure them, as of those
that have bent their forces by violence to root them out; as first for
example, our late Queen was not of her self inclined to force or constrain
the consciences of the Papists her subjects, and with that moderate course
which she held in the beginning of her reign she gained the general good
liking of all parts, and lived in great security of her person: But when she
was once drawn by men of violent spirits to root them out by loss of
fortunes, liberty, and She never put any to death but for Treason.
life, she found by experience that A manifest untruth.
the more they were afflicted the more their numbers daily increased, and her
self put often in fear as well of insurrections at home, as invasions from
abroad under color of relieuing men so grievously oppressed.

The greatest force that ever she used to root them out was about the year of
our Lord 1581. and inquiry being made in the year following of the number of
Recusants they were found by the bills (b) of Sir Owen Hopton then Lieuetenant
of the Tower and others in commission to have increased in the circuit of that
year A thing altogether unlikely.
ten for one. She assaied an other way by banishment of some, loss of goods
and life of others, yet left she at her death The reason hereof see in the
Answer.
more Papists then when she first began those violent courses; besides huge
numbers of close Papists and their well-willers, among which are many of high
calling who in regard that it concerns their And yet this fellow is no
Papist, forsooth.
Souls and everlasting life could not live but with a most fearful disgust.
The wars also which have been continued in Ireland against Oneale, Desmound,
and Tirone have been tedious, bloody, and coastly, all which might have been
avoided with carrying a gentle hand ever them and suffering them according to
their Religion, which notwithstanding is so firmly grounded in their hearts, as
very few persons of mark do at this time embrace the Note the Libellers gall
in this term.
liberty of the Gospel. besides that the country has been in hazard to be
lost and planted with And all by the disloyalty of Papists
a potent enemy.

Of the late Queens proceedings against Papists.
As it is true that Consciences are not to be compelled, but persuaded by force
of truth and use of all good means of instruction: So it is certain also,
that Causes of conscience when they grow to be matter of faction loose their
nature, wherefore Princes may and ought to punish exorbitant practices, albeit
colored with pretense of conscience in Religion. According unto these
principles has that Mirror of this Age, our late Sovereign Lady Queen
ELIZABETH of eternal memory, behaved her self during the whole time of her
happy reign.

Coming to the Crown, detesting the Popish Tyranny, which by terror and
rigor ouerruled men's consciences, with great wisdom she permitted only the
exercise of true Religion, and tolerated the Papists with unspeakable
lenity, expecting that time would work some good effect in them.

Popish Bulls against the Queen.
In the mean time, when the Pope, by intercession and entreaty of other
Princes abroad could not prevail with her Majesty, to receive again into her
kingdom the contagion of Popish Heresy, then he began to thunder out Bulls
and excommunications against her, which for many years her Majesty suffered
quietly, accompting them but as words, or wind, or water bubbles, without
punishing the diuulgers and fautours of them. But after some proof, perceiving
that some intemperate and factious Subjects took courage thereby; she could
not but esteem them to be preambles and forerunners of greater danger. And
therefore for her defense against them she revived former laws, to prohibit
the publication or execution of such kind of Bulls within her Realm and
Dominions.

The Bull of Pius V.
Notwithstanding this prohibition, the Papists, abusing her Majesty's lenity
and clemency, brought the said Bulls plentifully into the Realm to move
sedition, and at length most impudently and most arrogantly set up one of them
publicly upon the gate of the Bishop of Londons palace, wherein her Majesty
was denounced to be no lawful Queen, and her Subjects drawn upon pain of
eternal damnation from her obedience. Now who can in common Reason and Sense
mislike that her Majesty finding this kind of denunciation of war, as a
defiance, to be made in her imperial City, by one of her Subjects auowing and
obstinately maintaining the same, should according to justice, cause the
offendour to have the reward due to such a fact? Felton executed.
This was the first action of any capital punishment inflicted for matter sent
from Rome to move rebellion; which was about the 12. year of her Majesty's
Reign.

Rebellion in the North.
Hereat the Pope burning with indignation and fury, from words and writings
fell to actions and practices against her Majesty and the State, soliciting
and provoking her Noblemen and Subjects to disobedience and open rebellion.
Whereupon ensued the rebellion of the Earls of Northumberland and Westmerland,
and their adherents in the North, who putting themselves in arms against their
liege Lady, required by solemn Proclamation forsooth, not only safe conduct
and liberty for the Mass, but also the releasing of prisoners, banishing of
preachers, reuersing of laws, and displacing of Counselors: whom the Queen
subdued by her forces.

Invasion of Ireland.
Not satisfied herewith, the Pope entertained the Traitors and rebels that
escaped out of the Realm for the rebellion, and sent them with certain bands
of Soldiers and Captains of his own, furnished with treasure, munition,
victuals, ensigns, banners, and all other things requisite for war into the
Realm of Ireland, where the same forces with other auxiliar companies out of
Spain, fortifying themselves very strongly on the sea side, proclaimed open
war, erecting the Popes banner against the Queen: and also sent certain
disguised fugitives into England secretly to allure the people to new
rebellions. But through Gods power and special help, her Majesty by laws
suppressed the factious stirrers of sedition in England, and by her sword
vanquished all the Popes forces in Ireland.

The Original of Seminary Priests.
And when the Pope saw that he could not prevail by way of force and violence,
he devised to erect up certain Schools, which he termed Seminaries, to
nourish and bring up persons naturally disposed to sedition, to become
seedes-men in the tillage of Rebellion, and them to send secretly into these
kingdoms, to persuade the people to allow of the Popes Bulls, and to
reconcile men from their loyalty and obedience to the Queen, unto the Pope.
Which traitorous course, had it not been, by Gods goodness, espied and
stayed, there had followed imminent danger of horrible vproars in the Realm.
For some of these cursed and seditious Seedes-men and sowers of Rebellion were
discovered, and being charged with evident points of high Treason (not being
dealt withal upon Questions of Religion) were truly convicted, openly
condemned, and justly executed as Traitors unto their Prince and Country.

Hereby appears the Libellers impudency and malice in traducing the Queens
government for tyranny; whereas indeed it was but due and needful execution
of Justice, for necessary preservation of her person, estate, and Subjects, For
that Prince that neglects his Office, and suffers disloyal Subjects and
Rebels to have their wills, for want of resistance and courage, ought not to be
pitied, though he lost his Crown, his head, his life, and his kingdom.

Touching the increase of Papists, ten to one that were before, in the year
1582. ten to one it is a malicious lie and untruth, which needs no further
refutation. For lightly said without proof, may be lightly contemned without
answer.

Of the increase of Papists in the last years of the Queen.
And that the Papists began to increase in the later years of the Queen; it
was by reason of impunitie and slumber of Justice, as her Majesty confesses
in her Edict Nouemb. 15. 1602. which she was then presently about to reform,
and indeed had so done, if she had not been prevented by Death.

You will perhaps reply that in Scotland our brethren had better success when
they took arms in the days of his (a) Majesty's mother for the A malicious
untruth.
spreading of the Gospel: yet you must confess that it was but small
discretion to set all upon the uncertainty of a battle. Many like violent
attempts have been practiced in that Realm through zeal of Religion, but by
clemency and moderation his Majesty has not only escaped the dangers, but
also made himself a peaceable Master and Lord over them all, imitating herein
that most renouned French King Henry 3. who perceiving the fire of Civil wars
to kindle between the King of Navarre, who was of the Religion, and the house
of Loraine would For he never joined with both together.
break neither with the one nor the other, but favored them both so far, as
in the end he made himself The Libeller must needs be either a fool that
knows not what he writes; or a Knave for belying of Stories. For that poor
King was so far from being peaceably Lord over the house of Lorraine, that
they traitorously caused him to be murdered in his Camp before Paris. Read
the Answer.
peaceably head of them both, who afterward wholly depended upon his will and
pleasure. To continue yet further in the affairs of France, they that have
seen the success may witness that no violence could work out True, because
the gates of hell cannot prevail against Christ's Church.
them of the Religion in the time and reign of Charles 9. and since the said
King Henry's death the force of Spain joined with France under the conduct of
the Dukes of Parma and Du Maine did not so much (b) prevail in France as did
the Bishop of Rome his O courteous entreating!
courteous entreating the now King and his adherents although of a contrary
Religion unto him. If the Pope will for his more For he does nothing but for
advantage.
advantage yield to them in some things who were his greatest enemies, what
need we be so straight laced against our own Countrymen for matters of
Religion? May not his Majesty's example of clemency toward the Papists
here, move some Prince abroad to be Fond suggestions.
favorable to our brethren? Is not the Mass suffered at Rochell, and other
like towns in France in hope that they of the Religion may be like-suffered
in Paris and other such towns in France? Have not our brethren in Holland
offered to admit the Papists to preach and say Mass in their Countries, so
that they might have like liberty in all the other Provinces? If we have the
truth why should we Let the Libeller persuade the Pope and the King of Spain
first to grant this liberty to our Religion.
fear that other Religions should have liberty with us? and why may not the
King do as the Queen mother did in France who being a stranger in the
Country, and at the death of her husband the government of the Realm No
otherwise then by great means and entreatie.
falling into her hands during the minority of her children, did judge (a) it
the wisest way for the maintenance of her authority, to keep still on foot
the oppositions which she found either by diversity of Religion or otherwise,
and to favor them False, for from the year 1562. unto her dying day she was
an extreme enemy unto them of the Religion.
all in such sort as still she might be able to curb the stronger by
supporting the feeble and weaker party.

Every little governor in France that has under his charge a town or
province where men of sundry Religions live, as the Duke Memorancy, the Duke
Bullion, Diguiers and the like takes the same course as the Queen mother did,
and so keeps his places or provinces at his devotion and in due obedience.
And at this day in France you see no undiscreetly zealous man in great favor
with the King or in high estate to govern, that by the moderation of such as
are not too forward the insolency of other (whom zeal may move to be
troublesome) may be repressed. And Non causa pro causa.
thus the Country is kept in greater peace and quietness then has been
seen in France for 40. years before, and that chiefly by the diligence and
dexterity of two especial favorites of the King, the Marquis of Rosne high
Treasurer and Monsieur de Villaroy principal Secretary, both of them (b) of
far different yet temperate humor in Religion.

Wherefore the Scottish Noble men took arms.
It was not for the cause of Religion that the Noblemen of Scotland took arms,
(as the Libeller would make us believe) but for other matters. The house of
Guise in France under color of consanguinitie and Religion, brought into
Scotland French forces in great numbers. Whereupon the ancient Nobility of the
Realm, seeing the imminent danger of reducing their kingdom under the
Tyranny of Strangers took arms against the enemy: and being not strong
enough to subdue them, prayed the Queen of England her ayding forces, which
her Majesty, knowing the action just and honorable, easily granted them, and
accordingly expelled the Strangers, and restored the Nobility to their degrees
and ancient privileges, and the State to peace.

The other attempts which he speaks of practiced in that kingdom, when they
shall be particularly specified; they shall be fully answered.

That concerning the French King Henry 3. is altogether false. Of the French
K. Henry 3.
The truth is: The Duke of Guise that he might strengthen himself and his
house to take the Crown, if ought should befall the Kings line; by the support
and practice of the Queen Mother obtained great authority in the kingdom of
France: whereupon having raised and moved Civil wars under pretense of
Religion, though indeed to weaken and extirpate the Princes of the blood and
ancient Nobility of the Realm, took arms against the Huguenots, but seized
upon the best towns of the Catholics. Religion was preached at Guyenne, and
the Leaguers went to drive it out of Picardie: The Huguenots were at Rochel,
and their army marched straight to Paris: The Huguenots are at Montpelleir,
and the League set upon Marseille. Whereupon the King writing unto the King of
Navarre, says; That he knew that those of the League, what show soever they
made, plotted only against his Person and Crown, thinking to rise and become
great at his coasts, seeking nothing else but the utter ruin and dissipation
of his Estate. On the other side, the King of Navarre and the rest of the
Princes of the blood, together with many of the Peers and Nobles of France and
the greatest Officers of the Crown, perceiving the Duke of Guise his malice,
and seeing his injustice, that, being but a Subject, he would with private and
armed violence murder innocents and make himself sole commander, gathered
themselves, to preserve their liberties granted by public Edicts, and to save
their lives from the fury of that ambicious Blood-sucker, Mean time, the
Leaguers having the King at advantage, presented him with these requests; viz.
To make an irreuocable decree for the extirpation of Heresies: To take by force
those Towns held by those of the Religion: To renounce the protection of
Geneua: To auctorise the wars: To reconcile the Leaguers unto him: To be of
their League; that is, of a King to become a Participant. And thus the Leaguers
having made their peace with the King, they caused him presently to interdict
the exercise of the Religion by a new Edict, recalling all former Edicts for
peace; to approve the wars; to banish the Ministers; and to force all his
Subjects to become Papists. The King of Navarre being advertised of these
proceedings, complains unto the King of the peace he had made with the
League, declaring unto him that himself could not be ignorant, that he had
made peace with his Enemies, and armed them with his forces and authority
against the Estate, against the Blood, and against his own Person. The King
was now in woeful case, and in great perplexity and distress, neither durst
he use the authority of a King. If he consented to the liberty of Religion
and restored them the Edict of peace, he thought he heard all the mutinous
Leaguers continually about his ears: if he made war against the King of
Navarre and the Religion, he had fifty thousand Strangers upon his back, that
would constrain him to overthrow the League. Wherefore he desired the Duke of
Guise to yield to a peace, not to abandon the Estate of the Realm for a pray
unto Strangers, to procure the ease and contentment of the King, the comfort of
the people, the freedom of the Clergy, and the dignity of the Nobility by
other means, then by Civil wars which would overthrow all. But the Duke of
Guise, who rather desired a battle then a disputation, answered the King
resolutely, that he would have no peace but war, and caused the King in his
own person to march against the Protestants. After that the King had made some
few skirmishes, the glory whereof redounded to the Duke of Guise, he stayed for
a time to resolve himself upon the intention of the Princes of the League
(which was now favored by the Pope, the Emperor, the King of Spain, the Duke
of Sauoy, certain Princes of Germany, all the house of Lorraine, and all the
chief Towns in France that had entered therein) and made show to consent unto
them: for indeed he was not able to resist them, being in a manner banished in
the middle of his estate, and spoiled of his authority: So that now he
acknowledged his fault that he agreed to the treaty of Nemours, to the breach
of peace, and to approve the league. The people ever where Monsieur de Guise
came still received him with great joy and acclamations, Viue Guise, Viue le
Pillier de l' ^glise: in so much that the King was feign secretly to fly from
Paris, and shift for himself: For Monsieur de Guise being puffed up with
popular insolency, had absolutely determined, either to slay the King, or at
least to cast him into a Monastery, as Chilperic was, and to usurp the
kingdom himself. Now the King having escaped, and the rumor thereof being
spread over all France, Monsieur de Guise began to protest his innocence, and
the duty he had showed in restraining the fury of the people, traveling in
the Kings behalf against the attempt of the Barricadoes. But the King, The
death of the Duke of Guise.
thinking that the life of Monsieur de Guise would be his death, resolved to be
revenged of him: And so indeed, because very many were engaged in that
conspiracy, he caused him to be suddenly surprised and slain at Blois in the
entry as he came from the Councel-chamber into the Kings chamber.
Notwithstanding this execution of the duke of Guise, yet the flame of that
conspiracy was nothing assuaged: for the league caused not a few of the
chiefest cities in France to rise against the king; whereby the king grew so
distressed, as he was forced to make peace with the king of Navarre, to crave
his forces for his relief, and also to implore succors from her Majesty of
England, but before these forces could be transported into France, the king, by
the malicious and devilish instigation of the League, Death of Henry the 3. K.
of France.
was most traitorously murdered by Friar Jacques Clement, in his camp near
Paris. By this a man may see what conscience the Libeller makes of falsifying
Histories, and how true that is where he says, that in the end the king made
himself peaceably head of them both, who afterward wholly depended upon his
will and pleasure.

In the time of Charles the 9. albeit the Papists omitted no deceit, perjury,
massacres, nor wars, to root out them of the Religion: yet because they
defended their liberty by the confirmation and authority of so many Edicts of
peace (God also favoring their cause) their adversaries molested them in vain,
for they could not prevail against them; but for all their persecutions the
Protestants still increased more and more both in zeal and number.

Also in the time of Henry 4. the present king; the Dukes de Maine and Parma
with Spanish forces taking the Rebels part, against their lawful king, with
Cyclopicall immanitie set upon them of the Religion, whom they could not subdue
by any force of arms; because it was but vain for them to fight against GOD.
And the Duke of Parma his disgraces and shame in those attempts are commonly
known.

How courteously the Pope entreated Henry 4. K. of France.
But for the Pope his courteous entreating of the now king of France; besides
that thereby he provided for his own commodity and profits in that kingdom;
What courteous dealing was it, to lash such a mighty king (in the person of his
Ambassador at Rome) after the singing of every verse of Miserere, until the
whole Psalm was sung out? The king of Great Britain will never envy or
grudge this humanity and courtesy unto any.

Of the queen Mothers dealing toward Protestants.
The Queen Mother, desirous to retain the Regency in her own hands during the
minority of her Sons, used those of the house of Guise as a counterpoyse
unto the Princes of the blood; but never granted any thing unto the
Protestants, but what had been granted and ratified before by many public
Edicts. Yea from the year of our Lord 1562. until the year 1588. Ian. 5.
which was the time of her death, she omitted no slight, devise, cunning,
policy, nor devilish practice that she could possibly invent utterly to
extirpate and root out the Religion, out of the kingdom of France.

As for the Duke Mommorancy, the Duke Buillon, the Lord of Diguieres and such
other, they do but as they are bound to do by public Edicts.

Now then let us see what success they had that took the contrary course of
violence. Truxes in these our days B. of Colen became a Lutheran, and desirous
to bring the Country of his Electorship (and so in time the whole Empire) to
Lutheranisme, used no violence against his subjects that were Papists, Trucces
never used violence aagainst any man first nor last.
until Cassimere gave him contrary council, by which he clean overthrew
himself, lived in banishment, died in beggerie, and left the Country without
False.
all hope of ever enjoying the Gospel again.

The zeal of the Archduke of Stiria was highly commended by the Papists for
his religious mind, but not for his indiscreet attempts in banishing them
that were of a contrary Religion out of all his dominions except they would
become Papist like himself. and now it is evident that the moderate government
of his Father was much better, who considering how dangerous a neighbor he
had, and the number of those who otherwise would have lived discontented in his
Country, permitted them their Religion and entreated them no worse then (a)
his other subjects, whereby he ended his days in peace; Being banished thence
upon pain of Death.
departed their Country and had Most false.
intercourse with the Turk, others stayed and dissembled their Religion, while
Canisia the key and stay of that country was delivered up Because they could
not choose, the Turk winning the same by the dint of his sword.
by them to the Turk, who the more freely spoiled all the Land because the
Archduke, having lost the hearts of his subjects, wanted men and means to
resist him. A worthy but lamentable mirror for all Princes to look in, and
behold how perilous a thing it is to use violence against Against true
Religion.
whatsoever Religion, but especially for England, that so near at hand has
such mighty Kings, who perhaps would be glad of the like occasions. We have
sometimes supported their A lying Libeller.
subjects against them for zeal of Religion, and therefore we have just cause
to fear the like measure.

If Charles 5. in Germany had not abated the flame of civil wars by
forbearing to persecute true Religion.
by his conniuence and toleration, the French King had made as easy an
entrance into other parts of the Empire as he did into (b) those three
Imperial towns, Metz, Towle, and Verdun: but by the loss of these Cities
his successors have learned to take a more mild course with their subjects of
whatsoever Religion, least they should open a more dangerous gap for the Turk
the professed enemy of the Empire, and all Christendom.

The like toleration as in the Empire is all so permitted in the kingdom of We
live not by examples, but by Laws and rule of Reason.
Poland by reason of the Moscouit bordering upon them and in Dantzik (as you
know) there is public profession of both Religions.

In Zuitzerland at the first heat many a bloody battle was fought for
Religion, but in time they learned to join wisdom with zeal for
conservation of the state, and now they live in peace with all security
tolerating within their Cantons the one and the other Religion.

If the King of Spain had at first permitted liberty of Religion in the low
Countries, he had spared many a million both of men and money, and enjoyed with
peace that, which he is never like to recover. In that glass likewise may we
see how ready Great in the Libellers malice against the late Queen; but God be
thanked her Majesty had need neither to fear nor to envy any King or Prince
whatsoever.
Princes are upon such occasions to weaken the forces of other (a) Princes
their neighbors, whose puissance they fear or envy their glory.

But now let us look home, and we shall The infatuated Libeller can see
nothing but Papists.
see Ireland ouergrowen with Papists, who have not dissembled themselves as by
the late wars appeared but (especially at the Queens death when not only in
the Country The Libellers general and universal Lie.
generally, but also in the chief towns (where they were most restrained)
made their public processions after the Papisticall fashion, where the Right
honorable the now Earl of Deuenshire most sage and wise in his government,
not by force but True, when he had fairly hanged up the principal Agents in
that vile attempt.
fair means suppressing their fervor, conserved the Country in peace and
obedience to his Majesty, and we see that the King does not dislike that
course by his singular favor to His Majesty did but graciously ratify the
pardon which the Queen had granted before.
Tyrone and his accomplices.

Scotland for the face of the Church is generally of our reformed Religion: yet
has the Papist part Popish sclanders of the Liberller.
so great a sway in the Country and so mighty a support of the Nobility,
that not many years since they encountered the Earl of Arguile in the field
and gave him the overthrow. Howbeit they Loyal Subjects needed ot to have
fled.
fled before the face of the King when he came in person, leaving (b) their
houses and Country at his Majesty's devotion.

England is much more divided into sects especially into three, the Protestants
only allowed by authority in the Realm, the Papists who pretend antiquity,
and thirdly our selves who no less desire to reform the Protestant abuses,
then they have done the Papists. The state of his Majesty's Dominions standing
thus then as you see, what The Libeller thinks none wise but himself.
wise man can wish him to stir much against any? For what man may justly
repine if he but only abstain from violence? We may very well content our
selves that our King is of our faith, and will not suffer us and our doctrine
to be either disgrace or defaced. and a temperate course with the Papists may
win them to be as ready as others to withstand all foreign invasions or Who
are likely to make insurrections at home but Papists?
home insurrections if either of both under what pretext soever should happen.
And in like case as was our Portugal voyage, or upon any revolt of the
Indians, or tumult in France, ten thousand Papists would do mere service in
winning to them the inhabitants of those parts (being as they are affected in
Religion) then Who ever knew a more impudent lying Libeller?
thrice told so many of (a) us. wildness will do and how lately Repentance
may follow the Hence may be gathered that the Libeller is well stricken in
years.
green and unripe heads of Roboams young unadvised and violent counselors.

The Libellers instance in the Elector Trucces Archbishop of Colen.
The Elector Trucces Archbishop of Colen, never attempted any thing by arms or
violence within his jurisdiction. But as soon as the Pope understood that he
favored Religion, he unjustly deprived him of his honor and dignity; and
consecrated the ambicious Bishop of Leodium in his place.

In the Archduke of Stiria.
In Stiria the Archduke, by the instigation of the Spanish Queen his Sister,
and the pernicious Councels of the Jesuits, expelled true Religion from his
dominions, where it had taken deep root before; to the just hazard of his
Dukedom, which now lies sore bleeding. So also is all Hungary, at this
instant, like to be rent from the Empire and utterly lost, upon the same reason
and judgment. Oh Lord! What mean these men to pluck up the sweet flowers,
and leave the stinking weeds! To cut off the fruitful branches, and let
those that be rotten and withered alone! to burn the corn and spare the
stubble! Why put they Noah into the Arc, and drown themselves; whose being
amongst them kept them from the deluge! Wherefore do they thrust Lot out of
Sodom, that kept the city from burning! and oppress Moses, who should wrestle
with Gods anger and keep it from them!

Charles the 5.
As for Charles the 5. his granting of toleration: why should not the Germans
submitting themselves unto the Emperor at his Election but upon condition,
enjoy the same liberties and securities of their public State as their
Fathers did before them?

Poland and Dantzike.
The same thing also may be said of Poland etc. But the case is otherwise in
Great Britain, which is an absolute Monarchy.

Touching Zuitzerland: Heluetia.
it is no news to see many laws under many Lords; the Cantons or Cities of
Heluetia have regal jurisdiction within their several precincts and
liberties: not one of them admit mixture of Religion. Some of them, as Zurich,
Basil, Bearne, Schaffouse, Glaris and Appensel, have embraced the doctrine of
the Gospel: the rest, Fribourge, Lucerne, Vri, Swits, Zug, Vnderuard and
Soullerre persisting still in ignorance, retain the Popish Heresy in the same
fashion as they were wont.

And for the Low-Countreies: Flaunders.
What reason is there that the King of Spain should alter their State, euert
their ancient Laws, disanull their liberties and privileges, his style
declaring him to be not King, but Earl of Flanders? His purpose was to have
established a martial Government amongst them, as being very commodious unto
him, that in time he might easily, as occasion should be offered, have made
himself Commander of England and of France, and at length absolute Monarch of
all Europe. But the Netherlanders being very wealthy and inhabiting towns
strong and defensible by fortification both of nature and industrious art,
could not endure his tyranny. And indeed the Spaniard being admitted a
Protector, if he will needs become an oppressor; wherefore should not they
defend the freedom of their Country? especially their privileges being of
such nature, as they do justly esteem themselves but Conditionall-Subiects to
the King of Spain; and their Country being never an absolute Monarchy?

Queen Elizabeth supporting of the Hollanders.
Now because the Libeller maliciously glanceth at the late Queen for supporting
and protecting the Netherlanders, I answer; That her Majesty's proceedings in
that action, were so just, so Christian and mingled with so many honorable
reguardes, as nothing does so much acquit her Majesty not only from passion,
but also from all dishonorable policy. For first, at the beginning of those
troubles she imparted unto the King of Spain sincere advise not to hold a
heavy hand over that people, which he rejected and contemned. Her Majesty
nevertheless gave not over her honorable resolution, which was, if it were
possible, to reduce and reconcile those countreies unto the obedience of the
King of Spain; if not, yet to preserve them from alienating themselves to a
foreign Lord: and so continued to mediate unto the King for some just and
honorable Capitulations of grace and accord. Which course she held until the
death of the Duke of Aniowe, at which time the enemy pressing them, the united
Provinces were received into her Majesty's protection: which was after the king
of Spain had discovered himself an unplacable Lord to them: and also a
professed enemy unto her Majesty, having already actually invaded Ireland,
and designed also the invasion and conquest of England. Her Majesty
notwithstanding still retained an evident proof to the world of her justice
and moderation, in that she refused the inheritance and sovereignty of those
Provinces, which by the States with much instance was pressed upon her.

I will add yet an example in the Monarchy of the A fit President for
Papists to follow, but not for Christian Princes professing the Gospel.
Turk, who (governing himself only by the light of natural reason as we may
do when it is without prejudice to the gospel) set down as a Maxim in
policy to clime the better to that greatness whereto he aspired, not to force
the conscience of his subjects, nor ever to change with violence the Religion
in such kingdoms as he might happily subdue. Whereupon some have more easily
yielded unto his conquest, and Who be they that we may know them.
others oppressed by their own Princes, and perturbed with civil wars have
called the Turk unto them, and made him Lord of the wholle land which they
would never have done, if it had been his custom to force any against his
conscience in matters of Religion.

Luther himself being pressed by the wars of Charles 5. dealt earnestly with
the Germans A malicious lie.
to call in the Turk, hoping that under his guuernement he might more freely
preach the gospel. and Non causa pro causa.
for the (b) greater glory of their nation, and their Prince his advancement
the French do best like the same course of toleration in Religion, and have
found by practice that they live in peace with the exercise of both religions
Upon exception the Libeller means to defend himself by this word.
almost in all their towns. not without great hope that in revolution of
times their King may have thereby a more easy access unto the empire or to
other states as occasion falls.

The States of the united Provinces have offered him such an entry into their
country as he should never have obtained, if there had been the least
suspicion of forcing their consciences, and in vain should he Is the Libeller
of Counsel to the French King that he knows his secret intent?
aim at the kingdoms of Navarre, and Naples, or the Duchy of Millaine, were
he an enemy to their Religion. Why then might not our King take the like course
for This whole Paragraph with some few following do argue that the Libeller is
an Atheist.
occasions or pretensions abroad, and his safety at home, it being the
readiest way to keep all his forces united, and all his subjects in most
dutiful affection toward him and his royal issue. For whosoever considers
the multitude of his people and their valor, how easily they are leauied, how
speedily embarked for any (a) country, shall find that our King may with
greater reason aspire to the election of the Empire in case he did affect it
then any other, or some of his noble issue be chosen Kings of Poland, or be
ready to embrace any occasion offered for the increase of this Monarchy.

The French King was How proves the Libeller these things? or have we any
reason to believe him on his bare word?
glad to see our late Queen embarked in the wars of the low Countreies, at
what time perchance by reason of his trobles she might have recovered the
Duchy of Normandy, and perhaps the better part of France as she was once
resolved to have done by the advice of Duke Cassimer, and she had gonne
forward had it not been laid clearly before her eyes how An odious lie.
odious she had made herself unto that nation by persecuting her subjects at
home with taxations and torture. and to this purpose they published in print
the severe laws which she had made against the Mass and the Papists.

They that called in the Spaniard would have yielded more willingly to their
ancient Dukes of Normandy, had they not been withdrawn with fear of loosing
the exercise of their Religion. And if France should fall again (as it may)
(b) into the like danger upon some new occasion, were it not to be wished that
such parts theirof as would seek to be under the government of a stranger,
might fall rather into our hands then any other?

By this you may perceive that the Marquis Rosne his conceit was not to our
disadvantage. For they of the Religion in France in time of civil wars may
give us an entry, and the other the rather for our alliance with many of their
Princes will give us aplancke to pass over for their relief.

I dwell not in these examples as desirous of war, for I wish his Majesty for
his more assurance at home to strengthen himself abroad in civil amity with
all, with France, with Spain, yea with the No doubt the Libeller has a Pope
in his belly.
Pope himself. for it is no wisdom to make light of any man's friendship. I
wish his Majesty likewise to entertain as he does all his subiests with
sweet behavior to cut of all occasions from foreine Princes to support his
subjects or disunite his Kingdoms, which they never wished to see so united in
one. His Majesty therefore has great reason to cherish all indifferently, (a)
and to put none out of his English Arc, no more then Noah did out of his,
where as you know there were beasts of all kinds. Ireland was a great
temptation to the Spainiard, and the French take little pleasure at this
mariadge with Scotland, whence they were always wont to have relief when our
armies were in France.

All things are best preserved by such means as they are begotten. God has
made him our king without bloodshed, and with such peace he may reign more
assuredly then by any force or violence. The Turk as I have said got many
kingdoms by tolerating their Religions: but when there arose a new sect in
his own law^, passion and presumption made him forget the Principle by which
he grew to be so great, and so he lost by one reuolte the half of his Empire
(which now the Persian enjoys) whilst by war and force he striued to
gain them.

The Libellers instance in the Turk.
To pass over the looseness of the Libellers allegation, what means the
lewdness of his instance and example? Is his cunning so small or malice so
vile, that he will bring in the Turk to countenance his intention? What
madness is it for him to think that a Christian King furnished with so rare
gifts of wisdom, learning and virtue, would swerve from the steps of the
famous and godly Kings of Judah, would repeal the laws of Religious and
ancient Emperors, to be sorted with Saracins, or take part with the chiefest
vpholders of mahometisme?

The Libellers gross lies.
The residue of this parcel, is nothing but notorious and palpable lies,
interlaced with Machauellian occasions and pretensions I know not what.

His gross and palpable lies, are

I That some Protestants have easily yielded unto the Turks conquest. II That
others being oppressed by their own Prince have called the Turk unto them,
and made him Lord of the whole land. III That the Turks do not use to force
any man's conscience. IV That the Turks not forcing the conscience made the
Protestants to yield unto him. V That Luther dealt with the Germans to call in
the Turk. VI That under the Turks government he hoped freely to preach the
Gospel. VII That the French King grants toleration for the greater glory of
his nation. IIX That the French live in peace with the exercise of both
Religions. IX That the French King has great hope to have easy access to the
Empire. X That the States of the united Provinces have offered the French King
an entery into his country. XI That the French King aims at the Kingdoms of
Navarre and Naples, and the Duchy of Millaine. XII That toleration is the
readiest way to keep all forces united. XIII That toleration was the readiest
way to keep Subjects in most dutiful affection. XIV That the French King was
glad to see the late Queen embarked in the wars of the low-Countreies. XV
That the late Queen was once resolved to recover the Duchy of Normandy, or
the better part of France. XVI That Duke Cassimer did advise her so to do. XVII
That she had gone forward in that action, had it not been showed unto her that
she was odious unto the French. XIIX That she persecuted her subjects at home
with taxations and torture.
I cease to reckon up the rest: Here are 18. lies almost within the compass
of so many lines; and yet but suitable unto the precedent and subsequent parts
of the Libell; whereby it is easy to gather from whence it proceeds, and
also of what Spirit the Libeller is.

The Libeller an Atheist.
His Machiauellian course for occasions and pretentions abroad, are evident
arguments of the aspiring and unchristian Spirit of an ambicious Atheist, which
need no further refutation.

The means to apease dissentions are True, where milder means take place.
not rough speeches nor hard vsages, which if in all quarells it be true (as
Solomon says) then is it much more in matters of understanding as are faith
and Religion, wherein whenever willfullnes is (b) joined, persuasion may
perhaps prevail alone, but As if any wise Magistrate will use force without
reason.
force without reason never.

All violent proceedings engender grudge of heart in him that is oppressed; and
provoke to revenge, if gods grace hinder not, and so commonly is of small
continuance because the A lively description of a Popish disloyal Subject.
subject (quitting thereby the natural affection due to his Prince and
country) seeks for redress abroad, and rests his affection most commonly
upon the open and professed enemy of the state.

Queen Elizabeth was highly blamed of All such as the Libeller is.
all statesmen abroad that she being too straight with her Papisticall
subjects at home for the education and bringing up of their children, gave them
thereby occasion to seek to foreine Princes, where they might suck from their
youth affection to her enemies. His Majesty in my poor opinion may do much
better to call them home The presumptuous libeller will prescribe his Majesty
what to do.
not by threatninge Proclamations which hitherto we see could never prevail,
but by permittinge them at home such instruction as god shall inspire in their
hearts according to his What without using the means?
eternal election, and predestination for every good guifte and faith
especially is from above. Force none (a) to fly their country by persecution,
and few or none will That is to say, Let them have what they will, and they
rest satisfied.
go to be priested abroad.

Does the Libeller put no difference between such as be weak in faith, which
may be soon won, so they be followed; The we ache is to be borne with but not
the wilful.
and those which be wilful offenders, and will by no means be reformed? Does
he make no distinction between ignorance and error? infirmity and
infidelity? although all be sins, yet are they not of one sort, nor of like
consideration. If we hang such as imbeasle our goods, shall we harbor such as
impair Gods glory? Shall we prefer temporal commodity before the eternal
Majesty? No no, all favor is too little where there is hope of recovery;
any, is too much where the case is incurable. Therefore as those which are
tractable to be taught, and conformable to good orders, are to be continued and
favored: so such as set abroach gross importable errors, and obstinatly
persevere and maintain the same are to be cut off, least others by their
example be animated to evil: for better it were to cut off one member, than to
endanger the whole body.

Finally, in reason of state, if you will have his Majesty so straight laced
that he may not look vpona Papist, nor abide a Mass within his Realm, where
shall you find in Christendom a worthy match for the Let the Libeller care
for his winding-sheete, and let this business alone.
Prince his son? No daughter of France or Spain will com into England
without their chappells open after the Papists fashion. Shall we let Flaunders
upon this scrupulous point befall to France, or shall not we rather seek it
for our selves by the marriage of a daughter of Spain? And whereas all the
Croune of Spain may descend upon a daughter both by their ancient laws, and
the This probability is now made improbable, by the birth of a young Prince.
present probability, shall we leave that garland to others and deprive our
selves by such The Libeller accounts Religion and the worship of God, but a
nice poine.
nice points of all possibility to that succession? I tell you Who more bold
then blind Bayard?
plainly my conceipte, we should do his Majesty and the realm herein great
wrong, and very much hinder the propagation and course of the gospel.

Let us therefore hereafter use a more As if his Majesty's proceedings hitherto
were unchristian and uncharitable.
Christian and charitable proceeding with (b) them that differ from us in
Religion if they cannot be persuaded by our life and doctrine to be of our
felloweshipe and communion, let them remain a gods name (as they are)
Recusants. for to compel them by penal laws to our churches or to receive
the supper of the Lord cannot be called by any pretext an Apostolical
reformation, for if our treasure be pearls indeed, why shall we cast them
before swine and dispense them to men unworthy? Paul The Libellers
Andabatisme.
says that in such things we must shune them and not admit them so long as
they remain faithles. for as god and Beliall have no participation, so the
faithful and unfaithful may not have part together nor eat of the altar of
god and altar of Idolles.

Let us rather practice the means which we find in the world to reclaim such
as err, and in the mean time live in moral amity one with an other, for the
good and security of our king and country and the advancement of his
posterity, and abstain from all force for pressing of men's consciences. And
so to conclude, since this manner of proceeding by violence has often done
much harm and never good (as by sundry examples both (a) at home and abroad
is evident) it is good we be not singular but conform our appetites and
opinions to the example of our savior, of his most honorable Council, and
commone course of the wholle world. And thus much for the defense of my opinion
and (as I hope, at least wise wish) reformation of yours. To which howsoever it
shall please god to give his blessing, yet accoumpt me still your friend and as
faithful in the Lord now as For indeed the Libeller never yet was faithful in
the Lord; except he means his Lord God the Pope. And hitherto of this false
and I dolatrous Brothers Libell; who (if I can judge any thing) is a man of
quality and great veeres, one that would seem to be a Protestant in outward
profession and a Puritan in his writings; but is indeed a Papist in heart and
affection: and yet such a Papist, as does not grearly care for any Religion at
all.
ever.

FINIS.

The impudency of the Libeller.
Submission to God and his Prince would better become the Libeller, then this
malepert kind of prescribing, and presumptuous match-making. It is not for any
Subject to meddle herein, further then he has commission from his Sovereign.

Yet arrogant and pragmaticall Papists, as they dare be bold, being but dust
and ashes, impiously to oppose themselves against God, in prescribing and
appointing how he should be served: so also they audaciously presume to manage
State affairs, to dispose kingdoms, to order kings, and to match Royal
Children in idolatrous families. Of marriage with those of diverse Religions.


But we are assured that his Majesty's religious heart knows that it is not
lawful for Gods Children to marry with idolaters and superstitious persons.

I Because the faithful party is in danger to fall away from the Lord: which
clause is expressly added in the law. Deuteronomy. 7.3. II Because the old world was
drowned for such marriages. Genes. 6.2. etc. III Because the children of Israe
marrying with the daughters of Moab thereby fell into idolatry. Numb. 25.1.2.
IV Because King Solomon fell away upon the like occasion. 1. King. 11.1. V
Because Ezra and Nehemias with great indignation brake off such marriages. Ez.
9.10. Nehem. 13. VI Because Iehoshaphat was reprehended by Iehu, that he had
made affinity with Achab, in taking for his son Ioram, Athalia the daughter
of Achab to wife. 2. Chron. 19.2. 2. Chron. 21.6. VII Because this mischief
ensued thereof, that Ioram at the instigation of his wife, forsaking the true
worship of the Lord, followed the ways of the Kings of Israel. 2. Chron.
21.6.13. IIX Because it is an abomination in Israel, and a profanation of the
name of God, when Judah marries the Daughter of astrange god. Malach. 2.11. IX
Because such as do so, profane the covenant of God, contemn their brethren,
and pollute the Church of God, which should be holy and undefiled. Ezra.
9.2.14. X Because the Lord will cut off the man that does this, both the Master
and the Servant, out of the tabernacle of Jacob. Malach. 2.12. XI Because the
Apostle Paul forbids us to be unequally yoked with Infidels. 2. Corint.
6.14. XII Because the same Apostle wills widows to marry only in the Lord.
1. Corinthians. 7.39.
See (...) lib. 2. page 78.
These things, we know, his excellent Majesty is not ignorant of, and therefore
we are certainly persuaded that he will give no care unto dissembling and
whispering Papists.

To the Libellers Conclusion, I answer in one word; that if the Papists, the
more they be forborne, the less they are reformed, (as experience teaches)
surely I think it were pity they should be favored.

CHAP. X Of the Punishment which ought to be inflicted upon Heretics and
Idolaters.
Having spoken of the unlawfulness and Danger of Toleration, and answered the
Objections brought for licencious Profession: it follows to speak a word or
two of the punishment of Sectaries and Heretics.

Diversity of Offenders.
As all Offenders be not of one sort or condition, so are they not to be
punished alike, nor with one and the same kind of punishment.

Three things to be considered.
Wherefore Christian magistrates are wisely to consider 1. The Person that
offends. 2. The quality of his Offense or Error. 3. The degree and manner of
the punishment due unto him.

1. The Person.
First, for the Person. Some err of ignorance, others of malice: some of
weakness, others of wilfulness: some were never solicited to forsake their
heresies, others hate instruction: some are merely seduced, others are
arrogant Seducers; which circumstances must be wisely considered and
distinguished.

2. The Error.
Secondly, for the Errors. Some are against the Foundation, and those either
directly, or by consequence and diduction only; others leaving the foundation,
only build thereon hay, straw and stubble, which either time, that is the day;
or fire, the Spirit of God; or afflictions of this life; or at length the very
article and point of death does prove and declare; that at last these builders
may be saved, as Paul teaches. 1. Corinthians. 3.11.12.

3. The Punishment.
Thirdly, for the Punishment. It is not of one kind, for every one must be
punished according to the quality and nature of his offense. The diversity and
degrees of punishment are excellently laid down, in the Book of Ezra, thus:

And thou Ezra, (after the wisdom of thy God, that is in thine hand) set
Judges and Arbiters, which may judge all the people that is beyond the River,
even all that know the law of thy God, and teach ye them that know it not. And
whosoever will not do the Law of thy God and the Kings law, let him have
judgment without delay, whether it be unto death, or to banishment, or to
confiscation of goods, or to imprisonment. Ezra. 6.25.26.

Where God gives power and full auctority unto Ezra, and in him to all
Magistrates, to restore all things according unto the word of God, to instruct
the ignorant and weak therein, and to punish them that resisted and would not
obey. The punishment is fourfolde.


The Punishment to be inflicted upon offenders is foure-folde, 1 Imprisonment,
(for we will begin with the least) 2 Pecuniarie mulct, or Confiscatio^ of
goods. 3 Banishment or Exile. 4. Death; of which we will speak in order.

I. Imprisonment.
I Penal Imprisonment, (for we speak of no other here) must needs be
grievous, as well for the infamy and reproach of the place; as also for that a
man thereby is restrained of his liberty, deprived after a sort of common
breath and light, as being unworthy both of the aspect of heaven and the
fellowship of men, and also thrust into close and dampish rooms, dark and
loathsome.

Hereunto may be referred the Subtraction of the right of humane Society and
civil Privileges.

So Constantine the great deprived Heretics of power to make a Will of their
goods, or of bequeathing or giving any thing, of buying or selling. August.
lib. 1. contr. Epist. Parm. cap. 7.

Also his sons Constantine, Constantius and Constance decreed that all
Heretics should be incapable of any privileges granted to Christians. Cod.
Just. lib. 1. tit. 5. de Haeret. And Theodosius Mayor ordained the same thing.

Again, Heretics were not capable of any offices, either Ecclesiastique or
Civil. They were not admitted to be Counselors, Judges, Aduocats etc. Cod.
Just. lib. 1. tit. 5. l. Credentes. Neither could they be Plaintiffes in any
cause, but only Deffendants.

This Punishment being the easiest of all 4. is to be inflicted upon such
offenders as refuse instruction when it is graciously and gently offered them;
or that neglect the sincere worship of God, and will not be admonished;
refrain from public exercises and assemblies etc.

II. Pecuniarie Mulct.
II Pecuniarie Mulct, or Confiscation of goods, is that when the offender is
either deeply amerced; or else when by open Publication his goods are
confiscated and soulde.

Hereunto belongs disarming, disinheriting, incapabilitie of receiving any
legacies or other gifts, of bargaining, etc. All which were executed by the
ancient Emperors against Heretics.

A Bishop or Cleargie-man that was an Heretic was to pay ten pound-waight
in gold, or to be banished. Cod. Just. lib. 1. tit. 5. de Haeret.

Constantine (says Augustine) was the first, that ordained that Heretics
goods should be confiscate and sold. August. Epist. 48. and also that the
places of their meetings and conuenticles should be sold. August. Epist. 168.

Also he made them incapable of enjoying legacies or any thing that was
bestowed upon them. Aug. lib. 1. contr. Parm. cap. 7. and. Contr. Petil. lib.
2. cap. 92.

If it be objected, It is unlawful to take sale-money for conscience contrary
unto the word of God.

The taking of a pecuniarie Mulct lawful.
I answer, It is true. But this penalty or mulct cannot be termed Sale-money
for conscience: Because the Magistrate thereby respects not his own gain,
but, 1 The amendment of the offender. 2 his weakening and disabling in case of
obstinacy. 3 The deterring of others from offending in such manner, etc.

If any Prince interdict his Subjects to kill Partridges or Phesants, to hunt
in certain places, to eat flesh upon certain days, under the penalty of
such or such a mulct: who will say that the Princes intention, is to gain by
such offenses; and not rather that he aymeth at order, and labors to correct
the offenders by that penalty of a pecuniarie mulct?

Neither can any man affirm, that such a Mulct is contrary unto the word of
God, as well for that it is directly confirmed by this place of Ezra; as also
for that for the same cause, no Magistrate could with a good Conscience take
any mulct or forfeite for any offense whatsoever, because it would be deemed,
he took Sale-money to commit such and such disorders or offenses; which is
absurd.

Such as cannot be reclaymed by Imprisonment, must be won by this severe
mulct or confiscation of goods.

III. Banishment.
III Banishment or Exile, is when a man is compelled to forgo his Country for
his Offense. And this among the Romans was 3. fold, Interdiction, Relegation,
and Deportation; but we shall not need at this time to discourse hereof.

It was ordinary with the first Christian Emperors to bridle Heretics with
this kind of punishment. So Constantine the Great banished Arius and his
followers. Theodosius Junior, Nestorius. Valentinianus and Theodosius, the
Manicheis and Donatistes.

And when it was expected that Augustine, by reason of the mildness and
goodness of his nature should mediate for some part of these penalties to be
released; he gave this quick and stout Answer.

Augustine allowed and commended those penalties.
Ha ha, what else! I should gainsay this Constitution; That you loose not the
things, which you call yours; and you without fear spoil Christ of his. That
the Roman Laws should permit you to make your last wills; and you with
cauilling reuerse that which God bequeathed our fathers. That in buying and
selling your contracts might be good; and you share that among you which Christ
bought when he was sold. That you might freely give what you list; and what the
GOD of Gods has bestowed on his own Children from East to West should be
void. That you should not be banished from the place where your bodies rest;
and you drive Christ from the kingdom purchased with his blood to reach from
sea to sea. No, no; Let Princes (on Gods name) serve Christ in making laws for
Christ.

With this punishment must stubborn and obstinate (but not relapsed) Seducers
or Heretics be punished. Whom the Magistrate may brand with some indelible
mark, the better to know them, if ever they presume to return again without
leave.

IV. Death.
IV Death, is the last punishment that is to be inflicted upon the Offendour by
the Christian Magistrate.

Examples of this kind of punishment, are obuious every where in the Old and
New Testament, executed upon Heretics and Idolaters, Seducers or Seduced,
as well upon the one, as upon the other.

The Sons of Leui consecrated their hands unto God, that is, did a good and
acceptable work, in putting to death almost 3000 men, of them that worshipped
the golden Calfe. Exodus 32.27.

Asa made a decree, that whosoever would not seek Jehovah the God of Israel,
should be slain. 2. Chron. 15.13.

Iehu declare his zeal toward God, in killing all the Priests of Baal, 2.
King. 10.24.

Josias killed the Priests of the high places upon the altars. 2. King. 23.20.

Nabuchadnezzar decreed that whosoever blasphemed the God of Shadrach, Meshach
and Abednago, should be hewed in pieces. Dan. 3.29.

Elias killed 850 Priests of Baal. 1. King. 18.40.

In the New Testament: Peter stroke Ananias and Saphira for their hypocrisy
and close sacrilege with sudden death. Act. 5.5.10.

Paul stroke Elymas the Sorcerer with blindness, because he would have seduced
the Proconsul from the faith. Act. 13.8.10.

In the Primitive Church, Constantine, Theodosius, Grarian and Valentinian
decreed, that the punishment of Idolatry should be death. Cod. Just. lib. 1.
tit. 1. l. Placuit. and l. Ne quis.

Arcadius and Honorius punished the Manichaeis and Donatistes with death. Cod.
Just. lib. 1. tit. 5. l. Manichaeos.

Justinius about the year of Christ 526. caused all the Manichaeis in Persia to
be slain, because they had perverted the Kings Son.

Theodosius Junior would have none spared, that were deprehended by any means
to seduce others, or to infect any man with pestiferous doctrine. Cod. Theodos.
l. 46. Novel. Theodos. de Iud. Haeret. and Page

This punishment of Death is to be inflicted upon all obstinate, wilful, and
relapsed Seducers or Heretics: Upon such as maintain their pernicious
opinions, either of mere perfidiousnesse, envy and malice, for the repulse of
some dignity or Bishopric, as Nicephorus speaks of Tertullian after he
relapsed to Montanisme, of Florinus, Blast us, and Arius. Niceph. Ecclesiast.
lib. 4. cap. 7.12.20.30. and lib. 8. cap. 5. Or of confidence that they have in
their own wit, learning and eloquence, as Tatianus, Valentinus, Marcion,
Saturninus, and Nouatus did. Niceph. lib. 4. cap. 4. and lib. 6. cap. 3. Or of
ambition and affectation of primacie, as Montanus did. Niceph. lib 4. cap. 22.

These men, that are thus instructed with courage, boldness, hypocrisy,
learning, eloquence, do not only destroy themselves, and run headlong into
perdition; but also, as a swift torrent or stream, they draw others with them
into the same pit. Wherefore the Magistrate ought by death severely to punish
their fury, seeing such dangerous monsters can not be permitted to live,
without manifest and pernicious perturbation of civil Society.

APOCALYP. 7.12. Amen, Praise, and Glory, and Wisdom, and Thanks, and
Honor, and Power, and Might, be unto OUR GOD for evermore. Amen.
FINIS.
The Chapters of this Book.
CHAP. I. OF the diversity of opinions concerning Pacification. Page 1 CHAP.
II. Reasons against Toleration and Permission of diverse Religions out of the
Old Testament. Page 3 CHAP. III. Reasons against Toleration and Permission of
diverse Religions out of the New Testament. Page 11 CHAP. IV. Reasons against
Toleration and Permission of diverse Religions, out of the ancient Canons,
Councels and writings of the Fathers of the Primitive Church. Page 15 CHAP. V.
Reasons against Toleration and Permission of diverse Religions, from the ancient
Fathers practice and carriage in their exemplare lives. Page 20 CHAP. VI.
Reasons against Toleration and Permission of diverse Religions from the Acts,
Laws, Constitutions, Rescripts, Decrees, and Edicts of Christian Emperors.
Page 23 CHAP. VII. That most of these laws against Toleration and Mixture of
diverse Religions, were promulgated at the instance and request of the ancient
Fathers. And that when the Emperors began to slack the execution of
Justice, to be indulgent and to collude with Heretics, they were either
greatly blamed, or at least admonished by them. Also the Cause wherefore some
Emperors were more conniuent and indulgent toward Heretics. Page 31 CHAP.
IIX. Of the certain danger, mischief, inconveniences and confusions which
Toleration and mixture of diverse Religions brings unto the Commonwealth. And
how the Judgments of God prosecuted such Magistrates as permitted licencious
profession, and also the Commonweals wherein such dissoluteness has been
exercised. Page 38 CHAP. IX. A Consideration of an Epistle apologeticall
written by a Puritane-Papist, in favor of Protestants, Papists, and those of
the Reformation. Page 46 Particular things handled in this Chapter.
That the Libeller is a Papist. page 48 The Libellers Proposition. page 55 Of
Popish Compulsion. Ibidem. How Christian Princes may compel. page 56 The
Parable of the Tares expounded. page 58 The Parable of the fruitless
Fig Tree. page 62 Toleration of Iebusites, Jews, etc. page 63 Whether men
may be compelled to Faith. page 66 How Protestants spoke against compulsion.
page 67 The Libellers Digressions. page 70 Obedience to God the ground of
obedience to the Magistrate. page 71 Of Trial by disputation. page 73 B.
Jewels Challenge. page 75 Restraint of Heretical Books. page 76 Of Gamaliels
Counsel. page 78 The Libellers instance in the French King. page 79 Of Queen
Elizabeth's proceedings against Papists. page 81 The Original of Seminary
Priests. page 84. Wherefore the Scottish Noblemen took arms. page 87 Of
Henry 3. K. of France. page 88 H^w courteously the Pope entreated Henry 4. King
of France. page 92 Of the Queen Mothers dealings toward Protestants. page 92
The Libellers instances, in the Elector Trucces. pa. 96 The Archduke of Stiria.
page 96 Charles the 5. page 96 Poland and Dantzicke. page 97 Heluetia. Ibid.
Flanders. Ibid. Of Queen Elizabeth's supporting the Hollanders. page 98 The
Libellers instance in the Turk. page 101 The Libellers gross lies. page 102
The Libeller an Atheist. page 103 The weak is to be borne with, but not the
wilful. page 104 Of Marriage of those of diverse Religions. page 106
CHAP. X. Of the Punishment which ought to be inflicted upon Heretics and
Idolaters. page 108

