THE PLEASANT HISTORY OF the two angry women of Abington.

With the humorous mirth of Dicke Coomes and Nicholas Proverbs, two
Seruingmen.

As it was lately playde by the right Honorable the Earl of Nottingham, Lord
high Admiral his servants.

By Henry Porter Gent.

Imprinted at London for William Ferbrand, and are to be sold at his shop at
the corner of Colman street near Loathbury. 1599.

The names of the speakers.
M. Goursey. Mist. Goursey. M. Barnes. Mist Barnes. Frank Goursey. Phillip.
Boy. Mall Barnes. Dick Coomes. Hodge. Nicholas Proverbs. Sir Raph Smith. Will
sir Raphes man.
The Prologue.
GEntlemen, I come to ye like one that lackes and would borrow, but was loath
to ask least he should be denied: I would ask, but I would ask ^o obtain:
O would I knew that manner of asking: to beg were base, and to cooche low and
to carry an humble show of entreatie, were too Dog-like that fawnes on his
master to get a bone from his Trencher: out Curr^ I cannot abide it, to put on
the shape and habit of this new worlds new found beggars, mistermed Soldiers,
as thus: sweet Gentlemen, let a poor Scholar implore and exerate, that you
would make him rich in the possession of amite of your favors, to keep him a
true man in wit, and to pay for his lodging among the Muses: so God him help
he is driven to a most low estate, it is not unknown what service of words ^e
has been at, he lost his lims in a late conflict of floute, a brave repulse
and a hot assault it was, he does protest, as ever he saw since he knew what
the report of a volley of testes were, he shall therefore desire you: A plague
upon it, each Beadle disdained, would whip him from your company. Well
Gentlemen, I cannot tell how to get your favors better then by desert: then
the worse luck, or the worse wit or some what, for I shall not now deserve it.
Welcome then, I commit my self to my fortunes, and your contents, contented to
dye, ^f your severe judgments shall judge me to be stung to death with the
Adders hiss.

The pleasant Comedy of the two angry Women of Abington.
Enter Master Goursey and his wife, and Master Barnes and his wife, with their
two sons, and their two servants. Master Goursey. GOod master Barnes, this
entertain of yours,
So ^ull of courtesy and rich delight,
Makes me misdoubt my poor ability,
In quittance of this friendly courtesy.

M, Bar. O master Goursey, neighbor amity,
Is such aie well of high reckoned worth:
As for the attain of it, what would not I
D^sburse, it is so precious in my thoughts.

M. Gou. Kind sir, near dwelling amity indeed,
Offers the hearts enqui^y better view.
Then love that's seated in a farther soil,
As prospectiues the nearer that they be,
Yield better judgment to the judging eye,
Things seen far off, are lessened in the eye,
When their true shape is seen being hard by.

M. Bar. True sir, it is so, and truly I esteem,
Mere amity familiar neighborhood,
The cosen german unto wedded love.

M. Gou. I sir, there is surely some aliance twixt them,
For they have both the offspring from the heart,
Within the hearts blood Ocean still are found,
Jewels of amity, and lemmes of love.

M. Bar. I master Goursey, I have in my time,
Seen many shipwracks of true honesty,
But incident such dangers ever are,
To them that without compass sail so far,
Why what need men to swim when they may wade?
But leave this talk, enough of this is said,
And Master Goursey, in good faith sir welcome:
And mistress Goursey, I am much in debt,
Unto your kindness that would visit me.

M^. Gou. O master Barnes, you put me but in mind,
Of that which I should say: it is we that are
Indebted to your kindness for this cheer:
Which debt that we may repay, I pray lets have,
Sometimes your company, at our homely house.

Ms. Bar. That mistress Goursey you shall surely have,
Heel be a bold guest I warrant ye,
And boulder too with you then I would have him.

M^s. Gou. How do ye mean he will be bold with me?

M^. Bar. Why he will trouble you at home forsooth,
Often call in, and ask ye how ye do:
And sit and that with you all day till night,
And all night too if he might have his will.

M. Bar. I wife indeed, I thank her for her kindness,
She has made me much good cheer passing that way.

M^. Bar. Passing well done of her, she is a kind wench,
I thank ye mistress Goursey for my husband,
And if it hap your husband come our way
A hunting, or such ordinary sportes,
I Will do as much for yours, as you for mine.

M Gou Pray do forsooth, Gods Lord what means the woman,
She speaks it scornefully, I faith I care not,
Things are well spoken, if they be well taken,
What mistress Barnes, is it not time to part?

Mis. Bar. What Is a clock sir?

Nicholas. It Is but new struck one.

M. Gou. I have some business in the town by three.

M. Bar. Till then lets walk into the Orchard sir.
What can you play at Tables?

M. Gou. Yes, I can.

M. Bar. What, shall we have a game?

M Gou. And if you please.

M. Bar I faith content, we will spend an hour so:
Sir fetch the Tables,

Nic. I will sir.
Exit.
Phil. Sir Frank, whilst they are playing here,
We Will to the green to Bowls.

Fra. Phillip content, Coomes come hither sir,
When our Fathers part, call us upon the green,
Phillip come, a rubber and so leave,

Phil, Come on.

Exeunt. Coom. God's Blood, I do not like the humor of these springa^s, the^l
spend all their fathers good at (...)* But let them trowle the bowls upon the
green: He trowle the bowls in the Buttery, by the leave of God and master
Barnes: and his men be good fellows so it is, if they be not let them go snick
up.

Exit,
Enter Nicholas with the Tables. M. Bar. So set them down,
Mistress Goursey, how do you like this game?

Mi. Gou. Well sir.

M. Bar. Can ye play at it?

Mis. Gou. A little sir.

M. Bar. Faith so can my wife.

M. Gou. Why then master Barnes, and if you please,
Our wives shall try the quarrel twixt us two,
And we will look on?

M. Bar. I am content, what woman will you play?

Mis. Gou. I care not greatly.

Mis. Bar. Nor I, but that I think she will play me false.

M. Gou. I Will see she shall not.

Mis Ba. Nay sir, she will be sure you shall not see.
You of all men shall not mark her hand,
She has such close conueyance in her play.

M. Gou. Is she so cunning grown, come, come, lets see.

Mis. Gou. Yea mistress Barnes, will ye not house your jests,
But let them rome abroad so carelessly?
Faith, if your iealious tongue utter another,
I Will cross ye with a jest, and ye were my mother,
Come shall we play?

Mis Bar, I, what shall we play a game?

Mis. Gou. A pound a game.

M. Gou How wife?

Mis. Gou. Faith husband not a farthing less.

M. Gou. It is too much, a shilling were good game.

M. Gou. No, weell be ill huswiues once,
You have often been ill husbands, lets alone.

M. Bar. Wife, will you play so much?

Mis Bar. I would be loath to be so frank a gai^^ster
As mistress Goursey is, and yet for once,
I Will play a pound a game as well as she.

M. Bar. Go to, you will have your will.
Offer to go from them.
Mis. Bar. Come, there is my stake.

Mis. Gou. And there is mine.

Mis. Bar. Throw for the Dice: Ill luck they are yours.

M. Bar. Master Goursey, who says that gamings bad,
When such good Angels walk twixt every cast?

M. Gou. This is not noble sport, but royal play.

M. Bar It must be so where royals walk so fast.

Mis. Bar. Play right I pray.

M^. Gou. Why so I do.

Mis. Bar. Where stands your man?

Mis. Gou. In his right pl^ce.

M^s. Bar. Good faith, I think ye play me foul an Ace,

M. Bar. No wife, she plays ye true.

M^s. Bar. Peace husband, peace, i will not be judged by you.

Mis. Gou. Husband master Barnes, pray both go walk.
We cannot play, if standers by do talk.

M. Gou. Well to your game, we will not trouble ye.

Go from them. M^. Gou. Where stands your man now?

M^. Bar. Does he not stand right?

M^. Gou. It stands b^tweene the points.

M^. Bar. And that's my spite.
But yet me thinks the dice runs much uneven,
That I throw but dewes ase and you eleven.

Mis. Gou. And ^et you see that I cast down the hill,

M^. Ba. I, I beshrew ye, it is not with my will.

Mis Gou. Do ye beshrew me?

M^. Bar. No, I beshrew the dice.
That turn you up more at once, then me at twice.

M^. Gou. Well, you shall see them turn for you anon.

M^. Bar. But I care not for them when your game is done,

Mi. Gou. My game, what game?

M^. Bar. Your game, your game attables.

Mi. Gou. Well mistress, well, I have red Aesops sables,
And know your morrals meaning well enough.

Mi, Bar. Lo you will be angry, now heeres good stuff,

M. Gour. How now woman, who has won the game?

M^ Gou. No body yet.

M. Bar. Your wife's the fairest far't.

Mi Bar. I in your eye.

M^. Gou. How do you mean?

Mi Bar. He holds you fairer for it then I.

Mi. Gou. For what forsooth?

M^. Bar. Good gamster, for your game.

M, Bar. Well, try it out, it is all but in the hearing.

Mi. Bar. Nay if it come to bearing, she will be best.

Mi. Gou. Why, you are as good a bearer as the rest.

Mi. Bar. Nay that's not so, you bear one man too many.

Mi. Gou. Better do so then bear not any.

M. Ba. B^shrew me, but my wives iestes grow too bitter,
Plainer speeches for her were more better,
Malice lies inbowelled in her tongue,
And new hatched hate makes every jest a wrong.

Mi. Go. Look ye mistress now I hit ye.

Mi. Bar. Why I, you never ^se to misle a blot,
Especially when it stands so fair to hit.

Mi. Gou. How mean ye mistress Barnes?

Mi. Ba. That mistress Gourse's in the hitting vain.

Mi. Gou. I hot your man.

Mi. Bar. I, I, my man, my man, but had I known,
I would have had my man stood nearer home.

Mi. Gou. Why had ye kept your man in his right place,
I should not then have hit him with an ase.

Mis. Bar. Right by the Lord, a plague upon the bones.

M^. Gou. And a hot mischief on the curser too.

M. Bar. How now wife?

M. Gour. Why what is the matter woman?

Mi. Gou. It is no matter. I am.

M^s. Bar. I you are.

M^s. Gou. What am I?

Mis Bar. Why that's as you will be ever.

Mis. Gou. That's every day as good as Barneses wife.

Mi. Bar. And better too, then what needs all this trouble?
A single horse is worse then that bears double.

M. Bar. Wife go to, have regard to that you say,
Let not your words pass forth the vierge of reason:
But keep within the bounds of modesty,
For ill report does like a Bayliffe stand,
To pound the straying, and the wit-lost tongue,
And makes it forseit into follies hands,
Well wife, you know it is no honest part,
To entertain such guests with jests and wrongs,
What will the neighbring country vulgar say,
When as they hear that you fell out at dinner?
Forsooth they will call it a pot quar^ell straight,
The best they will name it, is a woman's iangling,
Go too, be ruled, be ruled.

Mi Ba^ Gods Lord, be ruled, be ruled
What, think ye I have such a babies wit,
To hane a rods correction for my tongue?
School infancy, I am of age to speak,
And I know when to speak, shall I be child for such a?

Mi. Gou. What a? nay mistress speak it out,
I scorn your stopped compares, compare not me
To any but your equals, mistress Barnes,

M. Gou. Peace wife be quiet.

M. Bar. O persuade, persuade.
Wife, mistress Goursey, shall I win your thoughts,
To composition of some kind effects?
Wife, if you love your credit leave this st^ife,
And come shake hands, with mistress Goursey here,

Mi. Ba. Shall I shake hands? let her go shake her heels,
She gets nor hands, nor friendship at my hands,
And so si^ while I live I will take heed,
What guests I bid again unto my house.

M. Bar. Impatient woman, will you be so stiff in this absurdnes?

Mi. Ba. I am impatient now I speak,
But sir I Will tell you more an other time,
Go too, I will not take it as I have done.
Exit
Mis. Gou. Nay, she might stay, I will not long be here
To trouble her: well master Barnes,
I am sorry that it was our happes to day,
To have our pleasures parted with this fray,
I am sorry too for all that is amiss,
Especially that you are moou'de in this,
But be not so, t's but a woman's jar,
Their tongues are weapons, words their blows of war,
It Was but a while we buffeted you saw,
And each of us was willing to withdraw,
There was no harm nor bloodshed you did see:
Tush, fear us not, for we shall well agree:
I take my leave sir, come kind hearted man,
That speaks his wife so fair, I now and than,
I know you would not for an hundredth pound,
That I should hear your voices churlish sound,
I know you have a far more milder tune
Then peace, be quiet wife, but I have done:
Will ye go home? the door directs the way,
But if you will not, my duty is to stay.

M. Bar. Ha, ha, why here is a right woman, is there not?
They both have din'de, yet see what stomachs they have.

M. Gou. Well master Barnes, we cannot do with all,
Let us be friends still.

M. Bar. O master Goursey, the mettell of our minds,
Having the temper of true reason in them,
Affoordes a better edge of argument,
For the maintain of our familiar loves,
Then the soft leaden wit of women can,
Wherefore with all the parts of neighbor love,
I impart my self to master Goursey.

M. Gou. And with exchange of love I do receive it,
Then here weel part partners of two cursed wives.

M. Ba Oh where shall we find a man so blessed that is not,
But come, your business and my home affairs,
Makes me deliver that unfriendly word among friends, farewell.

M. Gou. Twenty farewels sir.

M. Bar. But hark ye master Goursey,
Look ye persuade at home as I will do,
What man, we must not always have them soes.

M. Go. If I can help it.

M Bar. God help, God help,
Women are even untoward creatures still.

Exeunt Enter Philip, Francis and his boy from bowling. Phil. Come on Frank
Goursey, you have good luck to win the game.


Fran. Why tell me, is it not good, that never played before upon your green.


Phil. It Is good, but that it cost me ten good crowns that makes it worse.


Fran. Let it not grieve thee man, come ore to us,
We will devise some game to make you win
Your money back again sweet Philip.

Phil. And that shall be ere long and if I live, But tell me Francis, what good
Horses have ye to hunt this Summer?


Fra. Two or three Iades, or so.

Phil. Be they but Iades?

Fran. No faith my wag string here
Did founder one the last time that he rid,
The best gray Nag that ever I laid my leg over.

Boy. You mean the flea bitten.

Fran. Good sir the same.

Boy. And was the same the best that ere you rid on?

Fran. I was it sir.

Boy. I faith it was not sir.

Fran. No, where had I one so good?

Boy. One of my color, and a better too.

Fran. One of your color, I nere remember him, one of that color.


Boy. Or of that complexion.


Fran. What Is that ye call complexion in a horse.


Boy. The color sir.


Fran. Set me a color on your jest, or I will:


Boy. Nay good sir hold your hands.


Fran. What, shall we have it?


Boy. Why sir, I cannot paint.


Fran. Well then, I can. and I shall find a pe^sill for ye sir.


Boy. Then I must find the table if you do.


Fran. A whoreson barren wicked ^rchen.


Boy. Look how you chafe, you would be angry more, if I should tell it you.


Fran. Go to, I Will anger ye and if you do not.


Boy. Why sir, the horse that I do mean,
Has a leg both straight and clean.
That has nor spauen, splint nor flawe.
But is the best that ever ye saw,
A pretierising knee, O knee!
It is as round as round may be,
The full flank makes the buttock round,
This palfray stands on no ground,
When as my maister's on her back,
If that he once do say but, ticke,
And if he prick her, you shall see
Her gallop amain, she is so free,
And if he give her but a nod,
She thinks it is a riding rod:
And if he will have her softly go,
Then she trips it like a Do,
She comes so easy with the rain,
A twine thread turns her back again,
And truly I did nere see yet;
A horse play proudlier on the bit,
My master with good managing,
Brought her first unto the ring,
He likewise taught herto coruet,
To run and suddenly to set,
She Is cunning in the wild goose race,
Nay she is apt to every pace,
And to prove her color good,
A flea enamourd of her blood,
Digd for channels in her neck,
And there made many a crimson speck,
I think there is none that use to ride,
But can her pleasant trot abide,
She goes ^o even upon the way,
She will not stumble in a day,
And when my ma^ster.

Fra. What do I?

Boy. Nay nothing sir.

Phil. O fie Frank fie,
Nay, nay, your reason has no justice now,
I must needs say, persuade him first to speak,
Then chide him for it: tell me pretty wag,
Where stands his prawncer, in what Inn or stable?
Or has thy master put her out to run,
Then in what field, what champion feeds this courser?
This well paste bonnie steed that thou so praisest.

Boy. Faith sir I think.

Fran. Villain, what do ye think?

Boy. I think that you sir have been asked by many,
But yet I never heard that ye told any,

Phil. Well boy, then I will add one more to many,
And ask thy master where this Iennet feeds:
Come Frank tell me, nay prethie tell me Frank,
My good horse-maister tell me, by this light
I will not steal her from thee: if I do,
Let me beheld a selone to thy love.

Fran. No Phillip no.

Phil. What, will thou were a point but with one tag?
Well Francis well, I see you are a wag.

Enter Comes. Com. Swounds where he these timber turners, these trowle the
bowls, these green men, these.


Fran. What, what sir?


Comes. These bowlers sir.


Fra. Well sir, what say you to Bowlers?


Coo. Why I say they cannot be saved.


Fra. Your reason sir?


Coo. Because they throw away their souls at every mark


Fra. Their souls, how mean ye?


Phi. Sir he means the soul of our bowl.


Fra. Lord how his wit holds bias like a bowl.


Coo. Well, which is the B^as?


Fra. This next to you.


Coo. Nay turn it this way, then the bowl goes true.


Boy. Rub, rub.


Coo. Why rub?


Boy. Why you ouercast the mark and miss the way.


Coo. Nay boy Ivse to take the fairest of my play.


Phi. Dicke Coomes me thinks thou art very pleasant. When gotst thou this
mirrie humor?


Coo. In your fathers Seller, the merriest place in the house.


Phi. Then you have been carowsing hard,


Coo. Yes faith, it is our custom when your fathers men and we mere.


Phi. Thou art very welcome thither Dicke.


Coo. By God I thank ye sir, I thank ye sir, by God I have a quart of Wine for
ye sir in any place of the world, there shall not a seruingman in Barkeshire
fight better for ye then I will do, if you have any quarrel in hand, you shall
have the maidenhead of my new sword: I paid a quarters wages sor't by Jesus.


Phi. Oh this meat failer Dicke,
How well t'as made apparel of his wit,
And brought it into fashion of an honor,
Prithee Dicke Coomes but tell me how thou do?

Coo. Faith sir like a poor man at service.


Phi. Or serving man.


Coo. Indeed so called by the vulgar.


Phi. Why where the devil had thou that word?


Coo. O sir, you have the most eloquenst ale in all ^he world, our blunt soil
affoordes none such,


Fra. Phillip leave talking with this drunken fool, Say sir where is my
father?


Coo. Marry I thank ye ^or my ve^^ good cheer, O Lord it is not so much
worth, you see I am bold with ye, Indeed you are not so bold as welcome, I
pray ye come oftener, Truly I shall trouble ye, all these ceremonies are
dispatched between them, and they are gone.


Fra. Are they so?

Coo. I before God are they.

Fra. And wherefore came not you to call me then?

Coo. Because I was loath to change my game,

F^a. What game?

Coo. You were at one sort of bowls, as I was at another,

Phi. Sir, he means the buttery bowls of beer.

Coo. By God sir we tickled it.

Fra, Why what a swearing keeps this drunken ass,
Can thou not say but swear at every word?

Phi. Peace do not mar his humor prethie Frank.

Coo. Let him alone, he is a springall, he knows not what belongs to an oath.


Fra. Sir, be quiet, or I do protest.

Coo. Come, come, what do you protest?

Fra. By heaven to crack your Crown,

Coo. To crack my crown, I lay yea crown of that,
Lay it down and ye dare:
Nay god's blood, i will venture a quarters wages of that,
Crack my crown quoth a?

Fra. Wirl ye not be quiet, will ye urge me?

Coo. Urge ye with a pox, who vrges ye?
You might have said so much to a clown,
O rone that had not been ore the sea to see fashions,
I have I tell ye true, and I know what belongs to a man,
Crack my crown and ye can.

Fra. And I can ye rascal. Phi. Hold hair brain hold,
Do thou not see he is drunk?

Coo. Nay let him come,
Though he be my masters son, I am my masters man,
And a man is a man in any ground in England:
Come, and he dare, a comes upon his death,
I will no^ budge an inche: no god's blood will not,

Fran. Will ye not?

Phi. Stay prithie Frank, Coomes do thou hear?

Coo. Hear me no hears
Stand away, I Will trust none of you all,
If I have my back against a Cart wheel,
I would not care, if the devil came.

Phi. Why ye fool, I am your friend.

Coo. Fool on your face, I have a wife,

Fra. She Is a whore then.

Coo. She Is as honest as Nan Lawson.

Phi. What Is she?

Coo. One of his whores.

Phi. Why has he so many?

Coo. I as many as there be Churches in London.

Phil. Why that's an hundred and nine.

Boy. Faith he lies a hundred.

Phi. Then thou art a witness to nine.

Boy, No by God, I Will be witness to none:

Coo. Now do I stand like the George at Colbrooke:

Boy. No thou standst like the Bull at S. Albones.

Coo. Boy ye lie the horns.

Boy. The Bul's bitten, see how he buts.

Phil. Comes, Comes, put up, my friend and thou art friends

Coo. I Will hear him say so first.

Phil. Frank prethie do, be friends and tell him so,

Fra. Go to I am.

Boy. Put up sir, and ye be a man put up.

Coom. I am easily persuaded boy.

Phil, Ah ye mad slave.

Coomes Come, come, a couple of whore-masters I found
ye, and so I leave ye.
Exit.
Phil. Lo Frank do thou not see he is drunk,
That twits me with my disposition?

Fra. What disposition?

Phil. Nan Lawson, Nan Lawson,

Fran. Nay then,

Phil. Go to ye wag, it is well,
If ever ye get a wife, I faith I Will tell,
Sir at home we have a Seruingman,
He Is not humord bluntly as Coomes is,
Yet his condition makes me often merry,
I Will tell thee sir, he is a fine neat fellow,
A spruce slave, I warrant ye, heel have
His Cruel garters cross about the knee,
His woollen hose, as white as the driven snow,
His shoes dry leather neat, and tied with red ^bbins,
A nose-gay bound with laces in his Hat,
Bridelaces sir his hat, and all green hat.
Green Co^erlet, for such a grass green wit,
The goose that graseth on the green quoth he,
May I eat on, when you shall buried be,
All Proverbs in his speech, he is prouerb^ all.

Fra. Why speaks he Proverbs?

Phi. Because he would speak truth,
And proverbs you will confess, are old said sooth.

Fra. I like this well, and one day I Will see him,
But shall we part?

Phil. Not yet, I Will bring you somewhat on your way,
And as we go, between your boy and you,
I Will know where that Praunser stands at leuery.

Fra. Come, come you shall not.

Phil. I faith I will.

Exeunt. Enter master Barnes and his wife. M. Bar. Wife in my mind, to day you
were too blame
Although my patience did not blame ye for it:
Me thought the rules of love and neighborhood,
Did not direct your thoughts, all indirect
Were your proceedings, in the entertain
Of them that I invited to my house.
Nay stay. I do not chide but counsel wife,
And in the mildest manner that I may,
You need not view me with a servants eye,
Whose vassailes senses tremble at the look
Of his displeased master, O my wife,
You are my self, when self sees fault in self.
Self is sin obstinate, if self amend not,
Indeed I saw a fault in thee my self,
And it has set a foil upon thy fame,
Not as the foil does grace the Diamond.

M^. Ba. What fault sir did you see in me to day?

M. Bar. O do not set the organ of thy voice,
On such a grunting key of discontent:
Do not deforme the beauty of thy tongue,
With such misshapen answers, rough wrathful words
Are bastards got by rashness in the thoughts,
Fair demeanors, are Virtues nuptial babes,
The offspring of the well instructed soul,
O let them call thee mother, then my wife,
So seem not barren of good courtesy.

Mi. Bar. So, have ye done?

M. Bar. I, and I had done well.
If you would do, what I advise for well.

Mi. Bar. What Is that?

M. Bar. Which is, that you would be good friends with mistress Gours^y.

Mi. Bar. With mistress Goursey.

M. Bar. I sweet wife.

Mis. Bar. Not so sweet husband.

M. Bar. Could you but show me any grounded cause.

M. s. Bar. The grounded cause, I ground because I will not

M. Bar. Your will has little reason then I think.

M i. Bar. Yes sir, my reason equalleth my will.

M. Bar. Lets hear your reason, for your will is great.

Mi. Bar. Why for I will not.

M. Bar. Is all your reason, for I will not wife.
Now by my soul I held ye for more wise,
Discreet, and of more temperature in sense,
Then in a sullen humor to effect,
That woman's will borne common scholar phrase,
Often have I heard a timely married girl,
That newly left to call her mother mam,
Her father Dad, but yesterday come from,
That's my good girl, God send thee a good husband,
And now being taught to speak the name of husband,
Will when she would be wanton in her will,
If her husband ask her why, say for I will,
Have I chid men for unmanly choice,
That would not sit their years, have I seen thee
Pupell such green young things, and with thy counsel,
Tutor their wits, a^ dart thou now infected,
With this disease of imperfection,
I blush for thee ashamed at thy shame.

Mi. Bar. A shame on her, that makes thee rate me so,

M. Bar O black mouth'drage, thy breath is boy^^erou^*
And thou makst virtue shake at this high storm,
She Is of good report, I know thou know i^.

Mi. Bar. She is not, nor I know not, but I know
That thou do love her, there^o^e think her so,
Thou bearst with her, because she bears with the^*
Thou may be ashamed to stand in her defense,
She is a strumpet, and thou art no honest man
To stand in her defense against thy wife,
If I catch her in my walk now by C^^kes bones,
I Will scratch out both her eyes.

M. Bar. O Godl

Mi. Bar. Nay never say O God for the matter,
Thou art the cause, thou badst her to my house,
Only to bleare the eyes of Goursey, did not?
But I will* send him word I warrant thee,
And ere I sleep to, trust upon it sir.
Exit.
M. Bar. Methinks this is a mighty fault in her,
I could be angry with her: O if I be so,
I shall but put a Link unto a Torche,
And so give greater light to see her fault:
I Will rather smother it in melancholy,
Nay, wisdom bids me shun that passion,
Then I will study for a remedy,
I have a daughter now heaven invoke,
She be not of like spirit as her mother,
(...) she will be a plague unto her husband,
If that he be no^ patient and discreet,
For that I hold the ease of all such trouble,
Well, well, I would my daughter had a husband,
For I would see how she could demean her self,
^n that estate, it may be ill enough,
And so God shall help me, well remembered now,
Frank Goursey is his fathers some and heir,
A youth that in my heart I have good hope on,
My senses say a match, my soul applaudes
The motion: O but his land^ are great,
He will look high why I will strain my self.
To make her dowry equal with his land,
Good faith and twere a match twould be a means,
To make their mothers friends: I Will call my daughter,
To see how she^s disposde to marriage:
Mall, where are ye?

Enter Mall. Mall. Father, here I am

M. Bar. Where is your mother?

Mal. I saw her not forsooth, since you and she
Went walking both together to the garden.

M. Ba. Do thou hear me girl? I must dispute with thee

Mal. Father the question then must not be hand,
For I am very weak in argument.

M. Bar. Well, this it is, I say it is good to marry.

Mal. And this say I, it is not good to marry.

M. Bar. Were it not good, then all men would not marry
But now they do.

Mal. Marry not all, but it is good to marry.

M. Bar. It is both good and bad, how can this be?

Mal. Why it is good to them that marry well,
To them that marry ill, no greater hell.

M. Bar. If thou might marry well, would thou agree?

Mall. I cannot tell, heaven must appoint for me.

M. Bar. Wench I am studying forthy good indeed,

Mall My hopes and duty, wish your thoughts good speed

M. Bar. But tell me wench, have thou a mind to marry:

Mall. This question is too hard for bash^ulnes,
And Father, now ye pose my modesty,
I am a maid, and when ye ask me thus,
I like a maid must blush look pale and wan,
And then look pale again, for we change color,
As our thoughts change, with true faced passion,
Of modest maidenhead, I could adorn me,
And to your question, make a sober cursie,
And with clo^e clipped ciuility be silent,
Or else say no forsooth, or I forsooth,
If I said no forsooth, I lied forsooth,
To lie upon my self were deadly sin,
Therefore I will speak truth and shame the devil,
Father, when first I heard you name a husband,
At that same very name, my spirits quickened,
Dispa^^e before had killed them, they were dead,
Because it was my hap so long to tarry,
I was persuaded I should never marry.
And sitting sowing thus upon the ground,
I fell in trance of meditation,
But coming to my self, O Lord said I,
Shall it be so, must I unmarried dye?
And being angry Father, farther said,
Now by saint Anne, I will not dye a maid,
Good faith before I came to this ripe groath,
I did accuse the laboring time of sloth,
Me thought the year did run but slow about,
For I thought each year ten I was without,
Being fourteen, and toward the other year:
Good Lord thought I, fifteen will nere be here,
For I have heard my mother say, that then
Prittie maids, were fit for handsome men,
Fifteen past, s^xeteene and seventeen too,
What, thought I, will not this husband do?
Will no man marry me, have men forsworn,
Such beauty and such youth? shall youth be worn
As rich men's gowns, more with age then use?
Why the^ I'let restained fancy loose,
And bad it gaze for pleasure: then love swore me
To do what ere my mother did before me,
Yet in good faith, I was very loath,
But now it lies in you to save my oath:
If I shall have a husband, get him quickly,
For m^aides that wears Cork shoes, may step awry.

M. Bar. Believe me wench, I do not apprehend thee,
But for this pleasant answer do commend thee.
I must confess, love does thee mighty wrong,
But I will see thee have thy right ere long,
I know a young man, whom I hold most fit,
To have thee, both for living and for wit,
I will go write about it presently.
Exit.
Mall. Good father do, O God me thinks I should
Wife it as fine as any woman could:
I could carry a port to he obayde,
Carry a maistering eye upon my maid,
With minion do your business or I Will make ye,
And to all house authority be take me.
O God would I were married, be my troth,
But if I be not, I swear I Will keep my oath.

Ent. Mi. Ba. How now minion, where have you bin gadding

Mall. Forsooth my father called me forth to him.

Mi. Bar. Your Father, and what said he too ye I pray?

Mall. Nothing forsooth.

Mi. Bar. Nothing that cannot be, something he said.

Mall. I something, that as good as nothing was.

Mi. Bar. Come let me hear, that something nothing then

Mal. Nothing but of a husband for me mother.

Mi. Ba. A husband, that was something, but what husband

Mall. Nay faith I know not mother, would I did.

Mis. Bar. I would ye did, I faith are ye so hasty?

Mall. Hasty mother, why how old am I?

Mas. Ba. Too young to marry.

Mal. Nay by the mass ye lie
Mother, how old were you when you did marry.

Mis. Ba. How old so ere I was, yet you shall tarry.

M^ll. Then the worse for me, hark Mother hark,
The Priest forgets that ere he was a Clarke,
When you were at my years, I Will hold my life,
Your mind was to change maidenhead for wife,
Pardon me mother, I am of your mind,
And by my troth I take it but by kind.

Mis. Bar. Do ye hear daughter, you shall stay my leisure

Mall. Do you hear mother, would you stay from pleasure
When ye have mind to it? go to, there is no wrong
Like this, to let maids lie alone so long
Lying alone they muse but in their beds,
How they might loose their long kept maiden heads,
This is the cause there is so many scapes,
For women that are wise, will ^ot lead Apes
In hell, I tell ye mother I say true,
Therefore come husband, maiden head adieu.
Exit.
Mis. Bar. Well lusty guts, I mean to make ye stay,
And set some rubbes in your minds smothest way.

Enter Philip. Phi. Mother.

Mi. Ba. How now ^^rra, where have ye bi^ walking?

Phil. Over the meades half way to Milton mother,
To bear my friend Frank Goursey company.

Mi. Ba. Where Is your blew coat, your sword and buckler sir
Get you such like habit for a seruingman,
If you will weight upon the brat of Goursey.

Phil. Mother, that you are moved this mak^ me wonder,
When I departed I did leave ye friends,
What undigested ^arre has since betided?

Mi. Bar. Such as almost does choke thy mother boy.
And sti^^es her with the conceit of it,
I am abusde my son by Goursey^ wife.

Phil. By mistress Goursey?

Mi. Bar. Mistress flurt, you foul strumpet,
Light aloue, short heels, mistress Goursey,
Call her again and thou were better no.

Phil. O my dear more have some patience,

Mis. Bar. I sir, have patience, and see your father
To rifle up the treasure of my love,
And play the spend-thrift upon such an harlot?
This same will make me have patience, will it not?

Phil^. This same is women's most impatience,
Yet mother I have often heard ye say,
That you have found my father temperate,
And ever f^ee from such affections.

Mi. Bar. I, till my too much love did glut his thoughts,
And make him seek for change,

Phi. O change your mind
My father bears more cordial love to you.

Mi. B. Thou lie, thou lie, for he loves Gourseys wife, not me.

Phil. Now I swear mother you are much too blame,
I durst be sworn he loves you as his soul.

Mi. Bar. Will thou be pampered by affection?
Will nature teach thee such vilde perjury?
Will thou be sworn, I forlorn, careless boy?
And if thou swearst, I say he loves me not.

Phil. He loves ye but too well I swear,
Unless ye knew much better how to use him,

Mi. Bar. Does he so sir? thou unnatural boy,
Too well say thou, that word shall cost thee somewhat,
O'monstrous, have I brought thee up to this?
Too well, O unkind, wicked and degenerate,
Have thou the heart to say so of thy mother?
Well, God will plague thee sort, I warrant thee,
Out on thee villa^ne, fie upon thee wretch,
Out of my sight, out of my sight I say.

Phil. This air is pleasant, and does please me well,
And here I will stay,

Mi. Bar. Will thou stubborn villain?

Enter M. Bar. M. Bar. How now, what is the matter?

Mi. Bar. Thou setst thy son to scoff and mock at me,
Is It not sufficient I am wronged of thee?
But he must be an agent to abuse me?
Must I be subject to my cradle too? O God, o God amend it.

M. Bar. Why how now Phillip, is this true my son?

Phil. Dear father she is much impatient:
Nere let that hand assist me in my need,
If I more said, then that she thought amiss,
To think that you were so licentious given,
And thus much more, when she inferd it more,
I swore an oath you loved her but too well,
In that as guilty I do hold my self,
Now that I come to more considerate trial,
I know my fault, I should have borne with he^,
Blame me for rashness, then not for want of duty.

M. Ba. I do absolve thee, and come hither Phillip,
I have writ a letter unto master Goursey,
And I will tell thee the contents thereof,
But tell me first, think thou Frank Gours^^? loves thee?

Phil If that a man devoted to a man,
Loyal, ^eligious, in loves hallowed vows,
If that a man that is soul laboursome,
To workehis own thoughts to his friends delight,
May purchase good opinion with his friend,
Then I may say* I have done this so well,
That I may think Frank Goursey loves me well.

M. Ba. It Is well, and I am much deceived in him,
And if he be not sober, wise, and valliant.

Phi. I hope my father takes me for thus wise,
I will not glue my self in love to one,
That has not some desert of virtue in him,
What ere you think of him, believe me Father,
He will be answerable to your thoughts,
In any quallity commendable.

M. Bar. Thou chearst my hopes in him, and in good faith,
Thoust made my love complete unto thy friend,
Phillip I love him, and I love him so,
I could affoorde him a good wife I know.

Phi. Father, awife?

M. Bar. Phillip a wife.

Phil. I lay my life my sister.

M. Bar. I in good faith.

Ph^. Then father he shall have her he shall I swear.

M. Bar. How can thou say so knowing not his mind?

Phi All is one for that, I will go to him straight,
Father if you would seek this seven years day,
You could not find a (...) match for her,
And he shall have her, I swear he shall,
He were as good be hanged as once deny her, I says I Will to him

M. Bar. Hairebraine, hairebraine* stay,
As yet we do not know his fathers mind,
Why what will master Gours^y ^ay my son,
If we shou^ld ^otion it without his knowledge?
Go to, he is a wise and discreet Gentleman,
And that respects from me all honest parts,
Nor shall he fail his expectation,
First I do mean to make him privy to it,
Phillip this letter is to that effect.

Phil. Father, for Gods sake send it quickly then,
I Will call your man, what Hugh, where is Hugh, there h^.

M, Bar. Phillip if this would prove a match, it were the only means that
could be found, to make thy mother friends with Mist. Gou. Phil How a match? I Will
warrant ye a match^

My sister's fair, Frank Goursie he is rich,
His dowry too, will be sufficient,
Franke's young, and youth is apt to love,
And by my troth my sisters maiden head
Stands like a game attennis, if the ball
Hit into the hole or hazard, farewell all.

Ma. Bar. How now, where is Hugh?

Phil. Why what does this prouerbial with us, why where is Hugh?

M. Bar. Peace, peace.

Phil. Where Is Hugh I say?

M Bar. Be not so hasty Phillip.

Phil. Father let me alone,
I do it but to make my self some sport,
This formal fool your man speaks naught but proverbs,
And speak men what they can to him, he will answer
With some time, rotten sentence, or old saying,
Such spokes as the ancient of the parish use,
With neighbor it is an old proverb and a true,
Goose giblets are good meat, old sack better then new,
Then says another, neighbor that is true,
And when each man has drunk his gallon round,
A penny pot, for that's the old man's gallon,
Then does he lick his lips and stroke his beard,
That's glewed together with his slauering drops,
Of ye^^y ale, and when he scarce can trim,
His gouty fingers, thus he will phillip it,
And with a rotten hem say hey my hearts,
Merry go so^^y cock and pie my hearts,
But then their ^auing penny proverb comes,
And that is this: they that will to the wine,
Berlady mistress shall lay their penny to mi^e,
This was one of this penny-fathers bastards,
For on my life he was never begot,
Without the consent of some great prouerb-monger.

M. Bar. O ye are a wag.

Phil. Well, now unto my business;
Swounds will that mouth that's made of old sed sawes,
And nothing else, say nothing to us now?

Nich. O (...) you must not leap over the style before you come at it, haste
makes waste, soft fire makes sweere mast, no^ too fast for falling, there is no
have to hang true men.


Phil. Father we ha'te, ye see we ha'te, now will I see if my memory will serve
for some proverbs too. O a painted cloth were as well worth a (...), as a
these worth a halten well, after my hearty commend^tions, as I was at the
making hereof* so it is, that I hope as you speed, so you're sure a swift horse
will tire, but he that trottes easily will endure, you have most learnedly
prouerbde it, commending the virtue of patience or forbearance, but yet you
know forbearance is no quittance.


Nich. I promise ye maistor Philip you have spoken as true as steel.


Phil. Father, there is a proverb well applied.


Nich. And it seems unto me, I it seems to me, that you master Phillip
mock me, do you not know qui mocat mo^^bitur, mock age and see how it will
prosper?


Phil. Why ye whoreson proverb book bound up in folio,
Have ye no other sense to answer me,
But every word a proverb, no other English?
Well, I Will fulfill a proverb on thee straight.

Nich. What is it sir?

Phil. ^e fetch my fist from thine (...),

Nich. Bear withesse he threatens me.

Phil. Father that same is the cowards common proverb:,
But come, come sir, tell me where Hugh is?

Nich. I may and I will, I need not except I list, you shall not command me,
you glue me neither meat, drink, nor wages, I am your fathers man, and a
man's a man, and a have but a hose on his head, do not misuse me so, do not,
for though he that is bound must obey, yet he that will not tarry, may run
away so he may.


M. Bar. Peace Nicke, I Will see he shall use thee well,
Go to peace sir, here Nicke take this let ^r,
Carry it to him to whom it is directed.

Nich. To whom is it?

M. Bar. Why read it, can thou read?

Nich. Forsooth though none of the best yet meanly:

M. Bar. Why do thou not use it?

Nich. Forsooth as use makes perfectnes, so seldom seen is soon forgotten.


M. Bar. Well said, but go, it is to Master Goursey,


Phil. Now sir, what proverb have ye to deliver a letter?


Nich. What need you to care? who speaks to you? you may speak when you are
spoken to, and keep your wind to cool your pottage: well, well, you are my
masters son and you look for his land, but they that hope for dead men's
shoes, may hap to go barefoote: take heed, as soon goes the young sheep to the
pot'as the old. I pray God save my Masters life, for sildome comes the better.


Phil. O he has given it me: farewell proverbs.

Nich. Farewell frost,

Phil. Shall I fling an old shoe after ye?

Nich. No, you should say God send fair weather after me,

Phil. I mean for good luck.

Nich. A good luck onye.
Exit.
M. Bar. Alas poor fool, he uses all his wit,
Phillip in faith this mirth has cheered thought,
And cussend it of his right play of passion,
Go after Nick, and when thou think he is there,
Go in and urge to that which I have writ,
I Will in these meddowes make a cerckling walk,
And in my meditation conjure so,
As that some send of thought selfe^eating anger,
Shall by my spells of treason vanish quite
Away, and let me beat fromthee to night.

Phil. To night, yes that you shall, but hark ye father,
Look that you my sister waking keep,
For Frank I swear shall kiss her ere I sleep.

Exeunt. Enter Frank and Boy. Frank I am very d^y with walking ore the green,
Bu lersome Beer, sir call the Butler.

Bo. Nay faith sir, we must have some smith to give the butler
A drench, or cut him in the forehead, for he has got
A horses disease, namely the staggers, to night he is a good
Huswife, he reeles all that he wrought to day, and he were good
Now to play at dice, for he castes excellent well.

Fran. How meanst thou, is he drunk?

Boy. I cannot tell, but I am sure he has more liquor in him
Then a whole dicker of hydes, he is sockt thoroughly I faith.

Fran. Well go and call him, bid him bring me drink.

Boy. I will si^.
Exit.
Fran. My mother powers and will look merrily,
Neither upon my father nor on me,
He says she fell out with mistress Barnes to day,
Then I am sure they will no: be quickly friends,
Good Lord what kind of creatures women are?
Their love is lightly won and lightly lost,
And then their hate is deadly and extreme.
He that does take a wife, betakes himself
To all the cares and troubles of the world,
Now her disquietnes does grieve my father,
Greeues me, and troubles all the house besides,
What, shall I have so ne drink? how now a horn?
Belike the drunken slave is fallen a sleep,
And now the boy does wake him with his horn,
How now sir, where is the butler?

Ent. Boy. Mary sir, where he was even now a sleep, but I wakt him, and when
he wakt, he thought he was in master Barnses buttery, for he stretched himself
thus: and y^uning said, Nicke, honest Nicke fill a fresh bowl of ale, stand to
it Nicke and thou be a man of Gods making, stand to it, and then I winded my
horn, and he is horn mad.


Enter Hodge. Hodg. Boy hey, ho boy, and thou be a man draw, O here is a
blessed mooneshine God be thanked, boy is not this goodly weather for barley?


Boy. Spoken like a right maulster Hodge, but do thou heare^ thou art not
drunk.


Hod. No, I scorn that I faith.


But. But thy fellow Dicke Coomes is mightily drunk.


Hod. Drunk, a plague on it, when a man cannot carry his drink well: god's blood
I Will stand to it.


Boy. Hold man, see and thou can stand first,


Hodge. Drunk? he is a beast and he be drunk, there is no man that is a sober
man will be drunk, he is a boy and he be drunk.


Boy. No, he is a man as thou art.


Hodge. Thus it is when a man will not be ruled by his friends, I bad him keep
under the lee, but he kept down the weather two bows, I told him he would
be taken with a plannet, but the wisest of us all may fall.


Boy trip him. B. True Hodge.


Hod. Whope lend me thy hand Dicke, I am fallen into a Well, lend me thy hand, I
shall be drowned else.


Boy. Hold fast by the bucket

Hodge. Hodg, A rope on it.

Boy. I there is a rope on it, but where art thou Hodge?

Hodge. In a Well, I prethie draw up.

Boy. Come give up thy body, wind up, hoyst.

Hodg. I am over head and ears,

Boy. In all Hodge, in all.

Fran. How loathsome is this beast man's shape to me?
This mould of reason so unreasonable,
Sir, why do thou trip him down seeing he is drunk?

Boy. Because sir I would have drunkards cheap.

Fran. How mean ye?

Boy, Why they say, that when any thing has a fall, it is cheap, and so of
drunkards.


Fran. Go to help him up, but hark who knockes?


Bo. Sir, heeres one of Master Barnsies men with a letter to my old master.
Fran. Which of them is it?


Boy. They call him Nicholas sir.

Fran. Go call him in.

Enter Coomes. Coom. By your leave ho, how now young master how is it?

Fran. Look ye sir, where your fellow lies,
He Is in a fine taking, is he not?

Coom. Whope Hodge, were art thou man, where art thou?

Hodge. O in a well.

Co. In a well man, nay then thou art deep in understanding,

Fran. I once to day you were almost so sir,

Coom. Who I, go to young master, I do not like this humor in ye (...) give
every man his do, and give him no more: say I was in such a case, go to it is
the greatest indigna tion that can be offered to a man: and but a man's more god
her given, you were able to make him swea^e out his hear: blood, what
though-that (...) he ere or as some say, cut a feather: what though he be (...)
misled, band, or as it were it is no consequent to me: you know i have drunk all
the A^^houses in (...) dry, and laideth: tappes on the tables when i had done:
(...) I Will challenge all the true rob. pots (...), to leap up to the (...) in a
(...) of beer, and if i can not drink it down to my foot ere i leave, and
then set the (...) in (...) of the house, and then turn a good turn on the
toe on it, let me be counted no bod^e, a^pingler, nay let me be bound to drink
nothing but small beer seven years after, and I had as (...).


Enter Nicholas. Fran. Peace sir, I must (...) with one, Nicholas I think your
name is,


Nich. True as the skin between your brows.

Fran. Well, how does my master?

Nich. ^orsooth live, and the best does no better.

Fran. Where is the letter he has sent me?

Nich. (...)

Fran. It Is right as Phillip said, it is a fine soole,
This letter is directed to my father.
I Will carry it to him, Dicke Coomes make him drink.
Exit.
Coom. I, I Will make him drunk and he will.

Nicho Not so Richard, it is good to be (...)

(...). Well Nicholas, as thou art Nicholas, welcome, but as thou art Nicholas
and a boon companion, ten times welcome, Nicholas give me thy hand; shall we
be (...)? and we shall, say but we shall, and let the first word stand.


Nich. Indeed as long (...) the (...) man (...),
Anownce of debt will not pay a pound of care?

Coom, Nay, a pound of care will not pay anownce of debt.

Nich. Well, it is a good horse never stumbles but who lies here?

Coom. It Is our Hodge, and I ^hinke he lies a sleep, you made him drunk at your
house to (...) ^ut I Will pepper so^^ of you fort.


Nic. I Richard, I know yo^^e put a man over the shoes, and if you can, but
he is a fool will take more then will do him good.


Coom. God's Blood ye shall take more then will do ye good,
Or I Will make ye clap under the table.

Nich. Nay, I hope, as I have temperance to forbear drink so have I patience
to endure (...) company does, for when a man does to Rome come, he must do as
there is done,


Coomes. Ha my resolved Nicke Frol^go^ene, fill the po^^e Hostess, swounes you
whore, Harry Hooke's a rascal: help me but carry my fellow Hodge in, and
we will crushe it I ^^ith.


Enter Phillip. Exeunt. Phil. By this I think, the letter is delivered,
And twill be shortly time that I step in,
And woo their favors for my sisters fortune,
And yet I need not, she may do as well,
But yet not better, as the case does stand,
Between our mothers it may make the^^ friends,
Nay I would swear tha^ she would do as well,
Were she a stranger to (...)
But they are so acquainted, their nere part,
Why she will floute the devil and make blush
The boldest face of man, that ever man saw,
He that has best opinion (...) wit,
And has his brain pan fraught with bitter Iestes,
Or of his own, or istolne, or how (...),
Let him: stand^e^^ so high in his own conceit,
Her wit's a sun, that melts him down like butter,
And makes him sit at table (...) wise,
Flat, flat, (...) a word to say,
Yet she will not (...) him (...), but like a tyrant,
She Will persecute the poor wi^-beaten man,
And so be bang hi^ with dry (...) and scoffs,
When he is down, most cowardly good faith,
As I have pit^ed the poor patient.
(...) came a Farmers son a wooing to her,
A proper man, well landed too he was,
A man that for his wit need not to ask,
What time a year twere good to sow his Oats,
Nor yet his Barley, no nor when to reap,
To plowe his Fallowes, or to (...) his Trees,
Well experienst thus each kind of way,
After a two months labor at the most,
And yet it was well he held it out so long,
He left his love, she had so last his lips,
He could say nothing to her, but God be with ye,
Why she, when men have dined and call for chee^e,
Will straight ma^netaine iestes bitter todisgest,
And then some one will fall to argument,
Who if he over master her with reason,
Then she will begin to buffe^ him with mockes,
Well I do doubt, Frances has so much spleen,
Theil nere agree, but I will moderate.
By this time, it is time I think to enter,
This is the house, shall I knock? no I will not
Wait while one comes out to answer:
I Will in, and let them be as bold with us.
Exit.
Enter master Goursey reading a letter. M. Gour If that they like her ^owry
shall be equal,
To your sons wealth or possibility,
It is a means to make our wines good friends,
And to continue friendsh^p twi^ to two,
It Is so indeed, I like this motion,
And it has my consent, because my wife, is sore infected and heart sick with
hate: and I have sought the G^l^ of advice, which only tells me this same
potion, to be most sovereign for her sickness cure.

Enter Frank and Phillip. Here comes my son, conferring with his friend,
Fraunces, how do you like your friends discourse?
I know he is persuading to this motion.

Fra. Father, as matter that befits a friend,
But yet not me, that am too young to marry.

M. Gou. Nay, if thy mind be forward with thy years, The time is lost thou
t^rriest, trust me boy, This match is a^swerable to thy birth, Her blood and
portion give each other grace: These indented lines promise a sum, And I do
like the value, if it hapthy liking to accord to my consent, It is a match:
will thou go see the maid?


Fra. Nere trust me Father, the shape of marriage,
Which I do see in others, seem so severe,
I dare not put my youngling liberty,
Under the awe of that instruction,
And yet I grant the limmits of free youth
Going astray, are often restrainde by that:
But mistress wedlock, to my scholar thoughts,
Will be too cursed I fear, O should she snip,
My pleasure aiming mind, I shall be sad,
And swear, when I did marry I was mad.

M, Gour. But boy, let my experience teach thee this,
Yet in good faith, thou speakst not much amiss,
When first thy mothers same to me did come,
Thy grandsire thus, then came to me his son,
And even my words to thee, to me he said,
And as to me thou say, to him I said,
But in a greater huffe, and hotter blood,
I tell ye, on youths tip-toes then I stood,
Says he (good faith this was his very say)
When I was young, I was but reasons fool,
And went to wedding, as to wisdoms school:
It taught me much, and much I did forget,
But beaten much by it, I got some wit,
Though I was shackled from an often scoute,
Yet I would wanton it when I was out,
It Was comfort, old acquaintance then to meet,
Restrained liberty, at^ainde is sweet,
Thus said my Father to thy Father, son
And thou may do this to, as I have done.

Phi. In faith good counsel Frank, what say thou to it?

Fra. Phillip, what should I say?

Phil. Why, either I or no.

Fra. O but which rather?

Phil. Why that which was persuaded by thy father.

Fra. That's I, then I, O should it fall out ill.
Then I, for I am guilty of that ill.
I Will not be guilty, no.

Phi. What backward gone?

Fra. Phillip, no whit back-ward, that is on.

Phi. On then,

Fra. O stay.

Phil. Tush, there is no good luck in this delay,
Come, come, late comers man are shent.

Fra. Heigh ho, I fear I shall repent,
Well, which way Frank?

Phi. Why this way.

Fra. Can thou tell?
And take upon thee to be my guide to hell,
But which way Father?

M. Gou. That way.

Fran. I, you know,
You found the way to sorrow long ago,
Father God boy ye, you have sent your son,
To seek on earth an earthly day of doom,
Where I shall be judged, alack the ruthe,
To pe^nance for the follies of my youth.
Well I must go, but by my troth my mind,
Is not love capable to that kind,
O I have looked upon this mould of men,
As I have done upon a Lions den,
Praised I have the gallant beast I saw,
Yet wished me no acquaintance with his pawe,
And must I now be grated with them, well,
Yet I may hap to prove a Daniell,
And if I do sure it would make me laugh,
To be among wild beasts and yet be safe,
Is there a remedy to abate their rage,
Yes many catch them, and put them in a cage,
I but how catch them, marry in your hand,
Carry me forth a burning firebrand,
For with his sparkling shine, old rumor says,
A firebrand the swiftest runner fraies,
This I may do, but if it prove not so,
Then man goes out to seek his adiunct woe,
Phillip away, and Father now adieu,
In quest of sorrow I am sent by you.

M. Gou. Return the messenger of joy my son.

Fran. Sildome in this world, such a work is done.

Phi. Nay, nay, make have, it will be quickly night.

Fra. Why is it not good to woo by candle light.

Phi. But if we make not haste they will be a bed.

Fran. The better candles out, and curtans spread

Exeunt M. Gour. I know, though that my sons years be not many.
Yet he has wit to woo as well as any,
Here comes my wife, I am glad my boy is gone.
Enter (...) stresse Goursey. Ereshe came hither, how now wife, how is it?
What are ye yet in charity and love with mistress Barnes?

Mi. Gou, What mistress Barnes, why mistress Barnes I pray

M. Gou. Because she is your neighbor and

M^. Gou. And what?
And a jealous slandering spiteful queen she is,
One that would blur my reputation,
With her approbrious malice if she could,
She wrongs her husband, to abuse my fame,
It Is known that I have liude in honest name,
All my life time, and bin your right true wife,

M. Gour. I entertain no other thought my wife,
And my opinion's sound of your behavior.

Mis. Gour. And my behavior is as sound as it,
But her ill speeches seeks to rot my credit,
And eat it with the worm of hate and malice.

M. Gou. Why then preserve it you by patience.

Mi. Gou. By patience, would ye have me shame my self,
And cussen my self to bear her injuries:
Not while her eyes be open will I yield,
A word, a letter, a sillables value,
But equal and make even her wrongs to me,
To her again.

M, Gou. Then in good faith wife ye are more to blame.

Mi. Gou. Am I too blame sir pray what letters this.

M. Gou. There is a dearth of manners in ye wife,
Rudely to snatch it from me, give it me?

Mi. Gou. You shall not have it, till I have read it.

M, Gou. Give me it then, and I will read it to you?

Mi. Gou, No, no, it shall not need, I am a scholar
Good enough to read a letter sir,

M. Gou Gods passion, if she knew but the contents,
She Will seek to cross this match, she shall not read it.
Wife, give it me, come, come, give it me.

M^. Gou. Husband, in very deed you shall not have it.

M. Gou. What will you move me to impatience then?

Mi. Gou. Tut, tell not me of your impatience,
But since you talk sir of impatience,
You shall not have the letter by this light,
Till I have read it, soul i will burn it first.

M. Gou. Go to, ye move me wife, give me the letter,
In Troth I shall grow angry, if you do not.

Mi. Gou. Grow to the house top with your anger sir.
Nere tell me, I care not thus much for it.

M. Gour. Well, I can bear enough, but not too much,
Come give it me, twere best you be persuaded,
By God ye make me swear, now God forgive me,
Give me I say, and stand not long upon it,
Go to, I am angry at the heart, my very heart,

Mis. Gou. Heart me no hearts* you shall not have it sir,
No you shall not, nere look so big,
I will nor be affraide at your great looks,
You shall not have it, no you shall not have it.

M. Gou. Shall I not have it, in troth I Will try that,
Minion I Will hau'te, shall I not hau'te, I am loath,
Go too, take pausment, be aduisde,
Infaith I will, and stand not long upon it,
A woman of your years, I am ashamde,
A couple of so long continuance,
Should thus, Gods foot, I cry God heartily mercy,
Go to, ye vex me, and I Will vex ye for it,
Before I leave ye, I will make ye glad,
To tender it on your knees, hear ye, I will I will,
What worse and worse stomach, (...) ye faith,
Shall I be crossed by you in my old age?
And where I should have greatest comfort to,
A (...) of you nursle in the devils name,
Go to mistress, by Gods pre^ious dear,
If ye delaie.

M^. Gou. Lord* Lord, why in what a fit,
Are you in husband, so enraged, so moved,
And for so slight a cause, to read a letter,
Did this letter love, contain my death,
Should you deny my sight of it, I would not,
Not see my sorrow, not eschew my danger,
But willingly yield me a patient,
Unto the doom that your displeasure gave:
Here is the letter, not for that your incensment,
Makes me make offer of it, but your health,
Which anger I do fear has crasd.
And viper like has sucked away the blood,
That wont was to be cheerful in this cheek,
How pale ye look.

M. Gou. Pale, can ye blame me for it, I tell you true,
An easy matter could not thus have moved me,
Well this resignement, and so forth, but woman
This fortnight shall I not forget ye for it.
Ha, ha, I see that roughnes can do somewhat,
I did not think good faith, I could have set,
So sower a face upon it, and to her,
My bed embracer, my right bosom friend,
I would not that she should have seen the letter
As poor a man as I am by my troth
For twenty pound: well I am glad I have it.
Ha, here is a do about a thing of nothing,
What stomach, ha, it is happy your come down.
Exit.
Mi. Gou. Well crafty Fox, I Will hunt ye by my troth,
Deal ye so closely? well I see his drift.
He would not let me see the letter, least
That I should cross the match, and I will cross it.

Ent. Comes. Dicke Coomes?

Coom. Forsooth.

M^s. Gour. Come hither Dicke, thou art a man I love,
And one whom I have much in my regard,

Coo. I thank ye for it mistress, I thank ye for it,

M^. Gou. Nay heers my hand, I will do very much for thee
If ere thou standst in need of me,
Thou shall not lack, whilst thou have a day to l^ue.
Money apparel.

Coo. And sword and Bucklers.

Mis. Gou. And sword and Bucklers too my gallant Dick,
So thou will use but this in my defense.

Coom. This, no faith I have no mind to this, break my head if this break
not if we come to any tough play, nay mistres I had a sword, I the flower of
smithfield for a sword a right Fox I faith, with that and a man had come over
with a smooth and a sharp stroke, it would have cried twang, and then when I
had doubled my point, traste my ground, and had carried my buckler before me
like a garden ^ut, and then come in with a cross blow, and over the pick of
his buckler two else long, it would have cried twang, twang, mettle, mettle:
but a dog has his day, it is gone, and there are few good ones made now, I see
by this dearth of good swords, that dearth of sword and Buckler fight, begins
to grow out, I am sorry for it, I shall never see good manhood again, if it be
once gone, this poking fight of rapier and dagger will come up then* then a
man, a tall man, and a good sword and buckler man, will be spitted like a Cat
or a cunney, then a boy will be as good as a man, unless the Lord show mercy
unto us, well, I had as heue be hanged as live to see that day, well mistres,
what shall I do? what shall I do?


Mis Gour. Why this brave Dicke,
Thou know that Gourseys wife and I am foes:
Now man me to her house,
And though it be dark Dicke, yet we will have no light,
Least that thy master should prevent our journey
By seeing our depart: then when we come,
And if that she and I do fall to words,
Set in thy foot and quarrel with her men,
Draw, fight, strike, hurt, but do not kill the slaves,
And make as though thou struckst at a man,
And hit her and thou can, a plague upon her,
She has misusde me Dicke, will thou do this?

Coom. Yes mistress I will strike her men, but God forbid,
That ere Dicke Coomes should be seen to strike a woman.

M^. Gour. Why she is mankind, therefore thou may strike her.

Coom. Mankind, nay and she have any part of a man, I Will strike her I warrant.

M^ Gour. That's my good Dicke, that's my sweet Dicke,

Coom. Swones who would not be a man of valor to have such words of a
Gentlewoman, one of their words are more to me then twenty of these russet
coats Cheesecake; and buttermakers: well, I thank God I am none of these
cowards, well and a man have any virtue in him, I see he shall be regarded.


Mi. Gour. Art thou resolved Dicke? will thou do this for me, and it thou will,
here is an earnest penny, of that rich guerdon I do mean to give thee.


Coom. An angel mistress let me see, stand you on my left hand, and let the
angel lie on my buckler on my right hand, for fear of losing, now here stand
I to be temp^ed, they say, every man has two spirits attending on him, either
good or bad, now I say a man has no other spirits but either his wealth or his
wife, now which is the better of them, why that is as they are used, for use
neither of them well, and they are both naught, but this is a miracle to me,
that gold that is heavy has the upper, and a woman that is light does
soonest fall, considering that light things aspire, and heavy things soonest
go down, but lea^e these considerations to sir John, they become a black
coat better then a blew, well mistress I had no mind to day to quarrel,
but a woman is made to be a man's seducer, you say quarrel.


Mi. Gou. I. Coom. There speaks an angel, is it good?


Mis. Gou. I.


Coom. Then I cannot do amiss, the good angel goes with me.


Exeunt. Enter sir Raph Smith his Lady and Will. S. Raph. Come on my hearts, I
faith it is ill luck,
To hunt all day and not kill any thing,
What say thou Lady, art thou weary yet?

La. I must not say so sir.

S. Ra. Although thou art.

Will. And can you blame her to be forth so long,
And see no better sport?

Ra. Good faith it was very hard.

La. No it was not ill.
Because you know it is not good to kill.

Ra. Yes venson Lady.

La. No indeed nor them,
Life is as dear in Dear as it is in men.

Ra. But they are killed for sport.

La. But that's bad play,
When they are made to sport their lives away.

Ra. It Is fine to see the ^runne.

La. What out of breath?
They run but ill that run themselves to death,

Ra. They might make then less have and keep their wind.

La. Why then they see the hounds brings death behind.

Rap. Then twere as good for them at first to stay,
As to run long and run their lives away.

La. I but the sto^^est of you all that's here,
Would run from death, and nimbly scud for fear,
Now by my troth I pity those poor elfes.

Ra. Well, they have made us but bad sport to day.

La. Yes it was my sport to see them escape away.

Will. I wish that I had been at one Bucks fall.

La. Out thou wood-tyrant thou art worst of all.

Will.. A woodman Lady, but no tyrant I.

La. Yes tyrant-like thou love to see lives dye.

Ra. Lady no more, I do not like this luck,
To hunt all day and yet not kill a Buck,
Well, it is late, but yet I swear I will
Stay here all night, but I a Buck will kill.

La. All night, nay good sir Raph Smith do not so.

Ra. Content ye Lady, Will, go fetch my bow,
A berrie of fair Roes I saw to day,
Down by the groves, and there i will take my stand,
And shoot at one, God send a luckie hand.

La. Will ye not then sir Raph go home with me?

Ra. No, but my men shall bear thee company.
Sirs man her home, Will bid the Huntmen couple,
And bid them well reward their hounds to night.
Lady farewell, Will have ye with the Bow,
I Will stay for thee here by the grove below.

Will. I will, but twill be dark I shall not see,
How shall I see ye then?

Ra. Why hollo to me, and I will answer thee.

Will. Enough, I will.

Raph. Farewell.
Exit.
La. How willingly do thou consent to go,
To fetch thy master that same killing bow.

Will. Guilty of death I willing am in this,
Because it was our ill haps to day to miss,
To hun^ and not to kill is hunters sorrow,
Come Lady, weel have venson ere tomorrow.

Exeunt. Enter Philip and Frank. Phil. Come Frank now are we hard by the
house,
But how now, sad?

Fran. No, to study how to woe thy sister.

Phil. How man, how to woe her? why no matter how,
I am sure thou wi^t not be ashamed to woe,
Thy cheeks not subject to a childish blush,
Thou have a better warrant by thy wit,
I know thy oratorie can unfold,
Quick invention, plausible discourse,
And set such painted beauty on thy tongue,
As it shall ravish every maiden sense,
For Frank, thou art not like the russet youth
I told thee of, that went to woe a wench,
And being full stuffed up with fallow wit,
And meddow matter, asked the pretty maid,
How they sold corn last market day with them.
Saying: indeed it was very dear wit them:
And do ye hear, he had not need do so,
For she will Francis throwly try your wit,
Sir she will bow the metal of your wits,
And if they crack she will not hold ye current,
Nay she will way your wits as men may angels,
And if I lack a grain, she will not chanke with ye,
I cannot speak it but in passion,
She is a wicked wench to make a jest,
Aye me how full of floutes and mockes she is?

Fran. Some Aquavitae reason to recover,
This sick dis^ourser, soond not prethy Philip,
Tush, tush, I do not think her as thou say,
Perhaps she is opinions darling Phillip:
Wise in repute, the crows bird o my friend,
Some judgments slave themselves to small desert,
And wondernize the birth of common wit,
When their wone straungenes do but make that strange,
And their ill errors do but make that good,
And why should men debase to make that good,
Perhaps such admiration winnes her wit.

Phil. Well, I am glad to hear this bold prepare,
For this encounter, forward hardy Frank,
Yonder Is the window, with the candle int,
Belike she is putting on her night attire,
I told ye F rank it was late, well I will call her,
Mary softly that my mother may not hear:
Mall, sister Mall.

Enter Mall in the window. Mal. How now, whose there?

Phil. It Is I,

Mal. It Is I, who I? I quoth the dog, or what?
A christ cross rowel?

Phi. No sweet pinckanie.

Mal. O is it you wild oats?

Phil. I forsooth wanton.

Mal. Well said scape-thrift.

Fran. Philip be these your usual best salutes?

Phi. This is the harmless chiding of that Dove,

Fran. Dove, one of those that draw the Queen of love?

Mal. How now? Whose that brother, whose that with ye?

Phil. A Gentleman my friend.

Mal. Beladie he has a pure wit.

Fran. How means your holy judgment?

Mal. O well put in sir.

Fran. Up you would say.

Mal. Well climde Gentleman,
I pray sir tell me, do you carte the queen of love?

Fran. Not cart her, but couch her in your eye,
And a fit place for gentle love to lie.

Mal. I but me thinks you speak without the book,
To place a sower wheel wagon in my look,
Where will you have room to have the coachman sit?

Fran. Nay, that were but small manners, and not fit,
His duty is before you bare to s^and,
Having a lusty whipstocke in his hand.

Ma. The place is void, will you provide me one?

Fra. And if you please I will supply the room.

Mal. But are ye cunning in the Carmans lash?
And can ye whistle well?

Fran. Yes I can well direct the coache of love.

Mal. Ah cruel carter, would you whip a dove?

Phil. Hark ye sister?

Mal. Nay, but hark ye brother?
Whose white boy is that same? know ye his mother?

Phil. He is a Gentleman of a good house.

Mal. Why is his house of gold, is it not made of lyme andS stone like this?

Phil. I mean he is well descended.

Mal. God be thanked.
Did he descend some steeple or some ladder?

Phi. Well, you will still be cross, I tell ye sister,
This Gentleman by all your friends consent,
Must be your husband.

Mal. Nay not all, some sing another note,
My mother will say no, I hold a groate.
But I thought it was somewhat, he would be a carter,
He has been whipping la^ely some blind bear,
And now he would fe^ke the blind boy here with us.

Phil. Well, do you ^eare, you sister, mistress would have
You that do long for somewhat I know what.
My father told me, go too I Will tell all,
If ye be cross, do ye hear me? I hau^ labourd
A years work in this afternoon for ye,
Come from your cloister, votarie, chase Nun,
Come down and kiss Frank Gourseys mothers son.

Mal. Kiss him I pray?

Phi. Go to, stale maidenhead* come down I say,
You seventeen and upward, come come down,
You Will stay till twenty else for yo 'r wedding gown,

Mal. Nun, votarie, stale maidenhead, seventeen and upward,
Here be names, what nothing else?

Fran. Yes, or a fair built steeple without bells,

Mal. Steeple good people, nay another cast.

Fran. I, or a well made ship without a mast.

Mal. Fie not so big sir, by one part of four.

Fran. Why then ye are a boat without an oar,

Mal. O well rode wit, but what is your fare I pray?

Fran. Your fair self must be my fairest pay.

Mal. Nay, and you be so dear, I Will choose another.

Fran. Why take your first man wench, and go no further.

Phi. Peace Francis, hark ye sister, this I say, you know my mind, or answer I
or nay, Wit and judgment has resolude his mind, And he fore^ees what after he
shall find,

If such discretion then shall govern you,
Vow love to him, heel do the like to you.

Mal. Vow love? who would not love such a comely feature?
Nor high nor low, but of the middle stature,
A middle man that's the best syze indeed,
I like him well, Love grant us well to speed.

Fran. And let me see a woman of that tal^esse,
So slender and of such a middle smalnesse,
So old enough, and in each part so fit,
So fair, so kind, eudued with so much wit,
Of so much wit as it is held a wonder,
Twere pity to keep love and her a sunder,
Therefore go up my joy, call down my bli^^e,
Bid her come seal the bargain with a kiss.

Mal. Frank, Frank, I come through dangers, death and harms
To make Loves patient with thy seal of arms.

Phi. But sister softly, least my mother hear.

Exit. Mal. Mal. Hush then, ^um, mouse in cheese, cat is near.

Fran. Now in good faith Philip this makes me smile.
That I have woed and won in so small while.

Phi. Francis, indeed my sister I dare say,
Was not determined to say thee nay,
For this same the other thing, calde maidenhead,
Hangs by so small a hair or spiders thread,
And worn so too with time, it must needs fall,
And like a well lur'de hawke, she knows her call.

Mal. Whist brother whist, my mother heard me tread,
And asked whose there? I would not answer her,
She calde a light, and up she is gone to seek me,
There when she finds me not, she will hither come,
Therefore dispatch, let it be quickly done,
Francis, my l^ues lease I do let to thee,
Date of my life and thine, what say thou to me?
The entering, fine, or income thou must pay,
Are kisses and embrase^ every day,
And quarterly I must receive my rent,
You know my mind.

Fran. I guess at thy intent,
Thou shall not miss a minute of thy time.

M^l. Why then sweet Francis I am only thine,
Brother bear witness.

P^i. Do ye deliver this as your deed?

Mal. I do I do,

Ph. God send you both good speed, Gods lord my mother
Stend aside and closely too, least that you be espied,

Mi Ba. Whose there?

Phi. Mother it is I.

Mis. Bar. You disobedient ruffen, careless wretch,
That said your Father loud me too well,
I Will think on it when thou think I have forgotten it:
Whose with thee else? how now minion you?
With whom? with him? why what make you here sir?
And thus late too, what has your mother sent ye
To cut my throat, that here you be in wait?
Come from him mistress, and let go his hand,
Will ye not sir?

Fra. Stay mistress Barnes, or mother, what ye will,
She Is my wife, and here she shall be still.

Mi. Ba. How sir your wife? would thou my daugter have
I Will rather have her married to her grave,
Go to be gone, and quickly, or I swear,
I Will have my men beat ye for staying here,

Phi. Beat him mother* as I am true man,
They were better beat the devil and his dam.

Mi. Bar. What will thou take his part?

Phil. To do him good,
And twere to wade hitherto up in blood.

Fran. God a mercy Phil, but mother hear me.

Mis. Bar. Calst thou me mother, no thy mothers name
Carries about with it, reproach and shame:
Give me my daughter, ere that she shall wed,
A strumpets son, and have her fomislead,
I Will marry her to a Carter: come I say,
Give me her from thee.

Fra. Mather not to day,
Nor yet to morrow, till my lives last morrow,
Make me leave that, which I with leave did borrow,
Here I have borrowed love, i will not deny it,
Thy wedding night's my day, then I Will repay it:
Till then she will trust me, wench is it not so?
And if it be, say I, if nor, say no.

M^l. Mother, good mother, hear me O good God,
Now we are even what would you make us odd?
Now I beseech ye for the love of Christ,
To give me leave once to do what I list.
I am as you were when you were a maid,
Guess by your self, how long you would have staide,
Might you have had your will, as good begin,
At first as last, it saues us from much sin,
Lying alone, we muse on things and things,
And in our minds, one thought another brings,
This maids life mother is an idle life,
Therefore I Will be, I, I will be wife,
And mother do not mistrust my age or power,
I am sufficient, I lack nere an hou^e,
I had both wit to grant when he did woe me,
And strength to bear what ere he can do to me.

M ^. Gou. Well bold face, but I mean to make you stay,
Go to, come from him, or i will make ye come,
Will ye not come?

Phi. Mother, I pray forbear,
This match is for my sister.

Mi. Bar. Villain it is not,
Nor she shall not be so matched now.

Phi. In troth she shall, and your unruly hate,
Shall not rule us, we will end all this debate,
By this begun devise.

Mi. Bar. I end what you begun, villains thieves
Give me my daughter, will ye rob me of her?
Help, help, theil rob me here, theil rob me here,

Enter master Barnes and hi^ men. M. Bar. How now, what outcry is here? why
how now woman?

Ms. Ba. Why Gourseys son, consederates with this boy,
This wretch unnatural and undutiful.
Seeks hence to steal my daughter, will you suffer it?
Shall he that's son to my arch-enemy,
Enjoy her, have I brought her up to this?
O God he shall not have her, no he shall not.

M. Bar. I am sorry she knows it, hark ye wi^e,
Let reason moderate your rage a little,
If you examine but his birth and living.
His wit and good behavior, you will say,
Though that ill hate make your opinion bad,
He does deserve as good a wife as she

Enter mistrss Goursey and Coomes. M^. Bar. Why will you give consent he shall
enjoy her?

M. Bar. I, so that thy mind would agree with mine.

M^. Bar. My mind shall nere agree to this agreement.

M Ba. And yet it shall go forward, but who is here?
What, Mistress Goursey, how knew she of this?

Phi. Frank, thy mother.

Fra. Swones where? a plague upon it,
I think the devil is set to cross this match.

Mi. Go. This is the house Dick Coomes, and yonder is light,
Let us go near: how now, me thinks I see,
My son stand hand in hand, with Barnes his daughter:
Why how now sir, is this time of night,
For you to be abroad, what have we here?
I hope that love has not thus coupled you:

Fra. Love by my troth mother, Love, she loves me,
And I love her, then we must needs agree.

Mi. Bar. I but I Will keep her sure enough from thee.

Mi. Go. It shall not need, I Will keep him safe enough,
Be sure he shall not graft in such a stock.

Mi. Bar. What a stock forsooth? as good a stock as thine,
I do not mean that he shall graft in mine.

Mi. Gou. Nor shall he mistress, hark boy? thou art but mad
To love the branch, that has a root so bad,

Fra. Then Mother, i will graft a Pippin on a Crab.

M^. Gou. It will not prove well.

Fra. But I Will prove my skill.

Mi. Bar. Sir but you shall not.

Fra. Mothers both I will.

M. Ba. Hark Phillip, send away thy sister straight,
Let Francis meet her where thou shall appoint,
Let them go several to shun suspicion,
And bid them go to Oxford both this night,
There to morrow say that we will meet them,
And there determine of their marriage.

Phi. I will, though it be very late and dark,
My sister will endure it for a husband.

M. Ba. Well then to Carfolkes boy, I mean to meet the^.

Phil. Enough, would they would begin to chide,
Exit. For I would have them brawling, that mean while,
They nay steal hence, to meet where I oppoint it,
What mother, will you let this match go forward:
Or mistress Goursey will you first agree*

Mi. Gou. Shall I agree first?

Phi. I why not, come, come.

Mi. Go. Come from her son, and if thou love thy mother.

Mi. Bar. With the like spell, daughter I conjure thee,

Mi. G. Francis, by fair means let me win thee from her,
And I will gild my blessing gentle son,
With store of Angels, I would not have thee,
Check thy good fortune, by this thy cusning choice,
O do not thrall thy happy liberty,
In such a bondage, if thou wilt be needs bound,
Be then to better worth, this worthless choice
Is not fit for thee.

Mi. Bar. Is It not fit for him, wherefore is it not fit?
Is he too brave a gentleman I pray,
No it is not fit, she shall not fit his turn,
If she were wise, she would be fitter for
Three times his better, minion go in, or i will make ye,
I Will keep ye safe from him I warrant ye.

Mi. Gou. Come Francis, come from her.

Fra. Mothers, with both hands, shoue I hate from love,
That like an ill companion would infect,
The infant mind of our offection,
Within this cradle shall this minutes babe,
Be laid to rest, and thus I Will huge my joy.

Mi. Gou, Will thou be obstinate, thou self wild boy.
Nay then perforce I Will part ye since ye will not.

Coom. Do ye hear mistress, pray ye give me leave to talk two or thre^
cold words with my young Master, hark ye sir, ye are my Masters son, and so
forth, and indeed I bear ye some good will, partly for his sake, and partly
for your own, and I do hope you do the like to me, I should be sorry else: I
must needs say ye are a y^ng man, and for mine own part, I have seen the
world, and I know what belongs to causes, and the experience that I have, I
thank God I have traveled for it.


Fra. Why how far have ye traveled for it?

Boy From my masters house to the Alehouse.

Coo. How sir?

Bo So sir.

Coo. Go to I pray, correct you boie, it was nere a good world, since a boie
would face a man so,

Fra. Go to forward man.

Coom. Well sir, so it is, I would not wish ye to marry without my mistress
consent.


Fra. And why?


Coom. Nay, there is nere a why, but there is a wherefore, I have known some have
done the like, and they have daunst a Galliard at Beggars bush for it.


Boy. At Beggars bush, here him no more master, he does be dawbe ye with his
durty speech: do ye hear sir, how far stands Beggars bushe from your
fathers house sir? how thou whoreson refuge of a Tailor, that were prentise to a
tailor half an age, and because if thou had served ten ages thou would
prove but a botcher, thou leapst from the shop boa^d to a Blew coat: does it
become thee to use thy terms so? well, thou degree above a hackney, and ten
degrees under a Page, sow up your lubber lips, or it is not your sword and
Buckler, shall keep my Poniard from your breast.


Coo. Do ye hear sir, this is your boy?

Fran. How then?

Coom. You must breech him for it.

Fran. Must I? how if I will not.

Coom. Why then it is a fine world, when boys keep boys, and know not how to
use them.


Fra. Boy, ye rascal.


Mi. Gour. Strike him and thou dare.


Coom. Strike me, alas he were better strike his father, Sownes go to, put up
your Bodkin.


Fran. Mother standby, I Will teach that rascal,


Coom. Go to, give me good words, or by Gods dines I Will buckle ye, for all your
bird-spit.


Fran. Will ye so sir?

Phi. Stay Frank, this pitch of Frenzy will defile thee,
Meddle not with it, thy unreproved valor,
Should be high minded: couch it not so low,
Do hear me? take occasion to slip hence,
But secretly, let not thy mother see thee,
At the backside there is a Cunny green,
Stay there for me, and Mall and I will come to thee.

Fra. Enough, I will: mother you do me wrong,
To be so peremptory in your command,
And see that rascal to abuse me so.

Coom Rascal, take that and take all, do ye hear sir, I do not mean to
pocket up this wrong.


Bo. I know why that is.


Coo. Why?


Bo. Because you have nere a pocket,


Co. A whip sira, a whip: but sir provide your tools against to morrow morning
it is somewhat dark now indeed, you know Dawsons close, between the hedge and
the pond, it is good even ground, I Will meet you there, and I do not, call me cut,
and you be a man show your self a man, we will have a bout or two, and so we will
part for that present.


Fran. Well sir, well.


Nic. Boy, have they appointed to fight?


Boy. I Nicholas, wilt not thou go see the fray?


Nich. No indeed, even as they brewe so let them bake. I will not thrust my hand
into the flame and need not, it is not good to have an oar in another man's
boat, little said is soon amended, and in little meddling comes great rest,
it is good sleeping in a whole skin, so a man might come home by weeping cross:
no by lady, a friend is not so soon gotten as lost, blessed are the
peacemakers, they that strike with the sword, shall be beaten with the
scabberd.


Phil. Well said proverbs, nere another to that purpose?


Nic. Yes I could have said to you sir, take heed is a good reed.


Phil. Why to me take heed?


Ni, For happy is he whom other men's harms do make to beware.


Phi. O beware Frank, slip away Mall, You know what I told ye, i will hold our
mothers both in talk mean while: Mother and Mistress Barnes, me thinks you
should not stand in hatred so hard one with the other.


Mi. Bar. Should I not sir' should I not hate a harlot,
That robs me of my right, vide boy?

Mi. Gou. That title I return unto thy teeth,
And spit the name of ha^ ^t in thy face.

Mi. Bar. Well it is not time of night to hold out chat,
With such a scold as thou art, therefore now,
Think that I hate thee as I do the devil.

Mi. Gou. The devil take thee if thou do not wretch.

Mi. Bar. Out upon thee strumpet.

Mi. Gou. Out upon thee harlot.

Mis. Bar. Well, I will find a time to be revenged:
Mean time I Will keep my daughter from thy son,
Where are you minion? how now are ye gone.

Phi. She went in mother.

Mi. Go. Francis where are ye?

Mi. Ba. He is not here* o then they split away and both together.

Phi. I Will assure ye no, my sister she went in, into the house,

Mi. Ba. But then she will out again at the back door,
And meet with him, but I will search about,
All these same fields and paths near to my house,
They are not far I am sure, if I make haste,
Exit.
Mi. Go. O God how went he hence? I did not see him,
It was when Barnes wife did scolde with me,
A plague on her, Dick why did not thou look to him?

Coo. What should I look for him? no, no, I look not for him while to morrow
morning.


Mi. Gou. Come go with me to help to look him out,
Alas, I have nor light, nor Link, nor Torche,
Though it be dark, I will take any pains,
To cross this match, I prethy Dick away.

Coo. Mistress because I brought ye out, I Will bring ye home but if I should
follow, so he might have the law on his side.


Mi. Go Come it is no matter, prithee go with me.

Exeunt M. Ba. Philip thy mothers gone to seek thy sister.
And in a rage I faith, but who comes here?

Phi. Old master Goursey, as I think it is he.

M. Ba. It Is so indeed.

M. Gou. Whoes there?

M. Bar. A friend of yours.

M. Gou. What master Barnes did ye not see my wife?

M. Bar. Yes sir I saw her, she was here even now.

M. Gour. I doubted that, that made me come unto you:
But whether is she gone?

Phil, To seek your son, who slipped away from her,
To meet with Mall my sister in a place
Where I appointed: and my mother too,
Seek for my sister, so they both are gone,
My mother has a Torch, mary your wife
Goes darkling up and down, and Coomes before her.

M. Gou. I thought that knave was with her, but it is well,
I pray God they may come by nere a light,
But both be led a dark dance in the night.

Ho. Why is my fellow Dick in the dark with my Mistres. I pray God they be
honest, for there may be much knauerie in the Dark, faith if I were there, I
would have some knavery with them, good master will ye carry the torch your
self, and give me leave to play the blind man buffe with my mistress,


Phil. On that condition thou will do thy best,
To keep thy Mistress and thy fellow Dick,
Both from my sister, and thy masters son,
I will entreat thy master let thee go.

Hod. O I, I warrant ye, i will have fine tricks to cosen them

M, Gou. Well sir, then go your ways, I give you leave.

Hod. O brave, but where about are they?

Phil. About our cunny green they surely are, if thou can find them.

Hod. O let me alone to grope for cunnies.
Exi^
Phi. Well, now will I to Frank and to my sister,
Stand you two harkning near the cunny green,
But sure your light in you must not b^ seen,
Or else let Nicholas stand a far off with it,
And as his life keep it from mistress Goursey,
Shall this be done?

M. Bar. Phillip it shall,

Phi, God be with ye, i will b^ gone.
Exit.
M. Bar. Come on master Goursey, this fame is a means,
To make our wives friends, if they resist not.

M^ Go. T^t sir, howsoever it shall go forward.

M. Bar. Come then let^ do, as Philip has aduisd.

Exeunt Enter Mall, Mal. Here is the place where Philip bid me stay,
Till Francis came, but wherefore did my bother,
Appoint i^ here? why in the Cunny borough?
He had some meaning in it I warrant ye,
Well here i will set me down under this tree,
And think upon the matter all alone,
Good Lord what pretty things these Cunnies are,
How finely they do feed till they be fat,
And then what a sweet meat a Cunny is,
And what smooth skins they have, both black and gray,
They say they run more in the night then day,
What is the reason? mark, why in the light,
They see more passengers then in the night,
For harmfull men many a hay do set.
And laugh to see them tumble in the net,
And they put ferrets in the holes, fie, fie,
And they go up and down where connies lie,
And they lie still, they have so little wit,
I marvel the Warriner will suffer it,
Nay, nay, they are so bad, that they themselves,
Do give consent to catch these pretty elfes,
How if the Warriner should spy me here?
He would take me for a conny I dare swear,
But when that Francis comes, what will he say?
Look boy there lies a conney in my way:
But soft, a light, whose that? sold my mother,
Nay then all hid, I faith she shall not see me,
I Will play bo peep with her behind this tree.

Mis. Ba. I marvel where this wench does hide her self
So closely? I have searched in many a bush,

Mal. Belike my mother took me for a Thrush,

Mis. Bar. She Is hid in this same Warren I Will lay money.

Mal. Close as a rabbet sucker from an old conney.

Mi. Bar. O God, I would to God that I could find her,
I would keep her from her loves toys yet.

Mal. I so you might, if your daughter had no wit.

Mi. Ba. What a vilde gi^le it is, that would hau't so young.

Mal. A murren take that desembling tongue,
Ere your calves teeth were out you thought it long.

Mi. Bar. But minion, yet I Will keep you from the man.

M all To save a lie mother, say if you can.

Mi. Bar. Well, now to look for her.

Mal. I there is the spite,
What trick shall I now have to escape her light?

Mi. Bar. Whose there? what minion is it you?
Beshrew her heart, what a fright she put me to,
But I am glad I found her, though I was afraid,
Come on your ways, you are a handsome maid,
Why you forth a doors so late at night?
Why whether go ye? come stand still I say.

Mal. No indeed mother, this is my best way.

M. Ba. It Is not the best way, stand by me I tell ye.

M all. No you would catch me mother, o I smell ye.

Mi. Bar. Will ye not stand still?

Mal. No by Lady no.

Mis. Bar. But I will make ye.

Mal. Nay then trip and go.

Mi. Bar. Mistress, I Will make ye weary ere I have done.

Mal Faith mother then I Will try how you can run,

Mis. Bar. Will ye?

Mal. Yes faith.

Exunt. Enter Fran. Mal. sweet heart, Mal^? what not a word?

Boy. A little further, call again.

Fran. Why Mal. I prethie speak, why Mal I say?
I know thou art not far, if thou will not speak, why mal,
But now I see she is in her merry vain,
To make me call and put me to more pain,
Well, I must bea^^ with her, she will bear with me,
But I will call, least that it be not so,
What Mall? what Mall I say, boy are we right?
Have we not mist the way this same dark night?

Boy. Mass it may be so as I am true man,
I have not seen a cunny since I came,
Yet at the Cunny-borow we should meet,
But hark, I hear the trampling of some feet.

Fran. It may be so, then therefore lets lie close.

Mis. Gou. Where art thou Dicke?

Coo. Where am I quoth a, mary I may be where any body will say I am, either in
France or at Rome, or at Jerusalem they may say I am, for I am not able to
disprove them, because I cannot tell where I am.


Mi. Gou. O what a blindfold walk have we had Dicke,
To seek my son and yet I cannot find him?

Coo. Why then Mistress lets go home.

Mi. Gou. Why it is so dark we shall not find the way.

Fran. I pray God ye may not mother till it be day.

Coo. God's Blood take heed mistress here is a tree.

Mis. Go. Lead thou the way, and let me hold by thee,

Bo. Dick Coom^, what difference is there between a blind man, and he that
cannot see?


Fra. Peace, a pox on thee.

Coo. Swounds some body spoke.

Mi. Gou. Dicke look about,
It may be here we may find them out.

Coo. I see the glimpes of some body here,
And ye be a sprite I Will fraie the bug bear,
There a goes mistress.

Mi. Gour. O sir have I spide you?

Fr. A plague on the boy, it was he that discried me.

Exeunt Phi. How like a beauteous Lady maskt in black,
Looks that same large circumference of heaven,
The sky that was so fair three hours ago,
Is in three hours become an Ethiope,
And being angry at her beauteous change,
She will not have one of those pearled stars,
To blab her sable metamorphesis,
It Is very dark, I did appoint my sister,
To meet me at the cunny berrie below,
And Francis too, but neither can I see,
Belike my mother happened on that place.
And fraide them from it, and they both are now
Wandering about the fields, how shall I find them?
It is so dark, I scarce can see my hand,
Why then I Will hollow for them, no not so,
So will his voice betray him to our mothers,
And if he answer, and bring them where he is.
What shall I then do? it must not be so?
God's Blood it must be so, how else I pray?
Shall I stand gaping here all night till day?
And then nere the near, so ho, so ho.

Will. So ho, I come, where are ye? where art thou? h^re.

Phi How now Frank, where have thou been?

Will. Frank, what Frank? god's blood is sir Raph mad, heeres the bow.

Phi. I have not been much private with that voice,
Me think Frank Goursy^ talk and his does tell me,
I am mistaken, especially by his bow,
Frank had no bow, well, I will leave this sellow,
And hollow somewhat farther in the fields,
Do thou hear fellow, I perceive by thee,
That we are both mistaken, I took thee,
For one thou art not, likewise thou tookst me,
For sir Raph Smith, but sure I am not he,
And so farewell, I must go seek my friend, so ho:

Will. So ho, so ho, nay then sir Raph so whore,
For a whore she was sure, if you had her here
So late, now you are sir Raphe Smith,
Well do ye counterfeit and change your voice,
But yet I know ye, but what should be that Francis?
Belike that Francis cussend him of his wench,
And he conceals himself to find her ou^,
It Is so upon my life, well I will go
And help him ring his peale o^ so ho, soho,

Enter Frank. Fra. A plague on Coomes, a plague upon the boy*
A plague too, not on my mother for an hundredth bound,
It Was time to run, and yet I had not thought
My mother could have followed me so close,
Her legs with age I thought had foundered,
She made me quite run through a quickset hedge,
Or she had taken me: well I may say,
I have run through the briers for a wenche,
And yet I have her not, the worse luck mine,
Me thought I heard one hollow here about,
I judge it Philip, O the slave will laugh
When as he hears how that my mother scarde me,
Well, here I Will stand until I hear him hollow,
And then I Will answer him, he is not far.

Ra. my man is hollowing for me up and down,
And yet I cannot meet with him, so ho:

Frank. So ho.

Ra. Why what a pox were thou so near me man,
And would not speak?

Fra. God's Blood ye are very hot.

Rap No sir, I am cold enough with staying here
For ^uch a knave as you.

Fra. Knave, how now Phillip, art mad, art mad?

Ra. Why art not thou my man.
That went to fetch my bow,

(...). Indeed a bow,
Might shoot me ten bows down the weather so,
^ your man.

Ra. What art thou then?

Hollow within Phillip and Will. Fran. A man, but what is thy name?

Rap. Some call me Raph.

Ra. Well said familiar Will, plain Raph I faith,

Fran. There calls my man.

Ra. But there goes mine away.
And yet I Will hear what this next call will say,
And here I Will tarry till he call again.

VVil. So ho.

Fran. So ho, where art thou Phillip,

Will. Sblould Phillip,
But now he clade me Francis, this is fine

Fran. Why studiest thou? I prethy tell me Philip.
Where the wench is.

Will. Even now he asked me Francis for the wench,
And now he ask me Phillip for the wench,
Well sir Raph. I must needs tell ye now,
It Is not for your credit to be forth,
So late a w^nching in this order

Fra^. What Is this, so late a wenching does he say?
Indeed it is true, I am thus late a wenching,
But I am forc'st to wench without a wench.

Will. Why then you might have taken your bow at first,
And gone and kilde abucke, and not have been
So long a drabbing, and be nere the near.

Fran. Swounds what a pussell am I in this night,
But yet I Will put this fellow farther,
Do thou hear man? I am not sir R^ph Smith.
As thou do think I am, but I did meet him,
Even as thou say in pursuit of a wench.
I met the wench to, and asked for thee,
Saying it was thou that were her love, her dear,
And that sir Raph was not an honest Knight,
To train her thither, and to use her so.

Will. God's Blood my wench, swounds were he ten sir Raphs.

Fran. Nay it is (...), look to it, and so farewell.
Exit.
Will. Indeed I do ^oue Nan our darie maid,
And has he train her forth to that intent?
Or for another, I carry his crossebow,
And he does cross me, shooting in my bow,
What shall I do?

Enter Phillip Phillip. So ho?

Raph. So ho,

Phil. Francies art thou there?

Ra. No here is no Francis, art thou Will my man?

Phi. Will fool your man, will gose your man,
My back sir scorns to wear your ^uerie.

Raph. Nay sir I mooude but such a question to you,
Had it has not disparegd you I hope,
It Was but mistaking, such a night as this
May well deceive a man, God boy sir.

Phil. Gods will it is sir Raph Smith, a virtuous knight,
How gently entertaines he my hard answer?
Rude anger made my tongue unmannerly,
I^rie him mercy, well, but all this while,
I cannot find a Francis, Francis ho?

Will. Francis ho* o you call Francis now,
How have ye used my Nan? come tell me how?

Phil. Thy Nan, what Nan?

Will. I, what Nan now, say, do you not seek a wench?

Phi. Yes I do.

Will. Then sir that is she.

Phi. Art not thou I met withal before?

Will. Yes sir, and you did counterfeit before,
And said to me you were not sir Raph Smith,

Phil. No more I am not, I met sir Raph Smith,
Even now he asked me if I saw his man.

Will. O fine.

Phi. Why sir thou art much deceived in me,
Good faith I am not he thou think I am.

Will. What are ye then?

Phi. Why one that se^kes one Francis and a wench.

Will. And Francis seeks one Phillip and a wench:

Phil. How can thou t^ll?

Will. I met him seeking Philip and a wench,
As I was seeking sir Raph and a wench.

Phil. Why then I know the matter, we met cross,
And so we mist, now here we find our loss,
Well, if thou will, we two will keep together,
And so we shall meet right with one or other,

Will. I am content, but do you hear me sir?
Did not sir Raph Smith ask ye for a wench?

Phi. No I promise thee, nor did he look for any
But thy self, as I could guess.

W^l. Why this is strange, but come sir lets away,
I fear that we shall walk here till it be day.

Exeunt. Enter Boy. O God I have run so far into the wind, that I have run
my self out of wind, they say a man is near his end when he lackes breath,
and I am at the end of my race, for I can run no farther then here I be in my
breath bed, not in my death bed.


Enter Coomes. Coom. They say men moyle and toil for a poor living, so I
moyle and toil, and am living I thank God, in good time be it spoken, it had
been better for me my mistress angel had been light, for then perhaps it had
not lead me into this darkness, well, the devil never blesses a man better,
when he purses up angels by owlight, I ran through a hedge to take the boy
but I stuck in the ditch, and lost the boy: swounds a plague on that clod, that
Mowl-h^l, that ditch, or what the devil so ere it were, for a man cannot see
what it was, well, I would not for the prize of my sword and buck^er, any body
should see me in this taking for it would make me but cut off their legs for
laughing at me, well, down I am, and down I mean to be, because I am weary,
but to tumble down thus, it was no part of my meaning, then since I am down,
here i will rest me, and no man shall remove me.


Enter Hodge. Hodg. O I have sport in coney I faith, I have almost burst my
self with laughing at mistress Barnes, she was following of her daughter, and
I hearing her, put on my fellow Dickes sword and bucklers voice, and his
swounds and god's blood words, and led her such a dance in the da^ke as it passes,
here she is quoth I, where quo^h she? here quoth I, O it has been a brave
here and there night, but O what a soft natured thing the dirt is? how it would
endure my hard t^eading, and kiss my feet for acquaintance, and how courteous
and mannerly were the clods, to make me stumble only of purpose to entreat me
lie down and rest me, but now and I could find my fellow Dicke, I would play
the knave with him honestly I faith, Well, I will grope in the dark for him,
or i will poke with my staff like a blind man, to prevent a ditch.


He stumbles on Dick Coomes. Coom. Whose that with a pox?


Hod. Who art thou with a pestilence.


Coom. Why I am Dick Coomes?


Hodg. What have I found thee Dicke? nay then I am for ye Dicke, Where are ye
Dicke?


Coom. What can I tell where I am?


Hodg. Can ye not tell, come, come ye weight on your mistreffe well, come on
your ways, I have sought you till I am weary, and calde ye till I am hoarse,
good Lord what a iaunt I have had this night, hey ho?


Coom. Is It you mistress that came over me, god's blood twere a good deed to come
over you for this nights work, I cannot afford all this pains for an angel
I tell ye true a kiss were not cast away upon a good fellow, that has
deserved more that way ^hen a kiss, if your kindness would afford it him,
What shall I have it mistress?


Hodg. Fie, fie, I must not kiss my man.


Coom. Nay* nay, nere stand, shall I, shall I, nobody sees, say but I shall,
and i will smack ye soundly I faith.


Hodg. Away bawdie man, in truth lle tell your master.


Coom My master, go to, near tell me of my master, he may pray for them that
may, he is past it, and for mine own part, I can do somewhat that way I thank
God, I am not now to learn, and it is your part to ha^^ your whole desire.


Hod. Fie, fie, I am ashamed of you, would you tempt your mistress to
lewdn^sse.


Coom. To lewdness, no by my troth there is no such matter in it, it is for
kindness, and by my tro^h if you like my gentle offer, you shall have what
courteously I can afford ye.


Hod. Shall I indeed Dicke? I faith, if I thought no body would see.


Coom ^ush, fe^re not that, swones they must have Cattes eyes then,


Hod. Then kiss me Dick.


Coom. A kind wenche I faith, where are ye mistress?


Hodge. Here Dick, O I am in the dark, Dick go about,


Coom. Nay, i will grope sure, where are ye. Hodge. Here,


Coom. A plague on this poast, I would the Carpenter had bin hanged that set it
up so, where are ye now?


Hod. Here.

Exit.
Coo, Here, o I come, a plague on it, I am in a pond mistres.


Hod. Ha, ha, I have led him into a pond, where art thou Dick?


Coomes. Up to the middle in a pond.


Hod. Make a Boat of thy Buckler then, and swim out, are ye so hot with a
pox? would you kiss my mistress, cool ye there then good Dick Coomes, o when
he comes forth the skirts of his blew coat will dropp like a paint-house, O
that I could see and not be seen, how he would Spaniell it, and shake himself
when he comes out of the pond, but i will be gone, for now heel fight with a
fly, if he but buz in his ear.

Exit.
Enter Coomes. Coom Heeres so hoing with a plague, so hang and ye will for I
have bin almost drowned, a pox of your lips, and ye call this kissing: ye talk
of a drowned Rat, but it was time to swim like a dog I had bin served like a
drowned Cat^els, I would he h^d^didg his grave that digd the pond, my feet were
foul indeed, but a les^e pale then a pond would have served my turn to wash
them: a man shall be served thus always, when he follows any of these females
but it is my kind heart that makes me thus forward in kindness unto them, well
God amend them, and make them thankful to them that would do the^ pleasure I
am not drunk I would ye should know it, and yet I have drunk more then will
do me good, for I might have had a Pu^pe set up, w^^h as good March Beer as
this was, and nere set up an Ale bush' for the matter: well I am somewhat in
wroth I must needs say, and yet I am not more angry then wise, nor more wise
then angry, but i will fight with the next man I mere, and it be but for luck
sake, and if he love to see him self hurt, let him bring light with him, i will
do it by darkling else by gods dines, well here will I walk whosoever says
nay.


Entter Nicholas. Nic. He that worse may must hold the Candle, but my Master
is not so wise as God might have made him, he is gone to seek a Hair in a
Hens nest, a Need^e in a Bottle of Have, which is as sildome seen as a black
Swan: he is gone to seek my young Mistress, and I think she is better lost
then found, for who so ever h^th her, has but a wet Eele by the tail^, but
they may do as they ^^st, the law is in their own hands, but and they would be
ruid^y me, they should set her on the Leland, and b^d the Dwell sp^^ her,
beshrew her fingers, she has made me watch past mine hour, but I Will watch her
a good turn for it.


Coom. How, whose that Nicholas? so first come first serud, I am for him: how
now proverb, proverb, god's blood how now proverb?


Ni. My name is Nicholas, Richard: and I k^owe your meaning, and I hope ye
mean no harm: I thank ye I am the better for your asking.


Coo. Where have you been a whoring thus late, ha?


Ni. Master Richard the good wife would not seek her daughter in the Oven
unless she had bin there her self, but good Lord you are knuckle deep in dirt,
I warrant when he was in, he swore Walsingham, and chaft terrible for the time,
look the water drops from you as fast as hops.


Coom. What needst thou to care, whipper-Ienny, Tripecheekes, out you fat ass.


Ni. Good words cost naught, ill words corrupts good manners Richard, for a
hasty man never wants woe, and I had thought you had bin my friend, but I see
al is not gold that glisters, there is falsehood in fellowship, a micus certus in
re cer ta cernitur, time and truth tries all, and it is an old proverb, and not
so old as true, bought wit is best, I can see day at a little hole, I know your
mind as well as though I were within you, it is ill halting before a criple, go
to, you seek to quarrel but be ware of had I wist: so long goes the pot to the
water at length it comes home broken, I know you are as good a man as ever drew
sword, or as was ere girt ina girdle, or as ere went on Neats leather, or as
one sh^l see upon a summers day, or as ere looked man in the face, or as ere
trod on gods earth, or as ere broke bread, or drunk drink: but he is proper
that has proper conditions, but be not like the Cow that gives a good soap of
milk and castes it down with her heels, I speak plainly, for plain dealing
is a Jewel, and he that uses it shall dye a beggar, well, that happens in an
hour, that happens not in seven years, a man is not so soon whole as hurt
and you should kill a man, you would kiss hi^: well, I say little, but I
think the more, ye^ I Will give him good words, it is good to hold a candle before
the deuell, yet by Gods me, I Will take no wrong, if he had a head as big as
Brass, or looked as high as Poules steeple.


Coo. Sir, thou Grashoper, that shall skip from my sword as from a Since, I Will
cut thee out in collops and eggs, in sleekes, in s^ste beef, and fry thee with
the fire, I shall strike from the pike of they Buckler.


Nich. I, brag's a good dog, threatened folks live long.


Coo. What say ye sir?


Nic. Why I say not so much as how do ye.


Coo. Do ye not so sir?


Nic. No indeed, what so ere I think, and thought is free.


Coo. You whoreson Wafer-cake, by Gods dines i will crush ye for this.


Ni. Give an inch and you will take an elle, I will not put my finger in a hole I
warrant ye, what man, nere crow so fast, for a blind man may kill a Hare, I
have known when ^ plain fellow has hurt a Fencer, so I have: What, a man may
be as slow as a Snaile, but as fierce as a Lion, and he be moved: Indeed I am
patient I must needs say, for patience in adversity, brings a man to the three
Cranes in the Ventree.


Coo. Do ye hear, set down your Torch, draw, fight, I am for ye.


Ni. And I am for ye too, though it be from this midnight to the next morn.


Coo. Where be your tools?


Nic. Within a mile of an oak sir, he is a proud horse will not carry his own
prouender, I warrant ye.


Coo. Now am I in my quarrelling humor, and now can I say nothing but sownes
draw, but i will vntrus, and the^ have to it.


Enter Hodge and Boy. Hod. Whose there, Boy? honest Boy, well met, where have
thou bin.


Boy. O Hodge, Dicke Coomes has bin as good as a cry of Hounds, to make a
breathd Hair of me, but did thou see my master?


Hod. I met him even now, and he asked me for thee, and he is gone up and down,
whoing like an Owl for thee.


Boy. Owl, ye Ass.


Hod. Ass, no nor glass, for then it had been Owleglasse, but whose that boy?


Bo* By the mass it is our Coomes and Nicholas, and it seems they are providing
to fight.


Hod. Then we shall have fine sport, I faith sir, le^s stand close, and when
they have fought about or two, we will run away with the torch, and leave the^ to
fight darkling, shall we?


Boy. Content, I Will get the Torch, stand close.


Coo. So now my back has room to reach, I do not love to be lac't in, when I
go to lace a rascal, I pray God Nicholas prove not a fly: it would do me
good to deal with a good man now, that we might have half a dozen good smart
strokes, ha I have seen the day, I could have daunst in my fight, on, two,
three four and five, ou the head of him six, seven, eight, nine and ten, on
the sides of him, and if I went so far as fifteen, I warrant I showed him a
trick of one and twenty: but I have not sought th^s four days, and I lack a
little practice of my war^e, but I shall make a shift, ha close, are ye
desposed sir?


Nic. Yes indeed I ^eare no colors, change sides Richard.


Coo. Change the gallows, I Will see thee handg first.


Nich. Well, I see the fool will not leave his babble for the Tower of London.


Coo. Fool ye Roge, nay then fall to it.


Nic. Good goose bite not.


Coo. God's Blood how pursey I am, well I see exercise is all, I must practice my
weapons oftener, I must have a goal or two at ^oote-ball, before I come to my
right kind, give me thy hand Nicholas, thou art a better man then I took thee
for, and yet thou art not so good a man as I.


Ni. You dwell by^ neighbors Richard, that makes ye praise your self.


Coo. Why I hope thou will say I am a man.


Ni. Yes I Will say so if I should see you hanged.


Coo. Hanged ye Roge, nay then have at ye, swounes the light is gone.


Ni. O Lord, it is as dark as Pitch,


Coo, Well here I Will lie with my buckler thus, least striking up and down at
^andall, the roge might hurt me, for I cannot see to save it, and I Will hold my
peace, least my voice should bring them where I am.


Nic. It Is good. o have a cloak for the rain, a bad shift is better then none
at all, I Will sit here as if I were as dead as a door nail.


Enter M. Barnes and M. Goursey. M. Gou. Hark, there is one holloes.

M. Bar. And there is another.

M. Gour. And every where we come, I here some hollo. And yet it is our haps
to meet with none.

M. Bar. I marvel where your Hodge is, and my man?

M. Gour. I and our wives, we cannot meet with them.
Nor with the boy, nor Mall, nor Frank, nor Phillip:
Nor yet with Coomes, and yet we nere stood still.
Well I am very angry with my wife,
And she shall find I am not pleased with her,
If we meet nere so soon, but it is my hap,
She has had as blind a journey out as we,
Pray God she have, and worse if worse may be.

M. Bar. This is but short liu'de envy Master Coursey:
But come, what say ye to my policy?

M. Gou. I faith it is good, and we will practice it,
But sir it must be handeled cunningly,
Or all is mard, our wives have subtle heads,
And they will soon perceive a drift devise.

Enter sir Raphe Smith. Raph. So ho.

M, Gour. So ho.

Raph. Whose there?

M. Bar. Heers on or two.

Raph. Is Will there?

M. Bar. No, Phillip?

M. Gour. Frank?

Raph. No, no.
Was ever man deluded thus like me,
I think some spirit leads me thus amiss:
As I have often heard, that some have bin thus in the nights.
But yet this mases me where ere I come,
Some asks me still for Frank or Phillip,
And none of them can tell me where Will is.

Will. So ho?

Phil. So ho.

They hollo Hodg. So ho!

Boy. So ho?

within. Rap. Sownes now I here four hollow at the least,
One had a little voice, then that's the wench
My man has lost, well I will answer all, so ho.

Hodg. VVhope, whope.

Raph. Whose there will?

Hod. No sir, honest Hodge: but I pray ye sir did ye not meet with a boy
with a Torche, he is run away from me a plague on him.


Raph. Hey day, from Frank and Phillip to a Torche,
And to a Boy, nay sownes then hap as twill.

M. Gour. Who goes there?

Will. Guess here.

M. Bar. Phillip.

Will. Phillip, no faith, my names Will, ill will, for I was never worse, I was
even now with him, and might have been still, but that I fell into a ditch and
lost him, and now I am going up and down to seek him.


M. Gor. What would thou do with him.


Will. Why I would have him go with me to my masters.


M. Gou. Whose thy master?


Will. Why sir Raphe Smith, and thither he promised me he would come, if he keep
his word so it is.


M. Ba. What was he a doing wheat^^ou first found him.


Will. Why he holloed for one Francis, and Francis hollod for him, I hallod for
my master, and my master for me, but we mist still meeting contrary, Phillip
and Francis with me and my master, and I and my master with Philip and Frank.


M. Gou. Why wherefore is sir Raphe so la^e abroad?


Will. Why he meant to kill a Buck, I Will say so to save his honesty, but my Nan
was his mark, and when he sent me for his bow, and when I came, I hollod for
him, but I never saw such luck to miss him, it has almost made me mad.


M. Bar. Well stay with us, perhap^ sir Raphe and he,
Will come anon, hark I do here one hollo.

Enter Phillip. Phil. Is this broad waking in a winters night,
I am broad walking in a winters night:
Broad indeed, because I am abroad,
But these broad fields me thinks are not so broad,
That they may keep me forth of narrow ditches,
Heers a hard world for I can hardly keep my self upright in it,
I am marvelous dutiful, but so ho.

Will. So ho.

Phil. Whose there?

VVil. Heeres will.

Phi. What Will, how scapst thou?

Will. What sir?

Phi. Nay, not hanging, but drowning,
Were thou in a pond or a ditche?

Will. A pestilence on it, is it you Phillip, no faith, I was but durty a little,
but heeres one or two asked for ye.


Phil. Who be they man?

M. Bar. Philip, it is I and master Goursey.

Phi. Father, O father I have heard them say.
The days of ignorance are past and done,
But I am sure the nights of ignorance
Are not yet past, for this is one of them,
But where is my sister?

M. Bar. Why we cannot tell.

Phi. VVheres Francis?

M Gour. Neither saw we him.

Phi. Why this is fine.
What neither he, nor I, nor she nor you,
Nor I, nor she, nor you, and I ^ill now,
Can meet, could meet, or nere I think shall meet,
Call ye this ^oing, no it is Christmas sport of Hob man blind
All blind, all seek to catch, all miss: but who comes here?

Enter Frank and his Boy. Fra. O have I caught ye sir, it was your doing,
That m^de me have this pretty dance to night,
Had not you spo^ke, my mother had not scard me,
But I will swinge ye for it.

Phil. Keep the Kings peace,

Fran How? art thou become a Constable?
Why Phillip where have thou bin all this while?

Phi. Why where you were not, but I pray whers my sister?

Fran. Why man I saw her not, but I have sought her as I should seek.

Phil. A needle have ye not?
Why you man are the needle that she seeks
To work withal, well Francis do you here,
You must not answer so, that you have sought her,
But have ye found her, faith and if you have,
God give ye joy of that ye found with her,
Fra I saw her not, how could I find her.

M. Gou. Why, could ye miss form Master Barnses house unto his Cunnyberry?

Fran. Whether I could or no, father I did.

Phill. Father I did, well Fr^nke will thou believe me,
Thou do not know how much this same does grieve me
Shall it be said thou mist so plain away,
When as so fair a wenche did for thee stay.

Fra, Sownes man.

Phi. Sownes man, and if thou had bin blind,
The cunny-borow thou needst must find:
I tell thee Francis had it bin my case,
And I had bin a woer in thy place,
I would have laid my head unto the ground,
And sented out my wenches way like a Hound:
I would have crept upon my knees all night,
And have made the flint stones Linckes to give me light,
Nay man I would.

Fran. Good Lord what you would do,
Well we shall see one day how you can woe.

M. Go^. Come, come, we see that we have all bin crossed.
Therefore lets go, and seek them we have lost.
Exeunt. Enter Man. Am I alone? does not my mother come?
Her torch I see not, which I well might see,
If any way she were coming toward me,
Why then belike she is gone some other way,
And may she go till I bid her turn,
Far shall her way be then, and little fair,
For she has hindered me of my good turn,
God send her wet and weary ere the turn,
I had been at Oxenford, and to morrow,
Have been releast from all my maidens sorrow.
And tasted joy, had not my mother bin,
God I beseech thee make it her worst sin,
How many maids this night lies in their beds,
And dream that they have lost their maidenheads,
Such dreams, such slumbers I had to enioyde,
If waking malice had not them destroide,
A starued man with double death does dye,
To have the meat might save him in his eye,
And may not have it so am I tormented,
To starve for joy I see yet am prevented,
Well Frank, although thou woedst and quickly won,
Yet shall my love to thee be never done,
I Will run through hedge and ditch, through brakes and briers
To come to thee, sole Lord of my desires,
Short woing is the best, an hour, not years,
For long debating love is full of fears,
But hea^ke, I hear one tread, o were my brother,
Or Frank, or any man, but not my mother.

S. Rap. O when will this same year of night have end?
Long looked for days sun, when will thou ascend?
Let not this these friend misty vale of night,
Incroach on day, and shadow thy fair light,
Whilst thou come tardy from my Thetes bed,
Blushing forth golden hair and glorious red,
O stay not long bright lantern of the day,
To light my mist way feet to my right way?

Mall. It is a man, his big voice tells me so,
Much am I not acquainted with it tho,
And yet mine ear sounds true distinguisher,
Boys that I have been more familiar,
With it then now I am, well, I do judge,
It is not enuies fellon not of grudge,
Therefore I Will plead acquaintance, hyer his guiding,
And buy of him some place of close abiding,
Till that my mothers malice be expired,
And we may joy in that is long desired, whoses there?

Ra. Are ye a maid? no question this is she,
My man does miss, faith since she lights on me,
I do not mean till day to let her go,
For what she is my man's love I will know,
Hark ye maid, if maid, are ye so light,
That you can see to wander in the night.

Mal. Hark ye true man, if true, I tell you no,
I cannot see at all which way I go.

Ra. Fair maid is it so, say had ye nere a fall,

Mal Fair man not so, no I had none at all.

Ra. Could you not stumble on one man I pray?

Mal. No, no, such block till now came in my way.

Ra. Am I that block sweet tripe, then fall and try.

Ma. The grounds too hard, a feather-bed, not I.

Ra. Why how and you had met with such a stumpe?

Mal. Why if he had been your height I meant to iumpe?

Ra. Are ye so nimble?

Mal. Nimble as a Do.

Ra. Backed in a pie.

Mal. Of ye.

Ra. Good meat ye know.

Mal* Ye hunt sometimes.

Ra. I do.

Mal. What take ye?

Ra. Dear.

Mall. You Will nere strike rascal?

Ra. Yes when ye art there.

Mal. Will ye strike me.

Ra. Yes, will ye strike again?

Mall. No sir, it fits not maids to fight with men.

Ra. I wonder wench, how I thy name might know.

Mall. Why you may find it in the Christcrosse row.

Ra. Be my Schoolemistresse, teach me how to spell it.

Mall. No faith, I care not greatly if I tell it,
My name is Marie Ba^nes.

Ra. How wench, Mall Barnes?

Mal. The very same.

Rap. Why this is strange.

Mal. I pray sir what is o^ure name?

Raph. Why sir Raph Smith does wonder wench at this
Why what is the cause thou art abroad so late?

Mal. What sir Raph Smith, nay then I will disclose,
All the hole cause to him, in him repose,
My hopes, my love, God him I hope did send,
Our loves and both our mothers hates to end,
Gentle sir Raph if you my blush might see,
You then would say I am ashamed to be
Found like a wandering stray by such a knight,
So far from home at such a time of night,
But my excuse is good, love first by fate
Is crossed, controuled, and sundered by fell hate,
Frank Goursey is my love, and he loves me,
But both our mothers hate and disagree,
Our fathers like the match, and wish it don,
And so it had, had not our mothers come,
To Oxford we concluded both to go,
Going to me^te, they came, we parted so,
My mother followed me, but I ran fast,
Thinking who went from hate had need make have,
Take me she cannot though she still pursue,
But now sweet knight, I do repose on you.
Be you my Orator and plead my right,
And get me one good day for this bad night.

Ra. Alas good heart, I pity thy hard hap,
And I Will employ all that I may for thee,
Frank Goursey wench, I do commend thy choice,
Now I remember I met one Francis
As I did seek my man, then that was he,
And Philip too, (...) like that was thy brother, why now I
find how I did loose my self, And wander up and down, mistaking
so, Give me thy hand Mall, I will never leave.
Till I have made your mothers friends again,
And purchased to ye both your hearts delight,
And for this same one bad, many a good night,
Twill not be long ere that Aurora will.
Decked in the glory o^ a goldon sun,
Open the crystal windows of the East,
To make the earth enamourde of thy face,
When we shall have clear light to see our way,
Come, night being done, expect a happy day.

Exeunt. Enter mistress Barnes Mis. Ba O what a race this peevish girl has
led me?
How fast I ran and now how weary I am,
I am so out of breath I scarce can speak.
What shall I do? and cannot overtake her,
It is late and dark, and I am far from home.
May there not thieves lie watching here about,
Intending mischief unto them they meet,
There may, and I am much affrayde of them,
Being alone without all company,
I do repent me of my coming forth,
And yet I do not, they had else been married,
And that I would not for ten times more labor.
But what a winter of cold fear I stole,
Freecing my heart least danger should betide me,
What shall I do to purchase company?
I hear some hollow here about the fields,
Then here I Will set my Torch upon this hill,
Whose light shall Beacon-like conduct them to it,
They that have lost their way seeing a light,
Will come to it, well, here i will lie unseen,
For it may be seen far off in the night,
And look who comes, and choose my company,
Perhaps my daughter may first come to it.

M^. Gour. Where am I now? nay where was I ever now,
Nor now, nor then, nor where I shall be, know I,
I think I am going home I may as well
Be going from home, it is so very dark,
I cannot see how to direct a step,
I lost my pursuing of my son,
My son escapt me too, now all alone,
I am enforst to wander up and down,
Barnses wife's abroad pray God that she:
May have as good a dance, nay ten times worse,
Oh but I fear she has not, she has light
To see her way, O that some bridge would break
That she might fall into some deep digd ditch,
And either break her bones or drown her self,
I would these mischiefs I could wish to her,
Might light on her, but soft I see a light,
I will go near, it is comfortable,
After this nights sad spirits dulling darkness,
How now? What is it set to keep it self?

Mis. Bar. A plague ont, is she there?

Mis Gou. O how it cheares and quickens up my thoughts,

M^. Bar. O that it were the Besseli^kies fell eye,
To poison thee.

M^. Gou. I care not if I take it.
Sure none is here to hinder me,
And light me home.

Mi. Bar. I had rather she were hanged.
Then I should set it there to do her good.

Mis. Go. I faith I will.

Mi. Ba. I faith you shall not mistress.
I Will venture a burnt finger but I Will have it.

M^. Gou. Yet Barnses wife would chafe if that she knew,
That I had this good to get a light.

Mi. Ba. And so she does, but praise you luck at parting.

Mi. Go. O that it were her light good faith, that she,
Might darkling walk about as well as I.

Mi. Ba. O how this mads me, that she has her wish,

Mi. Go. How I would laugh to see her tro^ about.

Mi. Bar Oh, I could cry for anger and for rage.

Mi. Go. But who should set it here I marvel a Gods name?

M^. Bar. One that will hau'te from you in the devils name

Mi. Go. lle lay my life that it was Barnses son.

M^. Ba. No forsooth, it was Barnses wife.

Mi. Gou, A plague upon her, how she made me start?
Mistress let go the ^orch,

Mis. Bar. No but I will not.

Mis. Gou. I Will thrust it in thy face then.

Mi. Bar. But you shall not.

M^. Gou. Let go I say.

Mi. Ba. Let you go, for it is mine.

Mis. Go. But my possession says it is none of thine.

M^. Bar. Nay, I have hold too,

Mi. Gou. Well, let go thy hold, or I will spurn thee.

Mi. Bar. Do, I can spurn thee too.

Mi. Go. Can thou?

Mi. Ba. I that I can.

Enter Master Goursey and Barnes. M. Go. Why how now woman, how unlike to women,
Are ye both now? come part, come part I say.

M. Ba. Why what immodesty it this in you?
Come part I say, fie, fie.

M^. Ba. Fie, fie, she shall not have my torch,
Give me thy torch boy, I will run a tilt,
And burn out both her eyes in my encounter.

Mi. Go. Give room and lets have this hat carerie.

M. Go. I say ye shall not, wife go to, tame your thoughts,
That are so mad with fury.

M. Ba. And sweet wife,
Temper you rage with patience, do not be
Subject so much to such misgouernment.

Mi. Bar Shall I not sir, when such a strumpet wrongs me?

M. Go. How, strumpet mistress Barnes, nay I pray hark ye,
I often indeed have heard you call her so,
And I have thought upon it, why ye should
Twither with name of strumpet,
Do you know any hurt by her, that you term her so?

M. Ba. No on my life, rage only makes her say so,

M. Go. But I would know whence this same rage should come.
Whers smoke there is fire, and my heart misgiues.
My wives intemperance has got that name,
And mistress Barnes, I doubt and shrewdly doubt,
And some great cause begets this doubt in me,
Your husband and my wife does wrong us both.

M. Ba. How? think ye so, nay master Goursey then
You run indebt to my opinion,
Because you pay not such advised wisdom,
As I think due unto my good conciet.

M. Go. Then still I fear I shall your debtor prove.
Then I arrest you in the name of love,
Not bale, but present answer to my plea,
And in the Court of reason we will try,
If that good thoughts should believe jealousy,

Phil. Why look you mother, this is long of you,
For Gods sake father hark, why these effects
Come still from women's malice, part I pray,
Comes, VVil. and Hodge come all and help us part them,
Father, but hear me speak one word no more:

Frank. Father, but hear me speak, the use yourwill.

Phil. Cry peace between ye for a little while.

Mi. Gou. Good husband hear him speak.

M^s. Ba. Good husband hear him*

Coom. Master hear him speak, he is a good wise young stripling, for his
years I tell ye, and perhaps may speak wiser then an elder body, therefore
hear him.


Hod. Master hear and make an end, you may kill one another in jest, and be
hanged in earnest.


M. Go. Come let us hear him, then speak quickly Philip

M. Ba. Thou should have done ere this, speak

Phil. Speak

Mis. Bar. O Lord what haste you make to hurt your selves
Good Phillip use some good persuasions
To make them friends.

Phi. Yes, I Will do what I can,
Father and Master Goursey both attend,
It is presumption in so young a man,
To teach where he might learn or be derect,
Where he has had direction but in duty.
He may persuade as long as his perswase,
Is backed with reason and a rightful suit,
Phisickes first rule is this, as I have learned,
Kill the effect by cutting of the cause,
The same effects of ruffin outrages,
Comes by the cause of malice in your wines,
Had not they two bin foes, you had bin friends,
And we had bin at home, and this same war,
In peaceful sleep had nere bin dreamt upon,
Mother, and mistress Goursey to make them friends,
Is to be friends your selves, you are the cause,
And these effects proceed you know from you,
Your hates give life unto these killing stri^es,
But dye, and if that (...) ^ye in you,
Fathers yet stay, O speak, O stay a while,
Francis persuade thy mother master Goursey,
If that my mother will resolve your minds,
That it is but mere suspect, not common proof,
And if my father swears he is innocent,
As I durst pawn my soul with him he is,
And if your wi^e vow truth and constancy,
Will you be then persuaded?

M. Gou. Phillip, if thy father will remit,
The wounds I gave him, and if these conditions
May be performde, I bannish all my wrath.

M. Bar. And if thy mother will but clear me Phillip,
As I am ready to protest I am,
Then master Goursey is my friend again.

Phi. Hark mother, now you hear that your desires,
May be accomplished, they ^ill both be friends
If you will perform these articles.

Mi. Ba. Shall I be friends with such an enemy?

Phil. What say you unto my perswase;

Mi. Bar. I say she is my deadly enemy.

Phil. I but she will be your friend if you revolt.

Mi. Bar. The words I said, what shall I eat a truth?

Phi. Why hark ye mother.

Fra. Mother what say you?

Mis. Go. Why this I say she slaundered my good name.

Fra. But if she now deny it, it is no defame.

M^. Go. Wh^ shall I think her hate will yield so much:

Fra. Why? (...) it not, her spirit may he such,

M. Go. why will it be?

Ph^. Yet stay, I have some hope.
Mother, why mother, why hear ye,
Give me your hand, it is no more but thus,
It Is easy labor to shake hands with her.
A little breath is spent in speaking of fair words,
When wrath has violent delivered,

M. Bar. What shall we be resolved?

Mi. Bar. O husband stay,
Stay Master Goursey, though your wife does hate me,
And bears unto me malice infinite.
And endless, yet I will respect your safeties,
I would not have you perish by our means,
I must confess, that only suspect,
And no proof else, has fed my hate to her.

Mi. Gour. And husband I protest by heaven and earth,
That her suspect is causles and unjust,
And that I nere had such a vilde intent,
Harm she imaginde, where as none was meant.

Phil. Lo sir, what would ye more?

M. Bar. Yes Phillip this:
That I confirm him in my Innocence,
By this large universe.

M. Gour. By that I swear, i will credit none of you, until I here
Friendship concluded straight between them two,
If I see that they willingly will do,
Then i will imagine all suspicion ends,
I may be then assured they being friends.

Phil. Mother, make full my wish, and be it so.

Mi. Bar. What shall I sue for friendship to my foe?

Phil. No, if she yield will you?

Mi. Ba. It may be I.

Phil. Why this is well, the other I will try,
Come Mistress Goursey, do you first agree?

Mi. Gour. What shall I yield unto mine enemy?

Phil. Why if she will, will you?

Mi. Gou. Perhaps I will.

Phil. Nay then I find this goes forward still:
Mother give me your hand, give me yours to,
Be not so loath, some good thing I must do,
But lay your Torches by, I like not them,
Come, come, deliver them unto your men,
Give me your hands, so now sir here I stand,
Holding two angry women in my hand,
And I must please them both, I could please tone,
But it is hard when there is two to one,
Especially of women, but it is so,
They shall be pleased whether they will or no,
Which will come first? what both give back, ha, neither?
Why then yond may help that come both together,
So stand still, stand but a little while,
And see how I your angers will beguile,
Well yet there is no hurt, why then let me,
Join these two hands, and see how theil agree,
Peace, peace, they cry, look how they friendly kiss,
Well all this while there is no harm in this,
Are not these two twins? twins should be both alike,
If tone speaks fair, the the other should not strike,
Jesus these warriors will not offer blows,
Why then it is strange that you two should be foes,
O yes, you will say your weapons are your tongnes,
Touch lip with lip and they are bound from wrongs,
Go to, embrace, and say if you be friends,
That here the angry women's quarrels ends,

Mi. Gou. Then here it ends, if mistres Barnes say so.

Mi. Bar. If you say I, I list not to say no.

M. Gou. If they be friends, by promise we agree.

M. Bar. And may this league of friendship ever be.

Phil. What say thou Frank, does not this fall out well?

Fran. Yes if my Mall were here, then all were well.

Enter Sir Raphe Smith with Mall. Raph. Yonder they be Mall, stay, stand close
and stur not
Until I call: God save ye Gentlemen.

M. Bar. What sir Raph Smith, you are a welcome man,
We wondered when we heard you were abroad.

Raph. Why sir, how heard ye that I was abroad?

M. Bar. By your man.

Raph. My man, where is he?

Will. Here.

Raph. O ye are a trusty squire.

Nic. It had bin better and he had said, a sure card.

Phil. Why sir? Nic, Because it is the Proverb.

Phil. Away ye Ass.

Nic. An Ass goes a four legs, I go of two christ cross.

Phi. Hold you tongue.

Nich. And make no (...)

M. Gou. Go to, no more a do, gentle sir Raphe,
Your man is not in fault for missing you,
For he mistook by us and we by him.

Raph. And I by you, which now I well perceive,
But tell me Gentlemen, what made ye all,
Be from your beds this night, and why thus late
Are your wives walking here about the fields?
It Is strange to see such women of accoumpt,
Here, but I ges^e some great occasion,

M. Gour. Faith this occasion sir, women will jar.
And jar they did to day, and so they parted,
We knowing women's malice let alone,
Will Canker like ^ate farther in their hearts,
Did seek a sudden cure, and thus it was,
A match between his daughter and my son,
No sooner motioned but it was agreed,
And they no sooner saw but wooed and likte,
They have it sought to crose, and cross it thus.

Rap. F^e mistress Barnes and mistress Goursey both,
The greatest sin wherein your souls may sin,
I think is this, in crossing of true love,
Let me persuade ye.

Mi. Bar. Sir we are persuaded,
And I and mistress Goursey are both friends,
And if my daughter were but found again,
Who now is missing, she had my consent,
To be disposd off to her own content.

Raph. I do rejoice, that what I thought to do,
Ere I begin, I find already done,
Why this will please your friends at Abington,
Frank, if thou seekst that way, there thou shall find
Her, whom I hold the comfort of thy mind.

Mall. He shall not seek me, I will seek him out,
Since of my mothers grant I need not doubt.

M^. Bar. Thy mother graunts my girl, and she does pray
To send unto you both a ^oyfull day.

Hodg. Nay mistress Barnes, I wish her better, that those joyful days may be
turned to joyful nights.


Coom Faith it is a pretty wench, and it is pity but she should have him.


Nich. And mistress Mary, when ye go to bed, God send you good rest, and a
peck of Fleas in your nest, every one as big as Francis.


Phil. Well said wisdom, God send thee wise children,

Nich And you more money.

Phil. I, so wish I,

Nich. Twill be a good while, ere you wish your skinfull of ^let holes.

Phil. Frank, hark ye? brother, now your woings done,
The next thing now you do, is for a son:
I prithe, for I faith I should be glad,
To have my self called Nunckle and thou Dad,
Wel^ ^ister, if that Francis play the man,
My mo^her must be Grandam and you Mam,
To if Francis, to it sister, God send ye joy,
It Is fine to sing dansey my own sweet boy.

Fra. Well sini^ston

Phil. Nay fie, de you jest on.

M. Ba. Well may she prove a happy wife to him.

M. Gou. And may he prove as happy unto her.

Raph. Well Gentlemen, good hap betide them both,
Since it was my hap thus hap thus happily to meet,
To be a witness of this sweet contract,
I do rejoice, wherefore to have this joy
Longer present with me, I do request
That all of you will be my promised guests,
This long nights labor does desire some rest,
Besides this wished end, therefore I pray,
Let me deteine ^yee but a dinner time,
Tell me I pray, shall I obtain so much.

M. Bar. Gentle sir Raphe, your courtesy is such,
As may impose command unto us all,
We will be thankful bold at your request,

Phil. I pray sir Raph, what cheer shall we have?

S. Raph. I faith country fare, mutton and Veale,
Perchance a Ducke or Goose.

Mal. Oh I am sick.

All. How now Mall, what is the matter?

Mal. Father and mother if you needs would know,
He namde a Goose, which is my stomachs foe.

Phi. Come, come, she is with child of some odiest,
And now she is sick till that she bring it forth,

Mal. Aiest quoth you? well brother if it be,
I fear twill prove an earnest unto me,
Goose said ye sir? oh that same very name,
Has in it much variety of shame,
Of all the birds that ever yet was seen,
I would not have them graze upon this green,
I hope they will not, for this, crop is poor,
And they may pasture upon greater store.
But yet it is pity that they let them pass,
And like a Common bite the Muses grass,
Yet this I fear if Frank and I should kiss,
Some creeking goose would chide us with a hiss,
I mean not that goose sings it knows not what.
It Is not that hiss when one says hist come hither,
Nor that same hiss that sets dogs together,
Nor that same hiss that by a fire does stand,
And hisseth T. or F. upon the hand,
But it is a hiss, and I Will unlace my cote,
For I should sound sure if I heard that note,
And then green Ginger for the green goose cries,
Serves not the turn, I turned the white of eyes,
The Rosasolis yet that makes me live,
Is favors that these Gentlemen may give,
But if they be displeased, then pleased am I,
To yield my self a hissing death to dye,
Yet I hope heeres none consents to kill,
But kindly take the favor of good will.
If any thing be in the pen to blame,
Then here stand I to blush the writers shame.
If this be bad, he promises a better.
Trust him, and he will prove a right true debtor.

FINIS.

