The seditious and blasphemous Oration of Cardinal Pole both against god and
his Country which he directid to the emperor in his book intytuled the defense
of the eclesiastical unity, moving theemperour therein to seek the destruction
of England and all those which had professid the gospele

Translated into englysh by Fabyane Wythers.

Reed all and than Judge.

Fabyan wythers to the gentle reader.
IF in times past the ancient historiographers and incensinge prince against
prince but also that which more (yea worse) is has not fear id contrary to his
own forimer professions and confessio^s most sha^fuly and abominably to
backbyte and stander Christ him self his gospel and his true folowers, as
thauctours of all myschiefes seditious and tumultes, Such was his Good will
that he bare to his natyfe country and common wealth that for his own advantage
and preferment he desirid (yea and procurid) as much as in hi^ lay ye vter
subuersio^ and ruin of ye same, and to proceed whereas you shall read after in
Athanasius gloss that at what time he was in Germani at Augusta and there was
lodgid in the pastors house he said that he did very well allow and agree unto
all their doctrine and that he would declare no less if there were Any
couocations or common cou^cells holden. Now be hold the great and double
dissimulation of this holy ypocrite who al beit that before in his ambassade
under the pretense of intreati for peace had gone about nothing else then to
move and stir up discord and wars, even now again at his retorn unto Rome
fearid not to dissemble and cloak even with God him self, for although as
before you have hard he semid not to be ignorant of the truth yet when he was
come to Rome (whether he were suspectid of Lutheranysme and to avoid the
suspicion there of or no, or else that he did yt to gratify the pope with all)
he wrote a book against king Henry theyght king of England entitled the
defense of the unity of the church in the which book he converting his style
unto the emperor he includid this most detestable pestiferous yea and seditious
oration against the king of England unto whom he was not only most near
joined in affiniti and kindred but also as he him self confessith most greatly
bounden for his education and literature But now mark I pray you how the prick
of his own conscience causid him to display his own hypocrisy when he had
written this book he cansid yt to be imprintid at Rome at his own propet
costs and charges and when they were thus printed he fearing least if they
should be carried a brod and come unto the hands of such unto whom he had
before professid the contrari that then yt would torn to his great ignominy
and reproach took all ye books into his own hands and set none of them
abroad saving a few which he gave unto the pope and certain cardinales who^me
he knew very well would allow his doings, Sed nihil occultum quod non
reuelabitur. For God would not suffer his church to be so much abused or
deceauid by his hypocrisy but that at the length he would bring yt to light for
although these his doings werby a long ceason kept close and secret yet at the
length they came unto the hands of one or to in Germanye who has set theme
forth to the eyes of al men, And because all true english hearts should not be
ignorant what a venomous viper they have of late noryshed even in there own
bosoms which sought nothing else then to know a sunder ye bowels and to
destory his mother and cou^trei, I have for the use and comodyty of all men
translatid this his oration into english the which my labors and trauailles in
this behalf bestowid and taken if they may reapethonly fruits of tha^kfulnes in
accepting ye same, It shall cause me with more speed and greter diligence seek to
gratify ye again with most pleasant and godly histories to thy great delectatio^
and confort. now gentle reader yt I have so^ what declarid unto you thoriginall
and cause with the time and plase of this his oration with also his manner and form
in setting forth of ye same I will cease to be any longer tedious unto you
referri^g yt to your own discreation to judge upon the oration as you shall
think ye matter does require thus wyshing unto the all virtuous success in
godliness I comytt the to the tuition of allmyghty God.

F. W.

VErelye I do wytnes both the love of my co^trye the which nature to talk
with him before whom I would burst out and speak in this manner Caesar what
do thou go about, or what do thou intend whether wylt thou go or saill
with this thy great nauye and furniture if ye love of ye Christian Common
wealth do so much move thee, that thou would assaill and invade the king of
turks being an ancyent ennemy unto the name of Christ, were it not much more
mete and better for thee to convert and turn thy hole force and power, that
wais from whence a greater danger is imyne^t unto our common wealth from whence
also a present thousands of christians, opressed with ye most vile and hard
servitude and bondage of the turks you do think yt a worthy and notable act
to deliver them and to restore them unto liberti the which in deed is no
less the^ praise worthy but if you count this so laudable a thing how much
more glorious and praise worthy were yt to redeem and releas so many thousa^ds
of souls being even in present peril and danger being also violently rapt and
taken away out of the lap or bosom of the church and eue^ now brought into
great doubt and danger of salvation and to restore ye same again unto ye church
and faith of Christ. such is ye peril which is iminent and hangyng over our
heads and ye enemy also which goethe about and has brought a great part of
the same to pass, is such a one as thou can not excuse thy self o Caesar
but to understand and know the same. The which thing as it is most laudable so
does it also apere most necessari first to provide and seek remedy for this
myschief then have profited when in place New Turks.
which in time paste have shrounk and gone a way from the catholyke church.
Nether do thee turks, hate or abhor the name of Christ or reject his gospel
but as the arrianes did in times past they take away that dignity from Christ
that he should be thee son of God, The aria^
with many other things which they have taken of the arrianes how beit thy
affirm christ to be a great prophet, and also owe no small reverence unto his
mother mary. The orygynall and begynyng of the turks relygion is all one with
all other heresies. ^ho^igiyal of the turks religion.
They were the first which went away from ye church forsaking and denienge him
to be the head which was ordained and left by Christ and so by little and little
The Turkish sede in ^ermany.
because it is not yet sown or sprede nether by publyque auctority nether yet
by commandment of any one which has rule or power over others to compel
them unto yt, and there fore it is not vterly to be despaired but that ye true
germa^ church of the germans having oppressid this adulterous and noughty sede
may flourish and spring again and bring forth ye true and abou^dant fruits of
the catholic faith.

So likewise in England where as in time past true religion did also flourish now
is this sede so sown and strengthened by tha^ctorytuy of one man that it can
starsly be discernid from the turkish sede and to thin te^t that that which is
alredi sowe^ should have the better encrese it is defended with the sword, and
with the sword they answer all that is obiectid against yt and this is the very
turkyshe manner and thus their sect does in crese and grow But in this point it
does differ from the turks for so much as the turks sect does compel no man
unto there opinion for he that does them that they should pray for them and
comend them in there prayers unto almighty God unto whom he beleuyth ye ar most
dearlye beloved and in Favor, No man truly under all his hole emprye or
dominion and of what sect soever he be if he keep his tongue is in any manner
of peril or danger, But where as this new and pestiferous sede is now there is
no less punyshement or danger for them that keep silence the^ for such as
most in pugne and strive against them, behold. Thomas Moore who alone in
virtue and Learning did chieflye. so that finally all men's tongues ar stoppid by
fear of the swear.

Ye the turks them selves against whom thou do prepare wars may be an
example for the, the which having this path or way opened unto them have
attemptid to oppress and ouerthorw the church of christ when as they reiectid
and cast of thauctoryty of the superme head and instead there of have brought
in the force and rigor of the.

Swerd through the which they have so long a time defendid the^ selves yt it is
to late for the church to seek for, or call home her children again which have
already forgotten there mother. If the turkysh sect, do not sufficientlye declare
unto you the greatness and hougenes of the peril which I have spoken of before.
Germany it felfe does show it abundantly if thou do consider with thy self
how quiet, how peaceable, and religious a prounce it has been in times paste,
and finallye how plentiful and abundant it was in all things, so long as it
contynwed in the unity of ye church. Contrarywyse if you do mark these late
dais or times in ye which it is vexed and troubled with intestine and cyuyle
wars after yt it had refused and reiectid ye head of ye church it is so
tossed and troubled that all hope of recovery or end of there myschiefs is
utterly past except (as god grant they may) they do return again to thee
unity of there head and church. Verily this acknowleging of one head or Governor
has alwais benethe most sure and strong fort and defense of ye church. This
ye herytikes above all things do chyefly assaille and invade this same the
catholykes do alwais defend, yea and Caesar him self. like wise of late was it
also defendid in England even, of the nobles being the children of ye chuch in
so murch yt they thought it better to offer there maked bodies unto ye weapons
of their enemies rather then they would forsake that only fort and strong hold
the which being once subdewed and overcome thenemyes of christ mighty have easy
passage to assail and overthrow the church Notwithstanding they have
vaanquissed and slain diverse mighty men children of the church which sought
to with stand them. The which thing it is no* maruaill though it com so to
pass for so much as tehnemys have a king to bether gwyde and Capytaine. As yet
in all the great but now it has so inuadid ye heart of our king that he does
defend and mayntaine this his

Wylt thou then o Caesar: which say yt thou bereste such a zeal and love
unto the christian common wealth that thou wylt do althinges for thee louee
thereof, grant or give him this time and space, Seeing this part of the Common
wealth thus vexed crie^g and calling for thy help aid and socour seeing their
ruin so nere that remedi can not be any more prolonged if yt should any thing
at all profit.

But you covert your hole force and pour another wais so that what through your
far dystance and absence and your doubtful wars against so mighty an enemy
all hope is utterly taken away that you can by any means help or succor us in
seso^ as them whom you go now to deliver out of bondage, wylt thou then o
Caesar frustrate thexpectacion of all thy frindes especially seeing that the
trust and confidence which thy have in you is thonly cause why the have not
as yett tried there owen force and pouer at home nether have atte^ptid to defend
them selves by their own strength. do not hinke seven thousand men which had
not bowed their knes unto baal from thee wicked Achab when they should have been
slain thorough ye persuasion of his wicked wife Iezabel, do not think that in
this time in the which ye grace of the holy ghost is much more spread which for
a much lighter cause even them selves wihout any external help or aid have
taken vengeance on their owen kings for the evil administration of the common
wealth. They which also have called there kings to account for the wastfull
spending of there money to thee damage of the common wealth and when they could
not approve and justify the same they compellid them to resign both croune and
strepter whose coragions and stout stomachs for so much as they do yet remain
nothing does stay nether you would defraud your, own nature, which by many your
worthi acts they were persuadid to be most noble or else that you would set a
side all love of religion the which it has aperid you to be most studio^s and
desirous of: that they were assured yt you could not but you must neds take this
matter or cause upon you. For they suppose vereley yt through you their evil
may much more easili with less trouble and danger, unto the kingdom be
remedyed and withstand, then if they them selves should have attemptid it with
their owen pouer and there in suerly they Judge well and worthily do look for
you. But whether now o Caesar do thou fley so fare from the^, what thing does
draw the away so far from thy frindes leuing so great an ocasio^ ministered ye
at home and to go where there is less danger. do thy souldiars draw the that
way? Or is their wills more bent toward thee affairs of theast part where
their ancient enemies are then to ward the west where new enemies are Risen?

What Souldyars be they o Caesar? If they be the Spaniards to whom of Right
thou do much trust whose glory also in diverse battaills has largely
apearid: Truly if they hard or saw that noble progeny or ofspringe of Isabel
oppressed with mysery and calamity in a most Just cause desyring or requiring
their help and aid I know Caesar that the memory of that most worthy woman is
not yet so fare out of their mind that they would utterly frustrate the desires
and requests of her most worthy daughter. I know there is nothing so acceptable
unto them which they would not wyllingly refuse and Leave of to healp this noble
woman whom thonly honor of the knygdome of spain* which herin is chyefly
sought would sufficyently move there unto if they did but only hear or
understand, that ye king of spain his daughter being by the space of.xx. years
coupled in marriage to be thrust out of the kings palaice for a harlottes cause
as though she had been ye daughter of some light person or of some boure or else
had come by stealth from the futher parts of barbarye unto the kings chamber
and not to have had so noble a king to her parent Or that she had ryghfully
been given him to wife out of so noble a kingdom, would they with a quiet mind
suffer so great a injury which scarsly man of the basest sort would bear or
suffer. And where as there cane scarsly any man be found of so couerdly a stomach
which would not by all means possible even with the peril of his life seek to
revenge such an opprobri done unto his daughter: would not the Spaniards, whose
valiant courages has been experime^tid the semani years in sondri victoryes
revenge the iniurye of their kings daughter, how I say can the noble nation of
the spainyardes neglect or think any thing to be preferrid before this so
great an iniurye which does both deface there victories and most manyfestly
assault your honor and the glory and renown of spain. what thing can be more
ignominious or slau^derous unto you then so much to esteem other nations that
spain either will not or can not revenge such a contumelious iniuri done, unto
them. But truly yt can not so be thought. The which that thou may euydently
know suffer me (o Caesar) only to speak unto thy souldiars and thou shall see
them all with one accord as soon as they shall here the daughter of queen
Izabell and thy neuew once named desiringe there aid and healpe ready if thou will suffer them to alter their, course and journey. But I (Caesar) require or
desire nothing of the nor of thy souldiars for thy cosynne katherines sake.
Nether will she any thing to be spoken in her behalf complainyng nothing at
al of her unfortunate estate but willingli bearith ye vnstability of fortune yt
which has so shewid her cruelty upon her yt even in the time in the which
thou dydest most florysh and she ought to hau floryshed and she was cast down
into a most miserable state and co^dicio^, iea and by how much thy affairs did
most succeed and go forward with the: so much the more injuriously and
greuuosly she was handled and oppressid. But of her self privately she does
nothing complain or say nether of her one cause, it is for england o Caesar that
she co^playnyth to whom it is given into the which as a noble pla^t or graft
she is tra^slatid and grafted yt which country also she ought to love as her
own and truli does it. For this Country she does entreat for so much as her
cause is so knit by al means possible with yt cause of this most noble and her
derly be loved province, and country, that her cause being neglectid it must
needs follow thee country also to be in most evil estate. More over what a
peasable and quiet province she found at her coming thither, and now how yt is
vexid with seditious and inward wars, thee which can not happen without her
great hurt and detriment, for so much as her cause is so united and knyte with
religion: So that if she be forsaken, it must needs follow religion to be
destitute, thee ancye^t faith of the church to be abolished and new sects to
spring and rise, not only guess as a tempest ha^ging our our heads, but
perseaued to be even at hand and to be growe^ unto this point that no man's
estate or condition is more dangerous in england the^ such as be most relyons
and holy the which do retain and keep the ancient costume and faith of the
church (who can be in safeguard there where as such examples

For so much as that common cause does also privately touch her the which being
ye dougthter of ferdinando begottem of her mother Isabell and thy cosynne (o
Caesar) especially if she have comytted nothing unworthy her noble parents, her
stock or kindred, or to the noble realm from whence she is comme forth of,
nether at any time in all her troble was their any of her most cruel when he
does invade the but also dareste provoke hi^ unto war when he is at quiet:
that thou would first help in yt part from whence a greater myschyef then
the turks is risen toward the Crystian common wealth where as also easy wictory
with out a-any peril or danger is offered unto you. This she does make
intercessione for, even for thaffinity that is between her and you, for the
honor of the kindome of spain, unto thee which chyfe respect is had in this
matter, and for the health of the cristian common wealth, she does most humbly
desire you that you will not think any thing, to be preferrid before this most
holy and publyque vtilyti and oportuniti and unto your self privately most
glorious and praise worthy when as you may even at one time augment both the
honor of your oune house or family the glory of the kingdom which has made
the renouned in so mani and sundry, victoryes and also torn away ye great
ruin which is toward the cristia^. Common wealth Such as in many years before
the Like was never seen And especially for so much as what so ever thou shall
do in this part or behalf shall be as an instrument or help for the more
better and easy performans of those things which now altogether as vnre dye
and out of season thoue doste attempt and take in hand for these things being
ons brought to pass and set in order thou shalt much more better and with
less labor (thy pouer and strength being hereby rather in cresid then
dymynished) attempt yea and bring to effect thy other afaires and entrepryses,
but what do I now mean as being rapt and carried away with aboundans of matter
I seem to have forgote^ with whoome I do talk, thus I have knytt up my
oration unto Caesar as though I talked with Caesar and not with the o prince.
Therefore that I may return from whence I have dygressid. etc.

The end of the cardinals oration.
The gloss of Athanasius upon the oracion of Cardinal Poole made unto
the emperor.
Thou do transfygnre thy self into an angel of light be cause thou go
about to low most deadly poison.

This is the general and natural sense of all the popysh sect to count all
them which have professed the gospel for turks and worse then turks for there
Paul. 3.
is a bryeff (as they call it carted) about of paulus the.iii. unto the emperor
and king of the Romans in the which the very same thing is affirmed so that
who soever does consider this oration shall easily presaeue that that also was
made by the same cardinal

The Souls which are taken out of the lap and tyranye of the popysh church
and restoryd unto the true church of Christ such as ar all they whom thou
falsely call Turks can be in no manner of peril and danger of Salvation but
all such ar in great danger the which agree and consent with the popysh sect in
so much that all hope of rheir salvation is past except they be drawn a way
from thence by the mighty power of god

and existimation of your popes should be theirby be dymynyshed for as touching
the Salvation or perdytion of Souls what does that partain unto you.

Art thou not ashamid to call the most noble kings of england de^marke The
king which have embrosis. the gospel.
of the Son of god which thou faygnest to be so abundant in thy heart that
thou canste not lay it awa? teach or persuade the herunto.

Christ left none to be the head

Albeit thou had not expressid it thy self who did not plainly se that all
those opprobryes have with drawn them selves from the yoke and obedience of
thee popes, The turkish sede is pestiferous and falls.
notwithe standinge thou like a most modest and sober Cardinal even of
thaboundance of thy heart would also by name taunt and tear this country of
germany, dare thou be so bold to afirme the holy gospel of Jesus Christ the
which we preach and teach in our churches to be the adulterous and pestiferous
turkish sede? do you think that we have so much for sake^ and cast away the
catholic veriti, if these things be treue which thou do falsli affirm
then truli the apostles and al ye primitive church had not the catholyke faith
but that pestiferous and adulterous sede. Art thou not ashamed to affirm and
fett these things in thy books, and whereas thousaist thou do hope that this
nation will abject and cast of the pure and sincere doctrine of thee gospel
and return again unto your coruption and ydolatry thou art much deceauid or
that I think rather true, you do but fain your self so to believe or think.

I do verily grant that it is thee pope him self does daily answer the
children of God and such as do profess christ with ye sword galows and fire
and you your self in your oration go about nothing else then to move or styre
the emperor to warts and to shede the blood of good and holy men have you not
wisely declared herin ye pope to play a right turks part and you yourself to
have a turkish mind or stomak? The pope pla^^h the turks part.
The lyk words and to the same very effect we have Red in the Card cer.
the emperor and as tutor of Cardinal farnesius but in the maene time thou
do pretend and show forth such a modesty in those thy four books in thee
which thou do bost thye self to abhor all contentions never to have been
at controversy with any man and to have the love and Charity of God abondantly
in thy mind the which thing in deed many have often supposid and thought to be
in you but there is nothing hiden which shall not be opened, for thou have
betrayed thy self and have vttrid that which thou have long kept secrct in thy
mind.

Do you not thus reason that because thee turkish emperor therefore they do
truly worshipp God and Christ? It is most comely and mete for you to judge and
use thauctority of that tyrant as most holy, whose example of cruelty against
the Children of God you do not only follow but far surmount.

Noman does believe the that Moore was put to death for his silence for so much
as it is euedent Moore.
thou art not only joined by affinyti or kynred but also dydest confess thy
self most bounden who also was ordained to be thy prince and head, by god but
thou say thou would correct his errors and vices, Admytt that they were
vices, which had been comeli for the to correct where I pray you have you
learnid that they ough to be correctid with such slanderous fierce words as is
in your book printyd at Rome yt which not onley this present age but also ye
posterity to come shalrede. would you have done this thing if that you had the
charyty and love of God so abundantly shut up and enclosed in your heart or
mind?

The charter house ^uon^h.
Cartuslans those most holy and religious monks the which had enbrased a most
diverse and contrary order from the gospel of Christ and most contaminate and
defiled with false kind of worshippings and went about with to the and naill to
defend and keep the same and therefore styrred the people to rebellion against
their king.

Thou now go about to teach and persuade that the sect of the turks is
sprung and Risen the which would owerthrow the church, The Po^^
by the refusal and denial of your head of Rome, Mahomet.
but harken again what our iugment is here in verily that your worthy head was
the cause that Mahomet could not only plant that this most fylthy and wile sect
but also bring it to such eficasitie and force. Do you demand the cause why
for so much as this your head was thonli cause of all those discordes and
wars out of the which this great myschief sprange and burst out. Further
more we affirm that the popes them selves sitting under that shadow and color
in the church of God and exalting them selves as it were above all gods to be
more hurtfulle and noisome unto the true doctrine and faith of Christ then
Mahohomet him self which is an open enemy there unto. wherefore it is not for ye
to go about to driu this dream into men's heads that ye refusal of this most
evil and naughty head has bred and brought in somani mischiefs into the
cristian religion. but we rather think that thoze mischiefs which are already
roted can by no means be taken away except that your false head be first
abolished as the Rote and spring of all myschief. Germany
whereas you do strait annexe that Germani was quiet and peasable and abundant
in all things So long as it continwed under thobediens of your popes and that
since they have reiectid and cast of that yoke of obediens all things to be
turned into a worse estate thorder of the gloss does not suffer us to answer in
mani words (which we will do else where) now we will briefli show that you
popes you cardinals and you bishops which cannot bear nor suffer the light
of the gospel to be sheuyd or prechid Popes. Cardinal and bishops.
but rather desire to have yt utterly extincte and hiden, you, I say both have
been and at this present ar thonly authors and styrrers up of all sedition
dyscorde and mischiefs wherefore lay the fault on your own necks and not upon
the doctrine of christ. I prai you tell me where as you read often in the gospel
and acts of apostels yt cytis were mouid to sedition and that there was great
Vprores and tumultes amongst the people who were thauctors or mouers of ye same
was Christ or his apostles or the infideles and enemies of the truth. Suerly
the misbeleuers and not Christ nor his apostles. wherefore you may be ashamid
once to make mention or speak of those wars and myschieffes which you your
selves thorough your own endeavor have purposeli wrought and causid. Hungary
Further more where as you say that germani is vexid with many inconveniences
and euiles because yt has denied your hedwe answer that hungarye is much more
tormentid the which natwithstandi^g never denied or refused your pope. but do
you not know that through the afflictions which happen both to the godly and
ungodly we can judge whether we be in the favor of God or no.

Do you not know that the wyckid idolatres in Ieremye did utter even the like
words that you now do when as they said. Jeremy* 44.
since that we have left of to offer incence and burnt offringes unto thengine
of heaven we have had need and scartytie of al things and ar consumid with
theswerd and honger, all these things you know well enough and yett you strive
against the plain and evident truth obiectinge those things which you now lai
before the people only to diffame and slander the doctrine of our Lord Jesus
Christ as most pestylent and the Rote of all myschief but believe me thou shall
receue thy reuard for god him self will not suffer this great offense which
thou have ministered unto all Europe to be vnreue^gid, few men Iudgid in the
that thou had such a rancour or madness in thy mind as now thou haste
vttrid thy self to have by thy fourebokes which thou have set forth for ye
defense of the pope. do you not remember that christ does call and say that who
soever does offend but one of these little ones it were good for him to have a
mylstone hanged about his neck and to be throuen into the bottom of the sea.
Offense.
we will in no wise suffer our selves to drawn or plucked away from Christ but
ar most fyrmely contentid with this only doctrine and him to be our only head
and governor entending to cleue and styck unto thee same although you should
stir up a thosa^d times greater wars and myschiefes then you have hither to
raised yea although all thee world should swerve and fall away, we would
wyllyngly bear the cross with

Where as thou deniest any other king then yours to have refused this hedd thou
art deceauid for I have already reme^brid too other which have done the like
even the most holy and virtuous kings of denmark and gothia whom thou do
also call turks I pray you when you did write these things did you not cast
in your mind that there might happen some man to come forth which might tripe
you with a lie wherbi your name and estimation might be grealty hurt but this
is verily the work of God that he might destroy the wisdom of the wise Again
thou reprehe^dest the turk for shaking his teriblesword unto all such as dare
ones dissentt from him the which suerly you do very well repete renwing in our
memory and also reprehending that which your own pope does even with much more
cruelty The pope the Turk.


Here thou blowest thy trumpet saing unto Caesar convert thy navy put on thy
armor and transuereat into brytayne and destroi that kingdom with fire and
sword shed the blood of the king and his people yea and be most severely
reuengid upon them for they have for saken the pope to be their head. Is this
acomely saing of so sober, and holy man as you ar, have you learned this out of
the gospel of ye charity and love of god which you say is Christ Peter.
where as christ comandid peter when he drew his sword to put it up into the
sheath agaie^ Thou contrary wise call upon Caesar which has his sword
closed in his sheath, draw thy sword kill and slay? But wotte you what you have
brought to pas by this your oration, will you that I shall tell you? verily
that almen may iustli think and Judge in the, that in this embassade which
thou now art in unto the emperor that under the pretense of entreating of peace
thou soundest none other thing in his ears then those words which I have
before mentioned and that thou do study and go about nothing else but only to
move him and styrr him up against us.

So that if it happen wars to be moved at this season against us we will
impute all ye calamity and miseri unto the alone, and this eternal praise and
glory thou shall receive thereby

O Immortal God how dare thou be so bold to call that the pure and sincere
religion in the which you have most horribly prophanate and defiled the word of
God and the sacraments which were ordained by Christ verily you could have vsid
no word which might worse have agreed to that your romyshe seat and relygion.
Sincere relygion.
But contrary The consell for the ame^dme^t of the chuch.
it is even so thou art thauctor of them both. And in them both thou do
wisely affirm that you have forsaken the springes of the water of life (which
is the true doctrine of Jesus Christ) and have dug unto your selfs
Cesternes and pittes not able to hold any water, that is to sai, you have
brou^ght in men's fainid traditions, morouer thou say in the same place that
the popes has gotten unto themselves masters which do tikle them in theares of
whom truly they learn how to invert and contamynat all good and holy things,
I demand of the then, whether thou can truly call this asincere and pure
relligion or no, woo be unto the Cardinal pole woo be unto the for that which
nowght is thou call est good and contrary wise the good naught.

Thou say most truly that the grace of the holy ghost is more abundant in
these days then it has been sense the time of the apostles even* Caiphas.
as Caiphas truly prophesied yt it was meet that one man should die for thee
people but as he spoke that to his owen destrucion even so do thou he
understood not that christ should die for him but caused him crueli to the
Cardinal Poole woo be unto the.

A fore you called your papisticall hypocrisy sincere and pure and now thou
go stoutly forward in thy purpose calling the true worshippers of religion
ypocrites adding also yt they have bowed there kne unto Baall the which do
worship God and Christ with the holy ghost in spirit and truth. Baall.
But we truly know that you papists ar the false worshipers of religion the
which do not only prophanate Baall when as you worshipp your antycrist your
idols and images most folyshlye calling them sometime God him self sometime
saints and the bones and relics of your owen dead me^ and finally your sweat
breads

Concerning taking of Sengeans
Give diligent ear and hear what our Cardinal Pole which will seem so holy a
man does think as conserning taking of vengeance he affirmyth plainli all such
to be of a fylthy cowardly mind and stomach which by we ought by no means to
favor or spare them except we would be thought men of cowardly stomachs. But
we contrary wise have learnid of Christ that all such ar of a godly mind or
disposicio^ in whom Christ does truly inhabit or dwell, which patiently
bear and suffer all in iuryes and wrongs done unto them nether do once think
upon taking of vengeance but remytt and forgive thee same yea and love their
enemies and persecutors done unto them.

Again hepryckyth forward that injuries ought by no mea^s to be suffered cryeng
out that the

This most quiet and peasible Cardinal desirid of Ceasar yt he sort I know
well enough that you which are soldiars do not forsake your own country of
spain to go on warfare not only for glory or renown but also to get spoill
and riches wherefore harken unto me and I will show you now amean and occasion
whereby you may obtain and get great riches together with great renown and
glory.

The cardinal ration to oath spaniards.
Behold the kingdom of my Country of England is now offered unto you the
which is very Rich this now enter and invade with me spoil it yea and destroy
it with Fire and swerd and especially kill the king my kynsman and all those
heryticques which have shronk and gone away from the pope for I my self may do
much there both thorough mi estimation and auctoryty wherefore I will be present
with you and betray and deliver that my country into your hands. And as soon as
we have fynyshid those wars and thereby encrese our powers we will in like
manner set upon and destroy the princes of Germany and those Free cyties-This
should have be Cardinal pole his oration unto the Spanishe souldiars if he had
been licencid by the emperor to speak unto them.

^new ^ce.
Thou following thexample of the old prayseis do call the light of the gospel
which is now sprung up, a new sect how beit thou art worthy greater
punishment that this is the treth for ye which we do contend and strive with
you they knew yt not wherefore I will still use my acoustomed verse, woe he be
unto yt Cardinal Pole woe be unto the.

Here he that before was ignorant may understand and know what is ye state of
this most worthy cause of religion which in these our days is in controuersi
we vereli teach that we ought to observe and keep tholde and ancyent faith of
the church so that it is not lafuull to swerve The state of the cause of
religion.
ye same which Jesus Christ brought tou of the bosonne of his father.

And that which thapostles thorough his Co^aundements have preched and taught
unto us.

And the papists do agree with us in words saing that the au^cyent faith of
the church is to be holden and kept but they understand thereby that which by
little and little has been brought in by popes and monks contrary unto the word
of God adding also that we ought to keep the ancient customs of thee church
for they se in there church of Rome many things to be observed and astrew and
catholic but all is but in vain.

Like wise he callyth the true worshippers of the gospel cruel enemies the^
whom nothing ca^ be more meke or gentle, but Cardinal Poole is not a love
which speking of our brethere^ does us this bitter and sharp kind of phrase,
There is annother man Cardinal ceruinus.
he in a certain preface does resite that the block heded cardinal Cervinus
was on a time sent to oppress ye tyranny of the Luteranc sect. what thing
could have been more cruelly or vncharitablely spoken of us, well we admonish
him to leave those rough words least thorough his slanders he lose thee good
name and estimation which he has hitherto gotten by his lerning and gentleness.
And least that he prouok the wrath and indignation of God against him self.

Thou say (Cardinal Pole) that in many ages before there was never such a
ruin and decay brought upon the cristian comonwealth as this is now: Thr
cristian common wealth
The which things utterly falls for the light of the gospel which is now spro^g
out and the grace of the holy ghost which is abou^da^tli spread abroad does not
bring ruin and destruction but health and salvation: unto the cristian common
wealth. but you would have said unto the Romish church ye which we grant is
deed, has The core of Romm
Such is the pouer and force of the gospel and truth ye which being opened
partly with the pens and partly with the tongues of certain of the servants
of Jesus Christ and coroborate and strengthened with thauctority of many yers
and ages and confirmed with, thee pouer of many kings princes and people that
in thee space scarsly of xxx. yers yt could so shake and batter that Romish
fort and court and in short time utterly over throw it, for every plant and
thou know what folowes.

Thou wyllest Caesar above all things to go about to subdewe England under his
owen

Thou do not express but only signify that there ar yet certain things to
be atte^ptid and done by wars, what if that I do guess what thou did think
when thou wrotest those things wylt thou that I shall speak them openly? Truly
I will so do Thou go about nothing else in this thine oration then that
which thou have written for many years past and now do accomplish in this
tihme ambassade putting Caesar still in mind to take this occasion now offered and
to translate thee kingdom of England unto him and his posterity and when by
the means there of his pouer is agmentyd and incresid he may with less
danger invade and overthrow Germani and also if he will assaut

But we trust the emperor will not here the as he thought good not to hear but
to reject and cast of that dominicane friar zotus of Segobia now a professor in
the new scoole of Tilniga when as he being his confessor did affirm that he
could by no means be saved except that with force and armor he did subdew and
bring all Germany under the obediens jurisdiction of the popes of Rome. zotus
the dominica^ monk of spaym.


Thou say thy self to be rapt to write these things with Cardnall
Theatinus.
that thou dydest favor our doctrine Thou to purge thye self from ye great
Crime did set forth a book against: us in the which thou did also enclose
and contam this most venomous oration but thou shall recaue thy reward
Cardinal Pole, woobe unto the woe be unto the.

Imprinted At London by Owen Rogers dwelling between both. S. Bartelmews, at
the Spread Eagle.


