AGAINST Sacrilege,

Three sermons Preached by Master ROBERT PONT: an Aged Pastqur in the Kirk of
God

Augustine. Let God hear if they be (...) Angels hear if they (...).

EDINBVRGH PRINTED BY RObert Walde grave Prenter to the Kings Majesty.

1599.

Cum Priuilegio Regio.



TO HIS SOVEREIGN, THE KINGS MAJESTY.
SIR, I would think it an unworthy thing to present your Highness with such
a mean Pamphlet as this; taken out of my (...) Ser mones; unless the argument
thereof craved a powerful Protector and patron. For besides, it speaks the
truth ^ly, without colored Rethoricke of words, the matter therein entreated,
is odious in the eyes and ears of many, who find themselves tuitched as guilty
of Sacrilege. Herefore I could se^ke no other retreat, but under your highness
wings: who (besides ye would gladly hear the truth simply spoken) have also
your part in this turn. For your Highness is no less interest then the
Kirk, in the wrongful abusing of the Kirk-rents. And as to me, the Lord
knows how far it is from my heart, to procure willingly the hatred of any
person, great or small. Yet in respect of the charge I bear; and that it is
very uncomely for my gray-haires (my one foot being already in the grave) to
play the hypocrite or flatterers part: But to discharge a good conscience in
this and all other behalfes belonging unto my calling: Herefore reposing upon
your Majesty's good mind and countenance against all calumniators of me, for
this my plain dealing; and humbly submitting this and all other my labors,
to your hienesse censure and correction, in any thing I shall be found to have
failed or spoken amiss, I humbly take my leave: Beseeching the Lord of Heaven
to further and advance all your Hienesse good and godly intentions, to
thereformation of all abuses within your Land.

Your Hienesse subject with obedience and Prayer, ROBERT PONT.

AGAINST SACRILEGE* The first Sermon.
Romans 2. 22. Thou that detestest Idols, do thou commit Sacrilege?
IT Is of truth that a certain Poet sai (...) when fools es^hew one vice,
they (...) an other. So may it be seen by the discourse that the Apostle
makes in the second part of this Chapter. We have heard of before, how he
begouth to inuey against the hypocrisy of the Jews, who albeit they had the
law of God, and gloryed therein; yet were they as great transgressoures as the
Gentiles, who had but the law of Nature, written obscurely in their hearts: and
so were highlier to be accused then the other. To prove this he brings in,
the evident examples of their lives; being polluted with most gross sins,
contrary the doctrine of the law, which they taught unto others; namely, of
adultery, thieft, etc. And as to thieft, not being content to accuse them in
general; he lays to their charge (in the words now to be entreated) the most
heinous kind thereof, commonly called Sacrilege: And with that, sharply he
discoueres their hypocrisy, where as they would appear outwardly to keep
some points of the law; in the mean time, transgressing against as great
heads of the same. For they professed themselves, To abhor Idols, and Idol
service, and yet fostred a great Idol in their hearts, by committing
Sacrilege, thereby robbing God of his due honor, and things belonging to the
maintenance of his true service. And so, albeit they worshipped not Idols
outwardly, yet they offended in the like kind of sin, and thereby profaned
Gods holy name, which was blasphemed amongst the Gentiles by their occasion, as
will hereafter follow.

And this they did in deed in the days of PAVLL, not only by stealing of
God his honor from him, by preferring their own traditions above his holy
commandments; and by casting off his due reverence and fear, which is an high
kind of Sacrilege; but also by their wicked and detestable avarice (which is a
kind of Idolatry also) they abused Gods true worshipping, esteeming more of
the gold of the Temple, nor of the Temple it self: And (as our Savior
reprocheth them) preferring the gift of the Altar, above the Altar and offering
thereon: yea, this Idol of sacrilegious avarice, was so highly honored
amongst them, that the very office of the chief Priests was bought and sold
for money. And with this there lacked not amongst them such Sacrilegious
impiety, as is rebuked by the Prophet MALACHIE, in defrauding Mal. 3.
the Lord and his Ministry of his teindes and dew offerings, appointed for
the intertainment of his service. So the Apostle concludes most justly, the
Jews as well as the Gentiles, to be under the wrath of God, and that they
cannot be justified by the works of the law, more then the Gentiles, and
therefore must needs seek to the justification of faith in Christ.

Now (before we proceed further in the matter of justification) because
mention is here made especially of sacrilege; seeing the same was, never more
abundant at any time then in this corrupt age; and namely in this Realm,
notwithstanding the clear light of the Gospel shining amongst us: I think it
both expedient and necessary to make some large discourse thereupon: as a
common place most meet to be teached in our days. For it is marvel to
consider, and hard to be believed of the godly in other cuntries; seeing the
doctrine of salvation is daily so clearly beaten in the ears of all estates
of this land, with what impudent faces, all sorts of men, and namely they of
the greater rank, being entangled in this crime, advowe their doings, and
stand for no admonitions to their account to acknowledge, let be to amend
that filthy fault, whereby the holy word of God is slandered in their
persons, and they give ouer-good occasion to Papists to rail against the
word of truth, who cry out and affirm, that many Princes, Noblemen, Earls
and Barronnes, for that cause have casten off the yoke of the Roman Kirk, that
they may the more freely invade and possess at their pleasure the Kirk goods:
Doubtless they who give occasion to so great a slander, shall render a very
severe count unto God: and the very Heathen that have decored, and in ignorance
bestowed largely upon their Idol service, shall stand up to condemn the
sacrilegeous impiety of these men in the latter day.

Then to enter in the deduction of this matter, I mind first (as the Lord will
assist me) to declare how diversely the name of Sacrilege is taken by writers,
and how many kinds thereof there be. Then to take the proper definition of
Sacrilege, and apply it to the purpose and matter, whereupon I am to entreat:
And to these whom I account to be sacrilegious amongst us, which shall be the
subject of this present Sermon. In the next place or Sermon, I am purposed to
answer and meet the objections, that such men as we call Sacrilegious may
use, and commonly use for their excuse. And thirdly, in the last sermon, to
declare what punishment the law of God, and also the laws of men have
appointed for Sacrilegious persons, with rehearsal of ensamples of
extraordinary punishments execute by God against such, as well mentioned in the
Scriptures, as by profane writers and Histories. And finally, to speak of the
blessing of the Lord bestowed upon them who did advance his service, and
contribute liberally of their substance, for the vp-holding and furthering
thereof. So that our exhortation may tend, if not to provoke others to the
like liberality, at least to move them to abstain from such ungodly dealing,
as to abstract and greedely apply to their own profit and particular uses,
that which hes been given of others of good zeal (even in the time of
ignorance) to vp-hold the service of God, so fa^ as the giuers thereof then
understood. The Lord grant that our proceedings may be to his glory, and
that his word may fructify in our hearts.

To begin then to explain what we call Sacrilege, I find the word taken
diverse ways by writers. For (because the crime properly called Sacrilege, is
odious) commonly all heinous offenses committed against public Laws of God
or man, are named Sacrilegious. As the Poet calls them Sacrilegious hands
that murdered CA^SAR. The practices of Sorcerers and harlots are called
Sacriligeous arts. In like manner, the violence done to Parents, Magistrates,
or their laws; and generally all things that engender public infamy or
slander, may be so denominate in detestation of the committers thereof. But
Sacrilege properly taken, has respect unto God, and offenses done against his
divine majesty; either by blaspheming or profanation of his holy name, or by
ascribing his glory to creatures, or by contempt of his service or religion,
or by abusing of things dedicate to the maintenance thereof: or turning the
same to profane uses. And in sum, it comprehends al robbery or stealing of
holy things, as the word it self by interpretation bears. Truth it is, that
commonly among the Gentiles (who ascribed all the Majesty and honor of their
Gods unto Idols) the name of Sacrilege was appropriate to that which was
robbed from their Idols, or taken from their Temples, wherinto and certain
vain and superstitious ceremonie^ they placed their whole Religion. As the
Papists following the like superstition, commonly count no other Sacrilege,
but the robbing of their relicques, and other rich apparel of their Temples
and Idols. But indeed it is easy to prove by the Scriptures, and also by best
approved laws of men; that which is properly to be counted Sacrilege, to be
more largely extended, then to such a narrow compass. For besides things
immediately done against the honor and majesty of God (whereof I cease now to
speak) I find Sacrilege may be defined to comprehend and contain under it
also all robbery, or unlawful intrometting, bying, or selling of holy things;
as by the ensamples and testimonies following, may be evidently prouen.

For it is not to be doubted but ACHAN, in the days of IOSVA, thiefteously
Iosu. 7.
meddling with the excommunicate spoil of Jericho, committed thereby detestable
Sacrilege, as the punishment execute against him did declare: Al-be-it these
things were not taken out of any material 1. Sam. ^.
Temple. Likewise HOPHNI and PHINEAS, sons of HELI the Priest, who spoiled
and refte from the people, the Ram-flesh of the sacrifices, before the fat was
offered unto the Lord, according to the Law, cannot be excused of heinous
Sacrilege. The like is to be esteemed of the people, whom the Prophet MALACHIE
rebuked, for defrauding of the Malach 3.
Lord, and spoiling him of his teindes and offerings; for the which cause, he
pronounces them accursed. And in the New Testament, were not ANANIAS and
SAPPHIRA, guilty of the sacrilege, defrauding Act. 5.
and stealing from the Apostolical Kirk, the just price of the field sold by
them? Their suddane exterminion to death by the mouth of PETER, does bear
witness. And would not SIMON Act. ^.
the Sorcerer, by bying the gifts of the holy Ghost, have committed execrable
Sacrilege. For the which PETER threatened him with utter destruction. So
Sacrilege we see, may be committed many ways, although no material Temples
be robbed or spoiled. In the civil laws also, set out by Christian Emperors,
it is not only counted Sacrilege, if any man do L. ^iquis in hoc genus
sacrilegij. C. de Episcopis and clericis L. Qui divine C. de (...) Sacrilegij
C. de sepulchro (...). L. 1.
violence or injury unto Priests or ministers of God (which kind of
sacrilege is ouer-rife also in our days) or to divine service, or place where
it is ministered; but also generally, if any break Gods holy law: and in
special, whosoever of knowledge, touches or takes things destinat to
religious uses; and makes no scruple to buy or sell, or withdraw the same any
way, are said in these laws to have fallen in crimen laesae religionis, which
is Sacrilege.

Now if any man would demand what be those holy things, or how far be they
extended, whereof we account the intrometting to be Sacrilegious: I answer,
according to the Scriptures. All things separate from the common use of men,
whether it be man or beast, or land of inheritance, together with all the
teinds of the lands and other things destinate for holy uses, are said to be
most holy unto the Lord: as is expressly contained in the last Chapter of
Leuiticus: And a little Leuit. 2^.
before it is said, nothing that any man does dedicate unto the Lord of ought
that he has, be it man or beast, or land of his possession, may be sold or
analyed. And if a man would redeem any thereof, he should add a fifth part
thereunto. So that he may not lawfully diminish any of that thing which has
bin dedicate to an holy use. As also by the sacred co^stitutiones of Emperors
and Princes, such things cannot be annalied nor engaged, unless it be in great
necessity: as for the relief of the poor or captives: for all these holy
things are said to be in no man's possession, but to appertein to God his right.
So under the name of holy things are to be included, first all things that
be holy of their own nature, as are the spiritual gifts of God bestowed
upon his Kirk, which SIMON the sorcerer would have bought: And generally,
whatsoever pertains immediately to the glory and honor of Gods holy Majesty.
Of the which sort are the holy Scriptures and doctrine contained therein, the
which to violate is most heinous Sacrilege; so as JOHN testifies in the end of
the Revelation, whosoever add any thing thereto, God shall add against him
the plagues written in the book: and whosoever takes any thing there-fra, God
shall take and raze out his name out of the book of life. From the which kind
of Sacrilege, the Papists of our days cannot be excused, who have falsified
the writings of the ancient Fathers exponing the Scriptures: either by
fathering upon them such works as they never writ, or by adding, altering, or
diminishing their sayings, to foster and maintain corrupt doctrine: And
namely, by that Treatise lately come to light, which they call Index
expurgatorius, wherein they note all such places as make against their
superstition: and will have all Imprenters of books, whom they may command,
to delete and omit all such sentences, as they have thought meet to be razed
out of these works. Of this sort are also they who apply the Scriptures to
ungodly and profane uses, as to diuilish sorcerie and charms, or to Idolatry,
or profane jesting and mockage. In this first rank also, are to be counted
the Sacraments of Christ annexed to the word, which in like manner have been
corrupted by the Papists, ministering them without doctrine, and adding thereto
many superstitious rites of their own inventions.

Next, in the second order of Sacrilege, we place the violence done to the
Ministers of God, either in their bodies or in their office, who are called
holy in respect of their function. For albeit all the Zach. 2.
faithful be called, the Saints or holy ones of the Lord, and who touches
them, touches the apple of his eye, as the Prophet speaks; yet of the
Prophets and (...) in special, it is said: Touch not (...) ^ted, (...).
and do my Prophets (...). So they that invade or huit the^ in their persons*
especially, for the holy (...)* are culpable of great sacrilege* (...) they be
worthy of the titles of (...) and ministers, and do the du^y ^ning to that
charge. For they are ane chief part of the Holy Temple of God, which may be
highly violated, if violence be done to them in their persons or in their
office. In the third room are to be placed things dedicate to the holy service
of GOD, for maintenance thereof, such as are the Teindes, Lands, and
possessiones appointed for that use. For although they of themselves in their
own nature may be counted commoun and profane, like to others earthly
possessiones; yet in so far as they are annexed to holy uses, and can not be
separate without the decay thereof, they may well be called, and ought to
be repute holy. So it may be well concluded, that who-so-euer invade or
usurp unlawfully, any of such holy things, therein committes Sacrilege.
Concerning the which Sacrilege, because it is most common in this Land, and yet
holden by many no great sin, but rather a lawful conquest, to appropriate
such things to men's private uses. I mind specially to inciste and make some
large discourse, not only in this days Sermon, but (if God grant me
hability) the two Sabboth-daies hereafter following.

To enter then to speak more particularly 17. Q. 4. Quisqui^
of this last kind of Sacrilege, I find it to be divided in the ancient
Cannons in three sorts; to wit, when things called holy, either are taken
out of an holy place, or holy things out of a profane place, or things not
holy out of an holy place. Al-be-it some Civil Laws call it not Sacrilege but
thieft, to take private men's goods out of a Sanctuary or holy place.
Always, to speak according to the Scriptures, we may gather by examples
thereof, all these three kinds to be counted as Sacrilege: For al-be-it the
name of Sacrilege be rarely found in the Bible, and peradventure not expressed
in all the Old Testamente; yet it is alike, if we find the equivalente
thereof, as when meddling with Holy or Excommunicate things, is called in
Hebrew Hherem or spoiling of GOD, for the which he pronounces a curse upon
the dooers thereof. As when NEBVCHADNETZAR spoiled the holy vessels and other
plenishing out of the Temple of God in Jerusalem, al-be-it that plague come of
the Lord, yet no doubt he committed a great sacrilege, by taking of these holy
things out of an holy place. Which made CYRUS (although he was an Heathen King)
having some sponke of Religion, to send these vessels again to the house of
God. Also, to prove it to be Sacrilege to take away holy things, al-be-it not
out of an holy place or Sanctuary, the ensamples before adduced sufficiently
prove. As to the third, the treasures laid up in the Temple of Jerusalem by
private persons, and taken away first by IOAS King of Israel, and thereafter
invaded by HELIODORVS at 2 King. 4. ^. Mac. 3.
commandment of king SELEVCVS, no man can say but both the on and the other
were moved with a sacrilegeous greede, to apply the same to their own
commodity. The plague wherewith HELIODORVS was smitten, may well ratify it to
be truth.

But as to these two sorts of sacrilege, to wit, to rob and take away holy
things out of an holy place; or unholy things out of an holy place, we need not
in this corruptage to vex our selfs much therewith. For who will now commit any
treasures to be kept in Kirkes, seeing the most part of them be as open as the
Kirk-stile, as we use to speak. And to rob any thing out of them, it will
not in-rich the sacrilegious, unless it be some poor thief for necessity,
to rob a piece of a benke or window-bands, or such trifles. Therefore it is the
second kind of Sacrilege that we have to entreat of, concerning the rich
sacrilegious thieues, who meddle not with small matters, but with lands,
teindes, and great possessions, not regarding in what place things dedicate to
the holy service of God be found, so they may catch and apprehend them. And
first this I gather for a good ground, upon that which has bin already spoken,
that al they who appropriat to their own private uses, the patrimony and rents
of the Kirk, defrauding thereby, and disappointing the Ministry, the schools,
and the poor, of that which should justlye perteine to them, are to be holden
sacrilegious. And consequently, that there be mo sacrilegious in Scotland
(considering the quantity and revenues thereof) then in any other country,
that has embraced the true light of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. Whereof
almost all men amongst us will be called professors; but in that point, not
a few number are become transgressoures.

Then to compare time with time, and our estate with the estate of the people
of the Jews; we may understand and perceive, as in the days of PAVLL, when
he wrote this Epistle, the Jewish people were rid of external Idolatry,
having their Temple purged from the pollution of the Gentiles; and having
liberty granted unto them to use and exercise their Religion: So hes the Lord
delivered us of his mercy from the Papisticall Idolatry, and our Temples from
their superstition: yea and freede us from the tyranny of them that held us in
the thraldom of conscience. Yea, (I say) our estate has been far better in
this behalf, then that of the Jews. For as to them, although they had an
outward face of Religion, purged from external Idolatry; yet the doctrine of
God his law, was in many chief points corrupted, by false and wrong wresting
and exponing thereof, by the Scribes and Pharisees, and others pretending
themselves to be Doctors thereof. Whereas, (praise be to God) since the first
reformaof religion amongst us, the poor doctrine of the Gospel has been
continued in ane estate, without any substantial point of error, with
discipline agreeing thereunto. And whatsoever has bin cast in by Satan to
disturb the same, the Lord has not suffered him hitherto to prevail. But as
the buyers and sellers were not cast out of the Temple of Jerusalem; albeit
Christ with his whippe preassed diverse times to expel them: So for all the
crying out and preaching of the faithful messengers of God, with threatenings
used against such persons; yet they cease not, bur add daily more and more,
as well they of the nobility, as others following their ensample, to rob,
spoil, buy, conquest and occupy the kirk-rents.

Herefore, if the Jews might justly be accused by the Apostle, who being
contented to have a bare knowledge of the Law of God, lived no better then they
that lacked a law: How much more we, who brag of a sincere knowledge of the
Gospel, as being needful to order our lives thereby; not only live otherwise
licenciously, but also many amongst us (so far as in us lies) stop and
hinder the propagation of the kingdom of Christ: In so far, that they hold
him a man of no accounte, having any power in these corrupted days, who has
not polluted his hands with some spoil of the Kirk-goods. And as to the
doctrine of the word, it is so become loathsome to these men, that if they
hear it, they hear it with deaf ears, and are no more moved at the rebuke
of this their sacrilegious dealing, nor if they were stupide blocks or Idols,
without al sense of hearing. For they cease not still to maintain and advance
this detestable sin: And daily inuente new practices and colored titles of
the law, to augment and foster the same, both in heart and deed*
Notwithstanding that such deuourers of Christ his patrimony are* reckoned by
the godly Fathers, to be murderers of the poor: for it is a certain kind of
murder indeed.

And to this purpose, I will here cite certain of the authorities of the
auncientes, that it may be known how odious this sin of Sacrilege was in
their eyes. AUGUSTINE upon JOHN speaking of IVDAS the traitor, writes this.
IVDAS is amongst the Sain^es: IVDAS is a thief, Ioh. 12.
yea a sacrilegeous thief, not a thief of the common sort. A thief of
purses, if criminal persons of all kind of thieft be damned in judgment:
more of that thieft which is called peculatus. For peculatus is the thieft of
public things. And thieft of private things is not so judged as public
thieft. How much more detestably is a sacrilegious thief to be judged? Who
dare be bold to steal, even from the Kirk of God. Who steals any thing from
the Kirk, from that forth is compared to one that is lost. This far Citatu^
qu. 2. aurum Ex. lib. de off.
AUGUSTINE. In an other place, calls the teindes, the tribute of needy souls.

And that so many poor as dye in default of paymente thereof by famine, they
that with-holde the same, and apply 12. Q. 2. Aurum ex lib* de offi^. ^2. Q. 2.
^loria,
them to their own particular uses, are to be holden guyltie before the
justice seat of God, of so many murders. AMEROSE likewise wills, that the
goods of the Kirk be given to the use of the poor, rather then the
sacrilegious enemy, to spoil and carry the same away. And HIEROME writes
thus, To bereave any thing from a friend is thieft, but to defraude the Kirk is
sacrilege. To reserve that which is to be bestowed upon the poor and hungry,
is either craftines or fearefulnes, but to withdraw any thing from it, is a
most manifest impiety, and passes the cruelty of all robbers. I might cite
many ancient Cannons of councelles, to this effect (besides the cannons and
authorities of Bishops of Rome, which are innumerable, and others mentioned in
the decrees collected by GRATIAN) but for shortness I remit them that list to
read of this matter, to the seven and eight Cannons, of the council called
Gangrense, holden about the year of Christ. 324. Item, the Council of
Carthage-4. cap. 31. and 32. And of Antioche cap. 25. Item, the Council called
Agatheuse, holden about the 440. in diverse Ca^nons thereof: with many other to
the like purpose: Yea, the Ethnike PLATO writes in his laws; that of all
heinous Delegih^ lib. 1^,
doings; it is to be counted on of the greatest that is done against holy
things. And further he says, the sacrilegious hold one of three things,
either that God is not, or that he regards not the things done by men; or at
least, will be easily reconciled, when such impiety is committed with
sacrifices, and such ceremonies as were used amongst the Gentiles.

But now to take up this matter for the present, it is expedient to declare
how this Idol of sacrilegious avarice first begouth to take root amongst us;
and by what means it was increased and nurished: And finally, what great and
hydeous branches it has spread through the whole cuntrie. The beginning indeed
was small in respect of the increase: For at the first reformation of Religion
amongst us, they who took the work in hand (which were an few part) moved of
a pure zeal to Gods glory, and advanceme^t of the Gospel of Jesus Christ,
stood not to hazard life, lands, and whatsoever they had, to promoate the good
cause: and according to their zeales, the Lord granted them a good issue of
their enterprise. Yet a great many, not only of the rascal sort, but sundry
men of name and worldly reputation, joined themselves with the congregation of
the reformers, not so much for zeal of religion, as to reap some earthly
commodity, and to be enriched by spoil of the Kirkes and Abbey places. And
when the Preachers told them that such places of Idolatry should be pulled
down, they accepted gladly the enterprise; and rudely passing to work, pulled
down all both Idols and places where they were found. Not making difference
between these places of Idolatry, and many Parish-Kirks, where Gods word
should have bin preached in many parts where they resorted, as in such tumultes
and suddainties uses to come to pass, namelye, among such a nation as we are.
So their persons (I mean so many of them that had more respect to the
spoil of Kirks no^ to religion) I count to have been the first sacrilegious
amongst us.

With these I join an other sort, both of Gentlemen and laborers of the
ground, that were put in hope to have their ^eindes al-to-gether discharged.
And in that respect (rather then any zeal of religion) did assiste the
reformation. Now albeit, they were frustrate of their expectation, yet their
intention being to appropriate the Kirk rentes to their own use, they cannot be
excused at least of a sacrilegious meaning.

An other thing fell out at that time, which may be excused by reason of
necessity, when as the Lords, and some of the Nobility, principal
enterprysers, of the reformation, having to do with the French men, and many
their assisters of our own Nation enemies to these proceedings, were forced
not only to engage their own lands, and bestow whatsoever they were able to
furnish of their own patrimony, for maintenance of men of war, and other
charges, but also to take the Lead and Belles* with other Iewelles and
ornaments of Kirkes, abbayes and other places of superstition, to employ the
same and the prises thereof to resist the enemies. The most part of the Realm
beand in their contrary. This I say, cannot be altogether blamed. For in like
cases we find examples in the Scriptures, how things dedicated even to the
true service of God, for necessities cause, were distracted and employed to
stay the fury of enemies, not only by such Kings as had made defection from
the purity of Religion, but also by one of the most godly Kings of Judah,
EZECHIAS by name, who gave to the king of Ashur, to pacify his invasion, not
only all the money that was found in the house of the 2. King. 18.
Lord, and in the Kings treasury, but also pulled off the plates that covered
the doors of the Temple, and the Pillars which he himself had covered with
gold. And by the Civil Laws, and Cannons of councelles, it is permitted for
necessities cause (as for ransoming of Captains) to annaly such things, as be
dedicat to the service of God But this is no excuse to them, who in that time
of tumult for their own particular gains cause, meddled either with gold,
silver, or other thing that maintained the Idolatry and superstition of
Papists. For they could not vsurp it with good conscience. Although (for
eschewing of great inconveniences, there was a law, and act of parliament made,
to absolve the^ before men, called the act of Oblivion. Albeit I can not see
how these men (not being constrained for maintenance of the public actio^) may
be sufficiently excused in good conscience before God; that meddle with either
bells, lead, relicques, Jewels, stones, timber, or such like things of any
effectual valor, taken by the^ of the demolishing of abbeies, cathedral-kirks,
Frieries, nunries, or any such like places, which ought rather to have bin
bestowed upon the kirks affairs, or upon the poor. And in toke^ that God was
offended with the^, making the spoil of the kirk to cleave to their hands; it
was shortly seen, that the Lord blew so upon it, that it vanished away from
the most part of them. And they that think now to make profit by spoiling the
kirk, shall feel a judgment of God following them, as many of them already
confess by experience, that their houses are nothing enriched, but rather
damnified thereby. For there follows such a curse, and secret mishap upon that
kind of graith, that when even for necessary causes, it is applied to profane
uses, oftentimes, it neither profits them that give it, nor that receue it.
EZECHIAS was not delivered from SENNACHERIB, for all that he gave him. For he
immediately brake his promise. And the Lead that was taken off our Kirkes and
Monasteries, a great part perished by Sea, and an other was little advantage
to them who meddled therewith.

But all this was of small accounte, in respect of that which after has
followed, and daily falls out in this unruly commonwealth. For from the
year of our Lord 1560. unto this present time, the greatest study of all men
of power of this land, hes been by all kind of inventions, to spoil the Kirk
of Christ of her patrimony, by chopping and changing, diminishing of rentals,
co^uerting of victual in small sumes of money: setting of fewes within the
avail, ^ong tackes upon tackes, with two or three life-rentes, with many
twenty years in an tack, annexationes, erectiones of Kirk*rents, in temporal
livings and heritage, pensiones, simple donationes, erecting of new patronages,
union of teindes, making of new Abbattes, Commendatares, Priors, with other
Papistical titles, which ought to have no place, in a reformed Kirk and
cuntrie; with an infinite of other corrupt and fraudfull ways, to the
detriment and hurt of the Kirk, the schools, and the poor, without any stay
or gaine-calling: till all the revenues of the Kirk are so wracked, that the
posterity may look for a plain decay of Religion, which cannot stand
unless it be holden up by preaching; and preaching cannot be had without
provision; unless God by some means put to his merciful hand, and remeid
these evils. For this deceitful Idol of avarice, in spoiling the Kirk
goods, has so seized the self in men's hearts, that amongst us, the means
are already taken away in many parts* where by the ordinary ministry should
be sustained. Yea, a great part of the Realm lack Pastors and Ministers. The
Kirks are reviued, and many of them made Sheepe-coates, or applied to more
filthy uses. O; what barbarous cruelty is it to behold and suffer so many
poor souls perishing, for lack of their ordinary food! which is, the word
of God, not only in the out-Iles, Hie-landes, and Bordoures of Scotland; but
also in many parts of the Law-lande; so that either Papistr^e and Idolatry
must needs enter in again, or either plain Athiesme take place, with all
contempt of Religion, amongst these miserable destitute people. And what a
count shall they give unto God, that are the cause, not only of murdering the
poor, by withdrawing from them the food of their bodies, but by causing so
many souls lack the Spiritual food, whereby they should be nourished unto
everlasting life in Christ, by their insatiable avarice?

Truth it is, Parliamentes have been conveened, and acts have been made, for
providing Ministers of competent liuinges; for reparaling of Parish-Kirkes, for
trayning up the youth in schools of Theology. It has been also promised, and
subscribed in writ, by a great part of the Nobility, that the poor
laborers of the ground, should have an ease and relief of the rigorous
exacting of their teindes: and many other good things have been devised,
tending to the advancement of the glory of GOD, and establishing of Christ his
Kingdom. Amongst us, namely, in time of the gouernemente of that good Regente
(whom for honors cause I name) who although he could not do all that he
woould have done, (having so many hindrances and enemies;) yet his doings
might have bin a perfect pattern of Godliness to the rest of the Nobility,
to make them been content to live upon their own rentes, and to cease from
robbing and spoiling the Patrimony of the Kirk. But experience has declared,
and daily does declare, the most part of such professoures, vnder-takers of
Religion, and for-faking of Idolatry, to have fought, and yet seek none other
thing, but to pull to themselves the Kirke-goodes possessed by Papists: And to
foster as a Serpente in their bosom, that venomous Idol of avarice. For all
insatiable auaricious persons, are Idolaters indeed; and it cannot be, but by
making a God of unlawful gain, they deny the living God, dishonoring him most
ignominiously, by setting in their hearts that Mammon of iniquity (which they
love better then him) in his place. And if all avariceous men, generally after
this manner may be called Idolaters; how much more they, who spare not to fill
their houses with the spoil of the Lord his house, and of the poor. How dare
they either call upon his Majesty, or come in his house of prayer or take his
name in their mouth, whose hearts are polluted? Doutles, (as the Psalms
testify) Esai. 1. Psalm. 50.
GOD shall set himself a severe judge against them, and set their offenses
before their faces, to their just condemnation, without they amend their
doings, whereof there is ouer-little appearance in many of them.

What better are these men, with their ^eined profession, then the soldiers
that crucified Christ our Savior? to have his garments to part amongst them?
yet in some case they are worse, for they will not be contented with usual
partage, nor to cast lottes for Christ's coat, but every one would pull from
another; some the Lands, some the teindes, some the patronages, some the
Prelacies, some the other benefices: Ay the mightier prevailing against them of
less power, and such as they may hinder. And albeit, there be many ungodly
contentiones and controversies in the land (namely, amongst great men) yet for
no cause arise there so many pleadings in the law, as for the teinds and
Ecclesiastical goods: how many braulings and debates? how many convocations of
the Kings lieges; yea, how much shedding of blood in diverse parts is committed
for such causes. In the mean time, the poor laborers of the ground, who
should have had an ease and moderation of the severe payment of their teindes,
to relieve their necessities, (they being so hardly handled by their masters
and ouer*lordes in other cases) not only get no commodity there of, but suffer
great damnage, being compelled to leede the whole teindes, both corn and
straye to the use of their gredye masters, or others vn-juste possessoures of
the same, to their vine-yairds; yea, oftentimes the stock, and remanent of
their corns is w^acked, and put in point of tinsell, for lack of tymous
teinding. I cannot tell if any man o^ good conscience, that truly fears GOD,
should study or labor to stay or compone these controversies that rise in the
land for the Kirk goods, amongst such greedy and unlawful possessours of the
same. The Ministers of the word in the meanetime not being sufficiently
provided, nor the other affairs of the Kirk furnished, with the necessities of
the poor: wherefore the teindes in special were appointed, who are altogether
neglected, and idle bellies, with such as are rather enemies then friends to
the true Kirk of Jesus Christ, fostred and vpholden thereupon. For the which
cause, amongst many others, the wrath of God is threatened continually from time
to time, and may most justly fall upon this unthankful land, and inhabitants
thereof, who having the Gospel of the Son of God, so liberally, purely, and
peaceably offered unto them, that no cuntrie has, or hes had the like; not
only disdaines and abuses it by their wicked lives, but also stays and taks
away by such Sacrilegious dealing, the ordinary means whereby the same shall be
interteined, and without the which it cannot continue, laboring so far as in
them lies, to banish Christ and his gospel from amongst us, regarding more his
pelf nor himself, and are to be counted double murther^rs both of bodies and
souls of men, as has bin told before.

Herefore, to conclude for the present, I would earnestly exhort al them that
fear God truly, and specially you of this congregation committed unto my
charge, (albeit I suppose there be not many amongst you defiled with this
filthy crime of Sacrilege) that ye be not partakers with them, who are
involued in this sin, but rather abhor and reprove it. And if they will
not hear your admonition, condemn their doeinges at least in your
conscience. And this I speak the more earnestly, because I fear there be some
amongst you, that will rather pay your teindes and duties, to such idle
bellies, as devour up the sweat of your brows and your servants, for nothing
doing to your commodity, nor to them that labor in the vine-yaird of the Lord,
and others to whom the same ought justly to perteine. And think it not
sufficient excuse to say this is a common fault through the whole Country,
which we cannot mend; for an evil thing the more common it be, is the worse.
And the Wiseman says, Follow not the multitude in evil doing: Therefore,
suppose Exodus 22.
the committers of this crime amongst us, like senseles blocks, pass over and
shrink not for any admonitions, exhorting them to repentance; and skarsely one
amongst the whole multitude, labor to take up him self and amend the fault,
or to restore any thing wrongfully withholden by them from the Kirkes use; and
therefore the greater damnation abides them, for ought we can see; yet think
not with your selves we may do as other men do, or at least behold their
doings, and be nothing moved therewith. For they that will not lament for the
contrition of JOSEPH, that is, for the estate of the Kirk of God, being ready
to decay and come to ruin, by the doings of such ungodly Kirk-robbers, are not
worthy to be counted amongst the true members of Gods holy Kirk. The Lord for
his mercy grant that all our hearts may be effectually moved to know our
duty in this and all other behalfes; and that he will make us obedient for our
parts, to his will and commandments, and put remedy to the desolations of his
Kirk, by such means as he thinks best. To him be praise and glory for ever
and ever.

AGAINST SACRILEGE* The second Sermon.
Romans 2. 22. Thou that abhorrest Idols, do thou commit Sacrilege?
LOnger discourse upon this text, besides the things already spoken of,
being required at my hands, according to my promise, to meet the objectiones
and shifting excuses of men of this age, who cloak their avaricious and gre^die
appetites, to appropriate to them selves the Kirk-rentes, I am now (as the
Lord will assist me) to enter in to answer to such things as they may allege,
and commonly alleages for themselves, to color their corrupted sacrilege. I
intend therefore without more process, to gather the same in such order, as I
think the best advised amongst them, might propone the same, and to give
particular aunswers thereto, with resolution according to Gods word, and good
reasons and laws of men. And so to take away al vain excuses, whereby they
would flatter themselves in their sin, and fyle the eyes of the ignorant and
simple souls, that perceiues not their driftes. Protesting always, that if
(carried with the zeal of truth) in progress of this matter, I use some
vehemency of speeches, I do it not for offense of any particular person (the
Lord knows) but against the vice it self, to labor so far as in me lies
to convert, at the least some of them that have passed ouerfarre, and
ouer*seene themselves in this matter, to amendment, by considering with
themselves, better then they have done of before their duty by such
advertisement, as I am hear to give you that hear, and all others that will
inquire of me, concerning my judgment in this argument, and things depending
thereupon.

To come then to the first general excuse, and pretended reason that I think
these men may allege, who esteem this kind of alleged sacrilege to be no
sin at all (it being so universal amongst a great multitude) or at least,
not such a kind of sin nor so odious, as I would aggrege it to be: they will
say therefore that giving their intromission with such things, as sometimes
perteined to the Kirk were unlawful (as they would not grant it to be) yet
the name of sacrilege in the proper signification cannot be extended thereto.
For even in the laws which I would allege to prove it, and by the writers
there-upon we find, it is not properly called sacrilege, but quasi
sacrilegium, or instar sacrilegij, that is like unto Sacrilege, to take away
any of that money or other things given to that immortal God, for vp-hold of
his Religion and service. I answer, this is a poor shift, for the laws
gives it as odious a name, calling it crimen peculatus, and crimen laesae
religionis, that is to say, a crime and guiltiness ^d. ad (...), peeulatus. l.
1. and l. 4. C. de Sepul. (...). l. ^.
of stealing the public money, and a criminal offense against religion. But
(as I said before) we take sacrilege according to the meaning of the
Scriptures, and good laws of Christian Princes aggreable thereunto. As indeed
the very nature of things in themselves lead us unto this, taking the
argument from the less to the more, that we must needs confess it to be a
greater sacrilege, to take from the Kirk a barrony of land, or the teinde of a
whole Parish Kirk, being of the valor of many chalders of victual, nor a
little thing, as a Silver cup or chalice out of a Sanctuary or material
Kirk. For the greater the thieft or spoil of the holy thing be, it is the
greater Sacrilege. And as to the place out of the which the holy thing is
taken, it makes not much to the matter in the law of conscience. But to put it
out of doubt, that this kind of spoiling the Kirk, and defrauding of her
right; by the word of God is properly to be called sacrilege: No man can deny
but to spoil God is sacrilege. Now the Prophet MALACHIE proves against the
Jews of his days, that they spoiled God, Because they defrauded him of his
Mal. ^.
teindes and offerings, and therefore were al ac^ursed with a curse. Which is
the just punishment of a Sacrilege. And very nature it self teaches us
here-unto. For men understand naturally, and will confess that to spoil or
steal any thing from a private man is a great offense: how can they then deny,
that to spoil or steal from God things dedicate to his service, is a more
high and heinous transgression, and cannot be more properly termed by any
name then Sacrilege.

But yet these men will allege, that the authorities cited out of the Old
Testament, to prove our purpose serve not sufficiently to that effect. For,
albeit in the Leviticall or Ceremonial law of MOSES, not only the teindes,
but also the lands given to the sustentation of the Priests and Levites, were
separate from the common use of men, and called Holy; yet that law being
abrogate, or at the least ceasing and taking end, the substance thereof being
accomplished in Christ, we are no further bound to the observation thereof.
Therefore, the argument taken from that law, concerning holy things, ought not
now to have place, neither concerning the teindes, which are not now add^tted
to be paid iure diuino (that is of Gods Law) as the Cannonistes speak, and
much less concerning Temporal lands, given to the Kirk in time of
Papistrie, the which now cease to be of that nature, to be esteemed holy.
First, before I answer, I am well contented there be a distinction made
between the ^andes and Teindes, leaving off to speak of the teindes till
afterward. Then I answer concerning these Lands or annual rentes, out of
Lands delated and given to the Kirk, that although the Leviticall Law, with
the Ceremonies thereof, concerning the outward observation has taken an end,
and is fulfilled in Christ; yet the substance of the policy, concerning
interteinement of the service of God, and vp-hold of religion still remains.
And it is no less necessary, that the ministry of God amongst us be
maintained; and that sufficient provision be made to serve other Godly uses,
where-unto the Kirkerentes ought to be applied nor it was, that the Priests
and Levites should been vp-holden in the time of the Old law. And as to the
holiness or vnholines of these lands and revenues: albeit in their own
nature (as I said in the former sermon) they be like other earthly
possessiones; yet in so far as they were applied to an holy use, they may well
be called holy possessions and rents, as the Kirk is holy, to whose use they
are appointed. Then I say, the end and first cause wherefore these lands and
rentes were given, being therewith to vp-hold the holy service of God, a like
thing in substance, as well in the Euangelical, as in the Leviticall Law; and
the same being separate, dedicate, and mortified (as the Law speaks) to that
holy use, it can no more be lawful to abstract the same from godly uses, then
it was in time of the Old law, the Ministers of the word not being otherways
sufficiently provided, nor other godly uses for maintenance of religion, and of
the poor members of Christ, being duly considered and served.

But yet they may make instance and say, that the gift of things bestowed to
to the Kirk of old, by our forefathers in superstition, was for a certain
cause, to wit, to pray for the Dead, say Mess, and do other superstitious and
Idolatrous service, which now is not to be used. And therefore the cause
ceasing, the effect should also cease: And consequently, things given for such
abuses should return to the giuers or their aires, or at least to the Prince
to be otherways employed. As to that theorike of the Law, the cause ceasing,
the effect ceases (giving it to be true) I answer with a distinction, which
the Lawiers themselves make, that thereby, two kind of causes ar to be
considered in things, to wit, the impulsive cause (as they call it) and the
final cause. Now, albeit it be true, that the final cause ceasing, the effect
commonly ceases also. Yet it is not so in the impulsive cause, which al though
it ceasis, it makes not the effect of the final cause, which is the principal
intention to cease. But so it is in this case. For albeit it may stand, that
one of the causes that moved zealous men in time of blindness, to give diverse
things to the Kirk, and to places then called religious, was to pray for the
dead, and to do other superstitious seruie^, being persuaded by Monks, Friars,
and others of their opinion, that such prayers were valiable to deliver souls
out of Purgatory, which may be called the impulsive or moving cause: Yet the
principal and final cause was (no doubt) that they minded to serve God
thereby. For if they had not believed that these their gifts were to be applied
to the service of God, and godly uses, they would never have bestowed any of
their substance, rentes, or lan^es, to any Kirk or religious place: That this
is true; It is manifest by their euidents, fundations, and charters, made upon
such donations, in the words dispositiue, ever bearing this clause, Deo and
Ecclesiae, to God and his Kirk, before they make mention of any Saint, place,
or other use, whereto the same was to be applied. Now, seeing all these gifts
are so given, it is reason that God being first named in the Charters, have the
first place, as best and worthiest, and as the principal receiver of these
donationes, which are nothing else but a small portion of his own, which he
before has given unto them. And as a certain zealous man was wonted to say,
let God have his life-rente, as the first person expressed in the charters, and
take the^ the rest.

I add to this answer, giving, not granting, that the principal and final
cause where fore these gifts were bestowed should cease, yet it is no reason
that the same should return to the giuers or their aires, being once simply
disponed, and given to the kirks use; yea, and mortifyed thereto, as they use to
speak, which the laws call public dedication to the Kirk. But in the same,
in that case, if the cause wherefore they were given be not a good cause, these
gifts are to be applied to more godly uses, and not profane uses, according to
that common rule of the law, quod semel Deo dicat est deo, etc. The things once
dedicat to God may not thereafter be applied to profane uses, without great
necessity, as for redemption of captives, or other like cases. And for this
purpose makes that notable decisio^ of Modestine an ancient jurisconsult, where
of the sum is. That a certain leg^cy being left to a city, for a spectable to
be done in ^d. de vs^ et (...) ^ (...). L. le* gatu^.
memorial of the dead, which was not law full to be done in such a City. It
were wrong (said he) that this legacy should return back to the aires of him
that left it, but the same ought to be bestowed upon an other lawful use.
And as these laws contain great equity, so were they well practiced in the
days of AVGVTTINE. For when the Magistrates did take from the Donatistes their
possessiones, which they had of the Kirk, and they complained and disputed,
that none should be deprived of their revenues; for dissension of religiones
cause. That holy Father answered, that these goods perteined to the Kirk, and
therefore being rightly taken from them, who had made a separation from the
Kirk, the same should be applied to other Godly uses of the Kirk. As to the
Princes part in these matters, we shall speak (God willing hereafter) But yet
to answer further to these men, who object that their predecessoures (as they
say) gave such lands and rentes unto the Kirk, in blind zeal, and so they
have reason to take the same again. The antecedent or assumption of this
argument, albeit it were admitted to them to prove, I suppose it should remain
vnprouen by a great many of them, who are most greedy to invade the
Kirk-rentes now adays. For such as they be readier (as the Proverb says) to
eat the Kirk-loafe, then to give it. Yet supposing it were verified, it is of
no force to serve their turn, neither does the consequent follow thereupon.
For although they, or their antecessors had given such things to the Kirk, by
what reason should they take the same again at their pleasure? For what is
freer then gift? or what is more dishonest and against humanity, then to take
the gift again being once freely disponed? supposing it were given to a
private man, whereof he had brooked long possession. How much more shameless
and dishonest were it to the giver to take it again by force. Then by stronger
reason should this be thought unlawful, concerning things given to God and his
Kirk, which (as the Scripture shows) cannot be redeemed again, but Levit.
(...).
is to be restored whatsoever is defrauded thereof (although it were by
ignorance) or else the value, with a fifth part more. To this purpose pertains
that solemn protestation, which the people made when they brought in their
teindes and offerings to the Lord. And although these be counted among the
Mystical politic laws, yet the substance thereof (as was proved before)
remains, to wit, the law ought not to defraude God and his Kirk of their
duty. To the which purpose, yet let us hear what AMBROSE (a godly father)
speaks of such men, as would call back again that which they have given to
the use of the Kirk. There be some (says he) who after they have given their
goods to the kirk, rashly think to revoke the same, of who^, nether the former
gift deserves thanks, nor the latter doing is allowable. For the former
lacks judgment, and the other has with it Sacrilege. There be some whom it
repents to have distributed their goods to the poor; but concerning them
that so repent, it is only to be feared, that they shall not repent of this
their rep^ntance. See how this ancient father doubts not to call them
sacrilegious, C. de donationibus* l* si quis argentum Sin autem.
who take again from the kirk any thing, albeit they themselves have given it.
To this agrees very well the law of Iustiniane, in this sente^c^. Seeing it
lies in the heart of a man, to do or not do any thing that he intends, it
becomes him, either not to proceed to the doing thereof, or else haste to
perform it: Not defrauding his purpose by any crafty color of his
irreligious mind: and so much the more this ought he to take heed to, if the
gift be depute to godly uses or persons of religion, least he be found not only
void of religion, but also ungodly. And so be subject not only to the penalty
of the law, but also to punishmente from heaven. And notwithstanding, not only
he, but also his successors in this case shall be compelled to restore that
which they have taken and wit-holden, with the rest that follows. To the same
purpose it is is said in another law, written in the same title of Donationes,
speaking of things given by men's predecessors, that it avails nothing to say
such things perteined to our progenitors, after that the right and donation
thereof is deuolved to others.

Yet to beamfill their first argument, these men may allege and say, that
things dedicate to the kirk in Papistrie, were dedicat to Idolatry; which was
not only unholy, but also abominable before God, and consequently the lands and
rents so dedicat can no ways be called holy, and so apparently would infer,
they ought not to be applied to the holy service of God, but rather to profane
uses. This argument they see not how much it makes against themselves. For if
these things offered to idol service be abominable, why bring they
abomination into their houses? and so procure a curse against themselves. For
the Scripture says: Covet not the silver nor gold that is upon their
Idols, nor Deuteronomy. 7.
take it unto thy self, least thou be snard therewith. Bring not therefore
abomination into thine house, least thou be accursed like unto it, but utterly
abhor it. Again in an other place it is said, There shall nothing of the
Deuteronomy. 13.
damned things cleave unto thine hand: That the Lord may turn from thee, the
fearcenesse of his wrath, and show thee mercy, when thou shall obey the voice
of the Lord. Now although this be written in the Old Testament, it
astricketh and binds as well us as the Jews, Not to covet after evil and
unlawful things as they did. For these things ^. Cor. 10.
are written for ensamples to us, as the Apostle shows. So albeit the law of
Deuteronomy is not to be urged precisely in all things, yet as lusting after
evil things, is ay covetousness, so thieft is ever thieft, and Sacrilege is
ever Sacrilege.

But yet they whom we accuse as sacrilegious, may make instance, and say, how
can ye call always things dedicate to Idolatry holy things? And again, if
these things cannot be handled or intrometted with in any sort; how can ye
apply the same to the use of the reformed Kirk, and true service of God?
seeing ye abhor Idolatry, and hold such things abominable. For answer,
first I deny that these things were dedicate only to Idolatry, for I have
prouen the contrary of before. And as to that allegiance, that things dedicate
to Idolatrous service, if they be abominable, how can they be applied to the
service of God, in his reformed Kirk, being abominable in themselves? I say,
Sirres, we lack not examples of the Scripture, that such things may and should
be employed to the true service of God. In the spoil of Jericho, ^osua. 6. 7.
The Lord commanded, that all the silver and Gold, and other mettle that was
found in the City, should be put in the treasure of the house of the Lord. In
the which (no doubt) many things were, that had been dedicate to Idols
service. And yet in the mean time express inhibition was made, that no
particular man should meddle with any thereof, least he make himself
execrable thereby. And the punishmente that was executed against ACHAN,
declared how far God was offended with that transgression of that his
commandment. The like may be spoken of things taken in war by the Isralites
of their enemies, as of Madianites and others. I^g. 6.
And of Gedeon, who made sacrifice to the Lord of his fathers bullock, and
trees of the gr^ue dedicate unto Baal. And under the Law of the Gospel, the
Prophet shows, that the Gentiles shall bring al their riches to serve the
Lord, and to beautify the house of his glory.

Now, because in this there is no great question, we come to more pithy
apparante arguments, that our Kirk-robbers allege for th^mselues. The
Kirk-rentes, (say they) namely, the first kirk-lands, for the most part were
given by Kings, his majesty's predecessors, moved of blind zeal to the Kirk,
in time of Papistrie (for such abuses ar now abolished) to abbaies principally,
and other places called religious, to pray for the dead, sing and say Messes,
and to use other their superstitious service. The which lands and rents so
given, have greatly hurt and diminished the patrimony of the crown. Therefore
the king with advise of his estates in Parliament, hes called in and revoked
these donations, namely, of lands, and taken them again to his Hienes own
patrimony and disposition. And we again, have obtained some of these lands,
erected to us and our aires by liberality of the Prince in temporal livings or
lordships. And so we possess the same justly by our lawful titles, therefore we
ought not to be rayled on, nor called Sacrilegious possessors. I answer simply
(not for offense of any, but to utter the truth) that I judge these kind of
erectiones, or whatsoever new required titles by such means that the
possessours can pretend, to be altogether unlawful. But this question
requires greater consideration: which stands in two heads. The one is, what
entereste the Prince hes, or may justly pretend in Ecclesiastical livings. The
other, what right or title thereof, he may dispone unto others. As to the
former of these two heads (without offense of the Prince I speak) who is
prejudged by this kind of dealing, as well as the Kirk: I say, that Kings in
so far as they be called, nurishing Fathers of the Kirk, they ought to see
sufficient provision be made for vp-holding the service thereof. And the Kirk
again, to bestow al duty for furthering the Prince in the public affairs of
the common wealth. But the Prince to suffer the Kirk to be spoiled, not having
first provided sufficient means, how they that serve in the Kirk may be
honestly interteined according to their estate, with the other affairs
thereof. And the schools and the poor (who ought not to be neglected) well
seen to, it cannot stand with good conscience, law, divine nor humane.

Therefore I say (albeit these men allege the Kirke-rents to be ouer-great)
to begin at the spoil of the Kirk, the other not being done, is a very
preposterous 1. King. 21
order. When AHAB, being but a very wicked king, would have taken NABOTHS
vine-yarde, he offered first to give him a better vineyard then it was, or the
worth thereof, if it pleased him (he being a private man) in money. And so he
would have done indeed if NABOTH had accepted the condition. Now, to take from
the Kirk of God, which is more then to take from any particular person, a
great part of the rent thereof, and give nothing in the place of it, nether
to make sufficient provision for the necessary affairs thereof, I think the
like example hes not been practiced in any Christian Country, or common weill
heretofore. If they will give instance of our neighbor cuntrie, there is no
comparison; for they that serve in the Kirks there, at least are all well
provided of livings: But they will reply; The Parliament and estates agreed to
take these Kirk-landes: Therefore it ought to stand as a law, and it is not
now time to dispute nor reason thereupon. But how many acts of Parliament (I
pray you) are oftentimes again called and annulled by contrary acts. And how
can they be annalyed or bought, vake (unless they be first reasoned upon: Yea,
this were a very hard and rigorous dealing in a Princes minority, to make a
law, not only prejudicial to God and his Kirk, but also to the Prince
himself (if it be rightly considered) and yet no man to have place to speak
against it, or to suit any reformation. The Civil law says, that things done
in prejudice of the Kirk, albeit confirmed by laws, are to be rescinded. And al
such statuts (says the Emperor FREDERICK) should be raised out of the act
books. Moreover, the laws made after ^. Cassamus and L. deceruimu^ C. de
Sacro. s. Eccleijs
this manner, in prejudice of the Kirk, may well be declared null in themselves.
Because the most part of them were made in the Princes minority, as also,
because that represented the third estate for the kirk, had no commission nor
power from the reformed Kirk, being Bishops and Abbottes, the most part of
them, of the papistical promotion; protestation being made also publicly for
nullitie of their proceedings.

But leaving now the Princes part, who is indeed nothing helped nor enriched
by these annexations and assumptions (as they call them) of the kirk-lands and
rentes, for if they were, it should be more tolerable. I come to the second
head concerning them to whom the Prince has disponed in heritable titles, the
lands and rents of the kirk, by new erectio^s (as they term the^) in temporal
livings or lordships. These kind of dispositio^s, I affirm to be more
unlawful a great deal, nor if the Prince should have holden the same in his
own hands: yea, moreover I say, sik gifts and dispositions may not stand lawful
ly, neither by the law of God, civil laws, nor municipal laws of the cuntry.
For as to Gods law, I think they will acclaime to no warrante of it, because it
makes directly against them, and involving them in the estate of Achan,
Ananias, and Sapphira, procures rather a curse against them, without they
repent and amend. Which the Prophet MALACHIE pronounces against such
persons, as defraud the Lord of his teinds and offerings. And as to the civil
Laws and Ecclesiastical cannons, we may easily find an infinite number
against them, forbidding all alienation and distraction of Kirke-goodes to the
use of any particular person. Read the first book of Justinian his laws, in
the volume called Codex, in the title, de Sacrosanctis Authent. (...) non ali^
(...) Ecclesiasti ^oll. 2.
Ecclesiis, and others titles following, wherein all alienation of Kirk goods
is decerned null and of no force; and the things alienated are commanded to be
restored. To the same purpose agree the laws of the new constitutiones,
called Authentickes, in so far, that it is not permitted to the Prince
himself, to permit or change, with any of the goods of the Kirk, called
immovable, unless he give the better in steed thereof. And LEO the Emperor
sayet^, that they who dispone these goods, have Sacrilegious minds. Therefore
they who have persuaded our Prince (whom God preserve) to annaly or dispone to
themselves, or to others, these Kirk-landes, have done that they might to have
him counted Sacrilegious as they are. The law also ordeineth the buyers of
these goods, to lose the price, and to restore the goods again* The Notars of
such contractes, to be banished; the Judges that ratify the acts of such
alienationes, to be deposed from their dignities. How much more are they to
be judged gyltie and punished, that take and usurp those goods, without
alienation to their own commodity.

I omit here to cite many ancient Ca^nons of Councels to this effect, which
would occupy long time. For, who list to read the volumes of Councels and
Cannon-law, may find them very frequent in many places. Coming then to the
laws of the Country, and natural reason, the foundation of all good laws, I
say, the corrupted dealing of our time concerning Kirk-robberie, is such as
can not stand, neither with the one, nor with the other. For, as to our
municipal laws, which are either the laws of the Majesty, or acts of
Parliament. The laws of the Majesty altogether disallow, alienation of
Kirk-goodes, in so far, as if the Prelate himself, Abbote, or Bishop, make
any alienation or disposition thereof, ^
from the Kirk use: The byer thereof, should lose the price, and the lands
may be taken again by the King (but not disponed to others) if they were given
by him or his Predecessors. And in the acts of Parliament, both ancient and
recent, commonly the first act is, that the liberties and freedoms of the
Kirk be keiped. And how can these liberties be but hurt, when the Patrimony
of the kirk is taken away, and given to profane men and profane uses? Now, to
come in particular, to these new erectiones, and new found infeftmentes of
Kirk-Lands, they are (as I understand) of two sorts. For some are given
before the annexation of them to the Crown, and some thereafter. As to the
former, I would know by what law or reason they could be given by a simple
gift of the Prince, they being not yet come in his hands, and the consent of
the true Kirk, never had thereto? For, as to the consent of Abbots and
Bishops, being the most part of the Papisticall promotion, and chief
wrackers of the Kirk, no^ having any commission from the true reformed Kirk,
it cannot be of any force in this case, to defraude the Kirk of her
Patrimony. And albeit, the whole Kirk had consented, their consent could not
be sufficient to dilapidat or annaly the Kirk Lands in property to any
person, they being themseues only vsufructuares, and not proprietares thereof.
And as to the Princes part, can he take any private man's heritage from him,
and give it to whom he pleases, without consent of party, or fore faltrie?
I think all men will say no. Much less then, may he dispone these lands from
God and his Kirk, by sik simple donationes. As to the other sort of
infeftmentes or erectiones given after the annexation, they can be no better in
effect, for giving only for arguments cause, that these lands were lawfully
annexed to the Crown; whereupon I will not now farther dispute. I say, the King
cannot by the Laws of his Realm, dispone the same again from the crown,
they being once annexed thereto. Read the 43. act of King JAMES the second,
the 86. of King JAMES the Third, the 24. of King JAMES the Fourth, and
likewise his Revocation, act 83. As also the 4. and 54. of King JAMES the
Fifth: with others, tending to the like purpose. Yea, they would make our
Kings Majesty that now is, be involved in perjury by these dispositiones,
it being express against his oath, made at his Hienes coronation, and inacted
amongst the acts of Parliamente. The time straites me, that I cannot insist
longer upon this head.

Before I speak of the teindes, I come to the final reason, or rather excuse
that robbers of the Kirk pretend for them to color their Sacrilege. The
lands, with the other rents of the kirk (say they) given to it in time of
Papistrie, ar ouer-large, and more then sufficient, for the necessary uses of
the Kirk that now is. For, as to the Ministers, what should they have but their
necessary sustentation, with an gray gown, to go upon their feet Preaching
from place to place, as the Apostles did? They are as ^eedie as the Papists;
with many other like terms of their reproachful Rethoricke. And why may not
the King (say they) give these lands to Noblemen, Gentlemen, and others,
able to serve his Majesty; the teindes being more then sufficient to sustain
all the charges of the Kirk. As to the estate of the Ministers, it is no
marvel that they who care for no Religion, but so far as it serves their
turn, would well vouch safe to see them poor, that they might go the lighter
to heaven, following the footsteps of IVLIAN the Apostate, or rather IVDAS the
traitor, who envyed for the oyntmente that was bestowed upon Christ, because
he was a Sacrilegious thief, and would have had the price thereof to his own
use. Would these men commend unto us such poverty, as Christ did to the poor
in Spirit, or if necessity required, to loose all things for his names sake,
they should do well. But seeing they labor so far as they may, to bring
Ministers in contempt, and consequently, to deprive the people of the doctrine
of Salvation, we cannot admit their ungodly devises: For we have sufficient
warrant in the word of God, that the laborers in this function, are worthy of
their wages; not only for the honest intertenemente of themselves, but also
of their wives, children and families, and for hospitality. Which things being
ministered unto us, for our own parts, we would be well contented, so that
none of us did lack, as it was in the Primitive Kirk, providing not the
less, that the rest of godly uses belonging to the Kirk, were not neglected:
And specially, the schools and the poor: whose large portion ought to be
comprehended therein, seeing the Kirkrentes were justly called, ^he Patrimony
of the poor. As to the rest (this being done) we might well agree, it should
supply the necessary affairs of the Prince, and the Realm, and such other
Godly uses as the world allows. And the ensample of former ages agreeable
thereto have practiced. But the abuses we cannot allow, as that of the
Papists, of defrauding the poor of that part of the Kirkes Patrimony, which
should be bestowed upon them.

We know that the Kirk-rentes of old were divided in four parts. The one
part thereof was bestowed upon the Pastor or Bishop for his own use, and
for vp-holding of hospitality. An other, upon the rest of the officebearers,
in the Kirk (called the Clergy.) The third, upon the Poor. And the fourth
and last part, upon the interteinemente of Kirkes, Hospitalles, Brigges, and
other public and Godly affairs: Whereinto, the necessities of the Prince,
and public affairs of the Country are to be also considered. But the
degenerate posterity of the Antichristiane Kingdom, applied all these goods,
to the interteinement of idle bellies, dividing all the Kirkes Patrimony, into
Prelacies, and benefices, and in erection of Abbaies and Cloisteres, such as
are not to be found in the book of God, nor in any ensample of the Primitive
Kirk, and such as ought to have no place in any reformed Kirk or common
wealth. And yet this corruption remains amongst us, by distributing of new
titles, not only to the Bishops, but also to Abbottes, and new Prelates (as
they call them) after the manner of the old Papisticall promotion. The
affairs of the true Kirk, in the mean time, not being duly seen to nor
provided. And as concerning benefices under Prelacies, there is a new crafty
and fradulente invention found out, that these greedy gormandes have procured
at the Princes hands, gifts of the Patronages thereof: thereby to defraude best
qualifyed Ministers of the same, to give them, or rather sell them to whom they
can find out, who will be content to make unlawful paction with them, to take a
little portion of the fruits thereof (serve as they please) and let the most
part remain with themselves, either by setting of unlawful tacks, or by some
other fraudulent way.

Now, concerning the teinds (whereof I promised last to speak) I grant
indeed, if they were rightly gathered and bestowed to the right use, they
would both help the poor laborers of the ground, and serve to many good
uses in the Kirkes affairs. But as things now go amongst us, they are little
more profitable to these uses, then the Kirk lands. For they who wrongfully
have invaded the lands, mark as greedely for the teinds: and are entered
already in possession of the greatest part thereof. And now begin to make
question, what title or right the Kirk has thereto: So insatiable is the
greede of them who have once made shippe-wrack of conscience, that they would
Crucify Christ again for his coat. Herefore it is expedient, as shortness
of time will now serve us, to deduce from the original, the payment of
teindes. First, before any written law, we find, that ABRAHAM gave to
MELCHIZEDECK, Genesis 14.
as Priest of the most high God, teindes of all the spoil that he had
obtained of the discomfiture of the enemies, as pledge of his thankfulness
toward God. JACOB also passing to Mesopotamia, after that notable Genesis 28.
vision of the ladder, reaching from earth to heaven, made a solemn vow, that
if the Lord should be with him, preserving him in his way, and give him foo^e
and rayments, of all that the Lord should give him, he should render again
the teind unto the Lord. Whereby, it may well appear, that by the very
instinction of nature, this custom was received amongst the Godly Patriarcks,
to give teindes unto God, of that whatsoever he bestowed upon them, as well by
offering sacrifices, as applying the same to the utility of the Priests of the
Lord, the poor, and other godly uses. As to the offringe and paying of
teindes under the Law, we need to make no question, for the same is so set
forth at length, in the books of the Law of MOSES, that the adversaries can
make no argument against it. Wherein* among many other things it is written,
That all the ^erit. 27.
teind of the increase of the Land, as well of corns, as of bestiall,
perteined to the Lord as holy. And that he distributed the same again to the
Priests and Levites, and their families, for their service. And concerning the
Number. 18
teindes of every third year likewise, that the strangers, widows,
fatherless, and poor of the Land, should be participant thereof, so that I
need not insiste further thereupon at this present: only, calling to your
remembrance, that solemn protestation (of the which I made mention before)
that the people were ordained to make, that they had brought in all the teindes
of the Lord, and defrauded nothing thereof. Read the place. Deu. 26.

It restes to declare then, what has bin the use concerning teinds, under the
Gospel amongst Christians. Certainly the use of payment thereof has bin so
ancient, that it is difficil to find out the first original thereof. Always
it appears evidently, that godly Princes and common wealths, being willing to
provide the Pastors, and other godly affairs of the Kirk, of competent living
and revenues, did rather choose the teindes, then any other means to that
effect; following the example of the godly before the law, and imitating the
command of God, under the Law. Which loueable use and custom, has remained
through many ages (I think) inuiolably observed in all Christian kingdoms
and commonwealths. For it is more then a thousand years by. paste, since the
payment of teinds under the Gospel, was called an ancient custom, which the
Christians had observed by common consent, by ayplying Council. Matisc. 2, Can.
5.
the same to the use of the holy Ministry, the poor, redeeming of captives,
and other godly uses, as we may find in some ancient ca^nons of councels. So
that I can not marvel enough of a certain man, who held himself very well
beseen in the laws and customs of the cuntry, who was not ashamed to affirm,
that the paime^t of teindes to the Kirk, was not old, but of late brought up.
If this man had red diligently the Scotts Chronicles only, he (...). li. 9. f.
192.
might have found how CONVAL King of Scotts, who reigned about the year of
our Lord, five hundredth, three score and eight years. Did statute by law,
that the teindes of all that grew upon the ground, should be brought in unto
the Priests, and service of God, used in these days, which from that time by
long prescription has been observed amongst this our Scottish Nation. So that
the question cannot now have place, whether the teindes perteine to the Kirk
or not; I will not deny but the teinds might be possibly changed, in other
means of sufficient provision for the Kirk, if such godly zeal were now
amongst men, as was of old time. But in so far as we see the plain
contrary, that men are now readier to take away, the^ ever our predecessors
were to give; it were a foolish thing to loose the certain for the uncertain,
and that which is never likely to come to pass. And the wisdom of the
fathers, hes done better in this behalf, then any thing that we can now
devise or perform. Therefore, whosoever now do abstracte the teindes from
that use; for the which they have been of so ancient time appointed amongst
Christians, they are to be repute as violaters of that godly and public order,
and good estate of Christian commonwealths and cannot be excused from
Sacrilege.

Because time hastes me to an end, I am compelled for the present to cut many
things. Therefore I come shortly to the last refuge of these Kirk-robbers,
whereas they allege for themselves, their titles, tacks, and assedations, with
oother evidentes and rights, whereby they possess and brook the teindes. And
many will say also, that their predecessors have had kindness thereto of long
time bypast. And others, moreover will allege and say, we have paid great
gressomes, and sums of entresse silver therefore, besides our yearly duty,
having these teindes disponed to us, by them who had power to set the same. To
answer shortly to all this, first I say, to the takes-men, that all their
tackes and titles, for the most part are set contrary to the common Law,
and so are null in themselves. And if we shall examine them by the Law of
Conscience, which is the chief Law that Christistians ought to live by; it
will be hard to purge the taker and also the setter of Sacrilege. The first
cause that moved Council. Carthag, 5 cap. 6.
them of the Kirk to let teindes in tackes, was to defend them from the
invasion and violence of such mighty robbers, as spoiled them of their
possessions. For otherwise, it was not lawful in any case by their Cannones,
that any of them, (whom they called the Laick sort) should have any meddling
therewith. But now it falls out plain contrariwise, that none do greater
hurt to the Kirk, then those tackesmen, to make their own greedy gain of the
Kirk-goods. And they may well be compared to manchpresents (as we speak) taking
to themselves the best part, and leaving the least portion to the Kirks use.
So I say, that none of them that take the teindes in assedation, with evident
diminution of the old rentals can pretend, but they greatly hurt the Kirk,
contrary to good laws and conscience. Yea, many of their tacks are not only
within the half of the just avail; but oftentimes within the tent part, as
victuals now are sold.

For coloring of the which, there is a new fraud of the law devised, by
converting victual into money, unknown to our Fore-bearers* because (say
they) v^ctuall was sometime sold for such prices: But where find they that
argument, a Contrad^. ^d leg. (...). l, p^ecia.
posse ad esse, valiable in the Law? or why prefer they not at least, the
option to the receiver, rather to choose, then to the giver? or else, why will
they not pay Sterling money, or the avail thereof, as good as it was, when
victualles were so sold? Who will go to the market now with our money, to buy
victual of such prices, and not be mocked? Whereto should I insiste longer
upon the new maintained corruptiones of this age, to defraude the Kirk of
her due right? It should weary both me to rehearse, and you to hear it. When
as tackes was not set in times by-paste, but for the space of ninetene years
the farthest. Now three nintene years, with three life-rents, all in one tacke,
is thought nothing. Yea, many make heritage of the teindes, as they have done
of the lands. I omit to speak of the oppression of the poor laborers of
the ground, whereof I made mention before. As to the kindness, which these
men allege, because it is of no force in the Law, I cease likewise to speak
thereof. And as to the power of them that set these tackes, being for the most
part titulars of Prelacies, I count them no less Sacrilegious, then the
takers, as if I had time and space, I might easily prove. With them also I
join a sort of false brethren, called, beneficed Ministers, who make as little
conscience to dilapidate the kirk-rents, as others do. So that there is no
estate free of Sacrilege in the^e unhappy days. Lord arise and cast out all
buyers and sellers, with thieues and robbers, and corrupted Sacrilegious dealers
out of the Kirk, and stir up some zealous reformers of these manifold
deformities, that the Kingdom of Christ may continue amongst us, and his
Gospel not be removed and taken from us, for our great ingratitude and sins,
in abusing the name and profession of the same. To whom with thee, O Father
and holy Ghost, be all honor and glory. A^en.

AGAINST SACRILEGE The third Sermon.
Romans 2. verse. 22. 23. 24. 22 Thou that abhorrest Idols, do thou commit
Sacrilege? 23 Thou that gloriest in the Law, through breaking of the Law,
dishonorest thou God? 24 For the name of God is blasphemed amongst the
Gentiles, through you, as it is written.
MAny shifts and excuses can the corrupt nature of man find out, to cloak
their evil doings and impieties, how justly soever they be challenged for
their faults, if so be they be not willing to redress the wrong committed
by them. As in this matter whereof we entreat; ye have hard what pretended
excuses, and colored reasons they whom we blame as gyltie of Sacrilege,
oppone and allege for themselves: Which I suppose have been sufficiently
answered and refuted in the former Sermon. Now it rests to be declared,
what dangers such Sacrilegious persons stand into, and what punishment they
be worthy of, who are gyltie of that crime: As Well by the Law of God, as by
humane and Civil Laws. And if they will not amend for fear of these
punishments, appointed by good Laws* because Magistrates in that part do
not their office, and the law lacks execution in this corrupted estate. Yet at
least, they may be terrified in their Consciences (if they have any feeling)
with the examples of the extraordinary judgments of God execute against the
sacrilegious before our days, when the world was not so male-part in rebellion
as now it is. For the which purpose, I shall God-willing, bring forth
ensamples, both of the divine history and of profane writers; declaring how
the wrath of God fell upon such kind of men from time to time: And how by the
contrary, the blessing of the Lord has continually been with them, who
traveled carefully to buyld Gods house, and to bestow liberally of the goods
which he gave them upon his service and servants.

First, then to begin with the punishments appointed and threatened by Gods
Law, against the Sacrilegious. In Deuteronomie we find it written, that all
they who meddle with things dedicate to Religion (albeit it be Idols
service) and apply the same to their private commodity, are to be counted
Anathema; that is, accursed of GOD, both they and the things, which they by
such means appropriate unto themselves. Bring not Deuteronomy. 7.
(says the Law) the abominable thing into thine House, neither covet the
Gold or Silver which is on them, to take it to thy self, least thou be
snared therevvith. For it is abh^mination unto the Lord thy GOD: Therefore
thou shall abhor it, because it is accursed, least thou bringing the
abominable thing in thine house be accursed, as it is. Now, that the like
curse falls upon them that take or with-holde the holy things, dedicate to
the service of the Lord; it is manifest in the Prophet MALACHIE, a good
interpreter Mal. 3.
of the Law. By whom, God complaining upon the Sacrilegious people of Israel in
his days, says; Ye are accursed with a curse, because ye have spoiled me. And
they demanded (as such men are ever quarrelous) wherein they had spoiled him:
he answers, in his teindes and offerings. And before a little he had said.
Will any man spoil his gods? Whereby he declared, that it was a rare thing
(which is most frequent in our days) even among Idolaters to commit
Sacrilege. So we see the curse is common, both upon them that defraude the
Lord of holy things dedicate to his service, and them that appropriate to
themselves things dedicate to Idols. Moreover, we find Sacrilege punished
with death, in the person of A^HAN, according to the Law. For it is written in
IOSVA, He with whom the Excommunicate Joshua. ^.
thing beis deprehended, let him be burned with fire, even he, and all that he
has: Because he has transgressed the covenant of the Lord, and committed a
heinous offense in Israel. And the children of Israel (says he moreover)
cannot stand before their enemies, for they are gyltie of a curse, and I will
not be with you, till ye have destroyed the accursed etc. Here we may see it
was not an extraordinary punishment that was used against ACHAN, but required
the like execution in like case, for the transgression of the covenant of the
Lord; to wit, first, to be stoned, according to the Law, and thereafter
burned, with all his substance.

Yet, men may say, this was a politic Law, given for a time unto the people
of Israel only. But, giving it so be, yet it serves to our purpose, to prove
what punishment has been statute in the law of God against Sacrilegious
persons, who so highly provoked the wrath of God, not only against
themselves, but against the whole people, if they suffered such impiety
amongste them vn-punished: as this example of ACHAN declared. And let us come
to the New Testament, we shall perceive the Lords wrath, not yet to be quenched
against such per sons: Consider our text, does not the Apostle here, comparing
Sacrilege with Idolatry, declare that the Jews, as well as the Gentiles were
under the wrath of God for this crime in special? And if we think the
punishmente great that fell upon ACHAN and his family: What less was that
which PETER executed upon Act. 5.
ANANIAS and SAPPHIRA for the like, or rather les offense? were they not both
severely dung dead at an instant. And albeit, that was an extraordinary
punishment, if respect be had to the person of PETER; yet non can deny but it
was justly deserved: Otherwise PETER had been to blame in the execution
thereof: whom the Spirit of God does always allow. Herefore, it avayleth not
to extenuate this crime, and the punishment thereof, as that it were not so to
be agreged, nor so seuerly damned under the law of the Gospel, as it was in
the Law of MOSES. For although Christian Magistrates, be not astricted to
follow the policy of that Law in all points* yet Sacrilege is ay Sacrilege.
And very sharp laws has been made for punishment thereof, not only by
Christian Princes and Magistrates, but also by the Heathen Princes and
law-giuers, in their natural zeal and light.

But let us first come to Ecclesiastical Cannons and laws (I mean not the
decrees of the Popes of Rome, whereof it is easy to allege an innumerable
multitude) but the ancient Ca^nons of Councelles; and the writes of godly
Fathers of the Kirk, agreeable to the Scriptures. The greatest punishment the
Kirk has to use ordinarily, against all disobedient persons, according to
Ecclesiastical discipline, is Excommunication. For we have not to follow the
Papists, in exceeding the bounds of Ecclesistical jurisdiction, by imposing
corporal punishment, and pecuniall pains to the offenders, such as belong to
the Civil Magistr^t. So, I say, Excommunication, but excommunication in the
highest, and most severe sort, was appointed by the Cannons and Discipline of
the Kirk, against the Sacrilegious. For (we know) there were two kinds of
Excommunication; the one called the less, which was, debarring from the
Sacraments of the Kirk; the other the greater, which was a cutting off from
the whole society of Christ's body; which by the ancient Fathers, is
oftentimes called Anathema. Always, it is not to be understood, of that
Anathema, whereof the Apostle PAVLL speaks, taking it for Extreme Exterminion
from Christ. But in the other sense, as the Fathers used it. It is taken in
the eight Cannon of the Council, called Gangrense, which was a very ancient
and godly Council, holden about the 324. year of Christ; wherein it was
statute, that if any man presume to tak or dispone things offered to the Kirk,
except the Bishop, Carthag. council. 4* c, 95. Council. Ag^then. c. 3. and
alibi.
or they who are depute to ministrat mercy unto the poor, let him be
Anathema, that is, accursed with a greater Excommunication. To this agree, many
other Cannons of Councelles, and ancient Fathers, with more severe words,
threatening the judgementes of God, to the terror of all Sacrilegious persons,
calling them murderers of the indigent and poor. Yea* they may be called
murderers both of the bodies and souls of men, as was declared in an other
place.

And I cannot see how we, who now bear office in the Kirk, can be excused,
unless we proceed after this manner, as the ancient Kirk did against the
Sacrilegious of our time, who increase and multiply daily, In such sort, that
without severe discipline, they may not be possibly suppressed. Yea, I fear
me, the medicine be too late, and ouer-long delayed, which should have been
applied to this kind of disease. And as to the civil magistrates punishmente,
we have little appearance to look for it, seeing the most part of these, who
should remeid this evil, are infected themselves with the same sickness.
Notwithstanding, that all kind of Laws, both natural and written, divine and
humane, damn this heinous crime. For it is even against nature to the
Children, to rob and spoil their Mother or Parents, as the Kirk of God, is
to every one that profess themselves to be members, and have been brought
up in the bosom thereof. And let us see what punishment the natural
Philosopher PLATO in his Li^* ^, de ^ogibus
books of Laws, judges the Sacrilegious worthy of. If any man (says he) be
found so bold to commit such a heinous offense as Sacrilege (which we would
not, and can sharply believe to fall in any well brought-vp-perso^) if it be an
slave servant, or stranger, or strangers servant; let an mark be imprinted in
his face and hand; and let him be scourged with so many stripes as pleases
the Judge, and then casten out of the Cuntrie naked; that peradventure he may
become thereafter wise, and of a better mind. But if he be a Citiner
(meaning, a man of free condition) who commits at any time such an offense;
notwithstanding, his good education from his youth-heade, yet the Judge may
understand such ^ne one to be incurable. Therefore, death is the least evil
he should sustain. But it may profit for ensample to all others, if he be
deprived of all honors, and banished the Cuntrie. Ye see what equity is in
the Natural man, concerning the punishmente of this crime.

Now, as to the Civil laws, beginning at the laws of the twelve Tables, which
were most aunciente amongst the Romans; we find the same to be most severe
against the Sacrilegious, bearing that they who did rob by violence, or
steal holy things, or things committed in custody to holy places, should be
holden as Parricides, that is, slayers of their Parents. The Civil Laws,
collected by commandment of IVSTINIANI, for the most part, hold the
punishmente of Sacrilege to be capital, that is, worthy of death. But they
vary in the manner of execution. For some condemn the Sacrilegious unto the
beasts, some to be burned, some to be hanged. Always, the punishments L.
Sacrileg^ L. and Sacrilegij d^. Leg. Julian (...). latu^
are ordained to be weyed, according to the circumstaunce, and quality of the
persons, time, age, place, and estate of things to be execute more severely
or meekly, as the same re^quired. For the punishment of them who were condemned
to the beasts, is restrained to such only, as break Temples made by hands,
and take from them by night, things dedicate to God. But if any in daylight,
should spoil any Temple, he is decerned to be condemned unto the Mines; or if
he were of honest parentage, to be banished in some Island, and to loose all
his goods. There be some laws also, that make the punishment of Sacrilege to
be extraordinary. All agree in this, that is, requires a severe punishmente,
as the L. peculatus. ^d. e^d. tit.
highest kind of thieft: And extends it (as was said before) to all things
dedicate to the service of the immortal God: so that whosoever substract the
same, being once publicly dedicated, commits Sacrilege; and if it were
taken privately, to be holden as the highest kind of thieft, and like unto
Sacrilege. Now if we esteem it a greater fault, to take some little thing out
of a material Temple, nor to bereave and take great lands and possessiones from
the Kirk, is not that to strain out a Gnatte, and to swallow up a Camel?

Would to God I were able to walken these men out of the deadly sleep of
security, wherein they lie blinded by their corrupt affectiones; forgetful of
the unhappy end, whereto men are led by insatiable avarice. But seeing
neither admonitiones, nor sharp rebukes can serve in this declining age to
remeid this evil; yet to make them more inexcusable, if they will not amend.
I will produce certain ensamples of punishments of Sacrilegious persons,
partly taken out of the Scriptures, and partly out of humane histories; of the
which persons, diverse peradventure may be found less gyltie of this crime,
then these with whom we have to do, to the end, that our sacrilegious (if
they have any feling) may fear the like judgments to fall upon them; if not
in this life, yet as great, or rather greater thereafter, when they shall have
no purse nor penny, power nor means to make restitution of that which they
have, with so evil conscience conquised. And first we have two examples which
I have diverse times heretofore cited of ACHAN, in the Old Testament, and of
ANANIAS and SAPPHIRA, in the New: who were terribly punished for their
Sacrilege; as it is at length set forth in the Holy Histories, bearing their
doings and Tragical end of their lives.

We have further, the History of OPHNI and PHINEAS, the Sons of HELI, ^.
S^m. 1. 3.
who were both slain of the Philistimes in one day, the Ark of God was taken,
HELI their Father brake his neck, for the sleuthfull correcting of them. The
chief cause of their punishmente, is evidently set down to have been, For the
Sacrilegious abusing of the Sacrifices of the Lord, and making the people to
loath the same, in bereaving the raw flesh before it was offered, besides
their other abuses.

We have likewise the History of NEBVCHADNETZAR the great, who Dan. 1.
spoiled the Temple of GOD in Jerusalem, taking from thence ane part of the
Golden and Silver Vessels, appointed for the service of the Lord, and
carried the same to the Land of SHINAR to the House of his GOD, putting the
same in his Gods Thesaurie. Which not-with-standing, it was the Lords work
and appoyntmente, to wit, that Jerusalem and the Temple should be destroyed
for the sins of the people: Yet the Tyraunte thought not thereof, but did
execute the pride of his heart in that overthrow. Albeit there were some
things in him, that may condemn the Sacrilegious of our Age, for he took
but one part of the Vessels of Gods House, and not all, and brought them not
into his own House, but into the House of his GOD; Wherein, (albeit
ignorantly) he placed his Religion: So he declared some good Conscience in
his blind zeal. Yet the Lord did severely correct and punish him in his
greatest pride, deposing him from his Dan. 4.
Royal Throne, and taking his heart from him; For he was driven from
amongste men, and his heart, made like to the heart of a beast. And having
his dwelling among the Wild beasts, he eat grass like an Ox: His body was
vvette with the dew of Heaven, till his hair grew like the Eagles feathers,
and his nails like the fowls claws, unto the time that he knew the most
highest to bear rule over the Kingdoms of men, and to give them to whom he
will. And yet his Son, or rather Nephew ^ BELTSASER did not humble himself,
knowing al these things, Dan, ^.
but becoming worse then any his predecessors, lifted up his heart against the
Lord of Heaven, brought forth the vessels of the Lords house, before him in
his banquet, and he and his Princes, his wives and Concubins, drank wine
therein, and praised their Idols and Gods of Gold and Silver, Brass, Woodde
and Stone. And glorified not the God in whose hand his breath, and all his
ways were. Therefore the Lord sent forth the palm of an hand, and wrote
against him upon the wall, declaring the destruction of him and his Kingdom,
which came to pass that same night. For he was slain, and his Kingdom
translated to an other Nation, As the whole History at length bears record.

In the book of Machabees also (which, ^. Mac. ^.
albeit they be not Canonical Scriptures, it may serve for record of truth)
there is a notable history of HELIODORVS, Thesaurer to king SELEVCVS, who
having sent to spoil the Temple of Jerusalem of the Thesaurarie being
therein, whereof a great part perteined to the widows and fatherless, was
miraculously smitten by the hand of God, as he was about to take away the
money put therein: and was there left for dead, till by the prayer of ONIAS the
high Priest, he becoming penitent, was restored to his health. And being
returned to his Master, the king demanding who should be meet to send
again for that purpose: Answered, if the king had any enemy or euill-willer,
to send him. For he should receive him again well whipped and beaten, if he
escape with his life. Because, the power of God was truly in that place, and
he that dwelled in heaven, would be revenged upon them, who did invade his
house. In the same books, we have recited the miserable end of King
ANTIOCHVS, who after he had sacrilegiously spoiled the temple of Jerusalem,
passed in Persia, and preassing also to commit Sa^vilege, in the Cietie of
Persepolis, was ignominiously driven back, and threatening to return to ludea,
and make Jerusalem a barial place of the Jews, was brought to extreme
diseases, so that worms issued out of his body, and his servants could not
abide the vile sture of his Carcass: and so perished most miserable. The third
example we have also written, of certain soldiers ^. Mac. 12.
of IVDAS MACCHA^EYS, who were slain in a battle against Gorgias, Governor of
Iamnea, under whose coats were ^ounde Iewelles of the Iamnites, which thing
was forbidden by the Law. So every man sav^, (says the History) that this
was the cause wherefore they were slain. Whereupon Judas exhorted the rest o^
his army to keep themselves from such kind of sin, because they saw that
example before their eyes.

I add hereunto, that which is writren by JOSEPHUS, of certain Roman
Governors, namely, Crassus and Pompeius, of whom, the former going to war
against the Parthians, by the way, spoiled the Temple of Jerusalem, and took
thence, amongst other things, a golden pillar, of 150. pounds weighte, brake
it in pieces, and paid the soldiers wages therewith: afterward, he fought
against the Parthians, but with such unhappy succes, that it was counted one of
the greatest misfortunes and loss, that the Romans received: For, his Son
was slain with many Legiones of the Roman Chilvalrie; and he himself being
taken prisoner, fearing the enemies cruelt^e, was his own murderer, by
thrusting in his eye, the ryding wande wherewith he beat his Horse: his head,
and his righthand being thereafter cut off; the barbarous people, powered molten
gold in his mouth, because, he so inordinatly thyrsted af^ed gold in his life
time. The other, Pompeius the great by name, being otherwise one of the most
noble Senators and valiant Romans in his days, had no better success; after
that he likewise had spoiled the Temple of the God of heaven in Jerusalem: for
he and his army (although being of a greater multitud^) were discomfited by
Julius Caesar, at that most famous battle of Pharsalia; And himself shortly
thereafter murdered, by young Ptoleme, King of A Egypt. The contrary, fell
forth to ALEXANDER the great, who passing forward to his wars in Asia, and
coming to Jerusalem, by the way, spoiled not the Temple of the Lord, but did
great honor thereto, and to IADDVA the hie Prierst, granting to the Nation of
the Jews liberty to live after their own laws, and for the space of seven
years, they should be free from all kind of tribute. And he thereafter had a
most prosperous success in all his interprises.

I may for this purpose, produce many other examples out of profane writers: Of
the which, for shortness of time I will only collect and touch compendiously
some of the principals. There is a famous report, and past in a Proverb of
the gold of Tholose, Which Q. SCIPIO and his souldiars spoiled from the
temples of that City: how they thereafter come to a miserable ouer-throwe.
XERXES, king of Persia, invading Greece, with an innumerable army, was
shamefully driven back, who sent, as the history reports 400. souldiars to
Delphus, to spoil the Temple of Apollo; who were destroyed with thunder and
Tempest. Q. FVLVIVS FLACCVS a Censour of Rome (as VALERIVS MAXIMUS writes)
took the pillars of the Temple of Juno, out of the City of Locris, and placed
them in his own house; but he fell thereafter in a frenzy, and so still
continued: And finally, hearing tell of his three Sons, whereof one being dead,
another was grievously sick, he died miserably: wherewith* the Senate being
moved, decreed to send these Pillars again to their own place. Of this and
such things, it appears to have past in a common Proverb and saying amongst
the Romans, that they desired no more harm to their enemies, then to have the
stones of a Temple builded in their house. Plemmenius likewise, a Roman
Legate, having spoiled the Temple of Proserpina in Locris, as he carried the
spoil in his ships, they were casten and broken on the sea ^ands, and the
spoil found and restored again to the Temple. Plemmenius himself never
prospered thereafter. But being driven from Italy to Greece, dyed a shameful
death. The like thing also we read of Pyrrhus, And concerning Brennus, an
aunciente king of the Gauls, how he with his soldiers, going to spoil the
Temple of Delphos; the most part of his army was destroyed with an
earthquake, himself so smitten, that for sorrow he killed himself.

But men may say, why produce I these e^nsamples of spoiling of Idols, and
Idolatrous temples. Seeing, that by the just judgment of God, they are, and
were all destroyed. I answer, that the cause wherefore the true God of heaven,
brought such punishments upon them, who spoiled their own false gods; was,
because of the Sacrilegious contempt, which these men did to them whom they
held for their gods; and so were enemies to their own relicques which they
professed: and that may serve to teach the Sacrilegious of our days, how more
severely they deserve to be punished, either here or hence: who, professing the
knowledge of the true God, use such profane attempts, contrary to their
Religion. For, as to such rake-hell hounds, as was Dionysius the tyranne of
Sicilia, who can but abhor the Sacrilegious, spewing out their abominable
taunts. Who after his Sacrilege committed in spoiling of his gods, having a
favorable wind in his navigation, said to men, ye see friends, how favorable
the gods be to the Sacrilegious. And coming to the Temple of Jupiter Olympius,
drew from him his golden cloak, skoffing, that it was too heavy to him for
su^mer, and too cold for winter, and taking from AEsculapius his golden beard,
said, it seemed not the same to have a beard, and the father Apollo to be
beardles. As also, when he took of all the gifts that were offered to the idols,
and holden up by their hands, pretended that they were willingly holden out
and presented to him by the good gods. Brennus also (of whom I spak before) as
Trogus Pompeius reports, spoiling the temples of Macedonia, in skoffing manner
said, that the gods who were rich, ought to bestow on mortal men, of their
liberal gifts. But finally, this man in despair killed himself: and the
other, Dionysius, as is reported of him, urged by an evil conscience, after
that he had sold by public voice and Proclamation, that which he had spoiled
from the Temples, compelled them to whom such things were sold, to restore them
to the Temples, from the which they were taken. But how-so-euer this godles
tyrant behaved himself: we read, how he was casten out of his kingdom, and
being brought to great necessity, was compelled to teach a Grammar School at
Corinthus. And shall we think the punishment of such men, to be included only
within the short time of this life? albeit for the most part, such men escaped
not the Temporal punishments, as the history of their lives bears record.

But let us come to the nearer examples: when the Wandals came with a puissante
army, against Duke Gabinius (as is recited out of Eutropius) the Duke sent
some of his Captains disguised, to see whither the Wandals reverenced the
Temples of the Christians, or spoiled them. If they spoil or violate them
(says he) the God whom the Christians worship, whom I know not, if he be so
powerful, as they say, will not spare them that spoil his houses; and so it
come to pass: For the Wandals marching forward, enriched with the spoil and
goods of the Kirk; were vanquished in battle, slain, and put to diverse
torments. But Alaricus, king of the Gotthes, by the contrary, having won Rome,
would not suffer his men to spoil the Temple of S. PETER, nor touch any person
being therein, for the reverence he did bear to the place. Clotharius King of
France likewise (as Turonenss writes) presuming most irrelegiously (as
certain other Kings) to take the goods of the kirk into his Thesaurie, made
an Edicte, that all the Kirkes of his Realm, should pay to him the third part
of their fruits. But being rebuked of a certain Bishop, did retreat his
ordinance: a rare example indeed; For there is a pestiferous malady, whereof
few amend by repentance. To come yet nearer, we read of King WILLIAM of
England, called Rufus, who for his pleasure and pastime, to enlarge his
Forest, demolished 17. Parish Kirks, and all the Towns about them. But in the
same forest, being at his game, in the very place (as some say) where one of
the Kirks stood, was slain by an arrow, shot at a Dear, by a certain Knight,
and there fell down dead immediately. For pleasure procured with the displeasure
of the Almighty, cannot well profit. As for domestical examples of Kings of
this Cuntrie, that were spoylers of the Kirk, or Kirk-goods, they are very rare
to be found. Indeed we read of Feredethus, who arrogate unto himself the
kingdom of Pictes, after the death of Hungus, that he took again from the Kirk
and ministers thereof, such as then were the possessions which Hungus (being a
godly king) had given them: Which is reported to have bin one of the causes,
wherefore the kingdom of the Pictes, thereafter was destroyed.

But amongst the Scotts Kings, I never read of any that took from the kirk
any possessions. So did they abhor Sacrilege, howsoever otherways some of the^
were wicked, and of licencious life: But it is easy to read, of very many
that bestowed liberally upon the service of God: And more liberally in some
respects then become them; yet always godly as they supposed in their zeal.
And albeit, I allow no superfluity in the Kirke-rentes, but all may serve the
king, in time of necessity: Yet this may be esteemed as one of the causes
that GOD hes continued his Kingdom to stand so long vnco^quished or translated
to Forrayne power, above the continual success of an hundredth generationes.
Which is rare to be found in any other kingdom: The Lord grant that the
corruption of our days, bring not such an alteration as we have not seen,
nor yet have heard of before. Let us therefore rather praise others, who by
their godly zeal, have advanced the service of God, and bestowed liberally of
their substance, for maintenance of the same. In the book of Exodus, we have
a Exodus 36.
notable example of the people of Israel, Who offered so liberally, to the
wooke of the Tabernacle, that MOSES was forced to cause proclayme throughout
the host, that no man or woman should offer any further for the service and
building thereof. Because there were yuough, and more bestowed already to that
effect. Oh what contrariety is between them and their doings, and our men,
who cannot cease nor leave off without any hoe, to takaway that which has bin
offered by others, til almost now there is no thing left behind. The like zeal
Number. 7. Psalm. 12^.
of the Princes of Israel, in their offering at the dedicatio^ of the tabernacle
as is written of the^. whereto I remit you for shortness. This zeal is commended
by DAVID in the Psalm, 122. whereas he rejoiced at the readiness of the people,
to serve God in his Tabernacle.

And because I have begun to make mention of King DAVID, and the zeal of the
people in his days: Let us hear what vehement zeal was in himself, in this
behalf, to provoke others by his example. First, he called for the Prophet
NATHAN, saying unto him; behold, I dwell in an house of Ceder trees, and the
Arc of the 2. Sam 7.
Lord is under courtaines, thinking it an unmeet thing, that his Royal Palace
should be more honorably handled, then the house of his God. And when NATHAN,
finally resolved by the Oracle of God, declared, that it should 1. Ch^o. 22
not be he, but his Son that should buyld an house unto the Lord: He ceased
not to prepare all things necessary for that work, in his days. And to
exhort gravely, his Son SOLOMON to accomplish the same. Declaring how he,
according to his ability, had separated for the performing of that buylding,
an hundredth thousand talents of Gold, and 1000000. of silver, brass and iron,
without weight, besides wood and stone. To the which great preparation, (not
thinking it yuough, he desired SOLOMON and his Nobles, to add more, as they
did in very deed liberally and magnificently: As the holy History bears
record. Besides, this K. DAVID left of his own money (besides 2. Chro. 29
that which he had co^quished of his enemies) to the ornament of the walls of
the Temple, and other such uses, three thousand talents of gold of Ophir, and
seven thousand talents of fined silver: Exhorting the Princes of Israel,
according to their faculties, to follow his ensample: Who being instigate by
him (far unlike our degenerate Nobility) gave freely to the work of the
Lord, 5000. talents of gold, and 10000. talents of silver: Of brass 18000,
and of Iron, 100000 talents, which will amounte to exceeding sums of our
money. And it may be judged, that King SOLOMON doubled more. Now, if so much
was bestowed upon a material Temple building, what su^mes think ye, were
employed yearly for interteineme^t of the Priests and Levits, who had not only
the teindes of the whole Land, but also the great offerings, and first fruits
of the increase.

But if any will allege, that this Cuntry which we inhabit, is poor, in
respect of the Land of Canaan, that flowed with milk and honey: and therefore
may not spare so large provision upon the Kirkes affairs. I would answer and
demand, who makes it poor, so much as you insatiable pullers away of the rent
already given to the Kirk, to your particular uses, provoking thereby the Lord
to withdraw his blessing from the Land which otherwise were able to yield
sufficient provision, both for the Kirk, King, and common wealth. Does not God
say by his Prophet: Bring all the teinds in my Thesaurie, that there may be
meat in my house, and prove me now in this, says the Lord of Mal. 3.
Hosts, if I shall not make open the Windows of Heaven, and pour down a
blessing unto you And SOLOMON says, Honor the Lord with thy substance, and
with the first fruits of all thy increase: so shall thy Barnes be filled with
abundance, and thy presses pressed with new wine. Is it not a miserable thing,
and unworthy to be heard tell of, in any forrayne Country, that the Levites
of Israel, who were in number 38000. above twenty years of age, with their
wives and children, and the whole poor of the Land were so liberally
provided for and interteined sufficiently. And now amongst us, albeit it were
but 600. Ministers to serve the whole Country of Scotland, sufficient lives
cannot be provided for them? yea, of them that are planted, a great number
were left little better then begging, and some notable men left altogether
destitute? O miserable age, and unhappy days that we be fallen into? Shall not
the Papists in their blind zeal, rise up in judgment against this
unthankful generation, who sustained thousands in their Kirkes, Abbaies, and
Cloisters, besides that which they dealt to the poor, upon the Kirke-rentes:
And now there be not so much left, as to sustain a few Ministers, Colleges,
and Schools, albeit the poor should be utterly neglected.

May it not greatly ashame Christian Princes and others, that spoil and suffer
the Kirk of God to be spoiled. When as Cyrus, Darius, and Artaxerxes, heathen
Princes, did bestow liberally, to build up the temple again in Jerusalem,
which NEBVCHADNETZAR had destroyed, as the books of Esra and Nehemias bear
record. And the same Cyrus reverencing the God of heaven, of whom he had but
little knowledge, did send again the vessels of gold and silver which
NEBVCHADNETZAR had taken, to be restored to the temple of God, under the hand
of Zerubbabel. Whereto should I insist to recite other examples, as of Asa,
Iehoshaphat Ioas, Ezechias, and Josias Kings of Judah, whose diligence was very
careful in reparaling the house of the Lord, and providing for the Priests and
Levits, in such sort that great heaps were left, after that all were fully
satisfied: wheranent, because shortness of time, cuteth of amplificatio^, I
remit you to the histories of the books of the kings and chronicls: wherein
also, may be found, how because these Kings were zealous mainteiners of the
true religion, and holy ministry, God prospered them inal their affairs, so
long as they perseuered thereinto. I might also recite a great Catalogue of
christian Princes, who following the example of such ancient kings doted the
Kirk with sufficient patrimony. As the zeal of Constantine, and others godly
Emperors and Kings; yea, even of the Kings of our own Nation, who have been
(as our Chronicles and ancient monuments bear record) very liberal in this
behalf: But I may not rehearse every particular.

Only this I conclude, seeing that without Religion and justice, no common
wealth can stand (for these are the two pillars, whereby the estate of all
well governed common wealths is vp-holden) it is greatly to be feared, least
this our common wealth shall come to great desolatio^ and decay, unless speedy
remedy be found out to stay the inconvenientes and dangers that be at hand.
For as to Justice, where is it? when wrong partial dealing in judgment and
oppression* yea, not only Sacrilege, but Sorcerie, bloodshed, adultery,
falsehood, and all other abominable enormities, reign at such liberty without
punishment. And as to Religion, how can it but decay? unless God speedely put
to his extraordinary hand, when all ordinary means are taken away, whereby
it should be interteined: and Idolatry and Atheism already entered in place
thereof, in many parts of this Land, and like to enter further daily. For
albeit, many Kirks of the Realm, lack the Ministry of the word; there is no
means left to provide them, for all the Kirk rent is exhausted upon greedy
gormandes, careless of Religion, and that would with IVDAS sell Christ, or
with the godless souldiars of PILATE, crucify him for his garments; who have
never left off gaping, and shamelesly urging ouer-liberal a Prince, till they
have gotten all in their hands. Example we see this day, when as the poor
Ministers come to that woeful platte, or send their Commissioners, thinking to
have the Kirkes planted with sufficient Ministers and stipendes, they are sent
home empty, when they have waited long on without all comfort. For there is
nothing to augment, or advance any man, to any vacant room, unless one
Minister take from another; and so be exponed to the mockage of these, who have
spoiled the rentes wehereupon they should be sustained, when they see them
contending one against another.

And can the King (think ye) be in a good case, when the estate of the Kirk,
which was the first in Parliament, is so wracked? No, for if he ever have
war, or other great enterprises ado, as it is likely he is shortly to have:
he shall lack that (to speak worldly) which was his principal relief and
aid: to wit, the Thesaurie of the kirk, to advance such weighty affairs. For
as to the^ upon whom the same is unworthily bestowed (I mean the Kirk-lands
and rents) they shall fail him in his greatest need. For it is not his weal
nor standing that they have sought, but their own particular, with insatiable
greede. And now when they have done, the Lord shall so blow upon it, that they
or their aires shall be no better of it: but rather (because it is procured with
Gods curse) it shall wrack the rest of their patrimony and aunciente houses,
as experience has prouen in some of them. And as to the Kings Hienesse, seeing
that his estate, even from his Coronation, hes been so annexed and joined with
the estate of the Kirk, and reformed Religion, that it has well appeared
hitherto by experience, that the standing of the one, has made the other also
to stand: it is justly to be feared (the Lord auerte it) that the ruin and
decay of Religion in this Realm (if God of his just judgment suffer it) may
bring exceeding great danger to his person, and royal authority; yea, to the
whole commonwealth. And the authors of these new erectio^s of the kirk lands
inheritable titles to them selves, and private uses, shall be a chief cause
thereof: and that by withdrawing the blessing of God from the Land, and
procuring his wrath against the same. The Lord remeid these appearing euilles
by time.

Now, returning to our Text, and concluding with the Apostle, in the verses
following, as he most justly rebukes the Jews, who gloryed in the law of God,
and yet by breaking of the Law (by their Sacrilege, and other odious crimes)
dishonored his holy Majesty; declaring thereby the light regard they had to
that Religion, which they outwardly professed, so it may be justly laid to the
charge of this unthankful generation, that our outward glory in his religion,
shall turn to the utter confusion of many in this Land. For if it be (as it is
most true) that they who honor GOD, he shall honor them; and they who
contemn his worship, shall be brought to ignominy and shame. How can our
feined profession work otherways, when the Doctrine of Christ his Evangell,
whereof men will so babble in their idle talking, is so profaned and abused in
their daily life and conversation: So that the name of that good God, who has
so meruelously and mercifully in-lightned this nation above others, with the
knowledge of his undoubted truth, by our licentious living, being trod
underfoot, his name is evil spoken of by our occasion amongst the Papists,
and other enemies of the truth, as it was amongst the Gentiles, by occasion of
the evil lives of the Jews in their captivity; as the Prophet EZECHIEL here
cited by our Apostle does testify of them. And is it not Ezech. 36
a most unworthy thing, that they who have received glory and honor from
God, as our unthankful Nation have, in granting us so great light, denied to
other mighty Kingdoms of the earth, to render again such graceless payment,
as so to dishonor his holy name. The Lord grant, that at least, so many as
are appointed for his heavenly kingdom, may speedily repent with ZACCHEVS; and
the rest, at least, be not inferior to IVDAS, who restored that which he had
most sacrilegiously taken, in betraying his Master the Lord Jesus our Savior.
To whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be all honor and praise for ever.

FINIS.

