A NEW TREATISE OF THE RIGHT RECKONING OF YEARS, AND AGES of the World, and
men's lives, and of the estate of the last decaying age thereof, this 1600.
year of Christ, (Erroniouslie called a year of Iubilee) which is from the
Creation, the 5548. year. Containing sundry singularities, worthy of
observation, concerning courses of times, and revolutions of the Heaven, and
reformations of Kalendars, and Prognostications: with a discourse of Prophecies
and signs, preceding the latter day, which by many arguments appears now
to approach. With a godly admonition in the end, upon the words of the Apostle,
to redeem the time, because the days are evil.

By M. ROBERT PONT, and aged Pastor in the Kirk of Scotland.

The heads are set down in certain Propositions, in the Page following.

LVKE. 17. As it was in the days of Noe, so shall it be in the days of the
Son of man

EDINBVRGH PRINTED BY ROBERT WALDE-GRAVE, PRINter to the Kings Majesty. Anno
1599. Cum Priuilegio Regio.

The propositiones and heads to be handled in this Treatise.
1. THat the most sure reckoning of the ages of the world, is by Sabbathes or
weeks of years, and that they who count without respect thereof, are in an
error, and that by just account this 1600. year of Christ, is from the
beginning of the world, the 5548. year. 2 That this year of Christ, 1600. by
right reckoning, is neither a Sabbaticall year, nor yet a year of Iubilee:
and that the true Iubilee of Christianes is already accomplished: with
detection of the abuse of the counterfaited Jubilees holden at Rome. 3 That the
Iubilee of the Papisticall Romanistes, neither does rightly counterfaite the
Jews, neither the Seculare years of the ancient Romans. And of diverse
manners of reckoning the ages of the World, and of men's lives. 4 That in our
time, the signs and revolutiones of the heaven are changed and remooved from
the old accustomed places: And therefore the vulgar Prognosticators
reckoning, by the old rules are in an error. 5 That the Julian or Roman
Kalendare, might receive an easier reformation, and that the late attempted
reformation thereof, is not well taken up, but gives occasion of error in
reckoning. 6 That there is a merveilous sympathy of periodes of times, in
reckoning by seuens, and by Sabbatical years, and of the manifold mysteries of
the number of seven. 7 That there is an appearant dangerous alteration to fall
out this year, and within few years hereafter, and of the Prophecies and
signs declaring to us, the world to be near an end. 8 An admonition to all
men to prepare themselves, and to redeem the time because the days are evil.
TO THE RIGHT REVEREND^ NOBLE LORD, ALEXANDER SEYTON, L. Vrquhard and Fyvie,
President in the Senate of Justice, and Provest of Edinburgh, etc. All health
and felicity in Christ.
YOur Lordshippes gentle humanity toward all honest and well-hearted men, and
namely, toward me, since my first acquaintance, has moved me, to dedicate
to your honor, this part of the fruit of my studies, knowing, that amongst
the rare Mecenases of this Land, your name is with the highest rank, under his
Majesty to be mentioned. The first cause (I confess) that moved me to
publish this Treatise in our English tongue, was to dissuade the too curious
conceits of certain men, desirous to be at Rome this approaching 1600. year
commonly called a year of Iubilee, whereof they should receive no profit, but
rather damage, with loss of time and expenses. For your L. knows well enough
the manners of Rome, and (as I am persuaded) allows not of that pompose
superstition: yet if your L. will take pains (not being fashed with more
weighty matters) to read this whole discourse, I trust you shall find other
heads, whereof you shall like very well, that have troubled the heads of
learned men, and not been so exactly found out. Wishing your L. to accept of
this small token of my good favor toward your honor, and to accept of me
amongst the clientele of your friendship, wherefore God-willing, ye shall not
find me unworthy. To whose almighty protection, I commit your L. This last
of October. 1599.

Your L. ever ready to power in God. ROBERT PONT.

TO THE READERS.
HAVing in hand a more large work^ concerning controllment and examination of
times, by occasion of this incident 1600. year of Christ, which is reckoned by
the Papists and others, applauding to their superstition, to be a year of
Iubilee; I thought good to prevent that error, by this little Treatise:
discevering thereby the vanity of diverse men of this I Will, and of others far
cuntries, who with great los of time and hazard, not only of their substance
and lives, but also of their souls and consciences, mind to visit that Idol
the Pope, and to be present in Rome, only to see his year of Iubilee: falsely
being counterfaited to the imitation of the Jubilees of the Jews, but indeed
derogatory to the true Iubilee, and spiritual liberty purchased unto us by
our Savior Christ. And for-as-much as this instante year is the end of a
great Period of time, to wit, sixteen hundredth years, from Christ his
nativitie, wherein there appears diverse great mutationes, to fall out, as well
in the estate of Religion, as in civil affairs and common wealths: I have
herewith, not only discovered diverse erroures, in reckoning of times, and
ages of the World, and labored to find out the right reckoning, but also
touched the revolution of the heaven, and reformation of Kalendars and
Prognostications, and declared my judgment, concerning the Prophecies and
signs of the latter day, appearing now shortly to approach. If any be not
satisfied with the brevitie of this Treatise, I re^^itte them to my more ample
discourse, to be set out in Latin (if GOD grant me ability and time) wherein
the proof of these propositiones, with other matters of the like arguments,
will be contained at large.

Read, learne-well, and try,
Then judge advisedly.
OF THE DECAYING ESTATE OF THE world this instante, 1600. year of Christ.
FIRST PROPOSITION.
That the most sure reckoning of the age of the world, is by Sabbath's of
years; and they that count, not considdering the same, are in an error; and
that by just account this 1600. year from Christ his birth, is from the
beginning of the world, the 5548. year.

IN The beginning (as the Spirit of God records by MOSES) after that the
Lord in six days, Genesis 2. (...)
had created the Heaven and Earth, with all the furniture thereof, He rested
upon the seventh day; Therefore he blessed it, and hallowed it. Exodus 2^. 11.
This is also repeated in the fourth Commandemente, for the perpetual
observation of that day; and because the number of seven, by that reason is a
sacred number, and most meet for all kind of reckoning: It was ordained also
in the law, that amongst the people of God, Leuit. 2^.
every seventh year should be holden holy: wherein the land should rest from
labor; so that therein there should neither be sowing of corns nor cutting of
Vine-yardes: That liberty should be granted unto servantes, and that it
should be called a year of rest unto the Lord. And by like reason it was also
institute, that the Israelites should number unto them seven Sabbathes of
years, containing 49. years; and immediately in the beginning of the 50. year
thereafter, the trumpet of a Iubilee should be blown, the 10. day of the
seventh Month (whereon fell the solemnity of reconciliation) proclayming
liberty to all the inhabitants of the land, so that every man might return
to his own possession; as at more length is set forth by MOSES in the law.
Now, albeit that the law specifyeth, that these Sabbaticall years, and
Jubilees should be kept by the people of Israel, when they were come in the
Land which the Lord was to give them, and obtayn rest therein (because they
could not well keep the same before that time) yet the reason of this sacred
reckoning, proceeding by the number of sevens, has a ground in the natural
Law, which was before the written Law of MOSES, and the ensample of GOD
himself, who was before all Laws. And thereby, we may well gather, that this
Sabbaticall reckoning, has respect even to the beginning of the world; and is
to be counted even from that first Sabbath, wherein the Lord rested from all his
works. So that as God rested the seventh day of creation, in like manner, the
Sabbaticall years, and years of Iubilee, should proceed from that beginning:
For MOSES himself, who wrote the holy history, from the creation of the
world to his days, knew well enough, the just reckoning of these Sabbaticall
years, and by the Spirit of Prophecy, also he knew what time the people
should obtain peaceable rest and possession of the Land of Chanaan, that then
they might begin to reckon by these Sabbatical years and years of Iubilee. For
an evidence whereof, we find by just reckoning, which hereafter is to be
set down, that the 6. year of the government of IOSVA, wherein the
Israelites obtained peaceable possession of the Land, the same being divided
amongst them, was a Sabbatical year: and also the complete 49. year of a
Iubilee: So that from the creation, unto that time, there will be 357. Sabbathes
of years, and 51. Jubilees, And the next year thereafter (which was the 7.
year of IOSVA) will be found a just beginning, from the which forward, the
people reckoned both their Sabbaticall years, and years of Iubilee: whereupon
it follows, that this manner of counting, by Sabbaticall years, is the most
sure reckoning of the years and ages of the World, and may well be deduced and
brought to this present year, commonly counted the 1600. from the birth of
Christ. In the which reckoning, we have to proceed after this manner. First
taking an fixed year out of the Scripture, being surely a Sabbaticall year,
for an fixed stay or ground: and then reckoning from the same back, to the
beginning of the World: and like wise forward, to the year of the Nativitie
of Christ; and so consequently, to this present year. These stays or roots
of time, in Greek are called Epoche, and in Latin, Era temporum. And we
shall take the ground thereof for our present reckoning out of the 28. chap. of
the Prophet JEREMY, where he reckons the first year of K. Zedekiah (wherein
Hananiah the false Prophet, prophesied against him) to be the 4. year of
Sabbath or week of years. So that the 4. year of Zedekiah by his reckoning, was
a Sabbatical year, and also the 11. year. Next, we have to remember, that the
cou^ting of these Sabbatical years, after the Law of Moses is from the tenth
day of the seventh Hebrew Month, called Tishri, which answers for the most
part to our September; and not from January, which begins our year: By
reason whereof, the one half of the Sabbaticall year preceedeth the beginning
of our year, and the other half, or little more, follows after. Therefore
it is, that some reckoning with the Jews, from Tishri, or September, count a
year more then others, that reckon from January. But because the count made
from January, comprehends the most part of the Sabbaticall year, I. with
the most number of Christian reckoners follow it. Thirdly, by this reckoning,
we suppose the World to have been created in this seventh Month called
Tishri, which then probably was the first Month of the year: albeit it was
institute thereafter, at the departing of the Israelites out of Egypt; that
Nisan, Exodus 1^.
or the Month of Abib (aunswering for a great part to our March) should be
the first Month. Now, coming to our count, let us take the elleventh year
of ZEDEKIAH (which being a Sabbaticall year, was called the year of
desolation, because from it begouth the captivity of Babylon) and let it be
the ground of our reckoning. That year (I say) counting back, was the 3360.
year, from the creation of the world, which being divided by seavens, has for
the quotient number (as the Arithmetickes term it) 480. Sabbathes of years,
and no superabundant od years. And to prove historicallie, this to be a just
reckoning of the years of the World, by particular count of the Scripture,
we have first from the creation, Gene 6. 7. 11. 12. 15.
to the flood of NOAH: 1656 years. Then from the flood, to the promise made to
ABRAHAM, That to Exodus 12.
367. years. And from the departing of the Israelits out of Egypt 430. Gal. 3.
years. And from the departing to the buylding of the Temple by SOLOMON 480, 1.
King. 4.
years: And last, from the buylding of the Templ^, to the elleventh year of
ZEDEKIAH 427. years: The whole sum of these years collected, come justly to
3360. years. Now to try other reckonings, which have not respect to
Sabbaticall years not to be right, let us take for example, the supputation
of them, who suppose ABRAHAM to have been borne the 130. year of TERAH his
father, (and not as the Scripture speaks) in the 70. year. By that count we
must add to the former reckoning, 60. years more. And so the 11. year of
ZEDEKIAH, would be from the creation the 3420. year: which years, being
divided by seavens, there will remain after the division, containing 488.
Sabbathes of years, 4. superfluous and odd years. And so aggreeth not that
the 11. year of ZEDEKIAH, should be a Sabbaticall year, as I have proven it to
be by reckoning of the Prophet JEREMY. An other example. Supposing, as some
others do, that the children of Israel remained in Egypt, the whole space of
430. years, whereas by our former count (which may be verifyed by Scripture)
their remaining there, was only 215. years. By this their rekconing, we must
add other 215 years to our former count, and so the 11. year of ZEDEKIAH
would be the 3575. year, from the beginning of the world. Now dividing the
number by seven, there will remain after the division of 510. Sabbathes of
years, 5. odd years, whereby we may understand that reckoning not to be
right. The like we may perceive in all other reckonings, that bring not the
11. year of ZEDEKIAH, to a just Sabbaticall year, with out any superfluous
odd years. And so for the back reckoning of years, to the beginning of the
world, and from it, to the 11, year of Zedekiah, we have not only the just
reckoning of Sabbaticall years, but also the Scri^^ures for our warrant. And
for further confirmation, the agreement of the Sabbatical years, and years of
Iubilee, with the 6. year of Joshua, from the which, the Israelites made that
reckoning as was declared before. That year being from the Creation, the 2499.
year. As also, by this our count, the year of the promise made to Abraham
being of the world, the 2023. will be found a Sabbaticall year. And likewise the
year of the birth of Moses, being the 2373. year. And this much for the
back-reckoning. Now to count forward, from this our stay of time, to (...),
the 11. year of Zedekiah, being from the creation, the 3360. year: first we
shall add thereto, the 70. years of the captivilie of Babylon (which we
reckon from the 11. year of Zedekiah, being the year of desolation) and so
there will be 3430. years, from the beginning of the World. The which years,
we shall take for our second stay or root of reckoning, to wit, the first
year of the reign of Cyrus; wherein liberty was proclaimed to the people to
return, this 3430. year of the world, divided by seavens hathin the quotient
490. Sabbathes, or weeks of years, leaving no odd years. And the quotient
again, being packed by seavens, has justly 70. Jubilees of years, and there
remain no odd years, nor odds weeks of years. So this 3430. year of the
world is a most per^fite stay of time, and root or ground to reckon upon. And
has as many Weeks of years, as the 70. weeks mentioned in Daniel (whereof
we are to speak) have of years, that is, 490. which laketh not a mystery.
Then to go forward with this our second staying of time, I hold with some of
the best learned, that from this first year of Cyrus, to the Nativitie of
Christ, are 518. years, and from the creation of the World, 3948. years, by
adding to 3430. these 18 years. And so the year immediately preceding the
birth of our Savior Christ, to be a Sabbatical year, containing in the
q^otient 524. weeks of years, and leaving no odd years. Now to prove the
forward reckoning to be right, we shall take two warrandes out of the
Scripture, the one out of the ninth Chapter of Daniel, and the other out of the
^. Chapter of John his Revelation. As to the former out of Daniel, it was
revealed to him by the Angel that talked with him, that 70. weeks of years
were determined, or (as the Hebrew word properly signifies) decided and cut
in parts concerning Danie^l his people, and his holy City: And thereafter the
Angel divides these 70. weeks, in seven weeks, and 62. weeks, and
finally in one week. It is out of question, that this Prophecy is meant of the
returning of the people of Israel, from the captivity of Babylon, and of the
building again of the City of Jerusalem, after the captivity, and it cannot
be without a special cause, that the Angel divided the first seven weeks of
years, from the 62. weeks, and finally speaks, of the last week of the
seaventy, by the self. I therefore thus take it up, that as there was four
diverse liberties granted to the people, at four several times, so this
prophecy has respect to them all, and divides the time according thereto.
The first liberty was granted by Cyrus, in the first year of his reign, over
the Babylonians, where of mention is made in the first of Ezra. The second
liberty to proceed in building of the Temple (which work was impeded a
certain time) was given by Da^^^^, called Longimanus, whom Ezra in his fourth
Chapter names King of Persia. The third and fourth liberties, were granted by
Artaxerxes the Great, the one to Ezra, and the other to Nehemia. As we read
in Ezra the 7. and in Nehemiah, the 2. Chapter. Now where it is said in
Daniel, that from the going out of the Commandment, to bring again the
people, and to build Jerusalem unto Messiah the Prince; there should be seven
weeks, and 62. weeks, and that after 62. weeks, Messiah should be slain,
etc. Of these weeks, I take the first seven to begin immediately after the
first liberty, granted by Cyrus to the people to return, and to end at the
6. year of Darius, who in the second year of his reign, gave new liberty to
build the Temple, which was finished in his sixth year. And this is called the
going forth of the commandment, to bring again the people, containing the
space of 49, years, which make an Iubilee. The other 62* weeks of years, I
take to begin between the two liberties granted by Artaxerxes, the one to
Ezra, in the 7. year, and the other to Nehemia, in the 20. year of his
reign: To wit, the beginning of these 62. weeks, to be the 14. year of the
King Artaxerxes, and to end the 28. year of our Savior Christ his age. The
which two last liberties, concern the maintenance of the service of GOD, in
the Temple of Jerusalem, being already builded, and the building again of the
City and Walls thereof, by moyen of Nehemiah, and his assisters: For the
Angel makes a distinction, between the bringing again of the people, and
bulding of the Temple, ascribing there to the first seven weeks; and between
the building again of the City, and inhabiting therein, which he ascribes
to the other 62. weeks. Then, I say, having the beginning and endings of
these weeks so distinguished* there will be found an intervall of time
between the end of the seven weeks, and beginning of the 62. weeks,
containing the space of 63. years, that is, 9. weeks of years, the which
space and interruption of years, is most probably meante by the Angel, where
he says, seven weeks, and 62. weeks ^ere decided or cut in parts,
concerning the bringing again of the people on the one part, and the building
of the City and Walls thereof, on the other part: so that there is a
discontinuance of time, between the one and the other. As toward the last
week of these 70 weeks of Daniel, it is to be reckoned from the 28. year of
Christ his age, as may be taken up by the text, wherein it is said, that after
62. weeks, Messia^ should be slain. And a little thereafter, that he should
confirm the covenante with many for one Week: and in the midst of the
Week, should make the Sacrifice and oblation to cease. The which thing,
Christ accomplished indeed, by offering his own precious body, in sacrifice,
about the midst, or near the end of this last week of Daniel, which ends
in the 35. year of Christ his age. And as to the confirmation of the covenant,
it is meant (no doubt) of the Preaching of the Gospel, which he begouth near
the midst of this last week, about the 31. year of his age. Now to come to
the year before the birth of Christ, we must take off 35. years; which will
be five weeks of years: and so there will remain of the 70. weeks of
Daniel, 65. weeks, which make 455. years, and add thereto, the 63. years,
interlaced between the 7. weeks, and 62. weeks: The sum of years then,
from the first year of Cyrus, or from the captivity to Christ, will come
justly to 518, years, as I set down in the beginning of this reckoning, and
add these 518. years, to 3430. years, which was our ground and second stay
of time: The whole sum of years, from the creation, to the birth of Christ,
are 3948. years. Now we have further to verify this forward reckoning,
from the captivity to Christ to be just, and agreeable to the truth, which I
sha^^ do, both by reason and count of Sabbatical years, and years of Iubilee;
and also by Scripture, and best approoved Histories of these times. First, for
Sabbaticall reckoning, it is manifest that Daniel has respect thereto, in the
count of his 70, weeks, which make 10 Jubilees of years count. Now it was
proven before, that the 3430. year of the World, ends in an Iubilee, to
wit, counting 70. Jubilees from the beginning, and 490, Sabbathes of years,
which is the same number that Daniell comprehends in his 70. weeks, to wit,
490 single years, so that there been as many years in this Periode of
Daniell, as were weeks of years from the beginning of the World, to the
beginning of his reckoning. And seeing he counts by Sabbathes of years and
Jubilees, his count upon 490. years, must needs follow immediately the other
reckoning of 490 weeks of years, from the beginning of the world: and so must
proceed from the 3430. year of the World, and consequently, from the first
year of Cyrus. Secondly, we have to remember the second authority which I
alleged out of the 8. Chapter of the Revelation, for the second warrant of
Scripture, to confirm this our reckoning. In that Chapter, mention is made of
seven Angels, to whom seven Trumpets were given by God to blow, and to
declare things that were to fall out in the World thereafter. The blowing of
Trumpettes (being figuratively spoken) has respect to the blowing of the
Trumpets, at the end of every Iubilee, as is mentioned in the Law, the 25 ^
Chapter of Leviticus, whereby it may be gathered, that the distinct times
wherein these Trumpets, figuratively were blown, (that is, the Angels and
Ministers of God declared, his will concerning the estate of the World, and his
Church therein, after every Trumpet blowing) were years of Iubilee: For
Iubilee takes the name from Trumpets, and we know that the Preaching of the
word of God is also figured by blowing of Trumpets, Esaias 27. and 58. And in the
beginning of that 8. Chapter of the Revelation, it is declared, that at the
opening of the seventh seal of the closed book of the counsel of GOD, the
first Angel prepared him to blow his Trumpet. Now, the opening of the seven
seals of the Book, signifies (as all godly writers expone it) the revelation
and declaration of the hid counsels of GOD, which was when he sent his beloved
Son in the world, first to Preach the Gospel by himself, and his Apostles,
and thereafter, by the lawful Pastors and Ministers of his Word, declarers
of his holy will unto the world: the space of opening of these seals, as they
were seven in number, so every Seal opening, comprehends the space of
seven years. And the first seavent year of the first Seal, is the last week
of the 70. weeks of Daniel, called, The fullness of time by Paul: Gal. 4.
wherein the Gospel begouth first to be preached. From the which counting by
seauens; we find the opening of the seauent Seal, to fall upon the 71, year,
after the birth of Christ, as likewise the blowing of the first Trumpet: and
consequently, the 70. year, to complete a Iubilee of years: whereanent, who
would know further, let them read that learned and divine work of JOHN NAPER,
in the exposition of the Revelation, the 5. 6. 7. 8. and 9. propositions. Now
having found the 70. year of Christ, to be the 49. and last year of Iubilee:
let us count back from the 71. year of Christ, to the first year of Cyrus,
by Jubilees, and we shall find by our former reckoning, the space of 588.
years, which make 12. Jubilees compleete, and leave no odd years. For the
70. weeks of Daniel, make ten Jubilees, and the 63. years interjected between
the 7. weeks, and 62. weeks, together with 35. years, that are between the
end of the weeks of Daniel, and the 71. year of Christ, being joined together,
mak^ 98. years, and two just Jubilees. So that they are 12 Jubilees in the
whole, from the 3430. year of the world, to the 71. year of Christ. And from
the beginning of the World, to that 71. year 82. Jubilees: Yet further to
make this reckoning good by Histories of the time: we find by count of the
Kings of the Persian and Babylonian Monarchy, by Megasthenes (corruptly called
Metasihenes) the Persian Historiographer, whereunto Philo the the Jew, in his
Chronology aggreeth, counting by the years of the Hie-Priestes, and
governors of the house of David, to wit, from Iehosua the Hie-Priest, and
Zorobabel Prince of Judah, and first Governor after the Captivity; that
between the first year of Cyrus, and the first year of Alexander the Great,
conqueror of the Persian and Babylonian Empire, were 191. years: Whereof,
49. years are reckoned from the first of Cyrus, to the 6. year of Darius
Long^manus, who was the second that gave liberty to build the Temple, as was
declared of before: For Cyrus reigned 22. years, Assu^rus Pris^us 20. years.
Then there was the inter-reigne of one year: Then add to those 6. years of
Darius, they make up these 49. years. And from the 6. year of Darius
Longimanus, to the 14. of Great Artaxerxes, called Mnemon, are 63. years: thus
reckoned. Darius reigned yet 31. years, Darius Nothus 19. years, add 13. of
Artaxerxes, the sum is 63. years. And from Cyrus, 12 years. So there
rests, from the 13. of Artaxerxes, to Alexander, 79. years thus reckoned.
Artaxerxes, yet reigned 42. years, Artaxerxes Ochus 26. A^ses 4. and Darius
the last, vanquished by Alexander, 6. years. The sum is 79. years
completing the 191. years before mentioned. Now least any should derogate the
authority of Megasthenes and Philo, in counting of these years of the Persian
Monarchy: I will affirm (for my part) them to be most authentic of all that
I have read, whatsoever be said against them. And that they are to be prefer^ed
to all the Greek authors, who are of light credit, and full of Fables; as I
intend to declare at large, in my more ample discourse. For as to Combyses,
whom they make one of the Persian Monarchs, if we read diligently the
latter part of the 10. Chapter of Daniel, we shall find him to have been
Prince of Persia only, who ruled that Kingdom in place of his father Cyrus,
he being occupied in the Scythian wars. And that this Cambyses was an enemy
to the Church of God: And as for Xerxes, whom they count for an other, albeit
he invade Grecia, with an huge army, yet we read never that he did reign in
Babylon, but in Persia, in the days of Darius Longimanus. It rests then, to
go forward, with the years between Alexander and Christ: And by our count,
they must be 327. years, which are to be reckoned after this manner. From the
beginning of the Empire of Alexander in Asia, after that he vanquished Darius,
to the beginning of the Kingdom of the Greeks, by Seleucus Nicanor, after the
reckoning of the Jews, are 18. years, as Josephus Scaliger proves in his fifth
book, De emendatione temporum. And from the beginning of the kingdom of the
Greeks, to the Macchabees, are 145. years, as we have in the first book of the
Macchabees, the second Chapter. And the Macchabes ruled, as witnesses
Josephus, in his Antiquities 127. years. And after them, King Her^de reigns
^7. years complete, near the end of whose reign, Christ was borne. Join
those years together, and they will make up, from the beginning of the Empire
of Alexander to Christ, just 327. years: And adding thereto, 191. years,
between Cyrus and Alexander, the sum will be 518. years, according to our
first count. The same may be prooven by the Astronomicall calculation of
Piolemee, who in the end of his third Book, reckoueth from the decease of
Alexander, unto the reign of Augustus Caesar 294. years. And he counted the
beginning of Augustus his reign, from the time that he begouth to reign
himself alone, after his victory against Antonius: who slew himself in
Alexandria, So we must separate the years that Augustus ruled with Antonius,
from the rest of his Empire, which were fourteen years, as Josephus and the
Roman Histories bear record^ and he reigned 56. years. Now Christ was
borne in the 42. year of his reign: So joining 27 years of the Empire of
Augustus, and 6. year of Alexander, his Empire, to the 294. mentioned by
Ptolemee: The su^me from the beginning of Alexander to Christ, will be 327.
years, as of before. I have insisted the longer upon this reckoning, because
of the great variety amongst writers, namely, concerning the Monarchy of the
Persianes and Kings thereof: Alwaise I think, I have proven sufficiently our
reckoning by Sabbatical years, and years of Iubilee to be just: yet there
remains one scruple; Lib. 4. ^ 26
where as Josephus writes in his Antiquities, that that King Herod besieged
Jerusalem in the third year of his reign, and that then there was a great
scarsitie of victualles, because of the Sabbaticall year: which appears not
to stand with our count, to make the 37. year of Herod, to be a Sabbaticall
yearte: But we must understand, that Josephus means not that the third
year of Herod was a Sabbaticall year, but the second year which preceeded,
which made the scarsity in the third year following. So our counth oldeth
just, that the ^7. year of Herod, was a Sabbaticall year; at the end
whereof, Christ was borne. For Herod lived till about the Passover thereafter,
making the beginning of his reign, to have been in January, when he was made
King at Rome. To this also aggreeth the count of the great Cycle of the Jews,
who reckon the year that our Savior Christ was borne, to have bin the first
of their Semitah, that is, of the Sabbaticall week. Now then we have the just
reckoning of the years of the World unto Christ, to be 3948. years. And this
year of Christ 1600. to be from the beginning, the 5548. years. In the which
count of years (albeit by an other manner of reckoning) I agree with the
learned Josephus Scaliger, and some others more ancient then he. And as to
others, I find only Erasmus Reynoldus, Peucerus and P. Crusius, with some
others that follow their reckoning, to have had some apparent respect to the
Sabbaticall years, counting to Christ, 3962. years, but they will be two
weeks of years, over our calculation, and so will not agree in the years of
Iubilee. Others, whosoever they be, that hold no count of the Sabbaticall
years, are further out of the way, as they that reckone to the birth of
Christ, 3944. years, leave odd after division by seavens, three years. And
likewise they that count 3974. years. And so is to be seen in others, who
commonly are further from the mark, in not following the direction of
Sabbaticall years, which being thus justly taken up, make a strong bulwark
against the obstinate Jews. For it being known by the weeks of Daniel, that
the just count thereof, ends about the time when Christ suffered upon the
Croce, they are convict, will they, or will they not to know, that he is, of
whom the Angel speaks unto Daniel, who was appointed of God his Father, (as
the text bears) to finish iniqui^^^, to seal vpsinnes, and reconcile
wickedness, and to seal up visiones and prophecies, bringing in ever lasting
righteousness; and consequently, he is the most holy anointed, and that
true Me^ias promised to their fathers. And that in vain that miserable Nation
so many hundredth years looks for an other.

SECOND PROPOSITION.
That this present year of Christ, 1600, by right reckoning, is neither a
Sabbaticall year, nor yet a year of Iubilee. And that the true Iubilee of
Christians, is already accomplished: With a detection of the abuse of the
counter faited Jubilees holden at Rome.

NOt without weighty causes, have I so long insisted upon Sabbaticall reckoning
of years: For thereby more sure way is found out, to come to the right acou^t
of years, and progres of times, from the beginning of the world, unto the last
decaying age thereof, then by any other common manner of reckoning. And besides
that, it is most facile and easy. And we know there is nothing more
necessary for the knowledge of Histories, and diverse estates of the World,
nor the right reckoning of years and times, wherein the same with the
circumstances thereof fell out, that thereby men may be led to understand the
antiquity of every thing; as also by conferring time with time, may know the
difference of the manners of men, of one age from an other: without the which,
not only great darkness and obscurity, both in civil government and
actiones of men's lives, and in things concerning the estate of religion may
ensue. And that which is worse, many may fall in that inconvenient, wherein
Aristotle, and the Epicurians have fallen. For through ignorance of the
antiquity of times, he esteemed the world to have been from all eternity,
and these (to wit, the Epicutians) counted the nature of all things to have
bin by chance, and by, I wot not what, a concurrence of motes and invisible
bodies. This reckoning also, resolves many doubts, wherein writers are
involved, that have no regard thereto, and oft-times count by guess,
especially in reckoning of years, from the captivity of Babylon, to Christ:
and the right beginning and ending of the weeks of Daniel, whereinto many
learned men have been greatly troubled; laboring by a just count to agree the
Histories of times there with: which cannot be, unless there be certain
weeks of years, interjected between the beginning and end thereof. And
thirdly, I have used this kind of Sabbatical reckoning, because one of the
chief purposes, that presenttie I have in hand, is to discover the vanity and
ignorance of the Papisticall reckoners, concerning their counterfaited years
of Iubilee, by a preposterous imitation of the law of Moses. For the which
cause, it is expedient to have the exact knowledge of Sabbaticall years: For by
them the years of Iubilee are reckoned and found out. For thus lays Moys^s:
Thou shall also number unto thee seven Sabbathes of years, even seven times
seven years: (...)
and the space of seven Sabbathes of years, will be unto thee nine and
forty year. Then thou shall cause to blow the Trumpet of the Iubilee, in
the tenth day of the seventh Month: To wit, in the beginning of the fiftieth
year, which was commanded to be hallowed, and to be a year of Iubile^ unto
the people: But is not so to be understood, that every Iubilee contained full
fifty years, but that fifty year wherein the Iubilee was proclaimed, was
also the first year of the next Iubilee; for otherwise the reckoning by weeks
of years, should have been confounded, and could not be holden in just
count; which is contrary to the mind of the Lawgiver. And yet the fiftieth
year, by a common Phrase of speaking, was called the year of Iubilee. As the
Olympiades of Greece, albeit they contained but the space of four years, are
called by Pindarus, and other Poets, the spectacles or vassallages of five
years, because they returned every fifth year; And we commonly call the space
of an week, eight days, albeit it contains but seven. So it is evident,
that the right count of Jubilees, proceeds from every 49. to other 49.
years. Now let us considder the bastard Jubilees, begotten and feyned by the
Popes of Rome, whereunto they have no respect to Sabbaticall years, whereof
Jubilees (as the law required) are made up. But Pope BONIFACE, the S. Pope of
that name, the first father and inventer thereof, in the year of Christ, 1300.
took the whole compleit number of every hundredth year, containing twice
fifty, for his Iubilee. And CLEMENT the 6. reduced the same to every fifty
year compleete. And after him, PAVLE the 2. to every 25. year. And finally,
JULIUS the 2. to every tenth year. Ever diminishing the years; to augment
their Antichristian superstition, and the vent of their ungodly wares. So
unstable and changeable is the estate of that usurped Kingdom. This then is
the first error of those counterfaited Jubilees, concerning the times of the
appointment thereof: That they are nothing like in reckoning, to the Jubilees
of the Law, which those Apish juglares pretend to imitate. And as concerning
this 1600. year, from the Nativitie of Christ, whether we count by the number
and date of these years, or by the years from the beginning of the World, it
will neither be found a Sabbatical year, nor yet a year of Iubilee. For
dividing 1600. by seavens, it leaves 4. odd years remaining over 228. weeks
of years: And dividing again this quotient by 7. it leaves 4. od weeks of
years, above and attour 32. Jubilees. The like may be also found, if we shall
divide the whole years from the creation of the world, to this present. For
5548. being parted by seavens, leaves four odd years. And the quotient
again, which is, 792. being divided by seavens, after 113. Jubilees, leaves
one od week of years. And so the appointed times, of these new-invented
Jubilees, are no-wise rightly reckoned to counterfaite the Jubilees of the
Law. The second and greater error is, that they make their reckoning from a
wrong ground, to wit, from the Nativitie of Christ: whereas, if any such
reckoning were to be made, it should be taken from the year of the suffering and
death of our Savior Christ; to the which, Daniel reckons his Sabbaticall
years. For thereby Christ accomplished the true Iubilee, putting end to all
the preceding figurative Jubilees, and purchasing unto the faithful full
liberty and remission, from the Spiritual debt of sin, which was signified
by the freedom and liberty, granted by the Jubilees of the Law. And the
Popes pretend to do the like, by their blasphemous indulgences and Pardones;
which is the third and worst error of all: So that others might be borne
with, if this followed not. But when the substance, the Satanicall invention,
and false ground, whereupon these Jubilees are set up, is truly considdered:
There is no-well instructed Christian heart, but must needs abhor the
impiety and abuse thereof. And first let us make a conference between these
and the old Jubilees of the Jews. The year of Iubilee of the Jews, was
called the year of remission, because in it, all debtes were remitted, and the
Lands that were sold, returned to their former owners. These things had the
express commandment of God for their warrant. The Papisticall Jubilees have
no ground of the word of God, but have been lately invented, but 300. years
ago; by Pope BONIFACE the 8. a man of extreme arrogancy and cruelty, as a
tryumphe of his pride, when the Popedom was at the hight of tyranny. This was
also he, that set out the Sext book of Decretales of the Cannon law: and as is
testify ed in his life, regisirate in the same book, he obtained the Papacy,
by wicked deceit and circumvention of one CELESTINE a simple man. The pretense
of this BONIFACE, in the first institution of his Iubilee, was under color to
dispense his Pardones; but indeed, to make many people resort to Rome, and
Princes and Great men, to adore the beast, and kiss his filthy feet. For it
is reported in the History, that there were gathered thereby unto Rome, such a
multitude of people, that hardly might men pass through the City, and ruipes
thereof, albeit being most large. The Jubilees also in the policy of the
people of Israel, were institut for weighty causes, and for a great benefit:
For besides that, they figured our Spiritual liberty, which we have by
Christ, and were an instigation to the people more diligently to Sanctify
their Sabbathes; by them also the fields and possessiones of every man, were
reserved to their heirs: The licencious liberty of prodigal sellers, and the
avarice of greedy buyars was restrained, because they behooved to restore that
which they had bought, at the year of Iubilee. The Papistical Jubilees, to the
contrary are institute, for no good cause, but superstitiouslie, to maintain
the pride and avarice o^ the insatiable Court, and corrupt Church of Rome, and
to cause men exhaust and wast their substance, who vainly make long voyages to
Rome to see that Idol the Pope false hope of remission, by his Indulgences;
albeit they never learn to mortify the sinful lusts of the flesh, that they
may live a licenceous life, without controlment: And so ever to proceed from
worse to worse. For as the profane Poet says, Omnes licentia deteriores
sumus: Overgreat liberty and license, makes us all to become worse and
worse. Now where some of his Sophistes say, that these are only Canonical
pains inflicted by men, that he remitteth by his Indulgences: His own Canons
testify the contrary, which speak generally of the remission of all sins,
and temporal pains or punishments due for sin: Ex plenitudino potestatis,
that is, fulness of power, which the Pope presumpteously arrogateth to himself.
And supposing these Indulgences were extended only to Canonical pains, or
satisfactions appointed by men; what absurdity is it, to grant the same fully
and indifferently to all persons, by him who never knew the persons, for the
most part to whom they are granted, nor the qualities of their offenses, nor
the quantity or causes of their Injunctions, les nor more, to whom he prete^ds
always falsely to give full remission: neither suffiseth it to say, the Papale
indulgences are given to none but to them that are truly penitent, and
confess their sins. For by that argument, the same might been given to Judas
the traitor, of whom our Savior says, It had been good for him, he had
never been borne. For it cannot be denied but he was truly penitent, and made
public confession of his sin: Yea, and more over, made Papistical
satisfaction therefore; returning again the money which he had wrongeouslie
received. And for the more sure declaration of his repen^ance, he^ finally
hanged himself: But because he had no grace to turn to God by true faith, to
seek mercy, and fi^mly believe to obtain it for Christ his sake: His
repentance availed not. Like as there will be many other desperates, that will
repent and confess their faults, but have no grace to seek mercy at Gods
hand, who has only power to give it, with true faith to obtain the same.
Besides all this, there is a greater impiety (if greater may be) in these
Antichristian Indulgences, whereby this man of sin pretends, to take away
all corrections for sin, not only in the name of Christ and by his blood
(the which, (...)
as John testifies, purges us from all sin) but also in the name and
merits of Peter, Paul, and other Martyrs and Saints; For so speaks his
Canon law: That to the heap of the Thesaurie of Christ's blood, the merits
of the blessed Virgin Marie, and of all the elect: C. V^ige. (...) before
ci^ed.
from the first just man, to the last, are known to be valiable. And what can
be spoken to greater derogation, of the precious blood and merits of Jesus
Christ, then to mingle therewith, the blood and merits of creatures, and
sinful persons, ( For the most just man falls seven times a day, as the
Psalmist testifies) ascribing a part of our salvation, to them who had no
temission of their own sins, but by the blood of Christ only: Whereto
should I further insist, in refelling these and the like blasphemies against
the croce of Christ, which be known well enough, to all them that have ears
to hear the true preaching of his Gospel: Seeing the Popes officiares
themselves, who make vente of his Pardones at Rome, and make their gains in
sheepeskinnes, and pieces of plombe appended thereto, taunt and mock the
receivers of them, holding them for very fools, as they are indeed. For who
is endued with natural judgment, that sees not, that these counterfaited
Indulgences, serve for no other thing, but to mock and deceive the people, to
make merchandise of their souls, and to bring in money to those vagabound
pyke-parles, C Quemadmodum vb. S.
called in their law, Questores indulgentiarum, that is, Collectours of the
money of these Indulgences. What mad stupidity and foolishnes is it then, in
this clear light of Christ's Gospel, to men to hazard themselves with great
dangers, loss of time, and expenses, to raike to Rome, either to behold, or
to be participant of these unworthy wares: For if they do it of blind zeal,
believing them to be of any avail, they are miserably deceived, to the great
hurt of their souls health. And if they do it only of curiosity, to see such
things as they never saw before; they therein declare the lightness and vain
transportation of their minds, not being selted in the true knowledge and fear
of God. For as the common Proverb says, there is neither man nor horse, that
uses to be better of the passing to Rome: And so is seen indeed of many of
them that return from thence.

THIRD PROPOSITION.
That the Iubilee of the Papisticall Romanistes, neither does rightly
counterfaile the Jews, neither the secular years of the ancient Romans. And
of diverse manners of reckoning the ages of the World, and of men's lives: And
that reckoning by hundreths, we are now in the fifty six age.

AS The papal religion in many things is patched and made up, partly of the
old rites and ceremonies of the Jews, and partly of the superstition of the
Gentiles, so counterfaite they by imitation, sometime the one, and sometime the
other; and when they lack the one, they take the other for their ground. So it
is concerning their Jubilees, whereof I have been hitherto speaking: and have
proven already, that their imitation in times, is not according to the
institution of Gods law, promulgate by Moses. Now then they being put from
that ground, may allege, that they having no necessity to observe Moses
law in all points, have appointed the^ Jubilees, after imitation of their
ancient Romans (whose degenerate posterity they are) to wit, that as they had
their stages or plays, which they call their seculare solemnities, every
hundredth year, once in memory of the antiquity of their city: where in it
was proclaimed, by found of Trumpet, that the people of Rome, should see such
pompes and guises, as no man that was then living, ever saw before, neither
should see thereafter. So Pope BONIFACE the eight, did institute his Jubilees,
to be holden every hundredth year, with solemn Proclamation of his Pardones.
Now granting this to be true, as their ground is vain and profane, so
whatsoever is builded thereupon. And yet let us see how happily and
circumspectly these Romanistes imitate the ancient Romans: supposing that
they celebrate their secular solemnities, at the precise end and periode of
every hundredth year. This their ground (I say) is false: For it was the space
of an hundredth and ten years, between every one of the seculare solemnities,
according to the old institution, thereof, which 110. years were composed, of
twenty two of their Lustra, wherein they did lustrate and muster their people:
every Lustrum containing the space of five years, which being 22. make eleven
times ten year: Whereof Horace the Poet, bears witness in his song or ode
entitled Carmen seculare, in these verses:

Certus vndenos d^cies per annos,
Orbis vt cantus referatque ludos.
The sense is.

That certain circula^y space,
Ten times elleven years in a race,
Must bring again the songs and Plays,
At Rome of secular years and days.
So the Papisticall Romanistes, are wrong wrested in their reckoning in this
also. Now it is truth, that albeit this secular Periode of time, containing
the circulare course of an hundredth years, was most diligently observed by the
Romans, for diverse causes. Yet we notwithstanding, for the common reckoning
of an age, may well take the precise number of an hundredth years: Because it
is commonly the longest course of man's life in our days. And because I am
entered in to make mention of ages, I think it good, to discourse a little upon
the ages of the World, and likewise of men's lives. And to declare how many
manner of ways the same are taken: and of the diverse reckoning thereof. For
the which we have to understand, that as al things in this visible world, have
a certain age and continuance of time, so the World it self has the own
age: which being taken generally, signifies, the whole space of the durance
and continuance thereof. Otherwise the age of the World, betokens the
decaying part thereof, as the eeld or age of a man, is called the latter pa^te
of his life. And indeed it may well be said now, that we become to the
decaying part, and latter age of the World. 1, Cor. 10.
For (as the Apostle says) We are they upon whom the ends of the World are
come. 1. Tim. 4.
And in an other place, he calls these our days, the latter times. Now the
age of the World, taken in the former general signification, is divided
again in diverse particular ages, and that by sundry manners of reckoning:
For some distribute the whole ages of the World in three parts: ascribing to
every age 2000. years: Which comes of that common opinion, holden of maine,
and recited, for the saying of the house of Elias (not that great Prophet
Elias, but a certain Rabbin of the Jews so named) that the World should
stand 6000. years, and thereafter should be dissolved. Of the which they
count, 2000, year before the law (called the void time) 2000. under the law,
and 2000. under Christ, which shall be shortened, for the sins of the world,
which are many. There be diverse learned and godly fathers of this opinion:
supposing, that as the world, with all things therein contained, was created
in six days, so the same should endure 6000. years, taking each thousand
year for a day, as it is taken in the second Epistle of Peter, where he
says, That one day before the Lord, is as a thousand years, ^. Pet. 3.
and a thousand years as one day: And amongst others, Augustine writing of
these ages, and dividing them in six, reckons the first age to be from Adam,
to Noah: The 2. from Noah to Abraham: The 3 from Abraham to David: The 4. from
David to the captivity of Babylon: The fifth, from the captivity to Christ:
The sixth and last, under the Kingdom of Christ, unto the end of the World. But
this division not to be equal, it may be evident, by the supputation of
years, contained in the first proposition, and namely, of the last age under
Christ, which now has already endured sixteen hundredth years; and it is not
certain how long the same shall yet further continue. Albeit by all probable
conjectures, the world now appears to draw near an end. Always, I think it
not altogether to be resused, that is alleged of the Jews, of this their
Doctor Elias, who-so-ever he was. For it lacks not a reason, counting 2000.
years before the law. For indeed, from the beginning unto Abraham, with whom
the first covenant was made, and to whom the Law of circumcision was given, we
find to be about the space of 2000. years. And likewise under the law to
Christ, about other 2000. years. And now they lack but 452. years of the last
2000. under Christ. Therefore this authority being brought forth by the Jews
themselves, makes much against them, who will not yet acknowledge the true
Messiah: seeing they have waited in vain for an other Christ; about sixteen
hundredth years, above their ownereckoning. Others there be, that distribute the
ages of the world in four, according to the nature of four kinds of
mettalles. The first they call the golden age, or Golden world, which was the
most ancient and best of all; like as Gold is the chief amongst mettalles.
The second, is next best, the silver age: The third, the age of brass, and the
fourth iron, declyning ay, from better to worse, as the world does indeed. Of
this division of ages, the Poets oftentimes make mention. And the original
thereof, appears well to have been taken from the Prophecy of Daniel, who in
exponing the dream of Nebuchadnetzar, Da^^. (...)
speaks of that great Image, representing the four chief Monarchies of the
world, whereof the head was of Gold, signifying the Kingdom of the
BABYLONIANS: The arms of silver, figuring the Monarchy of the Medes and
Persians: the womb and sides being of Brass, betokens the Macedonian
Monarchy, obtained by great Alexander: The legs of Iron, and feet partly
of Iron, partly of clay, that of the Romans or the feet, as others,
interpret the Kingdom of the Greeks, begun by Seleucus, which being strong
as iron, and noisome against the people of God, become thereafter, mingled with
clay, declyning to weakness and being (...) in the self. And finally, the
Kingdom of Christ did rvse, wholly after destruction of all those Kingdom^s,
shall endure for ever, as at more length is specified in that prophecy. Who
would know more of the four ages, represented by these four metalles, may
read abundantly in Hesiodus and others Poets, Others count the ages of the
World by seavens, after the number of seven Planets, having a certain
periode and revolution amongst themselves, whereof we are to speak more in an
other place. There be others also, that distinguishe the ages of the world,
by the ages of men^ And sundry others use diverse other distributiones of the
ages and times of the world, whereupon I will not now insist. Always I think
the most facill and common division of the ages of the world, is by
thousands, counting in the whole sex, according to the analogy of the sex
days of creation. For to count by the lives and ages of men, has rather a
peculiar respect to the generationes of men, then to the time of the
continuance of the world. So it is more proper to count the ages of the world
by thousands, because of the long continuance thereof, in respect there was
never no man that lived out compleitly a thousand years. But this divisio^ of
the ages of the world by thousands, would appear more proper, if it were
made by equal division of thousands, or at the least, approaching near to
an equality, then as it is commonly parted by great inequality, as was
before recited out of Augustine. There fore it may be divided after this manner:
The first thousand year, counted from the creation; to Noah, albeit it
contains 56. years more. The second millenarie, from the birth of Noah, to
the calling of Abraham, albei^ there be twenty three more. The third milenary,
from Abraham his calling, to the building of the Temple by Solomon, albeit they
be 67. years less. The fourth millenarie, from the Temple building to Christ,
albeit there be fifty two years less. The fifth millenarie, from firist his
nativitie extends it self to his 1052. year^ but but I reckon the same to the
1000. years, when the Antichristian Papale kingdom, did utter the self in
the person of SYLVESTER the second, who by art Magic, and divelrie, made
himself to be promoted Pope The Image of the Roman Empire, being translated a
little before, by Otho the Third, unto the Germans. The sixth millenary,
whereinto now we are, shall take end, when God pleases, if so be the world
shall continue to the end thereof. The ages of the world being thus taken up by
thousands, we may call the first age, The old age, or the Golden, because in
it the world was governed in innocence, in respect of the ages following,
under Saturn, as the Poets record. And if we give credit to the Astrologes,
Saturn is the Planete of quietness and peace: But this age had the end or
the evening, thereof declining to darkness, when the seed of the godly,
mingled themselue with the ungodly, and al kind of wickedness begouth to
abound before the flood. The second age or millenarie, may be called the
renewed age of the world, and the poetical silver age, worse then the first,
but better then others that followed; wherein, after the destruction of
mankind, by that fearful flood, the world was renewed and inhabit again by
Noah, and his sons; and succession, under the benevolent Planete Jupiter; but
the same turned to a great darkness in the end or evening thereof, when the
whole posterity of Noah, for the most part, declyned to Idolatry, Nembroth
begouth to usurp dominion over others, and to be the founder of the first
tyranny in the world. The third millenarie or age, may be termed the age of
the Law, or poetically, the brazen age: Because in it God separated Abraham
from the Idolaters, and gave to him and his posterity, his Oracles, and a
written Law, whereby they should know how to serve him, and write his
commandments in Tables of stone, hard as brass, to declare the heard hearts of
the people of those days. The fourth age or millenary, we may call the age of
the four Monarchies, and the Poetical iron age, because in it were all the
four Monarchies, succeeding one after an other. And then Martial armor made
of iron, troubled the whole world, and subdued it to those impotent dominators.
The fifth millenarie or age, we call the age of Christ, and the returning of the
golden world again. For in it not only external, peace was restored to the
world, under Augustus Caesar, but also peace from heaven, to the conscience and
souls of men; as the Angels in the Nativity of Christ did declare: Whereof,
Virgile the Poet also makes mention, in citing the Oracles of Sibylla, (which
he understands not) in his four Eclogue. The sixth and last age, we may call
the age of Antichrist and his kingdom. For in it both, Gog and Magog is hid
and open Antichristian enemy, to wit, the Pope, and Mahomet, with their
wicked laws, chiefly have troubled the world, and true professors of Christ,
his true religion: But because these are kingdoms of darkness, and not of
light, after the darkness thereof. God in his mercy has made the light of
his Gospel, as the Morning star to shine in our hearts, by which this darkness
is expelled. But the unbelievers hearts are more and more darckned, till the
just judge shall come and put an end to all darkness, whose coming we beseech
the Lord, in his great mercy to hasten. As to insist longer upon these
ages, of the world, or the allegorical analogy thereof, with the six days of
Creation: I think it not expedient, let them that delight therein, read others,
that have discoursed thereupon. This much then for the ages of the world. As to
the ages of men's lives, they are also diversely reckoned. For some there be that
take the fourth part of an hundredth year, which is, twenty five years only
for a man's age; and some take thirty, because man of that age, is able to
become a father: And they refer^^e that which Homer the Poet speaks, (...)
of the age of N^stor that he attained to three ages, to be understood of
thrice thirty years. But the Poet Ovid, understands that place of Homer
otherwise, to wit, of three hundredth years: saying in the person of Nestor,
VIXI Annos bis centum, nunc tertiae viu^tur aetas. (...)

Two hundredth years I have over-past,
Now the third age my life does last.


As indeed it is most probable, to have been so meant by Homer. For in those
days it was no rare thing to see men live thrice thirty years. Others they
be, that distribute the ages according to men's life-times, by seavens; but
after diverse manners. For in the 90. Psalm, whereof the title is ascribed to
Moses, the common age of man's life is counted to be ten-times seven, that is,
seaventy years. And the cause why the ages be reckoned by seavens, is, by
reason that seven is a perfect number, whereof has been spoken largely of
before: And commonly, every seventh year, some notable change or accident
falls out in man's life: And namely, at the age of nine times seven, which
make, threescore three years, called the Climacterick year, which many count
for a fatal year, and term of man's life in our days. Others (as
Hippocrates) count seaven-times seven years, for a man's age, which makes 49.
years, conform to the Iubilee of the Jews. Yet notwithstanding, these other
reckonings, if we shall compare the ages of the world, with the longest age of
man's life, the most perfect and convenient reckoning, is to count by
hundreths: ascribing 100. year in a full and perfect number to every age: for
that is the farthest term of man's life, that we can now reckon to. Albeit a
few men in some cuntries live longer: And it appears well to be so taken in
the Scripture. For (as it is written in Geneses) when God showed unto Abraham
by Orackle, That his seed should be a stranger in a Land that was not their
own: (...). 15.
The space of four hundredth years thereafter, he exponeth it of four
Generationes, saying, In the fourth Geneneration they shall return thither
again: where he takes four generationes, for four ages. The same may be
approoven, by that which was cited out of Homer, concerning Nestor. So holding
us at this division of ages by hundreths, there will be from the beginning of
the World of those ages, now co^pleetly passed by our reckoning, before this
1600. year of Christ, fifty hundredth years, which make 55. ages: And we are
now in the 56. age, and at the 48. year thereof: which may well be called, an
age of the decaying and fading world, not only because it appears to
approach near unto the worlds end, but also by reason greater mutatio^s, and
alteratio^s are likely to fall out therein, both in the visible heavens, the
earth, and other elements, then in other ages before: whereof I intend to
speak more largely afterward. But to entreat of particular accidents that fell
out in the former ages, it pertayneth to a more large discourse.

FOVRTH PROPOSITION.
That in our time, the signs and revolutions of the heaven, are changed and
remooved from the old accustomed places: And therefore the vulgar
Prognosticator^, are in an error: And of the way to reform the same.

LIke as I have traveled heretofore, by Sabbaticall reckoning to deduce and
find out the perfect count of the years of the world, how long it has
continued unto this instant 1600. year of Christ: And there with to discover
the erroneous reckoning of the Papisticall Jubilees, and their impieties: So
now might I enter into an other kind of reckoning, which is called
Astronomicall, gathered by the course and revolutiones of the Heaven; the
Sun, the Moon, and the Stars: For as the Sabbaticall reckoning, (whereof I
have spoken) has the ground out of the Scriptures, and word of God; So this
Astronomicall count, has also the original out of the same. And as
thereckoning of Sabbathes and Sabba^icall years, begins at the seventh
day of creation, when God rested from all his works; so this Astronomical
calculation, has the beginning from the 4. day of creation, when as God made
those heavenly lights, and placed them in the lift of heaven: not only for that
cause, that they should shine and give light upon the earth, separating the day
from the night^ but also to be for signs and for seasons of times, days, and
years: that is, by their motions and revolutions, to distinguish times and
seasons, and therewith, to signify certain effects following, upon their
courses and motions: So that thereby, we may learn the difference of times,
and make distinction of the parts thereof: as of years, months, days, and
of all seasons and appointed diettes: Without the knowledge and reckoning
whereof, there should be nothing but extreme confusion, in all the actions of
men. For neither could the memory of things, by past be kept, norrespect had of
things to come, nor the progress of time be numbered, without the same were
defined and measured, by the motion of these heavenly bodies, and namely, of
the Sun and Moon. For the Sun, by his most equal and simple motion, is as
a most perfect rule to us, to appoint and measure the years and seasons
thereof: The Moon also by her short motion, to measure and distinguish the
Months of the years: So there is no more perfect way to measure the years of
the World, then by the course of the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars, which
every one have their just periodes of time, within the which, they compleit
their courses, and revolutiones, the which, albeit they appear sometime
unequal to us that dwell on the earth, yet they are most equal and constant
in themselves. But because I think I have prooven sufficiently already, both by
Sabbaticall and by Historical reckoning, the just count of the years of the
World to our days: I think it not necessary in this short Treatise, to set
down the Astronomicall reckoning: al-be-it it would ratify and confirm our
former count. For it should be both long-some and tedious to them that are not
well grounded in Astronomy: and peradventure, over difficill to be taken up.
Therefore I refer the same to a more ample work: In the mean time, by reason
of the great error I see fall forth among the vulgar Prognosticators, for
wrong taking up of their grounds, in judging the face of the heaven, the
weather, and other accidents and influences thereof: I have thought good to
discover their error, that they may amend the same, and others be no further
deceived by them. But first I would inform them to amend their error also,
that deny the heavenly influences to be effectual, because the predictions of
such as commonly set out the vulgar Prognostications oft-times, take not
effect: I say, these men declare them selves very ignorant in natural
Philosophy, and are convict by experience and ensample of such things, as
daily fall out, by virtue of the heavenly influences. Yea, by the Scripture it
self, Namely in Job, where the Lord himsele makes mention of the pleasant
influence of Pleiades, Job. 3. ^
which is the pleasant springtime of the year, when the Sun comes to those
stars. For these influences, not only make the earth to fructify, but also
work a great variety in the seasons of the year: so that they are not like
one to another, nor to themselves every year in many things. And many evident
signs are found in the motiones, configurations, and interchangeings of the
courses of the heavenly light, where by men, who are expert in divine science
of Astrology, may gather and conjecture, many things to fall out, not only in
the air, but also in the natural inclination of earthly creatures. For, for
that cause, the eternal God appointed them in the beginning, not only to
shine and show light unto the world, but also to be for signs of things to
come: as it is testified in Genesis. So that by the great providence of God,
Gen^
three excellent benefits are communicated to men, by these heavenly bodies:
The one is, to shine and give light unto the Earth: The second, to distinguish
times, days, and years: The third, to forewarne men of many things profitable
for this life; not that we should think that all things can be foretold
thereby, or that the stars have force to move the minds and wills of men,
as it were by constraint, to this or that. For this science, has certain
limittes and bounds, over the which it ought not to be drawn. For as the
chief author in this art Ptolemee himself affirms, that part of
Astrology, which is called Iudiciar, exceeds the weakness of men's
apprehension, which is aggreeable to that which God by his own words objected
unto Job, in the place before cited, saying: Know thou the statutes of the
heaven, and can thou set down the ruling thereof in the Earth? And besides
this obscure knowledge of the heavenly influences, there are supersticious
observations used by many in the artificial setting up of the figure of the
heaven, and applying the same without any sufficient natural cause or reason to
every purpose, which I for my part, altogether improoue and condemn. And yet
it follows not hereof, that this divine science should be allutterly rejected
or contemned, as many that be ignorant of it do. For by it, many profitable
things ar known, which some for the utility of men edify, and namely, for
instruction of Physitiones, laborers of the ground, Sea-faring-men, and other
travelers and observers of times, to know and foresee, the falling out of
winds, tempest, and other accidents of the air, and for releeving of
infirmities of men's bodies, by knowing the right times of applying medicines,
according to the dispositions of the complexions and humors, over which, the
Moon is known by experience, to have great dominion. For if it be granted (as
we know it is) to certain fowls of the air, and beasts of the earth, to
fore know and feel the mutationes of the air, and tempests to come, how
should we altogether deny fore-knowledgs to be granted to men, to conjecture
of these accidents, having reason, judgment, and experience to lead them
thereto? not as to come by absolute necessity (for God is above all second
causes, and may stay them when he pleases) but by probable reasones and
appearance. And yet, I confess, that men of no evil inclination, are moved
to have those Astronomicall predictiones in greater contempt, because of the
error and ignorance of many professores of this science, and namely, of such
as set forth the vulgar Prognostications, that are yearly to be sold
abroad. For when the common sort of men see, that the accidents fore-tolde by
them, as namely, concerning the mutationes of the air, fall not out according
to the judgment of such Prognosticators, they suppose the fault, which is in
the ignorance and evill-taking up of the men, to be in the science it self: as
though there were no probable certainty in Astronomical predictiones. But as
it follows not, if an ignorant Physician, kill a man, when he professed to
heal him, that therefore no man should use medicine, so the unskillfulness of
the professor is no good cause to derogate authority to this divine science:
if it be lawfully used and retained within the right bounds. Now because I
perceive one of the chief causes, of the error of those common
Prognosticators to be, that they take not rightly up the grounds of their
co^jectures, but follow the old rules of the Chaldeans, Arabians, and others
ancient authors in that science, which serve not for our days and time. For
the doctrine of the signs and houses of the heavens, and placing of the
Planets thereinto, with their triplicities and mutual qualities, in their
applicationes, and joining with the fixed stars, which served for the former
ages; cannot now serve, nor be sufficient to ground solid conjectures upon,
for they are altered and changed. For the which, it is to be understood, that
the ancient out-letters of this science, who divided the whole arche of the
Zodiake in twelve equal parts, and into twelve signs: For that time,
considdered the qualities of every sign, depending upon the nature and
qualities of the sixth stars, that were in such a sign; so that when any of
the Planets, come to the stars, or had aspect thereto, they caused the
alteration of the air, according to their natural qualities, and other
accidents to fall out, beg inning at the sign of Aries; and so counting
consequently from the Springtime Aequincctium throughout the rest of the
signs: At which time, the entering of the Sun, in the Aequinoctiall point, was
i^ the beginning of the sign of Aries, of the eight sphere, or not far
distant from the first star of that sign, which they peradventure thought to
be unchangeable: But by process of time and experience, it is found, that the
Aequinoctial point is moveable, flitting, and remooving back-wards, contrary
the order of the signs, and the fixed stars that were in the sign of Aries
removed forward. In so far, that from the first observation of the heavenly
motions, when the beginning of the sign of Aries, aggreed in position and
situatio^, with the first star of that sign in the 8. sphere, unto our days,
counting in the midde-motion of the Aequinoctial, to wit, to this 1600. year
of Christ, the fixed stars of the sign of Aries, that were some time in the
beginning thereof, at the Acquinoctial point, are now distant more then twenty
seven degrees, and fifteen minutes from that point fore ward: or rather, the
Aequinoctial point is slipped back from them, and preventeth their course in
the motion of the heavens. And so the stars that were in the sign of Aries of
old, are now (counting from the Aequinoctial point) for the most part in the
sign of Taurus, and they of the sign of Taurus in Gemini; and so consequently
of the rest: Notwithstanding of this difference, the common setters out of
Prognostications, and also the Mediciners, in giving of their medicine, make
their count after the old manner, as the signs were wont to be reckoned,
nearer to the point of the Vernall Aequinoctial: where upon follows this
error, that the signs taking their nature and properties from the fixed
stars, and having now changed their place, render other influences to the
air and earth, them they did of before. So that they which sometime were hot,
are now become cold, and they that were dry humide; and by the contrary,
cold, hot, and humide dry: And so no certainty can follow, to know the
mutatio^s of the air, or other accide^ts thereby: neither can the placing of
the^ in the twelve houses of the heaven, after the old reckoning, nor the
compting of their triplicities or aspectes by that calculation be right; and
consequently, all that is builded ^herupon, by out common Prognosticators,
falls to the ground, and can have no solidity: So that it is no marvel,
albeit they err in their predictions for the most part. As to the cause of the
prevention of the Aequinoctial, and concerning the inequall variation thereof,
because it belongs to a more subtle and ample discourse, for the present I
leave it: Only to speak some what of the remedy of this error in reckoning,
which falls out by not-taking-heede to the anticipation of the Aequinoctial
points. In my opinion, I think there may be two ways to remeid the same: The
one is, to reckon and calculate the signs, according to the eight sphere and
fixed stars being therein, as they were reckoned of old, and in the days of
Ptolemee, not having respect to the vernall Aequinoctial point: Albeit, in
describing the general disposition of the year, respect may be had thereto,
and likewise to the rest of the tropike points and fixed stars being
therein for the time, with the configurationes of the Planets, and the
conjunction or opposition of the Lights, being nearest unto the same. The other
way is not far different from the former, that is, without respect of the
signs of the ninth sphere, to begin to reckon at the twenty seven degree,
and fifty one minutes of Aries, as if it were the first degree this present
year, and as the Moon flitteth her Mansiones, from the Aequinoctial point
hereafter to follow the degree of the Zodiake, where she b^gouth her first
Mansion, and so to proceed with the rest, and to count by the mansiones of the
Moon, ascribing to every mansion, twelve degrees, fifty one Minutes, and
thirty secondes, as the manner is throughout all the twenty eight ma^siones,
which is a very sure way. For certain it is, that the affections and
influences that flow from the Moon, especially concerning the alterations of
the air, are of greater force and effect nor those that come of other planets,
by reason of her propinquitie to the earth. As also in medicine, she works
greater effects then all the rest of the Planets, because she is predominant in
all humide things, as well in men's bodies, as in the Sea and the air: And she
brings forth her effects, according to the qualities of the fixed stars
that are found in every one of her mansiones, when she is joined with them:
And so commonly is the disposition of the air at that present time, unless
some other great impediment stay the force thereof: Therefore, having respect
to the mansiones of the Moon, and the aspects and applications of other
Planets to her, and to her Mansiones, great conjecture may be taken of the
wether that is to fall out at any time, according to the season of the year.
Moreover, they that would Prognosticate rightly of the weather, should have
more respect to the Moon then all the rest of the Planets, because, as the
Moon sets after the first evidente appearing after every change (which is
commonly the third, or the fourth day) so follows the course of that whole
Moon: Therefore, considderation would be taken, what disposition the Moon has
the third and fourth day, and the fourth day especially, in what mansion she
will be, to what other Planets she will be applied in a conjunct opposite or
quadrate aspect: and namely, if she apply to Saturn soon after the change, or
immediately before, for then besure of rough weather. But if she be rid the
fourth day, of all malevolent aspectes, the mansion wherein she is, being of
temperate nature, the whole space of that Moon, commonly for the most part
will be fair: and generally note, that if any evil weather is to fall out in
the Moon, it falls with greater effect in the days of the quarters and full
Moon. But to speak more particularly and exactly of these things, it
belongs to a more large treatise then this present, which serves only for a
taist of things that may be spoken hereupon. And my intent was principally, to
show the error only of the common sort of Prognosticators, that deceive the
people, founding them selves upon wrong grounds, and thereby make the divine
science, of natural and lawful Astrology, to come in mockage and contempt.

FIFTH PROPOSITION
That the old Julian or Roman Calendar, might receive an easy reformation:
And that the late attempted reformation thereof is not circumspectly taken up,
but giue^^ occasion of error in reckoning.

Seeing we are entered in Astronomicall reckoning of times; and there is nothing
more necessary and profitable for all sort of people, that are not trained up
in Astronomy, then to have a perfect Calendar, whereby the right course of the
Sun and Moon being counted and known, the true distinction of all times,
may be particularly set down as in a Table, wherein all the actions of men,
both concerning Ecclesiastical and civil affairs, may be ordered and done in
due season. Concerning the which purpose, it is to be understood, that in all
ages, men have traveled to find out such a perfect reckoning of the year,
months, weeks, and days thereof, as might serve for this use: Some framing
their Kalenders (for so we must call them for doctrines cause) to the course of
the Sun, to count their years thereby, and some to the course of the moon,
reckoning by Months, and some laboring to reduce both those reckoninges to
an equality, and to make their Kalenders to agree to both. The which third
being the most perfect form of reckoning and most commodious for all affairs
both holy and politic, was first used amongst the Godly patriarchs, even from
greatest antiquity, whereof we have evident Testimonies in the book of God.
For in the time of Noah me^tio^ is made of months of the year, which could
not be counted but by a certain form of Calendar or Almanac, counting by
moons so many Months (for months take their denomination from the moon)
which we may gather then to have been 12. in number, to make out the space of
an year. And that the same were ruled also according to the course of the Sun,
we may have intelligence by the principal feasts appointed by God in the law,
which were not only affixed to certain days, but also to such times as had
respect to the seasones of the year ruled by the Sun, and to the times of
growing and winning of the fruits of the ground, proceeding from the course of
the Sun. As the first month named Abib, took the name from the first
fruits, because in it was the barley harvest in the cuntry of Palestina, as
Plinius also testifies. So was the feast of the Passover, celebrate the 15 day
of the first month being the first full moon after the vernall Equinoctium,
likewise the feast of Pentecost, was the fifth day of the third Month,
wherein the first fruits that were made in bread of corn were offered. In like
manner after collection of all the rest of the fruits, and namely of wine and
oil, was the feast of Tabernackles, which was celebrat in the reauent month.
All these feasts hade respect to the course of the Sun, as I said before.
Now to make the course of the Moon to aggree with the Sun, so that the
reckoning of the Months might be conformed to both, after two or three years
as the count fell out. The Hebrews in their Calendar added a certain od month
called their Intercalare month whereof mention is made in their almanacks and
named it Ve-Adar: the second or posteriore Adar, whereupon I will not now
insist. Always, because this form of agreeing the years, and framing them
both to the course of the Sun and the moon was thought (as it is in deed)
most pe^fite, Julius Caesar, a man of great magnanimity, and well seen in
letters, by the counsel and instigation of Sosigenes, an expert Mathemat^cien
in those days, where as the Roman years very confusedly were reckoned of
before unto the course of the Moon, about the space of 45. years before the
Nativity of Christ, divised a new form of Calendar: First framed after the
course of the Sun, dividing the whole year in 365. days and six hours: and
making it to contain 12 Months where of the names are yet in use. And because
of the od six hours, which could not be brought to count every year, he
ordained that every 4 year one day should be added to February, because
fouretimes six hours make up an whole day of 24 hours. And the year
wherein this od day falls, we call commonly Leap year. And because it was
added at the six Kalendas of March. it is named in latin Bissextus, or
Biss^xtilis annus, for the Romans divided their months in Kalendas, Nonas and
Idus. Now Julius Caesar begouth his year at the kalendes of January, which
was then when the Sun entered in the eight degree of Capricorn, eight days
after the winter Solstiti^m, which then being the shortest day of the year,
fell upon the 25. day of December: And the Spring time Equiuoctium, when the Sun
entered in Aries, after that old reckoning, fell upon the 25. day of March. And
the Summer Sols^itium, making the longest day upon the 25. of June. And the
harvest Equinoctium, about the 26. or 27. day of September: The which places of
the Sun, are now changed and slyden back in the Julian Calendar (by reason of
the prevention of the Equ^noctial, whereof I spak in the fourth proposition) to
the 12. 11. or 10. day of the said Months, and 13. or 14. of September. The
chief cause hereof (besides the prevention of the Equinoctial) is that the
Julian year, reckoned by Caesar, to contain 365. days and six od hours,
contains somewhat more, then the just calculation For by true Astronomical
reckoning, there will be every year, taking off the six odd hours, elleven
minutes of an hour, and certain secondes: The which, in the space of 130.
year, or thereby, will make up an whole day. And so in the space of 1645.
years, which is the time since Julius Caesar set out his Calendar, there will
be ^ore then the space of thirteen days accressed, to be taken away from the
count of the odd six hours, about the 365. days of the Julian year. For
this cause, sundry learned men of our memory and time, have earnestly desired,
that some Reformation of the Julian Calendar might be made to bring the same to
the old estate and institution thereof, as it was first set forth, by reason
of diverse inconvenients, that by process of time, occur by neglecting
thereof. And namely, that the aggreement of the course of the Sun, with the
Moon (which two Planets, were ordained of God in the beginning, to distinguish
times) cannot thereby, as it is now, be known. The which matter, being proponed
to diverse general councels, could not tak effect; till now lately in our days,
with favor of Pope Gregory the 13. his Cardinals and counsels, it was
permitted in the 1582. year of Christ, to one Aloysius Lilius, professor in
Mathematical Astronomy, to set down this long desired reformation: Who having
performed the same after his manner, has thereby purchased a merveilous assent
of diverse Princes and cuntries, to accept and authorize the same: Albeit not
without diverse contradictions. For in the year, 1584. in Auspurge of Rhaetia,
there fell out a great commotion, both in the Church and civil government
thereof. As also the 1585. year in Riga of Lituania, great trouble was raised,
till finally it was agreed, that the old Calendar should stand as it was
before, without reformation. And many cuntries yet there be, that have nor
accepted not allowed this pretended correction. Now as concerning this reformer
Aloysius Lilius, albeit (as it is supposed) he would have brought the Julian
Calendar to the old estate, as it was in the beginning, or near thereby, yet
they of the Papisticall Clergy, and others to whom the reformation thereof was
first proponed, would not agree that it should be drawn back any further, but
to the time of the Nicene council, which was holden and concluded in the 328.
year of Christ; herefore he was forced to begin thereat. And because there
interveend between that time, and the 1582. year of Christ, the space of
1254. years, he brought back the reck^ning of the Julian Calendar, only
ten days, seting forth a new Calendar, wherein he had respect to twelve
hundredth years, with so many ods, to wit, 54. years: For the which cause, he
was also forced to alter the Cycle of the Sun (the which is not compleeted,
but in 28. years) and so to change the Sundays letter to an other the^ that
which was found in the old Calendar books, now this reformation of the old
Calendar. albeit it was exactly calculate to the time of the Nicene council,
yet it makes a great change from the reckoning of the old calendar, and
puts many men in doubt what to follow, whether the old style of count or
the new. And has brought great controversy in diverse places (as partly I show
before) seeing that the day of the nativity of christ and other festiual days
(as they call them) and days of holding faires and mercates, are changed and
holden ten days before the accustomed times. And merchandes and others in
making their contractes and obligationes are often disappoynted of their days
of payment, with diverse others such inconveniences, where as it had been far
easier, without any such perceptable change (if so great need had been to
reform the old Calendar) to have done, as yet it may bedone, if it please
Christian Princes and countries to agree thereunto, after this manner, to
wit, that for the space of 56 years following this 1600 year of Christ,
there should be no leap year at al: But al years to be common and equal
containing 365 days only, according to the quantity of the old Egiptian
year. So that two cycles of the Sun should pass by continual progress in
the Calendar, by, A, B, C, D, E, F, G, wsthout any variation, during these 56
years, to bring it to the first institution, leaving out the fourteen od
letters of leap year, which are now interlaced in every two Cycles of the
Sun, for in them are fourteen times four, which make 14 leap years. So by
this reckoning 14 days being left out in the space of 56 years, the year
should come to the same estare wherein it was, at the first setting forth
thereof by Julius Casar, which was 45 years before the birth of Christ. And
these forty five years, added to the fifty six years, before mentioned,
make 101. years, which 101. years being added to 1600. years, which now
have been from the birth of Christ, will make up in the whole, 1701. years,
which being divided by 130. by true calculation, give in the quotient,
thirtteene whole days: and there will remain after division, twenty odd
hours, and forty six Minutes of an hour, laking only three hours,
fourteen Minutes, to accomplish twenty four hours: For the fourteen day,
which is no perceptible difference, and will be made up in the space of
sixteen years thereafter. And giving this reformation, should not be made
till sixteen years here after were past, it should make up the self: So by
this manner of correcting of the Calendar, it were casie to bring the Julian
year, to the first institution: letting the Cycle of the Sun, after the 56.
years before mentionate, return to the former estate, as it is now set down
in our Almanackes, as for example: If this Reformation should be attempted to
begin in the year, 1601. next following. The Sundays letter, that year
being D. the Cycle of the Sun fourteen, the year of Christ. 1656. being
compleet, the same letter should be the Sundaies letter, in the 1657. year:
and the Cycle of the Sun, 14. And so consequently, the Cycle of the Sun,
with the Sundaies letter, should proceed as they stand in the old Almanacks,
without any variation for many years; and, as may be supposed, should need no
further reformation to the end of the world, which appears now shortly to
approach. At least, every 134. year, leaving out a leap year, should hold it at
the old stand. And this should make no perturbation nor variety in the order
of the Calendar, nor in the dates of Obligations, or co^tracts; neither change
any of those days, which are called, fixed Feasts, from the days whereon they
are now placed in the old Kalendare. Let this much then suffice for
reformation of the Kalendare, to the course of the Sun. There is also an
other alteration used in this late reformed Kalendare, concerning moveable
Feasts, which comes by occasion of the course of the Moon, and defection of
the Golden number. For the which, it is to be understood, that they that first
placed and set down the Golden number in the Kalendare, as it is now (for it
was not Iulus Caesar) set the number of the year thereof, directly against the
day of each Month, wherein the Moon then changed: But now the course of the
change is flitted forward from those places, four days with the more. Now this
number, called the Golden number, by reason of the utility thereof, whereby it
was worthy to be written in Golden letters, was placed in the Calendar, to
agree the course of the Moon with the Sun (as is supposed) by DIONYSIVS,
called EXIGVVS, a certain Roman Abbotte, who after the Nicene Council, about
the year of Christ, five hundredth, thirty two years, set out that Cycle:
which is called the Paschall Cycle, or rather corrected that which was set out
of before, a two hundredth and nine years, by EVSEBIVS CAESARIENSIS: This
Golden number (I say) which is very profitable indeed, containing the space
of nine teene years, was believed by the auncientes, to compryse in the
periode or revolution thereof, the exact course of the motion of the Moon:
So, that after the accomplishmente of nine-teene years, the Moon did return
to the same course, that she was in before at the beginning thereof: and so
they thought it sufficient to agree the days of the Roman Calendar, with the
chaunges of the Moon precisely. Albe-it, it be of verity, that the true
motion of the Moon, in the space of nine-teene years, is more then to agree
exactlie to the course of the Sun, by the space of one hour and an half, or
thereby, which in the space of three-hundreth and four years, or little more,
will make up an whole day, wherein the reckoning of the course of the Moon,
by the Golden number, exceederh the course of the Sun, and goes forwards in
our Kalendars. And so in the space of an thousand, two-hundreth, seventy two
years, which is from the time of the Nicene Council, from the which DIONYSIVS
reckoned, to wit, from the year of Christ, three hundredth twenty eight,
vnthis present year, a thousand six hundredth years, are four times,
three-hundreth and four years, and more-over, fifty six odd years, which,
add four days (as was declared) and almost six hours of the forward
passing of the course of the Moon, attour the reckoning of the Golden number.
Now because this DIONYSIVS that placed the Golden number in the Calendar, took
no heed to this, or rather understood it not, by process of time, the changes
of the Moon fall not upon the days of the Kalendare, where DIONYSIVS placed
the Golden number, but four days, and sometimes five days thereafter. And
also those days, which are called moveable Feasts, and namely, the Feast of
Easter or Pasche day, cannot be rightly reckoned by the Cycle of DIONISIVS,
called the Paschall Cycle, containing the number of five hundredth thirty two
years, that is, nineteen times twenty eight years, by multiplying the Cycle
of the Sun, by the Cycle of the Moon: for albeit this man, named Dionysius
Exignus, a certain Abbot of Rome, who lived in the days of Justinian the
Emperor, about 500. years after the incarnation of Christ, the author of the
Romans Paschall count or Cycle, intended by setting out of that his Cycle of
532. years, to give a perpetual and infallible rule, to know the true day of
the celebration of the Paschall feast, called Easter, after the mind and
determination of the Nicene council, which decreed, that all times thereafter,
the Feast of Easter should be celebrate upon that Sunday, which immediately
followed the fourteen day of the Moon (which the Hebrews hold to be the
fourteen day of their first Month, called Nisan) next, after the Spring time,
Equinoctium, which then fell out in March, as it does now, but not upon the
same day of the Month. Yet this Dionysius was deceived in two things. For
first (as I have told) he took no heed, or understood not, that every ninteene
year, the Golden number lacks of the just reckoning, an hour and half an
hour, or thereby. Secondly, he remembered not the leap year in his
reckoning, or else supposed the Moon to have a leap year, as well as the
Sun, which very proposterously is called [Saltus lunae] the leaping of the
Moon by some; For the Moon has no leaping, but keeps a constant course.
Herefore it is, that the Cycle of Dionysius, serves not exactly to count the
course of the Moon, and those moveable Feasts: For Easter day, as it is
commonly now counted by that Cycle, falls out oftentimes a Month and more,
after the just appointed time of the Nicene council. And if we shall follow,
the old Roman Calendar and Golden number, set down by Dionysius, there in
minding to celebrate Easter day thereafter; we shall see a great variation from
the decree of the council. For sometime, Easter day shall fall before the
midst of March, the Tuesday called, Fastings even, shall fall in January: And
Whit sunday sometime in April. And after the reckoning of the Hebrews, our
Easter day, shall fall in the Month of Adar, the last Month of the year, and
not in Nisan, the first Month. For the which, I will give you one example. In
the year of our Lord 1598. lately by past, according to the decree of the
Nicene Council, and late Calendar, set outby Lilius, Easter day, fell upon the
twelft day of March, in the old Kalendare and Almancks, whereby we yet reckon
in England and Scotland: And Whit sunday upon the last day of April: And
Fastings-euen, upon the twenty four of January: Whereas after the vulgar
manner and count, Easter day was celebrate that year, the sixteenth day of
April, Whit-sunday, the fourth of June: And Fastings-even, the last of
February. Ye see the distance between the one calculation and the other, is
more then the space of a Month: what error it may grow to by process of time,
it is easy by this example to perceive: And so we must confess indeed, that
the old Kalendare in this point, has need of reformation: As also, that
Cycle or count, called the Paschall Cycle of Dionysius. Now Lilius in his new
Calendar, to restore that Cycle of Dionysius to the right reckoning, makes his
count by hundreths, because every 304. years, which is the space of sixteen
Golden numbers, one day being added to the Golden number of nineteen years,
supplieth the hours and Minutes of the course of the Moon. But this count by
hundreths, has diverse imperfectiones: Namely, because in his Epactes, counting
by hundreths, no exact method can be observed; yea, the variety of the course
of the Moon, can not so formally be counted thereby, as by the Golden number,
which contains less space: besides that, the Paschal terms aggree not
oftimes thereto: wheranent you may read, Joseph Scaliger, in the end of his
learned woork, De emendatione temporum; where also he sets down a more
perfect reckoning, by a Table of equal Epactes; where-anent, because it is
hard to be conceived by them that are not well acquainted with Astronomical
reckonings, I cease now further to speak. Always, we shall understand, it is
very difficill to find out ane Cycle that may make an absolute perfect
reckoning, of the course of the Moon, to frame it to any perpetual Calendar:
Yea, as Io. Stoeflere writes in his great Roman Kalendare; Propositi^^ 37.
no Paschall Cycle, may exactly comprehend the same: Which alwaise is best
found out by the Epacts, and by the Golden number, receiving a just
correction. Therefore, for the instruction of the common ^orte of men, best it
is by Astronomicall count, to set a Table or Almanacke, containing the right
reckoning of the course of the Moon, for many years, either by her midde
motiones, or by her appearing and true motiones: as Io. Stoeflere did for
certain years in his days. In the mean time, it shall suffice, for a gross
and common instruction of all men, to place the Golden number in the Iuliane
Kalendare, upon the precise days of the change of the Moon, as it is now
set down in diverse Kalendars: For that will serve to declare what day every
change falls out; and whether it be before or after noone, by adding of the
letter B. or A. to every particulare Golden number, which may serve for a
long season, without any perceptible variation. And who would know more
exactlie the hours and Minutes of every Change, Full, or quarter of the
Moon, let them get once by ane Ephemeride, or right Prognostication, the
change of one Moon, with the days, hours, and Minutes thereof, and count
to the next change, twenty nine days, twelve hours, and forty four
Minutes: And from the Change to the Full, fourteen days, eighteen hours,
and twenty two Minutes. And for every quarter, seven days, nine hours, and
elleven Minutes, proceeding so far as you list, it shall be the true
reckoning of the course of the Moon. As to the Paschall Cycle, we need not be
careful thereof; But take heed to the first full Moon, after the vernall
Aequinoctium, and ever the next Sunday thereafter, should be Pasche or Easter
day: and thereby, you may propagate an Almanacke for the moueables Feasts, as
far forth as ye please, after the rule of the Nicene Council. But to be
too much curious, concerning the observation of those Feasts, it is not
necessary for true Christians; for we know that concerning the resurrection of
Christ, which admonishes us to rise in newness of life, every seventh day
in the year, (which we call the Sundaie or Lords day) puts us in
remembrance thereof. And otherwise, we are forewarned by the Apostle, Not to
be supersititions in observation of times, Gal. ^.
days, and years, that we be not brought in Jewish bondage thereby: And
again, That no man should judge us in Meat or Drink, Col. 2^
or in respect of an Holic-daie or of the new Moon, or of the Sabbothe
days, which were but shadows of things to come: But the body is in
Christ: meaning the substance thereof, was accomplished in Christ. And we
have no commandment nor ground out of the Scripture, nor any example of Christ
or his Apostles, for observation of those days. For as to the typical Pasche
or Passover of the Jews; it was finished in Christ, when he our true
Passover, or Paschal Lamb was sacrificed for us: And we (as Paul says)
have now to keep a feast spiritually, Cor. 5.
all the days of our life ( putting away the old leaven of malice and
wickedness) with unleavened bread of sincerity and truth. And the other
invented Paschetyde or Easter, after the resurrection of Christ, is but the
invention of men, how ancient soever it be. So that the great contentiones and
controversies that followed in the ancient Church, for the day wherein the same
was to be observed, both before and after the Nicene council, are skarsely
worthy to be recited. And yet Victor Bishop of Rome (as that seat was ever
proud) for not observing the same day, which he and his adherentes kept, did
excommunicate al them of the churches of Asia, that kept an other day. For the
which cause, the godly Irenaeus Bishop of Lions, justly found great fault with
him: Notwithstanding, the Church agreeing to the observation of such a day, as
an indifferent thing, in remembrance of the resurrection of Christ, there is no
necessity to counterfaite the law of Moses, in observing the time of the
Moon, but it may be fixed to a certain day of the Month, or else, following
the full Moon, to find it out after the manner before recited: Always, our
Christian liberty ought not to be prejudged herein: And so I make an end.

SIXTH PROPOSITION.
That there is a certain merveilous Sympathy and aggreement of Periodes of
times, in reckoning by seauens, and by Sabbaticall years. And of the manifold
mysteries of the number of seven.

EVen as God the author and conserver of all things, in a comely and decent
order, has appointed an succession and progress of time, for accomplishment
of the natural course thereof; so has he appointed certain periodes and
revolutiones of time, wherein things return to the same or like estate,
wherein they were of before. So we see in the motions of the heaven, which are
measured by time (or rather which are the measures of time) the Sun, the
Moon, and the stars, to have their peculiar and distinct revolutiones,
wherein they accomplish their courses, and return after a limitate and
determinate space of time, to the places from the which they did depart. As
the Sun compleeting his course and revolution, in the space of 365. days,
and near six hours, or the quarter of an day, ascribes unto us, that space
of time, which we call the year, which returning in it self, in Latin is
termed Annus, quasi annulus, taking the similitude from an Ringe. And for the
like cause, the ancient Egyptians, made the figure thereof, in the similitude
of a Serpent by ting his own tail. The Moon likewise, by her revolution in
the lift, determines unto us the Months, and the Sun by his daily motion,
shows us the days and the hours thereof. The rest of the Planets also, have
each of them their peculiar and determinate recourses of time, wherein they
compleit their revolution, as Saturn in the space of thirty years, or
thereby: Jupiter in twelve years, March, in two years, Venus and Mercury
aggreeing with the course of the Sun. The fixed stars also have their
peculiar motions and revolutions, whereof it is not now necessary more largely
to speak. It is verifyed also by experience, that inferior things under the
heavens have their appointed recourses and returnings: Whereunto SOLOMON has
respect where in his book called the Preacher, he makes mention of the
Elements, the Sun, the air, and the water. ^^cles. 1.
The Sun [sayeth he] ryseth and goes to, and returns again to the place
from whence it did rise. The wind (which makes the moving of the air) goes
compassing from the South to the North, turning round about, and (...) by his
curcuits. All the rivers go into the Sea, yet the sea is not filled ^ver. The
rivers return to the places from whence they come to flow. He gives these
examples, to show the revolutions of worldly things, and applies it to declare
the revolution of the estate of men's ages and lives. So a generation [sayeth
he] passes, and another comes, and there is nothing new under the Sun, but
that which is new, has been in the ages before, and the like shall be
hereafter: Signifying, that after certain Periods and courses of time, all
worldly and earthly things shall return to their former, or to their like
estate, according to the determination and appointed will of God, as the first
cause, and as he directs and governs the second and inferior causes. And
this falls forth, not only in the ages and lives of men, but generally in
all things worldly that have a generation, must needs also have a corruption.
So that also in the commonwealths and policies, established by men, for
holding up mutual societies amongst themselves, there be certain periodes of
time, which make them to change and alter: which may be found out by experience
and ensamples of Histories of all ages, as well Ecclesiastical, as profane. The
cause thereof, cannot be ascribed to Chance and Fortune, as unskillful men do:
for then all these changes should be most uncertain, neither is it altogether
to be ascribed to the corrupt manners of men, that cannot long remain in one
estate, but evermore seek novationes and changes: Albeit it be, from the
better to the worse, although that may be as a concurrente cause, but it must
needs proceed from an high ground. Some therefore there be, that make all
these Revolutiones and chaunges, to depend and hang upon the Revolutiones of
the Heaven, which is by the courses, and influences of the Planets and Stars,
being therein moderate, and govern all inferioure things in the World.
Therefore, some of them part the Circkle of the Zodiake in Four Threes, or
Quarters, called Triplicities: And like-wise, the whole Heaven, and fixed
Stars being therein, and according thereto, Prognosticate of the estate, and
changeing of Realms, and Empyres of the Earth, attrybuting also unto every
Region and Kingdom, certain fixed Stars, to bear particular rule and
dominion there. Others have ane especial respect to the most notable
conjunctiones of the Plannets, And namely, of the superioure Plannettes, and
to the Eclipses of the Sun and the Moon. Others also, more probably
respecting the manifold mysteries of the number of seven, divide in seavens,
the whole periodes of time, according to the number of the seven Planets,
making every particular Periode, to follow the nature of the Plannets that
then reigns, beginning at Saturn, and descending through the rest. So that
the influence of things that fall out in every Periode, may be found
agreeable therev-nto. It is not to be denied indeed, but there is great
force and efficacy in the influence of the Heavens, and Heavenly Lights, to
alter and change inferioure things, but I can not be persuaded, tha^ men
have yet so far attained to the knowledge thereof, as to find out perfitelie
thereby, the general chaunges and alterationes of Kingdoms, and
commonwealths: Al-be-it it may be, and is probable, that they have found out
many particulars, concerning particular persons. Therefore that which is
gathered thereby, is involved in great obscurity and imperfite: Albeit I
confess, I have lately seen a Table, not yet set out in prente (the authors
name I will suppress till he himself publish it) wherein, in the space of the
side of an through of Paper, the less periodes of time, whereof we are to
speak, aggree so concerning things falling out thereto, even from the
beginning of the world unto our days, with the nature of the seven Planets in
their revolutions and order, that it is merveilous, and appears not to lack
a great mystery: where of I cease to speak further at this time. For I will not
ascribe unto me, the praise of other men's labors. But to our purpose, it is to
be granted also, that there be many other concurrent causes of the changes of
Kingdoms and earthly governements, which make them to fall from their
foundations, or at least to be translated from one estate to an other, which
may be spoken generally of the revolution of all worldly things: And namely,
Plato, in the eight Book of his Republicque, makes mention of three courses
of the estates of common wealths, to wit, the rising, flourishing, and the
decaying estate, and of four terms of their Periods: The precise time of the
which Periodes, he involveth in an Aenigmaticall speech, of two harmonies of
numbers. But unless we take a better and more sure ground then such
Philosophical conjectures, we shall never attain to any sure knowledge of
periodes of time, that bring great chances and alterations, either in
Ecclesiastical or in civil affairs: Therefore we must come to the book of
God, and first lay that general ground, whereof Daniel makes mention: that
it is he who alters and translateth kingdoms, and gives them to whom he
pleases. And as concerning the periodes of times, of such translationes and
mutationes, it is leisome to inquire and find out the same also by the
Scriptures. For albeit, the Apostles proponing the like question to Christ,
after his resurrection, if that was the time wherein he should restore the
kingdom to Israel? received this answer, Act. 1.
That it was not for them to know the times or the seasons, which the father
had put in his own power: Yet that is not so to be understood, as though it
were not lawful to search out and know those times and seasons, which the
father has revealed to be known by his Scripturs: or that may be gathered the
revpon, with sobrie^ie of inquisition: For our Savior Christ himself in an
other place, wills his Apostles to take heed when they shall see Jerusalem
besieged with soldiers, for then they should understand, Luke (...)*
that the desolation thereof was nere. And again, (as it is in an other
Evangelist) When ye shall see the abomination of desolation, spoken of by
Daniel, the Prophet, standing in the holy place: Then let him that reads
(meaning him that reads the Prophecy) considder. And thereafter he gives
his Disciples a sign, Saying, learn ye the similitude of the Fig Tree, Mat.
(...)*
when her bough is yet tender, and brings forth leaves, ye know the Summer
is near: So likewse ye (says he) when ye see all things, which I have
foretold, know that the Kingdom of God is near, even at the doors. With many
other sayings to the like purpose: Where he understands, by the Kingdom of
God, his spiritual Kingdom, and not as the Apostles in their question meant
of a Temporal Kingdom. For he came not to restore any such Kingdom: Likewise,
Daniel and the rest of the Prophets, are oftimes warned to mark the times,
when such things as were reveiled to them should come to pass: And John in his
Revelation to write the same. And expressly in Daniell, we have set down the
periode of time (whereof was spoken in the first proposition) of the standing
of the policy of the Jews, after the captivity of Babylon, to wit, of those
70. weeks which were prefixed to that people, and to their city of
Jerusalem, to stand. Now this space of 70. weeks of years, set down by the
Angel in Daniel, for the time of the standing of the commonwealth of the
Jews, after the restauratio^ thereof, so that thereafter it should come to a
determinate desolation, being a great periode of time, about 500, years, to
wit, 490. years, appears plainly by a certain fatal law, appointed and
determined by God, to bring to all other kingdoms and great Empires, a
merveilous mutation, as is evident and found out by aggreemente of many
examples, not sticking upon the precise day nor year, but about or near such
a revolution of time, either kingdoms fall, and are turned up side down, or
else are transferred and changed from their former estate, in other new
forms, for the most part. And also other most notable accidents fall out in
the world, both concerning the estate of the Church, and earthly policies,
either about such a time (I say) which I call the great or more periode of
490. years, containing 70. weeks of years, that is, the space of ten
Jubilees, or else, about the half space thereof, which I call the less
periode, containing 35. weeks of years, and five Jubilees, that is, 245.
years, which is the space of the blast of every trumpet, reckoned by JOHN, in
the Revelation. So that hereinto also the reckoning by seavens, and by
Sabbaticall years, brings out a great sympathy, and agreement, to count the
changeing of times thereby, of the which, I have thought good here to show many
examples. And first we do find in the Scriptures, and concerning the estate of
the Church of God, and of the old World; that in the first half periode of
time, to wit, about 245. years after the creation, Genes^.
after the birth of Enosh the name of the Lord begouth to be called upon, that
is, the hearts of the godly begouth then to be moved to restore the purity of
religion, which by Cain, and his wicked seed before had been suppressed. About
the end of the second great periode of time, to wrtte, from the creation 987.
years, Henoch was translated by God from this mortal life, Genes*
to immortality, to comfort the faithful of that age, and confirm them
against the ungodliness of the world, in hop of the general resurrection. About
the end of the third great periode, Gen 6* 7. 8
when fell out in the 1470. year, from the creation, the world begouth
universally to be corrupt, when the seed of the godly begouth to be mingled
with the ungodly. For the which cause, within the half period of time
thereafter, God in his just judegme^t destroyed the whole race of mankind,
except Noah and his family, by that fearful inundation of waters. Not many
years after, the fourth great period, which ended in the 1960. year of the
World, was Abraham called out of his native cuntry by God, to whom, and his
posterity, Genes. 1^.
God promises the Land of Canaan, and that in his seed, al nations should be
blessed. From the promise made to Abraham, to the departing of the Isralites
out of Egypt, we know, were 430. years, to the which adding 60. years of the
former age of Abraham, they will make out the fifth great periode. So that the
next year, after the departing of the people out of Egypt, to possess the
Land of Canaan, will compleite the same: which falls in the 2450. year,
after the ^^^ation of the world. We do know likewise, that from the departing
out of Egypt, to the building of the temple by Solomon, ar 480. years (which
lack only 10. or 11. years of an other just great period: For the sixth great
period, from the creation, ends in the ^940. year of the world, which was the
15. year of the reign of Solomon, near the time of the dedication of the
Temple. (...)
The seventh great period by exact calculation, comes justly to the year of
the World, 3430. which was the first year of Cyrus, wherein the people of the
Jews were delivered from the captivity of Babylon, in the which year, there
was a great concurrence of Sabbathes and Jubilees, as was shown before. And if
we will count forward from this year, we shall find the eight great periodes
to extend to the 3920. year of the world, which is but 28. year before the
birth of Christ. So we see and gather by the Scriptures, how about the end
of these great periodes of 490. years, or 70. weeks of years, mentioned by
Daniel, great accidents fell out in the World, and amongst the people of God,
even from the beginning, unto the birth of Christ. We shall find also, that
about the space of one of these great periods, the people of Israel were ruled
by Judges, and thereafter, about the like space, by Kings: And so long lasted
the restored policy of the Jews. And to come to profaine histories, many the
like periodes of Empires and Kingdoms, and great mutations may be found out,
and commonly, the greater dominions, have the more sudden changes, according
to the saying of the Poet: Summisque negatum stare diu, It is not granted to
highest things, to have long standing. Concerning this matter, we read of the
Philosopher Cratippus, that he being demanded by Pompeius, after that he was
vanquished by Caesar, at the field of Pharsalia; If there were any divine
providence, seeing that he who had the more just cause, was so overcome: The
Philosopher answered, that there were certain fatal periodes of Empires,
whereby then the commonweal of Rome was to be changed in a Monarchy. And to
indeed we find into the four Monarchies. For the first two Babylonian
Monarchies, the former occupied by the Assyrians and Medes; the other, by the
Medes and Persians, endured both but the space of 495. years. The kingdom of
the Greeks, begun by Seleucus N^cator* lasted but the half space, or less
periode, to wit, about 245. years. Rome was governed by Kings, likewise by
one of these less periodes, to wit, about 243. year. The Concelles thereafter
governed Rome by the space of an great period; to wit, about 462. years.
Thereafter endured the Monarchy of Emperors, from Julius Caesar the First, to
Valentinian the Third: one of these great Periodes, in whose time Rome was
taken and sacked: First by the Gotthes, and thereafter by the Vandales: And
albeit smaller Kingdoms oftimes be not subject to great mutations, yet they
have also certain fatal periods of time, wherein, either they are changed from
their former estate, or else alluterly altered in new forms of governeme^t. For
by the space of one of these great periodes, Kings did reign in Athenes: By
the like space flourished the commonwealth of Sparta: But the Kingdom of the
Troianes, endured little more then one of the less or half great periodes.
Many like charges may be found in other Kingdoms, who list diligently to read
the ancient Histories. But in time of the last of the four Monarchies,
according to the Prophecy of Daniel, was raised up, that everlasting kingdom,
of the true. Messas Jesus Christ; which albeit it has no end, yet in time of
it, many changes and mutations have fallen, and are to fall out in the World,
both in the estate of the Church, and of earthly policies. Concerning the
which, we have set forth in figure, by the prophetical Spirit of John, in
his Revelation, in seven Trumpets, blowing by seven Angels, the whole estate
of the Church, under the kingdom of Christ, every blast of trumpet containing
the space of one of those les periods, to wit, 245 years. And likewise, the
troubles and plagues that were to fall forth in the world, under the figure of
other 7. Angels, pouring our seven Viols of the wrath of God upon the earth
and elements, for not obeying the Gospel of Christ, where-anent, I will remit
the Readers to the profounde and learned Commentaries, of JOHN NAPER, upon the
Revelation, wherein the accidents of evrie particular periode of time, both in
the one estate and in the other, are set out at large. It shall suffice for
this short Treatise, to have poynted out these matters, to prove this our
sixte proposition, concerning the Sympathy of periodes of time, even from the
beginning of the World, unto the end thereof. For with the last blast of the
Trumpet of the seventh and last Angel, by all appearance, the world is to
take an end, as I mind to speak more particularly, in the seventh and last
proposition. There are also other periodes of times used in reckoning of the
years of the world, and of the right revolutions of the heaven: whereof, there
be two that have a special respect to Sabbaticall years: as that which is
called, the great Cycle or period of the Jews containing the space of 6916.
years, which is made up of 988. weeks of years, and 141. Jubilees, with a
week of years, It has also 364, Cycles of the Moon, and 247. of the Sun,
and contains 13. periodicall Cycles of Dionysius. By it the Jews count all
their new Moons and week days, and they suppose it reaches to the beginning
of the world, but they are deceved in the space of 190. years: alwaise this 1600
year of christ is the 5359 of that cycle: for the year of the nativity of
Christ was the 3760. year of the same. The other cycle that has respect to
Sabbatical years, is that which is commonly called the cycle or period of
Dionysius, co^teining the space of 532. years, which is made up by
multiplication of the Golden number: by the cycle of the Sun, is contained 76
weeks of years. And by it the Paschal terms were reckoned. Now by taking up of
this matter, we see always, that there are many great hid mysteries in the
number of 7. not only by counting Sabbatical years and Jubilees, but also in
reckoning of periods of years: as by the les period, whereby John reckons in
his Revelation, co^teining 35. weeks of years, and 5. Jubilees: and the greater
period co^teining 10. Jubilees, and 70. weeks of years, according to the
reckoning of Daniel. Moreover, many of all the mysteries, both of the Old and
New Testament, bin co^prysed under the number of 7. As all the sacrifices for
the most part were offered by seavens, as commonly by 7. bullocks, and 7. Rams or
sheep, which was observed amongst the people of God, but also by Balaam, that
hyreling prophet, as we read in the book of Numbers: and was also used by
ancient imitation of the sacrifices of Gods people, by the profaine Gentiles;
wheranent, the Poet Virgil brings in Sibylla the prophetess, thus
admonishing Aeneas, when he was to consult the Oracle of Apollo. Nunc grege de
intacto septem mactare iuvencos
Praestiterit totidem lectas de more bibentes. Aened. 6.

Better it were seven Bullockes now to take,
Without blemish a sacrifice to make:
Seven chosen gymmers of the sheep also,
According to the rite of times ago.
The principal feasts or solemnities of Gods people, lasted 7. days, and on the
8. day were dissolved 7 days, the people did eat unleavened bread at the
Passover, Seven weeks were counted between the Passover and Pontecost:
Maniest Feasts were celebrated in the 7. (...). And in a misery also, the ark
of Noah which was (...) of the Church) in the seventh Month rested upon the
Mountains of Ararat; signifying the restoration of all things, to be in the
seventh estate of the Church. ^word. 10
Likewise, Wisdom has builded her house, with seven Pillars: By her house,
we understand the Church, and by her seven Pillars, the gifts of the
Spirit; by which the Church is established: The which, albeit they be many,
yet principally they are comprehended under the number of seven, Apoc ^
which also, are figured, by seven burning Lamps; and in Exode, Exodus ^5.
by the seven graved Candle-stickes. Likewise, in Zachary, Za^h. 3. and ^.
the stone, which is Christ, has seven eyes, that go through the whole
world. Which is to be understood of Christ, lightning the world by these
manifold graces of the Spirit: Or as others expound it, by the watching eyes
of Gods divine providence. Many other like similitudes, taken from the number
of seven, may we gather out of the old Testament, as from a divine number,
and a number of perfection. Act. ^
Likewise, in the new Testament, by the seven Deacons, which were elected by
the Apostles, may be signified a number of perfection. And the wicked spirits
also are numbered by seavens, when it is said, that Christ ejected out of Marie
Magdalene* seven Devils. Luke ^.
And in an other place, how when the unclean spirit goes out of a man, he
goes about seeking rest, (...), 12.
and when he finds none, he passes and takes unto him, Luke 11
seven other Spirits worse then himself, and returns to his former
habitation. Not that in all places of Scripture, the number of seven is taken
for a certain and precise number. For we know, when it is said in the Psalm,
(...)* 119
That the just man falls, seven times a day: And when Christ said to PETER,
That he should forgive his brother, (...)
not only seven times, but seaventy times seven times, the meaning is of
many times, yet the seven fold number oft-times also is taken for a certain
number, as in many places before cited, and namely, almost through the whole
Revelation, the divine Spirit, in JOHN, sets out the estate of the Church,
Apoc ^
by the manifold numbers of seven. As first, he is commanded to write to
seven Churches in Asia, under the figure of seven Golden candlesticks, and to
the seven Angels, are the ministers thereof figured, by seven stars in the
right hand of Christ: Next, we have the book closed with seven seals, which
signifies, (...)
the hid mysteries of God opened by Christ, where the opening of every seal,
contains the precise space of seven years. As likewise, The seven Angels,
with their seven Trumpets, and seven Viols, every one of them (as was
declared before) contain the space of five times seven weeks of years. As
also may be understood of the seven thunders. Chap.* (...)
By every of them, are at least, of the first three seaven-time seven years,
that is, the space of ane Iubilee. There is amysterie also, in the seven
heads and seven Crowns of the beast, set out in the twelft Chapter, which
with the rest, I refer to the learned exposition of JOHN NAPER, upon the
Revelation before mentioned, By all which similitudes and reckonings, and many
moo, we may perceive not only of the number of seven, to contein great
mysteries, but also to be a number of such perfection, that years, times and
other accidents, be specially courted thereby. As also (if I would insist) the
like may be found in many natural things, both in heaven and earth. As in
the heavens, the seven Planets have their seven several courses, which work
great operations in the inferior Elements: Likewise, amongst the fixed
stars, there be 7. called Pleiades, and other 7. Hyades, and the two Polare
Images, called Visa mayor and Vrsa minor, contain either of them 7. stars. And
in the earth there be 7. principal habitable climates. The stature of man's
body, is of 7. foot, with many other suchlike. But it shall suffice here to
make an end.

SEVENTH PROPOSITION.
Of the estate of this present 1600. year of Christ in particular: And that
there is an appearant dangerous alteration, to fall out therein, and within few
years thereafter.

THe estate of this present 1600, year of Christ in particular (which moved
me to write this Treatise) is now to be considered which (as was declared) is
from the creation of the world the 5548. year, co^teining 792. weeks of years:
and for od years, it contains also 113. Jubilees, and 11 single years. For
before the 71. year of Christ, were passed 82. Jubilees: and from thence to
our time, to wit, to 1589. year of Christ, 31. Jubilees. Signified by the
Evangelist John, in his Revelation, by the space of the blowing of the 7.
trumpets, every trumpet containing 245. years. So that this 1600. year, is the
60 year of the blast of the seventh and last trumpet: for to the compleiting
of this 7. and last blast and years thereof, there will be from the creation of
the world 117. Jubilees that is, 819. weeks of years, and 5733. single years,
which will extend to the year of Christ 1785. years, if the world shall continue
so long. But the time by great probability, and good arguments, is to be
abbreviat, for the Elect sake. This 1600, year. then may justly be called a
year of the decaying and fading age of the world for many reasons. First,
because all things that approach near an end, are said to decaie and fail, as
it comes to pass in this year, by the preceding reckoning. For if the
reckoning fall not, Apoc. (...)
the prophetie in the Revelation, cannot fail, where it is written, That the
Angel that stood upon the sea and earth, having the book in his hand, swear
by him that lives for ever more, which created the heaven, earth, and sea, and
all things contained therein, that time shall be no more. But in the days of the
voice of the seventh Angel, when he is to blow, even the mystery of God shall
be finished, as he has declared to his servants the Prophets. Now the
seventh Angel has begun already to blow his trumpet by our reckoning, in
the 1541. year of Christ by-gan, and now the voice of that trumpet still
sounds in our ears, willing us to prepare us for that great day of the
Lords judgment. Secondly, because the signs and tokens foretold, as well by
our Savior himself, as by the Prophets, and namely, by the Spirit of God in
the Revelation, that were to proceed that great judgment, are for the most
part already come to pass and accomplished. Concerning the which, when as the
Apostles asked of our Master Christ, he fore-warneth them of seven. For they
demanded him of three questions, to wit, when shall be the destruction of the
Temple and city of Jerusalem? What should be the sign of his coming? Mat.
(...)
and of the end of the World? Mark. 13.
He makes his answer in two, resolving all these three questiones, Luke. 21.
by the two-times of his coming in the World: Whereof, the former was of his
first coming in the flesh; and the other in his latter coming to judgment.
For the signs, both of the one and the other, he declares to be a like.
Therefore (says he) Verily I say unto you, Matthew. (...).
this generation shall not pass til all these things be fulfilled: And again,
there be some here standing, that shall not taist of death, til all be done.
For albeit, the signs that preceed the latter judgment by extraordinary, yet
they were not to be unlike to them that were at his first coming in the
flesh: as he deduceth them by the particulars. First (says he) there shall
come false Christ's and false prophets: So was there in his first coming,
Benchobab, alias Barchosha^, who feined himself to be Messiah: And Judas
Galilaeus and The^das, (...)
with other false Prophets: And in this last coming likewise, The Roman
Antichrist, usurping Christ his authority* And the sect of the Jesuits,
falsely taking their name from Jesus, but more worthy to take it from Judas
Ischariot, with the Anabaptists, Libertines, and many other false Prophets.
Secondly, where he says, There shall be battelles, and rumors of battelles,
with pestilence, famine and earthquakes, in diverse places. So was it found
especially at his first coming among the Jews, rebelling against the Romans,
by whom they and their commonwealth, were finally utterly over-throwen: And
what famine was in the City of Jerusalem, with pestilence and strange
deaths: ye may read in Josephus de bello Iudaico. So in these latter days,
what wars have been, and yet continue: Nation rising against Nation, and
kingdom against kingdom, even amongst us Christians, the fearful effects
can declare, whereby we appear to be made a pray to the Tyranny of the Turk*
unless God of his mercy bridle his fury. As to the Pestilence, Famine, and
earthquaks and such things, were in the first coming of Christ, as namely,
Act, (...).
the famine whereof Agabus the Prophet fore warned, as that terrible
Earthquake; that was in the time that Christ suffered, with other the like
plagues: So we have seen, and daily see, many such fearful accidents, more
grievously vexing the World nor ever they did many years of before. The third
sign, is persecution of the servants of God, and especially, of those that
foreshewe faithfully the Gospel of Christ, as it was in his first coming: So
is it notour, what innocent blood has been shed, for renewing the true
Preaching of the Gospel in our days: because these things are in recente
memory, upon the particulars, I need not to insist. The fourth sign,
fore-tolde by our Master Christ, is the abundance of iniquity, that should
accompany both his commings, which with the rest of the signs of his first
coming, is properly to be applied to the Nation of the Jews, whose iniquities
(...) to such exceeding measure, that to overcome all the rest, they regarded
not to Crucify the Son of God. And now in these latter days, universally
amongst us Christians, what abundance of all impiety and wickedness, what
unkindly dealing, what untruth? Yea, amongst the better sort, who is not either
cold or careless? I need not seek examples, they are so ryfe. The first
sign is, the Preaching of the Gospel universally, the which, makes all the
other signs to work effectually. For these signs otherwise being natural, or
after a manner common, being joined with the Word, are made Sacraments; as was
the Rayne-bow, in the days of Noah: signifying, that there should not be an
other like flood to destroy the whole world: so in these latter times, such
signs preceding Christ his latter coming, and their significations, declared
by his Gospel, prognosticate undoubtedly his latter coming to judge the world
by fire. For as it was in the days of Noah, when a merveilous security was in
the world; notwithstanding, the Preaching of Noah, and preparation of his arc:
And as the Preaching of Christ and his Apostles was securely contemned by the
Jews: So now a days, the clear light of the Gospel shining again to the
World, and making all men without excuse works no more in the minds of the
most part, then (...) were raw flesh, which cannot digest upon a loathsome
stomach. And as to the sixth token of signs in the Sun, the Moon, and the
stars; and concerning the shaking and mooving of the powers of the heaven; such
things appeared in the first coming of Christ, when that most famous star
appeared, which declared to the Wisemen Christ his birth: and when that
extraordinary darkness fell upon the land of Iudaea in time of his suffering,
which albeit, I take it not to have bin an Eclipse of the Sun, by interposition
of the Moon, between it and the earth (which could not then be, without the
whole motions of the heaven had bin changed) yet was it an evidente darkness,
both in the Sun and in the air, throughout all the Land of Iudaea. ^^od. 10.
The like whereof, was in Egypt universally, except where the Children of
Israel remained, being the ninth plague wherewith the Lord smot that land. Now
likewise have we seen in our days, diverse apparitions in the heaven, namely,
that most notable star or comete, which appeared in the year of our Lord 1572.
most clear, without any spowting hairs or beams from it, the which the most
learned did take for a sign of the approaching of the Lord to judgment
against the bloody tyrants of the earth, and namely, that Herod of France. We
have also seen now lately, that great Eclipse of the Sun, the 1598. year,
whereof the effect yet continues. And as to the commotion or shaking of the
powers of the heaven, I show of before, how the signs are changed from their
former places: so that Aries is come to Taurus, and Taurus to Gemini for the
most part, and so forth the rest: To speak of the Triganes, and great
conjunctiones, I will not now enter: For I suppose the force thereof to be now
greatly debilitate, by reason of the alteration of the signs, and so leave
the discourse to others. The seventh and last sign, is of the coming of the
Sun of man, Christ himself, who as he appeared in his humanity, taking
upon him our nature, wherein he suffered for our sins: So is he to appear in
the clouds, in his second coming, fearful to the wicked, and comfortable
to the Elect: The which seventh sign rests only to come: For other six
i^ a manner are come already, albeit it may be, they appear more evident
hereafter. Always, we see how the signs of the first and second coming of
Christ do agree, so far as we have yet seen. And as for this present year,
and years shortly to come hereafter, there appears no less, but rather
greater mutationes yet to follow, which may be the third evidencie and
argument, of the approaching of the latter day. For as to the signs of the
heaven, so many and so great Eclipses, namely, of the Sun, have not been
seen, these many years by-gane, as shall be within six years to come: What
other heavenly tokens will be annexed thereto, the Lord knows. But this I see,
that after or before the effect of one Eclipse be ended, immediately falls
out an other, as this present 1600. years, at the end of the effect working
of that Eclipse, which was in the 1598. year: signifying, and bringing great
Winds and drought. In the end of June, falls out an other Eclipse of the
Sun, and so forth in the rest. As to other particulars, that are to fall
forth this year, I will speak sparingly thereof: for I pretend not the
Spirit of prophecy, neither do I depend much upon the conjectures of
Astrologues, notwithstanding, I shall recite that which I find in others,
concerning the estate of this year, and certain years following, and
thereafter shortly declare mine own opinion, following the grounds which I
have already laid. I read in the Treatise, called, The second coming of
Christ, whereof, Scheltco a Geueren is the author: his conjecture, that about
this 1600. year, shall be the end of the periode of the Papisticall kingdom.
But he takes up his periods by full 500. years, where as by our reckoning, the
greater period, contains only 490. years. And again, he counts from the
creation of the world, to this, 1600 year of Christ 5562. years, more then
our former count, 14. years. So that there will be a difference between our
reckonings of 44. years, but the matter and space is not great in substance.
For doubtless, that Antichristian kingdom, as it has begun already to fall,
so shortly shall it come to utter ruin. For Babylon must needs fall,
according to the Prophecy of the Revelation. In the which, we find also, at
the end of the 14. Chapter, this number of 1600. where it is said, That the
Vine-presse of Gods wrath was trodden without the City, and blood come out of
it, to the horse bridies, by the space of 1600. stades or furlungs. This
number, some of the learned understand to be meant of years, as though after
the out-running of 1600. years, the end shall be, when the wicked shall be
tormented in hell, after the similitude of a woundrous great blood shed in the
field. But in my judgment, that number is rather to be understood, of a space
of ground, containing so many Fur-longs or stades. For there being eight
Furlongs in a mile of our reckoning, they come to 200. of our common miles,
which was the longest reaching of the bounds of the Land of Israel. For by the
city, is signified Spiritual Jerusalem, the Church of God; within the which,
the Elect and godly are contained: And the tredding of the vine-presse without
the City, is meante of them that are out of the true Church, which are in a
far greter number, upon whom Gods wrath does fall, as it were, comprehending the
whole space of the Land, without the city: But to return to that Treatise, of
the second coming of Christ, the author insisteth very much upon the number of
5555. from the creation of the world, which after his reckoning, ends in the
year of Christ 1593. years; but after our count, the 1607. year: of the which
number, he gathers a great mystery: Because it contains, both an
Arithmeticall and Geometrical proportion of numbers, to wit, an Arithmeticall,
in proceeding by Four fiues, and a Geometrical, by reason the parts thereof are
made up in progres, by multiplication of 10. As fiue-times ten, make, 50.
ten-times 50. make 500. and ten times 500. make 5000. Or if ye like to proceed
the contrary way, the tenth part of 5000. is 500 and the tenth part of 500. is
50. and the tenth part of 50. is 5. whereof he gathers, that after the
co^pleiting of 5555. years, from the Worlds creation, there shall fall forth
a merveylous change of the estate of the World, as indeed there was not such a
concurrence of numbers, since the year of Christ 496. Neither shall the like
so long as the World lasts. Now because of the perfection of the number of
five, above other numbers, it comprehends in it, all unities, of the which,
all other numbers do consiste, be they eauen or odd: and because, distributive
justice stands in Geometrical proportion, he gathers and supposes, that
the Lord God, maker and governor of all things, by this proportionable
agreeing of numbers, would lead us to a certain deep consideration of a
perfect expyring and end of all things: So that he trusts, the coming of
the Son of GOD to judgment shortly thereafter to ensue. To the which, he
adds many other arguments and conjectures to the same purpose. As to me,
albeit I like not to follow any Pythagorical superstition, in observation of
numbers, yet in so far as we may have any good ground out of holy Scriptures or
evident reason. For such reckoning, I think it not altogether to be refused,
having the concurrence of other good testimonies, to confirm the same. As
indeed, there appears to be some great mystery in the conjoyning of so many
fiues to-gether. For before it, or with it, the manifold Eclipses that are to
fall out, with their effects, and specially, that fearful Eclipse of the
1605. year, wherein the Sun shall be allutterlie darkened at Noone-daie,
whereof the effects shall* continue certain years thereafter; pretend great
mutations and perturbationes to ensue in those few years following; As wartes,
seditiones, pestilences, famine, with many other grievous calamities, and
Tragical eventes; such as treasons, conspiracies; so that few men may trust
one another, wherewith the common society of men, is like to be dissolved, and
all licencious liberty to wickedness to have place. And shortly, Love to
wax cold, and self-love to wax hot, with all other such enormities and
corruptiones, as the Apostle PAVLE prophecieth to fall forth in the latter
days in his Epistles: And namely, in matters of Religion, ^. Tim. 3.
new sects and heresies, shall arise, with a merveilous defection from the
faith, according to the words of our Master Christ, When the Son of man
shall come, believe ye, he shall find faith in the earth? But the most
evident testimony of all, is the agreement of those said heavenly signs, with
the prophecies of the Revelation of the sixth and seventh trumpets. For the end
of the sixth trumpet and Vi^le, and the beginning of the seventh (under which
now we are) agree together, as they do in all the rest. Now the sum of all
those tokens and signs, is to declare, how when God sends his Word, and
Preachers of the Gospel in the world, men refusing the same, are tormented
with wartes, and many other calamities, and that by his just judgment. This
is meant first generally, by opening of the seven seals of the closed book.
For at the first seal opening, the white horse, Apocal. 7.
and the ryder, with his bow bent, signifies, the Preaching of the Evangel. At
the second seal opening the red horse, with his rydar, betokens the sword,
blood, and battle, which God sends in the World, being disobedient to the
preaching of the Gospel. Like wise, the black-horse, with his ridar, and the
balance in his hand, at the opening of the third seal, signifies dearth
and famine, sent for the same cause. And the fourth horse, being of pale color,
with his ridar Death, at the opening of the fourth seal, declares the plague
of pestilence, and other deadly diseases, punishing men's rebellion and
disobedience to the Gospel. At the opening of the fifth seal: The Saints and
Martyrs, for the testimony of the truth, crave revenge at God hand, for the
innocent shedding of their blood. At the sixth seal opening, the great
earthquake, with obscuratio^ of the Sun, and the rest of the signs therein
specified, declare great troubles in general, corruption and darkning of the
truth, with bloody persecution, and throwing down of the Ministers of the
Gospel, so that the Church did lurk in obscurity for a time, and many made
defection from the Roman Empire. But in the mean time, GOD had his servantes
marked, as is specified in the seventh chapter. Finally, at the seventh seal
opening the silence for half an hourse, signifies, a little rest by God,
granted to his Church, in the midst of these troubles: And therewith, is
declared, how GOD accepted the prayers of his Saints, offered by Christ. All
these things (I say) testify in general the estate of the Church, and such
troubles as have f^llen forth in all ages and periodes of time, the beginning
of the Preaching of the Gospel, and yet continue in ou^ days. For the end is
not yet come. And the estate of the Church is like to the self almost in all
ages. But by the blowing of the seven trumpets, alluding to the Iubil^es of
the jews, we understand the particular estate of every periode of time, since
the first Preaching of the Gospel, as partly was declared before. Of the which
periodes, we are now into the seventh and last, to wit, in the beginning
thereof, which has affinity and similitude, with the end of the former sixth
periode and blast of Trumpet. Apoc. 8.
Therefore, ceasing now to make discourse in particular of the first four
blasts of the Trumpet, wherein the first plague of hail and fire mingled with
blood, does signify, a certain unmeet temperature of cold and heat of men,
in receiving the Gospel, with mingled bloody persecution of the tyrants of
the earth. And the second, of the burning mountain, cast into the sea, may
signify, the great persecutor, Diocletian being last of these emperors, with
his fiery rage against the wavering multitude of christians, of who^, the
third part were either destroyed, or yielded to his tyranny. The third trumpet
likewise, making mention of a great star falling from heaven, does properly
signify Arius, who with his bitter heresy, against the divinity of the Son of
God, infected the pure fountains of the word of God. And where it is said, that
at the blaste of the fourth trumpet, the third part of the Sun, the Moon,
and Stars were smitten: We understand, the light of the pure Gospel, with
the Ministers thereof to have bin in a great part obscured in that four periode
of time. Of these things (I say) I will not now entreat in particular, but
come to the last three blastes of trumpet, containing three woes, that is,
three more fearful plagues then the former. Apoe. ^.
So comes the fifth blast, and first woe, about the 1051. year of Christ,
wherein a great star falls from heaven, to whom was given the ^eye of the
bottomlesse-pit, out of the which, arose a great and dark smoke, and out of the
smoke Locustes, which are described at length in the text. This star I take
undoubtedly, to signify the Pope, with his feyned keys, whereby he pretends
to have power to hind and louse, not only in the earth, but also to deliver
men's souls out of Purgatory, with the smoke of false doctraine: and the
^ocustes, to signify his corrupted Clergy, and swarms of Cloisters, who are
set forth with their lively colors and properties, that, no man can deny to
agree well unto them. This star may also signify, Mahomet that false prophet,
with his corrupted Alcoran and (...) of his sect. Always, the remanent of
this first (...), ^et troubles the world, albeit this Antichristi^^ and
Papisticall kingdom, in a part has gotten a great fall: Therefore we come to
the sixth trumpet, which begouth to be blown, about the year of Christ 1296.
wherein the four Angels were loused from the flood Euphrates, which is most
conveniently interpret of the four great Mahometane nations, coming from the
East, to wit, the Arabianes, Saracenes, Turks, and Tartarianes, with the
infinite number of their Horsemen, ay ready for battle, with a furious and
fyrie rage; and namly, that bloody Nation of the Turks, who now has the
dominion over the rest, and over a great part of the Earth. This is the second
woe, whereof this day still we have experience; JOHN therefore says, he saw
these horses long before in a vision, with them that sat upon them, having
fyerie habbergeons, and of Iacynth and brimstome, and that of the fyery smoke
and brimstone, the third part of men were killed: which may well signify their
goodness and artillery; by the which devilish inventio^, a great part of men of
the world, are daily murdered; shutt out at their mouths and fyered at their
tails. This plague then being one of the last plagues, signified also in
pouring out of the sixth Viole upon the great river Euphrates to dry it up, that
is, to take away all impediments, and to give place in the wrath of God, to the
kings of the East, to invade Europe; cease not this day to continue, and is
appearant to continue with great rage, this instant, 1600. year, and certain
years hereafter, concurring with the threatening signs of the heavens, whereof
I have already spoken. And the cause thereof, is evide^t: Because (as it
follows in the text) The rest of men which are not already killed by these
plagues, repented not of their works of their hands, that they should not
worship devils and Idols of God and of silver, of brass and stone, and of
wood, which neither can see, neither hear, nor go: expressly damning the
Papists, which yet remain in their Idolatry. As also these repents not of
their murdering of the Saints of God, nor of their sorceries, neither their
fornications nor of their thieft. In the which they, and other feyned
Christians amongs us still are involved: For the which causes follows the
third and last woe* with the blast of the 7. trumpet, which begouth to blow
about the 1541 year of Christ. Apoe 10. and 11.
But before this last woe fall out: the Lord by the Angel of his covenant Jesus
Christ, of his great goodness, offreth to the world, the book of his new
Testament, and wills the same to be preached by his Ministers: and with that
to our great comfort, the true church is measured, and the elect ar marked, so
that Satan and the tyrants of the world, cannot hinder their salvation. The^
finally comes the last plague and woe, upon infidels and impenitent sinners,
suddenly and unlooked for, when they with then head, the devil shall pass
with many woes unto everlasting torment, but this shall not be till the second
woe, be utterly consumed and past, with the dependances thereof, which a^
signified in the seventh blast, by a wounderfull great Earthquake, with
lighenings and voices, and thundrings, with much hail. The like whereof is
repeated, in pouring of the seavent viole of Gods wrath, where it is said also,
that the hail was great like talents that fell out of heaven upon men, Chap. 16.
so that they blasphemed God, because of the plague of the hail, it was so
great. By which figures, the Spirit of God will utter unto us, the great
destruction of his enemies, with such as hold still the beasts mark, and have no
grace to repent in these last days. For of before, the thundering of Gods
word, called all men to repentance, and to obedience of the Gospel, with an
amiable and loving voice. But now finally, such as will not come out of
Babylon, nor repent their wicked lines, by Gods just judgment, are threatened
with an other kind of thundering, to wit, with horible punishment, alluding
by these similituds to the over throw of Sodom, and to the words of the
Psalmist where he says, Psalm. 1^.
upon the wicked, God shall rain snares fire and brimstone, and stormy
tempests. It is more-over added, in pouring out of the seventh viole in the
air (whereby is signified a great perturbation of all the elements) that there
was such an Earthquake, that the like had never been. These tempests in the
air, may both be understood literallie and Spiritually. For literally, our
Master Christ fore-warneth us of the like, where he testifyeth, that before
his latter coming, the powers of the heaven shall be moved: and spiritually, the
moving of the air and the great earthquak signify such a co^fusio^ of al
things in the world, that the lik has not bin seen of before: And by the much
and vehement great hail, is meant the great coldness of love that now we see
in the world, as also it was fore told by our Savior Christ: And by his
Apostle PAVLE, speaking of self-love, and lack of zeal in Religion, which
makes men to despise God and godliness, and to blaspheme against the Gospel,
and Preachers thereof, which plague now (al^s) does every where increase. And
it is added futher in the text of JOHN, that the great city was divided into
three parts. By this city (no doubt) is meant the external face of the
visible Church, composed of true professors, Papists, and Hypocrites so that
we see there shall not be a full and perfect unity of religion, to the end of
the World. But in the midde-time, we have this soli^^e comfort, that at the
blast of the seventh trumpet, the mystery of God shall be fulfil^ed toward
his Saints, and great joye shall be among the Elect, because the Kingdoms of
this world, are our Lords and his Christ's, and he shall reign for evermore. And
with this shall come the end of this world, which albeit it be uncertain, as
touching the year, day and hour, when it shall be, yet certainly it is not
far off, seeing al these tokens and others, specified in the Scriptures, are
already fulfilled, and the great Angel has sworn that there shall be time no
more: The Lord make us ready for his coming, that we may lift up our heads
from the vanities of this world, and wait for that day of our Redemption:
Come Lord Jesus come.

FINIS.
A faithful and godly Admonition to al true Christians, gathered upon the
words of the Apostle PAVLE
Ephesians. 5. verse 16. Coloss ^. verse 5. To redeem time, because the days are
evil.
GOD The creator and author of time, as he has appointed all things that are
done in the World to be measured thereby; so has he ordained, certain limits
and bounds of time; some short, some longer, unto the life of every man in this
earth, according as it is written in Io^, where he says, (...)
Are not the days of man, and the number of his Months appointed with thee [O
Lord] thou have limited his bounds, which he cannot pass over. And a little
before, to declare the shortness of these bounds, he compares the life of
every man that is borne of a woman, to a flower that suddenly shoteth up, and
is cut down, and vanishes away as a shadow, and continues not. Likewise,
DAVID in the Psalm, Phalm* (...)
compares his days to an hand breadth, and shows, how every man walks, as
in a shaddowe; disquieteth him self in vain, heapeth up riches, and cannot
tell who shall gather them. And Pindarus the Poet, to expres to the uttermost
the brevitie and uncertainty of man's life, compares it not only to a
shadow, but to the dream of a shaddowe: And yet so is the corrupt nature of
the most part of men that they imagine and dream unto themselves, a certain
false opinion of immortality in this present most frail and transitory life.
And (as the same Poet says) a certain presumpteous hope, so has knit up our
mortal members, that we imagine many great matters in our minds, and our
fore sight has far ends. To refrain this vain curiosity, the Prophet
Moses, in the ninety Psalm, after that he has distributed the frail
estate of man's life, declaring how they pass away, as a sleep, and as the
Grass that grows in the Morning, and at the evening is withered away.

And how that commonly, the longest term of men's years, is about three
score and ten years: And if some of greater strength, attain to the age of
foure-score years, yet are they the more subject to labor and sorrow: he
makes his supplication unto GOD, that he will teach us to number our days,
that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom: Whereby he shows, that none
but they whom GOD of his especial grace, does illuminate by his Spirit,
can rightly apply their hearts, to this true Wisdom, to considder the
brevitie of the short number, of the days we have here in this present life.

Therefore (dear brethren and Christians) we have great need most
earnestlieto call and cry unto GOD, that we forget not this count: Forthere
be many that can make great reckonings of long times, and many years that
are paste before them: And yet cannot rightly reckon the short time and
continuance of their own lives: yea, men will reckon and count by Arithmeticke
all things, and even as the very distance, between the Heaven and the Earth,
and the most highest Stars: And yet only the faithful, (and they that put
their confidence in God) know the distance that is between this short and
transitory life, and that blessed and immortal life which has no end, unto
the which we are created, and to the which end, this present life ought to
be directed.

For, (dear brethren) let us bat considder the vanity of the most part of
men in this point, how littele they esteem of the short time they are to
remain in this present and momentaneous life: Not-with-standing, most of all
their vain pretenses and imaginationes, is to compass the whole World, (if
it were possible) and to do great wounders and acts therein.

For time being so precious, and so highly to be regarded, in respect of the
shortness of this life, that GOD has lent us in this wretched World, and
(as the Prophet DAVID shows us most plainly and evidently, in the some
score and tenth Psalm) we know not how soon the Lord shall say unto us,
Return ye sons of ADAM unto corruption.

And more-over, time once being lost, cannot be again recovered, for no Gold
not price, yet is there not any thing where-of men are more prodigal, in so
much, that there is nothing whereof they regard less the loss, yea, that
which is worse, the greater part of men count so little of time, that for a
short and transitory passing of time in this life, they lose the joy and
felicity of that everlasting life, and perpetual time, whereof, comes this
speec^e commonly used of this world (pas time) but by corruption of manners of
men, who esteemlightly how time passes away, so they may have some vain
pleasure in the drist thereof, as a thing where with they be fasshed and
wearied: So we see, how the little time that men have in this life, for the
most part is spent, to wit, in vanity, idleness, yea, over often in vice
and wickedness, and that little time which is bestowed in virtue or
godliness, is commonly most wearisome: As when men are occupied; be they
Magistrates or judges, in hearing the plaintes of the poor, and execution of
justice; be they inseriours or craftel-men, or laborers, in doing their handie
work, and appointed labor, to the profit of themselves, and their families:
But in spending of it, which by that means they win, as in drinking,
playing, or vain games, there is no hoe, not falsherie to be occupied night
and day; and in matters of godliness, see we not what fassherie it is, even to
many, not of the worst sort, to spend the space of an hour, or little more in
hearing the word of God, wherein stands our salvation, who will not like nor
tire of sit at table thrice as long to feed the body? yea, oft-times, to
over-burden it with meat and drink, to whom it is so irksom, shorter time to
have their souls fed with that word which is the more precious an delicat
food of everlasting life. Wherefore, seeing the most part of this world, regards
so little of time, but pas it over so lightly, to their great damnage and
perrill of their own souls: we, the faithful, ought to be the more earnest, to
exhort and admonish one another, to occupy the short time we have hear, not as
the common sort of careless men uses: but in such ways, as we may be able
(at least in some measure) to give account to him that ^es placed us in this
earth, as upon a skaffold to play our part: and if we have neglected or
misspent the time bypast, to take heed to recover the loss thereof in times
coming. Now this is the cause and end wherefore Paul in the words of our
text, exhorted so diligently the faithful of his days, to redeem time, by
recovering the loss bypast, and making much of the time present, and of time
to come, so long as they have it, apprehe^ding greedely the occasion offered
unto them to do well: And this the Apostle speaks to the Gentiles of his time,
being newly converted to the knowledge of the Gospel, having respect to
their-by-past life and conversation, spent in vanity, wickedness and
ignorance of God, according to the which, tends that saying of Peter in his
first Epistle, 4. chap. verse 3. as he writes also of the same matter, saying,
It is sufficient for us, that we have spent the time past of the life, after
the lusts of the Gentiles, walking in wantonness, lusts, drankennesse, in
gluttony, and in abhominaeble idolatries: And this same our Apostle, to the
like purpose, in another place says, Romans (...).
We know the time, that the hour is now to rise from sleep for our salvation,
is nearer then when we believed the night is past, and the day is at hand: Let
us therefore cast away the works of darkness, and put on the armor of
light, that we may walk honestly as in the da^e, not in gluttony and
drunkenness, nor in strife nor invying, not in chambring and wantonness, but to
put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and take no thought for the flesh, to fulfill the
lusts of it. So here the meaning of the Apostle is, where he speaks of
redeeming of time, that the faithful take great diligence in the recovering
of that which is bypast and lost, by walking more circumspectly and
diligently, in the trad of godliness, in times coming, taking a similitude from
worldly men, and worldly affairs: As if a Merchant having slipped and slept his
business, in not coming in due time to his market, should be put in
remembrance to be more vigilant in times coming, and use more diligence in
vttring his wares in time to come, or as if it were, to fore-warne us not to be
like unthrifty spenders wedde-setters of land, who spend ryotously the money
they take upon it, and have taken no heed to pay the yearly duty, or
annuel-rent to the creditors, but let it slip over, the longer they so do, the
Land is worse to redeem, unless they take better heed in times coming.

So they that drive time, to amend their lives from day to day, and suffer
themselves to be carried away in a custom and habit of evil doing, repent
over-late, when they cannot amend the former loss. Therefore the Apostle in
the words preceding, desires the Ephesians, to take heed to walk circum
spectly. not as such unwise men, but as the wise, and understand what the
will of the Lord is. And as we are made light in the Lord, so we walk in
the Light and sight of him and his Angels, having them as witnesses of all
our doings: Al-be-it, no mortal man should know the same, and so to become
wiser then the common sort of the World, as being instructed in the School
of Christ, the fountain of all true wisdom. This being the mind and meaning
of the Apostle, concerning the redemption of time, we have to mark the cause
of this his earneste admonition, which he adds immediately, saying, Because
the days are evil, not that the days were evil of themselves; but this he
speaks, in respect of the time, and dangerous estate of Christians in his
days, the world being also then full of corruption, and offenses, and
therefore more difficill to the faithful, to walk warily therein, the Gospel
then having so many adversaries; and the Devil himself occupying a tyranny
in the World, so that the time could not be dedicate and consecrate to the
service of GOD, unless the same were in a manner redeemed, and the lost time
bypast, bought again with the loss of worldly pleasures, and forsaking of
the unfruitful works of darkness: Seeking after new occasiones of
Godliness, which the World and worldlings, by evil example, would pluck
away from us. Colloss. ^.
And therefore he admonishes the Collossians likewise to walk warelie, toward
them that are without, redeeming the time, meaning toward the infidels, that
they being mingled amongst them, might not only beware, least they were
defiled with their corrupt manner of living, and so by process of time, become
like to them, but also to beware to give them occasion of slander by any
apearand evil ensample of life, thereby to make them to speak evil of the
Gospel, and also to be more cruel, and bente to persecute them for the
Gospelles sake; therefore he wills them, to redeem the time, by taking
occasion of well doing Wheresoever he same was offered, and strive against all
impedimentes, and that because of the evil days and great corruptiones, that
then reigns in the World.

Now, if the Apostle had need in his days, to use this exhortation, how much
more is it needful in this corrupted age wherein we are of the which, the
same Apostle PAVLE, speaks unto TIMOTHEE, in the second Epistle the third
Chapter, in this manner, Know thou this, that in the last days, there shall
be perrellous times: For men shall be lovers of themselves, boasters,
proud, cursed speakers, dissobedient to Parents, vn-thankfull, vn-holie,
without natural affection, truce breakers, false accusers, intemperat,
fearce, despisers of them which are good, Traitors, heady, high-minded, lovers
of pleasure more then of GOD, having a show of godliness, but denying the
power thereof. Turn away therefore (says he) from such. Surely, if ever there
was any time since the beginning of the world, or any age where-into such
corruptions and manners of men abounded; this may be holden the principal,
whereunto charity is waxed could, and all kind of iniquity waxed ho^e, and
has full liberty: And albeit the Apostle in this place, by the last times,
means in a manner the whole estate of Christ's kingdom, that was to follow
his days, yet the nearer the Sun draws to an end, Math. 24
the more danger and greater troubles no doubt were to ensew: For as Christ
himself does forewarne us, In these latter days shall arise wars and
tumultes of wars, famine, pestilence, pers^cution for the Gospel, with other
calamities and inconveniences, which fall out against men's bodies, but the
corrupt and evil manners of men, also should infect the souls of those that
be not ware with them, and that which is worse, the Apostle here means, not
only that such vices shall reign in these latter times, amongst the ungodly,
and enemies that are without the Church, but even of domestical professoures
with the same, that would be reckoned amongst the members of his Church, for
GOD will have the same so exercised, that she shall be subject to bear, albeit
not to foster such pestiferous corruptions, within her bosom: for which cause,
we have al great need in these days, of this fore-warning, that we should
learn in time to bear patiently our estate, and to eschew the evil example
of those men, who are now mingled amongst us, whose company is declared to be
the more dangerous, that he showed, that such men polluted with so many
erroneous faults, should nevertheless profess outwardly, and have a show of
godliness, for so is the nature of Hypocrites, to cloak their sins with
extreme impudency: Of such sort were the Pharisees of old; and in our time,
the filthy Papistical Clergy, and over-manie of those who pretend aye
reformed Religion: For the Apostle here makes a catalogue of such signs, as
appear not outwardly incontinent, but lurk and are hid under a certain
feined holiness. For where shall we find an hypocrite but he is proud, a
lover of himself, and contemner of others: yea, fearce, cruel, and
deceitful: but fo he will not appear to men's eyes, unless he be more
narrow^ie espied by them that have the spirit of discretion, to know them by
their fruits. Of these Hypocrites, the Apostle Paul, in his other Epistle to
Timothee, gives two examples, 1. Tim. 4.
which he declared also, shall be in the latter days, wherein some shall
depart from the faith, taking heed to deceivable spirits; yea, teaching
devilish doctrine, to wit, forbidding marriage, and commanding to abstain
from meats, which God created and ordained, to be received with
thanksgiving. Noting in special (besides other heretics) the Papists with
their superstitious decrees, whereby they bind the consciences of men, with
these two errovrs and many vthers, contrary to the liberty of the Gospel, and
persecute by fire and sword true Christians, that will not assent to their
devilish decrees: therefore we may well conclude, these are the dangerous
days, whereof Paul meant, and that the faithful have great need to take
heed to them selves: And by all appearance this same present year of Christ,
1600. with certain few years, immediately following, are like to be years of
great troubles to the Church of God and persecution, intended by the
Papisticall tyranny, against all true professoures of Gospel, wherein they
may be able to invade, as may witness, that late League, made in Ferrar, at
the marriage of the King of Spain, and that mis-made Cardinal, Albertus,
Archduke of Austria, celebrate by Pope Clement the eight, which has been
interprysed to be begun and to take execution in some parts of Almanie, and
of the Low cuntries: and great vows and preparationes made (as we hear) not
only against those cuntries, but against this I Will of Britain, and
inhabitants thereof, the which, the Lord in his mercy, turn to the
confusion of the interprisoures thereof, as he did before: And give us grace,
that we may with watching and prayer, depend upon his majesty, trustling, and
waiting for his deliverance, occupying the time, and ocasion offered to us of
peace and quietness, in such sort, that suddane destruction apprehend us not
before we beware, according as we have been forewarned of our master Christ,
and of his Apostle Peter, declaring that his latter coming to judgment, shall
be as in the days of Noah, when as they were eating and drinking, marying, and
giving in Marriage, unto the day that he was entered into the Arc, and then came
the floude and destroyed them al. So shall the coming of the Son of man be
(says he.) We see now the world is in as great and greater security, then
it was then, and all the sins that reigned the^ in the world abou^d now more
then they did. Therefore, the sins that we read of them of that age were two
in special, the one was the unlawful conjunction in marriage of the children
of God, or the faithful seed with the cursed posterity of CAIN, and that
there were then Giants in the Earth, to wit, mighty oppressoures, usurping
^yrannicall dominion over men, such as was not seen in the world of before.
And have we not these and many more greater sins and enormities, raignning
at all liberty in our days, for who now seeks alliance of marriage with the
Godly, for virtue or Godliness cause? But be they Godly, be they ungodly;
the first question is, what may they spend, how much men may give with their
daughters; and as to tyranny and oppression was there ever greater since the
world stood. But besides these specials, kindness, fidelity, and love, true
fear of GOD (which is principal) where be they to be found? But in place
thereof, craft, doubleness, deceit, insatiable greedines, and such other
sins, as was recited before, and prophesied by PAVLE, bear the swinge in
such sort, that it is marvel how a common society can stand any longer
amongst men. And if this were only amongst the Roman sort of profane
men, it were more to be borne with, but even they who will be in account and
have place in the Church of God, are no better for the most part: And (to cease
now to speak in particular, of other forrayne cuntries) coming to our selves
in this Island; what is there in England, and Scotland, but a naked profession
of Religion, with out fruits following? In England, a proud ambition, both in
Church, and amongst the whole multitude: Yea, proud profanitie, with contempt
and disdain of others. In Scotland, a sluggish security, and in both the
Lands, a loath-some haiting of the word of GOD, casting off the yoke of
discipline, and licenceous liberty in all kind of ungodliness, yea, meiting
of the Lord our God, with extreme unthankfulness, in respect of his graces
offered so long to both the Nationes: Falsehood, oppression, murders,
harlottries, and all other such kind of mischievous dealing, without having
any punishmente: Yea, filthy Swine, 2. Pet. ^. Jude.
and Dogs, eating their own vomit, as was prophesied in PETER and IVDE, in
their Epistles; and namely, such prophaine mockers of all religion, having once
professed the truth, and now turning to Epicureisme, and develish Atheism,
tanting at the promise of the coming of the Lord Jesus to judgment, and
saying, that all worldly things continue in the same estate they were from the
beginning, and so supposing the world never to have end, and that there shall
neither be punishment for evil doing, nor reward for well doing, after this
life: To whom Peter answered accordingly, as in his second Epistle, we may
read, how they willingly misknow how the first world was destroyed by
water, and it rests, that the next, which we are in, be destroyed by fire,
and that the long suffering of the Lord is (if it were possible) to bring al
men to repentance and how a thousand years is with him as one day, and one
day, as a thousand years, as indeed what is the time, if we shall reckon
all the ages from the beginning of the world, unto this present, but as it was
not six days expleit, for giueing to every age a thousand years, as some
do, the six thousand; vet it will lack four hundredth forty five years, and if
we count by hundreths, the ages of the world (which is now commonly the
longest time of man's life) there will be but fifty five ages paste, and we are
now in the fifty sixtage, wherein all tokens of the latter times, appears for
the most part to be fulfilled (whereof we have spoken in our Treatise before)
and if we shall believe the Astrologues, Saturn being Lord of the revolution
of the great Circle this year, signifies Sects, changing of estates and
Kingdoms. Seeing then all these things threatten vnvnto us the hasty cumming
of the Lord to judgment, it becomes us now not to neglect the occasion offered
unto us, so long as we are in this present short life, to do well, for we
know how occasion is painted, as the verse says: Front capillata est, post
hac occasio calva.
Occasion on the forehead has hair,
But ay behind she is naked and baire.


Wishing al men therefore earnestly, (as our Master fore-warneth us) to lift
up their heads, and wait for their approaching redemption, when the Lord shall
appear in the clouds to the comfort of the faithful. And seeing there is no
perpetual remaining for us in this world, but after a certain short space of
time, we all must needs change our dwelling place, and compeare before that
celestial Judge; that we learn to address our selves for that heavenly
life, while we have time, for it shall come to pass, that time shall be no
more, when as the seventh Angel shall begin to blow his trumpet. For then (as
John speaks in his Revelation) the mystery of God shall be finished. Let us
not therefore be like the foolish virgins, but when the bridgroome comes,
Math. (...).
let us have our Lamps reddy prepared with oil to meet him, and the more
thornie and dangerous the way of the jorney of our life is in these evil days,
let us be the more diligent, and warily taking heed to the steps of our feet,
that we may walk as in light and not in darkness; and the Lord will come
shortly and put an end to our labors, receiving us in his everlasting
kingdom, even the Lord Jesus Christ. To whom with his heavenly Father, and
the holy Ghost, be al honor and praise for ever, Amen.


