THEOLOGICAL AND SCHOLASTICALL POSITIONS CONCERning Usury.

Set forth by Definitions and Partitions; framed according to the Rules of a
natural Method.

AT OXFORD, Printed by JOSEPH BARNES, and are to be sold in Fleete-Streete at
the sign of the Turks head by JOHN BARNES. An. Do. 1602.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful, and most religious Gentlemen, RALPH HOCKENHVLL, and
HVGH HVRLESTON, Esquires, all Grace and Peace external, internal, eternal.
TO write against Usury (Right worshipful) is no noveltie; and to give the
Usurer notice of the dangers wherein he walloweth, is a thing necessarily
performed in all Ages; begun by our Fathers, who gave the first onset,
seconded by Us, who continue the skirmish, and to be practiced of our
Posterities, who doubtless will willingly follow their Fathers, wherein we
have so happily followed ours. The Sin is heinous, and the danger desperate;
yea so much the more dangerous, when it is covert and shrow ded; as a consuming
fever, that cannot be espied before it grow incurable. I know there be many,
otherwise good Christians, that entertain this ugly monster, who would not do
it to gain all the world, if they knew their trade were damned-vsury. Give
me leave therefore (Right worshipful) to decipher the deceiptfullnes of this
Sin, by pointing at some vsurarious practices, which are utterly unlawful
though commonly they be not so accounted. I will touch but some few of the
principal, least I should tread an endless maze, and enter a labirinth out
of which Theseus himself were not able to reduce me.

FIRST the^, this covert and shrow ded usury is committed in buying and
Selling.

1 I buy barley before hand for 4r. a comb which at the time of the delivery (I
know) will be worth 6r. or a noble.

This is cloaked Usury. Because that for payment before hand, I buy a great
deal the cheaper.

2 I sell my wares: I give a day of payment, and for that I am to forbear my
money so long, I sell above mine ordinary price, or above a reasonable gain.

Herein (no question) I commit usury. Because I sell the time, and make a gain
of lending.

3 A man comes to me to borrowe money: I answer, I will lend him no money for
usury. But if he vvil buy a horse of me for 10li. ( which is scarce vvorth
20s.) I will lend him so much money for such a time.

This is usury. Because the money which surmounteth the price of the Horse, is
a full recompense for the loan.

SECONDLY, It is committed under pretense of Letting.

1 One comes to me to borrow an 100li for 7. years. I answer, He shall have
it; if he will hire a house of me for 10li. yearly, ( which is scarce worth
10s.) and take a lease of the same during the said term of 7. years.

This is plain Usury. Because the rent of the house pays for the loan of
the money.

THIRDLY, It is committed in Lending.

1 I come to a man to borrow money. He will lend me so much as I ask, but in
light gould, in cracked angels, or such like. Yet he will have payment in good
current money.

This is Usury. Because he makes a manifest gain of Lending

2 If in consideration of a piece of money sent I take a piece of ground, a
house, or cattle, or any fructifieng thing, until the money be paid again.

This is Usury. Unless that the fruit I reaped from the pledge be diducted
from the principal.

3 If for such a consideration, I take for pleadg apparel, plate. etc. and use
the same until payment be made.

This is Usury. Because I reap comodity by the use of the pledge for the Loan
only.

4 I deliver 20li upon condition to have 22li at the years end, if I be the^
living, but if I die to have but 18li restored again.

This is plain Usury. 1 Because the gain is certain, in respect of the
Lender, and that for the Lone only. 2 Because there is no respect had whether
the borrowers gain be lawful or not, yea whether he gain any thing at all or
no. 3 Because the Lender does not adventure the Principal. 4 Because he does
not rely upon GODS providence for disposing, and ordering of his Goods: but
is sure of Gain (if he lives,) howsoever it goes with the Borrower.

5 I deliver 20li. upon condition to have 22li at the years end, if either my
self, or one other who^ I shall name, be then living, but if we be both dead
at the same time, then no part of payment at all to be made, neither of gain
nor of principal.

This is Usury: for the reasons house, or cattle, or any fructifieng thing,
until the money be paid again.

This is Usury. Unless that the fruit I reaped from the pledge be diducted
from the principal.

3 If for such a consideration, I take for pleadg apparel, plate. etc. and use
the same until payment be made.

This is Usury. Because I reap comodity by the use of the pledge for the Loan
only.

4 I deliver 20li upon condition to have 22li at the years end, if I be the^
living, but if I die to have but 18li restored again.

This is plain Usury. 1 Because the gain is certain, in respect of the
Lender, and that for the Lone only. 2 Because there is no respect had whether
the borrowers gain be lawful or not, yea whether he gain any thing at all or
no. 3 Because the Lender does not adventure the Principal. 4 Because he does
not rely upon GODS providence for disposing, and ordering of his Goods: but
is sure of Gain (if he lives,) howsoever it goes with the Borrower.

5 I deliver 20li. upon condition to have 22li at the years end, if either my
self, or one other who^ I shall name, be then living, but if we be both dead
at the same time, then no part of payment at all to be made, neither of gain
nor of principal.

This is Usury: for the reasons before alleged.

OBJECTION. I adventure to loose not only the profit of my money for a whole
year, but also to loose the principal it self.

ANSWER. No, no: Here is no adventure at all. 1 For if the Usurer lives his
gain is certain howsoever the Borrower shall do 2 The adventure must not only
be in respect of the Lender, but al so and that principally in respect of the
Borrower, who uses the money.

FOURTHLY It is committed in laying to pawn.

1 I lend 20li for ayeare, and for assurance of mine own, I take a pawn
worth 30. or 40li with a bill of sale, that in desalte of payment at the day
appointed the pawn shall be my own.

This is Usury: If either I hope the pawn shall be forfeited; or it I take
the advantage of the forfeiture, if it so fall out.

I am to bold to trouble your Worships with recital of particular Practices:
yet, because I know it is the custom of many men rather to scan over Epistles
and prefaces, the^ diligently to peruse whole books; I thought good to reserve
eve^ this place, for these few cases that al Me^may see the^ briefly censured,
and proved to be within compass of manifest Usury.

Many learned Divines have written concerning this point. I have read all that
ever I could come by, Fathers, Canonistes, and modern VVriters: and made
choice of what I judged best out of them al, which I have couched together
concisely, and methodically: so as the Reader may compendiously as it were with
one project, take a view of the whole, what has bin written concerning VSVRIE.

This Labor (how great or how small soever) I humbly present unto your
Worships jointly, and severally, as a token of the dutiefull regard, and loving
affection I bear unto you: being not otherwise any way able to declar my
thankfulness, for the great and manyfolde favors and benefits which from time
to time I haue^ received from you heartily beseeching your Worships, so to
accept this small gift, as it is consecrated and dedicated unto you; that is,
with a willing, cheerful, and Christian mind.

The LORD JESUS bless and preserve your WORSHIPS and perfect the good work he
has begun in you, that you may appear blameless in the day of the LORD.
OXON. From St. Marie Hall; this 1. of April, An. Do. 1602. Your VVorshippes
most humbly to command. GABRIEL POWEL.

The Contents of this Treatise.
Chap. 1. Of the Kinds and differences of Usury. Page n. Chap. 2: Of the
Defini^ion of Usury. 9. Chap. 3: Of the Difference between Usury and
Interest. 12: Chap. 4: Whether it be lawful to lend for Usury? 16: Chap. 5:
That Usury is unlawful and damnable. 27: Chap. 6: How great a Sin Usury
i^? 38 Chap. 7: Objections for Usury answered: 42: Chap. 8: Whether it be in a
Man's own free choice to Lend or no? 55: Chap. 9: Whether it be lawful to
borrow upon Usury? 58. Chap. 10: What Usurers should do with their gain? 67
CHAP. 1. Of the kinds and Differences of Usury.
THis word VSVRIE, is taken in diverse senses and significations: Properly, and
Improperly.

2 Properly, it signifies the use of a thing, as is manifest by the Etymology
of the word; for Usury is derived from using; Vsura, quasi vsus rei.

3 The name of VSVRIE is not evil, but the abusing of it, in applying it to
evil trades and actions.

4 Improperly (Metonymice, Causa pro Effecto) when we take it for the increase
that arises of it.

5 In this sense Usury is two fold Profitable and Unprofitable.

6 Profitable Usury, is a gain or increase that arises from the labor and
exercise of our lawful callings.

7 Profitable usury is two fold, Natural and spiritual, or Terrene and
Celestial.

8 Naturallor Terrene Usury, is that gain which comes and increases by
tillage of the earth.

9 This usury is lawful, because it is the ordinance of God himself; the
ancientest trade, first practiced in the beginning of the world. Genes. 3.23.
Genes. 4.2.

Spirituallor Celestial usury is that gain and glory wherewith God rewards
the graces and good works of his own children.

11 And this is either, Privatiue, or Positive,

12 Privative Spiritual usury is when we forsake or resuse temporary
commodities to gain eternal.

13 Of this Christ speaks when he says Math 19 29. Whosoever shall forsake
houses, or brethren, or sisters, or Father, or Mother, or wife, or children, or
lands for my names sake, he shall receive an hundred fold more, and shall
inherit everlasting life.

14 Positive spiritual usury is when we do any deed or act for Gods glory,
and the good of men, which shall be crowned in heaven.

15 This positive spiritual usury is two fold, Giving of Alms, and Employing
of Geds gifts.

16 Giving of Alms is munificence and liberality toward the poor and needy.

17 This is commended in the Scriptures. Prove. 19.17. He lends to usury to
the Lord that is merciful to the poor. He is as it were the Lords usurer; and
shall be well rewarded.

18 And commanded by God himself. Deuter. 15.10. Thou shall give him, and let
it not grieve thine heart to give unto him. Math. 5.42. Give to him that asks.

19 Imploring of Gods gifts is the faithful disposing of those graces that we
have received from God, to the advancing of his glory and the benefit of Men.

Of this Christ speaks, Matthew. 25.27. Thou ought to have put forth my
money to the exchaungers, and then at my coming should I have received my
own (...) with usury. See Luke 19.23.

Thus much of Profitable Usury. If follows to speak of that which is
Unprofitable.
21 Unprofitable usury, is a Gain or increase unlawfully exacted or hoped,
for the very duty of lending.

22 It is termed unprofitable, because in the end it turns into a curse,
and to bitterness to the Receiver or Usurer.

23 Unprofitable usury is either Ecclesiastical or Political and Civil.

24 Ecclesiastical usury is an increase unlawfully exacted for nothing, under
color of prescription or duty.

25 Civil or Political usury is when gain and increase is raised from the
use of worldly goods, which are things belonging to the civil and politic
estats of Men.

26 Political usury is twofold, Actual and Mental.

27 Actual usury is committed, when one does any act for gain or increase.

And this is twofold, Liberal, and by Compact or Covenant.

29 Liberal usury is when he that borrows desires to make some recompense.

30 That which is received above the principal is usury; yet this is not to
be condemned in three respects.

31 First Because it is the duty of thankfulness to make amends for a been fit
received.

32 Secondly because it proceeds from the givers freewill Now what is more
free then gift?

33 Thirdly Volenti non fit iniuria: If he will give it unasked and
vncompeled, he has no injury offered in the taking.

34 Usury by compact or covenant is when the lender covenanteth with the
Borrower to receive again not only the principal, but also increase and
advantage.

35 This usury is two fold Manifest and Covert.

36 Manifest usury is when one does covenant to take ten (more or less) in
the hundred for a year etc.

37 Manifest usury is two fold Lesse-Evill and More-Evill

38 Lesse-Evil. is either of the Rich, or of Orphans and widows.

39 Of the Rich who give money upon usury unto the Rich, to Merchants and
Princes; though not unto the Poor.

40 Of Orphans and widows, when their Overseers, or Guardians do put out
money for their use.

41. More evil and murdering usury, is when the poor is bound to the rich to
pay increase for the lone only.

42 Covert or close usury, is when one lends money, and shorowdeth it under
some other bargain.

43 As if I lend a man a 100li. for a year, upon condition that he buy a
horse of me (which peradventure is worth some 30.s.) and pay me for it 10.li.

So of Actual usury. Now of Mental.
44 Mental usury, is when one lends and does not compact, but expects and
hops for increase or gain.

45 Sole hope makes an Usurer. If thou do but expect to receive more then
thy own, thou art an usurer, says Augustine. Aug. in Psalm. 36. Ser. 33.

46 And CHRIST himself says Luc. 6.35. Lend, looking for nothing again.

So much for the kinds and differences of usury. Now we will speak only of
Civil Actual usury, which is commonly used amongst us.
CHAP. 2. Of the Definition of Usury
1 VSVRIE is a gain which by composition, compact, and agreement going before,
is raken for the very duty of lending, not adventuring the principal; and
that not only in money but in meat, ware, or any thing that is valuable by
money.

2 The Efficient cause of Usury is two fold, Principal and less principal.

3 The Principal and chiefest cause of usury is the DEVIL, who stirre^h us
up to oppression.

4 The less principal, or subordinate causes are covetousnes, the love of our
selves, and the hatred of our neigbour.

5 The Material Cause, is money, come, cile, or such like.

6 The Formal Cause is the composition, compact, or agreement.

7 The Final Cause is the enriching of our selves, by impoverishing of others.

8 Usury is a Gain, because it is an increase above the principal, for the
use and lending only.

9 Lending is a contract which transferreth the dominion and right of a thing
to an other, with promise to have the same thing delivered again, without
price or consiceration.

10 Lending is two-folde Mutuation and Accommodation.

11 Mutuation is when a man lends any thing and looks but to have his own
again in the same kind.

12 As when I lend money, I look not to have the same money again; but other,
of that kind, in the same measure and quantity.

13 Accommodation is when a man lends some thing, and looks to have the same
again in his own individual property.

14 As if I lend a horse, I look to have the same horse again, and not
another.

15 Usury is properly and truly in that lending which is termed Mutuation and
in no other contract.

16 Usury is by Compact, composition, and agreement going before.

17 A Compact or Composition is twofold, Silent and Express.

18 A Silent Compact is when consent and Agreement is intended: As,

19 When a man comes to an vsu ei, to borrow money, he tells him, that he will
allow him after 10. in the 100 although the usurer says nothing; this is a
kind of compact. Or,

20 If one comes to borrowe money, and the usurer says he will take after 10.
in the 100 albeit the borrower says nothing, but takes the money; it is a
kind of compact.

21 An express compact is either Bare or Shrouded.

22 Bare compact is when one comes to borrow money, the Usurer asks him if he
will give use for it, the Borrower says, he will.

23 Shrouded co^pact is either in Words or in writing.

24 In words when the Borrower passes his promise for payment of use.

25 In writing when the Usurer takes specialty for the use of his money.

CHAP. 3. The difference between Usury and Interest.
1 THe Usurers to gloss with the world are wont to confound the names of
interest and usury.

2 But the difference between them is manifest by the desinition of both of them

3 Usury is defined before. Cap. 2. Posit. 1.

4 Interest is a debte which one owes to another by the law of Nature and
Aequitie.

5 INTEREST is due two manner of ways, By reason of Loss suffered; and By
reason of Gain hindered.

6 By reason of loss suffered: As when I borrowe money for another, and enter
by bond for it, and take the like of him that receives the money, I may
lawfully recover that I loose by that money.

7 By reason of Gain hindered: As if I being a Tradesman lend my money freely
to my Neighbor till such a day, having then occasion to use it at some Fair,
to lay it out in ware: if he break touch, I may lawfully take so much as I
sustained loss, for want of money to lay out.

8 If a man sustain no loss or hurt, or can forbear the money so differred,
if then he take any thing for the forbearance, it is Usury and not Interest.

9 For Interest is so called, because one may say inter fuit mea habuisse: It
behooved me, it stood me upon to have it, and now by your default sustain loss.

10 The difference between them is great, and easy to be discerned.

11 Usury is an over plus or gain taken more then was lent.

12 Interest is neither gain nor overplus above the principal, but a
recompense demanded and due for the loss that is suffered, or the gain that
is hindered through lending.

13 Usury grows due by lending, from the day of borrowing until the
appointed time of payment.

14 Interest is never due but from the appointed day of payment forward, for so
long as I forbear my goods after the day in which I did covenant to receive
them again.

15 In usury I seek to be a gainer.

16 In Interest seek only to be no looser; gain or profit I seek none.

17 Usury is against all equity, conscience and reason.

18 Interest stands with equity, conscience and good reason.

19 Object. But here it will be objected. Why then does Solomon condemn
Interest as well as Usury, for so he says, Prove. 28.8. He that increases
his riches by usury and interest gathers them for him that will be merciful
unto the poor.

20 Ans. Here is (...) The Hebrew brewe has it (...) Beneshech vetarbith: by
usury and increase or superabundance. So do all the Interpreters that I saw
translate it, saving our English.

21 The Septuagint read (...). Vsura and s^perabundantia.

22 Tremelius, Leo Judah, Lavaterus, Vatablus, Pagninus and Mercerus have, Vsura
and foenore.

23 Arias Montanus. Vsura and augme^to.

CHAP. 4: Whether it be lawful to lend for Usury.
1 THat it is not lawful to lend for usury, appears as well by Testimonies
as a so by Reason.

2 By Testimonies, Of the Law, of Councils, of Doctors, of Philosophers, of
Poets, and of the Constitutions of this Land.

3 The Law is fourfold, The law of Nature, the law of God, the Civil and
the Canon law.

By the law of Nature to lend upon usury is unlawful, because it is (...),
contrary unto Nature: which thus I prove.

Cesare.

4 It is unjust to exact any money where there is no commutation.

But an usurer the principal being safe, does exact usury not for any thing
else, but for the duty of lending only.

Ergo, It is unlawful and unjust to exact usury.

Ferio.

5 A thing that is unfruitful by Nature is not to be transferred as fruitful.

But money is a thing that is unfruitful by Nature.

Ergo, For the lone of Money nothing is to be exacted; especially the principal
being safe.

Ferio.

6 The price must not be merchandise or ware. Money is the price. Ergo, etc.

7 The Proposition is proved, because when the price is merchandise, the vsuter
always gains somewhat above the price. So there is some thing added for
nothing, in which there is an inequality.

8 The Assumption is apparent from the invention of Money; Money ought to be a
rule and measure to apportion every man his own; but no marchandising thing.

Baroco.

9 Money was invented for commutation and exchange; not that money should
engender or beget money.

But in usury there is no co^mutatio^ Ergo. Usury is unlawful.

10 By the law of God, no man may lend upon usury.

11 Exodus 22.25. If thou lend money to my people, that is, to the poor with
thee, thou shall not be as an usurer unto him: ye shall not oppress him with
usury, or impose usury upon him

12 Levit. 25.35 36 If thy brother be impouerished and fallen in decay with
thee, thou shall relieve him, yea the stranger and soiorner that he may live
with thee. Thou shall take no usury of him nor vantage, but thou shall fear
thy God, that thy brother may live with thee. Thou shall not give him thy money
to usury, nor lend him thy victuals for increase.

13 Here we must understand, that it is not only the labourer that by his daily
work gets his living, nor yet the mean husbandman, that is called poor
or said to be impoverished in the Scriptures.

14 But also the Rich Farmer, the welthy Merchant, the landed Gentleman, or
others of great calling, who fall into decay, and wax poor, so that they have
as great need to borrow, as any poor laborer.

15 So then, the meaning is, If thy brother (whether he be labourer, artisicer,
husbandman, Yeoman, merchant, gentleman or noble man) be decayed, and his state
begin to fall:

16 Then thou shalt lend unto him freely, to help him, to uphold him, to
maintain his lawful estate and calling.

17 Thou shall not impose usury upon him, that is, when he is falling, thou
shall not strike him down and tread him under thy feet, but shall take him by
the hand, uphold him from falling, and let thy strength and thy wealth support
his weakness.

18 But shall relieve him, thou shalt not answer him as Naball answered
David, Who is David? etc. 1. Sam. 25.10. 19 Deu. 23.19.20. Thou shall not give
to usury to thy Brother: as usury of money, usury of meat, usury of anything
that is put to usury. Unto this stranger thou may le^d upon vsu. but thou
shall not le^d upon usury to thy brother. That the L. thy God may bless thee
in all thou setst thine hand to, in the land whither thou go to possess it.

20 In these words, there is an opposition between this stranger, that is,
the cursed Cananites, and the Jews.

21 By Stranger in this place are meant the Hittites, the the Girgashites, the
Amorites, the Cananites, the Perisites, the Hivites, and the Iebusites, and no
other stranger: as appears Levit. 25.35.

22 These the Israelits were commanded to destroy. Exodus 23.27 etc. Numb. 3.32.
Deuteronomy. 7.1.2.16.

Ferio.

23 That which the Lord permitted the Jews to do, for the punishment and
destruction of the cursed Cananites, cannot possibly be turned to a blessing
to Gods children

But it was to lend upon usury which the LORD permitted the Jews, only to the
cursed Cananits, for a kind of punishment to destroy them with all.

Ergo. To lend upon usury cannot turn to a blessing unto Gods children. And
whosoever lends to another upon usury, whether it be unto rich or poor, it
is to punish, and to destroy him.

24 The Lord adds Deuteronomy. 23.20. That the Lord thy God may bless thee in all
thou set thine hand to; to persuade men, freely and without usury to end
to them that are impouerished and decayed.

25 As if the Lord had said; As thou would have me to Bless thee: So help
thou and relieve him that is decayed.

26 Psalm. 15.5 He that gives not his money unto usury, nor takes reward
against the innocent, he that does these things shall never fall.

27 Prev 28.8. He that increases his riches by usury and increase, gathers
them from him that will be merciful to the poor.

28 That is, The Lord by his providence will defeat the Usurer of them, and
give them unto such as be more merciful and charitable. See Prove. 13.22. Job.
20.15.

29 Ier. 15.10. I have not lent upon usury.

30 Ezech. 18.13. He that has given forth upon usury, or has taken
increases, shall he live? He shall not live, seeing he has done this
abomination.

31 Ezech. 18.19. He that has not received usury nor increase, he shall not
die in the iniquity of his Father, but he shall surely live.

32 The same Prophet displaying the transgressions of Jerusalem says. In thee
have they taken gifts to shed blood, thou have taken usury, and increase,
and thou have defrauded thy neighbors by extortio^, and have forgotten me
says the Lord God. Ezech. 22.12.

33 Luke 6.35. Le^d looking for nothing again, and your reward shall be great.

34 In that Christ says Lend, he bids not to give, but would have the
principal to be restored: only he commands that nothing should be exacted
more then was lent.

35 By the Civil law, it is forbidden to lend upon usury 1. Because the law
says That it does not disdain to imitate the sacred Canons, especially in
cases concerning Matrimony and usury.

36. 2. Because Justinian says that he imbraceth the 4. General Councels, and
in the Nicene which was one of the 4. usury is forbidden. Did. 47. Ca. Quonia^.

37. By the Canon law, it is forbidden also Vide Decr. Iul Gelas. Mart.
Leonis, Cause. 14 q. 4 and Did. 47. c. Quoniam.

38. General Councels have condemned usury. Council. Arelatens. Terraconens.
Agathens. I N Nicen. Martini Papa. Of which see Cause. 4. q. 4. Also Eliher.
Did. 47. Can. Siquis clericaru^, Furones Lateran Vide Decr: Greg: l: 5: T: 19
De Us. C. 3. And Laod. Vide D. 49. c. Non licet.

39 All the Ancient Fathers of the Church have abhorred, and written against
this Sin: As Chrisost. in Oper: Imperf: Hom: 12: in Math: 5: Lactan: De Vero
Cultu Lib: 6: cap: 18: August: in Psa: 36: Hieron: lib: 6: in Ezech: 18: Leo:
Ser: 6: De ieiunio decimi men's: ca: 3: Basil: Com in Psalm: 14: Ambros: lib: 6:
Epist: 70: and lib: De Tob: c: 3: 4: 5: and 7:

40 Philosophers have condemned it: Plato lib: 5: De Leg. Aristot: lib: 1:
Polit: et lib: 4: Ethic: Nich: Cicer: lib: 2: Offic.

41 Poets have exclaimed against Usury, as Lucan. l 1. De Bell Civ. Hinc Vsura
vorax auidumque in tempore foenus, Vide L. Sex. 5 T. 5. de Us. And Auson. Ecl.
de Amb: vi: elig: -- turpia lucra Foenoris, et velox inopes Vsura trucidat.

42: The laws and constitutions of England have prohibited and fobiden this
sin: 20: H: 3: cap: 5: and 14: E: 3: Cap: 5: and 3: H: 7: cap: 6: 6. and 33:
H: 8: Cap: 9: and 06 5: and 6: E: 6. and 13. Eliz: Cap: 8:

So much for Testimonies; It follows to prove that it is not lawful to lend
upon usury by Reason.
43 First then, usury is intolerable, Because the foul vice of Avarice is
the root of usury.

44 Secondly, Because it is wicked to desire and exact gain of an other man's
labor.

45 Thirdly, Because he that paieth usury is greatly endammaged; and the
Usurer receives gain without the loss of any of the principal, howsoever
the matter goes.

46 Fourthly, Because usury does daily torment and assault his conscience that
takes it, and extenuateth the substance of him that gives it.

47 Fifthly, Because there were grievous punishments inflicted for this sin upon
him that was an Usurer, by the Civil and Canon laws.

48 By the Civil law A manifest Usurer is not capable to make a will of his
goods. The Ancient laws of the Romans punished a thief with the restitutio^ of
twofold, but the Usurer of four fold. Cato. l. 1 de re Rust. ca. 1.

49 By the canon law vsu. was prohibited either to the Clergy or to the lay
people.

50 If any of the Clergy did take usury, he should be degraded, and made it
reguler Conc. Nicen. 18, Did. 33. c. Martis Did. 46. c. Seditio.

51 If any of the Laytie were an Usurer, 1. He should be suspended from the
communion.

52 2. He should be excommunicated out of the Church.

53 3. He should not be admitted to Christian Burial Vide Decr. Greg lib. 5.
tit. 19. De Vsuris. and Cause. 14 q. 4. etc.

CHAP. 5. That Usury is unlawful and damnable.
Arg. 1. A Definitione Rei.
Barbara. 1
All gain that contrary to the word of god, is expected or exacted above the
principal, for the very duty of lending, is unlawful and damnable. Usury is
such a gain, as appears Exodus 22.25. Lev. 25.37. Deuteronomy. 23 19. Eze. 18.8. Ps.
15.5. Luc. 6.34. Ergo Usury is unlawful and damnable.
Arg. 2. Ab Etimologia seu Appellatione vsurae.
Datisi. 2
The Appellation whereby any thing is termed does also partly declare the
nature of the same. But the Appellations of usury, both in the old and new
Testament do signify a hurtful and monstrous thing. Ergo Usury is hurtful and
monstrous.
3 The Assumption is proved. First usury in Hebrewe is termed (...) neshech
Exodus 22.25. which signifies biting, derived of (...) nashach, to bite, or to
gnaw as Serpents and Mice do.

4 As venomous Serpents do sting and destroy the body with their poison, and as
Mice if they gnaw the loaf within, they will make it become unprofitable for
the use of Man.

5 So usury destroieth, biteth, and devoureth a man's substance very speedily,
and vexes the body with present pain; and poiseneth and polluteth the soul
with the contagion of eternal damnation.

6 An usurer is called (...) mashich because he gives the bite: and the
borrower is called (...) noshech, or (...) nashuch, because he is bitten.

7 The second appellation whereby it is called in Hebrew, is (...) tarbith,
Levit. 25.36. which signifies increase; derived of (...) ravah, to be
multiplied, to grow, or increase, Deuteronomy. 30.16.

8 It is so called because usurers attribute increase and multiplication unto a
thing unfruitful by Nature, which neither can increase nor multiply: and this
by the testimony of the Ethnickes, is contrary unto Nature and monstrous.

9 Vsuries are also called (...) techachim, which signifies Deceits, Psalm.
72.14. derived of (...) tachach deceit, or frawd, because usury is never
without deceit.

10 In Greek usury is termed (...), which is derived of (...), to bring
forth, or to beget.

11 It is also called (...) increase, which terms do not obscurely note the
monstruositie of it.

12 In Latin it is called Foenus, quasi foetus, increase as it were a child,
or thing begotten: and vsura quasi propter vsum res, Usury as it were for the
use of a thing.

13 Because contrary unto nature money being a thing unfruitful, is compelled
as it were, to beget and bring forth fruit.

Arg. 3. A Coniugatis.
Syllogismus connexus primo modo.
14 If usurers be excluded from Jehovah his tabernacle; Ergo Usury is a thing
unlawful and damnable. But the Antecedent is true: as appears Psalm. 15.5.
Ergo. The Consequent is true also.
Arg. 4. A toto and partibus.
Enthymema.
15 To usury there wa^teth the principal part of a Contract, vid. merchandise
or ware: for a Contract is Actus contra actum, where there is Quid pro quo.
Ergo. It is no contract; and so a monstrous and an unlawful thing.
16 The Argument holds for one principal part being destroyed, the whole is
destroyed.

Arg. 5. A Divisione.
Darij.
17 To condemn those things, which are forbidden by the law of Nature, by
the law of God, by the laws Civil and Canon, and by many godly constitutions
of Princes both ancient and late, is necessary, godly, and just. But to take
any thing above the principal for the lone only, is condemned by all these
laws. Ergo, The condemnation of usury is necessary godly and just.
Arg 6. A Causis.
Barbara.
18 Of what thing so ever the causes are evil that thing it self is evil.
Usury is a thing whose causes are evil; as is declared before. Cap. 2. Posit.
2. etc. Ergo, Usury it self is evil.
Arg 7. Ab Effectis.
Barbara.
19 That thing whose effects are evil, is also evil. Usury is such a thing,
as is proved Cap. 6. Posit. 2. Ergo, Usury is evil.
Arg. 8. Ab absurdis.
Darij.
20 That which being taught and received, many absurdities and inconveniences
do follow, connot be true, certain, and firm. But out of that doctrine
which teaches that it is lawful to take usury arise many absurditres. Ergo,
That doctrine that permits usury, is neither true, certain, nor firm; but
false and into erable in the Church.
The Assu^ptio^ is manifest for first, It is against the manifest text of
Scripture

22 2. It extinguisheth faith and charity

23 Thirdly, It takes away the law of nature.

24 Fourthly, It annihilateth the godly constitutions of Princes.

Arg 9. A Necessario.
Datisrij.
25 The commandments of God are necessarily to be obeyed. But God has
commanded to lend looking for nothing for the leave: Luk: 6: 34: Ergo, we must
do so.
Arg: 10: Ab Impossibili:
Celarent:
26 It is impossible that faith and an evil Conscience should at the same
instance be joined together, in the same man. All Usurers have an evil
conscience. Ergo, No Usurer has faith. And consequently it is impossible for
them that wittingly and willingly persevere in this sin to be saved
27 The Assumption appears because the Usurers sin against their own
conscience; which is manifest.

28 First, because they will not willingly be known to be Usurers: yea some
will swear and stare they are no such men.

29 And therefore they conjure faithful secrecy of the borrower, or they color
their usury under pretense of some lawful contract.

30 Secondly, Because that though they be known and reputed for common
usurers, yet they take it a great disgrace so to be called and termed of
others.

31 Thirdly, because they will not call usury, usury, but vsance, interest,
or consideration, being indeed ashamed of the direct name of usury.

32 So the^ the Usurers sin willingly and of set purpose, they follow a
practice contrary to the check, touch, and light of their own conscience; and
therefore as Paul speaks they are damned of themselves: Tit: 3: 11.

Arg: 11: A minori ad maius:
Enth:
33 Theft is unlawful and damnable: Ergo, much more is usury so.
34 The Consequence is good, because usurers do steal daily without ceasing
having no need: Thieves steal but sometimes, being urged by necessity:
Therefore Usurers are worthy of greater punishment then Thieves are.
Arg. 12. A Contrario.
Enthymema.
35 To help and to destroy are co^traries. Ergo, They cannot be both at once,
at the same time, and in the same respect attributed to the same man.
Therefore that brag of the Usurer is an impudentlie, when he boasts that
oftentimes he helps and enricheth them that he lends money unto.

Arg. 13. Ab Oppositis.
Syllogismus connexus primo modo.
36 There are two kingdoms, the kingdom of God, and the kingdom of the
Devil. But in the kingdom of GOD there is no sin, and usury is a sin.
Ergo, It follows that all usurers as long as they do not repent and leave
their sin, are of the kingdom of the Devil.
Arg. 14. A Natura Relativorum.
Enthymema:
37 In le^ding there is no marcha^dise. Ergo, There must no price be paid. For
he that asks a price giving no merchandise for the same is a damnable usurer.
Arg. 15. Ab Exemplo.
Enthymema.
38 Nehemias did well in prohibiting usury. Neh. 5.7.11. Ergo, Those
Magistrates which prohibit and repress usury do well likewise.
Arg. 16. ab Authoritate sacrae scripturae.
Enthymema.
39 Neither did the Prophets, nor Christ, nor the Apostles ever allow and
grant that usury is lawful, but rather they prohibited and condemned it. Ergo,
They who either allow or permit usury, do by a wicked and rash presumption
depart from the verity of the Scriptures, and contemn the word of God.
CHAP. 6. How great a sin usury is.
1 THe grievousnes of this sin appears by the Effects of it.

2 The Effects of usury, are to be considered, either in respect of the usurer,
or in respect of the Borrower.

3 In respect of the usurer, the effects are;

4 Goods gotten by deceit and guile, by robborie, sacrilege and murder.

5 The perturbation and breaking of society.

6 The wrath of God, malediction, evil conscience, the tyranny of Satan.

7 The murdering of the poor; the envying of other men's lives.

8 A riotous and tragical spending of goods after the usurers death.

9 The subiecting of goods to malediction.

10 Eternal da^natio^ of body and soul; etc

11 In respect of the Borrower, the effects are;

12 Poverty, hunger and thirst, nakedness, grief, death, etc.

13 Usury is compared to a ship wrack, wherein nothing is saved, because the
usurer consumes all.

14 To a raging fire, that never cease before all the house be devoured.

15 To dunge, into which if any man fall, he must either speedily run away, or
lie very still, or else he shall be all mirie: so a man must have no dealing
with usury.

16 To the stinging of Serpents: for usury so poisoneth a man's substance that
it shall have the rot, and consume away.

17 To a deadly and contagious Ague, whereby the poor are cast into shaking
fits, and at last consumed, and pined to the bones.

18 To a gulf or whirle poole, which devoureth souls, and utterly wastes
wealth.

19 An Usurer is a thief, because he steals from the poor borrower that
little he has.

20 An Usurer is a ravenous vulture, that will pick the guts out of a man's
belly.

21 An Usurer is a Murderer, because with a age cruelty, he eats up, and
slays the borrower and his family, who^ he should relieve with all works of
charity.

22 An Usurer is an Idolater, for he is covetous, and covetousnes is Idolatry,
Ephesians: 5.5: Coloss* 3* 5.

23 And Usurer is like unto the Devil, who continually seeks whom to devour;
so the Usurer night and day still devoureth the borrower

24 What wickedness then is VSVRIE wherein at once woeful ship wrack, raging
fire, filthy dunge, venomous poison, contagious sickness, and a devouring
gulf, is caused by a Thief, a ravenous Vulture, a Murderer, an Idolater, and
one that is like unto the Devil himself.

25 Usury is such a darte that the Usurer therewith strikes without a weapon,
he menaceth without handling, and stays without touching the body.

26 David ioineth usury with deceit, because usury is never without deceit.
Psalm: 55:11.

27 Ezechiell calls him unjust that lends upon usury. Ezech: 18: 8.

28 Usury is an abominatio^ Ezec. 18.13

29 The Lord will take away from the Usurer even that he has, and give it him
which will be merciful to the poor. Prove. 28: 8.

30 Usury excludes and shuteth him that practices it, from entering into
Jehovah his tabernacle, and from resting in his holy mountain. Psalm: 15, 5.

CHAP. 7. Objections for usury answered.
Object: 1: God allows some kind of usury for Deuteronomy: 23: 20: it is said: Of
a stranger thou may take usury

2 Answ: But thou take usury of thy brother, therefore this condemns thee,
because thou use thy brother like a stranger.

3 By the name of Stranger in that place are signified the cursed Cananits:
See Cap: 4: Posit: 21: So also does Ambros: lib: De Tobia, cap: 15: Paulus
Fagius Annot: in Caldaic: Paraphras: in Deuteronomy: 23: 20: Tremel: and Iunius Anot:
in Deuteronomy: 23: 20: expound it.

God does not license the Jews to take usury of any, but of their enemies
whom they might kill.

5 Showing that usury is such a punishment, as if we are to kill a man, it were
a fit punishment for him.

6 But now, we are alone body, we have alone spirit, one hope of our
calling, one Lord, one faith, one Baptism, one GOD and Father of al, which is
above all, and through all, and in us all.

Therefore amongst us there is no stranger

7 Object: 2: The Law of Moses concerning usury, is only political. Therefore
we are not bound to it further then equity and humanity permits.

8 Answ: It is not political, but mortal: The law says, Exodus: 22: 25: Ye
shall not oppress him with usury:

Barbara.

9 Oppression is a breach of the moral law Usury is Oppression.

Ergo, Usury is a breach of the moral law

10 David Psalm: 15: 5: reckons it among moral duties:

11 Ezechiel hedgeth it in between Bribery and Extortio^, which are notorious
breaches of the moral law: Ezec: 22: 12:

12 Object: 3: The law forbids lending upon usury to the poor and needy
ONLY, Exodus: 22: 25: Levit: 25: 35.

13 Answ. This is no good co^seque^ce, that he might borrow upon usury, then
that he might not borrow at all.

19 God in the laws of usury did specially and by name forbid lending in that
manner to the poor for two respects.

20 First, to show what care HE HIMSELF has over them, who are commonly and
usually neglected of men.

21 Secondly, because the poor are sonest and easiest oppressed of the rich;
as the lowest hedge is easiest stepped over.

22 Ob. 4. Moses says, Exodus 22.25. Ye shall not oppress him with usury.
Ergo, If I oppress not my brother with biting usury; I may take some usury
and increase of him.

23 Ans. All usury biteth; and therefore all usury is unlawful, albeit one
biteth sooner then an other, and one sooner perceived then another.

24 But to remove this excuse from us; god has forbidden al increase for
le^ding, and that in all things that may be lent A man may not take usury of
the Poor: Ergo, he may take of the rich.

14 Solomon says, Prove. 22.22. Rob not the poor because he is poor. Shall I
thence conclude; Ergo, I may rob the rich because he is rich.

15 The law says, Deuteronomy. 27.24. Cursed be he that smites his neighbor
secretly. Shall I thence conclude; Ergo, It is lawful for a man to smite his
neighbor openly.

16 Moreover, if the law of lending to the poor without usury, should infer
the lawfulnes of lending to the rich upon usury: It is manifest that Gods
inte^dme^t in that place, for the benefit of the pore; should rather prove an
hurt and hinderance unto them; because by this means it would come to pass,
that the poor should not borrow at all.

17 For who would lend to the poor for nothing, that could lawfully lend unto
the rich for usury?

18 Surely it were better for the poor by mutuation. Lev. 25.36.37. Thou shall
take no usury of him nor vantage. Thou shall not give him thy money to usury,
nor lend him thy victuals for increase.

25 Ezechiel condemns the people of his time, not only for taking usury, but
also for taking of increase. Ezec. 22.12. Thou have taken usury, and the
increase.

26 Ob. 5. Usury is no where prohibited in the new Test. Ergo, It is lawful,
or at least wise tolerable.

27 Ans. It is a monstrous blasphemy against the Gospel of Christ, to affirm
that the New Test gives more liberty to sin, then the old.

28 Yet this objection thinks Usury is no sin, because it is not condemned in
the new Testament.

29 But that is no good Argument, for Poligamie, Tyranny, Treason, Jealousy,
etc. are sins, and manifest breaches of the moral law; and yet they are not
condemned by those very names in the New Testament.

30 Furthermore; Usury is forbidden in the New Test. For the Gospel goes
further in this case, then the law. The law forbids usury: but the Gospel
commands the contrary virtue, that is, free lending without increase. Luc.
6.35.

31 Also, usury is manifestly against these places. Matthew. 7.12 Matthew. 5.42.
1. These. 4.6. Ephesians. 4.28.

32 Ob. 6. The usurer says, I lend for compassion; and by my money many are
relieved, and the poor thereby avoid danger.

33 Ans. To be partaker in our gains, and not in our losses is Usurers
compassion and charity.

34 The good that Usurers do unto the poor is like the good Men in hoate
agues have of drinking cold water, which for a time refreshes, but at length
increases their pain, and prolongeth the disease.

35 So at the beginning, usury is mild, but in the end, it is merciless.

36 The Usurer pleads love, but not for thy sake, but for his own: as the
Ivy colleth and claspeth the Oak, as a Lover. but thereby it grows up, and
overtoppeth the oak, and sucketh up the juice and sap thereof, that it cannot
thrive nor prosper: Such a blood sucker is the Usurer.

37 The vvoorme Teredo is soft to touch, but it has such hard teeth as it
devoureth and consumes the hard timber: So the Usurer is a soft beast at the
first to handle, but in continuance of time, the hardness of his teeth will
eat a man up, flesh and bone, if he have not an especial regard to shun him.

38 The Catte plays with the Mouse; But the play of the Catte is the death
of the Mouse: So the Usurer pleases the Borrovver; But the pleasure of the
Usurer is the bane of the Borrower.

39 The Scorpion laugheth when he strikes, and the Crocodile vveepeth when he
wou^deth: So the Usurer laugheth and then oppresses: he pittieth and then he
pintcheth the poor Borrovver.

40 Objection. 7. I do not sin says the Usurer, nor break the rule of
Charity: I do to others, as I desire that others should do unto me, as
Christ bad us. I would with all my heart, give ten in the hundred, if I vveere
forced to borrowe.

41 Answer No man would give 10 in the hundred, if he could tell how to
borrowe freely: but seeing they can get it no better they are content to give
ten.

42 That saying of our Savior Christ. What soever ye vvoulde that men etc.
must be understood of good things only, or else many absurdities should
follow; as,

43 I would that some man vvoulde kill me. Ergo, I may kill another in like
manner. As many a desperate man with all his heart wishes.

44 Wherefore, seeing to take upon usury, 10: for the 100: is not simply good,
but lesse-evill, then to take 16.20.30. or more: Therefore albeit thou for a
further gain, or upon extreme necessity, to avoid a further misciefe,
sometimes would give so to others, yet shall not that excuse thee, so to
take usury of thy poor and needy brother.

45 Object. 8. Usury is necessary for Orphans, Widows, and Strangers which
have no other way to get their living.

46 Answ. If usury be evil in it self, and condemned by God; then can it not
be good in any. For what is simply evil, is evil in all, albeit in some more,
and in other less evil.

47 Rom, 3.8. We must not do evil that good may come thereof. Therefore we must
not relieve the fatherless and widows by usury.

48 Object. 9: The Usurer will say, Alas I have no other trade to live upon I
must therefore live by usury.

49 Ans. So may the Thief say; Alas I have no other trade but robbing, I must
therefore live by that.

50 This excuse in other wickedness will not serve. Therefore neither in usury.

51 Object. 10: The laws of the land do allow to take 10: in the 100: Ergo I
may take so much.

52 Answ. The law of MAN cannot abrogate or disanull the law of GOD.

33 The Usurer herein is like the Jews, who said We have a law, and by our
law he shall die, Job 19.7. when they could not say, By Gods law he shall die:
they said By our law he shall die.

54 So when the usurer cannot say, By Gods law I may take usury; He says, By
man's law I may take usury.

55 As it would not serve Adams turn to say, The woman had me; So will it not
serve the usurers turn, to say, The Law does license me.

56 Yet herein the usurer standreth our law, for the law allows not 10. in
the 100. nor 5. in the 100. but punishes that Tyrant that exacteth above 10.
in the 100.

57 Ob. 11. Many learned Divines do tolorate usury, and write in defense of
it. Ergo, It is not unlawful.

58 Answer. No writer that ever I could see, or hear of, ever allowed VSVRIE.

59 There are many strong poisons, which the learned Physician can so qualify,
that a sick Person may take a potion wherein some of the poison is.

60 So holy men of God have done, and do temper and qual fie the usurers
poison, that they make thereof a wholesome medicine for many distressed Persons.

61 For by their holy and religious caveats, and lessons, they alter the
quality of the usury, and make it indeed no usury at all, but a lawful kind
of trade and dealing.

62 First they teach, That a man must take nothing, but that which his Debtor
can get by good and lawful means.

63 Secondly. He may not take more then the gain, nay not all the gain, nor
that part of the gain which drinks up the living of him that uses the money.

64 Thirdly. He must sometimes be so far from taking gain, that he must not
REQVIRE THE PRINCIPAL, if his debtor by inevitable and just causes be brought
behind hand, and it be also plain that he could not make, no not by great
diligence, any commodity of the money borrowed.

65 Now, how fare VSVRIE differs from this kind of dealing, if our common
Usurers will not confess, woeful experience daily teaches.

66 Object. 12. Lastly the Usurer will say: If I may not gain by money which
I lend, I will lend no more, but keep my money to my self.

67 Ans. It is as bad to keep thy money from him that has need, as to le^d
upon usury: For Christ says: From him that borrows turn not away thy face.
Math. 45: 42.

68 As he that keeps his corn, from the use of his neighbors and brethren.
Prove. 11: 26: is accursed: So is he also accursed that keeps his money, when
safely he might lend it: Ezech: 18: Look Esa: 5; 8: Habac: 2: 9: Mich: 2: 2:
3: Luke 6: 24: Math: 6: 19: James 5: 1: Dent: 15: 8 Psalm: 112: 5. Math: 5: 42:
Luke 6: 35.

69 That servant that hid and laid up his Talent was punished; Math: 25: 14:
30. And he that will not use his money according to the rule of charity, shall
be plagued with the wicked servant:

CHAP. 8. Whether it be is a man's own free choice, to lend, or not.
THe Children of this world, that think their wealth their own, judge it to
be free from them, whether they lend or no; and think they do not sin, when
they deny him that come to borrow of the^, if they can help him.

2 The Lord says Deuteronomy. 15.8. Thou shall open thine hand unto him, and shall
lend him sufficient for his need which he has.

3 Christ also says Math: 5: 42. Give to him that asks, and from him that
would borrow of thee, turn not away. See Luke 6: 34: 38.

4 Here we must consider two things, First, How we must lend? Secondly, Unto
whom?

5 For the first, CHRIST requires of his Children that they help their
brethren, and neighbors; not only freely, without any gain, ( for so do
the Sinners, Luke 6.34.) but also though it be to their loss and damage of the
money lent.

6 Christ puts a difference between his children and such as do not
appertain unto him.

7 The Sinners are so just, that they will lend without usury, desiring nothing
but only their own gain.

8 For even Sinners (says he) lend unto sinners to receive (not any
increase or vantage or any thing above the principal, but) the like Luke 6.34.

9 Out of this place, we that bear the liverey of Christ's name, and have
vndertake^an holy profession, may learn how we ought to lend, unto our needy
brother, and whether we ought to take usury of him, or no.

10 For the Second. Unto whom we ought to lend? we ought to lend: namely,

11 Unto them, that have not so much wealth as they are able to make
restitution. For Sinners lend unto them of whom they hope to receive, again
what they lent Luc. 6.

13 Not only unto our Friends, kinsmen, and brothers; but also unto Strangers,
yea and to our Enemies. For sinners lend unto their friends and kinsmen. Luc.
6. Mat. 5.

14 Unto them, who are not able to give us thanks, much less to make us
recompense. For Sinners lend unto the^ that are able to thank them.

15 If we lend unto such; then shall we verily declare our selves, to be his
sons, who lets his Sun shine upon the just and unjust alike, and lets
his rain fall upon the kind and unkind.

15 This is it that Christ requires of us: Lend (says he) looking for
nothing again, and your reward shall be great: and ye shall be the
children of the most High, for he is kind unto the unkind and to the evil.
Luc. 6.35.

CHAP. 9. Whether it be lawful to borrow upon usury.
Because in these days Charity is rather DEAD then COLD, Men must either
borrow upon usury, or they shall have nothing lent them at all.

2 There be two sorts of Borrowers upon usury, some RICH, and some POOR.

3 The Rich borrow because they would be richer, and richest of all.

4 And these are either Gentlemen, or Tradesmen.

5 Gentlemen, and country Farmers, they borrow upon usury, to purchase lands,
and to enrich their posterities.

6 Tradesmen, and Marchantes, employ all the money they can borrow, thinking to
get more by the use of it, then the usury of it comes unto.

7 These Rich-men, Note.
may not lawfully borrow upon usury as may appear. 1. By the Cause that
moves them to borrow. 2. By the Effects that follow thereof.

8 The Cause that moves Rich-men to borrow upon usury is, their covetous
greedy Mind, that like Salomons hoseleech, never cries Enough, but Give, give
They purchase all the land they can compass, and make a pray of their poor
Neighbors.

9 The effects that ensue of their borrowing are either common unto all these
borrowers, or proper to each one.

10 The common Effects are these:

11 1. They feed the usurers, as the bellows do kindle the fire; they
maintain them, as the Receiver maintains the Thief.

12 2. They undo the Poor. For they give so excessiuelie much for the loan
of money, that either they must give up housekeeping, or diminish their
hospitality.

13 Whereby it comes to pass, that the poor are neither set on work, nor
relieved by the Rich.

14 The Effects, proper to each one are:

15 1. The Gentleman that borrows upon usury, racketh his rentes, and so
makes his poor Tenauntes pay the usury.

16 2. The Farmer, or Yeoman sells his corn, and his cattle so much the
dearer, and makes the buyer pay his usury.

17 3. The Tradesman, and Merchant inhaunce the price of their ware, and who
so needs their merchandise, must pay their usury.

So much of Rich Borrowers upon usury: Now of the Poor.
18 The Poor Borrowers upon usury, are either Counterfeites; or Poor indeed.

19 Counterfeites, are they that would seem barer and needier then they are,
and that for two respects.

20 First, Because they would not be deeply charged with Subsidies.

21 Secondly, Because they would co^pounde with their Creditours for little or
nothing.

22 These are they, whom Solomon speaks of, Prove. 13.7. There is that makes
himself poor, having great riches.

23 These are those Foxes that having wealth enough to pay their debte, lie in
Prison, because they would defraude their Creditours.

34 These Counterfeites will have always some thing for usury, that men may
think them bare of money, and pity them in their charges.

25 Poor indeed, are they which borrow to supply their necessity; when they
are like to be undone, their children to be cast away, and their lease to be
forfeited.

26 This necessity is either extreme necessity, or not so extreme. Note.
It is lawful to borrow in any of both. See Cap. 4. Posit. 13.14. etc.

27 For necessity it was lawful for Adams Sons to marry with Adams Daughters;
because there were no other women.

28 For necessity, it was lawful for David to eat the Shewbread; because there
no other food. 1. Sam. 21.6.

29 For necessity, it was lawful to work, to heal and to fight upon the
Sabbath day; which was not lawful but for Necessity. Luc. 13.10.

30 Therefore for necessity, why may not a Man pay more then he borrowed?
Seeing no Scripture forbids to pay more, but to require more.

31 Yet with this caveat, Note well.
that the borrower entice not any man, to become an usurer, that is, unwilling
to exercise that cursed Trade.

32 The Usurer must be willing to lend for usury, otherwise the borrower does
grievously sin, notwithstanding his necessity.

33 Here will be Objections made, against borrowing upon usury.

34 Ob. 1. Jeremy says, Ier. 15.10. I have not lent upon usury to others,
neither have others lent upon usury to me: as though it were unlawful not
only to take usury, but also to give usury.

35 Ans. Thereby Jeremy does signify, that he was no medler in the world,
whereby they should envy HIM like other men; and therefore he cleereth
himself cheefely from usury, because Usurers were most envied.

36 And to show that he was no Usurer, he says he was no Borrower; which is
more lawful, then to be an Usurer.

37 Like a man, which says, I do neither hate him nor know him: and to prove
that he does not hate him; he says, he does not know him.

38 So Jeremy, to prove that he had not lent upon usury, says that he never
borrowed upon usury, nor had any dealing with it.

39 Object. 2. Christ did cast out the buyers out of the Temple as well as the
sellers.

40 Answ. But that was not for buying, but for buying in the temple where they
should not buy but pray.

41 Object. 3. It is a common proverb: If there were no buyers there would be
no sellers: if there were no brib-givers, there would be no bribe-takers.

42 Ans. But in this case, it may be rather said; if there were no Takers,
there would be no Givers.

43 For the Giver does not make the Receiver to take: but the Receiver does
make the Giver to give; because he will not lend, unless the other will give
him for the loan.

44 Therefore as we say, The receiver makes the thief: So may we say, The
receiver of usury makes the giver of usury.

45 There is no comparison between him that gives usury, and him that
receives usury. The ONE does it for covetousnes, and the OTHER of necessity.

46 He which lends for usury, lends for covetousnes: but he which
borrows upon usury, borrows for necessity.

46 Laban did evil in swearing by Idols: But Jacob did not evil in receiving
such an oath of him, though it were an unlawful oath, Genes. 31.53.

48 Though the Usurer does evil in taking usury; yet the Borrower does not
evil in giving usury.

49 If a man may lawfully pay, for any commodity, more then it is worth:
wherefore may not he, as lawfully, restore more then was lent him?

50 It is lawful to suffer injury: though it be not lawful to offer injury.

51 To take usury, is as it were to offer injury, and to give usury, is as it
were to suffer injury.

52 Therefore, though a man may not require more then he lent, yet may he
give more then he borrowed.

53 The conclusion is this. No man must pay usury unto Usurers, but for
necessity.

54 Even as a Traveller gives his Purse unto a Thief; because he cannot
choose.

CHAP. 10. What Usurers should do with their Gain.
THe best thing is to do no man wrong: but the next is, to make him ame^ds

2 The Usurer, because he has transgressed against the first, let him
endeavor to fulfill the second.

3 He that stole, let him steal no more; says the Apostle Ephesians. 4.28. But is
that enough? No. What remains? He must make restitutio^. Levit 6.2.3.4.5.6
Exodus 22.

4 So, It is not enough, that the Usurer take no more usury, but he must
restore that which he has taken.

5 If a man cannot say, as Samuel said; Whose goods have I taken. 1. Sam.
12.3. Then must he say, as Zaccheus said; Whose goods have I kept. Luke. 19.8.

6 As humility is the repentance of pride; and abstinence the repentance of
surfeit; and alms the repentance of covetosnes; and forgiveness the repentance
of malice: So is restitutio^ the repentance of usury.

7 He which is not humble, does not repent his pride; he which does not
abstain, does not repent his gluttony; he which does not give alms, does not
repent his covetousnes; he which does not forgive, does not repent his malice:
So he which does not restore, does not repent his usury.

8 For how can he be said to repent his usury, which lives still by usury.

9 As Daniel said to Nabuchadnezzer, Dan. 4.24. Break of thy sins by
righteousness: So may it be said to the Usurer; Break of thy usury by
restitution.

10 But as the Disciples of Christ said Ioh 6.60. This is a hard speech: So
says the Usurer, that has gotten al his wealth by usury, This is a hard
speech.

11 Object. If I restore al I have gotten by usury, (says he) I shall have
nothing left to live upon.

12 Ans. Zaccheus did not fear how he should live; but Zaccheus feared to
offend.

13 As the Prophet said to Amaziah; so may it be said to the Usurer; The Lord
is able to give thee more then this. 2. Chro. 25 9.

14 Fear not to restore other men's goods; and try him that says. Prove me
now here with, if I will not open the windows of heaven unto you and power you
out a blessing without measure. Malach. 3.10

15 Quest. What if a man cannot restore it to the right Owners, nor to their
Heirs.

16 Ans. Then give it unto the Minister, and to the Poor, and repent that thou
have kept it so long.

17 Quest. Put case a man be fallen in decay, and be not able to make
restitution as he would what then shall he do?

18 Ans. Let him acknowledge the fault, and God will accept the will for the
deed.

19 For so Paul says. 2. Corinthians. 8.12 If there be a willing mind, it is
accepted according to that which a man has, and not according to that which he
has not.

20 Quest. What if the VSVRER be dead; Must his Heirs restore that which was
gotten by Usury?

21 Answ. They may Note.
not keep it in any case; for it is none of theirs.

22 They must put away the execrable thing from among them: and Goods gotten
by Usury, and oppression, are execrable, unto the VSVRER, and his Heirs; as
was the Wedge of Goulde that Achan stole. Ioshuah 6.16. They must make
restitution then.

23 Though it be sweet in the beginning; yet as Abner said to Ioab, 2 Samuel
2.26. Know thou not that it will be bitterness in the latter end?

24 If THEY be condemned which give not their own Goods unto them that have
need of it: How can THEY be saved that draw other-mens Goods from them that
have more need of theirs!

Revel. 7.12. Amen; Praise, and Glory, and Wisdom, and Thanks, and Honor,
and Power, and Might, be unto OUR GOD for evermore; Amen.


FINIS.
Faults escaped in the Printing
Page Lin. Fault. Correct. 21: 7: the the the 13: 32 52 22: 22: from for 42: 9:
mortal moral 44: 45: These two pages are transposed, the latter must be read
first, and the former follows 44: 1: he they 2: he they 52: 20. oar our 54:
13: Matthew: 45 Matthew: 5 55: 6 is in 12: come comes 56: 16: gain again 57:
Between the 11: and 13: Positions, this must be added. 12. Unto the^ that
never lent us any thing nor are able to lend For Sinners lend unto the^ of whom
they have borroved.


