Alt^^^ Christianum: or, The dead Vicars Plea. Wherein the Vicar of Gr. being
dead, yet speaks, and pleads out of Antiquity, against him that has broken
down his Altar. Presented, and humbly submitted to the consideration of his
Superiors, the Governors of our CHURCH. By JOHN POC^^^^GTON. D. D.

In^edige primo, prius coepisse populum Christianum, quam populum Iud^^^^^.

S. Ambros. de Sacr. l. 4. c. 3. (...) hoc Al^are subr^er^, (...) illum
lapidibus obrueretis?

Chrysostom. Hom. 53. ad Populum Antioch. LONDON, Printed by Richard Badger. 1637.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
Good Christian Reader:
THere is lately come forth a Coal from the Altar, and behind it a Letter to
the Vicar of Grantham: The Author of either of these is to me utterly unknown.
My speech therefore must needs be innocent, and my personal reflections none
at all.

Mr. Cotton is marked by the Coal to be the Father of that Epistle: This man
I knew well in Cambridge to have humanity-learning of his own: And if I may
know him by this Letter, then I am sure, he has taken his Divinity upon
trust. Hereby he has made a double forfeiture, of the Merchants faith, and of
his own, and labored to his own loss, and theirs that believe in him, if he
make not both good.

It is twenty years and upward, since he was translated from the body of
Emanuel College, to be made a member of a new body severed from the ancient
Clergy of England (as King James of famous memory in his Directions speaks) to
become neither Parson, Vicar, nor Curat; but Lecturer of Boston. It is therefore
hard to determine, which of his Diocesans he does personate in that Letter.

Wherefore this Quaere we must leave, as the servants did the inquiry after
him that had sown tares, and was stepped aside, to their Masters detection.
Their Master told them it was the envious man that had done it, but named him
not, whereby they perceived, that the apprehension of the malefactor concerned
not them so much, as the plucking up of the tares.

The case is ours; The tares which the penman has brought out of his
treasures of late writers misunderstood, the Author of the Coal has plucked
up. What he has fetched from their Elders, my endeavor, by Gods assistance,
may in some part weed out. Thus having brought you acquainted with my scope, I
betake my self, and you both, to God, and the working of his grace, farewell.

Syllabus Capitum.
Cap I. page 1.2, 3
OF Christian charity. Of verity. Which of the twain is most to be regarded.
Which Pilate preferred. Which obtains the prime place with the Penman of
this Letter. Cap. II. 3. ad 7.
Of the Antiquity of Christians. Altar in Scripture: in the Decretals. Cap. III.
p 7. ad 9.
Of Altars mentioned in S. Martialis, S. Irenaeus, Tertullian, Origin, S.
Cyprian. Cap. IV. p 9. ad 15.
Who first objected against Christians, that they had neither Temples, nor
Altars, nor Gods. What those Temples, Altars, and Gods were which Christians
had not. Of Churches in the Primitive Church. Cap. V. p. 15. ad 18.
Of the favor which Christians had with the Emperors, out of Eusebius and
Tertullian. Cap. VI. p. 18. ad 22.
Of the succession of Bishops in their several Sees. S. Ambrose his art to save
his Church and Altar standing. Of their manifold Synods. Exercise of the power
of the Keys. Wealth of the Church of Rome. The multitude of Christians in
Cities and Castles, a terror to the Heathen. Cap. VII. p. 22. ad 25.
Sundry Parish Churches, or Churches in Villages in the Primitive times. Some
built Anno 47.97.110.117.150.160.182.193. Churches in Britanny in 183. and in
55. Churches frequented. Parish Priests. Books of Canons sent to be read in
Churches. Cap. VIII. p. 25. ad 29.
Situation of Churches on an Hill. Looked toward the East. Five distinct places
in Churches. Church porch a place for Penitents. Penance in Sackcloth imposed
on delinquents. Want of discipline among Heretics taxed by Tertullian. Where
the Pulpit stood in S. Cyprians time. Places for the Laity, and Clergy, were
distinct at the Communion. Cap. IX p. 29. ad 36.
Where the Communion was celebrated. Inthronization of Bishops S. James Chair
in Jerusalem, S. Peter's Chair in Rome. What kept S. Austin in the bosom of
the Church. Heretics had no Churches. Succession of Bishops from the Apostles,
necessary in a true Church. How S. Irenaeus, S. Augustine, Tertullian,
confounded Heretics. A true succession of Bishops in the Church of England.
Dedication and consecration of Churches by godly Bishops: Cap. X p. 36. ad 43
taxed by the Centurists for the mystery of iniquity. What penance was
performed by Heretics and Apostates, before their admittance into the Church.
Of Confession and Exomologesis. Days of penance and absolution. Citizens
penance. Of Schools of Religion. Cap. XI. p. ^3. ad 60.
Catechists. Degrees in the Church. Educati, Audientes, Catechumeni, Intincti,
Neophyti. Heretics neglected these Orders. Libraries. Treasuries. Offerings at
the Eucharist. Disposed of by Bishops. Corruption among Deacons. Timothy
directed to take part of Oblations. The Emperors brother a Bishop. The Altar
stood in Sacrario. Cap. XII p. 60 ad 66.
Mysteries of the Eucharist not permitted to be seen of all. Chancels how
divided. Communio Laicorum. Priests only stood about the Altar. What things
were done, and consecrated at the Altar. Heretics could not consecrate,
because they had no Altars, Priests not allowed to be Executors, nor to be
drawn from their daily service at the Altar. The Rubric concerning the
standing of the Table in the body of the Church. Cap. XIII. p. 66. ad 71.
Of the Rubric concerning Chancels. Who has the appointing of books to be
read by Priests. Peter Lombard, and the ancient Fathers appointed to be read.
Bishop Jewel and others directed to be read. Communion Tables, according to
Bishop Jewel, stood in t^^ Presbytery. The Presbytery is not the body of the
Church. The an(...) Communion Tables, Cap XIV. p. 71*
Eusebius's authority examined, for the standing of Altars in the body of the
Church. Church of Tire built by Paulinus. Paulinus adjudged an Arrian by the
Centurists. Illyricus heretical. The Altar in Tire how it stood in the midst
of the Presbytery. Church in Tire built conformable to the Temple. Four
distinct places in Solomon's Temple. How the Altar there stood in the midst.
Gods dwelling in the midst of his people. How David and Solomon praised the
Lord in medio Ecclesiae. The people did not see the Priest at Solomon's Altar.
Cap. XV. p 79. ad 84.
S. Augustines testimony concerning the standing of the Lords Table in the
midst of the Church. Five orders of persons distinct. 1. Audientes. 2.
Catechumeni, 3. Competentes, 4. Neophyti, 5. Fideles. All these invited, but
the faithful only allowed to come to the Lords Table. God walked in the midst
of the Camp, when he went either before or behind it. Audientes and the rest
that were invited, did all participate of Christ's flesh, and also of Christ's
blood, when their several duties were performed. Cap XVI. p. 84. ad 93.
The testimony of the fifth Council of Constantinople examined, touching the
standing of the Altar in the body of the Church. The people of Constantinople
violent to have the Diptychs read, forget their duty to the Patriarch, and to
the Emperor. The Archbishop and people adore the holy Altar. How David did
compass the Altar. How people do run about the Priest. What the Diptychs were.
Cap. XVII. p. 93. ad 97.
Whether the Quire may be found in the body of the Church out of Durandus, and
Platina. Boniface the second divided the Quire from the people, how to be
understood. How long this was done before ^he fifth Council of Constantinople.
The Priest turning about at the Altar, does not argue that he stood among the
people: no more than the Bishops blessing them argues the standing of the
Throne in the body of the Church. Cap. XVIII. p. 97. ad 104.
The consent and Testimony of Fathers ought to be reverenced. What office at the
Altar was performed by none but Priests. Of Sacrifices mentioned in the holy
Fathers of the purest times. In S. Justin, S. Irenaeas, Tertullian, S. Cyprian,
S. Chrysostom, S. Ambrose, S. Augustine. Cap. XIX. p. 104. ad 110
The meaning of the 31. Article delivered. What Sacrifices are blasphemous
Fables and dangerous deceits. The Doctrine of the Church herein delivered, by
Bishop Mountague, Bishop Andrews, Bishop White, M. Casaubon. Homily of
Sacraments. Cap. XX, p. 110. ad 115.
The necessity of admitting Christian Altars. The standing of the Lords Table
Altarwise, or having of Altars, is not forbidden in the 31. Article under the
name of blasphemous figments. Abuses of Altars and Sacrifices, are condemned by
our Church: not the things themselves. What is the faith of Protestants and
Papists. In what respect the Mass is not to be allowed. The outrage of the
people committed in breaking down of Altars, punishable by law. The duty of
well minded men concerning Altars. Altars crept not into the Church. Cap. XXI.
p. 115. ad 121.
Altars consecrated with more ceremony, and regarded with more reverence than
any part of the Church, appears out of Bishop Jewel. On the Altar stood the
Cross of Christ in the Primitive Church, and in S. Chrysostomes time; and for
some time in Q. Elizabeth's rain. Steps unto the Altar. Altar drawn with
Curtains. Archbishops, Bishops, and all sorts of people do reverence toward
them. Penitents humble themselves before them. Barbarous Soldiers humbly kiss
them. S. Ambrose willing to be made a sacrifice for them. Complying with the
Jews does not argue the creeping in of Altars. Cap. XXII. p. 121. ad 130.
The enemies of the Church have long since picked a quarrel at her Altars, and
her Priests. The Council of Aquisgrane defends them. At what hour of the
day Christian Altars came in. Christian Altars came in at Noah's flood, and have
continued in Gods Church ever since. Danger to meddle with holy and consecrate
things. K. JAMES washed his hands of them. The whole of the Christian Church
was framed by the pattern of the Jewish Church. Son of the Church an
honorable name. The conceit of a Dresser unworthy a Divine, Cap. XXIII. p.
130. ad 137.
or moral man: Suting. Psychicus in Tertullian. The Patriarch, and Bishops in
the fifth Council of Constantinople, express a different apprehension of the
Altar. Christ's first institution of the Sacrament, no rule to us in matters
circumstantiall. Those that have Altars may call them Altars. The Author
confesses we have an Altar. S. Paul did, and the Church may order things
otherwise than Christ used. S. Augustines determination herein. The Eucharist
is to be received fasting. Of the Table whereupon our Savior did institute his
last Supper. Cap. XXIV. p. 137. ad 147.
The posture of the partakers, lying, or leaning. Judith and Hesters banquet.
M. Beza describes how they leaned one upon another. The name Table how used in
Scripture: not such a Table as the Church wardens provide. Of that Logic
axiom, Sublato relativo formali, manet materiale tantum, ill applied to
consecrate things. No relation can alter the nature of things dedicated to God,
though they be not not used, or abused. Canons of the Church need no private
man's confirmation, Cap XXV. p 147. usque ad finem.
Rationibus cogentibus. Persons ill affected will take liberty to disturb
Church and Commonwealth, and renounce all obedience: if they may require proof
of what is commanded rationibus cogentibus. The edicts of Princes, Articles of
our Creed, petitions of the Lords Prayer, Books of holy Scripture, our
baptism, Eucharist will be questionable and unsettled, if men may require to
have these maintained rationibus cogentibus. Authority Ecclesiastical and
Temporal, cannot receive so much prejudice by the railing and malicious
writing of her professed enemies, as by her seeming friends, that will allow to
have it disputed and proved, rationibus cogentibus. The distress the Vicar is
in, being put to maintain the Canon touching bowing at the Name of JESUS,
rationibus cogentibus. The Author ill advised to make a jeere of the first and
second Service. The first and second Service have continued in the Church,
1636. years.
Perlegi Tractatum hunc Theologicum, cui Titulus est [ Altar Christianum,
etc.] in quo nihil reperio sanae doctrinae, aut bonis moribus contrarium, quo
minus summa cum utilitate imprimatur; ita tamen, ut si non intra quinque menses
proxime sequentes Typis mandetur, haec licentia sit omnino irrita.

Ex Aedibus Lambethanis Feb. 21. 1636. GUIL. BRAY, Reverendissimo in Christo
Patri, and Domino D. Arch. Cant. Sacellanus Domesticus.

ALTAR CHRISTIANVM.
CAP. I. The Letter. By that time that you have gained some more experience in
the cure of souls, you shall find no such Ceremony as Christian Charity.
Of Christian charity. Of verity. Which of the twain is most to be regarded.
What Pilate preferred. Which obtains the prime place with the Penman of this
Letter.
HE that made the poor Vicars plea (I dare say) looked for no fee in this
world. And he that makes the dead Vicars plea, must stay for his till the world
to come. But Truth is a Centurion of great command, whom that bids go, he goes;
and if that bid speak, who can hold his peace? Having therefore my known
imperfections and disabilities thus over-mastered, something I will say (by his
assistance, who is Truth it self) in zeal to the Truth, whose I am, and whom I
serve.

As the fort of Iebus was manned with the lame and the blind, so is this man's
letter maintained (to keep his own phrase) rationibus non cogentibus.

I will not therefore be afraid to assail it, and the rise of my speech I
take from the close of that Letter; And conceive that if that be true, that
there is no such ceremony as Christian charity, it is as true, that there is no
such substantial way for sound Christians to walk in, as Divine verity. If
two walk hand in hand together out of this path, their kind complying in
error, is nothing less than treachery. Their mutual love I may not call
piety: for he who is love, and truth, has entitled sanctification to this,
and not to that. Sanctifica eos in veritate, Ioh. 17.17. Love shows to all
men who are his Disciples, In hoc cognoscent omnes, etc. Ioh. 13.34 but Truth
it is that first makes them so.

Whilst men roave in their opinions, though good and reverend, some saying,
Thou art the Baptist, some Elias, etc. Yet quem dicum homines? they show
themselves by their errors to be but men. But those that he has chosen to be
his Disciples avouch this Truth, which their foreman says for them, Tu es
Christus, etc. says St. Peter. S. Chrysostom. hom. ^4.
Petrus tanquam os Apostolorum, and caput, pro omnibus respondet. Truth
distinguishes Christ's Disciples from other men: then Love declares and makes
known whose they are.

Truth then is first of all to be searched after. Pilate once made this
seasonable Quaere, Quid est veritas? But, unhappy man, he turned his back,
before Truth it self returned him an answer. No marvel then, if much bussle
and stir have continued ever since about it. His haste to please men, exivit
as Iudaeos, lost him; and so will us, that resolution. Pilate, to get favor of
the Jews, made haste out, and left Truth behind him: The like reflection upon
the men of Gr. and their friends, moved our Penman to affect a by-path, and to
run counter, flat-crosse to the present directions of the Governors of our
Church. Marry, you may not parallel him with Pilate, it was not for favor,
but dear charities sake, which he commends to the Vicar, and preferres before
all obedience to Ceremonies appointed by the Church. And doubtless if the
Vicar could have seen Truth, the foundation of his Charity, he would have
received it, The Letter. The name of Table in the Christian Church is 200.
years more ancient than the name of Altar. It is well known that there was no
Christian Church yet built in the Apostles time: and may we think that Altars
were built before the Church?

Verily Origin that lived 200 years after Christ, has these words against
Celsus, Objicit nobis quod non habeamus Imagines, aut Aras, aut Templ^* S.
Ambros. de sacr. l. 4. c. 3.


as he does the commands of his mother the Church, with all reverence and
subjection: but a formal recommendation of disguised charity, he conceives
ought neither to be given nor received as a legal supersedeas to the rules of
Truth, and directions of his Ordinary. Wherefore for the calling and setting of
the Lords Table, he thinks fit to follow the directions of his Ordinary: and to
traverse the whole matter contained in this strangers bill, and to give answer
to the chiefest points thereof.

CAP. II. Of the antiquity of Christians. Altars in Scripture. In the Decretals.
THe first point I will begin withal is this, The name of Table is not two
hundred years more ancient than the name of Altar in the Christian Church. The
Author maintains it is: but not according to his own directions to the
Vicar, rationibus cogentibus, and so makes a bad cause stark naught. Now that
neither the Author nor my self be mistaken in the name of Christian Church,
let us both hearken to St. Ambrose, Accipe quae dico, anteriora esse mysteria
Christianorum, quam Iudaeorum. And again, Intellige primo prius coepisse
populum Christianum, quam populam Iudaeorum. Christ was Christ before he was
born of the blessed Virgin. Himself says, Before Abraham was I am. And as
Christ was, so were Christians, and Christian Sacraments, and Christian
Ceremonies, before Christ was borne or the Jews either. Iudaei quando esse
coeperunt? says St. Ambrose, I pray you when began the Jews? why ex Judah
pronepote Abraha, from Judah Abraham's nephews son.

S. Amb. de ijs qui initiantur. Ca. 8.
1. Take we then a view of the Christian Church in the Old Testament, and there
we find the name and use of Altars is above eight hundred years more ancient,
than the name of Tables in Gods Service. The children of God, by the light of
nature infused into them, without any direction or special command; or rather
by inspiration of Christ's blessed Spirit, who delighted to walk with the sons
of men, erected Altars. Noah that durst not step out of the Ark without
special warrant, Genesis 8.20.
and direction from God, by instinct of nature, guided by Christ's Spirit, built
an Altar. Abraham also, with whom Christ walked as a friend, built two Altars,
Genesis 12.7.
in one Chapter: Whereupon St. Ambrose says, S. Amb. l. 1. c. 2. de Abrah.
Patriarch.
ubi Bethel est, hoc est, Domus Dei, ibi and Ara; ubi Ara, ibi and invocatio.
But the name of Table came in with the Ceremonial Law, about Anno 2465.

Whether the Church of God before Moses was called Christian, I will not
dispute: but sure I am, that it had the same Christ that we have, for their
Savior, and we are assured out of St. Ambrose, that it was Populus
Christianus, it was a Christian Church, if it were a Church at all, which no
Christian can doubt of. Therefore in the Christian Church the name of Table is
not two hundred years more ancient than the name of Altar: But the name of
Altars, and their religious use is, in the Christian Church guided by Christ's
Spirit, above 1200. years more ancient than the name of Tables in the Church
of the Jews, and above 2300. more ancient than the name of Tables in the
Christian Church erected by the Apostles among the Gentiles.

2. The Church in the New Testament I am sure is a Christian Church, in the
notion of this Author; and at Antioch it was so first called. And I am as
sure, that the name of Table is not two hundred years more ancient than the
name of Altar therein: but, if I be not deceived, of the same, or a later date,
that our Savior makes mention of a Christian Altar, and of a Christian
oblation, in his own Christian Church, where he says, Mat. 5.23.
If thou bring thine offering to the Altar, etc. Leave there thine offering
at the Altar, etc. I suppose no Christian will deny: and this was near three
years before he makes mention of a Table, at which the hand of him that
betrayed him was with him. Luke 22.20.


S. Paul makes mention of an Altar at which Priests in the New Testament do
serve, 1 Cor. 9.13. 1 Cor. 10.2 ^.
and of a Table which is the very same. Hitherto the name of Table is not two
hundred years more ancient than the name of Altar.

3. For the Primitive Church, Damasus says that Euaristus died a blessed
Martyr; this man lived within eighty years after Christ, Anno 112. who (if we
believe the Decretall) makes mention of Altars. For he speaks of the
dedication of Churches, Tom. Council. page 70.
and consecration of Altars. Hyginus that lived Anno 154. and died a Martyr,
makes mention of Altars; for, according to Gratian, he made a decree
concerning the re-dedication of a Church, si motum fuerit Altar. Pius
succeeded him, and lived Anno 158. who, according to Gratian, Tom. 1. Council
page 86.
makes mention of Altars, and of a linen cloth spread upon Altars: whereunto
the practice of the Church agrees; Beda.
for, Corpus Domini non in sericis, sed in syndone munda consecratur. Wherefore
for 158. years it may seem there is mention made of Altars, and none at all of
the Communion Table.

Ob. But the Centurists tell us, that these Epistles are forged things, and
trifles of no worth: Or if they be true, then you may see how timely the
mystery of iniquity began to work in the Church of Rome in the dedication of
Churches, Cont. 2. cap. 6.
and consecration of Altars.

Sol. If they be forged things, why did no Catholic Father, not so much as in
the Greek Church, detect the same, and cry them down? How comes it to pass,
that both the East and West Church keep so good correspondency in the use of
Altars, and in the dedication of them. Was this a mystery of iniquity in the
West Church, and none in the East? But who gave this Quaternion of Ministers
authority to brand the Martyrs of the Primitive Church, and the whole Church
both Greek and Latin, with the mystery of iniquity? But let the authority of
these Decretals be what it will, here is some thing to be alleged for the
antiquity of Altars; but no mention of the name of Communion-Tables in any
writing true or forged, within 180. years of Christ. Therefore as yet it
appears not that the name of Table is two hundred years more ancient than
the name of Altar.

CAP. III. Of Altars in S. Martialis, in S. Irenaeus, in Tertullian, in Origin,
in S. Cyprian.
But if the Decretals be of no value, S. Martial. Epist. ad Burdegal.
the like I hope will not be said of S. Martialis, who lived eighty years
before Pius, and makes mention of Altars, Coena Domini offertur in Ara. Now I
come to an Author whom I conceive to be without all exception, viz. Irenaeus,
a Martyr, and Scholar unto Polycarpus the Martyr brought up under S. John, and
therefore knew well what the practice was of holy Martyrs, and godly Fathers
both in the Greek and Latin Church, and was able to speak his mind, being
chosen Ambassador to the Bishop of Rome by the Church of France: though the
Centurists jerk him for his negligent, and improper manner of speech.

This Martyr lived within twenty two years of Pius, viz. 180. who both
mentions and allows of Altars in Churches, and oblations upon them, not
because Pius and his predecessors so decreed, but because it is the will of God
to have it so. Iren. ^ 4. c. 34
Deus nos vult offerre munus ad Altar frequenter sine intermissione. The name
of Table then cannot be two hundred years more ancient in the Christian
Church, than the name of Altar. For that were to place a table in the Christian
Church, twenty years before there was a Christian Church.

Tertullian lived Anno. 203. within twenty three years of Irenaeus. This
learned Writer speaking of confession made by Penitents, in the Primitive
Church, unto Priests; says further, that the manner was, according to
Rhenanus, Aris Dei adgeniculari, to kneel down before Gods Altar. Here is
mention made of Altars, and of reverence done before them. So Origin, who lived
within twenty three years of Tertullian, Tertul. De poenitent: cap. 9.
viz. Anno. 226. Rhenanus. hic vides Christianis antiquitus Altaria venerationi
fuisse, quibus adgenicularentur. Orig. hom: 11. super Number: Hom: 10. super Jesus
Navi.
makes often mention of Altars, and reproves those that brought not their
oblations to the Altar; And says, that it was the Lords own Ordinance, that
the Priests of the Gospel should participate of the Altar. He also mentions
the contributions that were made, ad ornatum Altaris, for the decking of Altars.

The blessed Martyr Saint Cyprian, who lived within 14. years of Origin, viz.
An. 240. makes often mention of Altars, and of the use of them in the
Christian Church, Saint Cypr. l. 1. Ep. 9.7.
long before his time, and the Priests Ab Altari non recedant, ought not to be
withdrawn from their service at the Altar, nor to be otherwise employed, Nisi
Altari and sacrificiis deserviendo. To descend lower to prove the Antiquity of
Altars, were against reason. By this, that has been said, it appears, that
the name of Table is not 200. years more ancient than the name of Altar. But
that the name of Altars, and the reverend use of them, have been in the
Christian Church long before the name, or use of Table; and have continued in
the Christian Church, in honorable repute from the very beginning thereof,
without interruption for 3943. years: therefore the name of Table cannot be
200. years more ancient in the Christian Church, than the name of Altar.

CAP. IV. Who first objected against Christians, that they had neither Temples,
Altars, nor Gods. What those Temples, Altars and Gods were, that Christians had
not. Of Churches in the Primitive Church.
WHereas it is said that Christians could have no Altars within two hundred
years of Christ, because they had no Churches in all that space: This makes
as much for the overthrowing of Tables, as for the removing of Altars. For if
there were no Churches in all that time, then there was no Table. Then is not
the name of Table two hundred years more ancient in the Christian Church, than
the name of Altar, by that reason.

2. Those that first made this objection were Heathens, whose malicious
speeches Christians should not make use of to the prejudice of their own
religion. Not Origin, but Celsus in Origin: nor Minutius Foelix, but Caecilius
in him do object against Christians, Quod tanquam athei nulla haberent Templa,
nec Deos, nec Altaria.

3. Those Heathens that say we had no Altars, do not say we had
Communion-Tables two hundred years before there were Altars in the Christian
Church. Wherefore this authority borrowed from Heathens, will not furnish this
man with a Table two hundred years before there were Altars.

4. It is true, Christians in the Primitive Church had no Temples, that is,
such magnificent Temples, as were dedicated to Heathen gods: but they had
Churches from the beginning of Christianity. Neither had they Altars to
sacrifice beasts on, but they had Altars for the offering up of their Christian
Sacrifices: Neither did they worship Heathen gods, but a God that made Heaven
and Earth. Deos vestros (says Tertullian) colere des^imus, ex quo illos non
esse cognoscimus; yet are we not Atheists for all that, but quod colimus Deus
unus est, Tertul. Apologet.
etc. verbo quo jussit, ratione qua disposuit, virtute qua potuit, ex nihilo
expressit, in ornamentum majestatis suae. The like answer is given in sundry
places to Celsus by Origin. The Heathen therefore did them wrong to charge them
with Atheism, because they departed from their Idolatry, and renounced their
Temples, Altars, and gods. For God they worshipped, and Altars they had, as
both Origin, and Tertullian before him, and Irenaeus before them both do
plainly witness.

Now that Christians had Churches, and Altars for Christian Sacrifices, from S.
Paul's time, till the time of Constantine the Great (notwithstanding the many
and bloody persecutions raised against them,) is so clear a truth, that I
wonder any man of learning should deliver the contrary. For what service they
can do the Church in maintaining an untruth, I cannot imagine.

True it is, some Christians in the Apostles times, and after, till
Constantines reign, and when he was gone also, were forced, first for fear of
Heathens, and after for fear of Heretics, were constrained sometime to meet
in private houses, and vacant places: and as the Apostle says, Heb. 11.38.
wandered in Deserts, and Mountains, and Dens, and Caves of the Earth: yet for
all that the greatest part of Christians had both Churches and Altars all this
time. And their Churches were distinct from private houses; 1 Cor. 11.22.
Have ye not houses to eat and to drink? despise ye the Church of God. 1 Cor.
14.23.
These Churches were common houses of great receipt. Here Men and Women,
unbelievers as well as believers, learned and unlearned. Here much people
assembled and were taught. Acts 11.26.
In these Churches Women were not permitted to speak: 1 Cor. 14.3, 35
but in their own houses they might speak, and ask their Husbands questions.
1 Cor. 11.7. verse. 18.
Here men might not be covered, for this was against the custom which they
observed when they met together in the Church. 1 Timothy 3.4.
These Churches had their Governors, which also had houses of their own. 1 Timothy 1.20.
These Governors were Bishops, which had power of excommunication and
absolution. 1 Cor. 5.5. 2 Cor. 2.7.
This power Diotrephes abused, 3. Io. Ep. 10.
for he cast godly men out of the Church. These Churches had stocks of money
belonging to them, which were dispensed by the direction of their Bishops to
such as were admitted into the Church to be so relieved, 1 Timothy 5 9, 14, 16.
as Widows of 60. years of age; 1 Cor. 16.1.
but young and idle Widows were not to have any such allowance. Tit. 1.5.
There was in these dangerous times a visible Church. Act. 20.31.
There were Bishops and Presbyters to govern it. 1 Cor. 11.18.20.
S. Paul himself, with these Presbyters at Ephesus three years together. And
it is manifest, that they came together into one place to serve God, and this
one place S. Paul says is a Church. How can it then be said, that there was no
Christian Church built in the Apostles time: but that they met only in private
houses. I maintain not the fabric and endowment of those Churches to be all
one with ours.

Our Churches by God's mercy are a glory to our Religion; the fruits not of
piety only, but of peace and plenty: are environed with Churchyards, are
fairly built of Stone, covered with Lead, beautified with goodly
Glasse-windowes, Pinnacles, Battlements, have their Porches, several Isles,
Belfreyes, Steeples, Bells. In the body of these Churches are placed Pulpits,
Seats, Pewes, and the Baptisterion or Font toward the West, together with the
poore-mans-Box; To the Chancels belonged the Vestry, Lavatory, Repository, and
Reclinatories for hearing confessions. Our Churches are endowed with
Gleb-lands, Tithes, Houses, Gardens, and Orchards, for Parsons, Vicars,
Prebendaries, Deans, and Bishops. Our Churches, with their Parishes, have their
several limits, bounds, and Precincts. Now to imagine the continuance of all
these in this complete and flourishing estate ever since the Apostles times,
were to build Castles in the air. The piety of Princes, and devotion of God's
people in aftertimes gave beauty and wealth to Churches.

But when I avouch the being and use of Churches in the Apostles times, I pray
conceive, I mean true material Churches, but suitable to the condition of the
Apostles, and Apostle-like men of those times. Those times had Wooden
Chalices, but Golden Priests. The Churches were wooden, poor and base, but
the Churchmen were like polished Saphyrs. They were poor in earthly
revenewes, but rich in the heavenly treasure.

But Churches, I am well assured, they had in the Apostles time, for the Saints
of God to meet in at least every Lord's Day: made at first of private houses,
dedicated by the Owners; and in such sort consecrated by the Apostles, and
Bishops their successors, to the Lord's service, that they could never more
return to their former common use, to eat and drink, to lie down and sleep
in: but were employed only for the worship of God, reading, and expounding of
Scripture, singing of Psalms; for supplications, prayers, and giving of
thanks, and receiving the holy Eucharist.

And all these holy offices were performed in a decent and reverend order, some
in the first, and others in the second service.

True it is, they were the houses of private men, which were at first converted
into the Houses of God; and whether they were Chambers or Parlors, upper or
lower rooms; whether covered with Thatch or Reed, Tyle or Slate: whether paved
with Stone, or beaten plain with the feet of the frequenters, I will not take
upon me to define.

But how ever they were made and prepared, none, I am sure, was so irreligious
to come into the Lord's-house, as then it was, especially on the Lord's Day,
without his oblation; which being then by the Priest collected, and put into
the Treasury, amounted to so good a famine, that therewith Captives, Prisoners,
sick and needy persons were relieved, Widows maintained, and the Elders that
ruled well were doubly honored.

These poor and contemptible Churches were at the very first so distinguished,
that Audientes, Catechumeni* Believers, and Priests, yea, and Penit^nts, had
their several places to set them apart one from another. These poor Churches
shined not with gold or precious stones, but were illustrious and glorious by
the holiness of Priests, holiness of Altars, where they alone waited; and the
holiness of the blessed Eucharist that was thereon, and could not elsewhere be
consecrated.

The maintenance, and Mansion-houses belonging to these Churches and
Churchmen, persecution made uncertain to the chiefest of them, more than to
the rest. For unto this very day, We both hunger, etc. thirst etc. are naked,
etc. have no certain dwelling place, says he, that knew both how to abound,
and how to want: how to enjoy the revenewes of devotion, and to endure the
misery of persecution.

The knees of Camels showed well, that the practice of piety was then
performed, in kneeling before their Savior and Redeemer. The stools they had
were either none, or none but fall-stooles, to come and fall down and kneel
before the Lord their Maker. Ambition to step up into the highest rooms and
seats, and there to enclose and inthronize themselves, was confined to
Pharisaicall Feasts, or Synagogues: holy men had no such custom, sought no
such state or ease; neither the Churches of God.

It is plain enough they had Churches for God's service, and as evident it is
that they had Altars. S. Paul says in plain terms, We have an Alt^^* and
distinguishes it from the Leviticall Altar: for hereof they have no right to
eat, Heb. 13.10.
which serve at the Tabernacle. Consider what Theophylact says, Nos (inquit
Apostolus) observationem habemus, verum haud eam qua fit in hujusmodi cibis,
sed super Altari, sive in cruenta hostia vivifici corporis. Hujus ut sint
participes, nec pontificibus quidem legalibus permittitur, tantisper dum
tabernacula, hoc est, legalibus umbris serviunt. Theoph. in Hebr. 13.
Some expound this place of Christ Himself: wherefore if any further
difficulty should be made in expounding this and the like places of Scripture,
the practice of the Primitive Church immediately succeeding the Apostles,
(whereof we have already heard, and may hear more) will make it plainly
appear; that Christians in these purest times, and in the midst of their
persecutions, had Churches, and in these Churches were Altars; and that they
are utterly mistaken that say no Churches were built, no Altars erected till
two hundred years after Christ.

CAP. V. Of the favor which Christians found, with the Emperors in the midst
of their persecutions. Eusebius and Tertullian witnesses hereof.
IT may not be denied but many and bloody were the persecutions, The Letter.
The faithful for fear of Tyrants, were feign to meet together in private
^ouses, in vacant places in Woods, and Forests, and in Caves under the ground.

And may we think that Altars were built before the Churches.


wherewith the Saints of God were tried in that fiery furnace, whereinto they
were cast, and continued near 300. years. Yet as it was with the Israelites,
when they served the Philistims, God sent them deliverers, and gave them favor
sometimes, in the sight of those that held them in subjection: So their
gracious Lords, upon reason of State, used some connivence, and extended an
hand of mercy, and sometimes an arm of protection over them. We may find,
that the Emperors caused sundry edices (upon petitions of grace, preferred by
diverse pious, and worthy persons unto them) to be issued out in their behalf:
as that of Trajan; Eusebius. l 3. c. 30.
hoc genus non inquirondum; This was in the third per^ecution, Dion.
Anno. 98. Nerva before, eos absolv^ vol^it. This was Anno. 96. Domitian, in
contempt of the mean and despicable condition of the brethren of our Savior,
Eusebius. l. 3. c. 17
did the like ten years before. This was in the second persecution, Anno.
81. Hence it was, that St. John returned again from banishment, Eusebius. l. 3.
c. 18.
and dwelt at Ephesus, and remained Bishop there as before. Adrian succeeded
these in his favorable edicts, in the behalf of Christians; Ne turbentur.
Saint Justin puts Antonius Pius his son in mind thereof. S. Just. Orat.
ad Anton. piu^ Eusebius. l. 4. c. 8, 9
This was Anno. 117. Antonius Pius, upon the petition of this holy man, Niceph.
l. 3. c. 27.
did the like; And this was Anno. 138. Melito Bishop of Sardis, confesses it
to be true; Eusebius. l. 4. c. 13
that Nero, and Domitian, at the instigation of some wicked men, Niceph. l. 3.
c. 28.
persecuted the Christians, but that Domitian, upon better consideration,
relented: And that the Emperors Ancestors, Eusebius. l. 4. c. 25.
to Antoninus Verus, did support and defend them, as he also did, this was
Anno. 161. But Marcus Aurelius, as he had just cause, not only defended them,
but commanded their enemies to be burnt quick, because by their prayers,
Eusebius. 5. c. 5.
his Army was refreshed with water, in a great famine and drought; Niceph. l.
4. c. 1^.
and his enemies the Germans, were burnt with fiery hayle storm. Julius
Capitolinus witnesses the same, Fulmen de coelo p^ecibus suis contra hostium
mac^inamentum (sc. Legio (...) dicta) extorsit, suis pluvia impetrata, Eusebius.
l. 5. c. 19.
cum siti laborarent. This peace Commodus granted unto the Universal Church,
Niceph. l. c. 4. c. 19.
throughout all the world. In his time Bacchylus was Bishop of Corinth, and
Polycrates Bishop of Ephesus. This peace was Anno. 180. Eusebius. l. 7. c. 4.
And in the seventh persecution, Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria, Eusebius. l. 7.
c. 12
in his Epistle to Stephen Bishop of Rome, confesses, that all the Christians
then enjoyed peace. And this was in the eighth persecution under Decius, Anno.
256. Galienu^ granted the like edicts, under whom and Valerianus was the ninth
persecution. This was Anno. 260.

Hear now what Tertullian will say to this purpose, who was 140. years before
Eusebius. The Laws made against Christians, Trajanus ex part frustratus est,
vetando inquiri in Christianos. And Hadrian, Vespasian, Antoninus Pius, Tertul:
Apolog.
Antoninus Verus, would never urge the execution of them: Let, says he, M.
Aurelius his letter be produced, hereby it will appear, that he quit the
Christians from all danger of punishment, and denounced death to their
accusers: And gives the reason before specified.

The name of Christians, says he, came in under Tiberius, who threatened
punishment against all those that accused them: Domitian indeed began to
persecute them, but he quickly relented. Caeterum de tot exinde principibus ad
hodiernum, Divinum, humanumque sapientibus, edite aliquem debellatorem
Christianorum. At nos e contrario edimus protectorem. The Christians, then, it
seems by Tertullian, from the time of Domitiam, Anno. 81. unto the Reign of
Severus, when Tertullian lived, found Protectors, not all great persecutors;
this was Anno 193. Nero excepted, the Heathen could not show from the Reign of
Tiberius, (when Christianity began) how any one Emperor sought to root them
out; but he could let them see, that very many had showed them favor.
Christians therefore, for fear of Tyrants, were not feign for 200. years
together, to live in Woods, and Caves, under the ground: But their Churches
were built, and frequented, and their Bishops well respected; and this favor
continued till about the nineteenth of Dioclesian, Eusebius. l. 8. ca* 1, 2.
Anno. 298. And Dioclesian was the first persecutor, that I can find, that
caused Churches and Oratories to be broken down, which had been soon done,
if Christians had no Churches, till above 200. years after Christ.

CAP. 6. Of the succession of Bishops in their several Sees. S. Ambrose's art
to save his Church and Altar standing. Synods assembled. Power of the Keys
exercised. The wealth of the Church of Rome. The multitude of Christians a
terror to Heathen.
Eusebius. l. 5. c. 6.11. l. 6. c. 9. l. 7. c. 31.
IT is also manifest, that there is a continued succession of Bishops from the
Apostles times unto the Nicene Council. Eusebius. l. 8. c. 1.
And the Catalogue of the four most famous Sees of Jerusalem, Eusebius. l.
3.11.19. l. 4. c. 4, 5.
Antioch, Alexandria, Rome, appear in Eusebius. And it is probable, that the
godly Bishops preserved their Churches standing in those dangerous times, by
the selfsame art whereby S. Ambrose kept his from surprising of Arrian
Heretics: Amb. Ep. 33. l. 5.
Fervebat enim tunc persecutio, says he.

The art was Christian fortitude and patience. Sane si me vis aliqua abduceret
ab Ecclesia, carnem meam exturbari posse, non mentem potuistis advertere? Me
you should find ready, Vt si Imperator faceret quod solet esse regiae
potestatis, ego subirem quod Sacerdotis esse consuevit. Quid ergo turbamini?
volens nunquam jus deseram, coactus repugnare non novi. I will not willingly
betray my Church, but submit to what the Emperor will cause to be done. Dolere
potero, potero flere, potero gemere. Adversus arma, milites, Gothos quoque
lachrymae arma sunt. Talia enim munimenta sunt Sacerdotum. So our holy Bishops
in the ten persecutions commended the preservation of the houses of God, who
would surely, as David did, look unto his own house, when by prayers and
tears he was forced so to do. Tertul. Apol.
Vis haec Deograta. A broken and a contrite heart thou can not despise. The
Heathen are entered into thine inheritance. Lay hand upon the shield and
buckler. Why pluckest thou not thy right hand out of thy bosom? Thus
(doubtless) Christians preserved their Churches standing. And it is more
Christianlike to acknowledge a truth, and to give God the glory thereof, than
to the dishonor of God, and shame of Christianity, to maintain a falsehood.

The Bishops of those times were contented to yield themselves to be
sacrificed, to keep their Churches from ruin. They put on the mind of the
Lord Jesus, If ye seek me, let these go their ways. This mind Saint Ambrose
notably discovered, S. Amb. l. 5. Ep. 32.35.
Offeram jugulum meum. Vtinam meo sanguine sitim suam expleant. Let my life go
to save my Church. O blessed mind, well beseeming a Bishop! nay to save the
Altars, pro Altaribus gratius immolabor, I would be glad at my heart to be
sacrificed for Altars. Behold, Behold, the president of a true Bishop! and let
him that is bound in conscience to president himself by such a pattern, be
astonished and ashamed, if he have betrayed the contrary disposition by word or
deed. To conclude, since there was such an evident succession of Bishops in
their several Sees, we may be well assured they had Churches, and did not for
fear run into Woods, and Dens, and Caves of the earth to administer the holy
Sacraments, where were neither Baptisteria, nor Altaria: for so to do was
forbidden. Council. Laod. Can. 9.
The Canon is expressed, De his qui ad Haereticorum speluncas causa orationis
accedunt: Heretics would consecrate and administer the Sacrament in any place,
in Woods or Dens; but Christians only in the Churches and upon Altars, even in
the heat of persecution under Valens.

Eusebius. 3.20.
Moreover, within the space of 200. years after Christ, there were made many
Assemblies and Synods of Bishops: as namely, one in Asia, at which was present
S. John himself, with the Archbishop and other Bishops, Eusebius. 4.14.
Anno 99. There was also a Synod at Ancyra in Galatia, against Montanus, Anno
163. wherein his opinion was adjudged profane, and the defenders
excommunicated. Therefore they had Churches. Council. Ancy^. Can. 2.3, 4, 5.6,
7, 8* 9.
But if we take a view of the Canons of that Council, we shall perceive the
several and distinct places appointed in their Churches, both for Fideles, and
Catechumeni, and Audientes, and Poenitentes: And that these Churches had Goods
and Lands belonging to them. Eusebius. 6 42.
In the year 254. there met a very great Synod at Rome, under Cornel^us, when
Novatus was cast out of the Church. In the year 273. a far greater Synod
met at Antioch, Eu^eb. l. 7.29.
wherein Samosatenus was condemned; and by the Edict of the Emperor Aurelian,
was cast both out of the Church, and out of his house.

Some of these Churches had so great means belonging to them, and particularly
to the Church of Rome, that even in the times of persecution, and when their
Bishops suffered martyrdom, yet the Church, as appears by Cornelius his
Epistle to Fabius Bishop of Antioch, Eusebius. 6.42.
maintained one Bishop, forty six Priests, seven Deacons, seven Subdeacons,
forty two Acolythits, Exorcists, Readers, and Porters, fifty two Widows, and
other poor one thousand five hundred. This was the estate of the Church of
Rome when Cornelius was made Pope, Anno 254. under Decius, when the eighth
persecution began.

If Christians had liberty to meet at Synods, they might with more liberty meet
at Churches. And if they duly exercised the power of the Keys, casting out
some, and receiving others into the Church; and if they had such a great number
of Priests and Deacons in some one Church, it is to be thought that innumerable
multitude of Christians resorted to their service: all which being put
together, it cannot be denied with reason* but that they had Churches to
assemble in. Trajan feared more the multitude, than the religion of the
Christians. Eusebius. l. 7. c. 12.
Tertul. Apol.
For as Seneca says, the superstition of Christians, had run through both
Cities, and Villages, and open fields. Omnia complevimus (says Tertullian)
urbes, insulas, castella, municipia, etc. And the meaning is not, that
Christians were clapped up prisoners in these places. For the complaint of the
Heathen was this, obsessam voc^ferantur civitatem, that they had in effect
besieged their Cities, in agris, in castellis, in insulis Christianos, omnem
sexum, aetatem, conditionem, etiam dignitatem transgredi ad hoc nomen, quasi
detrimento moerent. And Plinius. 29. ipsa multitudine, was troubled at their
number: whereupon Trajan made a law full of confusion (says Tertullian) hoc
genus inquirendos non esse, oblatos vero punire oportere. Christians therefore
being so many, so potent, so zealous, would not run out of the Cities whereof
they were Masters, to pray with Heretics in Dens and Caves, contrary to their
discipline, and leave their Altars on which only they consecrated the Eucharist*

CAP. VII. Sundry Parish-Churches, or Churches in Villages in the Primitive
times. Some built, Annis 47.97.110.117.150.160.182.193. Churches in Britanie,
183. and in 55. Churches frequented. Parish Priests. Books of Canons appointed
to be read in Churches.
BUT to put this matter out of all Peradventure, and to make their error
clearly to appear, that say there were no Churches built till 200. years
after Christ: It is manifest, that within less than 200. years after Christ,
Christians had some distinction of Parishes, though without Parochial rites
which they now have: these Parishes had Consecrate ground or Churchyards
belonging to them: in these Churchyards stood material Churches: these
Churches were distinguished into several parts and rooms. And if all this
prove so to be, then there were Churches built within 200. years after Christ,
and it is an error to defend the contrary.

Eusebius. 2.17.
About the year of Christ 47. Eusebius proves out of Philo, who lived under
Claudius, and had conference with S. Peter at Rome, that in every Village there
was then a religious House, which the Christians called Semnion, wherein it was
unlawful to eat or drink; but all the time they were present in these houses,
was spent in reading the Laws and Oracles of the Prophets, and in singing of
Psalms.

Clem. ^ecog. l. 10.
Before this time, Theophilus his house in Antioch was consecrated into a
Church. And there S. Peter set his Chair. About the year 97. S. John and
diverse other Bishops kept their Synod in a Church. This Church stood over
against the Hill where the Young Man robbed, Eusebius. 3.20.
whom S. John converted. Niceph. 3.2.
Anno 110. Ignatius reprooved Trajan in a Church. Anno 160. Polycarpus received
the Sacrament in the Church of Rome. About the year 182. under Commodus,
Narcissus was Bishop of Jerusalem, who absented himself so long from his
Church, that three one after another were created Bishops in his See. Eusebius.
6.9. Eusebius. 2.25.
So long stood the Church of Jerusalem. Gajus, Anno 121 succeeded Zepherinus,
and makes mention of Churches built by the Apostles, and of the Tombs of the
Apostles there to be seen, as Men went to the Vatican. Cent. 3. c. 3.
Anno 193. Severus allowed the Christians a Church or public house ad pium
usum* Dion in Adr.
and before him, Anno 117. Adrian had done the like. But it is strange, that
English Men of all other, against the Records of English Chronicles, and to the
disgrace of our English Nation, should deny that any Churches were built till
200. years after Christ. For Anno 183. Lucius struck with admiration with the
Miracle wrought in Germany his neighbor Country, by the prayer of Christians,
Beda. Flores Hist. Pol. Virgil.
made suit to Eleutherius, ut per ejus mandatum fieret Christianus, hoping
doubtless, that the God of Christians being his God, he and his Realm should
be preserved from all dangerous enemies. Hereupon he caused the Temples of the
Heathen gods to be dedicated to the worship of the true God; and erected 28.
Bishops, and Archbishops Sees, and liberally endowed them; and by his Charter
confirmed both Churches and Churchyards for Sanctuaries.

But above a hundred years before Lucius, Joseph of Arimathea in the reign of
Nero and Arviragus, Hist. Angle 2.
had built a Church at Glastonbury, Anno 55. Erat haec ecclesia ab ipsis
discipulis Domini aedificata, witnesses Hen. 2. in his Charter. Anno 66. S.
Paul sent Crescens into Galatia, who built a Church at Vienna. But all this
labor might have been saved: for Eusebius alone makes it plain, that many
Churches were built within 200. years after Christ; Eusebius. ^. c. 1.
and that the number of Christians was so great, and their Bishops so much
reverenced, that they built very wide and large Churches, because the old ones
would not receive their Congregations.

Eusebius. 7.24.
These Churches had Parish Priests, as we now call them, or Priests which were
not Bishops, belonging to them: for Anno 240. many of these were called out of
their Parishes to be present at a Disputation, undertaken by Dionysius
Archbishop of Alexandria, against the Chiliasts. Before this time, Anno 190. a
Decree was made in a Synod of Palestina, that Easter^ should be kept on no
other day but Sunday: and it was also ordered, that this Decree or Book of
Canons should be copied out and sent to several Parishes, Eusebius. 5.34.
as well as Diocese, there to be read, that themselves might not be charged
with the errors of their parishioners. Thus it appears, that there were both
Cathedral and Parish or Village Churches, within less than 200. years after
Christ.

CAP. VIII. Situation of Churches on a Hill: looked toward the East. Five
distinct places in Churches. Church portch appointed for Penitents. Penance in
Sackcloth imposed on delinquents. Want of discipline among Heretics taxed by
Tertullian. Where the Pulpit stood in S. Cyprians time. La^cks not allowed to
sit in the Church. Clergy and Laity divided at the Communion.
IT appears by what has been said, that there were Churches even from the
very Apostles time: and that no doubt may be made thereof, we have their
situation and forms described unto us.

First, for their situation, it is evident, that they were commonly set upon an
Hill, or some high and eminent place, and looked toward the East. Tertul.
advers^, Valent.
Nostrae columbae domus simplex, etiam in editis semper, and apertis, and ad
lucem: S. Just. Qu^ 118.
amat figuram Spiritus Sancti, orientem Christi figuram, S. Epiph. haeres. 29.
says Tertullian. S. Justin before him tells, that Christians prayed with their
faces to the East. Orig. hom. 5. in Numb.
This custom begun in the Primitive, has continued ever since, S. Basil de
Sp. S. cap. 27.
as may appear in the writings of the Fathers:

Secondly, S. Greg. Nyss. Orat. 5. de Orat: Dominica.
for their forms. The Centurists tell us, of a Canon under the name of
Gregory, Bishop of Neocasaria, and Scholar of Origin; wherein mention is made
of five distinct places, S. Aug. l. ^^. de s^r. Dom in mont. c 9. Damas. l. 4.
defide; ca. 1^.
or Rooms in Churches, set apart, for so many several uses. This Canon has
not gotten the approbation of these Judges, but we had not need to like it the
worse for that, in regard we do find the Observation of these distinct
places, and their several uses to be very ancient, and to be so set out and
used, before either the Scholar, or the Master were borne.

Cent. 3. c. 6. page 128.
The first of these rooms, is called (...), or the Church Portch, where
Penitents used to stand; or rather, to cast themselves down, and, in humble
manner, to desire the faithful to pray for them, as they went into the Church.
2. Is called (...), Auditorium, this was within the doors of the Church, here
stood those that were called Audientes, and behind them, such Poenitentes as
were admitted into the Church, after open penance, Ad manuum impositionem. 3.
(...), this was a place allowed for the Gatechumeni to remain in; and there to
stand and hear Lectionem and tractatum; which done, they were dismissed. And
the name of the place put them in mind of their duties; which was to stand and
view some Rites and Ceremonies of the Churches, and the place where the fideles
were to communicate; and to busy their minds, in the contemplation and desire
of those holy Mysteries, whereof the Fideles were partakers; and from which
themselves were excluded, til after Baptism: 4. (...), this was a higher, and
more eminent place, appointed for the faithful to stand in; who after the
dismission of the Catechumeni, went to the service appertaining to them.
Behind these, stood such Poenitentes, as had received imposition of hands, who
were permitted to behold the dispensation of the sacred Mysteries, but might
not partake the same: Therefore they stood, when the faithful kneeled. 5.
(...), or the Communion; where the Believers communicated, and received the
holy Eucharist; called also (...), expletio, because after delinquents had
perfectly fulfilled their penance, they were reconciled to the Sacraments, and
communicated. This distinction of places, in the Church, is very ancient:
Therefore their mistake must needs be great, that say, there were no Churches
built, till 200. years after CHRIST. That Churches had Portches, where
Penitents humbled themselves, before the Canon was made, ascribed to Gregory of
Neocaesarea, appears plainly, because Origin, after his fall, cast himself
down there, and prayed all that came into the Church, Suidas.
to trample upon him, as unsavory salt. Natalius also, who made himself
Bishop of the heresy of Artemon, for a salary of 150d. a month, did the like
before Origin did his. For he came in sackcloth, with ashes on his head, Eusebius.
5.28.
fell down before Zepherinus Bishop of Rome: Nay, pedibus advolutus, non
Clericorum modo, verum and plebis, laying prostrate at the feet, not of the
Clergy only, but, of the common people, he entreated all their prayers, and so,
with much ado, vix tandem admissus, he was at last received into the Church.
These distinct places continued in S. Cyprians time, Lapsis congruit
verecundia, etc. adeant ad limen Ecclesiae, sed non utique ut transiliant:
Modesty (say the Clergy of Rome unto S. Cyprian) becomes those that have fallen
in persecution; they may come to the threshold of the Church, but not presume
to step over: mittant legatos pro suis doloribus lachrymas, Cypr. l. 2. Ep. 7.
let the^ show their sorrow by their tears, and let these be their spokesmen
for pardon. This discipline was strictly observed before this time by Fabianus,
who would not receive Philip the first Christian Emperor into the communion of
Believers, Eusebius. 6.34.
before he stood in Locopoenitentium, in that place within the Church which was
appointed for Penitents.

There may also be found very good ground for the distinction of the other
places in the Church before mentioned. It appears out of S. Cyprian, that the
Pulpit stood in an eminent place in the Church; yet in such a place where the
whole multitude assembled together. He had made Celerinus Reader, S. Cyp. l. 4.
^p. 5.
and thinks fit to set him super tribunal Ecclesiae, ut loci altioris celsitate
subnixus, and plebi universae conspicuus legate praecepta Evangelii. It
appears also out of him, that several places in the Church were appointed
for the Clergy, and for the Laity. Trophimus a Priest had either sacrificed to
Idols in those times of persecution, or else was Libellaticus, had paid his
fine to be freed, and had his Ticket or Libell to manifest the same, and to
free him of further question. This man, after penance done for this fault, was
admitted into the Church again, but found no other favor, S. Cyp. 4. ^p. 2.
Eusebius. ^.43.
but Vt Laicus communicet, to communicate in the same place that the Laity did,
and was not permitted Locum Sacerdotis usurpare, to approach unto the Altar, or
take the place of a Priest any more: So Cornelius deposed Novatus that was made
Bishop in a Tavern; and after he had performed public penance, he was
received only, In communionem Laicorum, to communicate with the Laity. Now that
these distinctions of places were strictly observed in the Catholic Church
within 200. years after Christ, appears manifestly out of Tertullian, who,
to the shame and confusion of Heretics, very excellently discovers the want
thereof among them. Tertul de pre^^ript. cap. 16.
Non omittam ipsius haereticae conversationis descriptionem, I will tell you
(says he) what the fashion of Heretics is in their meeting, how light, vain,
and base it is, issuing out of the earth, and the brains of idle men, Sine
gravitate, sine authoritate, sine disciplina, very suitable to their faith. For
first of all, quis Catechumenus, quis Fidelis, incertum; you shall see no
distinction made amongst them of Catechumeni, and Fideles: Pariter adeunt,
pariter audiunt, pariter orant; they run in a rout together, and so hear and
pray all in one place: and if Heathen men come in while they are at their
Sacrament, before these Swine do they cast their Pearls, licet non veras,
though they be false: Prostrationem disciplinae, and when they prostrate
discipline in this manner, they would be commended for their purity and
simplicity. Cujus penes nos curam lenocinium vocat, the care whereof amongst
us, they style the trappings of the Whore of Babylon. For the reformation of
these gross and odious abuses, Council. Ancyr. Can. 3, 4, 5, 6.
and to restore the Church to her ancient and reverend discipline, the Council
of Ancyra was assembled. Here you shall find clearly, how Audientes,
Catechumeni, Fideles, and Clerici, and Sacerdotes, were distinguished: by all
which their mistake shows it self, that say there were no Churches till 200.
years after Christ.

CAP. IX. Where the Communion was celebrated. The installation of Bishops. The
Bishops Throne. S. James's Chair in Jerusalem. S. Peter's Chair in Rome. What
kept S. Austine in the bosom of the Church. Heretics had no Church.
Succession of Bishops from the Apostles, necessary to prove a true Church. How
S. Irenaeus, S. Augustine, Tertullian, confounded Heretics. The detection of
the creeping in of Aereticks. A true succession of Bishops in the Chapter of
England. When Schismatics crept into it.
LET us now come to speak more particularly of that place of the Church where
the Priests served. This was called Presbyterium, Eusebius. 5.26.
because it was a place appointed for Priests to administer the Sacrament in.
Here Anicetus gave the Eucharist to Polycarpus, Anno 167. Hither Theotechnus
brought Marinus to receive the Sacrament, Eusebius. 7.15.
thereby to be encouraged to endure Martyrdom. Here were made the
inthronizations of Bishops. Egesippus says that he was present at Rome, Eusebius.
4.21.
when Anicetus was installed, Eusebius. 6.29.
Anno 167. And many personages of great quality were present at the solemnity
of Fabianus his installation. All these received their president from the
Apostles. Eusebius. 3.23.
For S. John went from Ephesus into a Church, Constituere Episcopos, to ordain
Bishops. For this purpose, a Chair or Throne was placed in the Presbytery or
Chancell. Vrbanus Bishop of Rome, Anno 230. speaking thereof, says, that
before his time, Seeds in Episcoporu^ Ecclesiis excelsae constitutae
inveniunt^r; ut thronus speculationem and potestatem judicandi, and solvendi,
and ligandi a Domino sibi datam doceat; their High-place put them in mind of
their high authority, given of the Lord to bind and loose. And Vrbanus may
well say they were found there, for there they had continued in the principal
Sees even from the Apostles: Sublimiorem quanda^ sedem fuisse indicat historia
de Cathedra Iacobi; Cent. 3 c. 6.
that there were such lofty seats, S. James his Chair is an evidence, say the
Centurists out of Eusebius, that bare them no great good will. The Bishops seat
of S. James continued in the Church till Eusebius his time, Eusebius. 7.19 Eusebius.
5. c. 20.
Anno 326. which the Brethren there ordinarily have showed unto all men. Such a
Seat it was, wherein Saint Irenaeus saw Polycarpus Bishop of Smyrna sit, Anno
180. Such a Chair, S. Austin tells Petillianus, remained both at Jerusalem,
and Rome, from the Apostles days till his time. Though (says he) you
slanderously call the Chair in other Churches, Cathedram pestilentiae, what
cause has the Church of Rome given you, to say so of it; In qua Petrus sedit,
and in qua ^odie Anastasius sedet? or the Chair of the Church of Jerusalem; In
qua Iacobus sedit, S. Aug. l. 2. Cont. Liter: Petil: ca. 51.
and in qua hodie Johannes sedet, quibus nos in Catholica unitate connectimur,
to which two Churches we are joined in Catholic Unity? The succession of
Bishops in such a Chair, was one thing, amongst others, that kept St.
Augustine from departing out of the bosom of the Catholic Church. For thus
he says in his answer to the Epistle of Manichaeus; S. Aug. Cont. Manich.
Epist. cap. 4. Tom. 6.
Multa in Ecclesiae gremio me justissime tenent-tenet ab ipsa sede Petri
Apostoli, usque ad praesemem episcopatum successio sacerdotum* The succession
of Priests, from Saint Peter's seat, keeps me of right in the Church: Tenet
Catholicae nomen, the name of this Catholic See, keeps me in. For whereas all
Heretics would be called Catholics* yet when they demanded by a stranger, be
ubi ad Catholicam conveniatur? where is the Catholic Church at which they
meet? Nullus haereticorum, vel basilicam s^am, vel d^mum audeat o^^endere,
there is none of them all, that dare undertake to do that. The very note
whereby Heretics were known from Catholics, was; that Catholics could show
their Churches, and the very Chaires in them; wherein there was not only a
Moral succession in purity of faith and manners; but a Local succession of
Bishops, continued, even from the Apostles times, which Heretics could not
show, and therefore were hereby convinced to be such, and so put to shame, and
confounded.

Thus Irenaeus confounds Valentinus, Cerdon, and Marcion. We are able, says
he, to reckon up all those, that were appointed Bishops by the Apostles, in
their several Churches, unto our time. But because that was too long a
business, for the work then in hand; therefore he reckons up those that had
succeeded the Apostles, Peter and Paul, in the Church of Rome. And to them
succeeded Linus, then Anacletus; 3o loco Clemens; Clementi Euaristus, Euaristo
Alexander: then Sixtus, deinceps Hyginus, post Pius, post quem Anicetus: Then
Soter, and now 12o loco Episcopatum ab Apostolis habet Eleutherius. (...) l. 3.
ca. ^, 4, 5.
By this ordination, and succession (says he) the tradition which is from the
Apostles received in the Church, and the publishing of the faith, has come
even to us; which we being able to show, confundimus omnes eos qui, quoquo
modo, vel per suam placentiam, vel vanam gloriam, vel per coecitatem, and malam
sententiam, praeterquam oportet, colligunt: we put all those to confusion, that
through vain glory, or ignorance, broach new doctrines in the Church. For none
of all these Heretics can derive their succession from the Apostles; nor show
how their doctrines were received, by Tradition from them: For before
Valentinus, there were no Valentinians, and he came to Rome under Hyginus, and
increased his faction under Pius, and continued unto Anicetus. Cerdon also,
that was before Marcion, came in under Hyginus, who was the eighth Bishop; and
Marcion prevailed under Anicetus, which was the tenth. So those that are called
Gnostics, from Menander, Simons Disciple. All these sell into Apostasy, after
the Church had continued a long time.

Thus Tertullian confounds Valentinus, Apelles, and other Heretics: edant
origines ecclesiarum suarum, evolvant ordinem sacerdotum, ita per successionem
ab initio decurrentem, ut primus ille episcopus, aliquem ex Apostolis, vel
Apostolicis viris, (qui tamen cum Apostolis perseveraverit) habuerit authorem,
and antecessorem: Let Heretics show that they had an Apostle for the Author
of their doctrine, or some Apostolic man whom they do succeed: as Polycarpus
was placed by Saint John in the Church of Smyrna, Tertul. de per^scrip. ca. 11.
and Clemens by Peter in the Church of Rome. Confingant tale quid and
Haeretici, I would feign see H^reticks to set their heads to devise such a
pedigree. This he was sure they could not: for Valentinus, and Marcion (says
he) came in under Antoninus the Emperor, and were cast out of the Church by
Eleutherius. S. Cypr. l. 1* ep. 6.
In this sort does Saint Cyprian confound Novatian. Novatianus in Ecclesia n^n
est, nec Episcopus computari potest, Novatian is neither Bishop, nor member of
the Church, qui Evangelica, and Apostolica traditione contempta, nemini
succedens, a seipso ordinatus est, because he cannot prove his succession
according to Apostolical tradition. S. Aug: l. 2. Cont. Petil: ca. 51.
To conclude; thus does Saint Augustine confound the Donatists, and Sectaries
of his time; Numerate Sacerdotes, vel ab ipsa sede Petri, and in illo ordine
Patrum, quis cui successit videte.

They that say there were no material Churches built till 200. years after
Christ, are more injurious to the Church, and unjust to themselves, and to all
true members of the Catholic Church, than perhaps every one is aware. For if
in all this time there were no material Churches, then there could be no
material Chair, wherein their Bishops were enthronized, and if no Chair,
then no real inthronization, then no personal succession from the Apostles,
whereby the right faith was derived from God the Father, to his Son, whom he
has sent into the world out of his own bosom, nor from the Son to his
Apostles, nor from the Apostles to succeeding Bishops. Tertul. de praescr: c.
14.
For (as Tertullian reaoneth very excellently,) if we will have the truth to be
adjudged of our side, it must appear by this, if we walk in that rule, quam
Ecclesiae ab Apostolis, Apostoli a Christo, Christus a Deo tradidit, which we
have received of the Apostles, they of Christ, Christ of God. Those that
deprive us of the benefit of this Apostolical tradition, pluck one special
staff out of our hands, whereby we stay our selves from falling from the true
Catholic Church, and beat all Heretics out of our Communion. Miserable were
we, if he that now sits Archbishop of Canterbury, could not derive his
succession from St. Augustine, St. Augustine from St. Gregory, St. Gregory
from St. Peter. For he that remembers whom he succeeds, will doubtless
endeavor, and pray to be heir to their virtues, as well as possessor of their
places. What a comfort is this to his Grace, and to all those that receive
consecration from him, and to all those that they shall ordain, when they
remember, that this Grace can say, Ego sum haeres Apostolorum; Sicut caverunt
Testamento, sicut Fidei commiserunt, sicut adjuraverunt, ita teneo: I am the
Apostles heir, the Faith which they have by Will bequeathed to the Church,
that I hold. Mea est possessio, Olim possideo, prior possideo, habeo origines
firmas, ab ipsos authoribus quorum fuit res: Here I and my Predecessors have
kept possession, here are my evidences which I have to show, that I have
received the right Faith, from the true Owners. Vos vero, but as for you,
Marcion, and Apelles, exhaeredaverunt semper and ubdicaverunt, the Apostles,
Christ, God Himself has dis-inherited you, and cast you out: On the other
side, what a confusion is this to all Heretics, or Schismatics, when the
Fathers of our Church, and all true children of the Church shall be able to
tell them, that they have no right of inheritance or portion in their Mother.
Quando and unde venistis? Quid in meo agitis, non mei? tell us when, and from
whence you come? and what you make your selves to do in the Church, that are
no sons of the Church? We can with Saint Irenaeus point you to the time of your
coming in. You Cartwright, and your brood came in, as most Sabbatarians did,
under Archbishop Whitguift; and you Ames, and Brightman, with your Laodiceans,
came in under Archbishop Bancroft; and you Vicars, and our Cotton, with his
fugitives, came in, or rather went out under Archbishop Abbot. Thus Saint
Irenaeus, Saint Cyprian, Saint Augustine, and other holy Fathers have detected
the Donatists, Marcionists and other Sectaryes of their times, and so put them
to utter confusion: And so by their example are we taught to do, and our duty
is to bless God, that we are able so to do. Cotton therefore, or whosoever
else is the Author of this Letter, showed himself a sly and subtle Merchant,
when he would make use of the authority of a learned and godly Bishop of our
Church, against his mind, utterly to overthrow the Truth of our Church, by
making simple people believe there were no Churches nor Altars till 200. years
after Christ. For if this were so, and that he could tell us when our Church
came in, then there would no be cause but to honor him, and his party for a
true Church, as well as this of ours. And it would be no reproach to him and
his adherents, to have their coming in detected, and thereby themselves
discovered to be no other, but such whose coming in may be discovered.

CAP. X. Dedication, and Consecration of Churches, used by godly Bishops, and
taxed by the Centurists for the Mystery of Iniquity. What penance was
performed by Hypocrites, and Apostata's, before their admittance into the
Church Of Confession, [Exomologefis.] Days of Penance, and Absolution:
Citizens Penance.
I Will pass from the placing of the Bishops Chair, to the dedication of his
Church where it was set. The dedication of Churches within two hundred years
after Christ, shows clearly, that there were Churches within that time.
Decret: Euar: Decret: Hyg: Second: Gr^t.
There is mention of Dedication of Churches under Euaristus, Anno 112. and
under Hyginus, Anno 154. under Calixtus, of such as were fallen to decay by
age, Cl^^e^ ep: ad Jacob.
Anno 221. And before them all, Saint Clemens his command, both for building,
and Consecrating of Churches, makes it apparent, that there were Churches. The
words of his Epistle to St. James are these, Ecclesias facite per congrua loca,
quae divinis precibus sacrare oportet. Cont^ 3 c 7.
These testimonies of Roman Bishops the Centurists suspect, and brand the
Dedication of Churches, with the Mystery of Iniquity. But who delivered them
the keys of the bottomless pit, to condemn whom they list? Or what Mercury
conveyed Saint Peter's keys into their hands, to shut out, nay thrust out of
heaven, and to let in thither whom they list? No blessed Martyr, holy Father,
or godly man before themselves durst, nay would forget their own piety so much
as to tax the Dedication of Churches for a Mystery of Iniquity. But some of
all these sorts have allowed, commended, and practiced the Dedication of
Churches. Where then the Doctrine and Decrees of Popes, and of the first and
best times, are confirmed by the doctrine and constant practice of the holy
Catholic Church, it seems great boldness and impiety in three or four men,
to condemn and to brand their authority with the Mystery of Iniquity. It
appears by the testimonies of Eusebius, Athanasius, Basil, Nazianzen,
alleged by the Centurists Gent. 4. cap. 6. and of S. Austin, Prosper, and
Sidonius alleged by them, Cent. 5. c. 6. and, if they had been disposed they
might have added to these, S. Chrysostom, Sozomen, S. Ambrose, Greg. Magnus,
and diverse others in all ages, that have approved, and with great devotion and
piety practiced the Dedication of Churches: O then that there should be a mouth
opened to such blasphemy! But to let them stand to their own Master; whether
the work were good or bad, it is confessed on all hands, that there were
Churches dedicated within 200. years of Christ; therefore the Centurists will
help to cry down their opinion, that say there were none built in all that
space.

Secondly, the use of the keys, and the exercise of the discipline of the
Church in excommunication, abstention, giving absolution, and receiving
Penitens into the Church, all which were of famous and frequent use within 200.
years after Christ, do manifestly declare, that there were Churches built
within that space. For how Deliquents should be excommunicated out of Dens,
Forests, or private houses, or solemnly admitted into them again, is beyond
any common understanding. If we cast our eyes upon the discipline used in the
Primitive Church in casting out, and receiving men again into the Church, we
shall find, that it was executed so solemnly, gravely, and impartially, yet
with such pity and fellow-feeling of humane infirmities, as made the same very
awful and reverend, and struck the minds as well of those that stood, as of
such as had fallen, with grief and terror. None that had fallen into any
notorious crime, to the public scandal of their brethren, and to the wounding
of weak consciences, were admitted again into the Church, before they had
done open penance in sackcloth and ashes, with fasting and prayer. Eusebius l.
3.23.
Thus was the Young Man, who had committed many notorious robberies, received
again into the Church by S. John, Anno 100. So those simple Women led captive
by Marcus the Valentinian, and by him corrupted both in body and mind, made
open confession of their faults, S. Iren. l. 1.9.
Lugendo, and lamentando, Weeping and wailing before they were received into
the Church. S. Iren. l. 3.4.
So by the sentence of Hyginus, Cerdon a religiosorum horninum conventu
abstentus est, and was not received into the Church, before he had performed
his penance, exomologesin faciens, Anno 151. So Marcion and Valentinus were
cast out of the Church by blessed Eleutherius (says Tertullian; Tert. de
praes^r. c. 10, 11.
) and when Marcion confessed his fault, and submitted himself to take penance,
he was received to peace, with this Proviso, that he should reduce those to the
Church whom he had perverted. Now in what sort Penitents performed their
penance, and made confession, the act it self will discover. Tertul. de
poenitent. c. 9.
Is actus (says Tertullian) this act which usually and most commonly is
expressed by a Greek word, exomologesis est, wherein we confess our fault to
God; not as though he were ignorant thereof, but ^o far forth as by this
confession, Satisfactio disponitur, the mind is set in readiness for
satisfaction, p^enitentia nascitur, our repentance springs out of it, and
p^enitentia Deus mitig^tur, by our penance GOD is appeased. Therefore
Exomologesis prosternenti and hum^^if^e and^ hominis disciplina est, penance is
a discipline used for the humbling and casting down of men, conversatione in
injungens; imposing withal such a manner of conversation, as may move pity
and commiseration: De ipso quoque habitu, atque victu mandat; This Exomeloge^is
gives law both to our food and raiment, Sacc^ and c^nere incubare, and
orders men to lie in sackcloth and ashes; to have the beauty of the body in
no honor, to fill the soul with sorrow; Plerunque vero jejuntis preces ale^^,
to feed our prayers with fasting, to weep, wa^e, and mourn, night and day
unto thy God, Presbyteris advolvi, and aris (as Rhenanus reads the place) Dei
^dgeniculari, to humble your self before the Priests, and to fall down upon
your knees, before Gods Altars, to sue unto all the brethren for their prayers
in your behalf. Haec omnia exomologesis, penance works all this. Ergo cum te
ad fratrum genua protendis, Christum contrectas, Christum exoras, when you fall
down at your Brethrens knees, you catch hold of Christ, you over-intreat
Christ to be good to you. And when your Brethren weep for you, Christus
patitur, Christ is troubled and affected, Christus Patrem deprecatur, Christ
becoms your intercessor to his Father. Facite impetratur semper quod filius
postulat, a sons request is ^oone granted by a Father. Some (says he) think
they shall perform a special benefit, and afford an acceptable relief to
their modesty by concealing their faults. As if forsooth; because our cunning
will help us to bleere men's eyes; proinde and Deum celabimus, we shall be
enabled thereby to keep our faults from Gods notice: An melius est damnatum
latere, quam palam absolvi? had you rather be damned, so no body know of it,
than to have your sins pardoned before the face of all the world? Miserum est
sic ad exomologe sin pervenire, he is in a miserable case that makes such a
kind of confession. But besides modesty, which you hope to preserve by
concealing your faults you may perhaps fear other inconveniences and disgraces
that you make the body liable unto, quod inlotos, quod sordulentos, that you
have neither your face washed, nor your hair kemb'd, nor your clothes brusht,
and are shut up from all pleasure, and delight in asperitudine sacci, and
horrore cineris, and oris de jejunio vanitate, feeling nothing but rough
sackcloth galling the sides; seeing nothing but head, hands, face, clothes
covered over with ashes; have nothing to be seen, but a pale face, thin
cheeks, and a meagre look. And is this the matter that keeps you from
Confession? Number ergo in Coccino, and Tyrio pro delictis supplicare nos
condecet? It were good then to provide Purple, and Scarlet to mourn for our
sins.

You may perceive by this, what strict and severe Penance open offenders were
compelled to take, before they could be received into the Church. And this
continued 2, Council. A^ cyr. ca. 5 6, 7, 8* 9. Anno 308.
3. sometimes 4. years and more together, before perfectionem suam reciperent,
they could be perfectly received into the Communion of the faithful, as by the
Canons of diverse Counsels may appear. If any fell in the persecution of
Licinius, placuit Sanctae Synodo, the Nycene Council determined thus: That
though such were unworthy of mercy, yet aliquid humanitatis, some favor should
be showed them. And the favor was no more but this, tribus annis inter
Poenitentes habeantur, they must do Penance for three years together, Council:
Nicen. ca. 11.
Anno 325.

Indeed we do find more severity brought into the Church in the times these
Counsels were celebrated, than can be found in the writings of the Fathers
before alleged. Socra^* l 5. c. 1^
The reason is given by Socrates. The Novatians were a pure Sect, which divided
themselves from the Church under Decius, Anno. 251. because they conceived the
Bishops showed too much favor to those that fell from the Church by reason of
the persecution raised by Decius. Hereupon the Bishops made an Addition to the
Ecclesiastical Canon, that in every Church a Poenitentiary should be appointed
to admit Penitents into the Church after they had done public penance. This
kind of Confession Nectarius abolished in the Church of Constantinople, after
it had continued about 100. years, upon occasion of an abuse of an horrible
nature done to a Lady of that City, (under color of Confession) by a Deacon.
True also it is, that Saint Chrysostom, who succeeded Nectarius, does often
give a glaunce at that kind of public Confession, saying, non opus est quasi
in theatro, that there was no need that men should be set as it were upon the
stage to confess sins, which none suspected by them, and so make themselves
a scorn to the world, when they needed not, which was the case of this woman.
Howbeit the Confession whereof Irenaeus, Tertullian, and Cyprian speak, was
never abolished, but continued in Saint Basils, Saint Gregory Nyssens, and in
Saint Chrysostomes time, and ever after. So did likewise in the Latin Church:
and to this purpose a solemn day was set apart for taking of public Penance,
for open faults; by imposition of hands, and sprinckling of Ashes, namely
Ashwednesday, by the Canon of the Council of Agatha in Gratian. Council: Agath.
Can. 11. c. 15. distin: 5.
This is the godly discipline whereof our Church speaks in the Commination, of
putting notorious sinners to open Penance, in the beginning of Lent, and wish
that it might be restored again. And as Ashwednesday was appointed for
putting notorious sinners to open Penance, S. Ambr. ep. 33. l. 5.
so was Maundy Thursday set apart for their Absolution. Innocent. 1. ep: ad
Decen: ca. 7.
Dies quo sese Dominus pro nobis tradidit, in Ecclesia poenitentia relaxatur,
says Saint Ambrose; Council. Carth: 4. c. 80, 82.
So writes Innocentius to Decennius, quinta feria ante Pascha Poenitentibus
remittendum, Thursday before Easter is appointed for Penitents to receive
Absolution. This Absolution they took upon their knees, by imposition of the
Priests hands, as appears in the Council of Carthage. I know this whole
discourse, touching Penance, is not pleasing, and that those that read it, will
say, they have therein endured a long Penance. For all that hold the Nicene
Creed, do not hold the Nicene Canons. He that prophesies of Wine, and strong
drink, is a Prophet for some Palats. And he that will bring you fresh suits
of Tissue, and Cloth of Gold, to do Penance in every day, at some great Feast,
would be a welcome messenger of humiliation. That Ladies might say to their
women (to use Tertullians words) Cedo acum crinibus distinguendis, Tertul. de
poe^^ten ^ ca. 10.
fetch me my Crisping pinnes to curle my locks, and pulverem dentibus
elimandis, and Powder to turn my boxen teeth into Ivory, si quid ficti
nitoris, prepare me some excellent new Fucus to restore my complexion to a
cleerer nitour: praeterea exquirito balneas, prepare me a sweet perfumed Bath,
to cleanse the Cutis* Adjicito ad sumptum, be-speake me a banquet of all choice
Rarities at the Confectioners, quumque quis interrogarit, cur animae largiaris?
and if some inquisitive Dames ask you, what means this preparation, of these
dainties, of this exquisite Ceruse, this precious Fucus, this rare dentifrice,
this curiously prepared Pomatum? Deliqui, dicit^, in Deum, tell them I have
sinned against GOD, and periclitor in aeternum perire, and run a dangerous
hazard of eternal perdition: Itaque nunc pendeo, and maceror, and excrucior,
ut Deum reconciliem mihi, therefore I take this sore Penance, and do torment
and macerate my self, as you see, to procure my peace, and pardon with
Almighty GOD. Oh that there were not too many now a days, that willingly would
not think of any other Penance! But if any such be, they deserve as much to be
pitied, as such Guides, as the Author of this Letter, to be censured. For I
pray you tell me, if these kind of men intend not utterly to overthrow the
godly discipline of the Primitive Church, by denying that there were any Altars
or Churches within 200. years of Christ. For if this were granted to be true,
which is palpable unto me, then all that has been said concerning the godly
discipline, constantly practiced in Churches, and at Altars, would vanish into
frivolous fancies, and idle dreams.

CAP. XI. Of Schools of Religion. Catechi^ts. Degrees in the Church. Educati,
Audientes, Catechumeni, Intincti, Neophyti. Heretics neglect these Orders.
Libraries, Treasuries, Offerings at the Eucharist; disposed of by the Bishops.
Corruption among Deacons. Timothy directed to take part of Oblations. The
Emperors Brother a Bishop.
WHat should I speak concerning Schools, Libraries, Gazophylacia, Treasure
houses which were built in all Bishops Sees, and Metropolitan Cities, and
belonged to the Church? Can any man imagine then, that there were no Churches
built within 200. years after Christ, for the Bishop, Clergy, and people of
God to meet in? Since the only end, why these were built, was to fit men for
Gods Service in the Church. In Saint John's time there was a School, Eusebius.
3.23.
and Church near unto Ephesus: for himself did commend a young man to the
Archbishop, to be brought up, Anno. 100. There was a School in Alexandria,
where Pantaenus, Clemens Alexandrinus, Eusebius. l. 5. c. 20
and Origin taught one after another, Iren l. 3. c 3.
Anno. 182. There was a School or Church in Smyrna, where Irenaeus heard
Polycarpus teach, Anno. 180. In Rome there was both a Church and a School. For
Anthia brought Eleutherius thither to be brought up under Anicetus, Cent. 2.
c. 7.
Anno. 167. Tertul. de praesc: c. 16.
So much the Centurists avouch. And we may perceive by Tertullian and others,
what the reason was why these Schools were erected, namely for education of
Youth and Converts in the Catechism, and doctrine of the Church, that they
might be fitted to partake the Sacraments of the Church, and so in the end
attain to holy Orders, as they should be thought worthy by the Governors of
the Church.

For we must know, that there were many degrees for men to pass through,
before the Church would admit them to the Sacrament of Baptism and Eucharist,
or receive them into holy Orders. And their Schools and Libraries were of
singular use to fit them for these purposes. First they sent their children,
being come to years of good discretion, and such also as took liking to
Christian Religion, to these Schools, to be brought up under Governors
appointed for the purpose. These Governors were called Catechistae, and entered
early into the Church, Luke 1.4. Such an one was Origin, and those that were
before him in the Church of Alexandria. Eusebius. l. 6. c. 2
The Catechists, though they were learned Men, yet were not necessarily in holy
Orders: for Origin was Catechist at 18. years of age, An. 204. and he came to
Caesarea where he took Orders, Anno 234. thirty years after. Eusebius. 6. c.
22.25.
Their Scholars, that were admitted to their Schools to hear Lectures there,
were called Educati: and those that were present at the Homilies, and
Expoundings in the Church, were called Audientes. This was a distinct order,
and known by these names from those that follow. S. Justin. Apo^. ad Antonin.
The next to these were Catechumeni, which (as Justin Martyr says) being won
to a good liking of Christian Religion, by that which they heard expounded in
the Church, were not presently admitted to Baptism, but were permitted to
stand in place more honorable, than that which was allowed to Audientes,
Council. Cart^^ 4. c. 84.
which might be Heretics or Heathen. These had the favor both to hear and
see, more than the Audientes might. There was also Ceremony used at their
admission into the rank of Catechumeni, whereas none at all was used about
Audientes, being not esteemed any members of the Church at all. The Ceremony
for their admission was the signing of them with the sign of the Cross. S.
Aug. de sym. ad Catech. l. 2. and 4.
So says S. Austin, Catechumeni, non quidem per sacrum baptisma renati erant,
sed per Crucis signum in utero sanctae matris Ecclesiae jam concepti. S.
Ambrose said the like before him; S. Amb. de^^s qui init. c. ^.
Credit etiam Catechumenus in Crucem Christi Jesus, quia and ipse signatur; but
if he be not baptized, he receives no remission of sins. And all the time quo
locum, and nomen, that they had the place and name of Catechumeni, they had no
other employment, nisi ut audiant quae fides, S. Aug. de fide and oper. c. 6.
and qualis vita debeat esse Christiani, to hear what the faith and life of a
Christian ought to be. S. Aug. lib. 1. ad Simp. q. 2.
Therefore he compares them Embrionibus, which are indeed conceived in their
Mothers Womb, and so begin to live, sed nascuntur postea per baptismum. These
were not allowed to behold the Mysteries of the Altar, S. Aug. Sermon. de temp.
237.
but (as S. Austin says,) Ecce post sermonem missa est Catechumenis, after
Sermon these are sent out, S. Ambr. l. 5. Ep. 33.
sed manebunt Fideles, but the Fideles remain still. S. Aug. tract. in Ioh. 96.
S. Ambrose had taught him that piece of discipline; S. Basil. de bap. l. 2. c.
2.
Post lectiones atque tractatum dimissis Catechumenis, etc. For the Sacraments
of the faithful non produntur, S. Aug. in Ioh. tract. 11.
are not to be betrayed to Catechumeni, who are not allowed to see them. Non
intueri fas est ista non initiatis, says S. Basil. Therefore says S. Austin,
if you ask a Catechumenus if he believe in Christ, he will say, Credo, I
believe; Et signat se Cruce Christi, portat in front, and non erubescit de
Cruce Domini sui. But ask him again, do you eat the flesh of the Son of Man,
and drink the blood of the Son of Man? Nescit quid dicimus, he knows not what
you speak of: Nesciunt Catechumeni, quid accipiant Christiani. But let them
pass the Red Sea, be baptized, then they will understand what it is to eat
this Mannah.

S. Aug. Sermon. de temp. 116. de cur. pro mort. c. 1^.
In the third place were Competentes, so called, Quia nomina dederunt ad
baptismum, and eum simul petant, for giving up their names to the Bishop,
desiring Baptism, and this was done forty days before Easter; Council. Agath.
c. 11. Gratian. did. 50. cap. Syricius Ep. 1. Hymerio.
namely on Ashwednesday, in Sackcloth and Ashes, from whence that day receives
the name. And beginning thus to humble themselves, Quotidianis jejuniis and
orationibus expiati, they were all Lent long purged with fasting and prayer.
These were instructed in the Apostles Creed, which was done eight days before
Easter, upon Palm Sunday, in baptisterio, Council. Agath. cap. 9.
in the place where the Font stood; and but once a year, S. Amb. l. 5. Ep. 33.
semel in Anno ad baptisterium aceeditur, as the Priest entered once a year
into the second Tabernacle, S. Amb. de Sacra. l. 4. c. 1.
upon that very day himself says, he did deli^^^ S^^^^olum quibusdam
Competentibus in baptisteriis. S. Aug Hom. 42.
The Creed was not read at the Service whereunto the Catechumeni were admitted,
S. Aug. de sym. l. 1. l. 2. and 4. and de fide and operibus. c. 6.
S. Austin tells us. But now these Competentes were appoined to learn it by
heart, and to say it morning and evening: Quotidie dicite, quando surgitis,
quando vos collocatis ad somnum. And for eight days together before Easter,
they were to do penance, to fast, to refrain all manner of pleasures though
never so lawful, to stand barefoot upon sackcloth, Council. Antisiodo. c. 11.
and to watch on Goodfriday all night, or at least, till two a clock in the
morning; for ante secunda^ horam nobis non licet vigiliam expedire, says the
Council. And on Easter-Eve they were appointed to stand in some eminent place,
and say their Creed, and make profession of their faith before the whole
Congregation: Die Sabbati quando vigilaturi sumus in Dei misericordia, S. Aug.
Hom. 242.
reddituri estis non orationem, sed Symbolum, says S. Austin. The Creed they
were appointed to say, but forbidden the Lord's-prayer. For how can any one
say, Pater noster, qui nondum renati sunt? How can one call Father, before he
be a Son.

These Rites being duly performed, S. Amb. de Sacram. l. 2. c. 7.
they were brought unto the Font, and asked, Credis in Deum Patrem? and the
party answered, Credo: and mersisti, hoc est, sepultus es, and he was dipped
once. Then he was asked again, Credis in Dominum nostrum Iesum Christum, and
in crucem ejus? and the party answered, Credo, and he was dipped the second
time. Then he was demanded, Credis in Spiritum Sanctum? and he answered Credo,
and so he was dipped the third time. This was done three times, S. Ambr. de
Sacram: l. 2. c. 7, 8.
to the confusion of Arrians, that denied the Godhead of our Savior Christ.
But where no such are, in uno nomine Baptizari oportet, hoc est, in nomine
Patris, and Filii, and Spiritus Sancti. Marvel not (says S. Ambrose) that I
call it one name, because est una substantia, the substance is but one. But
afterward when the Arrians abused trinam mersionem, to signify the three
natures of the three Persons, S. Greg: l. 1. ep. 41. ad Leonid: Council. Tolet:
4. c. 5. Tertul: despect^c: c. 1. and de Coro: mil:
Saint Gregory ordained Vt in Hispania una mersio fieret. And the Council of
Toledo confirmed the same. And so it is used in our and other Countries. For
once, or thrice dipping is not of the essence of Baptism, as that holy Pope,
and Council do both witness. After his dipping, S. Aug: de Symb. l. 2. c. 1.
he was enjoined to renounce the Devil, and all his works, and the Pomps of
the world. S. Cypr. de dupl: Martyr:
Then was he signed again, with the sign of the Cross. S. Aug: tractat in
Ioh: 118.
For nisi signum crucis adhibeatur, sive frontibus credentium, etc. nihil horum
recte perficitur. And because the Competentes were persons of full age, they
received also Confirmation by Imposition of hands, Vr^at: ^p: (...).
Vt pleni Christiani inveniantur. And to their confirmation Iejuni veniebant,
Council: (...). 5. apud Gr^t. de Consecrat. did. 5.
they came Fasting. This form of admitting Catechumeni to Baptism, by Fasting
and Prayer, is very ancient. For Saint Justin Martyr informs Antoninus
thereof. All those that are persuaded, and do believe, that the things which
we teach are true, and will undertake to live accordingly, so far forth as
they are able, S. Justin A^ol. ad Anton^^: (...).
orare jejunantes, are commanded to Fast and Pray, and to ask God forgiveness
of their sins, and we our selves do Fast and Pray with them. Then we bring
them where water is, and we Baptize them in such sort as we were Baptized our
selves.

Fourthly, S. Aug. de fide and ope^ibus c. 11.
when they were thus baptized, they were called Intincti, tyrones, and
Neophyti. Saint Paul, Heb. 6.2. makes mention of these three principal things
before rehearsed, viz. Baptism, Penance, and Imposition of hands; and St.
Augustine says, haec omnia pertinere ad initia neophytorum satis aperte
Scripturatestatur: Scripture it self plainly testifies, that these Rites
belong to Neophyts. Being thus initiated, they were appointed to learn the
Lords Prayer, and told that they were to say it openly on Low-Sunday-Eve. S.
Aug: hom: 42.
Ad octo dies ab hodierna die, reddituri estis hanc orationem, quam hodie
accepistis, and oration quotidie dicenda, cum Baptizati fueritis, for it is said
every day in the Church, ad Altar, at the Altar, and audiant istam Fideles. S.
Amb: de ijs qui initiantur. ca. 7.
Being thus instructed, they are arrayed in white garments: Accepisti post haec
vestimenta candida, to express the effect of Baptism. S. Aug: Ser. 157. de
temp:
For if your sins were as Scarlet, they should be made white as Snow. And being
clothed in so rich a Robe, S. Dionys: de bap:
Dives insignibus ad Christi Altaria contendit, being made a Christian by
forgiveness of sins, he goes up to Christ's Altar, and videns Sacrosanctum
Altar compositum, and seeing the Holy Altar furnished, he cries out for joy,
and says, parasti in conspectu meo mensam, I see a Table prepared for me,
which I never saw before.

These white garments, the Neophyti used in the Church till the Octaves of
Easter, even for eight days together, viz. from Easter till Low-Sunday, called
hereupon Dominica in Albis, S. Ambr. in Psalm. 47.
and Low-Sunday, because it was Secundo-primum, the next great Sunday after
Easter. And then, S. Aug. de Cura pro Mort: ca. 12.
says St. Augustine peractis his diebus, Sanctis ad propria remeare licet,
they might ^eturne every man to his own place: And so they did, as may appear
by the story of Curma Curialis, Baptized of St. Aug. both in Vision, and in
Truth.

Now the reason, why the Church caused these Catechumeni, and Competentes to
take this strict Penance, was this, viz. that their great humiliation and
sorrow might make some amends for that liberty which some took to sin, whilst
they were in veteri homine, or remained in the rank of Catechumeni; for as
much as they were taught, and assured, that all their sins, would be washed
away in Baptism. Against this sort of people Tertullian directs his speech;
That men do linger their Repentance, and are loath to leave their sins,
praesumptio intinctionis importat: the reason is a presumption that they have
of their Baptism. Certi enim indubitatae veniae peccatorum, Tertul: de poetut
cap. 7.
for being certain to receive pardon of their sins then, till then they will
enjoy the pleasure of their sins. But how fond a thing is it, Poenitentiam
non adimplere, and veniam delictorum sustinere, to think to carry away with us
the pardon of sin, and not first of all to pay for our commodity. The Merchant,
before he deliver his wares, will look to your Coin, Ne sculptilis, ne
rasus, that it be neither washed, nor shaved; and do you not think that the
Lord will look well to your Repentance, and turn it over and over, before
tantam mercedem perennis vitae, you shall deceive him of eternal life?
Wherefore nemo sibi aduletur, quod inter Auditorum tyrocinia deputatur, let no
man flatter himself, because he is under the rudiments of Auditors, and
presume thereupon to sin. An alius est intinctis Christus, alius Audientibus?
does CHRIST, trow you, love sin before Baptism, and hate it after?
Poenitentia prima Audientis intinctio, Repentance is the first Baptism, that
the party baptized must bring to the Font with him.

Here you see are diverse degrees for men to pass through, before they could
be ranked inter Fideles, or be admitted unto the holy Eucharist, or Baptism
either; and much more was required of those that were taken out from these, and
received into holy Orders. For, though these Neophyti passed through a very
strict scrutiny, before they could attain that degree; yet were they not
possessed of holy Orders by and by: but they must be better approved, before
they were taken to be either Priests, or Deacons. For it was utterly unlawful,
and precisely forbidden by Canon to ordain a Neophyte. Syric: ep. 3. ad
Orthodox: Council. Arel. 2. c. 1.
Neophyti, vel laici Sacerdotes non fiant, was Syricius his decree: and before
him the Council of Orleans, Ordinari ad Diaconatus, Council. Laodicen. ca. 3.
vel Sacerdotis officium Neophytum non debere. And the Council of Nice takes
punctual order herein. Some heretofore have been made Bishops and Priests, as
soon as they were Baptized, but no such thing shall be done hereafter. Nam and
tempus opus est ut sit Cathecumenus, and post Baptismum multa probatione
indiget. Evidens namque Apostolicum praeceptum est, dicens, non Neophytum, etc.
This was the strict discipline observed in the holy Catholic Church. Tertul:
de praescrip: c. ^6.
The neglect whereof amongst Heretics is taxed excellently by Tertullian. For
Quis Catechumenus, quis Fidelis incertum est: There is no distinction of
places, or of names of Fidelis, and Catechumenus among them. Nay more than so,
ante sunt perfecti Catechumeni, quam educati, they skip into the rank of
Catechumeni, before they entered into the rudiments of Educati. And touching
their manner of taking Orders, I pray you see how it was. Ordinationes eorum
temerariae, leves, inconstantes; nunc Neophytos conlocant: now you shall see
Neophyts enthroned in the Bishops Chair, nunc seculo^ obst^ictos, and by and
by a Laick, some Basket maker, or botcher: nunc Apostatas nostros, straight way
some straggling fugitive of ours, Vt Gloria eos obligent, quia veritate non
possunt; that vanity may make a side, when Verity cannot do it. Nusquam
facilius perficitur, quam in Castris rebellium, Soldiers never rise to
promotion so fast, as when they serve under Rebels; ubi ipsum esse illic,
promereri est, where their presence is worth sufficient. Itaque alius hodie
Episcopus, cras alius, hence it is that they take their Superintendency by
turns; he that is Head to day, is Tail to morrow: hodie Diaconus, qui cras
Lector; He that is a Deacon to day, must come down a pin to morrow, and be
glad to be an Elder: Hodie presbyter, qui cras Laicus; He that is a learned
Lecture-man to day, will cry, have you any Bowls, or Trayes to mend, to morrow.
Nihil interest illis, licet diversa tractantibus, dum ad unius veritatis
expugnationem conspirent: Though they agree like Harp, and Harrow, among
themselves, it is all one, so the conspiracy hold good against the Truth. Ipsae
mulieres haereticae quam procaces: It is a world to see, what pert Gynny Birds
their Gossips are, quae audeant docere, contendere, exorcismos* agere,
curationes repromittere, forsitan and tingere, preach and dispute they will so
earnestly, and outragiously well, that their husbands Talent will show
ordinary, and his faculty but reasonable. But when they set themselves to
exorcising, and taking Devils to task, they make Darrels hair stand upright.
Thus amongst Schismatics libera sunt omnia and soluta, every one does what he
list. For ubi Deus non est, nec veritas ulla est, where God is not, there is no
Truth: and where there is no Truth, merito and talis disciplina est, such a
discipline suteth right well.

And now (I pray you) tell me if Mr. Cotton, or his Vmbra here have not spun a
fair thread. There were no Churches within 200. years of Christ; then
certainly, there were no Schools in all that time; and if no Schools, then
none of all these degrees, and distinction of places, names; no Educati,
Audientes, Catechumeni, Competentes, no, not Fideles neither, and least of all
Diaconi, and Sacerdotes. For Deacons and Priests, after long trial were chosen
out of the rank of Fideles; and these must first of all be Neophyti; and these
Competentes; and Competentes must first be Catechumeni; and these must be
Audientes, and Educati. And if there were no Deacons, nor Priests for 200.
years after Christ, to continue and derive power of Ordination and
Consecration from the Apostles, to their successors; I am sure there are none
now. Then may Mr. Cotton, by virtue of an extraordinary spirit, set up a Church
of his own: Then have some of our Lecturers rose of their right sides; for
these may speak as long as their Lungs last, and never care for coming into
Orders, as Origin did. I have often been thinking, why the chief of this new
Corporation have been so loath to take Benefices, to read the Prayers of the
Church, and to Administer Sacraments, as Deacons and Priests should do; and my
wit would never serve me to dive into the mystery, till this lucky man came
with his open Letter in his hand, as Sanballat did, to disturb the Church of
the Jews. And from him I understand the cause. For he says like Ananias the
High Priest, You understand nothing; know you not that we conform our selves
to the Primitive Church? And in the Primitive Church, and for 200. years after
Christ there were no Churches. Why this is full, and satisfactory. For then
every Child can conclude, if there were no Churches, there were neither
Diocese nor Parish belonging to them, nor Priests, nor degrees, out of which
those Priests and Deacons should be taken. I believe that in those times some
did stand, and some did speak, and some did Lecture; and to do these no orders
are required: and hereunto these men conform themselves.

Secondly, as they had Schools and degrees, so likewise had they public
Libraries furnished with useful and necessary books, to fit such as were in
the place of Auditors and others in time to be serviceable in the Church.
Eusebius. 2.18.
Eusebius tells us that Philo his books were chained up in the public Library
at Rome, Anno 39. The books also of Origin were placed in a public Library in
Caesarea, Eusebius. 6.31.
after that of a Lecturer he took holy Orders. Alexander Patriarch of Jerusalem
built a famous Library there, Eusebius. 6.20.
from whence Eusebius had his helps for compiling of his History, Anno 197.
And if they had public Libraries to preserve books, and Schools for
Professors to read them, and Scholars to be trained up under them to do the
Church service, and for no other end at all; can we imagine they were without
Churches for those to serve God in, whom they had fitted and enabled for that
purpose? This were to imagine Mariners, Calkers, and Pilots, 200. years before
there were any Ships. It were weakness to think, that their Persecutors would
give leave to building of Schools, and Libraries, but not of Churches; for
they hated all alike: As appears by Dioclesian, who spared their books and
Libraries, no more than he did their Churches, but burnt and destroyed all.

Thirdly, they had public Treasuries to keep the goods of the Church that
came unto them by Oblations, and other revenues, whereby the members of the
Church that a^tended the service of God were maintained, and the poor, Canon
Apost. 39.40 41.75. Te^tul. A^ol. adv. gentes. S. Cypr. l. 3. Ep. 24 and l. ^.
Ep. 10.
and such Christians, as lived in exile or in prison, were relieved. This is
clear out of the Canons of the Apostles, and Justin Martyr, and Tertullian.
Arcae genus est, whereunto he that is disposed stipem apponit. Haec quasi
deposita p^etatis sunt. This stock, qui praesidet, the Bishop bestowed in pious
uses. S. Justin tells us the very same. The richer sort every Sunday, when the
Eucharist is administered, offer what they think good: S. Iustin^ Apol. ad
Antonin.
and what is then so gathered, in communi aerario apud praepositum deponitur,
thereby to relieve Orphans, Widows, Prisoners, and Strangers. No Communion
then in the Primitive Church was without Obons, for the use not only of the
Priest who was to live of the Altar; S. Ambr l. 5. Ep. 32 Orat.
but also of the poor. And S. Ambrose gives the reason why they relieved the
poor with alms, to be this, that the poor might relieve them with their
prayers. Defensionem requiro (says he) and defensionem habeo, I crave defense
against the Goths, that intended violently to possess the Arrians of the
Churches of Catholics, and a defense I have, sed in orationibus pauperum.
Coeci illi, and Claudi, robust is bellatoribus fortiores sunt: The blind and
the lame, are the thundering and victorious Legion. Munera pauperum Deum
obligant, what is given to the poor, is lent to the Lord, and we have him fast
bound for the Loan and the principal. This (I am persuaded in my conscience)
has preserved all our Cathedral Churches from the rapine of sacrilegious
hands and hearts, as impure, (whatsoever they pretend) and subtly malicious,
as the Goths were violently barbarous.

As the poor, and strangers were relieved and entertained with these stocks of
money; so likewise were their Priests and Deacons thereby maintained: which S.
Cyprian calls st^pes and sportulae. S. Cypr l. 1. Ep. 7. and 11. lib. 4. Ep. 15.
And it seems the means belonging to some of their Churches was very great.
For the Church of Rome in those P^imitive times maintained above two hundred
persons, Eusebius. 4.23.
members of that Church: And as Dionystus Bishop of Corinth witnesses, it was
the pious custom of that Church also, even from the very beginning to send
relief far and near upon all occasions. And it seems that the Church of
Rome, Pius Ep. 2.
besides their Oblations, had revenues in Land belonging to them, V^ban. Ep. 1.
whereof mention is made in the Decretals. These common Treasuries were found
in all Churches, and continued even from the Apostles times. S. Amb. Com. in 2.
Tim. 2.
For as S. Ambrose collecteth, the Apostle S. Paul wishes Timothy to make use
thereof, and not to war at his own charges. Timothy, it seems, abstained a
participatione Gazophylacii, but the Apostle instructs him otherwise, saying,
that those That preach the Gospel, ought to live of the Gospel. Whereupon,
Prius hunc sumere praec^pit, qui primus est, and sic caeteris distribuere. The
Bishop was the prime man to whom the custody of the treasure was committed, who
was to make use thereof for keeping hospitality in his own house, Orig. Hom.
11. in Levit. and t^act. in Mat. ^^.
and to cause the Deacons to dispense the rest as occasion served, who dealt
not always so faithfully as they ought to have done; for they became sometimes
Nummularii, and to have, pecuniarum mensas, such tables and banks of money,
quas evertet Deus, which God would overthrow, as Origin says.

The Churches therefore being thus rich, it is no marvel if Demetrius, (...).
l. 8. c. 6.
brother to Probus the Emperor, was content to be Bishop of Byzantium,
afterward called Constantinople, and made his son Probus the Emperors Nephew
Bishop after him. Though happily it was not the wealth, but the holiness of
Bishops that made Princes desire their places; S. Amb. l. 5. ep. 33.
for vulgo dici, the old saying was, by Saint Ambrose his report, Imperatores
sacerdo^ium magis optaverant, quam Sacerdotes imperium. If then they were
careful to have, and build Treasure houses, and were permitted to enjoy their
wealth, and riches, and likewise had houses to give entertainment to Pilgrims,
and were not molested by their persecutors herein, shall we imagine, that they
would not be much more zealous to build Churches, and houses for Gods service,
wherein, as appears by their Vigiles, and continual Prayers, and receiving
the holy Eucharist, they employed themselves both night and Day? or will we
think that their enemies were more malicious against their Religion, than
covetous of their wealth, and therefore they would suffer them to enjoy their
Treasure houses and dwelling houses in their prime Cities: but would demolish
their Churches, and drive them into Forests, and dens, and holes of the
earth, to exercise their Religion in? But I take it, by that which has been
said, that it is more manifest, that Christians had Churches within 200. years
after Christ, than either Schools, or Libraries, or Treasure houses, or
dwelling houses of their own, though all this be as clear as the day. And this
is one note whereby Tertul. distinguishes Catholics and true Christians, from
Schismatics and Heretics: those had Churches and places of abode, but these
had none, but were straglers, and had their Communions in corners. You have
seen how the Catholic Church is accommodated with Churches, and other useful
houses: Now cast your eye upon the condition of Heretics, and behold the
model thereof in three words out of Tertulliar. Te^tul. de prae. scrip. 17.
Plerique nec Ecclesias habent, sine matre, sine sede, orba fide, extorres sibi
late vagantur. Heretics (says he) have neither Churches, nor houses of their
own to settle in, but like unto Caine, were Vagabonds, and Runnagars over the
face of the earth, and so the case was with them even to Saint Cyprians time,
and therefore that blessed Martyr says plainly, The Eucharist cannot be
received among Heretics, for the elements must be cons^rated before they
become parts of that Eucharist. S. Cyprian l. 1. ep. 12.
This Heretics could not then do, quia nec Altar, ^ec Ecclesiam, because
they had neither Altar, nor Church. For of necessity, says Saint Cyprian,
Eucharistia in Alt^ri Sanctificatur, the Eucharist is Consecrated upon the
Altar.

If then this were true, which this unadvised man would make the Vicar believe,
that there were no Altars, nor Churches neither within 200. years after
Christ, it must needs follow that the holy Eucharist was not received by any of
the Holy Martyrs and blessed Saints of God in all the Primitive Church, or else
that they did receive some kind of Sacrament that was not Consecrated. For
Eucharistia in Altari Sanctificatur, is a ground on which he sets his rest, as
the Fathers before him, and his successors ever did. I must needs therefore
conclude, that if Schismatics do not build Altars in the honor of this man,
for the good service he has done them, they are very ungrateful. For by
outing Christians, and driving them out of their Churches into Woods and
solitary places to Administer the holy Sacraments in, he has set the very
true Character of Schismatics, and Heretics upon the face of the holy
Catholic Church, that now you shall not know the one from the other; And what
is lawful for the one to do, shall be as lawful for others. Neither can
derive their Succession, nor Ordination, nor power of Consecration from Christ
and his Apostles. Therefore both Sacraments, and Sacramentalls may be
administered by all that list, and when they list, and where they list, and as
they list; and they can show as good evidence, and authority for their so
doing, as the best of them all that shall control them. And if any shall
censure them, they must look to have as good as they bring, censure for
censure, and excommunication for excommunication. For in the Primitive Church
for 200. years together, there was hail fellow well-met, all equals, no
Audientes, no Catechumeni, no Competentes, no Neophyti, no Deacons, no Priests,
or if there were Deacons, or such Antichristian names as Priests, there were
no Sacraments for them to administer, no Eucharist to deliver; or if they
delivered it, they gave it before it was Consecrated, for they had no Church,
nor Altar to Consecrate the same upon, and Eucharistia in Altari Consecratur;
we are sure out of all antiquity, that the Eucharist must be consecrated on an
Altar. These then being the inconveniences which must necessarily follow if
there were no Churches, nor Altars, within 200. years of Christ, I hope the
Author will repeal his assertion, and yield unto a Truth uncontrollable, that
there were Churches and Altars not only within 200. years after Christ, but
all those 200. years together, and were then, and ever since in the holy
Christian Church. And so I have done with that point.

CAP. XII. The Altar stood in Sacrario. The mysteries of the Eucharist not
exposed to all. The Letter, That you should be so earnest and violent for an
Altar at the upper end of the Quire, and that it ought not to be removed to the
body of the Church, I conceive to be in you so many mistakings.
Chancels how divided. Communio Laicorum. Priests only stood about the Altar.
S. Ambrose admonishes Theodosius thereof. Oblations daily made at the Altar.
Heretics could not consecrate, because they had no Altar. Priests not allowed
to be Executors, nor to be drawn from their daily service at the Altar.
BY that which has been said, I conceive the Author of this Letter stands
convinced in his understanding, that there were Churches, and Altars within
200. years after Christ. The next point to be enquired after, is, whether it
did stand in the upper end of the Quire, or in the body of the Church. For
where it did stand in the Primitive, there I suppose it ought to stand, if the
Canons of our Church have not otherwise ordered it. To both these I shall
speak briefly, and in order.

Touching the first, how the Altar or Lords Board stood in the best times;
whether in the Quire, or in the body of the Church, as this Author would have
it, is in part manifest by that which has been already said. And the
affinity, that the placing of the Altar has with the being of Altars, and
Churches within 200. years of Christ, will quit me of the trouble of a long
discourse touching that matter.

That the Altar did not, nor could stand in the Nave, or body of the Church,
commonly called, Auditorium, these reasons following seem to be very strong.
For then it should be exposed to such as were by the censure of the Church
abstenti, or Excommunicate, and to those, that were otherwise prohibited, as
Poenitentes, Catechumeni and Audientes. Now all these were not only inhibited
the use, and participation of the Holy Eucharist, but also the very sight, and
beholding of those mysteries.

Tertullian speaking of a Woman married to a heathen, Tertul. l. ^. ad uxo.
says, such an Husband will be inquisitive to know, quid secreto ante
Orationem cibum gustes: which the Wife could not have concealed from him, if
the Altar had stood in the body of the Church. For it was permitted to
Heathens, and to all that stood not prohibited by the censure of the Church to
come into the body of the Church. Council. Arcl. ca. 15.
But the Woman received it in Secreto, from whence the place was called
Secretorium. This appears also by the History of Numerianus. The Emperor
being entered into the Church of Antioch, desired only per transennam inspicere
mysteria Christianorum; but Babylas Bishop there, resolutely withstood him, and
told him plainly, that it was unlawful for him that was defiled with Idols, to
enter so boldly into the Church, Nicep. l. 6. ca. 33.
and divina mysteria contaminat is oculis spectare. These divine mysteries
therefore were not celebrated in Auditorio; for then there was no partition to
have hindered the Emperor from the sight of them: but in a place correspondent
to their holiness, called therefore Sacrarium.

Secondly, The Altar must needs stand in that place which was appointed for the
Priests to Officiate in. Now the place appointed for them to wait and to
administer at, was not in the midst of the Chancell, much less in the
midst or body of the Church: but in that place of the Presbytery, which was
called Sacrarium, or Sanctum Sanctorum. Council. Ar^l. 2. c. 15.
The Presbytery we do find thus divided. First, in the entering in on both
sides thereof were Exedrae, seats, or stalles, placed for the Priests. Here the
Deacons might not sit. Secondly, above these, near to the upper end of the
Quire was placed Cathedra, Decret. Urban.
the Chair, or Bishops Throne. This seat stood in such convenient distance
from the Altar, Council. Gangr. c. 7.8.
that the Bishop might see what Oblations were there offered, the dispencing
whereof belonged to his charge. Thirdly in the midst of the Quire kneeled the
Laics, S. Cypr. l. 4. Epist. 2. and lib. 2. Ep. 1.
that were admitted to the holy mysteries, and together with them such Priests,
as after penance were received into the communion of Laics, and not of
Priests. Fourthly, at the upper end of the Chancell was a place enclosed, and
rayled in from the rest of the Chancell, whereunto none, neither Priests that
were penitents, Council. Nic. 1. c. 14.
nor Deacons, were permitted to enter, and there to communicate and officiate
in the consecration of the Eucharist, or in the administration thereof unto
Priests, but they themselves. This place was called Sacrarium; here stood the
Altar or Lord's-Table, and hitherto none might approach, but the Priests
themselves. The Canon is clear for it. Council. Constantinop. 6. c. 69.
Nulli omnium qui sit in Laicorum numero liceat intra sacrum Altar ingredi, no
Layman may come within the Altar. A dispensation indeed there was for the King
to enter in thither, when he would Creatori dona offere, and this was made good
ex antiquissima traditione: but stay there he might not. Take this cleared in
the History of Theodofius his offering: when the time came (says Theodoret) quo
ad Sacra^ mensam munera offerrentur, surrexit similiter plorans, the Emperor
rose up, and with tears ad Sacrarium accessit, he came into the Holy Place
where the Altar stood enclosed, and post oblationem, ut consueverat, intra
cancellos restitit, and after his oblation he stood within the rayles, as he
used to do at Constantinople: but S. Ambrose Bishop of Millaine, Theod. l. 5.
c. 18.
discrimina locorum demonstravit, put him in mind of the difference of places,
and told him, Interiora solis Sacerdotibus patent, that that part of the
Sacrarium within the rail, was allowed only for Priests, Reliquis vero omnibus
inaccessa, and intacta, and no other might enter in thither, or so much as
touch them. Proinde exi, and communiter cum reliquis assiste, hereupon he wished
him to forbear, and to depart. The Emperor took no distaste hereat, but
wished the Priests to let the Bishop know, that he pressed not thither out of
boldness; but because at Constantinople he used so to do: which custom he
brake so soon as he returned thither. It appears hereby that the Altar stood
in Sacrario, and that the Sacrarium was railed in from the rest of the
Chancell, and that none but Priests might enter in thither: and that at the
Altar were their Oblations made. S. Cypr. l. 1. Ep. 9.
All this may be further proved out of S. Cypriaen; Antecessores nostri
censuerunt, The Bishops my predecessors (says he) have ordered, Non nisi
Altari deservire debere, that none but Priests might officiate at the Altar,
and there, and no where else was their service performed. Origin before him
witnesses the like, Orig. hom. 1^. in Number.
the Priests duty was assistere Altari, to wait at the Altar, and there to
receive Oblations, which were howerly brought thither: for impiu^ est in
ecclesiam, ingredi, it is impiety to enter into the Church without an offering
to the Priest. And if any Bishop or Priest fell in time of persecution, and
sacrificed to Idols, Sacerdotium Dei sibi vendicare non possunt, nec fas post
ar as diaboli accedere ad Altar Dei, they were not allowed to come unto the
Altar, S. Cypr. l. 1. Ep. 7. and. 4.
nec apud Altar consistere, nor to stand near it, Nec ulterius sancta
contrectare, nor to handle holy things any more. That this distinction of
places was kept within 200. years after Christ, is manifest, by the Stations
which the Priests kept at the Altar on Fasting-dayes, and not on Sundays in
those times, as Rhenanus thinks. Tertullian is clear for it. Tertul. de
Iejunio.
Nonne solennior erit statio tua, si ad aram Dei steteris? Solemn stations
were made at the Altar, and so continued to be there made on Wednesdayes, and
Fridayes, from the Apostles times: this holy place was also appointed for those
prayers, which the Priests daily made for the sacred persons of Kings, and
Bishops. And we do not find that high service was performed at that holy Altar
by any Deacon or Levite. Not only the Liturgies of the Church, but the
Constitution of the Apostles, from whom they had their direction, does order,
that Priests at the Altar do pray, S. Clem. Constit. l. 8. c. 18.19.13.
pro omni Episcopatu, for all Bishops: and particularly pro Episcopo nostro
Iacobo, and pro regibus, and for Kings, S. Amb. de vocat gent. l. 1. c. 4.
that they may lead a quiet and peaceable life, etc. S. Austin distinguishes
inter precationes, and orationes: precationes were called such prayers as were
made, before that which is on the Lord's board, incipiat benedici: but
Orationes, S. Aug. Ep. 59. Paulin. q. 5.
Orizons, were made, cum benedicitur and sanctificatur, S. Ambros. de Sacram.
l. 4. c. 4.
when it is blessed and sanctified; which kind of prayer all the Church almost
concludes; oratione Dominica, with the Lords Prayer. Here are those Prayers
made, which the Priest uses for Kings, even for those Kings a quibus
persecutionem pati^batur Ecclesia, that did persecute the Church. Prayer for
Kings, for Bishops, for the whole, and the Lords Prayer was then only said at
the Altar by the Priest, in the Holy of Holyes. S. Cypr. lib. 1. Ep 9.
At the Altar also were Commemorations made in Saint Cyprians time. If a Priest
at his death make a Priest his Executor, and so cause him to leave the Altar,
where he ought to serve continually, the Canon was, that for such an one non
offerretur, nec Sacrificium pro dormitione ejus celebraretur. Neque enim ad
Altar Dei meretur nominari in Sacerdotum prece, qui ab Altar Dei Sacerdotes
and ministros Levitas avocare voluit: He deserves not to be named, in the
Priests Prayer at the Altar, Canon. Apost. 4, 5.
that is an occasion to withdraw Priests from the Altar. Lastly, on the Altar
were made oblations of first fruits, Grapes, and Oil, as has bin noted out of
Origin, and may appear plainly in the Canons of the Apostles. I will not
dispute the Authority of these Canons. Council. Constantinop. 6. Can. 2. S.
Irenaeus l. 4. c. 34.
Some do reject them: but the sixth general Council approves 85. of them,
and says they were received by their Predecessors, tanquam a Deo traditi, as
delivered of God. Howsoever Saint Irenaeus witnesses, that for the point now
to be declared, Oblations were made daily and hourly on the Altar. God (says
he) would have us munus offerre ad Altar frequenter sine intermissione.

By this that has been said, it appears sufficiently (as I suppose) that
the Altar, or Lords Table, stood not in the body of the Church, but in the Holy
place separated and enclosed for Priests only to serve, who did there
consecrate the Eucharist, receive oblations, offer up prayers for the sacred
persons of Kings, and of Bishops, and the whole Church, and did there and no
where else conclude their Prayers and Orizons commonly with the Lords Prayer:
For none of all these holy Offices, belonging only to Priests, were performed
in the body of the Church, where every one might be present, and see what was
done. Therefore the Altar did not in those times stand in the body of the
Church, and so far the Vicar is not mistaken. The Altar then did stand in the
Primitive Church at the upper end of the Q^ire, and not in the body of the
Church, and by that Precedent the Vicar might suppose that it ought to stand,
except the Canons of our Church have otherwise ordered it. And this is the next
point to be inquired after.

CAP. XIII. The Rubricke touching the standing of the Communion Table in the
body of the Church. The Lette^. The Rubricke says the Table shall stand in the
body of the Church or of the Chancell, where Morning Prayer, and Evening Prayer
be appoin^ed to be read.

And if you desire to know how Communion Tables have stood: Read a book which
you are bound to read, Jewel against H^rding, and you shall be satisfied. Of
private Mass* Artic 11. p. 14^.


Of the Rubricke concerning Chancels. Who has the appointing of Books to be
read by Priests. Peter-Lombard, and the Ancient Fathers appointed to be read.
Bishop Jewel, and others directed to be read. Communion Tables, according to
Bishop Jewel, stood in the Presbytery. The Presbytery is not the body of the
Church.
I Will speak first to the Rubricke, which all men acknowledge for a Canon:
then to the book which the Vicar is bound to read, and commanded so to do.
Touching the Rubricke; It is fit we expound one Rubricke by another, and what
is briefly and obscurely set down in one, to supply and expound out of
another. The Table shall stand in the body of the Church, or Chancell, etc.
says the Rubric before the Communion: But the Rubric before Morning Prayer,
seems to put in a double exception, or Caution. 1. Except it shall be
otherwise determined by the Ordinary of the place. 2. And the Chancels shall
remain, as they have done in times past. The place* of reading of Prayers, in
the first part of the Rubricke, is left to the determination of the Ordinary of
the place, and upon good reason, because some part of those prayers, as namely
the First Service is to be read in Auditorio, or body of the Church; And some
part again, namely the Second Service, ought to be read only in Sacrario; if
the ancient practice of holy Church be enquired after. But the later part of
the Rubric, which concerns Chancels themselves, and so, by necessary
consequence, the essential parts of the Chancell, as in Cathedral Churches, the
Priests Stals, the Bishops Throne, and the Lords Table, or holy Altar, with the
railes whereby it is environed, to keep it from all manner of profanation, and
to preserve it entire, and apart for the Priests to officiate in, these shall
remain as in times past. The ordering of these things, otherwise than they
were in times past, is not referred (be it spoken under correction) to the
determination of the Ordinary of the place, much less to any Vicar or Parson
to make a Daedalus engine of the Lords Table, and so to set the Church upon
Wheels, and so to run it out of the pious, and Reverend practice of holy and
unreproved Antiquity. The Rubricke allows no such liberty. Let no man
therefore invade the Churches right, or go about to remove the ancient bounds
in this particular, that he bring not a curse upon himself. The Church (I
confess) is indulgent enough to these fancifull, and popular men; yet it is to
be hoped, she will not suffer her ancient Landmarkes to be plucked up, and
thrown by, to please new fangled people withal. For hoc ratum and fixum,
Chancels shall remain as they have done in times past: which is not to be
understood of walls and windows only, but of the fixing of the Lords Table,
which is the maine part of the Chancell considerable in the service of God, the
ordering whereof is determined in the Rubricke, when it is said, Chancels
should remain as in times past.

Now if the Vicar will know from the Author, how Chancels have remained in
times past, and how Communion Tables have stood in the midst of the Church, he
must read a book which he is bound to read, Jewel against Harding, and he
shall be satisfied. And so I am fallen upon the second point, which I have
bound my self to speak unto, namely to the book which the Vicar is commanded
to read, and told that he is bound to read it.

For the Injunction or command laid upon the Vicar, I think I may say thus
much; that for any man to appoint a Priest, that is not under his Jurisdiction,
what book to read, is a Prerogative and authority, that sideth with
Archiepiscopall, or Regal rather. King James of happy memory, I wot well, sent
us his directions to Cambridge (Doctor Carry being then Vicechancelor) for the
reading of Peter Lombard, Thom. Aquinas, and the Ancient Fathers, as may
appear in the Register of that University. Now if the Royal command of his
Majesty, of happy memory, had been as well observed by all Students of
Divinity there, as it is doubtless safely preserved in the Office, the Vicar
needed not to be sent to School, and bidden to read a book of this man's
appointment, to see how Communion Tables have stood in the body of the Church;
for he had been able enough to send his careful instructor from the River to
the Fountain.

But he bids him read no other book, than what he is bound to read, and that
swells not up to the height of a command, but is confined within the
precincts of a friendly advice, to have an eye to what he is bound to read.
Such Evangelicall Council, I confess, becomes Mr. Cotton much better, than
to arrogate a command, and execute his superintendency in that kind: For his
advice then; So far forth as Bishop Jewel, Bullinger, Erasmus, and the like
do explain unto us the true, and Orthodoxe doctrine of our Church, we are
bound in reason, as occasion serves, not only to have them, but to read them:
The like may be said for the reading of God and the King; And if some men read
such books more, and some such as the other, less; I doubt not, but they did
read such books as they are bound to read, as well as any of these.

Well, in the Vicars behalf, I have read the book appointed, and therein have
satisfied the Authors desire. Now I make bold to call upon him reciprocally to
make good his engagement, that undertaketh that the Reader shall be satisfied
out of Bishop Jewel, how Communion Tables stood in the body of the Church.

How Communion Tables have stood in the body of the Church, I do not find in
Bishop Jewel. But what I find I will tell you, and then tell you me, if
Bishop Jewel do not say, or prove at least, that the Communion Table or Altar
did not stand in the body of the Church. According to Bishop Jewel, the
Communion Table or Altar, (for he uses both words) stood in the Quire: The
Quire was divided with rayles from the rest of the Church. This Quire so rayled
in was commonly called of the Greek Presbyterium. This Presbyterium was
especially appointed for Priests. It was shut up from all others for disturbing
the holy Ministry. This appears notably in the story of Ambrose, who willed
the Emperor Theodosius himself to depart forth; And by Nazianzenus in the
life of S. Basil: Council. Laod. ca. 19.
And for further proof how the Alt^r stood, Bishop Jewel refers the Reader
to the Council of Laodicea, Can. 19. where it is thus determined; That the
Catechumeni do pray apart, and that they be dismissed before the Penitents be
admitted into the Church by imposition of hands: Tunc Fideles orare debent;
When all these are dismissed, then the Faithful are to perform their
devotions. Solis autem ministris Altaris liceat ingredi ad Altar* and ibidem
communicare: The Ministers of the Altar may only enter within the lists of the
Altar, and there communicate. Lastly, says Bishop Jewel, it may be gathered by
S. Chrysostom, that at certain times of the Service that place was drawn
with Curtains.

Now let all this be put together, and then resolve whether the Vicar may see
out of Bishop Jewel, how Communion Tables have stood in the body of the Church.
1. The Presbytery was neither in the Greek, nor Latin Church, taken for the
body of the Church, no more than Presbyter was taken for a Layman. 2. No
Laiman, neither Catechumenus nec Poenitens, neither Jew nor Gentile, Heathen
man, or Heretic, much less any Christian Emperor was shut out of the body of
the Church. 3. The body of the Church was never called Sacrariu^, into which
none but Priests might enter and there Communicate. 4. The body of the Church
was never the place set apart for Oblations to be made in. 5. The body of the
Church was at no time of the Service drawn with Curtains. Therefore the holy
Altar, (that stood in a place that was sometimes drawn with Curtains, that
was at all times railed in from the rest, that was set a part only for Priests,
that was ordained for Oblations, that was fixed in the Presbytery,) cannot,
acccording to Bishop Jewel, be set in the body of the Church. If then the
Vicar stand bound to read this book of Bishop Jewels, he is bound to believe
the authorities which Bishop Jewel brings, and not to mistake them, (as this
Penman does,) but to understand them aright; and then he shall see, how
Communion Tables have not stood in the midst of the Church, but in the higher
part of the Church, wherein the Vicar has the Authors assent already in
opinion, though he settle it otherwise for the Men of Granthams sake.

CAP. XIV. The antiquity of Communion Tables Eusebius's authority examined for
the standing of Altars in the body of the Church. The Letter. And if you desire
to know out of Eusebius, Augustine, Durandus, and the fifth general Counsel
of Constantinople, how the Communion Tables have stood in the midst of the
Church: Read a book etc. and you shall be satisfied.
Church of Tire built by Paulinus. Paulinus adjudged to be an Arrian by the
Centurists. Illyricus heretical. The Altar in Tire, how it stood in the midst
of the Presbytery. Church in Tire built conformable to the Temple. Four
distinct places in Solomon's Temple. How the Altar there stood in the midst.
Gods dwelling in the midst of the people. How David and Solomon praised the
Lord, in medio ecclesiae. The peole did not see the Priest at the Altar in the
Temple.
IN the next place I will examine the Authors out of which he says, the Vicar
may know how Communion Tables stood in the body of the Church. And he shall
give me leave to say, that whatsoever he can know out of any of these Authors,
he shall never know how Communion Tables stood at all; much less how they
stood in the body of the Church.

The word used in those Authors is Mensa Domini, or Altar, not Communionis
mensa, the Communion Table. For though the word Communion Table be a fit and
convenient word, yet it came not in so soon, but it came in (I will not
impeach the coming in thereof, nor speak so unreverently as he does of Altars,
and say it crept in) but it came in, long after the youngest of these Authors
went out of the Church Militant, into the Church Triumphant. Therefore it will
be hard to know out of them, how Communion Tables stood, which he shall never
find in any of them at all, nor in any before them, nor in the holy Scripture,
nor in any after them, till Anno 1552. For in King Edwards Liturgy (says the
Author) of 1549. it is every where, but in that of 1552. it is no where called
an Altar, but the Lord's board. From whence then we may guess, when Communion
Tables came in.

But if out of these Authors he can make the Vicar know, how the Lord's board,
or holy Altar stood in the body of the Church, the Vicar will not stand upon
the name of Communion Table any longer.

Wherefore to take his Authors in their order, I begin with Eusebius: Eusebius. l.
10. c. 4
his words are these, Absolu^^ Templo ac sedibus excelsissimis ad honorem
praesidentium, and subselliis ordine collocatis, ornat^ and post omnia Sancto
Sanctorum, viz. Altari in medio constituto. Out of these words the Vicar must
know how the Altar stood not at the upper end of the Quire, but in the midst
of the Church among the people. This Church whereof Eusebius speaks, was the
Church of Tire built by Paulinus the Bishop there. And to this place I can give
a speedy answer, by sending the Author, as he does the Vicar, to a book which
he may take himself bound to read and believe, Cent. 4. c. 9. fol. 688.
(as some willing to be deceived do) and he shall be satisfied (the Centurists.)
In this place Illyricus tells us, that Eustathius, who was Prolocutor in the
Council of Nice, and Patriarch of Antioch, was deposed in a Conventicle there,
only because he approved the Council of Nice, and opposed, and publicly
reproved Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia, and this Paulinus Bishop of Tire, and
others, tanquam Arrianos, for Arrians. With this tale of the Centurists, I
suppose the Author rests satisfied, that it is no good argument to say, the
Altar stood in the midst of Arrian and Heretical Churches, therefore it ought
so to stand in Catholic, or Orthodox and Christian Churches. But I will deal
more favorably, and not cut him off so short; nor resolve Paulinus for an
Arrian upon their information. I wish the Author could say as much, to quit
some of the Centurists of Arrianisme, as may be said in the behalf of Paulinus
in that respect. If Paulinus before the decree of the Council of Nice, did
lean to Arrius, (which appears not but by the report of Arrius, who may lie;)
yet after the Council had determined against him, neither Arrius, nor any of
his friends, embarke Paulinus in that frantic ship: but the Prolocutor
himself, and Athanasius affirm, that all the Bishops ( Theonas, and Secundus
excepted) assented to the determination of that Council, and condemned Arrius,
whether in truth and sincerity of heart, or otherwise, it is hard to say. But
of Paulinus we may be fully assured, that he gave his vote sincerely: for the
Preacher, who made the Sermon at the Dedication of that Church, acknowledged
our Savior Jesus Christ to be the natural and only Son of God, and God
Himself, and to be the Creator, and not a Creature (as the Arrian Council at
Ariminum resolved) and made him equal in honor with God the Father. S. Amb.
l. 5. Ep. 32.
This truth, tending altogether to the confutation of Arrius, the Preacher
might have forborne to deliver in that presence, if it had not sorted well
enough with his Lord Paulinus. But if we may give as much credit to Staphylus a
private man, speaking of Illyricus a private man, (as some yield Illyricus
against the testimony and doctrine of all ancient Fathers, in more things than
one) then was Illyricus in his opinion no better than a Arrian. For hunc inter
alia renovasse Arrii doctrinam, Pratcol l 9. c. 11.
talemque eum esse ab Academia Whittenbergensi damnatum testatur Staphylus,
says Prateolus. Heretical also is that doctrine of his, That original sin is
a substance; for which cause, his brethren, and those of his fathers house
threw stones at him. Wherefore I will make no use of the testimony of a man so
branded, but take Paulinus for a good Catholic, and yield that the Altar in his
Church stood as it ought to do, all things considered. But how will it appear,
that the Sanctum Sanctorum, as the Preacher in Eusebius calls it, or the holy
Altar, stood not at the upper end of the Quire, but in the midst of the
Church among the people? For this is the point which the Author informs the
Vicar, he shall know out of E^sebius. But certainly the Author never read, or
never weighed the testimony borrowed of Eusebius, but came lightly by it, and
presumed he might play it away, and pass it upon the Vicar as it came to him.
All that the Preacher in Eusebius says is this; that when all the parts of the
Church were finished, then the Sanctum Sanctorum, or holy Altar was set in the
midst: not in the midst of the body of the Church among the people, that
crosses all antiquity, and is supplied by a friendly hand to the Author: but
as Bishop Jewel points us very truly, to the Presbytery, and in the midst,
that is, in the midst of the Presbytery it was set. And in reference to the
Presbytery it may well be said to stand in the midst, though not in the very
Center of the Presbytery, but removed a good distance from it, and placed at
the upper end of the Quire. Thus Ioshuah says of the Gibeonites, Josh. 9.22.
In medio nostri est is, you are in the midst of us, when indeed they were
three days journey from them. Wherefore out of Eusebius the Vicar cannot know
how the Altar stood in the body of the Church among the people.

But were this granted, that the Altar stood in the midst of the Church of
Tire, yet shall the Author get nothing by the hand for his purpose. The Church
of Tire, as appears by the Preachers Sermon, was contrived after the pattern
of the Temple built by Solomon, and after by Zorobabel. And Paulinus in his
structure endeavored, as much as lay in him, to conform his building to that
model, and not to come behind Besaleel himself in expressing the like art
and cunning in his workmanship, that the Jews their neighbors might happily
take the better liking thereof, and be sooner won to Christiany. Now the City
Jerusalem, as appears in Josephus, Joseph de bell* Iudaico. l. 3. c. 2
was thought to stand in the midst of the earth; and the Psalmist favors
that situation, Deus operatus est salutem in medio terrae, Psalm. 73.12. and
that the Temple stood in the midst of Jerusalem, and the Sanctum Sanctorum in
the midst of the Temple, and the Arc of the Testimony in the midst of the
Sanctum Sanctorum. That this may better appear, and the conformity also of
Paulinus his Temple thereunto; let it be remembered, that to the Temple belonged
these four distinct places, and whatsoever was done in any of these, was said
to be done in medio Ecclesia. 1. There was Atrium majus, sanctified by Solomon,
1 Reg. 8.64. 2. Atrium Sacerdotum, where the Brazen Altar for burnt offerings
stood. Exodus 40.6. whereof is mention, 2 Reg. 21.5. and 23.12. and 1 Reg. 7.12.
and 2 Chronicles. 4.9. Before this Altar Solomon made a brazen Scaffold, and set it
in the midst of the Court, in medio Basilicae, upon which he kneeled, and
prayed before all the people, 2 Chronicles. 6.13. 1 Reg. 8.22. This was called the
Tabernacle of the Congregation that is among the people. Levit. 16.16. And both
David and Solomon, standing there, are said to praise the Lord in medio
Ecclesiae. Ps. 22.22. 3. There was the Sanctuary or Tabernacle of Testimony, on
the North side whereof stood the golden Table of Shewbread, Exodus, 40.22. and on
the East, between the Tent of the Congregation, and the Altar, stood the
Laver, and his foot made of the Women's Looking-glasses, Exodus 38.8. and 40.30.
On the West stood the golden Altar of Incense, without the Veil before the
Testimony, Exodus 36.35. This Veil divided between the Holy place where the
Priests burnt incense daily, and the Most Holy Place. Exodus 26.33. At the door
of this Tabernacle stood Aaron and his Sons, to pronounce the blessing
appointed, Number. 6.23. and this was done also in medio ecclesiae. 4. The Most
Holy was called the Propitiatory, or Oracle: here within the Veil stood the
Arc of the Testimony of pure gold, wherein was Mannah, and Aarons Rod, and on
that Arc stood the Mercy-seat, Exodus 26.34. and 25.21. and upon the Mercy-seat
stood the two Cherubims, Exodus 25.18. and in the midst between the two
Cherubims did God speak, Exodus 25.22. as we may see, Number. 7.89. and when the
Lord so spoke, he spoke most properly, and every way in medio Ecclesiae. For
the Temple stood in the midst of Jerusalem, and the oracle stood in medio
Domus, 1 Reg. 6.19. and in the midst of that stood the Cherubims, and the wings
of the Cherubims touched one another in the midst of the house, 1 Reg. 19, 27.
This is the place of which the Lord says, I will dwell in the midst of my
people, Exodus 19.9.
1 Reg. 6.3. and in medio caliginis.

Now to return to Paulinus; As no man will say, the Oracle or Propitiatory
stood in the midst of the Church among the people (for the Priests themselves
were not permitted to come into it, no nor the High Priest himself, but once a
year, though it stood most punctually in medio Ecclesiae;) And as no man will
say that the Altar of Incense, in the Sanctuary, stood in the midst of the
Church among the people; (for it was not at all lawful for the people to come
in thither; nor for the Priests, before they had washed themselves at the Laver;
yet what they did and spoke, was said and done in medio Ecclesiae;) so may no
man say, that Paulinus his Altar, made and set after that pattern, was set in
the midst of the Church among the people: For as the people were excluded from
the Altar of incense, (they standing without, all the time the Priest was
praying, and burning incense within, Luke 1.10.) so in like manner, the Altar
built by Paulinus was in medio Constituta, set in the midst, not in the midst
among the people* but in the midst of the holy place, which did represent the
Sanctuary, from which the people were utterly excluded. But whatsoever was done
where the people stood assembled (though themselves were excluded from the very
place, where it was done,) was done in medio Ecclesiae, but not in the midst of
the Church among the people. The people might see the Priest going into the
Sanctuary, they might hear the noise of his Bells; himself, his gestures, his
actions they saw not, yet all this was done in medio Ecclesiae, but not among
the people in the outward or inward Court, whereunto only the people were
permitted to come. And when David, and Solomon prayed upon a Scaffold set in
the midst of the Tabernacle of the Congregation, before the Altar, they were
said to pray, and Praise the Lord in medio Ecclesiae, because they did it, the
whole Congregation standing by, and looking on; yet properly they were seated
from the midst of the Temple where the holy Altar stood, and the Priests
ministered in their Order: and that place was likewise divided by a veil from
the Oracle, which stood properly, and punctually in the midst of the Temple. So
that if the Author will argue from the placing of Paulinus his Altar, that the
Table must stand as that did; then he must say, that it must not stand in the
midst of the Church among the people, but in the midst of the Church, or
Sanctuary rather, whither the people might not come. And thus much the Vicar is
given to know out of Eusebius; which if the Penman had been aware of, he
would have turned him to some newer leaf, and have let this escape, as I now
do.

CAP. XV. Of Saint Augustines Testimony concerning the standing of the Lords
Table in the midst of the Church. Five Orders of Persons distinct. 1.
Audientes. 2. Catechumeni. 3. Competentes. 4. Neophyti. 5. Fideles. All these
invited, but the Faithful only allowed to come to the Lords Table. God walked
in the midst of the Camp, going before, or behind it. Audientes, and all the
rest invited by Saint Augustine, were admitted to participate of the Cup, as
well as of the Bread, when their several duties were performed.
SAint Augustines Testimony comes next into examination; which if the Author
had ever read, and considered well upon, he would not have been so peremptory
to tell the Vicar, that out of him he should know how Communion Tables stood in
the midst of the Church among the people; S. Aug. de verb. Dom. Se^ 46.
for clearly the contrary will appear out of that Sermon of Saint Augustines.
The holy man's Text (as the manner was) was taken out of the Gospel that day
read, Ieh. 6.56. He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in
me, and I in him. This he expounds, and ^aies; all that heard the Gospel
read, understood it not. The Faithful, and those that were Baptized understand
it, but those that are called Catechumeni, and Audientes, that as yet were
unbaptized, understand it not. I speak to you both. Let those that eat his
Flesh, and drink his Blood, remember themselves well, what they eat, and what
they drink: And let those that as yet do not eat, nor drink, make haste; for
as much as they are called ad tales epulas, to such a banquet: Per istos Dies,
at this time Christ feeds us daily; Mensa illius est illa in medio
constituta, his Table is that whith is set in the midst. What is the cause
then, that you that are in the rank of Audientes, and see this Table, do not
come to the banquet? It may be you thought within your selves, when the
Gospel was read, what should be the meaning of this, my flesh is meat indeed,
and my blood is drink indeed? Si volueris, erit revelatum; if you will, it
shall be made known unto you. Accede ad professionem, and solvisti
quaestionem; do but make profession of your faith, and the doubt will be
thereupon cleared. Tu autem Catechumenus diceris, Audiens, surdus es. Thou who
remainest in the rank of Catechumeni, art called a Hearer, but art indeed
stark deaf. Well, what must this Hearer, and Catechumenus do, that he may
understand, how the bread is flesh indeed, and his blood is drink indeed? Why
this do; Ecce Pascha est, da nomen ad Baptismam; Now the time is Easter, give
in your name, that you may be Baptized. Si non te excitat Festivitas, ducat
ipsa Curiositas; If the solemnity of the time excite you not thereunto, let
curiosity make you do it; that so you may understand my Text, He that eats
my flesh, and drinks my blood, abides in me, and I in him.

Now let us take a view of what can be extracted out of S. Augustines speech;
Mensa illius est illa in medio posita, his Table is set in the midst. The
Author would make a Novice of the Vicar, and make him believe, that the Lords
Table was set in the midst of the people, that all that would might come unto
it, and that he does invite all his Hearers hand over head to come unto it,
and reproves them for their slacknesse in not coming when they were bidden;
And that Audientes had no other signification, or distinction in those times,
then now it has, viz. that all sort of people that hear Gods Word, are
allowed to come, and receive the Eucharist. But the case is clean otherwise,
as may appear by that which has been said. For, 1. Had these Hearers been
never so willing to come to the Lords Table, yet they could not have been
admitted, because as yet they were no members of the Church, being not
Baptized. 2. He does invite them to come to that Table set before them, but
exhorts them to take the benefit of that Feast of Easter, (which was the
appointed time for Baptism,) and give up their names to the Bishop, that so
performing the duty belonging to Competentes, they might, after the Scrutinie
taken, be Baptized: And being by Baptism made Neophyti, new plants, and true
members of the Church, they might draw near, (as it is in our Liturgy,) and
take that holy Sacrament to their comfort. 3. It is manifest by that which has
been said, Cap. 11. and 12. that the Lords Table did not stand, where every
one, of what rank soever, might see it, and be partaker thereof, before they
were Baptized. Now let any man that reads Saint Augustine, and understands
what he reads, say whether the Vicar could know out of St. Augustine, that
Communion Tables stood in the midst of the Church, among the people, whereunto
Audientes, all sort of Hearers might resort; or rather, whether the clean
contrary does not appear out of him, that neither Audientes before they were
made Catechumeni; not Catechumeni, before they were Competentes; nor
Competentes, before they were Neophyti, and Fideles, were allowed to approach
near unto the place where the holy Altar stood; or so much as see the
mysteries belonging to that holy Sacrament. Hence it was, that none of these,
but Fideles, did understand Saint Augustines Text* but let them come and be
Baptized, then they might: For the Table was set in the midst, for all that
were Fideles to be partakers thereof.

Ob. But Saint Augustine says plainly, in medi^ Constituta, it was set in the
midst, and in the midst it could not stand, if all, as well one as other might
not come equally to it.

Sol. This phrase implies no more, but that the Altar was so fixed, that all
those might take the benefit thereof, to whom in right it belonged; As all know
that understand Latin or English. Take the warrant of holy Scripture for it:
Deuteronomy. 25.14.
God is said to walk in the midst of the Camp of the Israelites; yet we know
he did not walk in the midst of them, as this man calls the midst* i.
Nei^ther in the Front, Wing, or Rere, but just in the very midst. Exodus 13.21.
For he went before them by day, in a Pillar of a cloud, and by night in a
Pillar of fire. Yet he is as truly said to walk in the midst, as he is said
to stand in the midst, when the cloud stood over the Tabernacle, which was
properly in the midst. Deuteronomy. 14.14.
In like manner the Altar may be said to stand in the midst of the Presbytery,
though it stand at the upper end of the Quire: as the Lord was in the midst of
the people, when he went before them, or behind them: Wherefore if the Author
desire to know, how the Table did not stand in the midst of the Church among
the People, let him read a book which he is in reason bound to read, before he
cite him, St. Augustine in the place alleged, and he shall be satisfied, that
S. Augustine makes utterly against his purpose.

But if he had looked well upon Saint Augustine, Syricus ep. 1. ad Heme^ium,
and 3. ad Orthodox.
and observed how he invites both Audientes, Catechumeni, Competentes, and
Neophyti, (which we are sure could be neither Priests, nor Deacons) to give up
their names, that they might be Baptized, and so be made partakers, as well
of CHRIST'S blood, as of his body, (for all these are invited to eat CHRIST'S
flesh, and drink his blood, and no bar is put in against them, though they
were Laymen, and could be no other but Laymen; but only that they did as yet
remain in those inferior orders:) he might from hence have drawn a necessary
conclusion in defense of the practice of our Church; that Laymen, in Saint
Augustines time, did receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper in both kinds,
and so were all alike able to understand his Text, touching the eating of
Christ's flesh, and drinking of his blood. By framing this Argument out of Saint
Augustine, he might have done the Church true and acceptable service; whereas,
(by wresting Saint Augustines words to maintain a conceit of his own, to
humor fancifull people,) he does cross and confound the practice of
Antiquity, and disturbeth the holy endeavors of the Governors of our Church,
that seek only to conform the same to the Primitive times; and by that means
brings both his Learning, and Piety into question. And so I come to his next
authority.

CAP. XVI. The Testimony of the Council of Constantinople examined, Touching
the standing of the Altar in the body of the Church. The people of
Constantinople violent to have the Diptychs read, forget their duty to the
Patriarch, and to the Emperor. The Archbishop and people adore at the holy
Altar. How David did compass the Altar. How the people run round about the
Altar, and Priest: What the Diptychs were.
THe fifth Council of Constantinople is brought in the next place, to let the
Vicar know how Communion Tables stood in the midst of the Church among the
people in those times. Surely the Vicar were much to blame, if he would not
take knowledge of that matter out of the declaration of that Council, and rest
therein very well satisfied: For that confirms the four first general
Counsels, and is it self confirmed in the sixth. The words alleged out of
the Council are these: Tempore diptychorum cucurrit omnis multitudo cum magno
silentio circum circa Altar, and audiebat: which he englisheth thus: when the
Lesson, or the Chapter was a reading, the people with silence drew together
round about the Altar, and gave ear. The words contain a declaration of a
passage in the fifth Council of Constantinople, Council. Con. 6. Act. 1^.
Niceph. l. 17. ca. 9.
Anno. 500. not under Menna and Agapetus, (he being dead sixteen years
before) for that was a particular Synod, and antecessit hanc quintam; so
Alstedius and Bellarmine agree, and the sixth General Council, and Nicephorus
make it clear; and this was held under John, Patriarch of Constantinople, and
in the thirteenth year of Vigilius Pope of Rome. That this passage may be the
better understood, I shall crave leave to set down the occasion thereof: This
Oecumenicall Council being assembled at Constantinople, to settle peace in the
Church, a Decree passed at the earnest and pious supplication of the C^^izens
of Constantinople, Niceph. l. 17. c. 9.
Vt sancta quatuor Oecumenica Concilia, and Divus Leo, ejusdemque tomus per
universum orbem praedicarentur; so Nicephorus: and likewise, that Severus
Patriarch of Antioch should be denounced ^xcommunicate. This Decree being
passed, it is sent from the Council by the Archbishops Agent, to be published
by him as the manner was. The Citizens accompany the Agent to the Archbishop
to see the Decree executed. The Patriarch, whether loath to grace Leo so much,
who had opposed the Patriarchship of Constantinople, granted in the Council of
Chalcedon; or not willing to denounce excommunication against so great a
Patriarch; or resolved, in matters of so high a nature, and great consequence,
to do nothing, before he made Justinian the Emperor acquainted with all, used
many delays. But the people, in heat of their zeal, run to the Archbishop,
and with violent clamours, and loud outcries, compel him to dispatch without
any more to do, and to denounce Severus excommunicate, and pronounce the
foresaid Councels, and S. Leo Catholic. The good man speaks mildly to them,
Scitis labores meos (dilectissimi) quos and in antiquitate existens subivi, and
nunc sustinui profide, and sustineo usque ad mortem; non opus est ergo
turbatione, aut tumultu: I pray you therefore rest satisfied, that you shall
have your desire: only, Hoc faciemus* consilio piissimi, and Christo
amantissimi Imperatoris nostri, we may not do any thing in the Church without
the counsel of Gods well-beloved, our most holy Emperor. Perseverantibus
autem ipsis, but the people persisting, and crying, Multi ann^ Imperatoris:
multi anni Augustae: multi anni Patriarchae: Orthodoxus regnat, quem ^imes.
Heus obtestor, vel praedicabis, vel exies. There being no remedy, the Patriarch
must either yield to their importunity, or be thrust headlong out of the
Church; addentibus, non recedimus per sanctum Evangelium: for they had taken a
deep oath, never to leave him before he had done as they appointed. Praedicata
est Synodas, the Synod of Chalcedon was confirmed, and Severus excommunicated,
before the Emperor was made acquainted. But when that he had done, that served
not the turn, because a Deacon pronounced it; and that the motion of reference
to the Emperor would not be hearkened unto, but still they cried, Severum
Ejice, Iudam Ejice. Mark what shift the good Patriarch had to gain time, and
to appease their tumult, had it been possible. Data est eis responsio a
sanctissimo, and beatissimo Archiepiscopo and Patriarcha O^cumenico Iohanne,
hac patienter sustinete mi fratres: My Brethren, I pray you have patience, ut
adoremus sanctum Altar, and post hoc do vobis responsum; let us first, says
the most holy and blessed Archbishop, adore, and do our reverence at the holy
Altar, and then you shall receive mine answer. The people that forgot their
duty to the sacred Majesty of their Sovereign, their regard to their most holy
Patriarch, were not so profane, and unchristian, to press rudely into the
Lords house, The place where his honor dwells, and not to perform their
most humble and lowly reverence toward the holy and most sacred Altar, where
Christ is most truly and really present in the blessed Sacrament, being put in
mind thereof by their Archbishop: but this duty upon the motion, and by the
example of the most holy and blessed Archbishop, being performed, as we may
well think, they lift up their voices again, and begin to cry; qui non
loquitur Manicbeu^ est. Multi anni Imperatoris, etc. D^ptycha amboni: and then
called to have the doors shut up, lest the Archbishop should get out, and
frustrate their expectation for the reading of these Diptychs, wherein the
four Councels, and Leo, were Registered, and Severus condemned. The good man
put them in mind again, Omnia Canonice, and bono ordine fieri, to have all
things done Canonically, and in order; give me therefore leave Congregare Deo
amantissimos Episcopos, ut secundum div^nos Canones omnia proveniant consilio
and jussu piissimi Imperatoris, to have the presence of the Bishops, and the
counsel and command of the religious Emperor. For I may not choose, but report
vestras exclamationes suae Serenitati. But let him say and plead what he
could, there was no appeasing of them. Wherefore when he saw that he prevailed
nothing, but more tumult was made, and clausissent portas, and that they had
shut up the doors of the Holy of holies, whereunto he was entered to do his
reverence to the holy Altar, and that he could by no means escape their hands;
Accipiens Diptycha sanctissimus and beatissimus Archiep. and Patriarchae,
jussit ordinari, sanctas quatuor Synodos, etc. he commanded that the people
should have their desire. Severus was excommunicated, and the four Councels
confirmed. When this was done, tunc v^ce magna omnes de populo, tanquam uno ore
clamarunt, they all gave a shout and cried, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel;
and so continued singing of Benedictus for an hour together Antheme-wise, some
standing on the one side of the Presbytery, and some on the other: till the
Singing men themselves came in, and set themselves to sing Trisagium. And now
mark what did lay these Zelotes, and reduce them to order again: when the
Quire began to sing, Totus populus quievit, and audiebat attentis auribus
Trisagium, the people heard Trisagium sung very attentively; Et post lectionem
sancti Evangelii ex more sacra missa finita, the Gospel being read, and
Service at an end, then follows that which gave occasion of this long
discourse, wherein the proof lies, That Altars stood in the body of the Church
among the people: Tempore Diptycorum cucurrit omnis populus cum silentio circum
circa Altar: all the people ran with great silence round about the Altar.
And when the said Diptychs were read, as they desired, Voce magna universi
clamaverunt, Gloria tibi Domine, they all cried aloud, as they used to do at
the reading of the Gospel, Glory be to thee, O Lord.

Now I dare appeal unto the Author himself to speak, whether this passage
was judiciously and to purpose cited, yea, or no; wherein there is not one
syll^ble that mentions or implies, that the Altar stood in the body of the
Church among the people. But the flat contrary manifestly appears; for the
Altar stood in that place where all this tumult was made. And this tumult was
made in the Presbytery, are the plain words of the Council; therefore this
Altar did stand in the Presbytery, and not in the body of the Church among the
people.

Ob. But it is said, The people ran round about it, therefore it must needs
stand in the body of the Church among the people.

Sol. True it is, the people in this tumult ran round about the Altar; yet does
it not therefore follow, that it stood in the body of the Church. For let it
stand as the Governors of our Church appoint it, at the upper end of the
Quire, (wherein they have this man's assent in opinion, though the Biasse of his
practice wind to the humor of the people,) yet might the people in a disorder
run about it. Cathedral Churches were not all cast in the same mold. In some
of them behind the Altar was Secretorium, a place set apart for the Bishop to
repose himself after he came from his Throne, till the time of consecration.
Not to travel far for an example. In this sort stands our Altar in the Church
at Peterborough, an hundred men in a tumult may stand round about it, yet does
it not follow, that it stands not Canonically close to the East wall, as our
Diocesane does appoint it: much less that it stands in the midst of the Church
among the people, for every one to go about it that list, as they may about
the Font, which never was, nor ought to be so enclosed as the Altar was; for
unto it, both Laymen and Women may approach, as well as the Priest. Council.
An^^^^odor. c. 14.
The Baptisterium was kept free from making it a burying place, or setting
Monuments about it; other enclosure I know none.

2 The people of Constantinople cast off not only all reverence to their
Archbishop, but even their allegiance to their Princes, and will compel their
Bishop to read, order, and settle what they think good in the Church, without
the command or knowledge of the Prince, and do themselves run rudely and
disorderly about the holy Altar: therefore this Author thinks fit that our
people should do the like, and president themselves by this pattern, and make
the world believe they have the fifth general Council for their warrant. This
inference he must make, or repent the bringing in of this instance. And this
his Predecessors put in practice in Q. Elizabeth's time in their Classes.

3 Let it be granted that darkness is light, and evil good, and that nothing
is done here by the people, but very regularly, and Canonically, and in good
and decent manner; yet ill luck still treads on the Authors heels, for his
Circum circa Altar leads him a Wildegoose-chase round about the bush, and
brings not his purpose about; that the Altar did not stand close to the East
wall, but in the midst of the Church among the people. For thus it is, S.
Gregory makes this decree; Sacerdos missam solus nequaquam celebret; S. Greg
in lib. Capitul. Cap. 7
There shall no private Mass be allowed. Esse enim debent, qui Sacerdoti
circumstent, quos ille salutet, a quibus ei respondeatur, and ad memoriam illi
reducendu^ est illud Dominicu^, Vbicunque fuerint duo ant tres congregati, etc.
The Priest must of necessity have some to stand about him, when he officiates
or does Mass. Will any man infer from hence, that it was S. Gregory's
meaning, that the people should run round about him, and stand on every side
of him, when he did administer the holy Sacrament? Bishop Jewel tells you the
contrary; that the people were therefore excluded with rayles, left by standing
about the Priest, they might disturb the holy Ministry. But S. Gregory's
plain meaning was this: he would not have the Priest administer that holy
Sacrament alone; but have always two or three at least about him, as we use to
speak, or present at the holy service. And this Decree whereby private Masses
are overthrown, takes place at this hour in our Church, brought hither from
S. Gregory by S. Austin, the Apostle of the English, as Beda styles him. The
Prophet David uses the like phrase of compassing the Altar, circundabo Altar;
yet thereby is meant no more but the humble presenting of himself, and his
prayers, and thanksgiving to God before the Altar, Psalm. 26.6. and 28, 2 for it
contained too many Cubits for him to compass, or fathom it round about. So if
these people had come about the Altar in due manner, it could have received no
other interpretation, than David's compassing the same.

Lastly, can the Author, or any man of learning imagine, that in this Council
the Altar did stand in the body of the Church among the people, because they
went about it in such sort, as has been said? out of his own mouth issues the
mention of the Diptychs, and out of his own mouth is he thereby condemned. The
Diptychs are not Lessons, and Chapters; it were pity this, or any learned man
should beguile himself, and others, with such a translation. Lessons and
Chapters were indeed read in the body of the Church among the people, out of
the Readers Pew, or Tribunal, (as Saint Cyprian calls it) and were part of the
First Service, at which the Catechumeni were present. Innocent. 1. ca. 2.
But the reading of Diptychs was part of the 2d. Service, and was appointed to
be performed at the Altar. Prius oblationes sunt commendandae ac tunc eorum
nomina, quorum sunt oblationes, edicenda, ut inter Sacra mysteria nominentur.
Now neither oblations, nor holy mysteries were solemnized in the body of the
Church among the people, but in Sacrario, in the Holy place upon the Altar, and
there were the Diptychs read. So that if the Author will hold himself to his
Diptychs, he must say the people ran round about the Altar where it stood, and
where the Diptychs were read; and that is not only in the Presbytery, but in
sacrario, in the most holy place of all the Chancell, and not in the body of
the Church among the people, which he would make us believe, by englishing
Diptychs, by Lessons and Chapters. This I am sure is not true; for lessons, and
Chapters were taken out of the word of God. But Diptychs contained the
Catalogue of General Counsels, or of such holy, and Catholic Bishops who
had derived themselves, their Faith and Religion from the Apostles, or
Apostolic men; that faithful men who desired (as they in the Council of
Chalcedon make profession) iter ambulare Regium, to keep the King of Heavens
hi^way, might daily see what guides to follow, and what paths to shun. This
was the holy and profitable use of these Diptychs: much unlike that List of
persons censured by holy Church, called with some reproach of truth, and
Christian Religion) Catalogus testium veritatis; and as unlike a Calendar that
I have seen, wherein the Holy Martyrs, and Confessors of Jesus Christ, (who
not only had place sometime in these Diptychs, but whose names are written in
heaven) are rased out, and Traitors, Murderers, Rebels, and Heretics set in
their rooms: that if Penry, H^cket, or Legate had come in time, they might
have challenged as Orient and Scarlet colo^^ed a Die, as some of them. These
Calendars were as unluckily made, as these Diptychs were alleged by the
Author, (for his purpose,) to make the people, and mar the Altar, and ^e^ace
the ancient form of Gods true Service; which is by naming of them utterly made
void, and frustrated. For it appears hereby, and by the fifth Council of
Constantinople, that the Altar did stand in the Presbytery, and not in the
midst of the Church among the people. And so I come to his next authority.

CAP. XVII. Whether the Quire may be found in the body of the Church out of
Durandus and Platina. The Letter. Durandus examining the cause why the Priest
turns himself about at the Altar, yields this Reason for the same. In
medidio Eccle^i^ aperui os me^e and Platina notes, that Boniface was the
first, that in the time of ministra^ion divided the Priest from the people. We
may see by these few, that the Quire was then i^ the body of the Church.
That Boniface the second divided the Quire from the people, how to be
understood. How long this was done before the fifth Council of Constantinople.
Of the Priests turning about at the Altar.
IF Durandus examined the cause why the Priest turns himself about at the
Altar, and found Scripture for it, medio Ecclesiae, etc. he did more than the
Author of this Epistle did, in examining Durandus or Platina either: For if
from Durandus, and his reason, h^e can infer, the Quire was then in the body
of the Church; from examining Platina and his testimony, he shall find that
the Quire did not stand in the body of the Church. Platina says, that Boniface
the 2d. (though the Author tell us not so) divisit populum a Clero, cum
celebraretur; he divided the people from the Clergy in the administration of
the Eucharist. He says not, he was the first, that so divided them. This is
put in by the Author, and is not true. For 300. years and upward, before
Boniface was borne, even in Saint Cyprians, Tertullians and Irenaeus his time,
they were so divided. And, if in 300. years a disorder crept into the Church;
he did no more than his duty, in dividing the people from the Clergy when the
Sacrament was Celebrated. In the same manner it may be said in time to come,
that our Diocesane divided the people from the Clergy, by setting a rail to
enclose the Lords Table; yet is not he the first in these latter times, that
began to conform his Diocese to the practice of the Primitive Church in that
respect. Neither can ages to come reason in this sort, (as this man does) that
therefore the Quire was in his time in the body of the Church: For we know this
is not so.

Secondly, That which Platina reports of Boniface the 2d. was about Anno.
525. The people then were divided from the Clergy; and this was about 800.
years before Durandus could examine causes of the Priests turning about. So
that if the Author allow what Platina says, he must disallow what himself
says, that the Quire was in Durands time in the body of the Church. For we
are sure out of Platina, that near 800. years before Durandus was borne, the
people were divided from the Clergy at the Celebration of the Sacrament.
Therefore in all that time the Quire was not in the body of the Church.

Thirdly Boniface the 2d. was four years before the particular Synod of
Constantinople, under Menna and Agapetus, and almost twenty years before the
fifth General Council of Constantinople, under John the Patriarch, and
Vigilius; which Council this Author brings here, to prove that the Altar
stood in the body of the Church among the people; because cucurrit omnis
populus circum circa Altar. Now this Author assures us out of Platina, that
Boniface had divided the people from the Clergy, Anno. 525. Therefore he must
needs confute himself, and tell us that in the fifth Council of
Constantinople, Anno. 545. the Altar did not then, nor 20. years before, stand
in the body of the Church among the people; for Boniface made a separation
twenty years before. Haud commode haec divisa sunt temporibus. Wherefore if
this man will examine his own Authors, (as Durandus did the cause of the
Priests turning about) he must say that the Quire was not then in the body of
the Church, when Durandus lived, nor for 800. years before that; and when he
is come so high, S. Cyprian, and others will lift him up so much higher, that
he may look 300. years further, and never find the Altar in the body of the
Church among the people, but always enclosed at the upper end of the Chancell,
and the people ever divided from the Clergy, cum celebraretur, as himself
tells us out Platina.

Fourthly, Let it be granted, that the Priest turn^th himself about at the
Altar, and that this reason is yielded for the same, In medio Ecclesiae aperui
os meum; does it therefore follow, that the Priest and the Altar stood in the
body of the Church among the people? Could not the Priest turn himself about
at the Altar, and say, I opened my mouth in the midst of the Congregation, but
the Altar must needs thereupon stand in the midst of the Church? When
supplication, intercession, consecration, and giving of thanks unto God the
Father, were finished by the Priest, with his face unto the East; and the next
office to be performed, being to bless the people, is it not fit he turn him
(after reverence done toward the holy Altar), and with his face into the West,
bless the Congregation of the Lord, and do it upon this ground, aperui os in
medio Ecclesiae? but this Author will conclude, that therefore the Quire stood
in the body of the Church among the people. David praised God In medio
ecclesiae, yet no man can from thence infer, that he stood in the Sanctum
Sanctorum, where the Lord appeared, and spoke in the midst of the people. The
Bishop, we see daily in our Cathedral Churches, standing in his Throne,
turns his face to the people, and dismisseth them with the blessing, is truly
said to open his mouth in medio ecclesiae; as Aaron, when he did the like at
the door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation; yet does his Throne stand in
the Quire for all that, and did never stand in the body of the Church among the
people, notwithstanding his, aperuios in medio ecclesiae. If this Author would
stand to Durandus his determination of this matter, he should sooner find the
people shut out of the midst of the Quire, than the Quire shut up in the midst
of the people, (if Ordo Romanus be considered, which Durandus examined as
exactly as any man else.)

So that for a conclusion, I may say of this man, as the Steward does of those
that make a Feast, They keep their worst wine till the last; so has he kept
his worst arguments till the last. If that which he brings out of Eusebius, S.
Austin, and the fifth Council of Constantinople, will not save him from
perishing in this cause; it will be bootlesse to catch at Durandus, or Platina
either. Let him bring in these, and they will pluck Ordo Romanus after them;
and then has he ordered the matter well, in his Lettered Institutions delivered
to the Vicar. For certainly, if there be good reason, that Durandus carry a
hard hand against the Vicar, if he be for the Penman; it is as good reason that
the Penman feel it as hard upon him, if he speak for the Vicar. This Millstone
of a consequence the Author has whelmed upon himself, under which I leave him
(as Durandus himself was once left sub lapide duro,) and how he will quit
himself, nescio, nec ego curo. But though this man's proofs borrowed of
antiquity, fail him for his project in taking away of Altars, Or setting them
up in the body of the Church among the people; yet he may hope of better
success from the Orders, and Articles of our own Church. True: this is indeed
his endeavor, but if he have the Father for enemy, it is a desperate assay to
raise a party for him of his children. But I forbear to censure him, and take
leave to follow him, and behold the issue. Thus he writes to the Vicar.

CAP. XVIII. The consent and testimony of Fathers ought to be reverenced: The
Letter. If you should erect such an Altar, that i^^ (an Altar at the upper end
of the Quire, or set the Table Altarwise, or fix it in the Quire, or not remove
it into the body of the Church) your discretion will prove the only holocaust.
For you subscribed when you came to your place, That the other Oblation, which
the Papists were wont to offer upon their Altars, is a blasphemou^^ ^igment,
and pernicious imposture, in the; I. Article: and also that we in the Church of
England ought to take heed, (...) our Communion of a memory be made a Sacrifice
In the first Humily of the Sacrament.
What office at the Altar might be performed by none but Priests. Of Sacrifices
mentioned in the holy Fathers of the purest times. Of S. Justin, S. Irenaeus,
Tertullian, S. Cyprian, S. Chrysostom, S. Ambrose, S. Augustine. The Council
of Carthage, etc.
THE purpose of this Author was, doubtless, to astonish the poor Vicar, and
to cast him into a Trance, and to take away the use of his senses, that he
should not understand nor see any difference, between having an Altar, or
setting the Lords Table Altarwise (as our Diocesane, and the Governors of our
Church have ordered) and the bringing in of that other Oblation, which the
Papists offer upon their Altars. What this other Oblation is he tells us not
now, nor named before. One of the twain sure, had been requisite for him that
meant to deal clearly. Thus (whether out of ignorance, or guile) he involves
himself, and perplexeth the poor Vicar. For the good man finds himself
metamorphosed into a Papist, he knows not how: his intention made that other
oblation God knows what: The Lords Table set Altar-wise, resolved a
blasphemous figment, and a pernicious imposture: and all this done against
himself, by no body but himself, under his own hand, when he subscribed to
the 31. Article. Here is a knack of art dexterously and swiftly performed, if
it would hold. But God forbid, that any impostor should make a man what God
never made him: Though what this man fetches about nimbly and invisibly, in a
refined way of giving satisfaction and advice, blunt malice practices daily
with downright strokes. But that the Vicar may keep his own shape against all
practices of transformation, it stands him in hand to have a double guard
always about him, of the holy Fathers, and blessed Martyrs of the Primitive
Church, and of the learned and godly Fathers of our own Church. Against these
two, Inchanters have no power, charm they never so wisely, or rudely. The
first thing then to be done for the poor man's security, against mishapening of
him into a Papist, is, to show this; That in case he had prevailed in his
desire to bring in an Altar, or to set the Lords board Altar-wise, (which,
thanks be to God, is now done by our Bishops direction) yet neither his Altar,
nor oblation, nor sacrifice would have been condemned for blasphemous figments,
or dangerous deceits; the ancient and holy Fathers and blessed Martyrs being
Judges.

I hope there is no man but will reverence the authority of these Fathers, and
not cast any such imputation upon them, as to say in the censorious strain of
our bold Centurists, that they spoke not according to the custom of the
Scriptures; or that they did obscure the true doctrine and right use of the
Lords Supper; or that by their liberty and impropriety of speech, they brought
diverse inconveniences to Gods Church. Let such boldness be far from good
children, to teach their fathers to speak. Kemnit. fol. 775. Can. 22 de
concionat. 1571.
Kemnitius teaches them more modesty and goodness: Bonae mentes plurimum
moventur consensu and testimonio antiquitatis: The Fathers of our Church
testify the like reverence, not allowing any Preachers doctrine, but such as
the ancient Fathers have reaped, and gathered out of holy Scripture to his hand.

Let therefore the Fathers themselves speak whether Altars, and all manner of
Oblations, and Sacrifices, (praises, and thanksgiving excepted) were had in
such abomination, that they were esteemed blasphemous figments, and dangerous
deceits.

The Prophet Malachi, says S. Justin Martyr, S. Justin Dialog. cu^ Triph.
did prophecy de sacrificiis gentium, of the Sacrifices which the Gentiles
should offer in every place, that is, De pane Eucharistiae, and Poculo
Eucharistiae. It appears that S. Justin that holy Martyr, did call the
Eucharist a Sacrifice, and has the Prophet for his warrant. Anno 150.

S. Irenaeus also says, S. Iren. l 4. c 32
that when Christ took the Bread and the Wine, he said the bread was his body,
and confessed the wine to be his blood, and novi testamenti novam docuit
oblationem; and taught a new Oblation of the New Testament; which the Church
receiving from the Apostles, in universo mundo offert Deo, does offer unto God
in all the world. This, says he, is that pure sacrifice offered unto God in
every place, which the Prophet Malachi spoke of before. Prayers and alms deeds
are a sacrifice acceptable to God, as the same holy Martyr shows out of S.
Paul, Phil. 4. yet that is no new Oblation brought in by the Apostles, but
taught from the beginning of the world in Abels Sacrifice, S. Iren. l. 4. c. 34.
Genesis 4. Anno 180.

Tertullian also clearly says, that when the body of the Lord in the
Eucharist is received on a solemn fasting day, Tert. l. 3. cont. Marc. lib. de
orat.
two things are performed, and participatio sacrificii, and executio officii
stationum: the sacrifice is received, and the fast kept. Therefore there is no
cause why some should withdraw themselves a sacrificiorum orationibus, from the
prayers of the sacrifices, or of the Eucharist, out of a fear to break the
devotion of their Fast before the set time. For both may stand together. Anno
203.

S. Cyp. l. 2. ep. 3
The Priest (says S. Cyprian) Sacrificium verum and plenum tunc offert in
ecclesia Deo Patri, si sic incipiat offerre secundum quod ipsum Christum videat
obtulisse: when the Priest does use bread, and power wine into the Chalice, and
does not consecrate water only, without wine, he does offer a pure sacrifice,
as Christ himself did. S. Cyp. l. 1. ep. 9
Passio est enim Domini sacrificium quod offerimus, our sacrifice is Christ's
passion, because we make mention of his passion in omnibus sacrificiis nostris.
Nay (says the same blessed Martyr) the Priests only duty is* Non nisi Altari,
and sacrificiis deservire, and precibus, and orationibus vacare. And because
Geminius did appoint a Clergy man his executor, whereby he was withdrawn Ab
Altari and sacrificiis, S. C^^. l. 3. ep. 6
therefore it was ordered, Non offerendum pro^eo, nec sacrificium pro
dormitione ejus celebraretur. On the other side, the same holy Martyr is
careful to have the names of such Confessors, as dyed in prison, to be
brought him, and the particular day of their departures, Vt celebrenter hic a
nobis oblationes and sacrificia. This he duly and yearly performed in the
behalf of Celerinus the Martyr, and others, and takes the whole Clergy and
Laity in Carthage (where he was Archbishop) to witness herein. S. Cyp. l. 4^
ep. ^^
For Sacrificia pro iis semper (ut meministis) offerimuus, quoties Martyrum
passiones, and dies anniversaria commemoratione celebramus, Anno. 240.

Saint Chrysostom also makes often mention, S. Ch^^so^t l. ^ de Sace^dot. and
lib. ^^
of the Host, of Oblations and Sacrifices in the holy Eucharist. Quum vides
quod Dominus offeratur, and vides sacerdotem in hostia occupari, and super hanc
preces effundere, do you not conceive your self to be wrapped into heavenly
meditations, etc? And again, How shall we receive the Sacred Host, how shall
we be partakers of that admirable mystery with this tongue of ours whereby our
soul is defiled? How shall we partake the Lords Body with a defiled tongue? S.
Chrysostom. Hom. 11. ^d pop Antioch. and hom 79.
For this Sacrifice Domini sacrificium est, and what communion has CHRIST with
B^lial? This Sacrifice the Priest standing at the Altar offers to GOD for all
the world, for Bishops, for the Church, etc. Anno. 398.

With what fear and reverence (says Saint Ambrose, S. Ambros. prec^t. 1. ad
missim.
) istud divinum, and coeleste sacrificium est celebrandum? Vbi Caro tua in
veritate sumitur, ubi Sanguis tuus in veritate bibitur, ubi summa imis
junguntur, ubi adest praesentia Angelorum, ubi and sacerdos, and sacrificium
mirabiliter est constitutum. Thus do I come to thy Altar (o Lord) though I be
a sinner, ut offeram tibi Sacrificium, to offer to thee that Sacrifice that
thou have appointed. Receive it therefore (I beseech thee o Lord) for thy whole
Church, and for all thy people whom thou have redeemed with thy precious blood.

We have seen (says the same Father) the chief Hie Priest offering his blood
for us; S. Ambr. in P^al. 38.
let us Priests follow him as well as we may, that we may offer a Sacrifice for
the people. For though he be not now seen to offer, yet is he offered in the
earth, when Christ's Body is offered: vae quoque ipsi mihi, S. Ambr. l. 5. ep.
33.
bonos filios diabolus gestiebat ^ripere, pro quibus ego quotidie instauro
sacrificium, Anno. 374.

S. Aug. l. 9. Confess. ca. 13. S. Aug in lib. 3. (...) Levit. ^ 57.
Saint Augustine says, that his mother Monicha desired only at her death,
memoriam sui ad Altar tuum fieri, unde sciret dispensari victimam anctam qua
deletum est Chirographum. Here is mention made both of an Altar and a
Sacrifice. Of the blood of this Sacrifice none are forbidden to take, but
hereunto all are exhorted that desire eternal life. By the way then it is an
injury to forbid Laymen to partake of the blood of this Sacrifice) For Christ
has changed the Sacrifice of beasts in hostiam secundum Melchisedech, S. Aug.
in Psalm. 33.
qui panem and vinum obtulit, and this Sacrifice toto terrarum orb diffusum
est. And again, the Lord by his Prophet says, sacrificium, and oblationem
noluisti. Quid ergo? nos jam hoc tempore sine Sacrificio dimissi sumus? absit;
perfecisti enim mihi corpus; Ablata sunt signa promittentia, quia exhibita est
veritas promissa: S. Aug. in Orat. Psalm. 39. S. Aug de Civ. l. 17. c. 20 and
li. 10. ca. 20. S Aug. Enchir. cap. 120.
The Sacrifice of Christ's body (says the same Father) succeeds all other
Sacrifices of the Old Law, and for all those Sacrifices, and oblations, Corpus
ejus offertur, and participantibus ministratur: Christ (says he) is both the
Priest, and the Oblation, who has power to make the daily Sacrament thereof to
be Ecclesiae Sacrificium. That as the Church is offered by him in her Head, S.
Aug. de Civ. l. 2^. ca. 8. S. Aug de sp. and lit. c^. 11. and de Civ l. ^. ca.
27.
so is he offered by her, as his Body. And when this Sacrifice of our Mediator
is offered, it cannot be denied but the souls of the faithful are hereby
eased. This oblation the same Father calls summum and verissimum sacrificium;
and says, that at the memories of Martyrs Deo offertur Sacrificium
Christianorum. We do not, says the same Father, set up Altars to sacrifice to
Martyrs, S. Aug. de Civ. l. 22. ca. 10.
but Sacrificium immolamus uni Deo, but we offer Sacrifice to God alone, both
their God, and ours. Ipsum vero Sacrificium corpus est Christi, S. Aug. de Civ.
l. 8. c. 27.
which is not offered to them (for themselves and the body of Christ,) but unto
God. For what faithful man did ever hear the Priest standing at the Altar,
over the body of a Martyr, say thus, S. Aug. de Civ. l. 22. c. 10.
offero tibi Sacrificium Petre, vel Paul, vel Cypriane, cum apud eorum
memorias offeratur Deo? True it is, says the same Father, the Martyrs suo
loco, and ordine nominantur, non tamen a Sacerdote, qui sacrificat invocantur:
Saint Augustine allows of Sacrifices, S. Aug. de haeres c. 53.
but not of Invocation of Saints. S. Epiph. haeres. 75.
And for this cause he and Epiphanius condemn Arrius for an Heretic.

It appears by that which has been said, that there were Altars, and
Oblations, and Sacrifices which the Fathers allowed; and if these be used as
they ought to be, and as these holy Saints of God used them, this man ought not
to score them up amongst blasphemous figments, and dangerous deceits, without
wronging the blessed Saints of God that continually behold his presence, into
whose society God grant both him, and me to come.

To conclude, this constant doctrine of the holy Fathers concerning Altars,
Oblations, and Sacrifices, is confirmed by the Canons of sundry Councels. And
in these also we may observe some difference made of Sacrifices. There we see
Sacrifices which Laymen might offer, as Sacrifices of Praise, Prayer,
Almsdeeds, and the like; and there were Sacrifices, which neither they, nor
Deacons neither might offer, and such were those Sacrifices whereof the Fathers
make so often mention, that are offered at the Holy Altar. Of such the Nicene
Council speaks: Council. N^c. ca. 24.
Diaconi offerendi Sacrificii non habent potestatem, Council. Carth. 3. ca. 24.
and 4.79.
and the Council of Carthage. Conc. Bracarense, and many more. All Gods people,
men and women were allowed to offer some Sacrifices, Council. Bracar. ca. 34.
and 39.
to commemorate the death of Christ upon the Cross, to offer all manner of
spiritual, and Christian Sacrifices, of Fasting, Prayer, Mortification,
Almsdeeds, praising of God, reading and preaching of Gods Word: but the
Sacrifice of the Altar, wherein the Death, and Passion of Jesus Christ is
commemorated in the Consecration of the Bread and Wine, and breaking and
delivering them to the Faithful; is the particular function of the Priest to
perform. Thus we see Altars, Oblations, and Sacrifices were in common use
amongst the most holy Saints of God that ever lived; Therefore far be it
from this man, to condemn these, or the like in our Church for blasphemous
figments, and pernicious impostures. Far be it (I say) from him, even as
far as it was from the mind of those learned, and godly Fathers, that framed
the 31. Article, whose meaning may yet more clearly appear from the
declaration made thereof by their successors in place, piety and learning,
whereof we are now to speak.

CAP. XIX. The meaning of the 31. Article delivered. What Sacrifices are
blasphemous fables and dangerous deceits. The doctrine of our Church herein
taught by Bishop Mountague, Bishop Andrews, Bishop White, and Mr. Casaubon.
Homily of Sacraments.
IT is very meet that we enquire more narrowly into the meaning of the 31.
Article. For we may be sure, that those godly and learned Fathers of our
Church, that give strict charge to private Preachers, that they shall take
heed, Can. 22. Anno. 1571.
that they teach nothing in their Preaching which they would have the people
religiously to believe, and observe, but that which is agreeable to the
doctrine of the Old Testament, or the New, and that which the Catholic
Fathers, and ancient Bishops have gathered out of that doctrine, will not
censure the constant doctrine of the Fathers, and Primitive Church, for
blasphemous Fables, and dangerous deceits: nor yet involve, and lap Chemnitius,
Gerardus, and other sound Protestants, yet such as suffer Altars still to
stand, (as this Author tells us) within any plait, or fold of that their
censure.

The words of the 31. Article, whereunto this lettered man relates, are these.
The Sacrifice of Masses, in the which it was commonly said, that the Priests
did offer Christ, for the quick and the dead, to have remission of pain and
guilt, were blasphemous Fables, and dangerous deceits. Now let us hear what is
the true, and Orthodox meaning hereof, out of the mouths of the most learned
men of our Church, and such as the most learned Prince that ever was in this
kingdom, King James of happy memory allowed and set on work, to deliver the
mind of the Church and of himself in this very point. And in this rank I
begin with Bishop Mountague.

Bishop Mountague speaking (as he says himself) in Bishop Mortons words,
Appeal. ca. 2^
says thus; I believe no such Sacrifice of the Altar, as the Church of Rome
does: I fancy no such Altars, as they employ, though I profess a Sacrifice,
and an Altar. And a little after speaking of his adversaries, says thus; I
have so good opinion of your understanding, though weak, that you will
confess the blessed Sacrament of the Altar, (or Communion Table whether you
please) to be a Sacrifice, not propitiatory, as they call it, for the living,
and dead: not an external, visible, true, and proper Sacrifice; but only
representative, rememorative, and spiritual Sacrifice. Now if you grant a
Sacrifice, why deny you an Altar? And again. I have used the phrase of Altar
for the Communion Table, according to the manner of antiquity, and am like
enough sometimes to use it still: nor will I abstain, notwithstanding your
agginition, to follow the steps, and practice of antiquity in using the words
Sacrifice, and Priesthood also, and ye^ be further from Popery in that
practice, than you from Puritanism^; or any Puritan indeed from true Popery,
being two birds of one feather. It appears plainly from hence, that our
Church does not condemn the Sacrifice of the Altar, mentioned in the holy
Fathers, Gag. Cho. 36. page 263.
for blasphemous figments and dangerous deceits, but the Sacrifice of Masses
because the common opinion held of them was, that they were propitiatory,
external^, visible, true and proper Sacrifices for the quick, and the dead. For
had they been commonly held to be no more, but representative, rememorative,
and spiritual Sacrifices our Church would not then, does not now find any
fault with them.

What the fault is, the said most learned, and acute Bishop proves out of
Saint Cyprian in this ^ort. Nam si Jesus Christus Dominus and Deus Noster, ipse
est ^ummus Sacerdos dei Patris, and sacrificium Patri seipsum ^btulit, and hoc
fieri in sui commemorationem praecepi^, utique ill^ Sacerdos vice Christi vere
fungitur, qui id quod Christus feci^ imitatur, and sacrificium verum, ac ple^um
tunc ^ffert in Ecclesia Deo Patri, si sic incipiat offerre, secundum quod ipsum
Christum videat obtulisse. You do not this (says he to the Gagger) therefore
in Saint Cyprians judgment, your Sacrifice is neither full, nor true.

The like does the Reverend Bishop of Elie avouch, turning his speech to the
Cardinal, and saying thus. At vos tollite de missa transubstantiationem
vestram: L. Eliens. ad Card. Bellar. Apol. Resp. ca. 8. p. 184.
nec diu nobiscum lis erit de Sacrificio. Memoriam ibi Sacrificii damus non
inviti. Sacrificari ibi Christum vestrum de pane factum, nunquam daturi.
Sacrificii vocem scit Rex Patribus usurpatum: nec ponit inter res novas, at
vestri in missa Sacrificii and audet, and ponit. Take you Transubstantiation
out of the Mass, and we will not contend with you about a Sacrifice. A memory
of a Sacrifice we grant: but grant we will never, that Christ made of bread is
Sacrificed. The word Sacrifice is in use among the Fathers, this the King
knows well enough, and he places it not among Noveltyes, as he does the
Sacrifice in your Mass. Will you be pleased, yet further to hear of the
doctrine of our Church in this particular, out of learned Doctor White now Lord
Bishop of Elie. White Orthodoxe faith, untruth 26. p. 340
The things which we simply condemn in the Popish Mass, are these. 1. That
CHRIST existing in earth, covered with forms of Bread and Wine, is in his very
substance offered to God his Father. 2. We reject private Masses, in which the
Priest eats alone, and undertaketh for a fee to apply the fruit thereof to
particular persons. 3. That it is of equal force, with the Sacrifice of Christ
upon the Cross. 4. That it conferreth grace by the outward work done to some
kind of unjust persons. 5. That it saves ex opere operato, for temporal
punishment. 6. And is beneficial to the defunct, as well as to the living. 7.
That it depelleth all evil: both of punishment, fault, and misery. 8. Or is
availeable as the Sacrifice of Christ's body to procure plenty of the fruits of
the earth, and to be a remedy against Pestilence, inundation, tempest,
scare-fire, etc. 9. And the administration thereof in an unknown, tongue,
together with invocation of Saints, and Prayer for Souls departed, with
reference to purgatory.

But because this point is exactly handled by learned Casaubon in his answer
given to Cardinal Perouns Epistle, by special direction of King JAMES of
blessed memory; Casaub. ad Ep. Card. Pero. Resp. ad 2 (...) de Sacrificio in
Ecclesia Christiano. page 5^.
I will set it down at large, that the mind of our Church from the late
Governor of our Church may more fully appear, and therein I will rest.

Veteres ^cclesia Patres sacrificium in religione Christiana unum agnovisse,
quod in locum successit omnium legis Mo^aicae sacrificiorum, neque ignorant Rex,
neque negat. Sed hoc sacrifiei^m nihil esse aliud contendit, nisi
commemorationem ejus quod semel in cruce Christus Patri suo obtulit. Quare
beatus Chrysostomus, quo frequentius nemo, hujus sacrifici meminit in nonum
caput Epistolae ad Hebraos, postquam (...) nomi^asses, continuo subjungit, sive
explicationis, sive correctionis loco, (...). Illa locutio, (...), quam vim
habeat, scis ipse omnium optime. Saepe autem Ecclesia Anglicana professa est,
de verbo nullam se litem moturam, si modo impetrari a vobis posset, ut pristina
fide in integrum restituta, quae contra usum veteris ecclesiae a vobis
usurpantur, tollerentur. Nam Eucharis^iae celebrationem sine communicantibus,
and universam illam priva^arum missarum nundinationem, multis etiam v^strorum
theologis damnatam, cerium est a perversa doctrina de hoc sacrificio originem
habuisse. Quod autem ad extrahendas defunctorum animas e flammis purgatorii,
sacrificia missarum exiguntur, and quidem saepe repetita: ^tlo^orum hominum and
simplicitate populoru^ ad quaestum suum impie abutentium, delirium esse, Rex
non dubitat. Tollantur hi, and similes his alii crassi, foedique abusus, qui
apud vos obtinent, ab ecclesia Anglicana, quae in sua Liturgia expressam
sacrificii mentionem habe^, facile impetraveris, ut in veteris ecclesiae usu
acquiescat. Quamobrem serenissimus Rex, quum nuper ei essent narrata, quae
paulo ante in celeberrimo conventu Dominicanorum docte fuerant a te disputata,
de duplici Sacrificio, expiationis nempe, and commemorationis, sive religionis:
sibi quoque idem probari multis audientibus pronunciavit, and nunc etiam hoc
ipsum tibi confirm^re me ejus Majestas jussit.

It appears then by the resolution of this learned man, that the things which
the Kings Majesty and our Church condemns, are the celebration of the
Eucharist without Communicants, the selling of private Masses, making a gain
of the simplicity of ignorant people, and causing them to pay more than once or
twice for, fetching of souls out of Purgatory, by virtue of the sacrifices of
their Masses. This practice the King accounts the dotage of men idly and
wickedly disposed, and rejects as gross and vile abuses, and such sacrifices
of Masses as these, our Church condemns as blasphemous fables, and dangerous
deceits. To which purpose we have a very godly Caveat given in the Homily.
Homil. p. 1. Concerning the Sacrament.
We must take heed, left of a memory it be made a Sacrifice: lest of a
Communion, it be made a private eating: lest applying it for the dead, we lose
the fruit that be alive.

CAP. XX. The necessity of admitting Christian Altars. The standing of the
Lords Table Altarw^se, or the having of Alta^s is not forbidden in the 31.
Article, under the name of blasphemous figments. Abuses of Altars and
Sacrifices condemned, not the things themselves. What is the faith of
Protestants, and Papists. In what respect the Mass is not to be allowed. The
outrage of the people committed in breaking down of Altars, punishable by law.
The duty of well-minded men concerning Altars.
IT appears by that which has been said, what Altars and Sacrifices the
ancient Fathers allowed; and what the most learned of our own Church
condemns in the 31. Article. Wherefore in my poor opinion, it is not well
done for an understanding, and well meaning man, and a son of the Church, to
turn and wrest the Canon of our Church from the face of her enemies, and
against her mind, (God knows) to level it at the heart of her dearest
children and best friends. Priests, Sacrifices, Oblations, Altar, the Sacrament
of the Altar is not abolished. He that will cast out these out of the Christian
Church, must with them cast out Edward the sixth, with diverse of Mr. Foxes
Martyrs, and some acts of Parliament in force. He must cast out the most
learned, holy and blessed Martyrs of the Primitive Church^ nay he must cast out
Priesthood, and the very Church it self, or have a Church without a
Priesthood, about which Cartwright and his apprentises have been hammering
their heads more than a good while.

For if there be no Christian Altar, there is no Christian sacrifice; if no
Christian Sacrifice, there is no Christian Priest; if there be no Christian
Priest, away with the Book of Ordination of Priests and Deacons, away with the
Rubric, and the Book of Common Prayer, that directs the Priest how to
officiate, away with the authority of the Prince, or Acts of Parliament that
confirm this Book. And doubtless this and no other must be the scope of him,
that says the name of Altar is abolished: that will go about to deter him,
that is earnest for an Altar at the upper end of the Quire, that the Table
ought to stand Altarwise, that the fixing thereof in the Quire is Canonical,
that it ought not to be removed into the body of the Church, by saying, that he
which should erect any such Altar, his discretion will prove the only holocaust
to be sacrificed thereon, that such doings are against the 31. Article: To what
purpose else is this confused blending and jumbling of these things, (which the
Vicar innocently desired) with that other Oblation which the Papists were wont
to offer upon their Altars, but to make the simple deluded people believe, that
all these are alike blasphemous figments, and pernicious impostures? And that
the Church that now is, is become an utter enemy to that it was in 62. and
altogether departed from the Faith, and Articles of Religion then held;
therefore such Priests and Priesthood ought to be cast out, and their Altars or
Tables set Altarwise, and their Oblations to be had in like abomination, with
that other Oblation which the Papists were wont to offer on their Altars; all
which are blasphemous figments, and pernicious impostures? This pernicious
purpose must in reason be in the heart of this Scribe, otherwise it was utterly
impertinent to scare the poor Vicar with such terrible and astounding words.
And better had it been to have kept such mortal bolts as these in store, and
not to discharge them so soon, before discretion had brought him within
eye-reach of the right mark. Had this man been so wise as the Vicar was, to
president himself by what he sees done in the Kings or Bishops Houses or
Chapels, he would have kept these shafts in his Q^iver, and bestowed them as
he sees M. Casaubon, and our learned Bishops by the Kings direction do, upon
gross and impious abuses clearly discovered, as well in Altars, as in
Sacrifices; and not therewith to strike through Oblations, sacrifices, and
Altars themselves, together with the holy and reverend use and users thereof,
from whom he has his Priesthood, Orders, Faith, and Religion too, if he have
any at all. In shooting after this blind heedlesse fashion, not the judgment
only and learning, but the discretion and piety of the Archer, to his Mother
the Church, and to all reverend antiquity, stands in greater hazard of the
shot, than the unremarkable actions of a simple Vicar.

They are not Altars (which still stand in the Churches of sound Protestants,
and may remain in some of ours, or to make use of their Covers, and Ornaments,
Tables may be placed in their rooms of the same length and fashion the Altars
were of, (as this Author tells us) with which practice he also concurreth in
opinion) they are not Altars, I say, or Sacrifices, or Oblations, that true
Christians and good Protestants have in execration, but the gross and vile
abuses of these. Against abuses only good Christians protested, and from
thence received they their names. This the most learned Bishop, in his Apology
for King James of happy memory, Eliens. Apol. ca. 1. pa. 20.
puts the Cardinal in mind of; Salva protestatione hac, haud ulla est
fides Nostra nisi quae Vestra est, vel esse debet, vetus (...). illa Catholica.
The Protestant holds the same Catholic faith which is or ought to be the
same in Rome, and over all the Christian world. The Protestant has the abuses
and Novelties only (which are crept into the Roman Church) in detestation, not
the things themselves: no, not the name of the very Mass it self. For as the
same Reverend Bishop tells the Cardinal in the Kings name; In missa si missa
fiunt, quae sum (...) antiatione vestra ibi submissa ^unt, bono fi loco res
essent, non valde de nomine litigaret Rex. The King would like well enough of
the Mass, if her Priests would ^hrive her of Transubstantiation; the name
should beget no real difference.

Those therefore were not well advised, nor thoroughly informed of the doctrine
of our Church, and of pious antiquity, that by their violent and unlearned
clamours incited the people unto that horrible outrage committed in breaking
down of Altars, and caused them to boggle and spy umbrages and scandals at
the things themselves, where none at all could have been found, if these
Arietes gregis had partaken as much of the mild temper of the sheep, as they
did of the Rams horn. But where simplicity and ignorance is armed, nothing can
be expected but a violent confusion, and the like disorder. This disorder
committed de facto (as the Author speaks) the supreme Magistrate thought meet
to punish, not by a kind of law; but by a law yet in force to punish the same
de jure, in case it should be committed. The law was made by Queen Mary, and is
this. Service and Sacraments Anno 1. Mar. and Anno. 1. Eliz. ca. 3.
If any shall unlawfully, contemptuously, or maliciously, of their own power
or authority, pull down, deface, spoil, or break down any Altar or Altars,
etc. such person or persons are to be punished, as in the law is expressed.
Queen Mary who made this law, did repeal the law made by King Edward for the
authorizing of the Book of Common Prayer. Queen Elizabeth, who did establish
King Edwards law for authorizing the Book of Common Prayer, did repeal Queen
Mary's repeal thereof: but that part of the Statute which concerns the
punishing of such disorderly people, that of their own authority riotously pull
down Altars, etc. the said Queen Elizabeth of famous memory repealeth not, but
it is still in force; that the Magistrate, whom it concerns, may proceed
against delinquents, that violate the Lords Table standing Altar-wise, or break
or deface the pictures of Christ, or of Saints in Church-windowes, or crosses,
or the like, upon that Statute, if any should so offend, (which God fo^bid) if
Sergeant Rastales hand and star, point and lead me not into an error.

CAP. XXI. Altars crept not into the Church. The letter. VV^ether this name of
Altar crept into the Church in a kind of complying in phrase with the people of
the Jews, as I have read in Chemnitius, Gerardus, and other sound Protestants
(yet such as suffer Altars still to stand) or that it proceed from the
oblations made upon the Communion Table for the use of the Pr^est, and the
poor, etc. the name b^ing so many years abolished, it is fitter in my
judgment that the Altar should stand Table-wise, than the Table Altar-wise, etc.
Altars Consecrated with more ceremony, and regarded with more reverence, than
any part of the Church, appears out of Bishop Jewel. On the Altar stood the
Cross of CHRIST in the Primitive Church, and in Saint Chrysostomes time, and
remained there in Queen Elizabeth's Reign sometime: steps unto the Altar:
drawn with Curtains. Archbishops and Bishops and all sorts of people do
reverence toward the Altar. Barbarous Soldiers kiss them. Penitents
prostrate before them. Saint Ambrose willing to be made a Sacrifice for them.
THe drift of the Author in this Epistle is the disgrace of Altars. To this
purpose he has framed these words to serve his turn two ways. 1. By the
manner of their coming in, and that was creeping. 2. By the means of their
creeping in, and that was by Complying with the Jews.

For as much as the most ancient and holy Fathers of the Primitive Church, and
the most learned and pious Fathers of our own Church, have Christian Altars and
Sacrifices in due, honorable, and reverend estimation; there is no cause at
all why a man not big with self love, nor made to kindle a faction, quae jam
plus satis calescit, should pick a quarrel first with them, then with their
name, then with their coming in, by phrasing it so contemptuously in that
term of creeping, whereby is employed their coming into the Church in some
base, secret, undue and unobservable manner. I dare be bold to say, that no man
of judgment, and learning, though he look over Antiquity, as the Devil looked
over Lincoln, will say, and mean to justify what he says by sound proofs
out of good antiquity, that Altars crept into the Church. It were not amiss if
this Penman would look the face of his actions in the envious man's tares;
these he shall find crept up among the Wheat, no man knowing how, when the
honest Husbandman, and his servants thought no hurt, but were at rest, and
asleep. The case is not so with Altars; the Husbandmen themselves that labor
faithfully in the Lords Vineyard, the Governors of Christ's Church, and the
true and only successors of the Apostles brought them in by the special
direction of Gods holy Spirit.

I shall not need to spend much time in proof hereof. The least thought of
what has been said, lights up a Candle to show the truth hereof, which no
blast of Puritan mouths set against it, is able to blow out, though Boreas
had made his bellows in their Cheeks: S. Athanas. Apolog. ad Constantium
Council. Bracar. 2. ca. 6.
Sure we are by that which has been said, that Churches were built, and made
with the very Cradle of Christianity; and when they were made, they were
consecrated. For a man may as lawfully and Christianly administer the blessed
Sacrament in a Barn, or Towne-Hall, as in any place that is not Consecrated to
such holy uses* And when the Church was Consecrated, was not the Altar the
chiefest place, which with most ceremony, and devotion, was hallowed? when it
was hallowed, was it not kept more carefully from profanation, than any other
part of the Church? S. Ambros. offic. lib. 1. ca. 56.
Levita eligatur (says Saint Ambrose) qui Sacrarium custodiat, not the Vestry
only, but the Altar belonged to his care. Council. Agath. ca. 14.
Was there not a feast annually kept in a joyful remembrance of the dedication
of every Church, S. Aug. de temp. Ser. 253.255.
and did not the Consecration of the Altar carry the name of that feast? does
not St. Augustine say, my brethren, you know right well that to day
consecrationem Altaris celebramus? was not the Altar set, and fixed in the most
eminent place of all the Church? The Readers Tribunal stood in the body of the
Church, in loco editiori, Eusebius. l. 10. c. ^
in a place exalted above the rest there. But was not the Altar set in
Sacrario, or Sancto Sanct^rum, in the highest place of all, whereunto the
Priest ascended by certain steps and degrees; Liturg. Basil and Chrysostom.
and when they did so ascend, were there not Psalms of degrees sung, called
for that cause Graeduals? were not tithes of greatest sanctity given to the
Altar? was it not the only place whither none but Priests might be allowed to
come to officiate? Liturg. Chrysostom.
was not the holy Eucharist there, and no where else Consecrated? Durst the
Priests themselves ascend thither without doing lowly reverence three several
times? Was not this holy Altar, and the mysteries thereof, at some time kept
rayled from the eyes of most men? does not KING Edward the 6th call it
Sacro-sanctum Altar in his writ to the Bishop? does not Saint Nyssex say,
Altar hoc Sanctum, etc. this holy Altar, at which we stand, is in his own
nature no more but a stone, such as our houses are made of, but being
Consecrated, and Dedicated, benedictionem accepit, and is become me^sa Sancta,
S. Nyssen. de Baptism.
Altar immaculatum, and quod non ampli^s ab omnibus, sed a solis sacerdotibus,
iisque venerantibus, contrectatur? Veneration toward the Altar was then
required, and practiced. Does not the most holy, and blessed Archbishop (as the
fifth Council calls him) perform his low obeisance toward the holy Altar,
Council. Constantinop* ^.
and exhort all others to do the like? does he no^ say, adoremus primum
Sacro-sanctum Altar? did not the reverence of holy Altars prevail so far
with the furious Soldiers, S. Ambros. l. 5. E. 33.
and barbarous Goths, that in all humility they willingly fall down, and kiss
the holy Altar? does not Tertullian say, that in his time Altars were had in
that reverence, that their Penitents used adgeniculare, to fall down upon
their knees? S. Chrysostom. hom. 3. in ep.
does not St. Chrysostom say, dum vides sublata vela, tum cogita c^elum ipsum
sursum res^rari, Angelosque descendere? when the Curtains are drawn by, our
hearts, which even then we are bidden to lift up unto the Lord, conceive heaven
it self to be open to us; when Jesus Christ is given to the faithful
Communicant, who, we may be sure, comes not alone, but with the blessed
Spirit, attended with his blessed Angels, whom he has made ministering spirits
for their good, who shall be heirs of salvation. Does not the same Father
say, semper in Altari manner solet Christi Crux? S. Chrysostom. in Orat an
Christus sit Deus.
the Cross of Christ always used to stand upon the Altar: does not Beatus
Rhenanus say out of Tertullian and Lactantius, B. Rhenan. in Apolog. Tert^l.
page 834.
that in those times Christians had no other Images in their Churches,
praeterquam crucis signum super Aram, adorientem versum, ut mentem oculosque in
co^lum, ubi Pater est omnium, erigerent espansis manibus? but only the Cross
of Christ which stood upon the Altar? And is it not also said, P. D. M.
that the Altar, which stood in former Princes times, continued in Queen
Elizabeth's Chapel with the Cross upon it? Does not Bishop Jewel, in the
place cited by the Author, confirm the greatest part of all that has been
said? And are these arguments, that Altars crept into the Church? If the
Governors of the Church had come in to see the furniture of the Church, as the
good man of the house did to see his guests; and had espied there an Altar,
amongst sundry other Consecrate things, would they not at one time or other,
have questioned some or other for it? and have said, Friend, how came this
hither. Neither the Altar nor his furniture, are such guests, or wedding
garments, as I look to find here, and therefore do you take it, and cast it
unto utter darkness. There it was bred, and so crept in hither: and there let
it be buried. But the case ye see is quite otherwise, they honor, reverence,
and adore toward it, for his sake whose Sacrament is Consecrated thereon; And
this is the first man that I can find, that ^aith Altars crept into the Church.
And if he be not, I hope he will discover himself, and ^ell us by whom he
does president himself. I am sure, not by Kings or Bishops Chapels, or
Cathedral Churches, or by any true Christian member of them.

But if Altars crept into the Church, I would but know how he and I came in. I
will begin with my self. I had my Ordination from Bishop Dove: he had his
Consecration from Archbishop Whitguift, and the Archbishop his from the
undoubted successors of Saint Peter, and of our Savior Christ: Here is no
creeping in all this. And I persuade my self he crept not into his, if he had
orders in the Church of England. If the Porter or Sexton had led him aside in
the night into the Belfrey, and had put what belongs to his custody into his
hand, and so he had stole up to the Chancell, this had been Creeping. But
Priests in our Church have their Ordination usually at the 4. tempora, they
prepare or ought to prepare themselves with Fasting and Prayer three days
before: and at the Ordination they kneel upon their knees before the holy
Altar. The Bishop and they pray before the holy Altar, then is given imposition
of hands before the holy Altar, then the Bishop takes the holy Gospels from
the holy Altar, and delivers the same into the hands of him that is ordained,
who makes solemn protestation before Almighty God, meekely kneeling still
upon his knees before the holy Altar, and in the presence of the Bishop and the
whole Congregation, that he will read these holy books, etc. Here is no
creeping; but this holy action is solemnly performed, and done openly before
all Israel, and before this Sun. But if the Altar had crept in, then the
Bishop had crept in much more, (for no Bishop was enthronized before his Altar
was Consecrated) and if the Bishop crept in, then I am sure, he himself crept
in; and if he crept in, the Sextons might do well to show him the way out. For
without the Church militant, and triumphant; in earth, and in heaven, shall be
dogs, and whosoever makes, or tells lies. And with untruth this saying
(that Altars crept into the Church) has more affinity than I could wish, and
more than all the water in his Well can wash off, if he make not ignorance his
refuge, and save himself under the shadow of her wings. And thus much of the
manner of creeping in of Altars.

CAP. XXII. Complying with the Jews, does not argue the creeping in of Altars.
The enemies of the Church have long picked a quarrel at her Altars, and her
Priests. The Council of Aquisgrane defends them. At what hour of the day
Altars came in. Christian Altars came in at Noah's flood: and have so continued
in the Christian Church ever since. Danger to meddle with holy and consecrate
things. King James of blessed memory, washed his hands of meddling with them.
The polity of the Christian Church was framed by the pattern of the Jewish
Church. Son of the Church, an honorable name. The complying of Sabbatarians
with the Jews.
IN the next place the Author shows the means whereby Altars crept into the
Church, and that is, By a certain complying in phrase with the people of the
Jews. Now see what a froward or blind destiny, haunted, and led the Secretary
of this Letter. For that very reason which he brings to prove the creeping in
of Altars, does clearly demonstrate, that they did not creep in. He tells us
what he has read in Kemnitius, Gerardus, and other sound Protestants* yet such
as suffer Altars still to stand. It appears he sailed not far for his gold.
And the Commodities which he brings, are common upon every petty Chapmans
stall, and such as will be his utter undoing, when they come to be rifled into.
The complying in phrase with the people of the Jews, is the means whereby
Altars crept in, say you: But I say, (and I hope to produce those that will
make it good,) that this complying, both in phrase and in other respects, is
the only assurance that we have, that Altars did not creep in, but were
brought in, or rather continued in the Christian Church of the Gentiles, from
the Christian Church of the Jews, and were always in both these in honorable
and reverend estimation; and ought not to be turned off by any Christian so
disgracefully.

There is not any one ancient Father that ever I see, who does not derive the
polity of the Christian Church, and take their pattern in laying down the
platform thereof from Gods Church among the Jews, as well before Moses, as
after: as well in external Rites and Ceremonies, as in the internal,
spiritual and essential parts of Gods service; I shall take as little pains
for this rich and sure commodity, as the Author did for the ruin of his cause.
The Council of Aquisgrave, j^st 800. years ago, has furnish me abundantly,
that I need look no further.

There were in those times some Factors for the Synagogue of Satan, that would
not be pleased neither with Priests, Altars, Oblations, Sacrifices, nor with
the very Churches, and Houses of God themselves, or any consecrated things, but
kindly persuaded themselves, that some of these they might pull down and cast
out, and make the rest their prey. These things were made common Table-talke,
and the food of Conventicles, and in the end it was commonly given out, Council.
Aquisgrave: sub Pipino filio Ludovici p^^ Imp. 1. lib. 1. Anno ^36.
Haec non ex authoritate divina constare, that all these and the like had but
slender, or no ground in holy Scripture, Sed potius arbitrario cordis nostri
(say the Bishops) imo cupiditate, and quadam inventione commenta esse, but by
some slye device of our own were brought in, or (as this man speaks) crept
into the Church. These things being by the careful Spies, and witty Agents, at
times buzd into the Kings ears; The godly and learned Fathers of that Council
think fit to present an humble declaration of the truth concerning these
matters, and give his Highness to understand, that if these Objectors and
Surmisers would diligently read, and seriously weigh, what in that writing was
contained; they would be brought to acknowledge, Nos quae Dei sunt, and ad
vestram salvationem, and ad regni stabilimentum, that the things which are
established in the Church, and which we have delivered, are the things of God,
and such as make for your Majesty's eternal salvation, and for the
establishing of your Kingdoms and Dominions: Se vero, but those that say, that
these things crept into the Church, Ea quae sunt mundi, and Dei voluntati usque
quaque contraria existunt, and ad animarum interitum pertinent, absque dubio
loqui. To come home then to the very point, whether Altars crept into the
Christian Church, by a kind of complying in phrase with the Jews; S. Ambr.
lib. 4. cap. 3. de Sacram.
let the authority of S. Ambrose commend one ground of Christianity to those
that hold by that Title: Accipe quae dico, anteriora esse mysteria
Christianorum quam Iudaeorum. Christians are more ancient than Jews, so are
the mysteries of their Religon, their Sacraments, Sacrifices, Altars more
ancient, than any of these among the Jews. Therefore the dream of complying
must needs be idle.

There are twelve hours of the day, and in one of these Altars came into the
Christian Church. They crept not in by complying. And the Council of
Aquisgrave will tell us plainly, S. Greg. Hom. 19. in Mat.
at what hour of the day they came in. The Morning of the World was from Adam
to Noah (says S. Gregory) the third hour from Noah to Abraham, the sixth
hour from Abraham to Moses, the ninth hour from Moses to Christ, the twelfth
hour from Christ to the worlds end. At what hour of the day now did Altars
come in? Hear these holy Fathers speak: Conc. Aquisg.
True it is (say they) Religio primum coepit ^ine Altar ab Abel justo:
Religion at first was without an Altar. Altars came not in at Sun rise. This
man would then have said they crept in under some cloud. Well, the third hour
was from Noah to Abraham. And now Arrige aures, Pamphile: for we are upon the
very hour of the coming in of Altars. Noah being preserved from the great
danger of the flood, Non extra Altar, sedjam supra Altar holocausta Deo
obtulit, he offered holocausts upon an Altar. And if the Vicar had erected such
an Altar, the only holocaust needed not to have been his discretion, except he
would have been as prodigal with his discretion as this Author; for there
were sacrifices of thanks and praise which Noah taught him to offer on an
Altar. Come we to the sixth hour. Those that are drunken, are drunken in the
night; and those that creep into houses, creep into them in the night.
Abraham, whose sons we are, not by nature, but by grace, at this very hour, in
the clear light of faith, Genesis 12.7.8.
built two Altars in one Chaper* one in Moreh, and another in Bethel. And now
under Abraham, and Melchisedech was the Christian Church in the prime. For the
Church of the Jews (says S. Ambrose) began not before Abraham's Nephew son was
grown up to man's estate. Now it is to be observed (say these holy Fathers)
Quantae fidei, quantaeque devotionis, how faithful and devout this blessed
Patriarch was, who because Deo credidit, Deoque altaria erexit, cultumque ejus
venerando dilexit, he believed in God, and erected Altars to him, God therefore
blessed him, and caused Semen ejus multiplicari, eique amplissimaregna,
terrasque dari, and de hostibus triumphari; nec non and in suo semine, quod est
Christus, gentes, quae nos sumus benedici: Abraham's seed was multiplied, and
upon him were large Kingdoms, and Territories bestowed. All his enemies
subdued, and in him were the Gentiles, that is, our selves eternally blessed,
because he erected Altars to God, and honored his service. And again, say the
same Fathers, if Abraham for these causes was blessed, Dubium non est, quin
Altarium sanctorum eversores, and sacrarum rerum, quibus in iisdem Altaribus
Deo famulandum est, surreptores damnentur; there is no doubt but they put their
salvation in great hazard, that undermine Altars, and put their hands to the
taking away of holy things, that belong to Altars, by their consecration, as
Tithes and offerings do, and the like: From which impiety King James of
blessed memory washed his hands. Eliens. Apol. ca. 6. p. 137.
Populari enim res sacras, and ad usus nescio quos (certe parum sacros)
addicere, bonis omnibus, Regi autem ante omnes displicet, quo nemo a sacris
alienandis alienior; maleque illum habuit, quod quae devota Deo erant, propter
voventium mentes abalienata erant, as testifies famous Elie. And so we see,
and all posterities doubtless shall see, how God has blessed his seed, and
propagated his Kingdoms, and subdued his enemies, as was affirmed of King
Pepin by these holy Fathers, to whom I return, and with them to Abraham. Genesis
22 9.
For so zealous was the Father of the faithful; that he not only built an
Altar, but was ready to sacrifice his son upon it. Genesis 26.25.
Isaac also aedificavit Altar, and therefore the Lord promised a blessing to
him and his seed. But Religion and Devotion increased much more with Jacob, who
did not only erect Altars, and consecrate them, and power Oil on them; but
made further promise of devoting his Tithes to the Lord. Now mark what
inference these holy Fathers make from hence, and then judge whether Altars
crept into the Church, or whether the complying of Christians with these
Fathers of the Jews, do not argue, that Altars did not creep into the
Church; but were received with public honor, and devotion. Vnde hodie
Christiana religio, exemplum sumens ex antiqua patrum traditione, domos in
honorem Dei aedificat, ac dedicat, and Altaria erigit, eisque oleum
superfundit. Whereupon Christian Religion taking their example from hence, do
build and dedicate houses to God, and erect Altars, and do receive many
precious gifts and oblations of Gods people, for the honor of his House and
service, and for the use and benefit of his Priests, and of the poor. And we
advise him that goes about to impropriate these things to his own use, and to
withdraw them from the uses, which the Dedicators and Donors intended to
remember, Cujus sit discriminis and damnationis, into what danger of damnation
he puts himself.

The ninth hour is from Moses to Christ. And how Altars were in an open and
honorable manner brought from the Church of the Christians into the Church of
the Jews at this hour of the day, the same holy Fathers show out of the
books of Moses, Ioshuah, Judges, and from the deeds of David, Solomon, and the
Machabees, even to Christ's time, and conclude thus; Haec idcirce posuimus, ut
animadvertatur, quantum apud divinam majestatem valeat, and veneratio divini
cultus, and erectio Altarium. And from hence the same Fathers infer (which
saves me a great deal of labor) ex Sanctorum patrum explanationibus, out of
the expositions of the holy Fathers in the best and ancient times, that
Christian Churches took their president in erecting Altars; so that their
complying herein with the people of the Jews, is a clear argument, that
Altars did not creep into the Christian Church. For that the Tabernacle typum
gerebat futurae Christi Ecclesiae; and that the Temple likewise typum gesserit
Sanctae dei Ecclesiae, nullus sanum sapiens ignorant: no man that has not his
understanding tackt, and the eye thereof turned after the humor of the men of
Grantham, as the Marigold turns with the Sun, will impeach the setting of
Altars, or the Lords Table Altarwise in any Christian Church, by terming their
coming in to be creeping, and to be the worse thought of for their complying
with the people of the Jews. For is it not fit there should be a complying and
correspondencie between the type or figure, and the substance which Christian
Altars are in regard of the Altars among the people of the Jews? Wherefore
since Altars in the Christian Church comply so fitly with the Altars in the
Jewish Church; it is an argument, that the Church wherein they are is a true
Christian Church; and that the honor done them is no other, then in truth
belongs to them. For if their types were had in singular honor among the
Jews, then the Substance ought to be had in much more honor among Christians.
And it is not the part of a good Christian Sanum intelligens, that is sound at
heart, to speak so unlike the Servant of Christ, good Christian, and so like a
Pensioner to the men of Grantham, as to say, that Altars Crept into the Church
by a kind of complying with the people of the Jews.

The twelfth hour is from the death of Christ to the end of the world, and how
the Church of God set it self to comply with the Church of the Jews in
erecting, dedicating, and consecrating Churches and Altars, ordaining of
Priests, and Levites, apointing, and receiving of oblations, offering
Sacrifices, and confirming Christ's Church to the true pattern thereof showed
to Moses in the Mount, and lively presented in the Tabernacle, and Temple, the
same holy Fathers take upon to demonstrate ex Sanctorum Patrum eloquiis, out of
the doctrine of holy Fathers. Can any man say then, that Altars crept into the
Church? as the Tables of monychangers came into the Temple, and were set where
they ought not, to the defiling thereof (which this pure man plainly intends)
that the next word must be, have these things hence? or that the complying of
these holy Fathers with Gods people the Jews, is in this respect any argument
of their secret, and undue creeping in? or not rather a forcible argument to
warrant, and justify the bringing of them into the Christian Church, and the
due honoring of them, being no worse things than such as the types whereof
were showed Moses in the Mount, and are themselves, (with their Priests, and
holy service performed about them,) visible types of the triumphant Church in
heaven, and for this cause, as chiefly because they are the seats and Chaires
of estate, where the Lord vouchsafes to place himself amongst us (as Optatus
speaks) have been in all ages so greatly honored and regarded of the most
wise, Optat. Mas. l. 6. cont. Parme.
most learned, and most blessed Saints of God?

So that he which says, Altars crept into the Church by a kind^ of complying
with the people of the Jews, may with as good reason say, that the orders of
Archbishops, Bishops, Priest^ and Deacons, with their several offices and
degrees, with their attire, habits, and vestments, together with oblations,
tithes, glebe lands, and maintenance, crept into the Christian Church by a
kind of complying with the Jews, and are therefore alike, and altogether to
be cast out of the Church, as Judicial Ceremonies.

But God forbid, that any son of the Church (as this man intitles himself)
or University either, should show so little good affection, and learning, as to
speak, or think the worse of any of these for their complying with the people
of the Jews herein, and cast them out as Judicial ceremonies. For what the
Patriarchs and people of the Jews practiced by the law of nature, or the rule
of right reason, or by inspiration of Gods Spirit many hundred years before
the Ceremonial, or Leviticall Law was given, are not to be ranked among
Judicial Ceremonies, which were fulfilled in our Savior Christ, and were by
him taken away, and nailed to his Cross. The Council of Aquisgrane, and the
Fathers whom they follow, take us out another lesson: For then making of vows,
singing of Psalms, and spiritual Songs, keeping of Feasts, observing of
Fasts, dedicating of places for Gods Worship, ordayning, and maintaining of
Priests and Deacons, as well as Altars, should all be cast out from the face of
this man, and his abettors, as Moses was from the presence of Pharaoh: beware
thou see my face no more: thou art crept in among us that are the sons of the
Church under a Vizard made of a kind of complying with the Jews, whose
Mosaicall ceremonies we renounce. But it is to be hoped, that he that wears
the name of the Son of the Church, will not to her wrong under that ensign
advance the party of Donatus. Nihil honorificentius, quam ut Imperator
Ecclesiae filius esse dicatur, (says Saint Ambrose.) a son of the Church is
a name for Kings and Emperors, S. Amb. lib. 4 to 32*
the nursing Fathers of the Church, and it were sacrilege to steal it away
from them, and convey it to their and her enemies. But if this man be a son
of the Church, then may we say with Jacob, deliver me o Lord, I pray thee, from
the hand of my brother, from the hand of Esau, lest he come and smite the
Mother upon her Children. He had showed himself more lik^ ^ son of the
Church, if he had said, that the name of Sabbath had crept into the Church in a
kind of complying in phrase with the people of the Jews, and that in a shadow
of things to come as if Christ were not come in the flesh, against the Apostles
express doctrine and charge, Col. 2. and from hence would have sought to have
cast out that old leaven out of our Church, which has sowred the affections of
too many toward the Church, and disturbed the peace, and hindered the pious
devotion thereof.

The Letter. If the Table should stand along close to the Wall, so as y^u be
forced to officia^e at the one end thereof, the Country people would suppose
them D^esse^s, rather than Table^. Besides that Christ Himself inst^^u^ed this
Sacrament upon a Table, and not upon an Altar, as Archbishop ^^ra^mer ob^^^ves,
etc.
CAP. XXIII. The conceit of a Dresser unworthy a Divine. Suting Psychicus in
Tertullian. The Patriarch and Bishops in the fifth Council express a different
apprehension thereof. Christ's first institution of the Sacrament, no rule to us
in matters Circumstantiall. An Altar confessed by the Author. Saint Paul did,
and the Church may order things otherwise than Christ used. The Eucharist to be
received Fasting.
THe Author has much busied himself to pull down, disgrace, and cast out
Christian Altars, as ever did Abraham, Isaac, or Jacob, or the old Christians
before Moses: or Moses, David, Solomon, or any of the Patriarchs before
CHRIST: or any blessed Martyrs, holy Saints of God, and zealous Christians,
since Christ, have been to build, consecrate, adorn, and honor them. Whose
Factor he is, and of whom he is to receive his pay, the enemy of Altars, that
befriended him with this inspiration, best knows. But if his pay must be
proportioned, no^ by his good will, but by his good success, then can it not
be good. The man I think was borne when all good stars had their backs
toward him. And if he bare not Sisera's mind, why do the Stars fight against
him in their order? for that wherein he thinks to win a reputation by
disgrace of Altars, brings them honor, and him confusion at every turn. Such
is the proud man's destiny. In eo deijciuntur in quo ext^lluntur, says Saint
Austin, their table is their snare, their prosperity their ruin, they hope to
lean on a wall, and adders sting them. Sicut fumus peribunt. The higher smoke
mounteth, the further from heaven, the nearer to nothing. So has it fared with
this man from the beginning hitherto. The higher he built his hopes upon old
writers, or new, the lower is he beaten with their fall upon his head? It is
found by his own Authors, that Altars were in the Christian Church, within
less than 200. years after Christ: that they did not stand in the body of the
Church: that they did not creep in: that their complying confuteth their
creeping. Hitherto we are gone already; and now comes forth a reason against
the setting of the Lords Table Altarwise made of such stuff, that if he had
studied all his life long to honor Altars in the opinion of good Christians,
and to fill his own face with shame; he could not (I think) find any
comparable to this fulsome, and nasty conceit of a Dresser. The Country people
would suppose them Dressers.

I confess unfainedly, that this speech was so scandalous and offensive to me,
and I persuade my self it is no less to any Christian apprehension, and
trencht so close upon blasphemy, that I could not choose but take up such
stones as lay near me to cast at it. And I cannot but wonder how any man, (I
will not say in holy orders, meditating on the holy Eucharist, Consecrated upon
the most holy Altar, standing no otherwise than it ever did in the holy
Catholic Church,) but any man of gentle extraction, liberal education, and
virtuous disposition, could have so unhallowed, and degenerate a thought come
into his mind, fitter for Epicurus, or one of Bacchus Priests, than the Priest
of the living God, that remembers with Saint Chrysostom, that by his office
he stands and ministers in the most holy place of all others under the Cope
of heaven, and mixeth himself in his service, with those Ministering spirits,
the blessed Angels, that with bended necks give humble attendance of their
Lord, and ours, circum circa Saecrosanctum Altar. Me thinks that livery which
Tertullian bestows upon his Psychicus, will suite this yeoman of the Dresser
well enough. Tertul. de Iejunio adversus Psychicos page 781.
Deus tibi venture est, and pulmo Templum, and aqualiculus Altar, and sacerdos
coquus, and Sanctus spiritus nidor, and condiment^ charismata, and ructus
prophetia. Apud te Agape in cacabis fervet, fides in culina calet, spes in
ferculis jacet. If the Prince of the air had caused such a thought like
lightning to strike through his fancy, yet he could not have forced him to
nurce it, to cloth it with air, to lend it wings to fly abroad in this sort,
to fly-blow, and cause to putrify other men's cogitations. Zealous and fervent
Prayer would have quenched this, and all such fiery darts of the Devil. And
herein is all our hope, that we shall take no more hurt by it, and that the
Author when he le^s what profaneness he may kindle in innocent men's hearts,
by casting such dangerous sparks as these, will be sorry for it. And so I
leave him in Tertullians words, Ne stili potius negotium, quam officium
conscientiae meae curare videar.

But for his Dresser. Can the Author, or any man of common parts in
understanding imagine, that when the most holy and blessed Patriarch, and rest
of the Bishops in the fifth Council of Constantinople; that when the Princes,
and Citizens of that Imperial City, performed lowly reverence and adoration to
the holy Altar; that when S. Chrysostom says, that the drawing by the
Curtains, that the holy Altar may be seen, did put them in mind of the
opening of Heaven; that when holy Gorgonia in S. Nazianzene, when Penitents in
Tertullian, when barbarous soldiers in S. Ambrose, when S. Ambrose himself
says, that he could be contented immolari pro Altaribus, if his fall might
make them stand: to come home to our country, when the Author sees the Kings
most sacred Majesty, and the honorable Lords of the most noble Order of the
Garter, perform most low and humble reverence to the most holy Altar, the
Throne in earth of that great Lord, from whom their honor proceeds, that
these, or any of these had that unworthy conceit come into their minds, to take
the holy Altar for a loathsome Dresser? or that any of these would have taken
it well, that any Buffon should have vented so scurrilous and profane ascoffe
against the sacred Altar, which all these think worthy of all reverence, and
when they have done all they can, yet still think they have done too little.
And so I leave him to his meditations, and follow him to another reason,
wherein though he argue weakly, and like himself, against Altars in Christian
Churches, yet he reasons so like a Divine, that a Christian may hear him
with patience, which his late rude scurrility and unsavory language was enough
to banish. Another reason the Author has met with for the utter casting down
of Altars, stand where they will, Church or Chancell: viz. that Christ himself
instituted this Sacrament upon a Table, and not upon an Altar, as Archbishop
Cranmer observes, and others.

I will say somewhat concerning our Saviors first institution of this holy
Sacrament, and then leave M. Beza to answer what he brings out of M. Fox
touching Archbishop Cranmer, and others.

Touching our Saviors institution, I conceive, none that read the story,
reads it and takes it, as a rule to guide the Church to the worlds end in all
circumstances and ceremonies, to be precisely observed in administering and
delivering the blessed Eucharist. For then the Sacrament must not be
administered on any day, but on Maundy thursday: nor in a Church, but in a
Chamber: and delivered only to twelve at a time, and those twelve not Women,
but Men, and those men not Lay persons, but Priests: and those Priests
receiving the same, not standing, or kneeling, or sitting, but lying, and
leaning one on another breast, or bosom, and receiving the same not in a
morning, but at night, and not fasting, but after meat, and that meat taken at
a supper, and that Supper not the first Supper, but when that Supper is ended,
and the Table taken away, and they all risen up; and after all this, the
deliverer must gird himself with a Towell, and wash the receivers feet; and
this done they must all couch them down again, and so receive the Sacrament.
These and diverse Ceremonies are to be observed, if our Saviors manner of
institution be our precise pattern. Now if no man will bind the Church to
observe these and the like Ceremonies, why will the Author bind us to a Table
rather than to an Altar? and why will he forbid the Vicar to call it an Altar,
considering that the Author tells him, that Altars stand still in some
orthodoxall Churches, and may remain in ours still, for ought he knows to the
contrary? What abomination is the name like to receive in our Church, more than
in Lutheran Churches, which he honors as orthodox? And why will he forbid
the Vicar to call it an Altar, since himself confesses also, that we have an
Altar, in regard of participation and communion? Have we it, and may we not
call it as it is? Those that have Superintendents, may call them
Superintendents: and those that have Lay Elders, may call them Lay Elders; and
shall not those that have Altars, obtain his favor to call them Altars? Our
Saviors institution at a Table, does not bind us to have such a Table as we
have, but such an one as he had, much less does it bind us to the name of a
Table. If our Savior had said, do not you call it an Altar; or the Church had
ordered, and said, do not you call it an Altar, he might have had some warrant
for his Injunction, Do not you call it an Altar. But our Saviors Table does
not restrain the Church from an Altar. An Altar we have, or the Lords Table
set Altarwise, which is all one, and an Altar we may call it, his peremptory
imperatives notwithstanding.

The truth is this, the purpose of our Savior Christ in his first institution
of this holy Sacrament, was not to make his example our pattern in the
circumstances of a Table, Times, Communicants, or the like. But when he
departed, he gave his holy Spirit to his Apostles, and to the holy Catholic
Church, which is the pillar and ground of truth; and to the Church are we to
resort, to hear the Church, to be guided by the the Church in all matters of
comeliness, and order. Other things will I set in order, when I come, says S.
Paul, and in setting things in order, he crossed the order used by Christ, for he
forbad them to take their Suppers before. The Church has ordered, that men
that are strong, and in health, receive the Sacrament not at night, but in the
morning: not after they have broken their fast, Aug. Ep^ ^8. ^^p. 6
but fasting. Therefore the whole Church does, and ever did since the Apostles
time receive the Sacrament fasting. Hear. S. Augustine for this. It is evident
(says he) that when the Disciples first received the body and blood of our
Lord, That they did not receive it fasting. Nunquid propterea calumniandum est
universae ecclesiae, quod a jejunis semper accipitur Eucharistia? Ex hoc enim
placu^t Spiritui Sancto, ut in honorem tanti Sacramenti in os Christiani prius
Dominicum corpus intraret, quam exteri cibi. Nam ideo per universum orbem mos
ist^ servatur. Neque enim quia post cibos dedit Dominus, propterea pransi aut
coenati fratres ad illud Sacramentum accipiendum convenire debent; aut sicut
facieb^nt quos Apostolus arguit, and emendat, mensis suis miscere. Et ideo non
praecepit salvator, (...) S. Cy^r. l 2. Ep. 2. S Chrysostom. (...) ^^ in 1 ^o. 1.
Ep. ^. ad ^^^. ^cum ^on^^l. Ca^^la. ^. (...) 29.
quo deinceps ordine sumeretur Eucharistia, ut Apostoli per quos ecclesiam
dispositurus erat, servarent hunc locum. The like is delivered by diverse other
Fathers, and Councels. Now in this place of S. Augustine we have many memorable
things noted worthy our observation. 1. That the whole Church ^
all the World over received the Sacrament fasting. 2. That our Savior did
leave the institution of mat^ers of order touching the manner of receiving the
Eucharist to his Apostles. 3. That the Apostles appoint the Eucharist to be
received fasting. 4. That S. Paul did correct, and amend their fashion, that
received it together with their own meat, after the manner of the first
institution by our Savior Christ. Lastly, that what the Apostles did order
concerning the receiving of the Eucharist fasting, was the ordinance of the
Holy Ghost. Placuit enim Spiritui sancto, it pleased the Holy Ghost, that for
the honor of this Sacrament, the body of our Lord enter into our mouths
before any external meat. Those then may see what they do resist, that do
oppose any of the decrees of the holy Apostles, and of their right successors
in the holy Catholic Church: and for this particular do not receive the
Eucharist fasting, or upon an Altar, if the Christian Church have, and do so
appoint.

CAP. XXIIII. The Table on which our Savior instituted his Supper. The posture
of the partakers. Beza describes it. A Logic Axiom alleged against Altars.
2 IT is very probable, that our Savior did institute this Sacrament potius
supra pavimentum, quam supra mensam, rather upon the floor after the custom
of those Eastern countries, than upon a Table. For the officer showed his
Disciples Coenaculum stratum, not mensam stratam. And Christ also did
administer the same, not sitting at a Table, but lying upon the floor on
couches, as it was in Hesters Banquet, Hest. 1. and in Iudiths Supper, that
spread her skins not upon a Table, but upon the very floor, Judith 12.15. And
so much will strongly be inferred out of the Greek word, (...) used by S. Mat.
26.20. and (...) used by S. Luke 22.14. that the posture then used, was
leaning, or lying flat along. Therefore S. Austin speaking of S. John, says,
Primo quidem jacens in sinu Jesus, supra ascendit, and incubuit supra pectus.
When S. Peter beckned to inquire who it was of whom Christ spoke, that should
betray him, he hitcht up from his bosom, to his breast, and then asked the
question. But let M. Beza answer the Authors authority, who concludes plainly
out of Josephus, Non sedebant, sed discumbebant, they did not sit at Table, but
lie down on Couches, Mat. 26.20. and shows the manner how they lay, in such
sort, ut proximus, quasi in priorem recumberet, that one lay upon his next
fellow, Pedibus exterius repositis, with their feet laid outward, John 13.21.
Therefore howsoever our Savior call it a Table, Luc. 22.21. His hand is with
me at the Table, that betrayeth me: yet no man considering the manner of their
lying, can from these words conceive, as the Author does, that it was a Table
framed of posts and boards, such an one as the Church wardens of Gr. must
provide without the Vicars direction. For our Saviors plain meaning in those
words is, (as himself tells us) to fulfill the Scripture, and the words of
David; He that sits at table with me, or eats my bread, has lift up his
heel at me. This was not the principal scope of our Savior Christ, to point
us to a Table, as if without a joined Table the Scripture could not have been
performed; but to signify a place, where he and his familiars ate friendly
together, one whereof betrayed him, as Achitophel sought to betray David. Thus
I conceive S. Augustine understands both these places. S. Aug. Tract in Job.
5.9. Job. 13.18. Psalm. 41.9.


In this sense, the same Prophet David says, thou will prepare a Table for me
in the wilderness, Psalm. 78.20. And this the Lord did for him, when he fled
from his Son Absalom in the conspiracy of Achit^phel; for into the
wilderness they brought him Figs and Raysons, and parched Corn, which were
eaten by him, and his servants together, in the Wilderness, where after the
manner of Soldiers they were glad of meat, and content to make the earth their
Table, as the floor was our Saviors, for any thing this man does or ever will
be able to show to the contrary: or at least wise, not a joined table, on which
his sole delight, and comfort lies. Now if the Author will tie the Vicar to a
Table, and such a Table as our Savior did administer his Supper at, and
imagine that if he but bring him to a Table, there must be no kneeling then,
which was used before Altars: but think that then the Vicar will be glad for
his own ease to bring a form with him, to sit down, and herein satisfy the
longings of his brethren, whom no hunger drives to that Table, if state and
ease be not provided for, he is utterly beside his cushion. For the Vicar led
by this man's own authority, must have such a Table, as our Savior did
institute this Supper on: but Mr. Beza will tell him for his comfort, that that
Table was no Table indeed, but in name only, or not a Table framed of wood, as
he has fancyed, and employed the judicious Churchwardens to provide; but it
was the very plain floor, and nothing else, upon which they spread their
skins, or clothes, and when all was made ready, then they lay down one in
another lap. And now that Mr. Beza has deprived the Author of his hopes of a
Table; he will be glad, I believe, to catch hold on the horns of the Altar
for his safety, after his opposing the practice of our Church, and of our
Diocesane, and of all pious antiquity, and be glad to say, not only as he
does already, that we have an Altar in regard of Participation, and communion
granted to us, but tacke about for other considerations also, if he be well
put to it. I am sure he will come off with for an Altar for Sanctuary and
preservation, and for oblation to offer thanks to God, that he that writes in
this sort to control present authority, and reverend antiquity, may escape with
the biting of a flea, with the refutation of a poor Vicar. I believe also he
will embrace an Altar for vows, that if he may thus come off, he will be
less peremptory in his commands hereafter, to say to the Vicar; Do not you
call it an Altar: do not you set the Table Altarwise, that your discretion
prove not the only Holocaust: but be glad to call it so himself in more
respects than one, or two: and not to affront the whole Church of God with his
judgment, but seek to reconcile his judgment to his opinion. And if the Vicar
have his consent in opinion for setting the Lords Table in the highest place of
the Quire, his judgment may not lead him down to the body of the Church, and
there set it Tablewise, and choose to disquiet the whole Church, rather than to
trouble the poor Town of Grantham: who ought to have been taught otherwise,
than to take offense or Vmbrage at the practice of the Primitive Church, and
the direction of our Bishop. For, as we were lately given to understand by our
Reverend Diocesane, it was ordered in most Diocesses of this kingdom; that the
Lords Table should be enclosed, and set Altarwise, as we conceive it is in his
own Chapel. So far was he, and the other Governors of our Church from
supposing, that the Country people would take them for Dressers.

But there is one battering blow for a farewell lent Altars, or the Lords Table
set Altarwise, out of John Seton, or Peter Ramus, choose you whither, and that
is this. The Lords Table must not in any hand stand Altarwise, sublato enim
relativo formali, manet absolutum, and materiale tantum. The Sacrifice
therefore which relates to an Altar being taken away, the Altar is thereupon
demolished, his name at least stands forfeited to destruction, and now no more
Altars, but Tables of stone, or timber. If this be a good and Scholler-like
argument, then God be with the Lords Table too, so soon as the Communion is
ended, and the Lords service finished, and the Priest, and people departed: For
questionless relativum formale tollitur according to this man's own
declaration. For the use of an Altar is to Sacrifice upon, and the use of a
Table is to eat upon; So that when the eating is done, he will not deny but
the formal reference is vanished; and the accidental form, or material
essence only remains. Then may you make the Lords Table a board for money
Changers, or a Chopping block, or a tressell to lay the Beer upon, as I have
seen it used, or a Glas^ers board, and the Chancell his workhouse, or an out
room to lay up old rotten timber, and vile luggage.

But I believe, when the Bishop or his officers come to question such matters
as these, they will not be answered with Axioms out of Seton or Keckerman
either, or take such metaphysicall coin for good pay: but the offenders will be
glad to turn over a new leaf, and be made to see, that Canons Ecclesiastical
will make their Canons Logical to fly: And that their accidental relations
will not stand them in any absolute, and substantial stead. For in those
things that are dedicated, and consecrated to God by the Bishop, or made Gods
by vow, and oblation from his children, are his at all times, though they be
not used at all times, nor scarce used at any time, as he allows, and as those
that vowed or dedicated them intended. As for example, in Tithes, and
offerings, you may not alienate them, or take them away, except you will add a
fifth part, and put a better in the room; the Council of Aquisgrane, and the
Fathers whom they follow, will teach you that for good Divinity under the
Gospel, as well as it was under the Law Leviticall. For this law is founded
upon nature and right reason. There is no reason that any man should take away
another right, much less the Lords right, or his Priests right. The things
then that are Gods, whether they be Altars or Tables, and things dedicated and
consecrated upon them much more, as Tithes, and oblations, whether they be
used, or not used, or used otherwise by those to whom in right they do belong;
as if a Priest should use his tithes and maintenance belonging to the Church,
Council. Agath. ca. 35. Episcopis, Presbyteris, aut Diaconis, canes ad venandum,
aut accipitres, aut hujusmodi res habere non li^cat, etc.
to keep hawks, or hounds, or dogs, or spend it in play at cards or dice,
which is absolutely against the Canons of the Church, yet the right of these is
still the Lords, and the abuse is to be reformed, and such holy things are to
be restored to that good and holy use whereunto they were intended, and at the
first dedicated and consecrated. M. Seldom, nor no man of judgment and
learning, will affirm otherwise, and they do wrong the gentleman, that do
wrest his authority to justify their encroachments upon holy, and consecrate
things, which in my conscience never came into his mind; the good old workmen
whom he affects, cannot easily shape him to this new cut, nor can it come into
the mind of any pious and godly man, except he be prompted to it by this
serviceable Logician, that the Relativam formale is sublatum: and the materiale
only remains, which is all his brethren hawke after. And this is the foul he
puts into their hands in an expedite, cleanly, and thrifty way. The plot of
setting up Lecturers in every good town to work this design, is a
chargeable, slow, and sometimes an uncertain way, and proves to be but a dull
device of a foggie brain, and willing blunderer, that light upon it in a mist,
wherein the brethren were at first involved, who truly meant well to their
cause, but mist of his mark intended. But let this Logicians nimble device be
received, and but one such Logic Lecturer be set up in a Diocese, the work is
done. All the rest may take their ease. For thus it is in a word. Sacrifices
are taken away, which is relativum formale, and therefore Altars must needs be
taken away, and nothing remain but what is materiale tantum, tables of wood or
stone, without any reference at all to the things they belonged unto. So in the
same manner, tolluntur Sacerdotes, tolluntur ergo and Sacerdotalia: Priests are
taken away, therefore all reference that tithes and other maintenance belonging
to Priests had, is taken away, and that which remains is materiale tantum,
corn, or hay, or a fat Pig, and these having their cognizance plucked off, and
nothing remaining but their Materiale tantum, which they owe to the soil of
some Landlord, whose should they be in true and legal right but his? So that
now the kind patron that has an handful of Meal to give his Priest, need not
run both his hands over with birdlime, and then take it up, and give it freely,
for all is his, the whole material is his. The Relativum formale fled, when
the Priest was banished, and the Evangelicall Minister came in. He may keep
all with a good conscience molded out of a Logic Axiom. May not all
sacrilegious persons bless this Man, and wish Many a good Letter like this may
he write, for this Letter is there writ, the cheapest, and gainfullest that
ever was procured. Herewith they can seize upon all revenewes belonging to
Priests, and in the end, if need be, arrest Heaven. Happy men, by thy boon,
that have done thus much for them.

But shall I ring you another peale. Wretched Man that thou art! thou make
this people to trust in a lie. Thy Wine is of the Vine of Sodom, thy clusters
are bitter: thou please them with Apples of Sodom, and feedest them with
ashes: thou leadest them by crooked paths, and the way of truth thou have not
made known unto them. Be not deceived, God will not be mocked, nor stripped of
his own by a Logic Axiom, which I leave to the Moderator of Sophisters to
canvasse, as nothing appertaining to this cause. The ground and foundation that
Church and Churchmen build upon for the revenues belonging to God, and to those
that serve at his Altar, is laid upon a Rock Christ Jesus. Whatsoever is, or
was given, devoted, consecrated, and dedicated to him, is his and his Priests,
and he that takes away, or secretly with Achan purloines but a Priests garment,
call them Babilonish garments if you will, or but a piece of gold, nay, but a
shooe-latchet, that person has trespassed, and is become execrable in the
sight of God, and doubtless his sin will find him out. And there is not a
sacrilegiously-disposed wretch in this Kingdom, but knows or may know, that
those coals which their predecessors in that vice have stolen from Gods
Altars, has burnt the houses of most of them, and turned them to ashes, and
laid them on ruinous heaps. And those that go by and ask, why has the Lord
done thus to these noble and renowned houses, can receive no other answer, but
that they have taken the houses of God in possession, and therefore God has
performed his word, and made them like unto a wheel, and turned them topsie
turvey, so that there remains not a stone upon a stone which is not cast down.

Wherefore let not the sound of that Logic Axiom mis-understood or
mis-applyed, be heard in the ears, or taken into approbation of any good
Christian. The Sacrifices which Papists offered upon their Altars, are taken
away, and therefore Altars themselves, by taking away of Relativum formale, are
also taken away, and nothing remains, but materiale tantum, wood or stone,
therefore do not you call them any more Altars, says he to the Vicar. O good
Sir, remember, the abuse of a good thing, is not, nor ever was, or can be the
Relativum formale of a good matter. The Sacrifices of Papists were abuses, and
were not the formale relativum of Altars. S. Cyprian tells you, that the use of
Altars is to sanctify the Eucharist upon, and that without an Altar it cannot
be consecrated, and that therefore Heretics have no Sacraments among them,
because they have no Altars. The consecration of the holy Eucharist by Gods
own Priests, who for this purpose do, or did daily Assistere Altari, wait at
his Altar, is rather the Relativum formale, than any thing else, this is not
taken away (God be blessed for it) when the Sacrifices that Papists offered
upon their Altars were taken away, and therefore Altars are not taken away.
Therefore do not you open a door to let in all profaneness and impiety, by
forbidding Gods people to speak like the people of God, and by reading such a
Logic Lecture as will assuredly (if it should be learned, which God forbid)
undo all the people of God, in the ruin of their Altars, Priests, and
Churches.

To conclude; For as much as God has put into the hearts of the Governors of
our Church, to restore the Lords Table to his ancient and true place it had in
the Primitive Church, and also to the honor, and reverence which of right
belongs unto it in regard of the presence of our Savior, whose Chair of State
it is upon Earth, and to enclose it with Rayles, not only to keep it at all
times from all manner of profanation, but also (if it might be) to strike the
minds of all beholders with some reverence and respect to keep their true
distance, and to make a difference between place and place, person and person,
holy and profane, that their preparations and dispositions may be suitable. Let
no man then that has the fear of God before his eyes, to whom God has given
wit, elocution, learning, place in Church or Common wealth, lend the Devil and
his Imps, sacrilegious or factious persons, the service and use of these, to
disturb so holy and godly a purpose, and so fully conformable to the beauty
and awful Majesty that the houses of God were in in the Primitive Church.

CAP. XXV. Canons of our Church need no private man's confirmation Rationibus
cogentibus. The Letter. That you do the reverence appointed by the Canon to
that blessed name of JESUS: so it be done humbly, and not affectedly, to
procure the devotion, not the derision of the Parishioners, and that you do not
maintain it rationibus non cogentibus, and so spoil a good cause with bad
arguments. These things I do allow and practice.
The edicts of Princes, Articles of our Creed, our baptism, Eucharist will be
unsettled, if men may require to have these maintained rationibus cogentibus.
Ecclesiastical and temporal authority receive more prejudice by having the
same disputed, than suffering it to be railed against. To what distress the
Vicar is put to maintain the Canon of bowing at the name of JESUS. The Author
ill advised to make a jeere of the first and second Service.
IF you do not allow and practice these things, except they be maintained
rationibus cogentibus, the Church is not beholden to you either for your
allowance or practice: neither will the Common wealth, or Prince, if need
require. With this proviso Judas of Galilee will admit of the Edict of Augustus
Caesar; Licinius allow of Christianity; Julian allow of Jesus of Galile,
Vicisti Galilaee; Ebion, and Cerinthus allow of S. Paul's Epistles; Wat Tyler
and Jack Straw allow of Lawyers, and the Laws of this Realm; Carthright and
his holy brood allow of Church government, of Supremacy of Kings over their
Presbytery, and of the common Laws of the Land over the Dictats of their
Consistory. Wherefore if you will not allow of what is by law appointed, nor
practice it, nor be the means that others practice it, unless it be
maintained rationibus cogentibus, and in the opinion of the men of G^. you make
Sovereign authority, and Laws Ecclesiastical and temporal, to depend upon a
Spiders thread. For if you, or the Vicar could frame such Arguments as were in
themselves every way exactly demonstrative, and such as in reason must
overmaster, and control the understanding, and compel assent, (which I
believe neither of you will ever be able to do) in this Letter the world sees
you have not done it. Yet are not you or he Master of an other man's
understanding, and of his will much less, no more than the Vicar is of his
ears in Tacitus, as you wittily allude. You know, he to whom all things were
committed, gives off, when it comes to this, with Ego volui, vos autem
noluistis. So it may be probably presumed, that some of Gr. and others of that
Immercuriall wood, may be so knotty and sturdy, that if you come with your
Herculean arms to twine and twist them with your rationibus cogentibus, they
will crack in the bending like a gunne, and say non persuadebis, etiamsi
persuaseris.

Nay, give me leave to say thus much, that if you had a purpose to prepare, and
send forth factious, seditious, schismatic, and heretical Foxes into the
standing Corn of Church and Commonwealth, you need tie no other fire brands
to their tails, nor inspire them with any other doctrine, or afford them any
prime Materials, or principles so full of spawne and probability to multiply
their like, for them to hatch and work upon, as this feracious, and pregnant
Plebiscite, that what is by Law, custom, prescription, or prerogative royal
appointed, and settled, shall not be allowed, or practiced by the men of some
incorporation, or other, before it be maintained rationibus cogentibus. Let
this principle be granted, behold what a spectacle I shall present unto you
withal. Let this man's plot take effect, that nothing be allowed but what such
as he and the Vicar shall maintain rationibus cogentibus, the men of Grantham
being Judges, and such Scribes and Pharisees as this man appears to be, then
the orders of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, with their tithes, and
maintenance, together with the houses of God, and all Consecrate things, the
power of the keys, and all discipline shall be utterly overthrown, and
ruinated. Then shall the holy Scripture, the holy Sacraments, the Articles of
our Creed, and saying of our Lords Prayer be doubted of, and called into
question. Then shall the power of Kings and Monarchs with their Crowns and
dignityes, with their Laws, Ordinances, and prerogatives be shaken, nay
racketed up and down.

If a decree come from Augustus Caesar, that all the world shall be taxed, and
if Tiberius after him, and their successors, Princes and Monarchs shall require
taxes, and tollages, Carts and cariages, aids, and subsidies of their subjects
in never so gracious a manner for the necessary support of the Commonwealth,
the Crown and dignity; though this power do belong to Monarchs, and that the
Kings of Israel, and Judah, from the first to the last, and all Emperors and
Kings, heathen and Christian exercised, and practiced the same, and that St.
Paul to prove himself, (as Theophylact says) to be no Galilean, Romans 13.
impose a necessity of this duty upon all good Christians, ye must be subject
for Conscience sake, and testify your true subjection by ready payment of
customs, and tributes: and that all holy Fathers resolve, that all men's goods,
even of Clergy men, are subject to the impositions of their Princes, agreeing
herein with Theophylact, S. Theoph. in Romans 13.
who delivers the cause of such subjection to Princes, qui nisi essent, jam
omnia olim periissent, potentioribus imbecilliores devorantibus; yet will Judas
of Galile, who (as Origin says against Celsus) was a man of great place and
account in that Country) and by his example, the men of Galilee stand out,
till the Emperor maintain his edict rationibus cogentibus; otherwise, he
which pays makes himself Caesar's slave, says Judas of Galile, as Josephus
reports him, Joseph. Antiq. l. 18. ca. 1.
pretending the defense of public liberty; Sed revera privatorum lucrorum
studio. But our Savior Christ (who was a Galilean by habitation, and suspected
to be tainted with that Galilean leven, and tempted accordingly with that
question, Is it lawful to pay tribute to Caesar, and strongly put to it, shall
we pay it, or shall we not pay it?) both under Augustus, and Tiberius, did
submit himself to their prerogative, and did not stand out till he was
convinced rationibus cogentibus. For who could frame a better argument for
exemption from their authority, than that which is included in that question,
of whom do the Kings of the earth, (intimating other Kings as well as Caesar)
take tribute, or poll money? of their sons, or of strangers? and concludes,
that the children are free; wherein his exemption is clearly included: yet for
all that, lest we should be an offense unto them, by putting them to maintain
their right, (as this man counsels, and Judas would do) rationibus cogentibus,
though the tax was heavy, dragma, and sometimes Didragma viid. ob. and xvd.
upon every pol, which was the double days wages of a labourer, and yearly
paid, yet our Savior gives present order, and rather than a failing should be
with him, or his, works a miracle for payment thereof.

Our Savior Christ allows of what is appointed by the edict of a heathen
Prince, and settled only by right of Prerogative, and prescription, without
requiring to have the same maintained rationibus cogentibus. And so ought this
author to do, or destroy GODS Ordinance.

But I beseech you, consider what large, and spacious floud-gates this man sets
wide open to let in a whole deluge of confusion, impiety and sacrilege into
the Church, if the contents of his Letter in this particular, might obtain,
viz. that the constitutions, orders, decrees appointed by Canon, or received by
tradition of holy Church, be not of absolute authority, and require full
obedience, but are to be scanned, and disputed, and not allowed, or received
before they be maintained rationibus cogentibus; You shall neither say nor read
the Apostles Creed, much less the Nicene, and Constantinopolitan Creed: for
Arrius, Eutichus, Nestorius, and an 100. Heretics more will tell you, that the
Articles touching the Deity, and Humanity of our Savior Christ, and concerning
the procession of the Holy Ghost, and the true descent of Christ's soul into
hell, the place of the damned, are not maintained rationibus cogentibus. You
shall not believe that the Mother of our Lord was a Virgin, ante partum, in
partu, and post partum, for you know who have not been ashamed impiously, and
blasphemously to write, and Preach the contrary, and do hold that it is not
maintained rationibus cogentibus, you shall not believe the holy Catholic
Church, because you know who say it is not maintained rationibus cogentibus,
the word Catholic being not found in all the Scripture. You shall go nigh to
lose two petitions of seven of the Lords Prayer, Luke 13. Fiat voluntas tua,
and libera nos a malo, because some may say that it is not maintained
rationibus cogentibus, that there ought to be more in the Greek, than are in
the Vulgar translation. You shall lose all Saint Paul's Epistles for Ebions
sake, and especially the Epistle to the Hebrews, because you know who says it
is not maintained rationibus cogentibus. You shall lose Saint James's Epistle,
because you know who says it so far from being maintained to be Canonical
rationibus cogentibus, that it is vere straminea. You shall loose two Epistles
of Saint John, and also the Revelation, for these are not maintained to be
Canonical (say some) rationibus cogentibus. If Saint Augustine had stood upon
these terms, he had never been Catholic.

Come we to the holy Sacraments, and of two which remain as generally
necessary to salvation, we shall not have one at all left us, if they and the
rites, and ceremonies about them, must not be maintained by the Authority,
practice, and tradition of holy Church, but with this man's rationibus
cogentibus. You shall have no Godfathers, nor Godmothers, no imposition of
names, no saying of the Creed, or Lords Prayer at the Font, nor Font neither,
no vowing in the child's name abrenunciation Satanae, Mundo, and Pompis ejus, or
to believe in God, and keep his Commandments, no taking of the child into the
Priests arms, S. Basil de Spir. Sanct. ca. 27. Tertul. de Coro. ca. 2.
no dipping nor sprinkling, to omit the signing with the sign of the cross,
for in all these, says S. Basil, and before him, Tertullian, is amplius
aliquid qua^ Dominus in Evangelio determinavit. The ground of these is the
practice and tradition of holy Church, say these Fathers, and therefore not to
be allowed, says this Author, because they are not maintained rationibus
cogentibus. You shall not have the ten Commandments, the Epistle, Gospel,
Constantinopolitane, commonly called the Nicene Creed, the Lords Prayer,
Trisagium, and other prayers and doxologies read at the administration of the
holy Eucharist; for these were not read by our Savior Christ, but brought in
by certain Popish Bishops, and are not maintained rationibus cogentibus. You
shall not receive the holy Sacrament in a morning: nor fasting, nor kneeling,
nor standing, nor walking, nor from a framed Table, nor in bread cut with a
knife, nor in the Quire, nor in the body of the Church, neither with this man,
because none of all these things are maintained rationibus cogentibus.

Your Bishops shall have no power of Ordination, Consecration, or Jurisdiction
over Priests, neither ought there to be such degrees, or names in the Church:
your Chancellors, Commissaries, and Officials, ought not to keep Courts, to
send out Summons, Suspensions, and Excommunications: your Clergy ought not to
be maintained by Tithes, Offerings, or Glebland, for these things they will say
depend only upon use, prescription, and authority of the Church, and are not
maintained rationibus cogentibus. And to conclude, you shall not bow nor do
reverence to the blessed name of JESUS, more than to the name of Lord, or
Christ, or Emanuel, or God, or Jehovah, or Savior, or Maker, or Redeemer,
because it is not maintained rationibus cogentibus.

Thus in three words this man has laid a plot, in case it should be
apprehended, and concealed from the Bishop of the Dioces and his Officers, to
do more hurt than all his Predecessors did or could do. For all our old
dotards could not devise such an exquisite engine, to undo Church and
Commonwealth, as our acute and witty Dedalus has found out. Cartwright with
his heavy Volumes, Martin with his virulent tongue, Wigginton and Hacket with
their extraordinary spirit, Dorrell with his miraculous power of possessing,
dispossessing, and repossessing, and trouncing of Devils up and down, and
those odd fellows in a corner, with their spirit of prophecy, could never
fetch about that which this man has light on. All these did but set their
mouth, and fill their cheeks with wind to blow out the light of the Moon,
which so long as the Sun lasts, they will never be able to do. Some of
these were divided one against another, Manasses against Ephraim, and Ephraim
against Manasses, and both agreed against Judah. One allows not the cross,
but the Surplice he esteems as a fools coat, so can be content to wear it,
since it is the Kings pleasure to have it so. An other casts out that rag of
Antichrist, but submits to the Cross, as better agreeing with his disposition.
An other passes not upon these, but his knees may not buckle to Baal, nor
kneel at the Communion. An other having his back shored up with his seat, will
stand at the Gospel, but it stands not with his ease in that posture to bow
his knee at the name of JESUS. But this man allows all, practices all this,
and is so benign, and propitious to the Vicar as to approve his doings in all
these. And says, It is well done, that you affect decency and comeliness in
officiating of Gods divine Service, and that you do the reverence appointed by
the Canon to that blessed Name of JESUS. All this while the Vicar stands much
beholden to him for his kind approbation. Marry he had need take heed, that
he kill him not with his kindness. For there is a So or two: two or three
limitations, which the Vicar must look to observe, otherwise he loses his
approbation, and exposes himself to so much danger, as may be imagined in a
Counterfeits censure. And if he avoid his censure, and win his approbation, he
loses himself, and the cause of holy Church. He likes well the reverence
done to the Name of JESUS, so it be done humbly, and not affectedly; to procure
devotion, and not derision of the Parishioners, and so he do not maintain it
rationibus non cogentibus. You will say, is not this very fair and plausible?
Yes marry is it Sir; therefore I pray you tell me, whether it be in the Vicars
power to hinder the Parishioners, that they shall not say that that is done
affectedly, which he does most humbly: or that which he heartily intends to
move devotion, shall not move derision, both in the better, and worser sort of
the Parishioners. Of the better ^orthere will be no great doubt, but they will
be apt enough to deride him, of whom (if this feigned Letter were to be
regarded) they have complained already as to a Diocesan. And the Vicar can
look for small relief against their derision, if the stroke were in such a
man's hands, as the Author has ^eigned himself to be, in regard that he finds
him to commend some of them for discreet and modest men, who have complained
against the poor man for doing well, as this Author himself confesses,
namely in presidenting him^selfe in setting the Lords Table, with the form in
his Majesty's Chapels, and the Quires of Cathedral Churches.

Those that will complain of him for this, and go away with his commendation
and approbation therein, and have the Table settled (if this forged Letter were
of any proof) after their wills, and contrary to the Vicars good and approved
desires, are not in all likelihood to receive a check for their derision and
scorn cast upon the good man. The Vicar then sees by this time in what case he
is. For if he do reverence to the Name of JESUS, as he ought to do, and they
deride him, and complain of him, what will become of the man trow ye? He must
utterly forbear to use any reverence to the Name of JESUS, and conform
himself therein to this discreet and modest Alderman and his brethren; or be
laughed out of the Church for doing the same, as by Canon he is appoined: I pray
you therefore tell me, whether this personating person had not said enough in
this So of his, to keep the Vicar that he should never do the reverence
appointed by Canon to that blessed Name of JESUS, if he must do it with this
hazard. Exposed he is to derision: to derision of his enemies: enemies that
have appeared against him: enemies fleshed, countenanced, and graced against
him: excluded also from all hope of relief. And now that he has set him in
this crampe, he bids him do his reverence on Gods name, as law appoints.
Either he must be a profane Esau and flat Schismatic, and not do it, or be
made a Holocaust indeed, a Confessor, or Martyr if he do it. Had this man
railed against the Canon, and the makers thereof, in odious and ribald-like
terms with Martin, or disputed against it with Cartwright, with spiteful and
venomous reasons, he could not have frustrated the execution thereof so
speedily, and effectually, as he has here done, with his artificial and
plausible dandling of the poor man, approving, commending, and bidding him do
it: but in such a sort, that if he do it, he shall be sure to bring an old
house on his head, for observing an old popish antiquated Canon. If there be
laughing, jeering, and derision in the Church, and that raised in the judgment
of the discreet, and modest Alderman and his brethren, by reason of the Vicars
bowing affectedly at the name of JESUS, I pray you what will be come of the
man? had not he a fair warning given him? and see, he would not look to it.
The Item was seasonable Do it: So, you do it not affectedly to procure
derision of the Parishioners: And now behold here are the best of the Parish
make a general complaint against you, that you have done it affectedly, and
procured much derision. I see there are offenses and Vmbrages taken by the
Town against you, whereof I gave you a timely caveat when I spoke with you
last; and that which I did not then suspect, is now come to pass. The
Alderman, whom I have known this 17. or 18. years to be a discreet, and
modest man, and far from any humor of Innovation, together with the better
sort of the Town, have complained against you. What is now to be done? bad
enough with the Vicar, I fear me; but that all this is but done in
perspective, without realities: The Penman of the Letter would but let you see
a device of his fancy. So I leave the Vicar but in a fantastical danger.

But what I pray you will become of the Church, if this lettered man's device
should Cotton and take real effect? For though he do but play in
counterfeiting his Ordinary, yet he plays as the Cat does with the Mouse, for
in the end he intends to ruin her, and to be the death of all her Canons. If
the Centurion, or a meaner man, even this Penman himself say to his servant,
go, he goes, or bid him do this, he does it. But the case is not so with
the Church; her decrees constitutions, and Canons must be scanned, and disputed
upon before any obedience be yielded them. She like a Mother commands, and of
right expects Obedience immediately from her sons. She says ye shall all
bow, both Priest, and people at the blessed Name of Jesus.

But this man thinks fit to demurre upon the command of his mother and before
he will perform, it or be a means (if his place require it) to exact
obedience in others, he will have the matter disputed on, and disputed before
the good men of a Corporation. And then the disputer must use no inartificiall
arguments, and say the Church so appoints; this perfect artificer, and Peter
Ramus will not allow of that So; but he must first of all maintain the decree
of the Church with arguments, and reasons, and those must be forcible too
rationibus cogentibus; or else no bargain: and that is as much in Vicars
power, or any man's else, to force the approbation of his reasons upon wilful,
and disaffected persons, as it is to avoid the derision of his gestures.

In the mean time the Authority of the Church stands at a weak stay, if the
Vicar must lend his shoulder to proppe it up with his rationibus cogentibus,
that it reele not on his head; And it would be a merry world with the men of
every good Town, if they might be allowed to piert upon the Canons of the
Church, and crow over her authority, and bring her to the question before the
common Council, to know of CHRIST'S Spouse, as they did of Christ Himself, by
what authority do thou these things (to make us bow at the Name of JESUS)
and who gave thee this authority within our incorporation? Saint Paul says
indeed, every knee shall bow, etc. But we among our selves have concluded, that
that place Phil. 2.10. is meant of the knees of the soul. What shall the Vicar
do in this case with his rationibus cogentibus? If he tell them the ancient
Fathers expound it of the knees of the body, as well as of the knees of the
soul, or of spirits, or devils: and that according to the plain Text of
Scripture, and doctrine of antiquity, the Church has ordered that the knees of
your body shall bow, as well as the knees of your soul to that JESUS that is a
Savior of the body, as well as of the soul, this is new doctrine to them.
Therefore now there is no remedy, but to take him along with them into
Mars-street, and after they have benched themselves say, May we not know what
this new doctrine, whereof thou speak, is? for thou bring certain strange
things to our ^ares: we would know therefore what these things mean.
Doubtless, this is the liberty this man seeks to thrust into their hands. But
thanks be to God, there is not a Corporation in this kingdom, I persuade my
self, but has more grace, piety, discretion, and good government, than to
lend an ear to such idle Dreamers, that (as Saint Jude says) defile the
flesh, Jude 9.
despise Dominion, and speak evil of dignities, and by the grace of GOD they
will be wiser than to be bewitched with the charms of his commendations of
discreet, and modest men, who does but seek thereby to praise them into
Innovation, by cunningly applauding them to be far from any humor of
Innovation. They therefore in their discretions, and wisdom, will think fit
in matters of the Church to guide themselves by what they see done in the Kings
Majesty's Chapels, and in Cathedral, and Mother Churches, and to order
themselves humbly, and piously, according to the godly, and wholesome Canons and
constitutions of their Mother the Church; that so from her, and her Governors,
and from the Kings most sacred Majesty, they may, to their comfort and
commendation, receive the commendation of modest, and discreet men, and such as
are far from any humor of Innovation: and let this subtle Innovator, with
his popular devices, go by, who with Judas of Galile, and boasting Theudas
seeks, with feigned words, and deceitful speeches, to beguile simple, and
well meaning souls, and to draw much people after him. But by reading of the
holy Scriptures, which now (GOD be praised for it) almost every one with
Timothy knows of a child, they understand what befell such seducers, and
their followers, and therefore they have no list, either in piety or reason to
follow them, Acts 5.36.
for they, as many as obeyed them, were dispersed, and brought to naught.

To conclude; I desire to make any sober man, and endued with common reason, my
judge, whether he would think that, the Lords Archbishops and Bishops, and the
whole Convocation house, men of singular wisdom, piety and learning, (as
their years, breeding, and education gives them,) should be at so much
trouble, and charge to sit so long together, to consider of the state of the
Church, and to consult with the Kings Majesty about the same, as by the words
in his Majesty's Writ may appear, and then to devise and frame Canons and
laws useful, and necessary for the good, pious, and peaceable Government
thereof, and that the Kings Majesty also, according to his supreme power in all
causes Ecclesiastical as well as temporal, should give his royal assent
under the broad seal of his kingdom for confirmation of them, as all Princes,
and Monarchs have done in the first six general Councels; if after all this
is done, all such their Laws, and Canons so made, and established, should be
turned into Tennis Balls for Vicars, Parsons, and Parishioners to toss, and
bandy up and down, and question at their pleasure, and not to have them
executed, nor allowed, before they be maintained rationibus cogentibus? I
believe otherwise, but that I leave to whom it concerns.

There is one thing more which I cannot choose but touch upon this Author for.
For me thinks that modesty and discretion, which he commended in the Alderman
of Grantham, he has not reserved for our commendation in himself. For thus he
twitteth the Vicar; The Communion, you (out of the Book of fast 1. of the
King) are pleased to call Second Service.

In my poor opinion, modesty and discretion might have taught him to have
forborne such petulant language. Surely the man could not but know, but that
the book of Fast was not compiled, nor ordered to be read publicly in every
Congregation, without the appointment of the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, nor
without his Majesty's gracious directions, and royal Confirmation thereof; and
if the Vicar having such authority for his warrant, do call the Communion the
second Service, me thinks in common discretion, and ordinary civility, he
ought not to have a Ieere cast upon him, by a bettter man, than this Secretary
can be: for the reflection of the jest and scorn (you are pleased) transcends
the Vicars head quite and clean, and strikes hie, and aloft upon the tops of
hills and mountains, from whom he may be taught to learn to keep better
distance.

Well, the Vicar is pleased, having so good authority, to call it the Second
Service: but this man is not pleased. Truly I cannot but pity the Vicar, that
has met with a man so hard to please. When the poor man did president himself
in his actions, and setting the Lords Table Altarwise, by the Kings Chapel,
and Quires in Cathedralls, the man is not pleased, he will upon Vmbrages have
it ordered otherwise, if this feigned Letter deserved any credit: when the
Vicar performs the reverence appointed by Canon to that blessed Name of Jesus
he is pleased, So it be done So and So, with such limitations, and hedgings,
and enclosures, as the canon never allowed or thought on, except it meant to
build with one hand, and pull down with another: otherwise he is not pleased.
Now he does but conform his speech to such language, as he hears used by the
chiefest and most eminent personage in all our Cathedral Churches, and by the
Kings Majesty, our supreme Governors in all things belonging, or in any wise
appertaining to matters of the Church, whether they be Rites or Ceremonies,
words, or actions, and yet he is not pleased. He will have his Vicar neither
do, nor so much as speak as they do, but he will be displeased, and lend him
a smart jerke for so doing.

What, trow you, has put the man's mouth so out of taste, that he can in no sort
relish what was done by the Archbishop that then was, and what he did by his
Majesty's authority that now is: whom God of his infinite mercy long preserve.

I hope he has more learning, than to conceive the Second Service to be a new
thing, and so to be ashamed of the name. For besides the Liturgies of Saint
Basil and Saint Chrysostom, and others used in the Greek Church, and those
that have been used at all times in the Western Churches, wherein he sees
with his eyes, both the First and Second Service distinct one from another: He
may also observe the use hereof in the Primitive Church, if he please to
consult with Saint Justin Martyr, Tertullian, Origin, Saint Cyprian, Saint
Ambrose, Saint Augustine: or read a Council, which he will not deny but he
is bound to read, Council. Nicen. Can. 11.
the Nicene Council; and he shall perceive there the first, and second
service distinguished one from another. He shall find one service wherein
there was sola Oration: he shall find a Second service wherein ^^

And I looked, and there was none to help; and I wondered that there was none
to uphold. Esa. 63.1. But those mine enemies, which would not I should reign
over them, bring them hither, and slay them before me. Luc. 19.27. -- Vnum vos
poscimus omnes.


