The precepts of war, setforth by James the earl of Purlilia, and translated
into englysh by Peter Betham.

1544.

Though peace be a virtue, that virtues do the excel.
yet may thou boldly fight, in a just quarrel.
The Epistle. To the right honorable sir Thomas Audeleye knight, lord
Audeley of Walden, and lord Chauncelour of England, Peter Betham wishes
health and co^tinuaunce of honor
SOme men peradventure (right honorable lord) will think me blame worthy,
because I have presented this translation to the hands of your lordshyppe
rather then to some actyue and valyau^t captain, whose prowess is wytnessed
by his martial affairs, and bold enterprises, which also is thought in some
men's opinion by duty to have the patronage of all those things that
appertain to knyghthode and chiualry. Even as Law wyghtes and Philosophers,
which take to their selves ye perfect knowledge of things, are judged among
all other men (although there be some men, whose judgment is no less
allowable) most worthy, of whom in matters doubtful, we ought to ask
counsel, and those men ben esteemed unwise which debate such causes with
other, then with them, sith they have professed that knowledge: Yet to those
which weye things by the outewarde face, breuely I will make this answer. Like
as there be many men which although they have not their beerdes long, their
locks lyinge on their shoulders, ne be clothed with the robes of a philosopher
yet for their high knowledge, they are not unworthy that name. Even so there be
among noble men, that be worthy to have the praysefull name of a capytayne,
not for their broad shoulders, out set breasts, and knyghtlye feats: But for
their wisdom, conueyaunce, and watchefull foreseinge of all such things,
which by any means may anoie or ouerwhelme the state of the common wealth.
For the strength of the body is not to be matched with wytfulnesse and fine
understanding. And that city is not best defenced which is inuyronned with
strong walls, and warded with fortresses of bulworkes, trenches, and such
other like, but that which with wise counsaylours is proptvp and strengthed.

Also right honorable lord, like as Cicero which was chosen Consul in the
ciuyle and inward ruffelyng, by the free consent of good men, was worthily
called the father of their country, defendour of their city, and mayntayner
of their liberties, not for his valiantness in warrely deeds, and that he was
the graunde capytayne to lead the Romayne power against Catilyne, and his
most wicked fellows, but that through his endeavor and carefulle
dylygence, he saved the city of Rome from fire, the virgyns and wives from
rauyshyng, and the temples from spoiling, the Senators from slaughter, and
thoughtlesse for his own life, vanquyshed the cursed conspiracye of Catiline,
with the whole route of so many brainsyke hopelostes, which were alied unto
him. This was not done by his stout fighting, but by his dilygente
carfulness and sweet orations: by which he brought to pass all his
attemptates and affayers. Even so right honorable lord, you being chosen to
this high office, which by you is setteforth and honested, have both in
inward commotions, and outward wars, showed your endeavor to defend this
royalme, as well from the bloodsheddynge and slaughter of it self, as from the
entryes of forayne enemies, not that you did bear harness on your back,
lodge in the camp, and lead an army, but that by your advise and counsel,
such things have been decreed: such enterpryses fynysshed, and weyghtye
matters concluded, that this royalme has flourysshed, all things have luckely
chanced and our enemies on every part subdued. This your lordshyppes
wisdom under our most gracyous, noble, and soueraygne prince King Henrye
the tyght, by your sweet and pleasant orations, have opened and brought to
pass such things among other the honorable senators, ancient fathers and
worthy counsaylours of this royalme, which have auaunced the common profit,
enlarged the marches of this land, and brought under to this day all our
enemies. Wherefore the famous and worthy name of a capytayne in such one as
you be, rather then in any other is prayseable, in whom so many virtues be
linked: which you have gotten by paynefulnesse, paynefulnesse has purchased
you great renoume, renoume has auaunced you to honor, honor has made many
to follow you, which folowers with most praise, do tread the, footesteppes of
so ancient and wytfull a capytayne.

Furthermore if we call to remembrance the Greeks and Trojans, and search
which of them deserved greatest praise in that long battle (among whom the
feats of chivalry were most used) we shall sone se that wisdom had ever the
highest praise. For Ulysses both of Homere and other writers, was much more
praised then either was Achilles or Ajax, which both in strength passed all
other. For how many things were conveyed by Ulysses wisdom, which the
puissaunce of Achilles, the strength of Ajax, the fersenesse of Diomede could
never bring to pass, ne ones attouche Who was ambassadoure to Achilles?
Ulysses. Who plucked the Greeks from flight? Ulysses. Who caused the death of
Rhesus? Ulysses. Who was the destruction of Troy? Ulysses: which all were
done by wisdom, and not by strength of the body. For strength stryketh,
wisdom refrayneth, strength fears no perils, wisdom stays, strength is
rasshe and foolehardye, wisdom is bold and puissaunt, which alone does
shape and work all things past man's judgment, for which cause in the frame
of man's body she is set in the highest place Wisdom also is lykened to ye
goddess Pallas, which as well among the will les of ye gods as men's doings
does decise all things. This lady was of the greeks party, which ever was
at hand with Ulysses in all weyghty and dowbtefulle matters by whose help he
waded thorough owte all ieoperdyes, which might have been noyouse to the whole
army of the grecians.

This one lady does guide al magistrates as well in time of war, as of
peace. This lady in all commonweals does lift up one, to ben as a shynynge
star, and a pure bright glass, yt in one she may show forth her hye
gifts, as appears by one Annibal, which by wisdom did almost cast down
the romayne empire, break their force, and darken the renoume of the noble
Senators which being lords over all the world in strength could never be
matched with any forayne prince, but with this one Anniball whom wisdom did
guide. Which also did welknowe that wisdom would master strength.

Now right honorable lord, none vpryght reader can blame me, that wisdom is
so set alofte, and enhau^ced, which so much surmounteth strength, when
greater renoume, is due to the polytike counsaylour, then to the strong man of
arms. Which thing is daily seen in our wars, and in the noble capytayns
of this realm, whose strange sleightes and feats of war, if any man will go
abowte to bring together, and make a book thereof: he should plainly show
that the youth of England does so florysshe in warlye knoweleage that they
pass all other both Greeks and Romans to this day. Thus when the laud of
chyualdrye, does so clerelye shine in a wise counsaylour: I shall desire your
lordeshyppe to take in good worth this my simple doing, in which I have done
my diligence to content your lord ship and satisfy the nobilitye and ge^trye
of England, as well in the terms as in the sentences, whom I do most
hartelye wysshe, that this translation may please, the which to read theye
shall be the rather drawn, when that thing shall be taught here in lessons, the
which is showed to be done in deed, in ye book of Julius Frontinus, which is
translated by the well learned Morison a man of sweet and eloquent speaking, so
that the feats of war there done and told by hystories, do prove these
precepts of chyualdrye, for the most part in every place. That book is
worthy to be red of all the^ that be chyualdrous, and couette to win renoume
in warfare, which is with feate terms adourned, to the euerlyuyng praise of
the tra^slatour. I se it time to make an end, lest my epistle wax ouermoch,
yet I will be bold under your lordeshyppes license, somethyng to wander from my
first mattyer, and to speak a little of the translatours of this age, which
after my pore judgment do mar and misframe our english tongue, through
their terms vnnedefullye borrowed of other languages. For like as the carpenter
that goth abowte his work, does occupye for the most part his own
instruments, and has little need to borowe of any other craftesman: So I
think that all translatours ought to use the usual terms of our english
tongue, which of it self is rich and plentyfull and not to break without all
judgment in to the bounds of the latin tongue, to steal terms of it, as if
our english tongue had not in himself suffysaunce of words, to set fourth
all our speakynges. But such men as do unadvisedly desire other to^g terms,
would be taken (to my indgement) as authors of our words, thereby to enlarge
our language (which rather they do make poor and barrayne) so that many good
mattyers be dusked and defaced, with their new borrowed ynkehorne terms, and
the common people of England, do not understand the wrytynges ne yet the
speech of the^, fortheyr trycke terms of their own brayn shaped.

These men think all their own doings woorthye greatest praise when that but
some of them be well done.

Yet let no man thyncke, that I do damn all usual terms borrowed of other
tounges, when I do well know that one tongue is interlaced with an other. But
now to be short, I take them best english men, which follow Chauter, and
other old writers, in which study the nobles and gentle men of England, are
worthy to be praised, wha^ they endeavor to bring again to his own clennes
our english tongue, and playnelye to speak with our own terms, as our
others did before us, which men I could reherce by name, but that I should be
thought to flatter. The dead I may well praise.

Wyate was a worthy flower of our tongue, as appears by the mornefulle ballet
made of his death in English, which is most wyttye fine and eloquent.

Now ones again right honorable lord, I must beg a little pardon to make an
answer to some euylle speakers, which of nature enforced to dysprayse other
men's doings, will berke and rage against this mine enterprise, which am thus
bold to take marters of war in hand, when that I am no warrior But let
them bluster and spitte owte their poison words: learned and witful me^ do
know, that physicians and astronymers do come to their knowleage, more by
great study and reading of books with them self, than by the teaching of
other men: so I right honorable lord, chyfelye help by much reading of
books and markynge of the same, and partlye by the help of them, that have
been in wars, have (as I trust) not gone far amysse, as shall appear to
the gentle reader, whom I desire to report as he shall se. This said, I pray
god shylde your lordshyppe from al mischau^ce and continue your health and
honor to the comfort of poor suitors, and preferment of them that be honest
and virtuous.

In the month of Decembre, 1543.
Thomas Phayes.
Chyefest is peace, but if by extremity,
Thou be enforced to fight for thine own,
Learn here the science and acts of chyualdrye
Policies, and priuities, to many men unknown:
Whereby thine enemies may be overthrown.
In such a necessity shall thou never find
Such an other treasure: keep it well in mind.
* REX INETERNVM VIVE.


Fautes escaped in the printyng through ouermoche haste.
In the prologue, the first page, line. 15. read law wryghtes for law
wyghtes. The. 2. page, the. 19. line, for that be worthy, read many that be
worthy. The. 3. page, the last line, leave out (and) The. 11. padge, the. 13.
line, read mothers for others. The. 12. page, the. 3. line read matters for
marters. In the first Chapter. 2. padge, 4. line, leave out (not) The. 3.
padge, the, 5. line, read trustynesse for trustye men. In the same padge. 21.
line leave out (high). Chapter. 2. the. 7. line read this for his. Chap. 5.
line. 10. read lyghter for higher Chap. 7. line. 8. read abode for abide.
Chapter. 9. line. 10. read behauyour. Cha. 19. line. 5. read agreued for
agreed Cha. 21. line. 7. read do not stray for not straye. Chap. 24. line. 7.
leave out to. Cha. 27. line. 2. read not to be, for to be. Cha. 30. line. 4.
read recount for to recou^t Cha. 36. line. 4. read argument for agreement. Cha.
40. line. 1. read this law for law, the. 17. line of the same chapter, real
by manly for manly, leauyng out and in the same line. Cha. 45. line. 10. read
ever for never. Cha. 50. line. 6. read do with spedynesse, for put in
execution. Chap. 58. line. 10. read their voyage for voyage. Chap. 59. line.
1. read will give none, for will none. Cha. 61. line. 1. read vnwyllynglye for
wyllyngly. Chap. 65. line. 4. read those for these, the seventh line read se
for set. Cha. 67. for successed read surcessed. Cha. 72. line. 8. read
braggeth for brings. Cha. 74. line. 4. read conning for coming. Chap. 75.
line. 21. read province for proving. Cha. 77. line. 14. read flayne for
shame. Chap. 105. line. 6. read to constrayne, for constrayne. Cha. 109. line.
11. read name for men. Cha. 117. ye last line read badge for lodge. Chapter 124.
line 13 read bind them for bind Cha. 142. line. 8. read for ye most part,
staautes escaped in the printyng through ouermoche haste. ly. 9. read they be
brought, for be brought Chap. 143. line. 5. read whom for when. Cha. 144.
line. 19. for fynges redr fyngers Cha. 149. line. 15. read singular for siguler
Cha. 154. line. 6. read should for do. Cha. 157. line. 8. for coming read
co^nyng. Chap. 158. line. 8. read lay for lie. Cha. 170. line. 4. read
demeanor for demeanours. Cha. 194. line. 5. read won for join. Cha. 196.
line. 5. read discover for to disco. Chapter 1003. line. 14 for coming, read
co^ning
Fautes escaped in the second book.
In the. 36. Chapter, line. 5. read taking of demeanes, for take demeanes.
Cha. 38. line. 3. read woad for wood. Cha. 40. the last line save one, read
continuance for countynaunce. Cha. 41. line. 10. read search for seche. Cha.
46. line. 4. read foes for force. Cha. 47. line. 7. for one read upon. Cha.
51. line. 4. read vnmmanued for vnmaymed. In ye title of. 58. chap. for relyue
read help, line. 3. ye same cha. read weak for wean. In the last chapter
added of the translatour, line. 17. read of nature, for of our nature, line.
35. botye for both.
BEfore that thou begin to make battle, it is needful to take aduysement
ones and again, whether the cause and beginning of thy warmakynge be honest.
But yet that is not a suffycient cause to give battle, except for this
purpose thou do it, to live afterward peaceable, and in quyete, not willing
to sow and stere up battayl after battle, the which thing is both foolyshe
and cruel.

But if thine enemy can satisfy and content the by sorowfulnes, or else
otherwise it were wicked, cruel, and rather beastly than manlye, to make
battle against him, either for the vain desire to bear rule, or for the
covetousness of richesse. And so to destroy him by the swearde, whom gentle
words would have vanquyshed. When I speak of this sorowfulnesse, I mean that
which is unfeigned and without any doubt or ieopardy, that such wrongs
unpunished, should entise thine enemy, to offer semblable trouble, and
occations of displeasure. For the^ quycly and sharply punishment is to be done.
And if thou abide any hurt through his wrongfulnesse, by and by redress it,
and the people shall thereby well judge and esteem the. But if thou be not
afraid that some prince either stronger or egall in power, will make battle
against the (my counsel is) First to raise and styre up war against him:
because the greater boldness is thought to be in him that begins, then in
him which defends the assaults of his enemies. As to lead out thy
souldyours first after winter, tha^ to set them in array, and so to set upon
thine enemies, is very profitable. By which means, thou shall bring thine
enemies to quiet, and repentance, and eftsoon shall purchase peace, which
thou have desired. And so thy fear and dread is a just occation, first to
give battle, and the same to put away and end.

But one thing do not forget, although thou have a just occation, to begin
the fray, diligently to foresee what shall be the end. For every man may
begin war, but to cease and have an end stands in the conqueror his hand
Wherefore dyligentlye know thine own power, and therewith the strength of thine
enemies before thou begin battle. Know also thy friends, and learn who be
thy foes, and how great their puisaunce is. Also attempt and prove their
trusty men in other things, least when thou art troubled in thy wars,
sodeynlye with all their force and violence, they come upon the, and so do unto
the much hynderaunce. And brefelye think that all men may be thy friends, and
that the same may be thine enemies, and what is to be done if this or that do
chance. Remember also all things in thy mind which may happen in so doubtful
battle and daungerfull wars.

Moreover p^pare and make ready all things necessary for battle (so yt thine
enemies be not priuye to the same) before y^ bid battayl. For long p^parau^ce
brings ready victory, and so high charges and all other things necessary ar
to be co^sidred For if thou be like to have ye vpperhand, then to want money
and treasure, to be without instruments of war, and to lack provision is ye ready
way to purchase shame and sclau^der, after so hasty and unadvised enterprise
Wherefore truly it follows, and even so chances, that he which rashlye
begins battle, sone shall repent: and after with all humbleness, shall
desire peace, not without his great danger, and notable reproach.

2 To chose the captain.
Chose such one to be captane of thine Army which is borne of a noble and
valyaunte stock, and fearyng nothing more then shame and reproach, and is with
out all evil doings. For he that shall rule other, convenient it is that he
know to master him self. For where affection surmounteth, reason is
vndertroden and gives place, without which men be me^ apparent, and not in
deed. And therewt comely it is, the captain not to be defamed with lecherye
and coueytousnesse, which be vices chefelye to be eschued and abandoned. For
these two detestable vices bring forth diverse effecteis. Lechery forsooth does
shame the good fame of the capitaynes, to run in disdain of friend and foe,
and therewith causes the whole Army, (which is much worse) to follow his
fleshlye uncleanness, through which the whole Army with the capttayne is
unapt to battle, and faynte strengthed. And when they do apply such
wanton pleasures, and give them to Venus daliau^ce, then they forsake the
feats of Arms, and despyce the manlye wrestlynges of Mars. For his goddas
does destroy the courage of ye mind and wastes the strength of the body, and
brefely where luxurye raygneth, no virtue will appear. Such enimitie, such
hateful spyte is betwyxt virtue and unclean lechery, that no loueday, no
hope of peace is at any time among them.

But that captain which is covetous causes his souldyours, which been of
them selves bold and ready, against al dangers, to give back, loath and
strange, to put them in ieopardye, or go upon any perils, either for the
praise of their captain, (which is hateful for his nygardnesse) or else to
get the victory when they perceive their labor to be spente in vain, trustyng
no reward for their pains and daungerfull attemptes.

But what shall it need to speak of all, when these two vices be the spryngwel
and heed of al myschefe. Moreover chose the such a captain which is luckye.
For some be so unhappy through unkind fortune, that their chance is to be
vanquysshed, although they have a great nombre of souldyours, and power of
men. Therefore luckynesse is to be wisshed in a good captain, which from his
youth has been in warfare, under a good captain, and praised for keeping his
array, always hyghly taken and regarded of the whole Army. The which also has
showed many tokens of wyttynesse and in the feactes of Arms pressed and redye to
try mastryes, felowlyke in apparel, whose affairs have always been guyded
by reason, which has not also assayed any things rashly. I was purposed to
have written more of thoffyce of a captain, but at large in the other two
books I am minded to write thereof. And in many Chapters ensuynge, I will note
and show the manners and co^dycyons of capitaynes.

3. Of sufferaunce in war.
Many things are to be suffered in war, which were to be looked on, in the
pleasant time of peace. For it is not expedient out of hand to revenge all
iniuryes and displeasures. But to differ the punishment to the end of the
battle, dissemblyng such injurious deeds, left at that time we purchase so
many our enemies, yt we be not able to bear their malice and force. For it is
a light thing to stir up battayl, but to leave of with glory and renoume, is
an hard thing. And little sparks (which nothing we regard) sometime kendle a
great fire.

4. Of the stout and valiant mind of the captain.
A prouide^t captain and expert in the knowledge of war, will never rest
neither in his victory ne yet subdued, but in all states, will bear him self
most stoutly, by which means his enemies shall dread him, whether he have ye
upper hand, or vanquished, and shall think him both there and away, to work
and imagine their discomfiture. Whereby it shall chance, such a valiant
captain either to purchase honest couenauntes, of peace, or else prayseable
victoryes of his enemies.

5. Of the siege and assault of a city.
All cities and towns for the most part be more wynable on the one side,
then on the other. Wherefore cause all ye trompettes to blow up on yt side
which is better defenced, whereby thine enemies called up, and feared by the
noise of the trompettes, may run thither, leauyng the other side of the
city which is vndefenced, and so the assault shall be the higher. For
undoubtedly with little slaughter we may scale and clymbe upon the walls, where
few be leafte to defend, and leest head is taken. Also a little nombre, is
despised of many, and shortly ouercomen. But thine enemies gladly will leave
the part defenced, if that they se the weaker and vndefenced part to be
assaulted. Wherefore my counsel is to take the strongest part of thine at mye
and assault the side of the city defenced, and so leest doubted, although ye
captain may use his own advise according to the situation of the place, and
nombre of his enemies.

6. Of a great army of our enemies
When the nombre of thine enemies is great, then my advise is, to increase
thine Army, with maryners and shypmen: if thy Nauye be nere at hand, or else
shortly to pike some new band and garrison of men, to match thine enemies both
in power and no^bre of soldyours. For many ben a great fear to few, and the
multitude of enemies, will dismay a little army. But when suddenly they shall se
thine Army renewed, and well furnysshed, their braggyng courage shall fall,
and they will not match ne auaunce forward, with such gladness, as they
would have done, if thy nombre had continued the same: Wherefore an expert
captain will remember, (sparyng for no costs) sodeynlye and at a tryse, to
renew his Army. Whereby he may be either egall, or exceade his enemies in
strength and nombre of souldyours.

7 Of the reproach of the captain that houseth his Army in the somertyme.
That capytayne is worthy great blame and sclaundre, which lodges his Army
in houses in somer time, when ye feats of Arms and martial affayers, are
chefely to be put in ure. And what other thing is it (I swear by Hercules)
when your soldyours take up their lodgyng and abide in winter time, then to
make them unmeet to battle, and insufferable of all labor. Therefore let the
captain diligently provide, that his Army do not sloudge in slothful
idleness, but wont themselves to daily labor, whereby they shall take all the
time of warfare, to be a game and sport. For what is more then custom, which
causes al intolerable and hard pains, to seem light, easy and gentle.

8. To spy and search a place to fight in
The captain, before that he join in battle, or fall in handegrypes with
his enemies, ought to view with his eyes (which be sure and faithful judges)
the place where the fight shall be, and thereby shortly he shall perceive, what is
profitable for him, and what no, and how to set his men in array, and order his
battle, and how to work by pollicye and craft, and whether his enemies can
work any wyles or craftye sleyghtes against him. But a wise captain will
remember, that he do not carry his hooste to the field, before that his spies
and scoutewatches have surely known, that his enemies do not lie in wait,
but that all things be sure and faulfe.

9. Of the apparel of the captain.
The captain ought to be felowlyke in his garments, whereby he shall purchase
the favor of the commons. And declare his humbleness, avoiding the name of
arrogancy. But in his virtues let him surmount all other. For it becomes him
that coueyteth to bear rule, even as he is higher in dignity and honor, so
to blemysshe all other with his virtues and gentle behauyou. Otherwise he is
unworthy to be called a captain which is more blameworthye then his
soldiers, and whose doings be much worse.

10. To know the manner and co^dicio^s of thine enemies before thou make battayl
To fight hand to hand with thine enemies, except thou surely know their manners
before is very daungerfull: and great damage thereby may chance to thy army.
For a captain expert in the knowledge of war will never make battle,
before he know the manners of his enemies. For how many diverse countries
there be, so many diverse sorts of fyghtyng there be. And against euerychone
dyuersely we must set our arraye, and be stowe our strokes. And so a prudent
captain will advise and head with him self, the harneys, horsemen, and
foteme^ of his enemies, and beside that will rekon with himself what is to be
done, and what things ben expedient.

11. Of the Germaynes and Frenchemen.
When thou have battle with the Germaynes and Frenchemen, prolonge the time,
before thou come to handestrypes. For their bodies be nesshe, and vnpaynefull,
and by hungre and thyrst much weakened, that for werynesse, they can neither
stryke other men, ne yet defend themselves. And thus whom by strength thou
can not overcome, by pollicye and craft, thou shalt subdue. And by this
sleygth, the soldyours of the East part shall vanquyshe and destroy, the
Italious men, both strong and better harnessed then they be.

12. Of sedicion to be appeased among an Army.
When any trouble or sedicion is in thine Army, the captain ought with gentle
and fair words to mitigate and aswage the fierce hertes of the soldiers And
when the contention is ones appeated, to punysh the authors of that factious
sedicion, or else to se^de them on some business, that the correction of a
few, may be an example to many, whereby (other thereby feared) will not be
bold to styre up and nourysh such tumultuous sedicion, lest they have like
punishment.

13. How to view the Army of thine enemies.
A captain which would view the camp of his enemies, must feyne and desire
peace. And under that pretense, send some of his souldyours expert in wars,
to search and advise the camp of his enemies, the ways to their pauylyons,
and in what part every captain does lodge, and how great their power is.
Then by night he may set upon them, and easily give a noble vyctorye. For it
is a light thing to put to flight and slay men unawares, and half deed in wine
and sleep.

14 Of peace to be p^ferred before battayl
A wise captain will not forsake any couenauntes and conditions of peace which
may turn to his honor and profit, although the mastrye be in his hands.
Lest fortune which now appears gentle and favorable, hereafter show her
self unkind and strange, and he yt eue^ now reioyseth as victour, shortly
after vanquished, may wayle and sorrow

15. Of trompettes and other clamours in an host.
When the host of thine enemies is nere, good it is, to command all the
fewellers to build their fyres, the tro^pets blow up alarm, all the host to
make an outcrye, and brefelye to fill heaven and earth with the noise and
sound of tro^pettes, and make all on a rore, wherewith thine enemies may be
afraid; and thy fre^des gladdened, taking example of Po^peius, yt through
ignorance, warned al his soldiers pryuily to go without any brute or noise
making: which thing was the destruction of all his host.

16. Of the rerewarde.
Let the captain set in the last ward good and strong men. For if that part
be kept hole and saulfe, ye rest of the Army may be defended: yea oftentimes
the victory by that ward, is atcheued and gotten because when other wards do
faint and wax feeble in fighting, this fresh and desirous to graple with their
enemies, fierselye will fight, and as soldiers pyked out of ye whole host,
will renew ye battayl more gredely, then the other before them, and be like to
ouercom their enemies weried with long trauayl and co^tinuau^ce of fight.

17. Of great cities.
Great, rich and welthy cities ca^ not stand long among them selves in peace
except they have some outward enemies. Wherefore such cities which be
enryched with great lordshyppes, and have yearly new maiestrates, do provide
to have some outward enemies, lest in long rest and idleness, they grow
to great, richesse and houge possessions: whereof all things that been ill
issue and spryng. When Carthage did with stand the people of Rome, then
thempyre did florysshe. But when that Carthage was onerthrowen, Rome wythered,
and fell to al kind of noughtye living. Wherefore what profit is in outward
fear, the thing does show himself.

18. In campyng thine Army what is to be done.
When the camp is measured, the captain ought to keep the stronger part of
his men in harneys, until all the fortresses and fences be finyshed. For it
happens oftentimes, when thine Army disordrely does wandre, in measurynge
of the camp, tha^ to be overcome of their enemies, and utterly destroyed. For
what great mastrye is it for an hooste harnessed and prepared to fight, to
encountre with thy men which ben vnharnessed, and bent to the measuryng of the
camp, and to chase them away, with most bloodssaughter. The which thing
euydentlye does appear by the slaughter of the Trentes done by ye Venetians

19. To keep thy friends.
When the capytayne neadye and poor can not be beneficial, and give rewards
to his friends, yet at the leest let him take punishment of their adversaries,
with whom they been agreed, for that shall be a great example and pattern,
that other will abide faithful and friendly, and therwyth will gladly
wythstande the wrongs of his enemies.

20 Of quycknesse in battle.
Castles and cytyes, with fortresses well defenced, ben oftentimes cast down to
ye ground by spedy quyknesse. Wherefore after ripe and quycke counsel
taking, it is profitable to use all spedynesse. For what goodness does ensue
of forwardness, experience does show, and men may playnlyse.

21. Of the arraye to be kept.
The nerest way to atchyue ye victory is to keep the soldiers in array:
wherefore the captain must warn his soldiers, under great penalties, not to
break their arraye, chefely when we make battle against the east country
souldyours. Who dylygently keep their arraye, and not straye out of order, if
they be guyded by some expert warryour, and others that be practysed in such
warly feats. For such men will be no less careful to look on all thiges,
then the graunde capitaynes, and will recover of fresh the battle again,
bringynge into arraye the whole host, sparpled and disseuered abroad.

22 Of a little multitude in a city.
Where a little band and company of men is in the city, my counsel is, to
co^ pass and inuiron^e them about garlandwyse, and hold them in fight both
day and night, incessauntly besiegyng them, that through werynesse, they shall
be enforced to give up. For who is so lustye and strong, that long can live
without quiet and rest, yea that is able to stand in fight. Wherefore the
capitaynes in the assiege of cities, must aduysedlye search, what company of
men be within the city, and whether they ben able to defend the city, day
and night, if he purpose to vanquysh them.

23 Of the hope and trust of sedicion.
When there is any semblau^ce or hope of any sedicion to be in that city,
which we purpose to besiege, my counsayl is, to leave of and differ thassaulte
for a time. For in such sedicion the city is like to be taken, with little
labor, and great praise. Therefore let the captain be watchful, to
foresee every occation, lest by his vnwarynesse, some mischaunce and damage do
ensue, ever observing this, not at any time to give battle, if any hope or
lykelyhode be, that wrathful sedicion is risen among the cytizins.

24 What is to be done in time of peace.
When the wars do surceasse, suffer not thy soldiers, to dispende their
life in idleness, but occupy them in husbandrye, that by the profit and
fructe thereof, thou may both nourysh thine army with wages and vytayles, and
by such exercise, to keep their bodies strong and durable. Also it shall not be
unprofitable at such time to overcome and fence the cytyes with trenches and
bulworkes.

25. Of feigned rumors.
Feigned rumors in time of battle, been both profitable and likewise
hurtful. For which cause a captain, which forecasteth many things, will
cause false tales and vain rumors to be spat pled abroad, in the stead and
place of true tidings: as well among his enemies, as in his Army. For
experyence does teach, feigned rumors sometime to do much profit.

26. Of the office of the captain.
Let never the captain command any greater thing, then he him self first
will take in hand. But let him at this time show himself afraid, and at
other times dissemble, to give back and fly. Through which sleygth the
victory does chance.

27 To know whether a city is thy friend or no.
When the captain does suspect any city to be his friend (me counsel is)
to desire and ask some great request, which would not be granted, but of a
frendlye city. And by this mean he shall plainly know their mind and heart
toward him. And this counsel shall so turn to his advantage and great
profit.

28 Of confidence and assured hope in battle.
Although the wars be very great, yet must not the captain despair. For
the chance of battle is doubtful and uncertain, whose end does not answer
to the beginning. And in that time lady fortune, now does show her self
gentle and bonaire, now cruel and churlish, sometime fauourynge this part,
efte that part, after her own pleasure.

29 Of the situacion of the city to be searched and known by the captain
him self.
A captain ought to behold with his own eyes the situacion of the place,
before he come with his host to besiege it, or make any assault thereto. For
more ease it is to assault the city on one part, then on an other. Wherefore a
witty captain will view and mark the situacion in every part, and thereby
know which part of the city may most easelye be besieged.

30. Of liberty to be kept and increased of all men.
A wise captain will not change the liberty of towns which he has
subdued, but rather increase and keep them saulfe. For nothing there is, that
sooner shall entyse and allure the captyues, to love the, and forget their old
lord, then to se their libertyes and priuyleges untouched, in which men set
all their felicitye, and for which no reasonable man would forsake to suffer
most cruel and fearful death.

31. Of the doubtful coming of thine enemies.
When we be in doubt, on what party our enemies will set upon us, and so we
know not how to order our army, and set our arraye, best it is to set our
array foursquare. For in that sleyght is most sauftye and syckernesse, and so
no part shall be vndefenced, whereby our enemies shall be disceyued, which thought
to have commen upon us on the back side. By which policy either our enemies
shall be put to flight, or at the leest thine army shall be saulfe and harmless.

32. When the arraye of thine enemies is troubled and out of order.
When the arraye of thine enemies is broken, and they in great fear, the
capytayne must pursue with his most valyau^t warryours, before they recover
their selves, and be delivered from that fear. For if they take heart again,
hard it shall be without a great nombre and puisaunce of men to vanquysh them.

33. How to make thine army strong and lustye.
Keep thine army in rough and mountain places, to make their bodies styffe
and strong. For pleasant places, do cause weakness: wherefore souldyours
whether they be springalles, or ancient warryours, that long have sludged in
idleness, neades must be exercysed in rough places, that their bodies may be
strong and more durable, through their exercise in such rough and hyllye
places. For according to their exercise, so shall they be in strength and
valiantness. And this is the only mean to make our army strong and lustye.
The captain may sometime for their exercise, deuyde his souldyours and order
them in form and likeness of a battle. But he must beware of bloodsheddyng,
lest some discord and quarellyng, thereof do rise, which is the destruction of
an hole host.

34. A policy to be used when thy men do forsake the.
If any company of thy souldyours, of any evil mind and wicked purpose, do
forsake the, and goo to thine enemies, in time of battle, to the intent that
other of thy host be not amassed with their sodeyne departure: The captain
must publysh and noise, that thing to be done by his advise and counsel.
Thereby to deliver his company out of fear, and make them more redye to fight,
trusting the departure of their fellows aduysedly to be done.

35. To search and boulte out the counsel of thine enemies.
Send those that be wyttye, and there with expert warryours, which under
color that they have forsaken their company may spy and search all the
doings, endeavors, and counsayl of thine enemies, and the same to recounte to
the captain, which after that all thing is delated, and discussed, with the
wyttyer sort of his soldiers with hastye and quycke expedition will follow
the same.

36. Of them that be besieged.
They that be besieged, and set about with their enemies, that they can not
issue out of the place where they be, must show some token and agreement, yt
they have plentye of vytayles, and other thin ges necessary, to continue
thassaulte.

Whereby their enemies having no hope to win the city, may leave of and
retire homewarde. For by this policy and sleyght many have been disceyued.

37. What is to be done when two hosts do vex and pursue the.
If thine enemy have two Armies of men, and thou also other two, to with
stand his force (my counsel is) to pyke the chefest men that thou have of
the one party of thine army, and then with al speed to set upon the one
hooste of thine enemies, before they both come and join together. By this
pollicye Hasdrubal of Carthage was lost with all his hole host yea then
Carthage was destroyed for ever. And the Romans empire did florysh and stand.

38. A craft and pollicye to take a city.
If thou be not able to take the city by strength, and the siege seems long
(my counsayl is) to depart for a time, and stray this way and that way,
sometime nigh, and sometime aloof. And then suddenly come upon them. For by
such often styttyng and remouyng of thine army, thou shall dismay them, and so
to take the city

39. A place to increase thine army without great charges.
If when thou art far from thy cou^trye, thou must set forth mo men, my
counsel is to call together all the most worshypfull and rychest citezins,
there about dwelling, and command them both well horsed and harnessed, to
be ready at a certain day. And when all shall be assembled, will them to
prepare them selves ready, or else to appoint some in their stead, which are
strong and lusty. This policy Scipio Africanus used, when he made most
cruel battle against Carthage.

40. Of an wholesome law to be made in the city.
Establysh and ordeyne law in the city, that the captain shall be beheeded,
and lose his polle, if his army be over comen. So either shall he win the
victory, or else valyauntly fighting shall dye, deseruyng immortal praise.
Also he will be more careful to foresee all things, then if no such law
had been decreed, ne yet will he suffer his army ydelly to sludge, but he
will keep them occupied in daily exercise, oftentimes admonyshyng them to
remember their cou^trye law, which is either to kylle, or to be killed: to
slay or to be slain, therwyth warning them, nothing to be more prayseworthy,
in a good warryour, then manlye fighting and for to obtaynethe victory
fearing not to dye.

41. Of excess to be eschued.
Excess in apparel, meat and drink does make feeble the virtue of thy mind
and causes the strength of the body to decay. Wherefore wise men have
purposed, to fly mistemperaunce, as a pestiterous and deedly disease.

42. Of wantonness, to be cast of in wealth.
Let not the captain be wanton and proud in good chance and luckynesse, but
rather beware and remember, that in such luckynesse men fall to riot, to
their great reproach, and the utter damage of ye whole host. Therefore let
not the capytayne swell and wax proud in happiness, ne yet yield and be
discouraged in adversity but for ye time in both fortunes keep ane gall and
uniform state of mind.

43 To throw down villages and castles vndefenced.
In countries be many vyllages and castelles, which be not defenced at all.
Wherefore my counsayl is, to throw the^ down, and set them on fire, that
thine enemies may have there no vytayles, neother things necessary, to succor
them selves and their horses. First, if we do leave them standing, we give to
our enemies a great occation to trouble us, by war. Also it is expedyent to
waste all the fodder, and corrupt the fountaynes of waters (if there be many)
so that their coming toward us, shall be to their great charges and
anoyau^ce to the whole army. For a garrison of men, can not long soiourne and
tarry in one country without vytayles, and other things necessary for their
living.

44. How to purchase friends, and to keep the same.
Every wyttye captain ought earnestly to travail, to labor, first to get
friends, and long to retain the same. For by friends realms be mayntayned
and preserved, and great succor stands in them, if they be true. Such
virtue and force is in frendshyppe, which is the only nourysher of mankind,
and releue of sorrow. Wherefore worse it is for a capytayne, to be without
friends, then to lack treasure.

45. To abydesiege.
All things (yea, be they never so grievous) are to be suffered in a sore siege
before we yield ourselves to our enemies. For nothing is so praise worthy in
men, as unfeigned faith, the which ones being defiled, what is in those men
prayseable? Wherefore honest it is, for the^ that are besieged, to keep their
foretresses, to the end and extremity of their lives, and never to put their
bodies to most hard pains. For fortune many times does lift up men
unawares. Therefore do they abide in one mind and faith, that be besieged, and
give their bodies for the saulfetie of their lord. For a valyaunte man can do
nothing more worthy everlasting renoum: then to fynishe his life by keeping his
faith, and bounde^ duty.

46 when it is mete to fight by eruption.
It happens oftentimes for ye great assault of our enemies, to appoint our
selves suddenly to burst out. In which case, let every valiant captain know
yt it is not good to fight by eruptio^, but in extreme need. For yt kind of
fight is to be refused, but in great ieopardy and at low downfall, and when no
hope is leaft to defend our tents: or when our souldyours be whole weryed in
battle. The same thing is to be marked in thassault of cytyes.

47 To enterclude the passage of our enemies by fire.
Fire is a great succor and aid to an host. For when our enemies ben at hand
that without great danger we can not leave the tents (my counsel is) to
conueye woodde between both the hoostes, and to set it on fire, and then with
all haste to depart into some other places, better defenced. For the flame and
smoke will let the prospecte and foreseinge of our enemies, that they can not
sykerlye pursue and follow us: wherefore before that the fire be utterly
quenched, the captain may have space to goo far of, with his Army.

48. A policy to stop the flying of thine enemies.
When thine enemies do faster fly, then thou can well follow with thine
Army, then send forth thy horsemen, to let their flight, which may snatch up
and trouble the last ward, until the fotemen shall approach. For then the
battle more sykerly and egallye, shall be foughten and tried on both sides,
and the victory more easelye shall be gotten, without great loss and
slaughter of men.

49 How siege is to be laid to cytyes and castles, and of them that be
besieged.
My counsel is, when thou do be liege any city or castle, to cast
first a trenche, then bulworkes, and above that build many turrettes, that no
man can come out of the cyty, ne yet any man may have free passage into the
city.

Other ways you shall never take any city or castle which is well fortifyed.
For else they may call unto them outward aid and succor, and therewith may
certify and admonysh their lords and princes, in what estate they be, what
vytayles be in the city, and how long they may abide and continue
thassaulte.

And if thine enemies obstynatlye do defend the city, my counsel is, when
the city is ones taken either by sleygth or rendrevp, cut of the hands of
them that kept the city, so toughly that their grievous punishment, may be an
example to other, not so frowardlye to stand in their own conceyte, and
continue their assaults.

50. To avoid and escape traynes.
Traynes and wyles may be eschued as well by chaungynge of the place, as by
appoyntynge of capitaynes. For in time of rest men have opportunity, to inuente
wicked counsel, and the same immedyatly to put in execution.

51. Of hostages and pledges rather to be taken, then to fight in open battle.
Better it is, and more for thy saulfegarde, to take hostages of noble me^, and
so to have thine enemies to yield, and render up all their lands, then in
cruel fight to prove the doubtful chance of battle: which oftentimes is
varyable and wavering, and causes them to have the upper hand, whom ye would
have judged, to have been subdued. And then time it is, to take heed, when that
fortune does flatter us. For she is false and deceytfull. Wherefore let us
follow this common saying. Assured peace is worthy to be preferred, before
doubtful and hoped victory.

52. To stop our haven.
If thou wylt stop an haven (my cost sail is) to fill a ship full of
great stones, and then to drown the same ship, ouerth warte in the haven:
whereby other ships can not well arryue at any strounde, ne yet go out of the
haven.

53. To make hid and false dytches to betray thine enemies.
They that ccueyte to conueye and lead their enemies into couerte and hyd
dytches, my counsel is, to set a band of men nigh unto them in harneys,
which softely and privily may convey them selves into dytches.

54. To pass over a water with an Army.
If thou wylt pass over a water, that can not be waded, my cou^sayl is, to
drive an houge nombre of cattle into the upper part of the stream, by which
mean, the stream beneth will run more gently and still, and thine army may
have the more free passage.

55. To know if thine enemies be afraid.
If we perceive the stomakes of our enemies to quayle and wax faynte, it is
good, gredelye to pursue them, that we may either put them to flight, or else
utterly slay the^ before they recover their strength. It is the office of an
expert warryour to know when his enemies ben afraid. But the better to
learn the same, take this one lesson of me. If thine enemies often change and
pytche their tents, it is a sign and token of fear.

Wherefore a wise capitaynes part, is to assail them with bikerynges and rodes
to know if they dissemble, or else would train us in their trappes.

56. To constrayne thine enemies to fight in open battle, and come to hand
strypes.
If thou will constrayne thine enemies, to stand in fight against the,
although the place be vnegal and inconuenyent, my counsel is, to conueye
thine army to some of their cytyes or towns And so either will they suffer to
take their city, or else they will fight with the, and deal strypes.

57 A pollicye to stye.
Best it is for an host, that purposes to stye, to kyndle and build many
fyres, to fasten many helmettes, on stakes in the top of their tents. And
thus thine enemies being scorned, and brought into a double, thou may convey
thine army far of, before that it be known whether thou be in thy tents, or
fled away.

58. When thine enemies snatche up and destroy the last ward.
When thy men be snatched and disco^fyted in the last ward, my counsel is,
to set there the strongest men and best warryours. Otherwise thine army shall
have much harm, through the destruction of that ward. Also that ward is
not able to withstand the force of thine enemies, except it be sometime renewed
with good warryours. And by this mean thy host may freely pass on voyage.

59. Of the notable falsehode of the barbarous people.
A circumspect captain will none af fiaunce or trust to the cruel barbarous
aliau^tes. For many due profes of antiquitye, do plainly show, not without
experyence of the same, that no faith ne loyalty is in them. Which examples I
will ouerskyppe, desyryng to be short. They be men in shappe, but brutall
beasts in fearcenesse and crueltye, subtyl, and craftye, desirous and
thyrstyng man's blood in that one thing, passing all kind of wild and savage
beasts. Wherefore a wise captain will beware of their disloyalty, and
villanye, and will think him self never in saulfegarde, from their falsehode
and engynnes. I speak of the^ that be not Chrystians.

60. When few must make battle with many.
Best it is for a little host, which by necessitye must fight and make battle
with a stronger Army, to set upon the chief captain, and with all violence to
seek means to kill him: which being ones slain, thine Army either shall
atchyue the victory, or else depart with egall praise of that bickeryng. For the
heed being cut of, what strength is in the other members.

61. Thoffyce of the captain.
The captain wyllyngly must hear the complayntes of the souldyours, and
their guydes. But yfhe be driven and enforced thereunto, let him show him self
to take the thing in hand against his will. And by that means he shall
purchase their favors, and be taken as a father, rather then a captain,
whom the souldyours will have in great reverence without any fear or dread.

62 To forbear holy things.
The captain ought to command his men, to refrain and forbear from holy
things, under a great penaltye. Lest other his affaiers (the more vnluckelye
for such things) do chance, and God be enuyfull to us as well as man.

63 Of the capitaynes liberality when the battle. is won.
The captain ought bountifully and with a pleasant countenance, to reward
his whole host, after that the vyctorye is atchyued. That his souldyours by
such rewards enlarged to them, may henceforth be more redye and glad, to
enterprise most peryllous dangers. For a faithful army will swallowe up
all parylles, before that so lyberall a capytayne, should have any shame or
reproach. Therefore yt capitaynes must in such case show them selves large in
rewards, with which not only me^, tut gods also be wonderfully reconcyled. Also
let the capitayrs remember to setforth the doings of his soldiers with
highest praise, using some oration, eftsoon gyuing the^ immortal thanks for
their manfull valiantness in that battayl: declaring al things to be done
according to their loyal duty and allegeaunce.

64 Of reproach to be eschued.
A wise captain ought to warn his soldiers, to regard and wey nothing
somoche as their good fame. For who would desire the fruition of this life, but
rather miserable death, to have his name stained with cowardyse. Therefore the
captain ought to inform his whole army that they regard their name, before
al other things. By this mean he shall have his company fearig nothig more
tha^ shame very desirous of praise, and ready in all perils, so that he
shall take none enterprise, ne high affayre in hand, which shall not chance
to his mind and will.

65. Of the capitaynes office in ioynynge of the battle.
The duty and office of a good capytayne, is to come into the forewarde and
front of the battle, in the ioynynge of the hosts, to succor these
companyes yt begin to stagger and faynte, and furnysh them again that be
discomfyted. It is fearful to his enemies to set the captain in the
foreward at the first ioynyng, and to his own men an hartyng and boldness.
But let not him long tarry there, but return to the other wards, and know
what things they lack, and what may be profitable to them, and what noisome,
ever bryngyng fresh and new men, for them that be wounded, therwyth
strengthenyng the forewarde, with pyked champyons, which be most valyaunte and
best practysed in trauayles and feats of war.

66. How to entreat thine enemies, the vyctorie obtained.
The duty and office of a polityke captain is, after that the battle is
won and the vyctorie ones atchyued, to save their lives that have not ben very
cruel, and over stubburne. For what can be thought more ungentle, yea more like
to the cruel and fierce brutall beasts, then without any mercy and
meekness, to handle thine enemies. A captain undoubtedly of such
conditions, shall kendle the minds of all men against him, that they had
leauer to suffer all things then to be under his rule and governance and
prove the chance of battayl, then to yield them selves to such a cruel
monster. Wherefore let every captain be gentle to his souldyours, vsyng all
means to keep them bounden to him, partly by praysynge their valiant deades,
sometime rewardyng them lyberally, remembryng this, where leest ieopardy is,
there to use his power with like descretion, lest he be mocked, that in such a
little business, he does use his mayneforce and puisaunce. For that captain
is judged rather to be foolysshe, then wise, that uses more fierceness, then
is needful. Therefore a wise captain will considre the time and cause, and
not follow his anger, the compagnion and marowe of cruelnesse.

67 To keep leage and promysse of peace with our enemies.
Whatsoever leage of peace the capytayne shall make with any city, king or
prince, honest it is that he keep the same steadfastly, and that he do not
slyppe from it, or show him self disloyal, for any displeasure done to him of
his enemies. For how much is that captain worthy to be regarded, whose
faith is attaynted, and whose falsehode, is disdaynfull to every man? wherefore
not only to our friends, but also to our enemies, faith is to be kept, and
promyses are surely to be performed All wise capitaynes have done this. Yea
Scipio Africanus, in the time of truce, with the cytizins of Carthage, moved
diverse ways, and sufferyng many rebukes, successed to revenge his wrongs,
both for the dignity of the Romayne people, and also for his own honor,
willing to keep his faith of peace, otherwise then the citizins of Carthage,
men notable for their falsehode, did perform toward him, knowing traynes
and deceiptes to come rather of a seruyle nature, then of honest mind and
noble heart.

68. Of the captains office in accomplyshyng al things.
The office of a careful captain, is to watch, to be spedye, to go about al
things: not plucked away for any sleep, pains, or other pleasures,
therwyth redye day and night, to seek all occations to noye his enemies, and
to relief his friends, which must spare for no money to know the endeavors of
his enemies daily, yea if he can every hour. By faith full spies, shortly he
shall know that, if he will freely reward them, at the beginning, and then
after lode them with greter promysses. This is the nerest mean to avoid
hynderaunce, and discomfiture of our men, and the best pollicye to get the
mastrye.

66. When thine enemies army prepares passage over any water.
If thou have pytched thy tents nygh to any ryuers side, and thine enemies
would have passage that way, suffer the^ freely to pass by, dissembling fear
and flight, and when part of their army is passed over, then set upon them,
with all thy puisaunce. For at such times, the victory is most easily
gotten, when thou do fight against part, and not with the whole Army. But
spare not to dyscomfyte them that be passed over, and also to stop and keep
back those that be on the other side.

70. When thy souldyours ben astonyshed and fearful.
A captain that is redye to fight, and perceyueth his Army fearful and
astonyshed, ought to refrain for that time, feynyng one cause or other, that
his purpose is so shortly changed. For fear is the ready way to lose the
victory, when on the other part boldness and sure trust to over throw all,
do cause worth ye vyctories. Fear also causes much staughter, of thy men.
Therefore a wise capitayn will not issue, with his Army toward his enemies, for
fear of discomfyture, when his men be so hertelesse and cowardlike, but will
forbear for that time, and use all means to pluck yt fear out of their
minds, finishing his orations with this conclusion: That the vyctorye is in
their hands, if without fear they will bolden themselves to match and
encountre with their enemies.

71. When scarcetie of vytayles is among our enemies.
When our enemies lack vytayles, and suffer great scarcity of all things,
best it is, to withdraw ourselves, and utterly refrain from battle, that by
famyn our enemies may sterue: And then we shall get a noble victory, without
blood sheddyng of our souldyours. For an Army besieged will attempt all
things, rather then to be famyshed. But a paynefull captain, in all things
consydryng the commodity of his hooste, in such case will not give open
battle, neither for iniuryes of his enemies, ne yet for the lauash words of
his own company. Not consydryng and weyinge before, the end of the matter,
as it becomes a wise man.

72 Battle is not to be begone but of necessity and constraynte.
Battle is never good to be begone, but either of urgent necessity, or else
of great opportunity. Although some princes shortly ben entysed to make
battle, when any light occation shall serve, and yet they be not trauayled in
knowledge of war, ne do perceive the slyppernesse of fortune, which for this
time brings herself very favorable. To thinte^t she may overthrow and
cast into myseryr all her adherentes: whyich thing Marius the Romayne emperor
did well know which after he had twyse driven king Bocchus to flight, and
done much slaughter, upon his men, yet he denied not to stryke truce with him,
although many of his petycapitaynes earnestlye bralled and grudged against
that deed of Marius which did remember the bryckelnesse of fortune, that at
her pleasure, lifts up the oppressed, and treads under ye victours

73. To refrain from battle before that we have devised and laid our
traynes.
A watchful captain will beware to make battayl, before that he have laid
and covertly conveyed his traynes, which be the chefest cause of the victory:
without which (for the most part) Annibal never gat any famous victory. For
when the Romans and the Carthaginenses did join together in battle, in
open and plain field, the Romans ever prevailed, and gat the vpperhande,
wherefore a wylye captain will chose a place, to in trappe and betraye his
enemies. For by such traynes he shall conquer them easily, and otherwise
perchance he shall be shamefully discomfited and oppressed.

74 What is to be done, that our enemies may be persuaded, their captain to
be slain.
When the hosts be joined together, and god Mars guydeth al, then use this
pollicye, to cast thine enemies in fear. Send some soldier, coming in
their language, which may sown and cry with a loud voice, that they do fight
in vayn for their chief captain is slain. This must be done in that part,
where the capytayne is not. For there the souldyours will be more light of
credence, and sooner in fear. Yea, and for this cause chefelye, that battle
brings this ill with him, that noman is there borne, or waxes to any
stature, but many be slain, yea the stro^gest and most deliver men of all. By
this mean therefore sone they do believe the rumor, and be put in fear, which
if it abide, causes the puisaunce both of the mind, and the body, to fall and
faynte. And they be ready to retrace, offering them selves to be slain, like
beasts.

75 To keep whole and saulfe territories and towns.
A foreseing captain ought (yea provoked to many injuries) to refrain, and
not to wast such towns and territories as he purposes to have under his
dominyon and rule. For by that mean he shall purchase the favor of the
countrymen and by such gentleness, he shall escape the name of cruelty. For
certes the men of that prouynce, will think that that chief captain does
favor them: when he does forbear to dispeople and waste their towns and
fields, and does not appear, to strive for their goods and richesse, but
for the empire and lordshyppes. For no man does doubt that realms be
mayntayned and nouryshed by ye only love and obeysaunce of the subjects, and
not by any Arms of men, or rich treasures. Therefore let the captain
command all his soldiers to use no fierceness in that prouyng, which
entendeth to subdue, but to dismiss the noble men and citizins that be taken
captyues freely, and with great gifts, vsyng all means to crepe into their
favor.

76 That thine Army is to be lodged and kept in the marches of thine enemies.
Keep thy host in the borders or pale of thine enemies, for any thing, and
there puruey vytayles for them with all dyligence, sparynge thy friends. For
when thou do lodge thine army, in their cou^tryes, or nigh to their camp,
thou do break their heart, and much discourage them: eftsoon auauncyng and
encouragyng the stomakes of thy friends. In example whereof, Annibal the chief
capytayne of the Carthaginenses, does teach what profit it is to lodge our
host in the camp of our enemies, which conducted and conveyed his army from
Hispayne by many ieopersome trauayles, into Italye, which wholly almoost he did
waste, by fire and sword, and conquered a great part thereof. Scipio also
knowing ye same policy, brought forth his Army into Afryke, and gat
Carthage by render and vpgyuynge.

77. What is to be done, when in winter we must fight.
Best it is in cold winter, to take mete before we go to fight. For good meat
and drink, be the nerest remedies, to refresh us, and put away cold. The
proffe of which thing, by ye slaughter of the romans at the stoude called
Trebea, is playuly showed where the romain power was almoost lost and
destroyed, ye cause where of was, that the captain brought forth his
soldiers which were willing to fight, fasting and vndyned: whereby the most
part of them clunged for cold, was rather by starknesse of meat, tha^ by ye
violence of their enemies shame. Therefore the captain must warely foresee, yt
in winter time he do not issue forth with his men before they be refreshed with
hot meats and drynkes. By this mean he shall ouergo and subdue his enemies,
which by long fyghtyng shall faut and fall down for hungre, when men
refresshed with hot meats, been hable to sustain battle an whole day.

79 Of pleasures to be eschued of the captain, and the host.
The invincible Army of Annibal, does planly setforth before our eyes, that
the pleasures of the body be hurtful to an hooste of men, to berefte them of
their wit, fierce and fell courage, which win teryng in Capua, lost their
strengthes.

For Capua is the mother city of wanton pleasures, so that Anniball did often
embrayde his men, saying: that that host was not his, which he had before. The
cause whereof was the pleasure of Capua whereby the lustye minds of the
souldyours were nesshed and made womanlike Therefore the capitaynes ought to be
careful, that their men be not vanquysshed sooner of pleasures, then of their
enemies Which thing were shameful and reprocheable. The city called
Spartana did turn the eyes of their cytizins from Asia, because from thence
did come all things pleasant, which be the deedlye poison of the mind, and
of the body. They also did well know, and were assured that men sooner do fall
to wanto^nesse from virtue, then they do forsake pleasures, and embrace virtue.

79. To chose a place to fight in, when the sun and the dust may be noisome
to thine enemies and in their eyes.
The captain ought to chose a place, mete and commodious to fight in,
prouydyng that the sun may be in the face of his enemies. And if the place be
sandye or dry, for the heat of summer, let him tarry the time, that the wind
blow in the face of his enemies, and on his souldyours backs. For the
coursynge of horses will raise up a great dust, which the wind will carye into
the faces of thine enemies, and blind their eye sight.

And this was the chief cause of the Romayne slaughter at ye town called Ca^ne

80. Of time not to be lost, or vaynely spent.
Nothing ought to be more regarded, of a pollityk captain, then time, which
entendeth to enterprise great things, worthy euerlyu yng renoume. For
sluggeshnesse causes both loss and shame. Wherefore he must endeavor, to
fynysh all things with care and spedynesse, after the example of Annibal of
Carthage which by great rewards, purchased passage into Ytaly, yt thesoner
he might finysh his journey, and end his voyage. The same thing also was done
by the romayne captain, which embraided and rebuked of his friends, that he
boughte his passage derelye, made this answer. I regard not my costly
iourneye, when I have redeemed the time, most dear to them that travail and
employe their wit about things weyghtye, and of great importance.

81. Of good and evil doings semblable to be rewarded as punyshed.
Yfthy men do any fault in thine Army, be slow in their punyshmentes. But
bountyfull in gyuynge rewards, if thou have knowledge, yt they have done any
thing galauntly and well, that other may be provoked and styrred up, at that
example to be redye at hand. For valiant and lusty warryours be more slow
when their welldoinges dye without rewards, or thanks. Therefore let the
captain auaunce and setforth himself, by largess the only virtue
laudable, to knytte and lyme his men in sure love, and the causer of all good
chances, without which all other things decay, as it ap peareth by the rich
king Perses, which nygardly gapynge after treasures, was berefte by the
Romans, both of his kingdom, and richesse, with most shame and sclaundre.

82. What is to be done when thy men be light and spedye.
He that has a light Army must pursue, and with speed trace after his
enemies, which be laden with harneys, and trouble them day and night, with
contynuall assaults, not sufferyng them quy etly to take their meat and
drink, but bring them into extreme despair. The which thing was well known
of Sertorius, an expert warryour and wise captain, which did so disquyet
Pompei, with his light harnessed men, that he brought him into vttermoost
distruste and discomforte. Wherefore it is a great policy to have light
harnessed men in thine Army. For so thou mayeste discomfyte thine enemies,
and they not like wise the. If therefore an Army laden with harneys pursue the,
thou do not need greatly to care, that thy men shall be oppressed by them,
when on the other party, thou may now and then assault, and kylle them,
when they be weryed, and yet quycklye thou may retrace back, and skape. It
is therefore profitable for the Italyons to fetch many horses out of the east
party, which be to them a great help to destroy their enemies.

83. That examples do help to encourage souldyours.
How much examples do move and encourage soldiers, Sertorius common of the
stock of Senators, and a valiant captain does witness, which when he was
not able to bridle and rule the fierce violence of the barbarous aliens (whom
then he did lead in battle) after that many of them were slain of the
Romans, and mo wounded, endeuourynge to comfort their sorrowful and heavy
hertes, and restore their old strength, caused two horses to be brought into
the open field of the whole army, of which the one was lean and the other
was fat and lustye, commaundyng also a strong man to pluck of the tail of
the lean horse, and a weak man to pluck of the tail of the fat horse. But
the strong man went about to pluck the whole tail away at one pluck, and
yt nothing auayled. And the weak man that labored to pluck away here by
here, made all bare to ye stompe. Then the army which did not know, what that
example did mean, had the thing declared to them of their captain. And so
by that wyttye example he had them ever after buxome, and obedient at his
commandment.

84. That nothing be done against the capitaynes commandment.
In the Army, neither meat ne drink ought to be taken, without the co^sente
of the captain. But all things must be done by his aduertysemente. By this
way their business shall more happily come to pass.

85. To refrain thy souldyours sometime.
It is a point of wisdom, sometime to hold back thy souldyours from
battle, which pollicye is not unprofitable. For afterward they would be
more glad to fight, and more fiercelye will go upon their enemies.

86. It is not time to fight when thine enemies do despair, and be careless
of their lives.
When we perceive our enemies, nothing to regard the pleasure of their lives,
but like brute beasts headlynge, to come upon us. It shall be profitable somewhat
to give place to their woodnesse. Yea although we be able to ouermatche them in
nombre and force of men. Also if they were closed and enuyroned on every side,
best it were to open way, and make a glade for them. For nothing is more folysh
and vain, then to fight with them that wyllyngly would dye.

87. What is to be done when we mistrust our souldyours to be afraid of the
sown of gu^nes and noise of them yt wayle.
If any likeness be, or mistrust that thy souldyours been afraid of the
gunshote and otherwise, whereby their hertes be like to fail, it is a good
pollicye, to stop their ears with some thing, and so with out fear they shall
fight, neither hearing the woeful waylynges of them that be wounded, ne yet the
noise of gunnes. Which pollicye will serve at these days against the Almaynes
that use a great nombre of gunnes in their armies.

88. What is to be done when thine enemies be most part archers.
When our enemies be for the most part archers, then set aganyst them, men
fenced with tergates, which sort of souldyours be sometime in the hosts of the
East party. And by this policy thine army shall be out of their danger.

89. What is to be done before the siege of a city.
Before we begin to lay siege to any city (my counsel is) first gently to
fall into some entreatie with them, and therwyth to provoke and entyse them, to
render up their city by large gifts, and fair promysses, chiefelye if that
people be naturallye desirous of riches. For the renoume of that captain
which without bloodsneddyng does atchyue the victory is vnmatche able, beside
that his men with fierce stomakes will adventure their lives for his sake.

09. Of rashness to be eschued of a captain.
It is a thing vnsittyng to se a capytayne or an army trauayled in wars, to
use any violence, or unadvised heedynesse. Such a braynsyke and hopeloste
captain, is worthy to be forsaken, lest that by his follye the whole host
be destroyed of their enemies like sheep.

91. A pollicye to take the fotemen.
If thou purpose to bring forth the fotemen of thine enemies, then cause thy
horsemen to retreat and give back, by little and little, dissemblyng fear and
flight that thereby the fotemen may be entysed to raunge and run abroad,
which keep them selves in strayte, hyllye, and roughe couertes, where the
horsemen can have no easy entry to them. By which mean the fotemen shall be
taken and slain.

92 A policy to diffeate and dispoynt the gunners, that they stand in no
stead and use.
The Frenchemen and Almaynes, at these days have in the^yr armies a great
nombre of gunners, which sore trouble and hyndre their enemies. Wherefore my
cou^ sail is, that army (which has no such souldyours) to set upon them
in most raynye wether. For at those times they be vnseruyable, and can do no
good.

93. Of the office of the captain in orderyng the affayers of his army.
The graund captain ought discrete ly to deuyde and point in good order, the
business of his army among his peticapi taynes. Whereby he may be dispatched
and depeched of al other business, but only to search the counsel and
attemptates of his enemies, and therewyth he may ouerse, that enery man
attentyuelye perform his work and task.

94. To refrain as well from the empire as from the treasures after the victory.
Our ancestors noble men, of godly living, thought it enough to overthrow
their enemies, and only content with the conquest, did earnestly refrain from
the empire, lest they should be judged rather to fight for vain richesse,
which be the very cause of deathfull battle, then for euerlyuyng renoume.

These were men, whose doings ar worthy to be fresshe and flouryshynge in the
memory of man, whose names are worthy to be spread immortal, in every age,
whose fame should not be shut up, or hid in any posterity. These may be
a patent and president, to all other, and the shynyng image of virtue, whom al
men may behold and look for the enforceme^t of their prowess, in such like
affayers. But alas the chrystian princes and kings, of this age, be of an
other sort and condition (the whyth thing uneath I can rehearce without tears)
which ought to cast down their eyes, with blushing countenance, when they
read or hear the Ethnike princes so far to pass them, in their doings,
and in all other kinds of virtue.

95. To constrayne thy souldyours to fight.
When thou do mistrust that thy soldyours will give back and fly, my
counsel is, to set at their back a strong garryson of men, which may
receive and take them at their retreat, and without mercy kill them, in the
sight of the other And therefore make this cry and proclamation among thy men,
that they fight manfully, puttyng no trust in runnynge away. Which opinion of
desparation is the only remedy for such toward.

96 To tame fierce people.
If there be any sort of people, that be fierce and noisome to thy men: Best
it is to take from them their horses, harneyes and weapons. For what can their
haulte froward, and churlysfhe stomakes prevail, without their weapons. And
this policy the machomete bishop, which is called the Soldane, does use. Or
else he could never keep under and tame, so many people with so few guydes,
and vile soldiers, except he had forbidden them the use of their horses,
harneis and other things.

97 To dissemble retreat.
Profitable it is sometime, to leave to thine enemies, thy pauilions furnyshed
and replenysshed with good wynes, and dayntye meats, and to dissemble to fly,
with thy host. And after at mydnyght unlooked for, to assail them, when they
be filled and engorged excessiuelye with wine and meats. For certes then thou
shalt find them dronken, and as deed, with such intemperaunce, that it
shall be easy, without manslaughter to subdue them. And this pollicye is
worthy to be remembered.

98 To pyke out for souldyours those which be paynfull.
When thou do master thy men, tha^ best it is to chose for souldyours, those
yt be hardye, strong and paynfull. For dastardes and nesh fellows ben vnfytte
for wars, when paynfull and bourlye fellows will become good warryours.

99. Of exercise.
The Romayne people (lords over all the world) have taught us by their
doings, to know what profit does come of exercise, which as well in time of
peace, as in war, did occupy their chyualerous men, in the feats of war.

They of right were called lords. For what science is that which can be kept
flouryshyng without exercise, when exercise does pass and overcome nature,
and also causes women unmanly, to be warlyke and bold? As appears by the
women called Amazones: which practisyng their selves in martial labors,
became princesses and empresses.

Therefore a skylfulle capytayne ought to drive his men to some kind of
exercise, lest they be astonyshed, when time is that they must fight. For this
word (exercitus) an host, has his name of exercise.

100. What is to be done, when our enemies be conquered.
If it shall be thy chance to overcome thine enemies, it shall be not
unprofitable, to put on their armature and apparel, and then with all speed,
to goo and assail their cytyes. For peradventure they being deceived through
the fashyon of the armatour, and apparel, sooner may be taken, and also
dismayed with the sudden chance, and being bare of al counsel, will yield
up their city, and their selves.

101. When few must fight against many.
Oftentimes it chances, that a little nombre shall be enforced to fight against
a great power. Wherefore this is my counsel, in such a case, that thou set
upon thine enemies by night, which contemnyng so small and weak a nombre, will
neglygently keep watch and ward, at which time by fortune being lady of
wars, which fortune is gentle to them that beseech and ensue her help, and
favors them, that do lose their own demayns, and after raven other men's
possessyon, thou mayeste dyscomfyte, and overthrow them. By this pollycye, the
fierce Carthaginenses, having three main hosts, reioysynge at the death of
the Scipions, and at the discomfiture of the most part of the Romayne
hooste, were in one night in Spain scattered, driven to flight, and slain
with ye Romans, that remained alive, which were a very few. Which
destruction of the citizyns of Carthage, was the chief cause that the Romans
kept still Hyspayne, after the unlucky death of ye Scipions. Therefore this
policy may be used in great need and peryllous danger.

102. when the souldyours must sleep.
Accustom thy soldiers to sleep with out straw, that by usage they may do
that wyllyngly, to the which necessitye shall sometime compel them. And what
does more in all things, then custom, which is the ladymastresse to put
all things in ure. For nothig can be thought sharp or paynefull, to them that
wont their selves to hardynesse. Therefore let men use sufferaunce, in new and
strange enterpryses, which does bring al things to a perfection.

103. To bring suspicion of treason among thine enemies.
If any of thine enemies which has good skyll in warlye business, do
disappoynte the of those things yt thou do attempt: It shall be profitable
for the, to bring him in suspicion of treason, with his prince, or his
citizyns, by some crafty deceit. As in these two examples I shall teach the.
The one is, when thou do waste other men's fields, that then thou forbear
purposely, from his, whom thou do couette to bring into suspicion of
treason. Which policy Annibal of Carthage used against Quintus fabius maximus
the Emperor of Rome, yea rather the conseruatour.

The other policy is, to send some of thy servants that be trusty and
subtle to him whom thou would bring in a ielousye of treason, to common
and talk with him as with his friends, which thing shall bring him both in
hatred and suspicion of treatorie, against his king, and cityzins. The which
feate the Romans used against Annibal. Or else the capitayn may invent,
beside these ways, some other craft consydryng the time and place as to feign
letters, in which some matter of treason, is contained and entreated of between
them, and provide that those letters may be conveyed to the hands of the
Emperor. But this stratageme neither I approve, ne yet greatly praise except
it were agreed of the hole destruxtion of thempyre.

104. Of outward help that he suspicious warely to be received.
They that make battle, are wont to require aid from their confederates, and
from their tributaries, or else to hyre strange souldyours, which thing often
times is the fall and destruction, of an whole Army. For when they have any
affyaunce, in their hired men, sharpelye beginning to fight, and rejoice as
vyctours, either shortelye the hired souldyours, do stagger, and stand at a
stay, to turn their face, or else the captain is driven to fight against
them with his me^. Wherefore do thou not require much outward help, but of
such whose faith thou do not suspecte. These hired and strange souldyours
were the destruction of the Scipions in Hispayne. For when they trusted and
affyed the Spaynyardes, the two brethren divided their Army, which being kepet
together, could not have been subdued. And shortly after through their false
helpers, both were slain, and all their men for the most part maimed or
killed.

105. Of discention to be swaged and appeased.
If any heinous discention be styred among thy souldyours, which oftentimes
may happen, for divisions rysyng among the^, my cou^sayl is, to set all things
in quiet stay, and bring them again to concord, co^strayne them by oaths
making, to forget such wrongs, and become good friends, and fellows again
co^maundyng also that from thenceforth, they do not show any token or
remembrance of that varyaunce, in deed ne word.

106. what time towns and cities may be despoyled and taken.
That captain is worthy to be hyghly praised of his own men, and greatly
feared of his enemies, that by his wit and conueyaunce goth about to take and
despoyle towns, without bloodsheddig of his army, and endeavors by policy
to conquer countries. That capitayn shall ever have his souldyours redye and
at hand, to ieoparde on things hard and dangerous: wherefore it becomes a
provident captain, to prove and assaye all things, rather by conueyaunce and
pollici, then by force of arms. For greater victoryes be won and gotten by
pollicye, then strength. Therefore by night, and when rain falls, cytyes and
towns are to be taken and despoyled.

107 How much the presence of the graunde captain does profit.
How necessary the presence of ye grau^d capitayn is in the battayl, al men
(whose wits be not on batfoulyng) may clerelye perceive and se. For the
souldyours, yea and their capitaynes, as well for fear of shame, as specyallye
for the presence of the graunde captain, will bestyrre themselves most
valyauntly. Many also for trust of reward, and chefely to purchasse the
Emperors favor attentyuely will exploite and furnysh all things. Oftentimes
also the battle slowlye and cowardly foughten, is renewed and restored,
manfully by the presence of the graund capityne, which does not leave any
feate or train unprovided, encouragyng his men now with me nacies, and now
with gentle and comfortable words. By which mean the souldyours will
contend one to pass an other in prowess, so that in the Emperors sight,
they may do some thing notable and praise worthy. Therefore nothing worthy
perpetual memory can be done, if the Emperor or graund captain be not at
hand.

108. Of the multitude of enemies.
If it chance, any great prince to be besette on every part with many
enemies, so that he is not able to bear their force and vyolence, mine advise
is, that with some he do make a leage of frendshyppe, and with other he do
entreat of peace, And so he shall escape and avoid ye daungerfull destruction
of his country. For when so many go about to get thy kingdom, it is a light
thing, to put of some of them, either with great promyses, or with money, and
chefely in this time, when me^ do not strive somoche for renoume, as they do
for riches, and all the world does gape for gold and silver.

109. Of enemies that be humble and treatable.
Sometime for a light cause, great battayles be begone among men: wherefore if
they against whom we make our preparau^ce, show them selves gentle and
tractable, it were not honest on the other party to show our selves
vnmercyful. For what can chance more shame full to any man in his life, then
to be noted and attached with tyrra^ny. What ca^ make us more worthy to be
lykened to the wild beasts, and also more does hurt the advancement of our
renoume the increase of our honor, and the well public of our realms, then
horrible tyranny. Wherefore such cruelty ought to be eschued, no less then
the wild beasts.

109 Of daungerfull and peryllous battayles.
Grievous and daungerfull battayles, do chance oftentimes among men.

For which cause a sage captain ought to provide for all things, with ernest
labors, and cheifely that he have old and beaten souldyours. For they
knowing the use of battle, do not fear naked swords, ne yet for strypes,
no although they take many deep wounds, they styfly will abide and stand to
all ieopardies for the keeping of their old men. Also they being practysed in
warly knowledge, can discern what is profitable and what is not, ever decreing
this with them selves, either to conquer and overcome their enemies, or else
manfullye to dye, which is the trne token and argument of a noble heart and
lustye blood.

111 It is mete for young men in their youth to practyse martial feats.
They which will become good and expert warriors, ought in their youth
dilygently to apply and follow ye same. For if a yongeman wont him self
quyely to bestryde and mount upon his horse, and likewise to light down, to
takevp his horse with the spurs, that he may praunse, trauerse, and flyng
with the heles, then surely he shall become a good warryour. Let him also
practice to shote in hand gunnes, and crossebowes, to cast darts, and
chargegunnes, to carry swerd and tergate, and sometime with his marrowes to
raunge like a man of arms, to resemble a battle: that when he comes The
youth of England does use in their playi^ges a warrelike sport and reseble of
bat tail, which is called England and Scotla^s
to man's stature, great experyence shall shine and appear in him. To such one
all labors, which be to other men intolerable, be light and easy, as to
lodge on the earth, to suffer famyne, and abide all other most sour and
trauaylous pains. Wherefore it is great profit to bring up youth in such
exercise, to harden them in greater things.

112 To increase the nombre of thine enemies by a rumor.
When a rumoure is sparpled, that a mighty host of men comes against the,
augment the same rumoure among thy souldyours, affyrmynge the same to be true,
by the report and acknowledgig of thine outryders. Thereby thou may be
assured with what stomach and heart they will buckle and bend them selves, to
withstand and receive such an huge nombre of enemies, if the nombre were so
great in deed. When they shall come to fight, and se the show to be abated, and
diminisshed, forthwyth they will gather their hertes, with much more force and
vyolence, which before doubtyng of the victory, now as victours will boldelye
fight, steppynge forward, with cherefull courage, to whom nothing is
ieoperdsome, against their conceit and opinion of the victory.

113 To prevent the wylies and traynes of a nobler prince.
When thou do fear (and not without a cause) the trappes and deceiptes, of
some noble man, lest that he will come upon the suddenly, and bereft ye of thy
kingdom, dispoyle thy cities and towns, and thruste thy live: It is not the
worste, in preventing him, to waste his kingdom spoil his cities, and ymagyn
his death. And so such traynes which were provided for the, thou shalt use to
overthrow and disceyue him, and shall catch him in the same nets and snares,
that were laid and set for the. For God his laws, the law of man and
nature, suffer well this, that a man may turn that to the undoing of other
men, which they laid for him.

114. Of them that have long here and long beerdes.
Men in some countries use long berdes and long here, which in battle be
troublesome and unprofitable. For they be good stays, to hold a man hard and
fast. Wherefore it shall be good to clap them short. For little things somtymes
do much hurt. And in such case al things which be hurtful to us, and
profitable to our faes, are to be put away and not used.

115. Before we lay siege to cytyes, good it is to possess the vplande
fields.
It is not best to lay siege to any cities before that we have brought the
whole demeanes of the city, into our hands. For if the citizins keep part of
their feldes in their possessyon, hard it shall be to get them without the great
loss of time. When other cities in that time might have been subdued. Which
policy ye women called Amazones, being of a manlye spyrite and bold stomach,
did put in ure: which would never assault any city, before that the y had
taken the vplande villages.

116. Of men wounded and killed to be conveyed privily out of the way.
Men wounded and killed, do much bolden thine enemies, and therewith cast down
the hertes of thine own men. Wherefore the captain must diligently provide,
that he convey away, and sent his flayne men, with those that be wounded to
some out place (as well unawares to his enemies, as also to his own host) For
Philip of Macedon was much hyndred thereby, when he left ye slain men in ye
sight of his own army, and there with plainly to be viewed of the outryders of ye
Romans, whereby the host conceived such a fear, when they saw the wide
dens and deyntes of the wounds of their fellows, that they had rather suffer
any distress, tha^ to have any mo bickerynges with the Romans. In this
thing the king was blamed for his ygnoraunce, which after he did
acknowledge. The Turks that be^ in these days, men most expert in war, know
this policy which do burn their slain men, lest their own men should have
any discomforte, or their enemies any courage thereof.

117 Of the requests of low and humble peronages to be herd.
A merciful captain ought not to dis dayne the prayers and peticions of
humble personages, but gentlye to hearken their behestes and desires. For what
is somoch praise worthy in a captain, as lowlynesse and humanity: whereby he
shall purchase both the favor of his own men, and also of his enemies. Scipio
Africanus warryng in Spain against the Carthaginenses, subdued more by his
unspeakable hu^blenesse, then by ye sword Also the vnprocheable humanity of
Caesar did much more lift up and auaunce his renoume, then all his noble
acts, and did make him wonderful, and merueyled at, of all the world.
Embrace therefore and follow gentleness, which is the lodge of manhood.

118 To use cruelnesse in the beginning of the wars.
It is not dishonest in the beginning of thy wars, to use cruelty, which is
the very cause that cytyes and towns well defenced, many times be yielded up:
which if they had not feared such crueltye, would have tarried and tried the
doubt full chance of war, whereby much hinderaunce might have chanced and
ensued to the captain and his Army. This pollicye the wise Romayne capytayn
Metellus used against Iugurth, in Numidia. But why speak I of Metellus when
all wise capitaynes used this pollicye, and will use it so long, as they be in
deedly wars.

119. How to keep thy kingdom by boldness and couragyousnesse.
Brefelye we have told in our book of the government of an empire, how
kingdoms ought to be guyded. But now I will recyte one reason, not
unprofitable, because it happens oftentimes kingdom to be ruled by lineall
descent of heirs, and because yongemen which be tender of age, sometime do
possess the royal authority, and themperiall estate which for their youth
sake ben assaulted of their neighbors, nygh ioynyng and borderynge on them.
Therefore my counsel is, at the beginning of their governance, to show them
selves stern and stout of mind, thereby to encourage the hertes of their
subjects, and put their enemies in fear. That thing was well perceived of
Alexandre of Macedon conqueror of all the world, which being young and
tender of age, taking the empire of Philip, kept it against them that
rebelled, by his lusty courage, braggyng port and greatness of mind,
although he was otherwise enfourmed of his counsaylours.

120. Of chastity in war.
Chastity of all wysemen is hyghlye praised, without which no man is worthy
to be called, or to have the name of a captain. For how can he well guide
other men, that is ruled and led by pleasures and lusts, which be to man most
enuyfull foes. Therefore let such capitaynes follow Alexander the most
dradde king of Macedon, which not only abstayned from the steshlye pleasure
of the beautyfull daughters of the king of Persia, but also from the sight of
them. Also Scipio Africanus the luckie Emperor of the Romans, for his most
passing chastity deserved euerlyuing name. And also this word (Castra) which
we call an army, has his signification, because men there should live
chaste. I will not speak of the sclaundre which thereby capitaynes do get,
but do you look on the profytes. Does not lecherye make feeble and weaken the
strength, murder the wit, hurt the memory, dasel and blind the sight, and
perysh the hearing? which all how necessary they be in battle, and else
where judge you.

121 Of cauillations to be experiensed in ieopardyes by capitaynes.
Wise capitaynes are wont in great ieopardyes to use cauillations, to deliver
their souldyours out of care. For in so doing, they appear little to regard
that thing, which their men chefelye fear. Wherefore the souldyours in such
case, cast away al fear, through the brag and confidence of the captain, and
pluck up their heart and courage. Anniball of Carthage, what time he rose in
battle, against the Romans in Italy used cauellations. Alexandre of
Macedon used also such tryfelynges, in the great battayles, with the king of
Persia. For when his friend asked of him why in so ieoperd some a battle, he
went to sleep, he gave him this answer merely. Do thou not know yt we have
ouerco^me^ our enemies, which saying was blown throughoute all the host,
whereby they conceived sure trust of the victory.

123. Of souldyours that do say ill by their captain.
It chances oftentimes, the souldyours, yea those that be valyaunte
warryours, to speak ill and backbyte their capytayne, when they be not taken
and rewarded as they deserve by their doings But yet the captain must take
no dyspleasure therwyth, but rather show him self liberal and gentle, that
afterward they may the more wyllynglye, follow him at need, then any other.
Yea and gladly to run through fire and water, with him, if the cause shall
require. Therefore a forecastynge capytayne will not cast of his strong
souldyours for light causes and tryffelles, but rather by all means he would
entertayne and entreat them gentlye.

123. With what things thy souldyours ar to be encouraged.
Marius the happy captain of the Romayne people, does show him self a
pattern and example, that souldyours ar to be encouraged by ye doings of the
captain, and not by vyolence. Which Marius did sweet in all sort of labors
and took great pains, trauaylyng thereby, rather then by violence, to call up,
and quycken the courage of his men. For when they saw their captain, to take
on him such intolerable pains, they were ashamed, that they did not abide
such like labors, yea and much more insufferable. Which doing of Marius, was
worthy to be praised. For how can a captain yt gives him self to gluttonye
and sleep, kendle agd stir up the dullness of his men, to any bold
enterprise to watching or such like things. The souldyours will also scorn
such a captain, that rebukes other men of such faults as chefelye appear
in him worthy to be blamed. That captain therefore that will guide and
govern other men, must learn to master his own affections, which if he do,
no doubt there is, but that the hole army with glad mind will follow his
instructions, and obey his decrees.

124. To purchase the favor of a strange country.
The captain that wears the apparel, and uses the manners of the cou^trye,
where he is, wonderfullye shall come in their favor, when he shall appear as
a countryeman there borne and of the same people. Which policy Alexandre of
Macedon used after he had subdued the king of Persia, and obtained the empire.
For he did inure and accustom him self to their manners and fashyons. And so
he by wearynge their kind of raiment, and by keeping their usual customs,
did bind as true liege men, whom before he had conquered in battle.

125. A captain must be liberal, and therewith praysynge the stoutnesse of his
men.
A captain ought to be liberal to his men according to their deserts, and
therwyth to give them hye thanks, for their famous enterprices. And when they
setheyr acts well rewarded and taken, tha^ all labors seem to them easy and
light, and that they may please their captain they will not fear to shed
and spend their blood. Therefore nothing does sooner purchase the favor and
true hertes, of thy souldyours, then liberalite and thankesgyuyng, which two be
nouryshers of valiantness. For which purpose a bou^tyfull captain will not
spare for any cost, to join the hertes of his soldiers that thereby he may
have them ready, and forward in all ieopardyes.

126. what is to be done when eruption is feared.
When we be afraid of eruption, either of our enemies, or out of any city,
best it is to cast bulworkes, with turrettes of wood, that our army may be
defenced and kept in saufetye on every side. For sudden outbrastes do much
discom fyte and trouble our army, when our enemies unlooked for do set upon
us.

Such is the violence of sudden eruptio^ which makes the downeman to become
vyctour, and gives the victory to him that is unlike and nigh subdued.

127. what is to be done of the captain, when his arm is in extreme peril
and danger.
A venturous captain in thextreme distress and ieopardy of his me^, must
neglect his own safety, casting him self in ieopardye, and put his life in
hasarde. For the souldyours seeing the great and dangerous peril of their
captain, will be imboldened to pluck up their force afresh contemning their
private life. For what comfort can they have, when their captain is lost
and slain. Wherefore they then past hope, will fight in hope, and destitute of
all hope, will most desperatlye, and like hopelostes, run on their enemies:
which is sometime the recouerye of an whole host.

128 With what thing the mind of the co^munaltie is gotten.
The hertes and good will of the rude people is chefelye gotten by bankettynge
and rewards, wherwyth they be much pleased, iudgyng their selves, not to be
regarded ne yet sethy, except they be called to deyntye feasts and bankettes.
For the co^meners do not seek, what is honest, but what is profitable, and if
no profit do ensue, their frendshyp and good will decays. Which thing was
not followed of Salust, that did bestow and employ his labor, rather to write
the historyes of the Romans, then to seek and hunt for their favor by
feastmakyng and ban kettynge.

129. Of the fashyon to send letters.
Letters may be conveyed to thy friends in cities, camps, or else where, by
byndynge them to arrows.

130. To allure thine enemies to slyppe away, and fail their capitaynes.
A wytfull captain will send some of his souldyours that be subtyle and
wyttye, to prove and tempt the mind of his enemies, and by all means to allure
some of the capitaynes, or expert warryours, to forsake and fail their master
in time of need, promysyng to them great rewards, making large profers, and
therewith settyngforth and practisyng thaffabilitie and lowlynesse of their
captain, cessing not to grant any demand, and also to promysse what thing
soever shall be pleasant or acceptable to them.

131. Of the badgies of the souldyours.
All the souldyours ought to be known by some badge, that the better they may
be discerned from thine enemies, lest indifferentlye they beat down and
stryke their fre^des as foes. Which may chance where there is no difference of
armature and where thy men can not be distinctlye known from their enemies, by
their apparel and cognisaunce.

132. Of kings and other princes that keep not their feyth.
Kings and other princes, do somtymes abuse the conditions of the laws of
war and peace, to their own commodity. Yea rather to their private lust and
pleasure, and have not their eyes upon justice, which only they ought to have
in reverence, and also worship. For what king or prince is there now on
days, so just and uncorrupted, which would not seven times in the day, break
the leage of peace (which ought to be undefiled) surely trustyng thereby to
occupy and enjoy the demaynes of his enemies, or at the lest the best part of
his lordshyppes, wherefore ever have thy friends as well as thy foes suspected,
and chefely when thy kingdom is in strife. For no man is sooner deceived then he
which has affyaunce in all men. Wherefore that prince, which is wise, will not
commyt his secrets to an other prince, but only for his safeguard The priuities
in the heart can not be searched. Also he will not suffer any other prince, to
enter into his castelles and holds, which he has fenced, that they may view
and mark them.

133 Of the condition of the common people.
The conditions of the common people be very hateful, which covet always to
resort to them, where they trust to have most advantage, which do not set
by ne regard any man for his excellent and high virtues, if there be no hope
of profit, to rise by him. Which thing is shameful to be spoken of, but
chefelye to be done. But therefore we must apply us to ye inconstaunt nature of
such people alluryng and hailyng them, to follow us, by feastyng and bankettes.
As the fysshe is taken with the bayte. Wherefore a wise captain will use no
less wisdom, to maintain the state of his kingdom, then he did in getting
it. By this way he shall keep vpryght and establysshe all things. Otherwise,
he shall bring all to naught, and a wyser prince shall possess, and enjoy his
kingdom.

135 Of a certain kind of defense.
Charrettes set in the earth, before the camp, with the wheles dygged deep,
and cheyned fast together, be a great defense. And this was chefely used among
many of the ancient souldyours for their spedynesse, which were wont to carry
with them a great nombre of charettes.

135 Of the swetnesse of advantage.
Advantage makes those that be cowardes, for the most party redye to
battle. Wherefore a wise captain ought much to crake of the spoil and
pillage, which wylbe great after ye victory, with such riches, that poverty
shall never pinch the^ after, if they bestow the^self valiau^tly, in this one
battle, and bear them like men, this one day, the last day of all their
myserye and labor. Wherefore it is the capitaynes duty, with such like
orations to comfort and encourage his men to be forewarde, fiercelye to fight,
and boldly to stand to it.

136. Of a troublesome and unruly multitude.
A great multitude of souldyours which be barbarous and rude, must be carried
to long wars, for fear that some sedition do grow among them, which
many times does overthrow whole countries. Wherefore the capitayn hedely must
foresee, that all causes of sedicion be taken away and plucked up by the
rotes. For if sedition be ones kendled the city is like to be burned, and all
the citizins utterly confounded.

137 Of the duty of a good capytayne.
A valyaunte captain will be ashamed to be seen alive, and all his me^ slain
For with what countenance, dare he be bold to show his face, or to prease
into the company of valiant capitaynes, when he does suruyue his men being
slain. if the battle was ill fought, who shall be blamed but the captain?
which either in an vnegal and inconvenient place did pytche his field, or
else with a little power, rashly gave battle against his enemies, which were
both mo in nombre and more expert in wars, which thing is not to be done, but
in a great strayte, and urgent necessity.

138. In a new render.
When any province or city have newly yielded them selves to the captain, he
shall do well to pardone all burdens, and charges of the city, as to open
prysons for them that be in duraunce, and burn books of conde^nations, and
brefely no kind of humanity, ne yet of bountyfulnesse is to be forgotten.
Whereby the capytaynes gentleness and good will, may be known, and appear.

139. Of the punishment of the captain which forsakes his men.
The captain that forsakes his host, and flies away, is worthy to be
beheeded, in example of al other. For more praise worthy, it is to dye in
battle valyauntly fighting with great glory and renoume, then after for
his cowardice with shame, and reproach to lose his life.

140. To abstain from robbyng of temples.
Command your souldyours, that they shun to spoil and rob temples, lest
God be offended therwyth. For great hurt and damage chances to an army by
such vnreuerent spoil of churches, which for such mischeuous doings never
skaped unpunished, neither in our days, ne yet in any time out of our mind
Therefore command your men to abstain from the robbyng of temples. For no
battle is so hard to be skaped from as the battle of God.

141. To pursue thine enemies in the chase.
When thine enemies do turn their face and stye, then pursue and chase them
gredelye, if there be no suspicion of traynes. Do thou not defer ne yet be
slack, lest they recover them selves, and ashamed of their cowardlye flight
turn again and cause the to recule, recoueryng the battle, which now
before was lost. For experyence does show how unprofitable it is, not to
take time, when time does serve.

142. To dissemble retreat and fear.
If the captain shall perceive any place conuenyente and mete for the
disco^fiture of his enemies, it shall be not vnpro fytable, to dissemble retreat
and fear, until he have trained and led his enemies thither. And then let
him set upon them, on the foreparte, on the back, and on both wings.
Therefore the most part be brought into such traynes that tarry in holds,
and abide thassaultes of their enemies, and at the last ben enforced for
famine, to pyght field in open cha^pyon ground.

143. what is to be done when great ieopardyes are to be undertaken.
When great ieopardies ben at hand, which we must by some mean avoid, the^
mete it is, to chose souldyours, which ben vnfearfull and courageous to
encou^tre with their enemies, when we must imbolden with rewards, and fair
promysses, that gladly they will march forward, and not to step back for
any ieopardyes. Also they are to be admonyshed, what praise and richesse they
shall get of that vyctorie. Besides that we must earnestly affirm, that the
only trust and hope of the victory stands in them. Wherefore they debatyng
all these things with themselves, and myndefull of their former doings, will
purpose with them selves, to atchyue the vyctorye, and win their spurs.

144 To abstain from treason.
You capitaynes and souldyours which look and clymbe for honor, and will not
indamage and impair your name, beware of treason: which is most cursed and
hateful. For first you shall have them, whom you do betraye your deedly foes,
and extreme enemies, and they for whom you work that treason, shall fear and
suspect you. Yea and at the last hate and abhor the deed, and ever doubtyng,
lest you practyse such traytorus wylyes against them, which you have used for
the^ Wherefore yfsuche men will rebelle, and depart from their captain, let
them yet beware, to commit so heinous a fault, which in all ages is most
abominable for great hatred is gathered of treason, which fault is abhorred
of all men. The traitor also is hated, boked at with fynges, and defamed both
alive and deed. Therefore you may se the fruits of treason.

120. Of the sagenesse and eloquence of the captain in his orations.
The oration of the captain, setforth and spoken, with weyghtye sentences,
and apt words, is much commendable, and very requisyte. For weyghtye and
fete words shall make him praised of al men and taken as the very image of
virtue, and wisdom. Therefore the capitaynes must not in the face of al men,
follow their merye conceiptes, and vnaduysedlye speak, but among their
familyers and nyghe friends: Yea and then not wantonly and foolyshlye. But
their words ought to be seasoued with sagenesse and gravity, and esteemed as
the oracles of the gods.

146. To refrain from spoil and pillage before thine enemies be wholye
subdued.
Do thou give to thine hooste a general commandment, that they refrain from
spoil and robberye, until thine enemies be conquered, and wholly brought
under, and a great penalty must be set to the contrary. For when thy men
fall to spoil, and be given to vau^tage, thine enemies may recover and
restore their strength, and even now subdued, and lost men right again, become
vyctours. Wherefore so long as one lives, and any part of their strength
remains, for bydde thy men to gape after pray, lest the mirth of the
vyctorie be turned to an heuye and sudden sorrow.

147 To refrain from burning.
After that the cities be taken, and thine enemies vanquyshed and slain, it
were unprofitable to burn and waste all. For thou may leave those cities to
be inhabyted and kept of thy friends, and hereafter they will be a great refuge
and succor to the. Although the captain consyderyng the time and place, may
follow the aduertysement and read of his friends.

148 Of aid and succor to be sent to thy neighbors abborderynge on the.
If thy neighbors be vexed and tourmoyled on every side with wars, it is
conuenyent and honest to send them aid yt the sorrowful war may rather be
bewailed of them, then of the. For to quench ye fire of thy neighbors house,
is the safegarde of thine own. Therefore mete it is neighbors to be fre^des,
when outward wars do noie them, lest thy neighbors hurt and damage light
also upon the.

149 what it is to do some valiant act in the sight and face of thine enemies.
To show some token of puisauncie, and do some valiant act in the eyes of
thine enemies, is a great help, and much vayleable, to the gettyng of the
victory, whether it be done by the captain or any other soldiers, and also
the envy of him shall inflame and provoke other of thy men to enterprice like
things, and the courage of thine enemies thereby shall be shaked and abated. And
so a few valiant men, oftentimes have been the cause of all victories.
Therefore let the captain be sure to have some man vaileable in feats and
strength. Which in siguler strife, and man to man is bold, valiant, and
courageous.

150. Of little power not to be contemned.
A wise captain will not be careless, and despise a little army, although it
be but weak, and a small power, when of a little spark (which he would not
think) a great fire does kendle. Wherefore the fire must be quenched before
the flame flasshe out, and all be set on fire. And likewise we must quench
and overcome, that little strength and puisau^ce of our enemies with all our
endeavor, lest it wax and grow bygger, and then without more ieopardye, it
can not be wtstande. Wherefore it is great folly to neglecte such things, and
not in time to mete with little powers, and utterly to discomfyte them.

151. Of slothfulness to be eschued of the captain and all other.
All capitaynes, souldyours, and other ought to fly from idleness, even as
from the pestylence: yea and rather more. For idleness does destroy the body
and the mind, which is most highest of al things, and drowneth the renoume of
men, when the pestilence destroys only the body: wherefore all capitaynes
and souldyours, do you cast of that sluggyshnesse both in time of peace and
war, and stye from it, as from a wild beast, when she sets on you in time
of prosperity, gyuyng most deedlye battle. For cytyes which never could
have been overthrown in time of war, have be^ destroyed, by slougthfulnesse
in time of peace, which brings with her this mischefe, that not only fools,
but also wise men be choked up with the stynkyng canells of that vice

152. To view and know the countries, before thou carry thine Army thither.
A good captain will be sure diligently to vewe with his own eyes, the
cou^tryes round about, before that he carye his army thither, and he will
surely know what way his men may journey most saufelye, and where that his
enemies may lie in wait for him, or else he for them, and what cities and
towns to destroy by the way, it shall be profitable and expedient for him,
lest he be deceived sometime by espyes, sometime by ignorance, sometime
trapped in their traynes and snares.

153 Of the increase of thine empire.
The duty of a soueraygne emperor is, in time of blysfull peace, to augment
and fence his empire, with the procurement of new friends. Asdrebal the wise
king of the people of Carthage, was not unknown of this. For after the first
battle that he had in Affrike, he enlarged and increased, the power of
Carthage, when he hooked in those that did bordre on him, and purchased their
favor. Which thing all wise Emperors before this time, and in this time
also, have done and do.

154 The conditions of the captain.
The captain ought to be bold in adventures, and therewyth wyttye, and of
much counsel. For what co^moditye is it to have a captain bold, and the
same foolysh and without counsel, when they both do join and iumpe so nere
together And also the one needs so the help of ye other, that for the
defaulte of the one, no man is worthy to be called a captain, but a very
loute and a lobre, and unworthy that honorable name, which also is lyker to
have a master, then to be a master.

155 What is to be done in the besiege of cities.
It is very profitable in the assiege and beatynge down of cities, to make
this proclamation among the main hooste, by the commandment of the graunde
captain, that all the pillage and prays shall be due to the souldyours. Then
they allured and enflamed with the sweet desire of vauntage, and strengthened
with the hope of riches, will not be put back for any violence, though it be
never so great, but they will surely take and beat down the city. Such
desire and insatiable coueytosnes of vauntage raygneth among men.

156. A policy to know if thy soldyours be faithful.
If thy souldyous gently follow the, from place to place, it is a greattoken
and argument of their faythfulnesse.

157. Of the great and huge covetousness of the barbarous people.
As the fyshes be taken with sweet baytes, so the barbarous aliens be plucked
and hailed with gold, yea and much sooner. For they esteem gold and silver,
much more then any praise or renoume, so that the Italions have great hope to
overcome them for their gredye desire of treasure, although the coming of
warfare and praise thereof, has ever flourished and yet does among the same
Italions.

158 How to carry an army over a water thine enemies resting.
It happens oftentimes, that algates thou must carye thine army over some
river, where thine enemies do resist and withstand thy passage, in which case
thou must get boots, if matter and time want to make a bridge. But before
that time far from the camp of thine enemies, above or beneth thou must lie
in embushment, a band of good warryours, covertly, which must come on thine
enemies priuilye at their backs, and lokyng for no such thing, when they go
about to stop and let thy passage. And this is the best pollicye to carye
thine army over any water.

159. The comfortable words of the captain, when his souldyours be in
despair.
when thy souldyonrs do despair, either of the victory, or of their iourneye:
A stout captain will not cease dylyge^tly to comfort them, whereby yt
heaviness and fear may be plucked out of their minds, and they more pressed
and ready, either to fight or to go on their journey.

160 Of thy soldiers, worshypfully to be buried.
If it happen thy souldyours, to be slain, thou shall swage and appeace the
angrye hertes of the rest, if the deed bodies, be brought worshipfully to
burying whereby they shall se by the funeralles, that thou purpossed not their
death, and destruction, but ye praise of that battle and victory, whereby
they can not but love and honor so gentle and merciful a captain that is of
such pytie, then which nothing is more praise worthy, ne yet draws sooner
the minds of men, most marvelously and enterelye to love him.

161 When the power of thine enemies is much stronger, what thing is to be
done.
If thine enemies prevail both in no^ bre and puisaunce of men, by no means
do thou come to hand grypes, ne yet appoint the to fight hand to hand, ne
yet do thou give battle in pyght field.

Nevertheless do thou not suffer them to lie quiet, but night and day assail
the^ busyly, with some pyked souldyours, making roodes and assaults, unto
their pale, continually renewyng skyrmyshies with them, ever shonnynge joined
battle. Mine advise also is, when thine enmyes be very many on the land,
then to take the sea, where thou shalt either get the better, or else lose
nothing.

162. Of hostages.
Receive hostages and pledges of great men from any country or city, which
either be sent frelye, or by constraynte, and chefelye where there is any fear
of false dealyng and vntrustynesse, which be the surest and most fast band
of their loyalty and faith. For the great love, which they have to the
pledges, will make them to stand to their promysse.

163. To stynt the weapynges and skrykes of women.
The sorrowful weapynges of women within the city, with diligence are to be
stopped and stylled. For such owtecryes and waylefull lamentation of women,
let the soldiers that they cannot take any counsel of things to be
done in such uproar and wepynges.

164. To hyde and cover the slaughter.
A skillful capitayn will bear in mind to keep close and layne (to his power)
from the rest of his Army, the slaughter of his men, and turn all to the
best, with gentle words, burning them in the night priuyly and unawares to his
army therwyth sendyng those that be wounded and maimed, to the cities thereby
which be frendfull to him, sparyng nothing, yt they may be healed, and may
have their strength restored. And those men which be now hardened, he shall
have in other battayles forward, and redye to ieoperd them selves most
boldlye, at the request of so gentle a captain.

165. To pacify a strong and valiant warryour which is displeased.
If it chance any of thy valiant souldyours to be wrongfully used, or suffer
any rebukefull reproach, and therwyth to be displeased, it is expedyent with
fair words, to assuage his anger, lest as he has been valiant and wytty on
thy part so styrred by displeasure and unkindness work much hurt and harm
against the.

166. Wagies are not to be craved when the treasures be spent and wasted.
The duty of a faithful captain is, and also of the souldyours, when they
shall perceive the treasure to be wasted, to surcesse, and not to desire their
wages For so doing they go about and endeavor them selves to betraye their
lord. Where fore they must leave for a time to call for their money, if they
couette and hunte to have the favor of their prince.

167. To pass by little things that be hard.
Little things, even as great things which be hard, are to be passed by. For
the charges be like, the pray unlike wherefore good it is, to pass by such
places, where great labors with expenses must of necessity be taken, and the
profyt thereof is little or none.

168. what is to be done of the chief capitaynes.
Many things there be, which are not to be taken in hand, but after that ye
enterprise is begone, and the assiege attempted, by no means they must be
leafte of. The proof of which thing is plain by the wise Roman Emperors,
which besieged the city Capua, and overcame it, tarying there so toughly,
that they left the defense of their own country, to destroy and vanquish it.
Also the huge host of Annibal could not pluck them away although they were
brought to uttermost despair, yet nothing doubtyng ne weryed with any
labors, would not give over thassaulte, but constauntly continuyng, did bring
home a famous victory with immortal renoume.

169. To keep the possessyon of the thing ones gotten.
If thou have gotten cities or countries, by any means do not leave, ne give
them over, but keep them with all diligence. For greater reproach it is, to lose
little thin ges, then at all not tohaue won them. Also hard it is, to win
and destroy countries. Wherefore it were no point of wyttynesse unadvisedly to
redelyuer up, that which with so great labors and charges was gotten.

170. Of the nature and condition of the common people.
The condition of the base and rude people, is piuysh and mutable, either wilye
and boundely to serve, or else after a proud and haulte demeanours, to be are
rule. Wherefore the multitude never justly ne egally can bear rule and office
thorough their arrogaunte, stubburne, and stately conditions, which use all
kind of cruelty, temperyng and measuryng all things by their fancye, and not
by reason. Therefore no kingdom long can stand, guyded and governed by the
commeners and unskillful people.

171 Of a multitude of gunners and crossebowe shoters.
When for the multitude of gunners, and other shoters in crossebowes, the soul
dyours can not stand saulfely on ye walls, mine advise is, to make holes, and
so disturb thine enemies with arrows and darts.

172 What is to be done when the walls be beaten down.
It happens oftentimes, the walls of cities, to be shaken and beaten down
with gunnes (that deuilysh instrument) then bulworkes with all speed, to keep
back our enemies must be made, with turrettes of wood, and ouerthwarde
trenches filled up with sharp pyles, whereby thassiege on that part may be more
hard through the strong munimentes, then it was before.

173. What is to be done in the slackyng of cities.
When the city begins to slack, it must be vanquyshed with the sword.

174. To set upon the camp of thine enemies not warely kept.
Best it is, thine enemies negligentlye keeping watch and ward, not by day
time but by night to set upon and invade them. For then without question the
fight shall not be hard, when thine enemies overthrown and half deed with
sleep and wine, whyther to go or what to do, sodaynlye wakened, shall not
know, ne yet shall perceive the cause of that brute and disturbaunce, before
they be strycken down, taken, and slain.

175 what is to be done in slow and slack siege.
When thy souldyours cowardly and with hollow hertes, nothing freshlye fight,
pluck the standart from the standart bearer, and flynge it among thine
enemies, then after exhort and desire them, not to suffer such a shame and
reproach, that their enemies shall keep their standart. Then take thou a weapon,
and command the best warryours to follow the to win again their standarte,
ma king a lane with much violence.

176 Of little things not to be despised.
Nothing is of so little valewe, which in war will not do some service.
Therefore an expert captain will contempne nothing, although it be little worth.

177. Of war on the sea.
In war on the sea, the full wind is the great part of the victory.

178 Of great perils escaped and avoided by rashness and foolehardynesse.
It sometome chances, thine army to be in great ieopardye, and so enclosed
and set about, yt impossible it is to escape away. Then the captain must use
some sudden and unadvised mean, that by rashness the victory may be
ieoparded, when wittiness can not help, whichthing has luckely chanced to
many capitayns disco^fited with uttermost perilles. Such force is in rashness.

179. Of a certain kind of defense.
When thy camp can not be well defended for the open bareness of ye place,
mine advise is, to make the fortresses of fardels which kind of defense,
although it be not good, yet it makes a face and show. whereby thine enemies
for a time feared with the novelty of the thing, will recule, and not
hastelye march forewarde.

180 where thine enemies preua isle in horsemen.
If thine enemies be well horsed, and thou would gladlye make a fraye with
them moved either by some profit, or else constrained by need, this is my
best counsel, that each of the horsemen, have with them swyfte and nymble
footmen, which quycklye, can mount upon an horse, and so lyuerly light down,
so that which to other men appears hard, is to them through custom; light
and but a tryffle. This kind of fight was begone at the siege of Capua.

181. To raise the siege of any city.
If thou purpose to raise and move the siege from thine own cytyes, then
fierselye lay siege to some city of thine enemy. For when they endeavor to
succoure and rescue their own city, they will sone depart from thine. And so
they then that be not able to keep and aid their own cytyes, by strength, do
save them well, by siege made to the cytyes, of their enemies.

182 Of cities yeldynge them selves.
Those cities which wyllyngly yield, and give up themselves unto us, although
we be not able to defend them, it is not conuenyent to spoil and pylle them,
or to vex them with any wrongs, but rather with bountyfulnesse and humanity,
to entreat and use them, that although that great gentleness shall not move
and tender their stomach, yet that deed worthy the memory of men, shall be
further known. By which other cities moved hereafter, will yield the sooner.

183. How necessary warly connyng is to souldyours.
The knowledge of martial feats does much imbolde^ and encourage both
souldyours and their capitaynes. For such men do know to help theyrselues,
and can take time to strycke their enemies, without hurt. And except their
enemies be skylfull and expert, as they be (the battle not joined) they be
assured of the vyctorye, in whose bold hertes, strength so much increases,
and they styfly stand in fight to obtain the victory. But this science as it
is gotten and assured by exercise, so is it lost by negligence.

184 Great victories ben eschued with few and expert soldiers.
If thou endeavor thy self to do famous and valiaunte acts, take to the a
few, and those pyked souldyours, well exercised in war, and hardened in
labor with whom thou may discomfyte, at thy pleasure, the unskillful
multitude of thine enemies. But if thou trust to do ye same thing with an huge
garriso^, which be rude, and having no skyll, thou shall be trapped of thy
purpose, and shamefullye destroyed, and therewith taken in thine own train.

185 Of young men to be chosen.
Young men ought to be chosen for soldyours which be tall and strong, which
can suffer hungre, thyrste, and lie on the ground, which also have a
pleasure, to handle weapons, to fight, taking it for a sport and game. Such
fellows lustye and strong, be like to become valiaunte and expert warryours,
whose help thou may be assured to use in great ieopardyes, and all things
shall chance to thy desire and mind. Therefore diligent care and wisdom is
required in choosing and taking up souldyours.

186. What men they should be to whom the keeping of countries and cities is
committed.
We must warely foresee to what men we commit the keeping of provinces, and
cities, and whom we make our lieufetenauntes, and that they be rich and
ancient cytizins, of our own city, having children thryfty and disposed to
virtues For such men undoubtedly would be faith full and loyal, in whom no
suspicion of treason is to be feared, which would be reprocheable and shameful
to them, and their posterity, ne yet any falsehode is to be demed or mistrust
in them.

187. Of the manner of fighting.
Cause thy souldyours to foyne contynually, and not lay on downryght, which
force of fighting is much dreaded of thine enemies, cheifelye if the foynes
be cast at the face. These wounds ben incurable, and the wounded have more
need of a preeste then of a surgyon. But if thy men have bastard swords, or
twohanded swords, used in the ast parties, let them give downryght strokes.
For those swords be so deedlye, that lyghtlye they will stryke of the heed,
cleave the body, and dismembre all parts.

188. In what place best it is to lodge thine army.
Camp thy souldyours so nere as thou can, in places where fodder, water, and
fuel is abundaunt, that thy soldiers may have plentye, without any stop or
intercourse of their enemies. Beware al so to pitche thy pauilyons and tents
under an hill, lest thine enemies (unawares to the) take and occupye the hylle,
to thy great discomfyture. Do thou also forsee that thine army, be not lodged
in places which with raynes and brooks will be shortly ouerflowed, or where
the banks may be cutout to drown thine army, or at the leest thy catall and
other vitayles. Provide therwyth not to tarry, and keep the host, there where
is al playnes, and champion ground, for the danger of gu^nes. But to be
brieue I can give no sure rule where to lodge thine army. For the place and
time must change thy purpose, in which case the wittynesse of ye capitayn, and
knowledge, is much required

189. How to make strong the camp with fortresses, thine enemies assaultynge
the.
If thine enemies ben at hand, and needs the ca^pe must be fortifyed, set
abroad a few horsemen, and a greater garryson of fotemen ready to withstand
and drive away thine enemies, until thy fences and fortresses be wholly done,
and then convey them by little and little into thy camp By which mean thine
enemies shall be mocked, and thy me^ shall afterward more sykerly raunge forth,
and thine enemies which even now reioysed as victours, shall be driven away
with shame.

190 To take our subjects rather then strangers for souldyours.
Mete it is rather to raise and assemble an army of thine own me^ tha^ of
strangers, whom thou shall have faithful and redye in all peryls, which
having their cou^trye, parents, children, kynsemen and friends, in
remembrance, will not give back ten times in the day to danger their lives.
In which mind all kings and princes be (except the wise and rich
Venetians) that they would rather take their own men, then outpeople and
aliens.

191. What is to be done in thassemble and taking up of souldyours.
When we purpose to make battle, expedyeut it is to foresee and surely know
in what places the thing is to be done.

For if we must travail in hyllye and rough places, our army must be
garnysshed, much more with fotemen, tha^ horse men. And the horsemen also must
be light harnessed, that with more ease they may clymbe up, and likewise come
down the hills, if neade be to fight on foot. But if we must war in plain
and champyon countries, then horsemen be most necessary. For fotemen will
stand in little stead and use. These things be spoken, not without some
co^syderation, when in ye assembly of an army kings and princes ben at great
charges, and somyme in vain.

192 To keep thine army healthful.
The health of thine Army is mayntayned by exercise, by healthsome country
and sweet ayers: but chefelye where is plentye and abundaunce of vytayles.

For of famyne the plage sometime does come, when men for want and defaulte
of vytayles, be driven to eat vnhealthsome and corrupted meats.

193. what is to be done when waters can not be waded over.
Where the water is so deep, that neither fotemen ne yet horsemen dare venture
over: best it is to turn the water into dyches out of the wont course, and
great stream, by which mean the water being fallen, thine army may wade
and pass over.

194 To chastise and agrieue thine enemies host.
It is a good policy by hungre, rather then by weapon and incurtions, to
vanquysshe thine enemies. For nothing is more profitable, ne yet more praise
worthy, then by vnbloudye battle to join the mastrye. But take heed lest
thine enemies, thus sterued, and tamed, with ho^ger: do provoke them by some
dyspleasures to battle. But then lie stylle, with thine army, and refrain
from any assaults, or bykerynges, until their vitayles be whollye spent.

195. To know if any spies lurk among thy soldiers.
Although it be very hard in a great army, to know the lurkyng spies, yet I
will show some ways, not unprofitable, of which this shall be one. Ofte^tymes
to search and view thy registre, and if there be any not registered, and
written, it is a great token, those to be spies. And also if any of them that
be regestred, do carye ty dynges and thy endeavors to the other part, then
nedefulle it is, to stop and besette ways, passages, and woods, by night
and day, to take and to carye them to the captain there to be racked, yea
and if any do wander owte of the camp, the captain not commaundyuge, they
shall be taken gyltye of petitreason. It shall be therefore, the office of a
captain daily to behold about his army, both by him self and other
trustye and beleueable souldyers, and mark men by their face, by which
policye he shall know the time if any of his souldyours abode.

The captain also must command al men to take their lodgyng by day light,
and to be in their tents, and if any shall be suspect, than take and imprison
them, by torment also constraynyng them to tell their intentes, co^mandes, and
charges.

196. To keep close their counsayles.
Let the captain debate and discuss, with the wytty and expert warryours,
now and again, what is to be done. But what he will do, let him disclose, and
to discover that to few, depelye wayeng the thing, with him self, by which
policy he shall never atte^pte, ne enterprise, any matter voydelye, when his
endeavors, and affairs be unknown, and conceled: but by all ways he shall
have his own desire.

197. The oration of the capytayne to his host wha^ they be marchi^gforthe to
fight.
The host vauncyng toward battayl, the captain ought to speak these
words: that wyllynglye he will seek his own death, except he bring with him
the victory, which words wonderfully will move and arrayse their hertes, and
chiefly if they love and have him in any reverence, so that for his wont
gentleness and largess, they will put their lives in danger to get him the
glory and renoume coueytynge their death with his death. Wherefore let the
captain show and persuade to his company, that his life, death, and
renoume, do stand in their manlynesse and hands.

198. To take thine enemies by wyles.
Mine advise is, to send forth thine unable souldyours, sorye fellows and most
unprofitable, to be as a bayte, pray, and vntysement to thine enemies, which
provoked and allured to take them prisoners or else utterly to slay them,
right way may be catched and trained in snares. For they then gladsom of the
little mastry disordrelye will (as victours) follow the pursuit and chase
farreof, keeping none arraye. By which couyne and train, many have been
deceived: which pollicye was not unknown of the East souldyours, which did
let loose their horses to straye among their enemies, and they coueytyng to
steal the horses, were taken and slain.

199. What is to be done with captyues and prisoners.
It is not good to kylle the captyues, and prisoners, but to keep them to
tillage and those chefelye that be burlye, carterlyke, and fytte thereto. For
what profit can come of their death, when if they be kept on live, we may
use them in husbandrye: and of their labors get great increase and
advantage. Which thing has been done of many kings and princes. And the
Turk does at this time in drugerye and most vile occupations, keep as
slaves and bondmen, a great no^bre of christen men (Alas to the reproach and
shame of Christen princes) knowing his army can not be nourysshed, without the
fruits of the ground which being soulde, his souldyours thereby have and
receive their wagies, knowing also famyne to be noyouse, and worse then a
plage, to his host: which desstroyeth cities, countries, and towns.

1000. To find sweet water and fresshe.
Abowte the sea banks, fresshe water is found, also in the mydde land, and
places far from the sea, where shrubbes do grow. Mete it is, the capytayne to
have knowledge of these things.

1001. Of night battle.
If thou fight, in the night time: profitable it is to have the moon, on thy
back. For so thine enemies, shall not well ward, ne escape the strokes, of
thy men. For the light, and also for the false vmbrage, which the Moon does
show fourth.

1002. Of the dewetye of the captain in excersysyng his souldyours.
Nedefulle it is, for a capytayne to know, before he come to battle, that
both his horsemen, and also his foot men, rude in the cunnyng of war, must
be daily exercysed. For their vnskylfulnesse is the great destruction, of the
whole host, when they know not how for to keep their arraye, nae yet what to
do, but like men astonysshed, void of all warlye knowledge, and now to learn
the feats of war, in whose hand the chyfe part of the battle does stand,
begin to stay and proffer their backs.

1003. Of the duty of the graunde capytaynes in battle.
Kings and princes, (the counsel lours of the weal publyke, for the time
dismissed) must call unto them, actyfe, and expert warryoures, and use their
counsayles, in warlye affairs, not doing any thing, rashlye, against their
advertisement, of which thing Pompeyus may be an example, that for his
knowledge of war, deserved to be called (magnus) great or noble, which when he
warred against Caesar, was costrayned by the Senate, to change his purpose
and to use an other way, then he with him self had decreed, or else the
coming of war required: whereby it chanced that he was vanquysshed with his
friends most shamefullye.

1004. Of the fotemen, and sign of battle.
The tents read, beforetokens of battle to come, and signs of the
vyctorye, with the bloodsheddyng of thine enemies.

FINIS libri primi.
The second book.
The Proheme of the second book, unto the laws of war.
IT now remains, that in few words we playnelye show and open what laws,
the graunde capitaynes and also ye peticapitaynes ought to use against the
defaultes of their souldyours, not only in time of war, but also of peace.
For without man's justice and equity, not armies only, kingdoms and
lordshyppes, but also little countries can not long continue, and keep their
egall estate, such strength and virtue is in justice and equity. Therefore it
shall not be much unprofitable, here shortly to show, what I have found in
the Romayne laws, and also what things ben observed and used now in these
days, in the punishment of soldiers, which may be taken for a law, so
that there shall be none in the whole army, that can say the captain to have
wronged and injured him.

2. Of them that yield their selves to their enemies.
If any yield their selves to thine enemies, having no just and urgent cause,
the higher he is in his degree, the sorer let him be punysshed. And for this
cause that the other souldyours and their capitaynes take none example of him
(the chance of the battle not tried) to yield themselves to their enemies.

3. Of an outstrayer.
He that leaves and strayeth from his own company, must be punysshed by the
purse, or else lose his place, or be send forth abroad like a slave, that he
may be an example to other, not to straye out of order.

4. Of a spy or outryder.
A spy which will be entysed, at the request of his enemies, and so leave his
captain, is worthy to be beheeded, and that iustlye. For the saulfetye and
destruction of the whole host does lie in him. Wherefore his punishment must
be the greater.

5. Of ronneawayes and landeleapers.
They that run to their enemies, and then after return, must be hanged. He
also that is purposed to fly, and in ye mean time intertaken, is worthy to
be beheeded. Which law among our souldyours now on days is put in ure, but
not before.

6. Of them that lose their harneys.
He that loses his harneys in battayl or shall alienate them, must change his
place, but he that steals others, must be put out of his souldyourshyppe.

7. Of them that do things prohybited, and keep not the laws and decrees
proclaimed.
He that shall do any thing forbidden of the captain, and therwyth does not
keep his commandments, must be be heeded: although the thing be not well
done. Also if he steal into the camp, by walls or ditches, dryue^ by no
great fear he is worthy the same punishment.

8. Of them that raysevp sedicion.
They that styre up any sedition, are most worthy to be beheeded, but if the
sedicion shall come of some light co^playnt then put them out of their place of
souldyourshyppe, which first did move that business.

9. Of a legion reculynge.
If any legion give back, let them lose the name of chiualrye for ever.

10 Of banyshed personage.
Banyshed persons intromyttynge their selves to be taken up as soldiers
must be beheaded for the dignity of chyualrye.

11. Of him that is sentforth like a slave.
He that is sent away like a drudge, for the glory of chiualry, must not be
received as a souldyour again, that the renoume of chiualry thereby be not
impaired.

12. Of them that be judged to dye.
They that be judged to dye, for ye sclau^der that runs on them, must not be
taken in and received.

13. Of them that steal ye youth of chivalry
He that shall steal young scholars in ye feats of war, in time of war,
must be exyled, and lose part of his goods in time of peace, he must be
beaten with stanes or kytgels.

14. Of him that maymeth a young souldyour.
He that maymeth a young souldyour of chivalry, is worthy banyshment.

15. Of him that leaves his compagnie.
An horseman that leaves his company in time of war, deserves heedyng and
in time of peace to lose his room.

16. Of them that rebel.
He that does offer violent hands to any of the capitaynes, is worthy heeding
and that fault is augmented by the state and honor of the captain.

17. Of disobedience and sturdynesse.
Disobedience against the graunde captain, or peticapitayne, is worthy
heedynge.

18. Of him that flies.
He that first tourneth his face in the battle to the example of other,
deserves heedyng. For by such cowardly and holloweherted fellows, thine
enemies be comforted and encouraged, and thine own men discouraged and afraid.

Whereby it happens oftentimes, thine army retreatynge to be driven down and
slain: wherefore this penalty is iustlye ordained for such heavy hertes.

19. Of spies and scoutwatches.
Espials which reuele and open thy secrets to thine enemies, be rank and high
traitors. Wherefore to have their heed chopped of, is their mete punishment.
Also those which dissemble syknesse, for any fear, be worthy the same
punishment.

20. Of him that wounds his fellow.
Choppe of his heed that wounds his fellow with a sword, and thrust him out
of his room, that hurleth a stone at his fellow: lest of such braulynges some
sedicion do rise.

21. Of runneawayes and traitors.
Cause ronneawayes and traitors to be racked, before they suffer heedynge, to
know if they have not other fellows, priuye and alied to the same conspiracy.

22. In what places thy souldyours shall be forbidden to bye thy bytayles.
Forbydde and restrain, thy souldyours to bye their vitayles, in those places
where they keep war, lest the country men be constrained rather for fear,
then for a just price, to sell their wares, and lest that by dayntye fare, thy
sold yours be flacke in their feats of chiualrye.

23. Of them that leave nyghtwatche.
Beheede them that leave the nyghtwatche, which punishment is needful, when
not only the captain, but also the whole army deeply and soundly sleep, in
the eyes of the watch, and the diligence of the watch, is the foretresse and
defense of thine army. What thing therefore is more shameful and cruel then
to betray and slay the whole army slepynge, and taking their rest after their
werye trauayles and business.

24. Of them that escape out of prison.
He that scapeth out of prison, is not lykened to ronneawayes. For that was
done to save his life, which thing nature has granted to all beasts.

25. Of a ronneagate or strydlande.
A ronnegate brought again, by his father, is to be punyshed more gently, tha^
by the heed.

26. Of the time appointed by the captain.
He that does not repair to his company by the time appointed, without a
lawful excuse, is to be taken and accounted a ronnegate.

27. Of a disturber of the peace.
Punysshe by heedyng that souldyour, which brings thine army in an uproar

28. When thy soldiers be in their iourneye.
Soldiers which be taken un wares and suddenly (their former life well known)
are worthy pardone.

29. Of them that scatre out of the company.
They that wandre from their company are worthy to be kidgelled or lose their
place.

30. Of a captyue.
If any of thy men that is taken prisoner would not return when he might,
decken him for a ronneawaye, but if he return, receive him: if it be sure that
he was taken against his will, and ran not thither.

31. Of them that forsake the capytayne.
He that does not help and defend his capytayne, when he may, or leaves him
when he is environed and set abowte with enemies, is worthy to be hanged on a
pair of gallows.

32. Of gonners on horseback.
It shall not be unprofitable to acquaynten and wount your horses, as the
duchmen do, to suffer the sytter which is a gunner and not to be affrayed
thereof. For no sort of souldyers, is more profitable tha^ they nor yet does
more myschife and hurt. For no man is so well harnaysed, that can be saulfe
from them: such a vyolence is in that warlye instrumente.

33. Of gunnes called serpe^tines with other.
It shall be very profitable to have many wagons and charettes laden with gons
For there is none army so strong, whom they will not destroy, so that horses
and men far of be slain, with them. Also the great sound shall so fear men,
that their strength and courage shall fall and decay.

34. Of a profitable defense of the camp.
A great defeuce for thy camp, shall be to have many wagons and carres, shod
with iron, and above those turrettes of wood filled with serpentines and other
kinds of gonnes, which is the sureste defense for thy camp.

35. To give thanks and praise to god after the victory.
Because we be pourpossed to leave nothing in this book unto wched, which is
to be required, in warlye knowledge, and eke in the conning of chyualdrie.
Therefore comelye it is the head leader of the army, (the victory ones
atchyued and gotten) humblye to render and give praise, everlasting, with his
whole host, to the living lord, that he of his vnspeke able and
omnisufficient mercy, in other battayles, would be mercyful, and good unto
them, for without the help succor and strength of the Lord, man's power is
unable and nothing. And if the living god, shall be with us, and fight on our
side, what can the swords of our enemies hurt or harm us. Therefore the
chyefetayne or graunde capytayne, (no time let pass, ne no tariaunce made) and
his whole army, with a pure sincere and unfeigned heart ought to give thanks
to the Lord offering up with a faythefulle mind, wherwyth god is pleased.

36. Whether it be lawful for christen men to make and styr up battle.
Least that some men, reading this my book, should doubt whether it be
lawful for christen men to styrvp battayl when that man slaughter, captiuitye,
rauyne, deflowrynge of mayde^s, and take demaynes, do follow thereof. To pluck
this fancy out of their mind, let them know in few words that warfare is
no syn, but he that keeps battle, highly pleases the Lord, which thing
does plainly apere by holy George, and David the elect prophet of god, and
by the battle and turname^t of Centurio. I leave of the testimonies of saint
Gregory, and other saints, which do say and affirm, that god is not displesed
with war. But what shall I say of the undoubted, and infallible saying of
Christ, which commands tribute to be paid to Caesar, that he may have to
bestow on his souldyers, and so to keep the world in peace and quiet, the
which peace, god the rewarder of all faythefull has left here behind him,
the only pawn, and pledge of his merciful goodness. Shall we therefore
dysproue christen warrefare, of which we have such a commoditye? The
souldyours also ought to be content, with their wages, and not to crave more
than their duetye is. But that such men, may with great praise and glory,
keep battle, mete it is these qualityes and virtues, to appear and shine in
them.

First that he be a temporal man, actyue and valiante. For the defense of his
contreye, and justice, casting no peryls, expert and cunning in warlye
feats, so ber and temperate in living, prompte to do all things, reasonable,
sowthefast and faithful, wyttye, merciful: and of good hope. If these things
shall be in the capitaynes, and rulers, what can be blamed in them? be they not
then acceptable unto god.

37. They that go on warfare, do leave their jewels behind at home.
When we go forth to battle, good it is to carye nothyuge with us, that is of
any valewe, except our horses, and harnays, no ne yet to leave any thing in
the camp, and tents, least our enemies be thereby strengthed and encouraged
to fight for the hope and desire of that pray. For all men be endewed with
this of nature, that for riches and vauntage sake, they think all perils
light and easy, all labors a play and sport. Therefore do we leave our
riches at home, least vnwyllynge we give mattyer and occasyon to our enemies to
fight, and so of dasterdes, make them bold: of cowardes, coragyouse.

38. To make the water noisome and vnhealthsome to thine enemies.
If we covet to make the water poison full to our enemies, it shall not be
unprofitable, to cast a great quantity of wood, broken and bruised a sonder, in
the upper part of the stream, whereby the water shall be bitter to the taste,
that neither me^ne horses may drink of it.

39. In what place the battle is to be fought.
The chyeftayne must forsee and provide, that his men may have a water
behind their backs, to refreshe and water their horses, and his ennemies
none, by which mean forsothe, he shall carye away the maystry, when his
enemies, and their horses weryed by long travail, and fight, can have no
refreshment.

40. To keep the city besyeged in faith and constancy.
Ofte^tymes it chances, cities to be be syeged, and therwyth to suffer great
famyne and honger (thonly tamer of men) over their huge and paynfull watchynges
in the same syege, which al do cause the cities rather and right way to give
up, and yield, except the captain by his policy, with fair words and
exhortacions, do keep the citizens in sure faith and constancy dissembling
and faynyng many things. In example and proof whereof I will note some
things hereafter that capitaynes instructed with my lessons, may search mo
ways, to keep the city, to their king or prince, obeysau^t and faith full.
Wherefore first the captain, ought to feyne letters, sent from his lord where
in he is promised, in short space to have more aid and succoure. And if he
shall perceive them waueryuge, and bente to yield up, he must go abowte at
some times, to persuade them, by orations decked and garnyshed with art, and
pyked reasons to pluck them from such a myschyfe, promysyng them all liberty.
Than after let him also labor, that letters fastened to shaftes, may be
conveyed by night, to the batelyng of towers in which some cityzen is
admonyshed by some good friend of his, in the army of their enemies, not to
yield and give up the city. For their captain is disceyptefull, and works
all by couyne and craft which (although his promises be fair) is minded with
fiere and swoorde, to destroy the whole city. And such other things are to
be feyned, which appear trouthlyke, that the countenance of the syege, may
not be grenous to the citizens.

41. To escape out of a narrow place.
It chances of tentymes, thine army wandering in hyllye countries, to enter
into some narrow and strayte place, besette couertlye, with thine enemies.
Where, what to do, or whyther to turn, thy men do not well know: wherefore a
skillful capytayne, must thus provide, yt if he be not of power to drive his
enemies, from thense by strength, let him day and night seche, when they be
without watch, and then sodaynlye, and unlooked for, rushe upon them. At other
times, let him feign despeyre, and retrace back in many skyrmysshes, layenge
some pyked and actyue warryours, in couerte embusshemente.

42. Of bows.
Fotemen with bows, which englysh men use: do great service in an host. For
there is no breast plate, which is able to wythstand, and hold owte the
stroke of the arrows, such force and vyolence is in bows.

43. Of the owtragyouse assault of thine enemies.
If thine enemies that be horsemen, be within a mile, and do come toward the
outragiously (the reins of their horses being let slack) stay there. And if
they be fotemen and be within half a mile, stand still, and gredelye receive
them, pantyng for werynesse, hertynge thy men boldly to fight, and to give
many a sore stroke, which thing may be done, when thine enemies be weryed.

44. To foresee the place round about, where the battle shall be.
Beware to give battle, except thou have before diligently viewed, by thy
self and thine espyals, if there be any ieoper dye of traynes and gyles, lest
thou overthrow thy self. When thine enemies at what time thou art most
earnestlye set to fight, shall oppress the sodaynlye, either on thy back, or
else on thy side: where thou shall yield thy self vanquyshed and taken,
because the defaulte can not be escaped ne helped, and al through thine
vnwarenesse.

45. To set upon thine enemies in their iourneye.
If we can know what way out enemies will take their voyage and iourneye, it
shall not be unprofitable, spedelye to prevent them, and getting a place
conuenyent to lie in wait, and set upon them unawares, lokyng for no such thing
For then undoubtedly, easy it is to ouermatche and conquer thine enemies.

46. What is to be done when our enemies ouermatche us in force.
It chances to have such men, our enemies whose force and strength uneath or
not at all we ben able to sustain: wherefore mine advise is to entreat the
force of our enemies, and beseech aid and succor at their hands, or to seek
for help of them that bordre on us, and been our neighbors, warnyng them
diverse ways of the ieopardye that is at hand of their lordshyppes, and if the
sooner they do not aid and releue them, they can not but yield and submyt their
selves, which thing shall be also great damage to them For the downfall and
burning of this house, is the fyrematche of the next.

47. what is to be done when we do fight in straites.
If both the hosts mete and join in strayte places, and neythet will recule,
one foot, but styfly endure the fight, then mine advise is, the cheftayne
(taking a certain of his strong and weyghtye souldyours) to assail his
enemies coming on their back, or one the one wing although the passage be
dangerous and long: whereby certes he shall attain a prayseworthye victory,
with little loss or none, of his men.

48. Of ouermoche confidence.
If we have gotten thupper hand, of part of our enemies, it is not good to
to^ tinue the battle, trusting in our puissaunce, and so hope on a greater
victory, lest we put in hasarde what we have gotten, encountrynge with the
whole host, which were fondely and rashly done.

49. Of the capitaynes commandment that no man take any prisoner.
If we purpose and travail to get a notable conquest of our enemies, the
capytayne ought to command, under a great penaltye, to his men, that they
take no prisoner, ne captyue, until he shall give some token of the same, which
policy is not the worst. For the souldyours shall then lose no time, about
captyues, but shall with al their force put to flight beat down, and kylle
their enemies. Which done, hereafter the capytayne may give the sign of
praycatchynge.

50. Not to depart from the place appointed.
Peticapitaynes be wont oftentimes, because they would be judged valyaunte and
skylfull, to depart from the place appointed, in hope of some pray, and
pyllage: which thing has been the cause of great slaughter, in many battayles,
and the loss of victory: wherefore the peticapi taynes must learn to be
obeysaunt to the commandment of their capitaynes, and not to seem more
wytfull then they be.

51. That the tents be not leafte vndefenced.
When the captain shall displaye and advance his baners to battayl, let him
beware that he leave not his camp vndefenced, and vnmaymed lest when he is
most enforced to fight, his vytayles be despoyled, his camp set on fire, (as
it is like to be) and after he shall have no such place so defenced, unto his
great damage and hynderaunce.

52. Of thine enemies falling in varyaunce and strife.
If the capitaynes of thine enemies do not well agree, it is then expedyent,
before they fall to an onement and concord intermyttyng no time to assault
them. For the maystrye then will be lyghtlye won, when not one, of a
stubburne stomach will consent and agree to thothers aduertysement. But had
leauer to be subdued of his enemies, then co^quere by the policy of his fooe.

53. Let thy men be redye in harneys, thine enemies lying at hand.
If the camp of thine enemies be pytched nygh unto the, suffer by no means,
not for any fair words of thine enemies, nor promysse of truce and alience,
that thy men ben out of harneys (chiefly the best part ne yet yt thy
souldours, neglect watch and ward. For not seldom times, it chances in
leage of peace, thy men to be beaten down, slain and conquered, by traynes
and wyles, whom prowess and manlynesse could never have subdued.

54. Of the besiegyng of cities.
Let not thine army doubt to setvpon cytis warded with all kinds of defenses
if they shall perceive dastardes, and vnscylfull fellows to keep the defense.
For high towers, strong double walls, can not defend those that be cowardes,
caytyfes, and rude of all warlye knowledge. Fear does stop their ears, and
dasyll their sight. Wherefore without taryau^ce when thou shall come to such
cytyes, set upon them round about, thonderyng as heaven, with noise and
outeryes, whom it shall be easy to vanqnysshe, without much blooudsheddynge.
But beware, thou slack not and abate thine assault, until thou have won
the city, lest their courages and force by sufferaunce, increase, and so the
siege shall be daily more paynefull and hard.

55. To make brydges with ropes.
Ancient capitaynes were wont to caryouer their army (because boots and
queres were scante and dangerous) with joined brydges made of wood. But
because stuff does sometime want to make such brydges, and long it is yer
they ca^ be done, mind advise is to make brydges with strong ropes, cast over
the water, knytte fast to pyles and stakes of woodde and in the mids of the
stream, underset with proppes and beams to make them styffe. For the easy
passage of thy men. And such ropes the army may always carye with them,
that they be not stopped at any water.

56. To revenge our enemies with like anoyaunce.
It chances often times, either for valiant prowess of our enemies, or ye
multitude of them that thy men do sultayne great loss and damage: which is
to be revenged most fiercely, with such an other like, and not to be
forgotten and un paid. For by such displeasures or vyolence should ben
enflamed to vengeance, whereby we shall keep our dygnytye, and purchasse the
good opinion of our souldyours, and also of the communaltie, which shall be a
stay to keep the same faith full and sothfast.

57 How to conueye the battayl from one place to an other.
If it be more dangerous and noyous unto the, to give battle in this place,
than in that, use this remeadye. Carye thine army unto the other countries of
thine enemies, besyegynge their cities, burning the villages, spoylyng and
wasting the fyeldes, and so cause them rather to follow the, then thou to
follow them. But for all that, do not leave thine own countries vndefensed,
desyryng to waste and destroy others.

58. To relyeue the scarcenes of water.
If cities and towns besyeged, have scarsitye of water, this remeadye is next
First to send out the base people, we^n and unprofitable, and then to kill
all the cattle, and lay them in salt for their sustenaunce, that the water
which was so wasted by them, may be kept, by which mean, they shall be able to
continue longer assault.

59. To recover cities and. towns lost.
If we have lost in summer time (oppressed with the multitude of enemies,
deceived by the defaulte of our men, or undermined with some trecherye) our
cities or towns, let us endeavor to restaure in winter time the same cities,
that the things lost by the slowthefulnes, of our souldyours, in summer time,
may be recovered with spedynes, and dilige^s in winter, and that we win
again and restore the fame of chiualdrye, by the again getting of our
losses. For good fortune, sometimes does ensue, by the change of time.

60. What is to be done when thou art ouermatched.
If thine enemies gredely pursue the, ne yet then thou art not able to defend
and wythstande their vyolence: best it is to carye thine army, to some cities
nigh unto the sea, both for the plentye and abundance of vytayle, and also to
refresh their broken strength, and wangled bodies, and chyefty to furnysshe
thy number, that thou may match thine ennenyes, as well in noumbre of men,
as also in valyantnes.

91. To set fyere on thine ennemies pauylions
If thine enemies pauilions be rered up, and made of dry stuff, travail with
all, haste, to set them on fire, and chief lie the wind blowyng hard. By
which policy they shall be despoyled, both of their cattayle, and other
necessary implementes. For the fire taken with the wind sodaynlye will ouerburne
all the pauilions. And than also thowe may have a good time, to set upon
them. For wha^ they be doubtful, what is to be done whether to resist thy
force, or to save their riches, (which they set more by than their life) they
may easelye be put to flyghte, and be slain, and so then shall atchyue the
victory without much bloodshedyng

62. What is to be done when we can not atcheue out of a place with our army.
We come somtymes by chance, with our army, into such places, where neither
long we can abide, ne yet saufely depart, or yet retreat without great
danger, than what is to be done in such trouble and uttermost discumfyture,
with all speed we must take counsel, wha^ that one way of our sauftye does
remain, that we take truce with them for a time and Promysse sure couenauntes
of peace by wytfull a^bassadours. Whereby it shall be sure, that thine enemies
more neglygentlye, will keep watch and ward. And thy time spyed, it shall be
light to pass by and escape either by night, or else by day, out of that
dangerous place. But sometime perforce thou must open a lane, and make a way,
by hard strokes and manfull fighting.

63. To make an assemble and show of horsemen in the face of thine enemies.
Mine advise is, that the number of our souldyours may appear great and huge,
to harneys the lacqueis of our horsemen, and apoynte them, to stand far of
like a garrison of men, with the points of their speres vpryght. For so thine
enemies will judge a band of horsemen there to appear, which shall much
affraye them, that we have yet so great a noumbre of souldyers at hand, to
succor and aid us if need require.

64. To refrain from the besiege of such cities which have daily new
succor.
Best it is to wythdrawe and leave of the syege of such cities, which fetch
unto them (maugrye our teth and in spyte of our hertes) daily new succor.
For the assault through their new aid, is hard yea almost impossible, when
lustye and strong men, occupy the rowmes of them that be wounded, and their
vytayles be so plentye, that they feel no lack nor skarsitye. Wherefore we must
all ways fight with fresshe men, new strengthes, and plentye of vytayles. But
yet suddenly to break owte, and besyege such cities I do not much dysalowe.

65. What is most expedient for the chyfe captain to do at the first entrye
in to countries.
If we make entries in to any country with an army, mine advise is, because
it were paynful, and hard, to lay syege to every town, and assault every
city, to send sage and honest personages, to promise, for a long time, the
release of their rentes, and affirm the same with faith and many oaths. If
wyllyngly they will yield and become his lyeges, and true subjects.

66. What is to be done in ye syege of bygge cities.
In the syege of great cities, taking a bygge compass round abowte, we must
with all labor: make and intercut not far of the citte, broad and deep
trenches defensed with turrettes of woodde, for fear of sudden eruption, owte
of the city, which is the cause of many incommodities, than broad ways must
be cast that the one part of the host, may have course and recourse to help
the other if need be.

67. What is to be done wha^ our enemies spies are taken.
If the spies of our enemies chance into our hands, mine aduisement is, to
grant them life, and give to them great sums of money, thereby to know the
counsel of our enemies, and their purpose, and semblable to tell to them
what things be most profitable, for us to know. For nothing is more
necessary, than to know the endeavors, of our enemies, when little or nothing
they can hinder what we do purpose. But if we shall send them away
liberallye, rewarded, demanding nothing of thaffayres, of our enemies, it
shall be a great argument of confydence and assured boldness in us, to the great
feae of orur enemies, But the captain may take counsel of things, and
perform what he shall think necessary.

68. Not to have one espy always.
Do we remember this, that it is not convenient ne yet necessary to use one
espy still. For they allured and enuegled, with ye hope of great rewards, do
bring our conueyaunces and affairs, to the ears of our enemies, and recount
to us such things, as be false and nothing necessary, with many false lies,
wherefore we must diligently forsee, that neither of the scoute watches, the
one know the other, for fear of craft and treachery which thing ones known,
to hang the^ is next remedy.

69. To know the fear and cowardice of thine ennemies.
When the hosts been at ioynynge, if we perceive the speres of our enemies,
to move and beat to gyther, that is a great sign of their waueryng, and
hollow hertes. And it is good sometime to know such tokens of cowardnes.

70. Of the duetye of bold and stout fellows.
It becomes not those that be balyaunt, to fear any ieoperdye, or to be
broken with the doubtefull change of fortune, when nothing is so vnweldable,
that by manlye prowes, and sufferaunce, may not be conquered and vndertroden.

71. To recover the health of thy souldyers.
If thine army be troubled with any disease, and you do covet to recover
their wounte health, it shall be the best, to carye them to open and hyllye
places.

72. A policy to disceyue and defraude our enemies.
Easy it is to trifle with our enemies, and make them believe that we be
vnharneysed if we cover our harueys, with some kind of raiment, under which
color and gyle, they will come hedlynge to fight, and with few rashlye, will
set upon us.

73. To get the favor of our souldyers.
If the capytayne be dyligente to heal them that be wounded, and also
cherysshe the sick folk, shortleye he shall win the favor of his
soldiers, so that for the increase of his renown, they will not shrynke: to
bestow and spend their life.

74. To have fyere to burn in water.
It shall be very profitable i^ wars on the sea, to have an artificial fire,
which with water can not be queanched, by which policy, the nauye of
Sarracena, was destroyed at Constantinople, and the king thereby paid yerelye a
hundred pounds of gold for tribute.

75. What is to be done when capytaynes do not a gree in one sentence.
It chau^ceth often times yt minds of yt capitaynes to be diverse and variable,
about the besiege of cities, where best it is first to begin, and there
chefely where the army is furnyshed with like power of diverse capitaynes. But
what is to be done in such a change of minds, shortly shall you know.
Write the names of the city and cast them into a pot, and the city which
shall first by chance be taken out set upon that wholye together, with one
force and power, which aduertysement is not the worste. For through such
dyscorde, the death of an whole army may rise and come.

76. Of false hode to be revenged.
Although other iniuryes may be suffered, and to forget them is a token of a
noble mind, yet dissoyaltye by all means is to be revenged and acquyted.

77. A way to lay siege to cytyes on the sea side.
When we may arryue and cast anchor by the walls of the city, mine advise is,
to drive thine enemies of the walls is this. First hard and fast, to bind the
mastes of the ships together with the gable ropes nigh some shore, and so to
make a bridge, that the gunnes may stand to beat thine enemies from the
walls, which ones driven away, it shall be easy on that side to set ladders,
and scale the walls to the wynnyng of the city.

78 Where we have only well water.
If for the great scarcity of water, we ben enforced to occupye well water,
great head is it to be taken, that such wells be not poisoned, by some
craft: to the utter destruction of their whole host, which sone may
chance, if we take not most dyligent care and head.

79. To chose a place to fight in.
When our enemies do prevail in force and nombre of men, and we can not avoid
but give battayl, best it is to chose a narrow and strayte place, lest our
enemies enclose and compass us round about, whereby we shall be sone vanquyshed
and ouercomen.

78. To mock our enemies.
If we be driven to flight on the hye see, for that we be not able to match
our enemies, and they make sail after us very swyftly, and ben even in our
tail, it shall be good to mock them thus. First to cause our nauye to stryke
sail, and make a brag as we would fight, that done, will the maryners (at a
sign given) to hoyse up the sails, to be ready to fly again, the which
thing when thine enemies shall perceive, shortly will they ship their ores,
and take them to their harneys, covering their heedes with their sallettes,
and brefely prouydyng all things which shall be thought necessary for
battle. The^ when we shall se our enemies harnessed, and ready to fight, (the
sign given) our nauye may make away with all haste, and fly. And they laden
with harneys, shall not recover to overtake us.

81. When thine host is in great ieopardye.
When thine army is in great ieoperdie, my cou^sayl is yt chief captain,
yea and al yt capitaynes, to light down from their horses, thereby to encourage
the hertes of their soldiers by their bold adventure and like danger, and
that more stoutlye and gredely they may fight, seeing their capitaynes being
in like peril, and fierselye encountrynge with their enemies, and so the
souldyours casting of all hope to fly, may cousydre this with them selves
either to vanquysh their enemies, or else to dye with glory and praise.

82 what is to be done when thine enemies ben at hand.
When the hosts ben in ioynynge, and both parts redye to fight, it is the
part of a pollityke and wyttie captain, to pmesse great rewards unto his
men, if they beatdowne and subdue his enemies with which hope they greatly
gladdened, will be more pressed to set upon their enemies and purpose with them
self never to give over, ne turn their faces, until they have atchyeued the
vyctorye, which assured opinion has been ye cause of many victoryes.

83. To provide that thine army may have suffysaunce of vytayle.
The duty of a careful captain is to foresee that his army have suffycyent
vytayles. For if they be sterued for hu^gre, impossible it is that they should
do any thing vyliauntly, when not only men, but also horses famysshed, do
lose their strength and lustynesse, whereby they be not able to stryke their
enemy, ne yet to defend their selves.

85. To provoke thine enemies to fight in joined battle.
If thou desire to join in battayl with thine enemies, and to come to
handstrokes, either for the great commodity of thine army, or for some great
need, mine advise is to dispeople the countries, wast and destroy the fields
round about, to cause thine outryders to raunge, hard to the pale of thine
enemies, or use some other kind of displeasure, wherhy they provoked, rashly
will give battle, and so according to thy desire, thine enemies shall come
forth. But yet remember never to join in battle, except thou have before
used some policy, or laid thy traynes, to entrappe thine enemies, or do
prevail in an excedyng nombre of men, and force of souldyours which be both
act yue and puissaunt. Then undoubtedly without any sleyghtes in plain
field saufely thou may encountre and join in battle with them.

Thus ends the book of James the Earl of Purlilie, dedicated to king
Ferdinandus, in the pear of our Lord. M. D. xxvii.
I Will be bold most gentle readers to put to this one precept of war. In
which I will somewhat to my poor judgment, show the nature of Englysh men,
that the capitaynes of England may know and be warned (which thing without
my warnyuge they do well follow and keep) although I shall do no great hurt to
leave that in writing, which they to their high praise forsee in their
wars, that Engysh men be not able to continue war, neither at home ne yet in
forayne royalmes, without vytayles.

Wherefore all capitaynes ought to provide, that their souldyours may have
meat and drink enough to fylle their bellye, or else they can not so fiercely
and gredelye continue war as they did begin. For Englyshmen of our nature,
be not content with so little meat and scarce food, as other men borne in the
hye countries be: For which cause, their strength is weakened, when that they
lack feedyng, according to the saying of Polidore, which says that none
army, never so great, is able to withstand a garrison of English men at the
first brounte and begyunynge of their wars. Which saying may thus way be
true, if they have not such plenty of vytayles to suffyce their appetyte and
hungre as they had at the beginning. For by hungre their force and fierceness,
does slake. Also all you capitaynes remember to praise and set forth with most
gentle words, the doings of your sold yours, and sometime to reward them
freelye, when with praise they ben encouraged and hearted to take in hand any
great enterprice, and for hope of richesse at the deuysion of the pyllage, and
both they will not fear to ieoparde their lives.

Wherefore they must be commanded at the winning of all towns and cities,
first manlye to fight and deliver them selves out of al fear of their
enemies, and then frelye every man to get what they can, and gather all
prays to their own use and profit. With which hope they will be so
encouraged, that the power of any prince, is not able to be are their force
and violence. For by nature men of the east country, be sharpened to fight,
and encouraged by hope and aduau^tage.

FINIS.
A table contaynynge the chapiters of the first book,
To chose the captain. Cap. 2. Of sufferaunce in war. ca. 3. Of the stowte
and valiant mind of a capytayne. 4. Of the assyege and assault of a city. 5.
Of a great army of our enemies. 6. Of the reproach of that capytayne which
howeseth his army in the summer time. 7. To spy and search a place to fight in
8. Of the apparel of the captain. 9. To know the manners and conditions of
thine enemies, before thowe make Battle. 10. Of the Germaynes and Frenchmen.
11. Of sedition to be appeysed among an army. 12. How to view the army of
thine enemies. 13. Of peace to be p^ferred before battle. 14. Of tempests
and other clamours, in an host. 15. Of the rerewarde. 16. Of great cities. 17.
In campyng thine army what is to be done. 18. To keep thy friends. 19. Of
quycknesse in battle. 20. Of the arraye to be kept. 21. Of a little multitude
in a city. 22. Of the hope and trust of sedicion. 23. What is to be done in
time of peace. 24. Of feigned rumors. 25. Of the office of the captain. 26.
To know whether a city is thy friend, or no. 27. Of confidence and assured
hope in battayl. 28 Of the situation of the city to be searched and known by
ye captain him self. 29. Of liberty to be kept and increased of all men.
30. Of the doubtful coming of thine enemies. 31. When the arraye of thine
enemies is troubled and out of order. 32. How to make thine Army strong and
lustye. 33. A policy to be used when thy men do for sake the. 34. To search
and boult out the counsayl of thine enemies. 35. Of them that be besyeged. 36.
What is to be done when two hosts do vex and pursue the. 37. A craft and
policy to take a city. 38. A policy to increase thine army without great
charges. 39. Of an healthsome law to be made in the city. 40 Of excess to
ben eschewed. 41. Of wantonness to be cast of in wealth. 42. To throw down
villages and castles vndefensed. 43. How to pourchace friends and to keep the
same. 44. To abydesyege. 45 When it is mete to fight by eruption. 46. To
interclude ye passage of our enemies, by fire. 47. A policy to stop the
flyeng of our enemies. 48 How syege is to be laid to cities and castles and
of them that be besyeged. 49. To avoid and escape traynes. 50. Of hostages and
pledges rather to be taken than to fight in open battle. 51. To stop an
haven. 52. To make hid and false, dyches to betraye thine enemies. 53. To
pass over a water with an army. 54. To know whether thine enemies ben
afraid. 55. To constrayne thine enemies to fight in open battle, and to
come to handy strokes. 56. A policy to fly. 57. When thine enemies snatche
up and destroy the last ward. 58. Of the notable falshod of the barbarouse.
people. 59. When few must make battle with many. 60 The office of the
captain. 61. To forbere holy things. 62. Of the capytaynes liberalitye when
the battle is won. 63. Of reproach to ben eschewed. 64. Of the capitayns
office in ioynyng of ye battle. 65. How to entreat thine enemies, the
victory obtained. 66. To keep leage and promysse of peace with our enemies.
67. Of the capitaynes office in accomplysshynge all things. 68. When thine
enemies army prepares passage over any water. 69. When thy souldyours be
astonysshed and fearful. 70. When scarsitie of vytayles is among our
enemies. 71. Battle is not to be begone but of necessity and constraynte.
72. To refrain from battle before we have devised and laid our traynes. 73.
What is to be done that our enemies may be persuaded their captain to be
slain. 74. To keep whole and saufe territories and towns. 75. That thine
army is to be lodged and kept in the marches of thine enemies. 76. What is to
be done when in winter we must fight. 77 Of pleasures to ben eschewed of the
captain and the host. 78 To chose a place to fight in when the son and
the duste may be noisome to thine enemies and in their eyes. 79 Of time not
to be looste, and vaynely. spente. 80. ^ Of good and evil doings semblable to
be rewarded as punyshed. 81. What is to be done when thy men be light and
spedye. 82. That examples do help to encowerage souldyours. 83. That nothing
be done against the capitayns commandment. 84. To restrain thy soldiers
sometime. 85 It is not time to fight when thine enemies do despair, and be
careless of their life. 86. What is to be done when we mystruste our
souldyours to ben afraid of the sown of gonnes and noise of them that wayle.
87. What is to be done when thine enemies are most part archers. 88. What is
to be done before the syege of a city. 89. Of rasshenes to ben eschewed of a
captain. 90. A policy to take the fotemen. 91. A policy to defeat and
disapoynte the gunners that they stand in no stead and use. 92. Of the office
of the capytayne i^ ordryng the affairs of his army. 93. To refrain as well
from the empire as from the treasures after ye victory. 95. To constrayne thy
souldyers to fight, 96 To tame fyerce people. 97. To dissemble retreat. 98. Of
exercise. 99. What is to be done when our enemies be conquered. 100 Wha^ few
must fight against many. 101 When thy souldyours must sleep. 102. To bring
suspicion of treason emonge thine enemies. 103. Of outewarde help that be
suspiciouse warely to be received. 104. Of discention to be aswaged and
appeased. 105. What time towns and cities may be despoyled and taken. 106 How
much the presence of the graunde captain does profyt. 107. Of the multitude
of enemies. 108. Of our enemies that be humble and tractable. 109. Of
daungerfulle and peryllouse battle. 110. It is mete for young men in their
youth to practice martial feats. 111. To increase the noumbre of thine
enemies by a rumor. 112 To prevent the wyles and traynes of a noble prince.
113. Of them that have long hear and long berdes. 114. Before we lay syege
to cities, good it is to possess the vplande fyeldes. 115. Of men wounded and
killed to be conveyed priuilye out of the way. 116. Of the requests of low
and humble per sonages to be herd. 117 To use cruelnes in the beginning of the
wars. 118. How to keep thy kyndome by boldenes and couragyousnes. 119 Of
chastitye in war. 120 Of cauillations to ben experiensed in ieo perdies by
capitaynes. 121. Of souldyers that do say evil by their captain. 122. With
what things thy souldyours are to be encouraged. 223. To pourchace the favor
of a strange country. 124. A capytayne must be liberal, and therewyth
praysynge the stoutenes of his men. 125. What is to be done when eruption is
feared. 126. What is to be done of the capitayn wha^ his army is in extreme
peril and danger. 127 With what thing the mind of the co^ mynaltye is
gotten. 128. Of the fashion to send letters. 129. How to allure thine enemies
to slyppe away and fail their capitaynes. 130. Of the badgeys of the
soldiers 131. Of kings and other princes, that keep not their faith. 132.
Of the vile condition of the common people. 133. Of a certain kind of
defense. 134. Of the swetenes of advantage. 135. Of a troublesome and unruly
multitude. 136 Of the duty of a good capytayne. 137. In a new render. 138. Of
the punysshemente of the capytayne, which forsakes his men. 139 To abstayn
from robbyng of temples. 140 To pursue thine enemies in ye chase. 141. To
dissemble retreat and fear. 142. What is to be done when great ieoperdies ar
to ben undertaken. 143. To abstain from treason. 144. Of the sagenesse and
eloquence of the captain in his orations. 145. To refrain from spoil and
pyllage before thine enemies be wholly subdued 146 To refrain from burning.
147. Of aid and succoure to be send to thy neighbors abbordryng on the. 148.
What it is to do some valiant act in the sight and face of thine enemies. 149.
Of a little power not to be contemned. 150. Of slouthfulness to be eschued of
the captain and all other. 151. To view and know the countries before thou
carry thine army there. 152. Of the increase of thine empire. 153 The
conditions of the captain. 154. what is to be done i^ ye besiege of cities.
155 A pollicye to know if thy souldyours be faithful. 156. Of the great and
huge coueytousnesse of the barbarous people. 157. How to carye an army over a
water, thine enemies resystyng. 158. The comfortable words of the captain,
when his souldyours be in despair. 159. Of thy soldiers worshypfully to be
buried. 160. When ye power of thine enemies is much stronger, what is then to
be done. 161. Of hostages. 162. To stint ye wepiges and scrikes of women 163 To
hyde and cover the slaughter. 164. To pacifye a strong and valiant warryour
which is displeased. 165. Wages are not to be eraued, when ye treasures be spent
and wasted. 166. To pass by little things yt be hard. 167. what is to be done
of ye chefecapitai^s. 168 To keep the possessyon of the thing ones gotten. 169.
Of the nature and condition of the common people. 170. Of a muititude of
gu^ners and crossebow shoters. 171. what is to be done when the walls be
beaten down. 172. what is to be done in ye slackig of cities 173 To set upon
the camp of thine enemies not warely kept. 174. what is to be done in slow
and slak siege 175 Of title things not to be despised. 176. Of war on the sea. 177. Of great perilles escaped and avoided by rashness and
foolehardynesse. 178. Of a certain kind of defense 179. where thine enemies
p^uayl i^ horsemen. 180 To raise the siege of any city. 181. Of cities yeldyng
them selves. 182 How necessary warly connyng is to souldyours. 183. Great
victories ben achieved with few and expert souldyours. 184. Of young men to
be chosen. 185. what men they should be to whom ye keeping of countries and
cities is committed. 186. Of the manner of fighting. 187. In what places best
it is to lodge thine army. 188. How to make strong thy camp with fortresses,
thine enemies assaultyng the. 189. To take our subjects rather then strangers
for souldyours. 190. What is to be done in the assemble and taking of
souldyours. 191. To keep thine army healthful. 192. what is to be done when
waters can not be avoided. 193. To chastise and agrieue thine enemies host.
194. To know if any spies lurk among thy souldyours. 195. To keep close thy
counsayles. 196. The oration of the captain to his host when they be
marchyngforth to fight 197 To take thine enemies by wiles. 198. what is to be
done with captyues and prisoners. 199. To find sweet water and fresh. 1000. Of
night battle. 1001. Of the duty of the captain in exercysyng his
souldyours. 1002. Of the duty of the graunde capitaynes in battle. 1003. Of
the foretoke^ and figne of battayl. 1004.
The Chapiters of the second book.
The proeme of the second book unto the laws of war. 1. Of them that yield
their selves to their enemies. 2. Of an outstrayer. 3. Of a spy or outryder.
4. Of ronneawayes and landleapers. 5. Of them that lose their harneys. 6. Of
them that do things prohybyted, and keep not the laws and decrees proclaimed.
7. Of them that raise up sedition. 8. Of a legion reculynge. 9 Of banysshed
personages. 10. Of him that is sendforth like a slave. 11. Of them that be
judged to dye. 12 Of the^ yt steal ye youth of chyualdry. 13. Of him yt
maymeth a young souldyer. 14. Of him that leaves his company. 15. Of them that
rebel. 16. Of disobedience and sturdines. 17 Of him that flees. 18. Of spies
and scowtewatches. 19. Of him that wounds his fellow. 20. Of runawayes and
traitors. 21. In what places the soldiers shall be forbidden to bye
vytayles. 22. Of them that leave night watch. 23. Of them that escape out of
prison. 24. Of a ronneagate and strydelande. 25. Of ye time appointed by ye
captain. 26. Of a disturber of the peace. 27. When thy soldiers be i^ their
journey. 28. Of them yt skater out of the company. 29. Of a captyne, 30. Of
them that forsake the captain. 31. Of gonners on horseback. 32. Of gonnes
called serpentines with other. 33 Of a profitable defense of the camp. 34. To
give thanks and praise to god after the victory. 35. Whether it be lawful for
christen men to make and styrvp battle. 36. They that go on warfare do leave
they^ jewels at home. 37. To make the water noisome and vnhealthsome to thine
enemies. 38, In what place ye battle is be to fought. 39 To keep the city
besyeged, in faith and constancy. 40. To escape out of a narrow place. 41. Of
bows. 42. Of ye outrageous assault of thine enemies. 43. To forsee the place
round about, where battle shall be. 44 To setvpon thine enemies in their
iourneye. 45. What is to be done when our enemies ouermatche us in force. 46.
What is to be done when we do fight in straytes. 47. Of over much confidence.
48. Of the capitaines commandment that no man take any prisoner. 48. Not to
depart from the place appointed. 50, That the te^tes be not left vndefensed. 51.
Of thine enemies falling in variaunce and strife. 52 Let thy men be ready in
harneys, thine enemies lyenge at hand. 53. Of the besyege of cytyes. 54. To
make brydges with ropes. 55. To revenge our damages with like annoyaunce. 56.
How to conuaye the battle from one place to an other. 57 To relyue the
scarsenes of water. 58. To recover cities and towns lost. 59. What is to be
done when thou art over matched. 60. To set fire on thine enemies pauilyous.
61. what is to be done wha^ we can not escape out of a place with our army. 62.
To make an assemble and show of horsemen in the face of thine enemies. 63. To
refrain from the besyege of such cities which have daily new succor. 64.
What is most expedyent for the chyefe capytayne to do at the first entrye into
countries. 65. what is to be done in the syege of bygge cities. 66 what is to
be done when our enemies spies be taken. 67. Not to have one espy always.
68. To know the fear and cowardyse of thine enemies. 69. Of the duty of
bold and stowte felows. 70 To recover ye heath of thy soldiers. 71. A
policy to deceive and defraude our enemies. 72 To get the favor of our
souldyours. 73. To have fire to burn in water. 74. what is to be done when the
capytaynes do not agree in one sentence. 75 Of falshode to be revenged. 76. A
way to lay syege to cities on the sea side. 77. where we have only well
water. 78. To chose a place to fight in. 79 To mock our enemies. 80. when
thine host is in great ieoperdy. 81. what is to be done, when thine enemies be
at hand. 82. To provide that thine army may have suffisaunce of vytayle. 83.
To provoke thine enemies to fight in joined battle. 84.
Finis.
Imprynted at London in the old Iewery by Edward Whytchurche. Cum priuilegio
ad imprimendu^ solu^.

These books are to be sold at the weste door of Paul's, by William Telotson.


