A CONSIDERATION OF the Papists Reasons of State and Religion, for toleration
of Popery in England, INTIMATED IN THEIR Supplication unto the Kings Majesty,
and the States of the Present Parliament.

Mich. 7.10. She that is mine enemy, shall look upon it, and shame shall
cover her which said unto me; Where is the Lord thy GOD? Mine eyes shall
behold her: now shall she be TRODDEN DOWN as the mire in the streets.

AT OXFORD, Printed by JOSEPH BARNES, and are to be sold in Paul's
Church-yarde at the sign of the Crown, by Simon VVaterson. 1604.

To the Christian Reader.
AS I have professed heretofore (in my Treatise against the Papists first
Petition) so here again I protest, that, this fourth Supplication being
directed unto his Majesty, I have not presumed to Answer any thing at all
thereunto; because I know his Highness Christian and heroical Spirit is only
worthy to give Answer in this case. Notwithstanding, seeing the impudency of
the Petitioners is so intolerable, that in so flourishing an age, and unto so
learned a Prince, they dare exhibit their idle fancies, and vain toies (being
utterly devoide of better Arguments) which they have scraped out of the
often-refuted writings of their own Sophisters, and couched together without
form or method; I have bin once again imboldened to consider of their
Reasons, which (I hope) I have proved in sufficient to force such a Conclusion,
as should be the overthrowe of our Christian Church and State, of the Gospel
and his excellent Majesty. I confess my pains herein might well have bin
spared, and indeed had I known so much in time, I would not have made this
parenthesis in my Studies; considering that a thrice-learned and reverend
Father of our Church M. Doctor Sutcliffe the worthy Deane of Exceter, has even
already (as the report goes, although I have not yet seen his Book) amated
these importunate and shameless Petitioners, and made them as mute as a fish,
not daring to exspect any other ANSWER (in reason) at his Majesty's hands,
but Le Roy ne le veu't pas* yet forasmuch as diverse books, being written in
diverse methods of the same argument or subject, are not unprofitable; I have
bin bold not to suppress what I had done already, committing the su^cesse unto
Almighty GOD, and my self herein unto the Censure of the learned, who (I
presume) can not but judge Christianly and charitably of my good meaning and
endeavor to promote the common cause, against the common adversary. Farewell.

Oxford, from St. Marie Hall. 13. of April. 1604. Thine ever in the Lord,
Gabriel Powel.

THE PAPISTS SVPPLIcation unto the Kings most excellent Majesty etc.
Most high and mighty Prince, and our deerestly beloved Sovereign.
How can Papists without blushing acknowledge his Majesty's title unto the
Crown of England to be DIRECT: seeing they have heretofore by tooth and nail
most indirectly and most unjustly oppugned the same Which traitorous Parsons
confesses; albe it, for excuse, he assures himself, that whatsoever has bin
said, written, or done by any Catholic against his Majesty, which with some
others might breed disgust, has been directed to the end (for sooth) to make
his Majesty nrst a Catho^ike, and then our King as if treason ^^^ed treachery
against his Highness could make him a Catholic; or the denying and impugning
of his direct and just title tended to make him our King. Rob. Pars in his
Treat. of three Convers. in the Dedicat. Addition to the Catholics.
SO many causes concur, wheresoever we turn our thoughts and these most great
of rejoicing as we know not with which we should begin the count, nor on which
to ground our chiefest joy. Your Majesty's, direct tide to the Imperial Crown
of the Reasme, both by lineall descent, and prioritie of blood, and your
Highness most quiet access to the same (Gods on^y work, above the
expectation of man) do, (as by most right they should,) exceedingly p^ssesse
and englad our hearts: Also the thrice fortunate uniting of the two Kingdoms
(which not seldom in former times have bin much infestuous one to the other)
and this after so sweet a mean, as by rightful deuolution of both Scepters to
the immediate issue of either Nation, cannot but in semblable proportion
multiply and advaunce our joys; nor can we any way doubt, but that thest egth
of the Monarchy (now in de invincible by the union) will ever be most able to
preserve these our joys unto us, and make them perpe^ual, either kingdom
being such a fortres and countermure to other, and both so abounding with men
and shipping, as no foreign enemy, how potent soever, unless he first be
weary of his own for^unes, dare ever adventure to offend or pick quarrel
unto: Likewise the hope and strongest affiance which your Majesty's reign over
both nations yields, of reducing the bordurers of either Country to Christian
order: of turning to commodity the vast quantity of ground, which, by reason
of the savage demeanor among them, has, time out of mind, layne wast and
unoccupied: and of enjoying peace, commerce and traffic with all Nations, a
blessing most sovereign, and which already is lighted on us in good measure:
Then, the unspeakable benefit of your Highness fit years to govern, and
your long and successful experience in the affair, being the Art of Arts,
and office of God, far more intricate d^fficult and combersome then any
other kind of ministration, or state of life on earth: Then also, the special
consolation which all men take in your Majesty's regatdfull love toward the
Nobility of the Realm, as having already restored some to their lost
dignities, and endowed others with honor and authority in State: Lastly, to
omit other infinite particulars of less moment, the good trial of your
Highness prowess, wisdom, judgment, clemency, bounty, compassion, the
edification of your exemplar life (of like force to your subjects for
fashioning their manners thereunto, as were the twigges of party color, which
the Patriarch Jacob laid before the flock of sheep he had in keeping, at the
time of their conceiving,) the noblest disposition of our young Prince and his
brother, the rare virtues of their Queene-mother, our most respected Princess,
and the hope of such store of children from both your bodies, as may to the
worlds end most renowmedlie spread and perpetuate the royal conjunction, name
and family: We say, all these, and other like gracious respects do so
abundantly replenish our hearts w th joy, as no temporal thing can more in
the world. And to the end these our joys may ever inhabit in our souls
prosperoulsly without change or diminution, we your Majesty's reuere^tly
affectionate subjects, do prostrately beseech your most Princely
consideration, to commiserate our Causeless complaints, not of persecution for
Religion, but of Christian Justice for treason.
grievous and long endured pressures for confessing the Catholic Roman faith;
the Popish Religion is the high and broad way to destruction, which we have
elsewhere proved as large.
all only mean (as we undoubtedly believe) of saving our lives eternally.

We do not presume (our dread Sovereign) to beg the allowance of some few
Churches, for the exercise of our Religion, nor yet the allotting of any
Ecclesiastical living toward the maintenance of the Pastors of our Souls (a
benefit that is not denied by the Princes and State politic of Toleration is
granted in other Countries of necessity and disability of the Papist^ part to
expugne and ruin the Protestants.
other Countries, where diversity of religion is tolerated, and infinite If
toleration brings with it such infinite good, wherefore do not the Papists
persuade the Pope, and all Popish Princes to embrace the sa^e?
good found to arise thereof) but the only degree of favor that we seek at
your Majesty's hands in th^s case, is, that out of your Princely compassion,
you would be pleased to An unreasonable request, as may appear manifestly in
the sequel.
reverse the penal laws, enacted by our late Sovereign against Catholic
believers, and to license the practice of our Religion in private houses,
without molestation to Priest or lay Person for the same. For this (most
gracious Prince) we entreat, for this we shall ever continue our humble
petitions, and the suite being (as our faith assures us) for the not
abolishing of Antichristian Religion, every true Christian knows, is neither
the Cause nor honor of GOD: but extreme dishonor, and blasphemy againest God.
Gods noblest cause and honor upon earth, and no ways against the Popery is
most pernicious unto the peace, strength and safety of the kingdom, as
appears in the Answer unto the Reasons of State.
peace, strength, or safety of the Kingdom, but rather much convenient (it
happily not necessary) for the good preservation thereof, and also, for that the
obtaining of the suite would bring unspeakable renown to your Majesty, with
all the chiefest Rulers of the Christian world, and endless comfort to
thousands (who otherways living against their conscience, must needs abide in
continual horror of Soul) we cannot think it a breach of duty, and less
think it a point of disloyalty, ever lowly to solicit, yea petitionarily to
importune your Majesty, for the happy grant of so manifold, farre-spreading
and universal a blessedness. And because we would not be thought to speak
unadvisedly in the premises, we crave leave of your gracious Majesty to
adioyne a few brief reasons for remonstrance of that which is said.

ANSWER.
TO speak nothing of this exceeding joy, wherewith the Papists pretend they
are affected, by his Highness most quiet access into the kingdom: although
wise men may well suspect their affection herein to be rather in show then in
deed and truth; and my self can testify that here in Oxford, at what time his
Majesty was proclaimed King of England, etc. A man might easily have traced and
culled out every Papist within this City, (if the rest were so affected, as
those whom I have either seen, or heard of) by his extraordinary and
unmeasurable yelling, howling, and sobbing for grief, that their long Weston.
de trip. Hom. Offic. lib. 3 cap. 8. page 122. lin. penalt.
expected day was not yet come, that their hopes were frustrated, and their
exspectational in vain; some of the simpler sort crying out in express
terms, Alas, alas, how shall the poor Catholics do now! we are all undone!
we are undone! whereas al his Majesty's liege Subjects, by manyfold tokens,
declared their extraordinary rejoicing. To speak nothing, I say, hereof; I
will come to the maine Proposition of the Supplication; which is, That his
Majesty would be pleased to reverse the penal laws, enacted by our late
Sovereign against Papisticall believers, and to license the practice of their
Religion in private houses, without molestation to Priest or lay Person for the
same. And because the Papists would not be thought to crave any thing
unadvisedly, the adioyne their reasons for remonstrance of what they desire.

The Papists Reasons for toleration of their Religion.
THe Reasons which the Papists allege for toleration of their Religion in
England, are of two sorts; Reasons of State; and Reasons of Religion. But how
forcible these are for their purpose, the sequel will declare unto the
indifferent Reader. First therefore let us hear their Reasons of State.


THe world knows that there are three kinds of subjects in the Realm, A
malicious calumniation of our Christian state.
the Protestant, the Puritan, and the Note the Petitioners policy in this
term: they say not Catholics, but Catholikly affected, to the in^ent that to
make their party the stronger, they might challendge, upon exception, all such
as be not zealous Protestant, children, neutrals, and such as be ready to
embrace any Religion; these the Petitioners term Catholikly affected.
Catholikely affected: and by general report, the subject Catholikely affected
is not inferior to the Protestant of Puritan, either in If you m^ane plainly
Papists, the world knows that, in comparison of the Protestants, they are but
as it were a handful of thieves amongst honest subjects howsoever you are bold
to brag that at this present there are within the Realm more Catho ikes and
Catholic Priests the^ there were forty years since. Matthew. Kellison in his
Survey, in the Epist. Dedic. almost at the latter end.
number, or allia^ce, or generosity of spitite and resolution. Which multitude
or third kind of subjects, would through the benefit ot the dispenall use or
toleration of their religion, hold themselves infinitely obliged to your
Mai^stie, and be ready in all occurrences very willingly to sacrifice their
lives and last drop of blood in any service soever belonging to the defense of
your Majesty's person, crown, or dignity: whereas being debarred of the said
favor and freedom of conscience (in which consists the true comfort of
soul, and all Christian courage) they must be forcibly drive^ to These be
fair shows; but their third Petition, even in the very beginning, by the
example of the Jsraelites Petition unto Rehoboam, and the effect thereof, which
they allege, declares what loyal hearts the Papists bear unto his Majesty,
in case of denial of their request. But his Highness is wise enough (God be
praised) ti prevent such revoults.
lament their hard fortunes to lie groaning under their crosses, and
consequently without spirit or forwardness in action, unapt for any
employment, as persons overwhelmed with grief and desolation of their most
piteous and miserable state.

Resolution of the 1. Reason.
The Papists, through the benefit of the dispenall use, or toleration of
their religion, would hold themselves infinitely obliged unto his Majesty,
and be ready in all occurrences very willingly to sacrifice their lives and
last drop of blood in any service soever belonging to the defense of his
Majesty's Person, Crown, or dignity.

Ergo.

Toleration of their religion is to be granted unto them.

ANSWER.
THIS reason the Papists have urged heretofore in three several supplications
exhibited by them at several times unto his royal Majesty; and is refuted in
the Answer unto their first supplication, page 20. Yet forasmuch as the
Petitioner has new furbished them same over again, and here even in the
forefront of this fourth Supplication placed it to be first considered, as the
maine and principal motive, whereupon his whole request is grounded: I will
not be a ggrieved to take the pains to refute it once again. I answer
therefore.

I. To the Antecedent.
1 If the Papists do not hold themselves obliged unto his Majesty, except
he grant the^ Toleration, the^ what cause have they to rejoice so much at his
access into this kingdom; as they pretend they do, in the beginning of this
supplication?

2 Their allegiance here promised, is upon condition, that his Majesty will
grant them free exercise of their Idolatry and superstition, but promise
nothing in case of denial. Yea they blush not to say expressly, that then
they will be without spirit or forwardnes in action, unapt for any employment
etc. and yet not without generosity of spirit and resolution, to practice
treachery against his royal Person, and the State; as they were accustomed to
do in our late. Soveraines days.

3 If the Papists had promised absolute loyalty and service unto his Highness;
yet could they not have performed the same: all their subjection and obedience
being anticipated and forestalled by the Pope of Rome.

4 Mercenary service, and obedience not performed of conscience, is like the
loyalty of Judas, who diligently attended his Master whilst he kept the
bag: and afterward, when he had no more hope to gain that way, perfidiously
and traitorously betrayed him.

5 If the Pap^sts were tolerated to exercise their religion freely, without
molestation; their obedience and loyalty unto the King would be much less then
now it is: because their Religion, in the Articles thereof, being treason
against the lawful auctority and State of Kings; they would profess and
practice the same, with more boldness and impudency the^ now they dare. And that
the Articles of their Religion be flatt Treason, I have proved already in the
Answer unto their first Supplication; which because they be but short. I will
here again insert.

I The Papists hold; That the Pope may excommunicate Kings. II That the Pope
has power to absolve subjects from their faith and allegiance. III That the
Pope may depose Princes from their scepter and crown. IV That any private man
may be made executioner to murder, or to poison the excommunicated King. V
That it is lawful to kill a Tyrant. VI That a King breaking and contemning the
common laws of the l^nd, may be deprived of his crown by the people. VII That
there be other causes for the which Princes, and great personages may be
slain. VIII That faith must not be kept with Heretics. IX That whosoever is
not within the communion of the Popish Church is an Heretic; and consequently,
that his Majesty of England is such a one. X That no Cleargie-ma^ can commit
treason against any te^porall King, because he is not the kings subject, but
the Popes. Vide Orat. ad Reg. Galliae de Restit. Jesuit. Et Eman. Sa in
Aphorism. Et Bellarm. lib. de Exempt. Clericorum. Et Catechis. Jesuit. lib 3.
cap. 26. page 235.
6 Again, seeing the Papists brag, eve^ in the time of their restrainte,
that they are not inferior to the Protestant or Puritan, either in number,
alliance, or generosity of spirit and resolution. What will they not dare to
attempt when their number is increased, by immunity of profession?

7 By virtue of Popish Religion the Ecclesiastical state, or Clergy of their
Church, are not the Kings subjects; but challenge immunity and exemption from
his Highness power, from his indiciall Courts, and in case of ordinary
co^tributions. Wherefore toleration would make these men yet more insolent in
withdrawing their allegiance from his Majesty.

8 Put case, Papistrie were not Treason against the Kings lawful power: and
also that the Clergy of that Church would become very dutiful and obsequious
unto his Majesty: yet were not toleration to be admitted. Because it would
breed innumerable troubles, and vproares in the state Ecclesiastical of this
land: which being disquieted and unsettled, the civil regiment cannot be long
in peace.

II To the Consequence.
1 Howsoever his Majesty might wish, in policy, that all Papists might think
themselves infinitely obliged unto his Highness, and be ready in all
occurrences to perform all serviceable duty, and awfall obedience in any
service soever belonging to the defense of his Majesty's person, crown, or
dignity: Yet cannot his Highness allow, or practice the means leading
thereunto, if they be simply unlawful, and prohibited by the law of God; such
as toleration of Idolatry and false worship is notoriously known to be.

2 The malice of Papists against the Gospel being unplacable, their
treacherous hearts against men of contrary Religion experienced and
sufficiently known, and their practices against his Majesty's person and the
State uncertain: it fits not the deep reach of a Prince so long experienced
in government, to cure the headache by knocking out the brains, to remedy
uncertain and lesser accidents, by opening free passage to most certain and
greater perilles.

3 The Papists may be compelled to become obedient and dutiful subjects,
without toleration of their religion: By abating their multitudes and lessening
their numbers, by banishing their Priests, by planting a learned ministry for
their conversion to true religion, and by the making, and due execution of
penal laws against the obstinate and stubborn* Recusant, etc.


Again, the Puritan, as he A manifest un truth, and slander of the state.
increases daily above the Prote^tant in number, so is he of a more presuming,
imperious, and horter disposition and zeal, ever strongly burning in desire to
reduce all things to the form of his own Idea, or imagination conceived, and
therefore by discourse of reason not unlike (the enterprise being to be
paralleled by many examples) to attempt the overthrowe of the Protestant, and
bring the kingdom, especially the Ecclesiastical state to a paritie or
popular form of government, if the Catholic (perchance the A loud lie of
insinuating companions.
powerablest let thereof) were once extinguished: and to extinguish him, no
mean more potent, then to forbid and punish the exercise of his religion. And
what confusion, havocke, and effusion of blood such an attempt would work in
the co^mon-weale, it is easy to conjecture, whiles the Melancolike
imaginations of malicious and restless brains, to set the State together by
the ears.
Puritan with his accomplices, and such as thirst (an infinite number) to have
matters in scustling, do impugn on the one side, and the Bishops, Deanes,
Canons, and the greatest possessors of Spiritual livings, with all those that
do adhere to them, defend on the other side, and either party stiffly and
violently persecuting other, as is the custom in such commotions, without
regard of God or country. Which disastrous and most deadly mischief cannot in
probability approach, or ever grow to head, so long as the Catholic finds
favor with your Majesty in enjoying the free use of his religion. Or put
case, the Puritan should ever adventure to make such an attempt, yet the ods
agains him (he having two sorts of adversaries, the Protestant, and the
Catholikely affected by the foresaid favor) are much greater then any way in
reason or likelihood the victory may be justly doubted of.

Resolution of the 2. Reason.
The Papists should be specially respected, and made much of, because they are
profitable members, and the powerablest let to hinder and curb the Puritanes,
who increase daily above the Protestants in number, etc.

Ergo,

Toleration of Papistry, must needs be granted.

ANSWER.
I. To the Antecedent.
1 IS not the Kings Majesty, and the whole Church of England infinitely
beholding unto the Papists for their hot service against the Puritanes? Poor
fools! who does not know, that al their proiects, plots, machinatio^s,
treacheries, designements and bloody attempts have ever been practiced for the
overthrow of the Protestant, and not of the Puritan? whose books have they
answered? whose livings have they gaped for? whose blood have they thirsted
after? was it not the Protestants? witness hereof, their naked swords, their
bloody pistols, their deadly poison, wherewith they have oftentimes attempted
the overthrow of our late Sovereign Queen ELIZABETH of eternal memory, and
of other principal Protestants of note. Witness also their books and
writings, wherein they solely fight against the Protestants, vomiting and
disgorging their immortal hatred against them, and infintly commending the
Puritanes before them. Westonus li. 3. de Trip. Hom. Offic. Cap. 16. page 226.
Protesta^tibus sure sacraprastabiliores Puritant. Qui enim estis Protestants,
hominum indicamens iguavissimi omnium, religionis etiam fuco destituti,
impijssimi aeruscatores, parati iurare in cuiusvis verba, modo inde emolumentum
rebus vestris accrescat. And in the 227. page Puritani sa^e multo solidius ac
sincerius sua dogmata profitentur.

2 It is a manifest calummation and sclander of our Christian Church and State
(I think) to affirm, that there are any Puritanes amongst us, who are of a
presuming, imperious, and hate disposition and zeal to reduce all things to
the form of their own Idea or imagination conceaved, who attempt the
overthrow of the Protestant, and to bring the Ecclesiastical state to a
paritie or popular form of government; and that such do in number increase
above the Protestant.

3 But suppose there were such Puritanes in this kingdom; yet the presuming,
imperious, turbulent, and hot disposed Puritan may be easily restrained,
without the Papists help; by conference, persuasions, penallawes in case of
obstinacy, etc.

II. To the Consequence.
1 To tolerate the Papist to exercise his Idolatry for curbing of the Puritan:
were as much as to suffer the Jesuit, to go on with his proiectes for
repressing of the Secular Priest: or contrariwise, to license the Priest to
practice his policy, for grubbing up and rooting out of the Jesuit.

2 As the Priest and the Jesuit are not to be licensed, to war the one
against the other, but are both to be expelled out of all peaceable
Commonwealths; so is neither the treacherous and seducing Papist, nor the
imperious and turbulent Puritan to be tolerated, to roost in any Christian
State, the one to impugn the other: but both are absolutely to be repressed
and banished.

3. REASON OF STATE.
MOreover, toleration of Catholic religion seems very convenient for
strengthening and securing your Majesty against all worldly Fond suggestions,
as appears in the Answer.
attempts foreign and domestical. Against foreign, in respect the cause why
any such trouble should be once intended, must needs be in all probability the
restoring of Catholic religion, which pretext or cause i^ quite removed by
your Majesty's grant of the free exerci^e thereof. Or if it should fall out,
that not withstanding the happynes of the said most sovereign favor, any
foreign Prince, or Princes confederated either on envy of your Majesty's
greatness, or upon fear of what consequence the union of the three Kingdoms
might prove in time should be so intemperate as either to inc^te companies
within the Realm, or invade upon the above named pretense, no doubt but all
Catholics would eftsoone disclose the practice, and most willingly strain the
uttermost of all their possible forces and resistance for withstanding the said
enterprise, made by whomsoever, and under what shadow of title or authority
soever. And if intestine war or any vproare should happen through any
disloyalty of the There is no subject likelier to make any up roares or mutiny,
then the Papist.
subject or other accident, there can be likewise no doubt (the Catholic
religion teaching all temporal obedience to Princes, and more severely
censuring and punishing all sores of Either the Suppliants speak by
contraries; or they equivocate in chic word Rebellion.
rebellion, then does either the Puritan, or the Protestant doctrine) but that
all Catholics would presently flock to the banner of your Majesty, and wi^h
the effusion of their best blood first guarde and protect your royal person,
and then defend all and singular your Highness rightes and prerogatives.
Abounden duty, as our selves do right widing^y acknowledge, and the contrary
a most detestable and treasonable offense, nevertheless the readiness and
performance of our serviles herein cannot but They speak by contraries.
increase your Majesty's strength and safety of the Crown and Realm the
things we desire to have believed, and would remonstrate.

Resolution of the 3. Reason.
Toleration of Popery is very convenient for strengthening and securing his
Majesty against all attemptes, foreign and domestical. Against foreign; for
Princes would not attempt war against him, the cause wherefore they
should do so (the restoring of Popish religion) being taken away. Or if any
did fight against the King of mere envy: then the Papists would disclose
their practices, and manfully take his Majesty's part. Against domestical; for
then also the Papists would play the me^, and defend his Highness against al
intestine adversary.

Ergo.

Toleration is not to be denied.

ANSWER.
I To the Antecedent.
THE Antecedent is altogether false in every part and particle thereof.

1 Popish religion cannot be convenient for securing his Majesty, being a
Protestant King: Yea the Papists themselves confess, that, in this case, it
is most dangerous and pernicious, both to his Person and estate. Principis
salus non patitur promiscuous conventus, aut religionum cultur confusaneos
Weston. lib. 3. de trip. Hom. Offic. cap. 14. page 198.

2 It cannot stre^gthen his Majesty against foreign atte^pts. For the cause
wherefore foreign Princes should attempt any thing against this kingdom, must
be, in all probability, not only Restoring of Papistry (which indeed the
Papists have ever attempted to do by fire and sword) but also (as we have
already said, in the Answer to the first Supplication, page 27.) violent
humors of ambition to a Monarchy, of malice and revenge upon supposed
indignities, the securing of their own greatness by impayring their Neighbors,
etc.

3 If Religion were the cause of such wars; yet would not the wars cease
for toleration: considering the Papists (if they be not restrained) will never
rest until they see an alteration, and full restoring of the Popish Idolatry.

4 If any of the latter cases should be the cause of war, yet cannot Popery
strengthen and secure his Majesty therein: Because it is not likely and
probable, that the Papists will sincerely and faithfully sight the bottailes
of a Protestant King, against a Prince of their ownereligion.

5 Popery cannot strengthen his Majesty against ^^rest^^^ and do^^esticall
forces. For in all reason, none are like to rebel at home, but Papists: as is
man fest by the example of all the civil wars, which have bin in England, or
Ireland this 46. years and vpwardes.

6 It is most probable that such toleration would rather breed dissension and
civil wortes at home amongst us, then any way hinder or stay the same.

7 Popish Religion cannot any way secure the King against neither forr^^^^ nor
d^^^sticall attemptes.

1 Because the Papister obedience and ^idelay is pinned upon the Popes sleeve;
who when he pleads, may discharge them from their alloageanes unto their
Prince.

II Because the Popish says wenkeneth the kingdom of people; considering the
great number of Priests, professed votaries, and other superstiuo^s persons,
with all their servants and attend^ts, that are exempted from the Princes
warries, yea from any con^^^^tion and payment to manta^^ them.

III Because all this superstition (...) breing rest^^ned fro^ma^^ge, whereby,
(...) ^^hoy had noch^ldren, or not daring to avow them most cruelly ^^^^dered
them I the posterity could not multiply any thing in such sort, as if it had
bin lawful for them to ^arris.

IV Because the practice of Popery impoverisheth the land of treasure: at is
manifest by the infinite sum^^^, which by a thousand means the Popish religion
draws spo^ all the states and kingdoms where it is received.

V. In this kingdom of England the ordinary revenewes and profits of religious
men (falsely so called) rose to one third part of all the land, in the reign
of Noble King HENRY the VIII. The furniture of their Churches with so many
copes of all sorts of rich sluffe, was such as no King or Prince could wear
better. Their massy crosses of silver and gold, their Idols of finest
metals; their ordinary charges of wax incense etc. the plate and jewels of
Abbeiest. Priories, and other superstitious houses, were of infinite value and
price, (as I think) the Court of Augmentation might sufficiently testify.
Besides all these, the extraordinary charges of appeals and following suites
at Rome; the payme^ts imposed by most tyrannous oppression both upon King.
Nobles, and all the people of the la^d; the treasure drawn out of this
kingdom, by names of Perter-pence. Palles, collatio^s, first fruits, and
thousand such crafty and subtle titles of most extreme exactions, did so
impoverish the state, as both the Kings, the Nobles, and all the people did
grievously complain, as finding indeed the Court of Rome to be the very
leach, that suckr the blood of all the land, and could never be satisfied.

8 Certeinely in respect of their own, Antichristian kingdom, I must needs
confess, that for the establishment, continuance, security, wealth, and honor
of the same, the Devil himself (whose depths their Popes and Peelass
understood) could never have devised any thing more politic and sit, then
that which was devised by them.

II To the Cousequence.
1 If the Antecedent were true, yet ought nor the consequence be granted. For
(...) is to be done this good may come thereof.

2 His Majesty may be secured from all attempts, foreign or domestical, (God
be praised) without the Papists help: Yea he is then most secure, when they
are farshest off.

IV REASON OF STATE.
FVrthermore, both the suncient Philosophers and the Statesmen of latert me
do wrie, and common sense proclameth, that the glory, puissaunce and
stablenesse of a kingdom, consist more in the true virtue and goodness then
in the store and multitude of subjects; because verstue begeneth glory, and is
the cherisher of fortitude, both which disdain nothing more then treachery and
baseness of mind, the common slewees which convey into all estates all that is
dishonorable. And it is seldom, if ever seen (most noble King) that they who
are comstant obedient and faithful to God in the religion they No man can be
faithful to God in a false religion.
believe, are not likewise true, subiectiue, and faithful to their King in
all duties The Suppliants should plainly declare what these duties appertaining
are.
appertaining. For as grace, the fear of sin, and the love of heaven do
work them to the performing of the one; so will the same grace, fear and love
(the neglect being of equal damage in both) induce he^ to observe the other.
Nay, they both are so nearly allied, depend so absolutely one of the other,
and are alike essentially Imcked together, as the one cannot be either laudably
or in dissefulfilled and the other not accomplished.

How constant and faithful the Catholic has carried himself in the religion
he professes, it appears by this, that neither the Where divellish super
otisis sittesh Judge, there neither Na^re nor Reason in aydare to plead the
cause. What marveil then if desperate Papists, neglecting their own safety, and
their Princes wercis, have endured less, embraced the gallows, and wilfully
suffered the just reward of death? Have not Pagans and Jusidels suffered many
things for their own Idolatrous devise? Have not the benis womed winds of
miserable men, by the subtle delusion, of Saran ben so bewitched, that they
have not hinafraid to offer both themselves and their yourg bobes through vio
uts flamec for the devils sacrifice?
paying of twenty pounds a month, only for not going to the Piotestants
church, or where his ability could not afford so much, there the leesing of
two parts of his livings, and the utter forfeiture of all his goods, nor making
of Priests (the seeders of their souls) to be maitors and their receavers,
sellons (laws and penalies that never, A wanifest slander, and vntrush.
had similitude of instance or president in the world) either did or could
make him to deny, or exteriorly to disguise his religion, or relinquish to
practice it: proofs, in all understanding, most sufficient to convince, that
he dreadeth God, fears to offend his conscience, and that he Christialy
seeks to save his soul. And if so, the^ as we think there cannot justly be
made any doubt, but that he will likewise show himself obedient and dutiful
to his Sovereign in all things that belong to How the Suppliants show
themselves in their right colors, they will needs divide their obedience, and
serve his Majesty in temporal maiters, as far forth and so long as pleas^^h
their spirimall Lord. Inferences that would make a horse breaks his Iuidle.
temporal allegiance, or wherein soever the omission may taint or endanger
the safety of his soul.

Of that which is said, we would, under your Majesty's gracious leave,
infer, that the Catholic subject is (if any other) the glory, strength and
perpetutie of the Kingdom, because he prin pallie seeking: heaven in this
world, Abraham said to Dives, Remember that in thy life time then receavoof thy
pleasures. Luke 16.25. And Christ unto his Disciples for the world you shall
have affliction: Ioh. 16.33. The Popists looks for heaven hear, and for hell
loveafoor.
will not for the world be diverted, cannot be treacherous or disloyal, or
undutiful to your Highness, but in every service, and distress occourring,
vndiant, re oues and most faithful. By which it seems maniest, that it the
Laws of our deceased Queen should not be repenled; but more, if they should
be re established (a rigor which in it self presently, imbarketh us into all
calamities) alas your Grace does not only thereby deprue your They hopely
monacing his Majesty is exters their request
Imperial crown and Realm of the best meriting aflection, and suppressingly
disable those your subjects, who otherwise would for their qualities stand your
Majesty and their Country in good service, and due much ong for opportunity to
make known their readiness that way; but your Highness by the same shall also
give occasion to the frailer sort, of adventuring their souls to everlasting
damnation, by dissembling their faith and religion. Which inconstancy and
vomanly part of theirs, how little credit or reputation it ought to bring unto
the^, or is cause of trust to your Majesty, we leave that prudent and
heroical example to inform your Highness, which Niceph lib. 6. cap. 35.
Nicephorus and others record of the Emperor Theodocius, who seeing aspeciall
minion of his to have changed his religion, thereby to please and wind himself
into greater favor, judged him to loose his head, saying, That is, how can
Papists who are mainers unto GOD, but be Traisours also unto then Prince.
Si Deo fido^ sincorow non ^^^sli, quoinodo mini qui homosum, conscieniant
sanam prestabis? Thou that have violated thy faith with God, how is it possible
thou should lest keep thy sidelitie with me being a man?

Resolution of the 4. Reason.
The Papists who are constant, obediout, and faithful to God in the Religion
they boleeve; will be likewise true, subiective, and faithful to then King in
all dwens appartarring.

Ergo.

The Papists ought to be ^^l^r^^^d firsty to exercise th^^ Religion.

ANSWER.
I. To the Antecedent.
1 IT is not enough that a man be constant, obedient, and faithful in that
Religion which he believes, except that his Religion be the only true
Christian Religion given of GOD for the saving of our souls.

2 Constancy and obedience in any Religion, does not infer subjection and
faithfulness (of conscience) toward the Magistrate: but only constancy in the
true Religion.

3 The Papists are not constant, obedient, and faithful unto GOD in their
Religion; because their Religion is not of GOD, but of the Devil; and
therefore the worship which they perform in their Religion, is not done unto
GOD, but unto the Devil; See Deuteronomy. 32. ver. 17.

This Reason is thus co^vertibly verified of the Papists. The Papists who are
traitors unto GOD, are also traitors unto the Magistrate, Again, The Papists
who are traitors unto the Magistrate, are also traitors unto GOD.

5 If the Papists were constant, obedient, and faithful in their Religion: yet
can they not be so unto the Magistrate; because their Religion, in the Articles
thereof is treason against the Magistrate, as I have proved before. Hence it
seems that the Petitioner aequivocateth in these words, in all duoties APPERT
AINING: for happily, he will infer, that in what displeases the Pope, at
APPERT AINETH not unto Papists to obey.

6 The more devout and zealous the Papists be in their Religion, the more
treacherous and pernicious they are unto his Majesty and the State.

7 His Highness, and the State have had too much experience already of the
loyalty and fidelity of Papists toward their Magistrates.

II. To the Consequence.
1 If the Papists were true, subiectiue, and faithful unto the Magistrate: yet
cannot the Magistrate permit the free exercise of their Religion, being so
repugnant unto the laws of God.

2 If the Magistrate could permit this; yet were he not in policy to do it:
considering that scabbed sheep will sooner infect the whole, then the whole
cure the scabbed.


BEsides, the good that, to Blinded with affection and partiality.
our understanding, would redound to your Highness and the whole Realm, by the
grant of a toleration, is Still they speak by co^traries.
manifold and very great; for that the same could not but Melancholic
speculations of idle and ungodly persons.
beget and foster a right earnest and zealous aemulation, or holy strife among
your Majesty's subjects, differing in Religion, who should exceed the other
in duty, service and love toward your person and affairs, whiles every one
enjoyed the freedom of his conscience, a mean of all others most likely
Weston, and others deny it, and affirm the contrary.
to make your own state and person very secure, renowneable and blessed: your
kingdoms opulent, peaceful and invincible your subjects studious, serviceable
and loving, and in all employments, pressing to surpass one the other in care
and diligence. Then the which, nothing can be thought that is either more
happy, more glorious, or more general; and which earthly heaven, if it be any
other way to be attained, it seems soonest, by granting a Wherefore do not
Popish Princes procure this earthly heaven by gra^ting of tolerati^^^
toleration of Religion, and by indifferently preferring the Professors,
according to every man's desert, quality and sufficiency: because all being in
this manner in eressed in your Graces favor, and impartially tasting the sweet
thereof, cannot be but all fastest united in the defense of the Realm, and in
tenderest safeguard of your Majesty's person, crown and dignity.

Resolution of the 5. Reason.
Toleration of Papistry would beget and foster an earnest and zealous
emulation, or holy strife among his Majesty's Subjects, differing in Religion,
who should exceed the other in duty, service, and love toward his Person
and affairs.

Ergo.

Toleration is to be granted.

ANSWER.
I. To the Antecedent.
1 THe Papists with intolerable boldness, with Lucia^like impiety, and horrible
injury unto his Highness, imagine, nay would have others think, the Kings
royal Majesty to be an Atheist or an Epicure, that cared not for Religion,
nor for GODS worship, so his estate might be secured, and his Person honored of
all men. Whereas his Majesty's constant profession of the Gospel of Jesus
Christ, from his cradle unto this day, manifestly demonstrateth unto all the
world, that his royal heart is most sincerely religious, and no colluder with
Heretics.

2 The Papists themselves testify, that it is impossible for Protestants and
Papists to live together in the same civil society. Fieri non potest, ex
institutis politicis, vti tam disparis sententia cultores commode cadem
societato civils continaantur. Weston. lib. 3. Cap. 14. page 198.

3 And indeed unto a man, though but of mean understanding and knowledge in
the estate present of the world, it cannot but seem impossible, for the
Protestant and the Papist to inhabit and commerce together, considering the
intestine and implacable hatered of the one against the other.

4 It is not wisdom to prove the Papists fidelity in a kingdom, nor to make
trial of their earnest and zealous emulation in so rare a jewel, as his
Majesty's person is, for all their flattering speeches: but rather to keep a
vigilant and jealous eye open over them night and day, that they may not be
able (how willing so ever they would be) to do any thing to the annoyance of
his royal person, and of this noble state and kingdom.

II. To the Consequence.
1 It is a gross error in Theology, to commit sin against the Majesty of
GOD, to gain the greatest good that may be: much more to gain a little
worldly honor, or other public or particular advantage.

2 It is a gross error in policy, for gaining of idle and momentanie
reputation, to make choice of certain mischief.


NEither would toleration of Catholic Religion bless your Majesty and all
your several Dominions, with the happynes precedent only, but the same would
also invite all the Catholic Kings and Rulers in Christendom (being
incomparably more in number and potencie, han are the Protestant, Puricane and
Lutheran Potentates) to seek and continue a true and real league, both of
peace and A thing v^^^^ unlawful, and conde^^ed to the word of God. R^^d the
Answer.
amity with your Highness (the sourse and self life of princely felicity)
and make your Majesty's choice of ^^^^ful also.
matches for your children far more noble, rich and ample, in regard (...)
Catholic Prince will refuse to entertain, yea to me for like treaty, where
toleration of his Religion, is by Royal assent permitted.

Resolution of the 6. Reason.
Toleration of Popish Religion will ^^^ite all Papisticoll Kings and Rulers in
Christendom to seek and (...) a true and real ^^^gue, b^^^^f^eace and ^^^ty,
with her Highness; and make his Majesty choice of matches for (...) children
^^ble, (...), and ample.

Ergo:

Toleration is to be ^^br^^ed.

ANSWER.
I To the Antecedent.
1 Faithful Christians may lawfully join with faithless Idolatrers and other
Infidels in league and so^^^^ of Peace and Concord: because by the general
calling of Christianity they are bound to have peace with all (...). (...)
12.14. Romans 12.18.

2 As for the league or society of Amity, that is, of familiarity and special
love; Christians may not join therein with Idolatours and Infidels. Protestants
may not contract league of mutual aid and protection with Papists.

I Because it makes Idolatours and Infidels boast, that the people of GOD
cannot stand without their aid. II Because it is a farther occasion of
Idolatry. III Because this league often infoldes the people of GOD in the same
plagues and judgments with Idolatours. IV Because Iehoshaphat for making this
kind of league with Achab was reproved. 2. Chro. 19.2. Would thou HELP the
wicked, and LOVE them that hate the Lord? Therefore for this thing the wrath of
the Lord is upon thee.
3 GOD forbid that any Christian Prince professing the Gospel should match his
royal Children with Idolators, which the Scripture precisely condemns.

I It is an abomination in Israel, and a profanation of the name of GOD, when
Judah marries the daughter of a strange GOD. Malach. 2.11. II Such as do so,
profane the covenant of GOD, conte^ne their Brethren, and pollute the Church
of GOD, which should be holy and undefiled. III The Lord will cut of the man
that does this, both the Master, and the Serva^t, out of the tabernacle of
Jacob. Malach. 2.12.
II. To the Consequence.
1. His Majesty has peace already with all Christian Princes and Nations (GOD
be thanked) without toleration of Papistry.

2. If he had no peace already, yet were it not lawful for his Highness to
procure it, by sinning against GOD; in licensing the exercise of Idolatry.

3 As for the league of Amity, either in special love and protection, or in
contract of Marriage; the same being unlawful in it self, cannot any way
infer hateful toleration of Popery.


IT is affirmed in holy Writ, that Mercy and Truth preserve the King, and his
Throne vestablished by clemency; Prove. 20.28.
Avowances, which before they were written, the great Monarch Artaxerxes well
observed and trusted unto. For, ruling over many nations, and having subdued
the whole earth unto his domin on, concluded nevertheless with himself (as it
is read in the book of Esther) To govern his subjects with clemency and
lenity. Cap. 13. v. 2.
And the reason is plain, for that the love of the subjects (soonest and most
woone by these virtues) is the strongest Castle, in the world, an army, if any
other, most puissant, and a bulwark inexpugnable. And as nothing can sit so
near a Christian man's soul, as the religion he believes: so undoubtedly no
mercy, no clemency, no lenity, of what nature, or in what matter soever, can
relish so sweet, so lastingly grateful, so forcibly binding, ravishing, and
as it were, conturing the hearts of subjects, as does the mercy and benignity
which is showed in licensing A plain inco^sequence, which no ways follows
out of the premises.
freedom of conscience, and the exercise of their religion. So that by
permission of Catholic religion (a religion that of all other kinds
o^religion, has A manifest untruth.
most and worthiest Professors in other Kingdoms that next border upon your:
Highness, and neither the Another untruth.
least, nor meanest sort of subjects within your own realm) your Majesty may
make millions in and without your territories, so entirely and affectionately
These me^professe they will woi be de voted, unto his Majesty, without
toleration.
devoted to your person, crown and posterity, as no attempt, no danger, no
tumult can arise, wherein your sacred Majesty shall not find They speak by
contraries.
present and securest harbor.

Resolution of the 7. Reason.
Mercy, clemency, and benignity, which is showed in licensing freedom of
conscience, and the exercise of religion, soonest and most of all wins the
love of the subject, wherein his Majesty shall find present and securest
harbor against all attemptes, dangers and tumults.

Ergo. The free exercise of Popish religion is to be admitted.

ANSWER.
I. To the Antecedent.
1 IT is certain that Princes do, as it were, flow into the hearts of their
subjects, by Mercy and Clemency: and that Mercy and Truth preserve the King, as
Solomon says Prove. 20.28. Mercy, in ceasing from grievous exactions, in
releiving the poor and the oppresled, and in using moderation in punishment.
Truth, in keeping of his promises and covenants, in preserving and due
executing of his laws: By these the Kings throne is established.

2 But here must be observed the difference between true Mercy and Clemency,
and preposterous lenity and pusillanimity, in sparing the wicked, who should be
severely punished. Prove. 20.26. Awise Kingseattereth the wicked and causes the
wheel to run over the^. Prove. 17.15. He that instifieth the wicked is an
abomination to she Lord. Prove. 24.24. He that says to the wicked. Thou are
righteous, him shall the people eurse, and the muliitude shall abhor him. v.
25. But to them that rebuke him, shall be pleasure; and upon them shall come
the blessing of goodness.

3 Preposterous mercy showed unto the wicked and disobedient, is cruelty
toward the good and loyal subjects. Prove. 16.12. The throue is established by
instice.

4 If any be to be accounted wicked, if any be pernicious unto civil
government, and the throne of Kings, it is the Idolatrous, the seducing and
tutbulent Papist; of whom the Lord particularly says, Rewaraber as she has
rewaraca you etc. Apoc. 18.6.7.

II To the Consequence.
1 The Consequence has not the least coherence with the Antecedent: wherefore
it may justly be denied.

2 The love of Papists unto the Magistrate is not absolute solute of
conscience, but for private respects, and but during the Popes pleasure,
wherefore it is not much to bear: guarded.

3 If it were to be regarded in it self; yet is it not wore thie the least
respect, when question is made of toleratio^: the mischief of this, infinitely
surpassing the commodity and profit of the former.


IN few words, for that we are loath to be A good excuse: whereas indeed they
are quite destitute of any arguments.
tedious to your Majesty, in multiplying of reasons, beside the pleading of
these and other like regardfull Motive, that might be alleged, which do all
how directly they stand for to ler ation the Answer shewath.
direct y stand for toleration, we further think (under your Majesty's
correction) that the permission of the liberty we entreat, is, neither in
reason of State, a thing Most pernicious unto the Stare.
hurtful, nor by the doctrine of Protestants A thing cloane contra it to our
doctrine.
un awful to be granted. The first is clear by the example of Germanit,
France, Poland, and other Countries, where diversity of Religion is licenced
by supreme authority, and the like Non causa pro causa.
found peace wrought and established thereby, as both make the said Dominions
and Territories to flourish, and could n^uer (though of labored) be brought to
pass by force of war or bloodshed. The other like-wise is as little
doubtful, if not better known, he Protestants Bold assertio^s, but no proofs.
books, their Pulpits, their private writings, and Discourses sounding nothing
more (whilst they had not the Sword and Scepter on their side) then that it was
unlawful, tyrannical, yea diabolical, and Antichristianlike to punish any
for matter of mere conscience, faith and religion. And the favor we sue for,
is but the benefit of that pofition which Who be they? wherefore are they not
named?
they held for most true and scripturall: so that if they should now depart
from that doctrine, they most needs give the world to see, that either then
they did wittingly mainetaine the pofition against truth, only to serve their
own This is just your practice as this time, in supplicating for soleration,
being a point of doctrine against the stream and currens of your own men.
turn withal (an engraven blemish) or generally erred in that point of
doctrine (a blot of no less discredit unto them) which breaching clemency,
did most recommende, and gave greatest increase to their religion.

And if the Petition we prostrate, and do most uppliantly beg of your
Majesty, be neither prejudicial to matter of Stat, nor repugnant to the
doctrine of the Religion established and regnant in the kingdom, as the
proofs afore-going Maine things seem which are non and so do those proofs
you speak of, for indeed they are no proofs (...) all.
seem to make plain, we hope there is no other exception that can justly
impeach, and many several respects that may much further the obtaining of our
request at your Graces hands.

Resolution of the 8. Reason.
Toleration of Popish Religion is neither in Reason of State hursfull, as is
clear by the example of Germany, France, Poland, and other Countries, where
diversity of Religion is licensed by supreme auctority: nor, by the doctrine
of the Protestants, unlawful to be granted.

Ergo:

Toleration is not to be deuyed.

ANSWER.
I To the Antecedent.
THe Antecedent is notoriously false, for it is both pernicious unto the State,
and also contrary unto the doctrine of Christ, which we profess.

2 FIRST, it is not only pernicious, but also the very overthrow and ruin of
the State.

I Because it draws GODS curse, and provokes his wrath against the same,
subiecting it to male diction.

The Prophets and Apostles teach us, that no kingdom, no State can prosper; no
Prince, no Potentate, no people can be wise, or blessed in their government,
but by honoring and obeying almighty God, in such sort as he has appointed.

Which doctrine oftentimes is repeated in the law, wherein it is declared
unto the people of GOD, that this should be their wisdom with all nations,
which should say, swely this only is a wise and a politic people, if they
kept, without adding or diminishing, all the precepts which GOD commanded.

The promise of blessings unto the obedient; and the threatening of curses unto
the disobedient, with taking heaven and earth to witness that they should
find it so in the end; does plainly testify, that such religion must needs
be good, for the establishing and prospering a Commonweal, which the Lord
himself has left unto us: and contrary wise, that no false service of him,
can be good for any State; but that it continually provokes the curse and
indignation of GOD against it. Deuteronomy. 28. Deuteronomy. 30.19.

Therefore was the King commanded to take a copy of the law, to have it by
him, and to read in it all the days of his life; that he might learn to fear
the Lord his God, to observe all his words and statutes by doing of the^, that
his mind might not be lift up above his brethren, nor he depart from the law,
to the right hand or to the left; that he might prolong his days in his
kingdom, and his sons in the midst of Israel. Deuteronomy. 17.18.19.20.

To like effect it was said unto Joshua, Let not the book of this law depart
out of thy mouth, but meditate in it night and day, that thou may diligently
observe as it is written in it. For then, thou shall prosper in thy wates, and
have success in thy affairs. Josh. 1.8.

For this cause, the Kingly Prophet exhorts Kings to be wise, and judges to
be well advised, that they worship GOD, and his anointed: denouncing unto the
enemies the Almighty power of Christ, to the confusion of all that set
themselves against him, whereby he should be able as easily to break them, as
a man with a bar of iron does dash in pieces a pot of earth. Psalm. 2.10.11.12.

To this purpose, notable is the speech of Asaria the Prophet unto King Asa,
and to all Judah and Benjamin, when the Lord had miraculously foiled the
innumerable multitude of their enemies. The Lord (says he) has been with
you, while ye have been with him, and if ye will yet seek him, be will be
ready for you; but of ye for sake him, he will for sake you. According to
that which the man of GOD had said before: I will honor these that honor me,
and despise those which despise me. 2. Chron. 15.1. Sam. 2.30.

This doctrine was sealed in the casting away of Saul: and in the choosing and
prosperous success of David, as he often acknowledges. 1. Sam. 15. Psalm.
18.2. Sam. 22.

Likewise in Solomon, the most wise and politic Prince that ever sat in the
seat of David, or ruled any people in the world, who because he fully
established the service of GOD, according to all that had bin commanded by the
Prophets; the Lord also established his seat, and increased his glory above
all the Kings of the earth; till he began to decline from the Lord his God; and
brought the abominable Idols of the strange women, whom he loved, into his
own kingdom and houses. 1 King. 10. Then the Lord raised up his servant
against him; who also in the days of his son, so rent away the ten tribes of
Israel from the house of David, that they never returned unto it again.

This was the speech of the Prophet Shemaiah to Rehoboam and the people of
Judah; Thus says the Lord, You have for saken me, therefore will I also
abandon you, and give you into the hand of Shishak. which was performed, but in
mercy upon their repentance. 2. Chron. 12.5.

Abuah King of Judah, obiecteth against Jeroboam that he could not prosper,
because he had erected Idols in his kingdom, and had made him Priests contrary
to the law: and assured himself of GODS assistance against him, for this
reason; because they had the Lord for their GOD, who was their Captain; and
his lawful Priests the Sons of Aaron sounding the Lords trumpets in the
field before them. Therefore says he, O ye children of Israel, fight not
against the Lord GOD of your fathers; for ye shall not prosper. And
accordingly it is added that the Israelites were overthrown, having five
hundredth thousand men of war slain; and the Jews were strengthened, because
they rested upon the Lord GOD of their fathers. 2. Chron. 13.

Diverse was the estate and aflaires of King Asa, according as he walked with
GOD: prospering when he trusted in GOD, and decaying when he followed the vain
discourse of flesh and blood, and sought to the Aslyrians for help.

The same is always diligently noted in the lives of the rest of the Kings,
Amazia, Azaria, Ioas, Ezechia, Iehoshaphat, Manasles and the rest, even to the
Captivity of both the houses of Israel and Judah with their Kings, for false
worship and disobedience unto the word of the Lord their GOD.

What shall I say of the life, reign, and death of our late blessed Sovereign
Queen ELIZABETH of most famous and happy memory, who being but a woman, after
innumerable dangers and manifold Persecutions, coming to the crown; (as the
learned and reverend Father, M. Doctor Abbots Deane of Winchester notes, in
his Auswere unto Reas. VI. of D. Hill, in the latter end) with unspeakable
courage, notwithstanding very many difficulties of Subjects at home, of Princes
abroad, and of the Devil every where, professed to mainetaine the truth of
the Gospel, and to deface Idolatry and superstition: which with singular
constancy, she continued all the days of her life; yielding her land a
Sanctuary to all Christians throughout the whole world, groaning for liberty of
true Religion; protecting and defending the afflicted Christians abroad in
foreign Countries from the oppression of savage and bloody Tyrants;
flourishing in wealth, honor, estimation; being every way admired of all the
Monarkes under the Sun whither her fame did come and leaving matter for such
a story as no Prince ever has left the like. This thrice noble Princess after
many glorious victories, triumph^, and other renowned prosperities,
notwithstanding the tyra^nous attempts of foreign enemies abroad, and the
frequent conspiracies of ungodly persons at home, against her crown and person,
by the favor of the Almighty, under the shaddowe of whose wings she was ever
safely protected, having Reigned four and forty years, four months and eight
days a Virgin Queen, dyed in peace, in a full and glorious age, so beloved,
so honored, and so esteemed of her Subjects, as never was any Prince more.
And GOD, to testify his own work, left, at her death, no calamity or
misery in the kingdom; no wars (but even Ireland then calmed) no famine, no
apparent pestilence, no inundation of waters, but plenty and abundance, with
inexspected tranquillity. Yea to the end that he might crown her with
blessings, he put unity and agreement into the Nobles, Clergy, and Commous of
this Land, that readyly they submitted them. selves to the only lawful and
royal Successor.

These, and infinite such like examples, declare true Piety to be the very
base, and foundation of all true wisdom and policy: and Impiety, what show
so ever it have of outward ward profit and commodity for a season, yet in deed,
and in the end, to be the very cause of ruin and overthrowe to all estates and
kingdoms.

The reason whereof is manifest; because all Kings and Princes hold their
Crowns and Scepters at the will and pleasure of GOD, who is King of Kings, and
Lord of Lords. Prove. 18.15. Dan. 4.32.

As therefore the Tenant at will has no better policy, then to please his
Lord of whom he holds: so the greatest policy, and sou^dest wisdom that may
be used by Kings and Princes, is to please the Lord our GOD in all obedience;
and namely, in the zealous advancing of his true religion and service; and in
the repressing of all false worship, Idolatry, hypocrisy, tyranny, which
otherwise call, nay cry aloude, for GODS vengeance, to pull down such sleeping
and dissembling colluders out of their thrones.

II Popery cannot be tolerated in England, because it cannot choose but involve
the State in infinite perplexities, and raise tumults and vproares in the
kingdom.

3 The insta^ces in Germany, France, and Poland are false: for their estate
is nothing so peaceable and flourishing, as this Commonwealth is.

I Let us consider the Roman Empire. She having pity to see that Church
creeping, as it did in the beginning, upon the ground; suffered the same to
embrace it, and to grow up by it, (as the Yvie does by the oak) whereof the
Empire, being a mighty tree indeed, felt not at the first any annoyance; but
now finds, that it has sucked it in such sort, as it has drawn out all
the juice and vigor of it, being brought by it now to a withered stock,
scarce able to bear the barren branches that are upon it.

For by means of Excommunicating and cursing the Emperors, by giving the
Empire to whom it pleased them, by forcing war between the House of France
and the Empire, and other the noble Houses of Europe, the Pope has brought to
pass, that now there is no Emperor at-all at Rome, but himself.

II France, the world knows, was almost torn in pieces by civil wars; and
now by the banishment of the firebrarnds thereof, the Jesuits, has obtained
peace.

III As for Poland, the Popish Priests themselves confess that the Jesuits
excited and st^rred up such an I hade of tumules and civil wars amongst those
Christians, as that they caused of late more battles to be fought, then had
bin in five hundred years before. Le Frank Discourse. page 89.

4 So then it is not toleration that causes peace in these kingdoms, but
other causes, as is manifest.

5 If toleration were the cause, as the Petitioner pretends: yet is that no
sufficient warrant for his Highness to allow of wicked and dangerous
toleration in England. For we must not live by examples, but by laws, and rule
of reason.

6 Popish Princes may lawfully, without disparageme^t of their estates,
permit Protestants to exercise their religion within their kingdoms; the
doctrine which they profess, being the only word of GOD, which ca^ be
prejudicial to no estate, or true policy. But Protestant Princes may not
permit Papists, to exercise their idolatry within their domimo^s; the
doctrine which these profess, being both contrary unto the lawful auctority
of Kings, and unto the express word of GOD, More plainly:

7 The doctrine of the Gospel holds nothing that may impugn Kings lawful
right and auctority; but contrariwise teaches all due honor and obedience to
be given to them, and that for conscience sake. Wherefore both they may suffer
the exercise of it without danger, yea to the great establishing of their
states and thrones in security and assurance; and consequently also such
professors may be faithful and loyal subjects, yea even to heathen Princes:
as the Apostles and Fathers of the Primitive church were. But a Papist, that
houlds a faith and doctrine, the maxims and rules whereof are opposite to the
state and dignity of Princes, though they allege a thousand times, they stand
but for their conscience and religion: yet because their conscience and
religion is such, as the principles and grounds of it, are contrary to all
States and auctority; the Magistrate cannot endure such a conscience and
religion, without the certain danger of having the mace and scepter wrong out
of his hands.

8 Again, the Papists do intolerably wrong his Majesty, in soliciting of his
Highness, to grant that whereof they can give no similitude of instance in
any Protestant Prince: Yea which the Pope himself cannot endure.

9 For if toleration be so beneficial to the State as here the Papists
affirm: wherefore do not they persuade the Pope, and all Popish Princes, to
practice the same within their dominions? why do they not cancel the bloody
Inquisitio^; and surcease their persecuting of the Protestants? If they think
this intolerable in their regiments: wherefore should we judge it tolerable in
our State; especially their Popish docume^ts being very firebrarnds to set al
on fire; their Popes very leaches of our treasure, that will never be satisfied;
and very tyrants that will oppress not only the lawful liberty of the
people, but also the royal power and auctority of our Kings and Princes; and
their Priests and Jesuits very bellows of all sedition and rebellion?

10 SECONDLY, Toleration of Papistry is contrary unto the word of GOD, (as I
have proved in the A^swere unto the first Supplication, and also, besides what
I have written in this already, shall be more plainly showed in the sequel) and
therefore contrary to the doctrine which we profess.

It is written in the law, that the false Prophet, and the seducing Idolater
should be taken from amongst us and slain, that all Israel may hear and
fear, and not dare to commit the like. Deuteronomy. 13.

We acknowledge that Faith is the gift of God, which comes by the preaching
of the Gospel: and yet we think it not unlawful for the Magistrate to
execute the Lords just vengeance upon obstinate Heretics and seducing
Idolaters.

Repentance and holiness of life is also the gift of God, and comes by the
same means: and yet the Magistrate not only in a good conscience may, but in
duty to GOD ought to draw out the Lords sword of execution, justice and
vengeance against all ill doers, to wound and to kill according to the
qualities of the offense. So likewise ought he in this case.

And though conscience and religion be not put in by torments; yet may one,
having his obstinacy chastened by auctority, be stirred up to consider more
seriously of the course he holds, and by such occasion, growing to a deeper
examination of the cause, through the grace of God, attain to the true faith.

And if they should not be co^verted, yet is not the punishment in vain. For
by it many, which oftentimes by a dissolute lenity, would be encouraged with
impunitie, and follow the same wicked ways, are better advised and kept from
destruction; else were it in vain said, which I have alleged before, Take
away the evil from amongst you, that all Israel may heart and fear, and not
dare to do the like.

11 If any have taught otherwise then this, it can no more, yea not so much
prejudice our cause; as now this pleading for toleration (being a thing which
they have ever abhorred, both in words, and writing) does prejudice the great
Patrones of Unity, and Constancy in their profession, (as they term
themselves) the Papists.

II To the Consequence.
1 The Antecedent being absurd, and false all the breadth of heaven the
Consequence must needs be absurd and false in like manner.

2 If the Antecedent were true, yet could not the Consequence be admitted.
For it is not agreeables to the State; nor yet supposed conformity with the
doctrine of the Protestants, if it be not otherwise simply true in it self,
that can make a thing lawful and tolerable.

Hitherto of the Reasons of State: Now follow the Reasons of Religion.

The Religion, Untruth, it is clean contrary unto that Religion.
that under your Highness favor we sue to have tolerated, is the selfsame
Religion, and no other, to which our country was converted from Paganism, and
which, bo h False agains.
all the Christian Kings of our nation ( Edward the 6. a child, A. Do. (^) 596.
by S. Austen the Monk, and our Apostle, sen^ hither by S. Gregory the great
Pope of Rome. Beda de gestin Anglorum lib. 1. ca. 23.
only excepted) and also al your Highness predecessors in the Crown of
Sco^land, Englad was converted long before this time
ever publicly professed, and for the zealous maintenance whereof, your
Majesty's great grandfather James the fourth, was worthily surnamed Protector.

Resolution of the 1. Reason.
Popish Religion, is that, to which England was converted from Paganism: and
which all Christian Kings of England, and of Scotland, ever publicly professed.

Ergo:

Popish Religion, is true Religion, and consequently to be tolerated.

ANSWER.
I. To the Antecedent.
1 IT was not Popery, to which England was converted from Paganism; but true
Christian Religion. Because England was converted to the faith of Christ,
when neither the Pope, nor Popery was yet hatched.

2 It was not in the year of Christ 596. that our Country was first converted
unto the faith; but long before, even in the Apostles times; as appears by
the testimonies of Gild as, De excid. Britan. ca. 6. Origin, Hom. 40. in Ezech.
Tertullian, in Iudaeos. Athanasius Apolog. 2. contra Arrianos. Theodoretus,
lib. 9. de curand. Grac. affectib. and Sophronius, in Catalog. Nicephorus, lib.
3. Hist. cap. 1.

3 It was not converted by Augustine the Monk and false Apostle, sent hither
by the Pope; but either by the Apostle Paul, as Theodoretus, lib. 9. de
curand. Grac. affect. Sophronius, Sermon. de ^atal. Apost. Venantius Fortunatus
De Peregr. Pauli, and Arnoldus Mirmannus In Theatr. de convers. Ge^t. do
testify: Or by the Apostle Simon Zelotes, as Nicephorus, lib. 2. Hist. cap.
40. and Dorotheus in Synops. do affirm; Or else, by Joseph of Arimathea, a
noble man of Jury, that buried the body of Christ; as Freculphus Lib. 2. Cap.
4. John Capgraue, in Catalog^ Sanctor. Augl. and Polidore Virgil, Hist. Auglio.
Lib. 1. do write.

4 That religion, which Augustine the false Apostle, brought from Rome, was
contrary, in many points, unto that Christian doctrine, which was professed
before in this land; as appears by the dissension between the Britt^^es, and
this Augustine, recorded by Bid, and others.

5 But if Friar Augustines Religion were not contrary, but the very same with
that which was here professed, yet was it infinitely different from the Popish
doctrine at this day; as is manifest by many Atticles of Popery, which were
but lately invented; as the Popes Supremacy, (which Pope Gregory, in Friar
Augustines time, utterly condemned) Transubstantiation, many parts of the
Mass, etc.

6 It is not true, that ALL Christian Princes of England and Scotland,
professed the Popish Religion: some of them being dead long before the
beginning of Popery: and others also, as King Henry I, King Henry II, King
John, King Richard II, King Edward III, King Henry VIII, even in the midst of
Popery, impugning the Popes almighty power and primacie in this land.

II To the Consequence.
1 As the Antecedent is, so is also the Consequence; a false Antecedent, and a
false consequence.

2 If the Antecedent were true; yet could it not infer such a necessary
consequence. For Religion is not therefore true, because such a Nation, or such
and such Kings professed the same: but because it is conformable unto the word
of God; 2. Reason of Religion.
such as Popish Religion can never be proved to be. ^ite their words and you
shall have your Answer.


2. REASON OF RELIGION.
This appears by Merma^mus in sus Theatro, the^ Magdeburgenses in it is. de
propagatione, Baronis and all other Collectors of Antiquity.
A religion which by the testimonies of all Antiquity ^ was the An impudent
begging of the question.
primary religion that ever any heathen Nation, converted Christian, did
profess: and the wisodome of heaven commands, Popish ^^el^gi, on is none of
those bounds, neither ^ur is from the b^ginning.
not to transgress the ancient bounds which our Fathers appointed, but
contrarily, to abide in that which we heard from the beginning.

Resolution of the 2. Reason.
Popish Religion was the primarie Religion, that ever any heathen Nation,
converted Christian, and profess.

Ergo:

It is true, and therefore to be tolerated.

ANSWER.
1 BOth the Antecedent, and the Consequence, are an impudent begging of the
question. For neither was Popery hatched, in time of the primitive Church:
neither yet can the Gentiles professing of any thing, make it therefore
absolutely true.

2 But to deal liberally with the Papists; let them, by inevitable
demonstrations, which may convince the conscience, prove the Antecedent
(which they shall never be able to do) and we will grant them the
Consequence.


A religion, of whose communion and fellowship the founders of other religions,
or the We are Christians and desire to be so called.
reformers of our Churches faith (if they more desire to be so called) were We
never were of the communion of the Popish church, but (by the great mercy of
God) have ever k^pt our selves from that wicked one. 1. Job. 5.18. and our
Fathers, who were once of that communion, obei^d the divine commandment G^t
out of her, my people, etc. Apoc. 18 4.
once, and went out; and This is no good consequence, read the Answer.
consequently their doctrine newer, and less ancient then ours and therefore
as we believe, not the good seed, Matthew 13.24. but the cookle that was sown
after. And that we never going out of any They have lost the faith, and yet
they smite us, as Ziakva the false Prophet did Micheah, and ^^ke. When went the
spirit of the Lord from me to speak unto thee. 1. King. 22.24
known Christian society (for the whole world cannot tell your Grace out of
which church we departed, when, how, and where) as did the former, the
Apostolical marks of false believers, namely, To go out from others; 1. oh.
2.19 To segregate themselue., Jude. v. 19. and To make dissension and
scandalls, contrary to the doctrine they had learned, Rom 16.17. They spoke by
contraries.
cannot belong to us by any possible application, nor by any slight or devise
sh^fted from them.

Resolution of the 3. Reason.
Popish Religion, was that of whose communion the Protestants were once, and
went out; a mark of new Doctrine.

Ergo:

Popery is true Religions; and consequently to be tolerated.

ANSWER.
I. To the Antecedent.
1 NOT every going out, departing, or separation, is a token of new doctrine,
or a mark of a false believer: but only that going out, departing, and
separation, which is made from the true Church of Christ.

2 We have separated our selves from the communion of the Pope of Rome, and
from his Synagogue, we confess: but not from Christ, and his true Church.

3 The Pope, is that Robber, that Thief, that Destroyer of the Sheep, who
first departed and fell away from Christ our Lord. But we, being the Lords
Sheep, departed and fell away from the Pope. We separated our selves, not from
the Church, but from the robber and worrier of the sheep in the Church.

4 Our separation cannot indeed properly be termed a going out, a departing,
a falling away or A^ostasie, but a Renunciation of Apostasy. Wherein we have
imitated the Patriarks, the Prophets, Christ himself, and his Apostles. In the
time of Enosch, the Godly separated themselves, from the rabble of the wicked;
and had their private meetings, wherein they applied the holy exercises of
devotion and Religion, calling upon the name of the Lord. Genesis 4.26. Paul
separated the Disciples from the rest of the Jews, who vvilfully and
obstinately resisted the Gospel of Christ.

5 We in like manner, have separated our selves, not, as Heretics are wont to
do, from the Church of Christ: but, which all good Christians ought to do,
from the co^tagion of wicked men, and of Hypocrites.

6 The Cardinals, the false Bishops, and all the rest of the Popish faction,
have made a plain and manifest Apostasy from the faith of Christ Jesus;
because they fell from the wholesome doctrine, comprehended in the writings of
the Prophets and Apostles, from the pure worship of GOD, from the right
administration and use of the Sacraments, and also from holy discipline in
manners: And therefore the Papists be they, that went out, that segregated
themselves, that made dissentions and scandals contrary to the doctrine they
had learned; not the Protestants,

7 Who appeal unto this Faith, from which they fell away, unto the holy
Scriptures: albeit they still inculcate unto us, the faith of the Popish
Synagogue, the Decrees and Decretals, and the auctority of the Romish Pope: for
they see, they cannot stand, if judgment be made of their doctrine, according
unto the rule and square of the holy Scriptures: no more then the ancient
Heretics could. Tertul. de Resurrect. Carnis, cap. 3.

II To the Consequence.
The Consequence has no coherence with the Antecedent. For our doctrine is not
therefore new, because we went out, departed, and separated our selves from the
society and communion of the Popish Church: seeing we we are expressly
commanded, upon pain of eternal damnation, to go forth of Babylon. Apoc. 18.4.


A religion whose first Instituters, except Christ and his Apostles, or
after-deuisers A manifest untruth, neither does the Argument follow if we could
not.
cannot be named by any of our Adversaries, nor can they a show that piece or
fu^damental point of our faith, either of la^e, or since the Apostles time
defined, which This is witnessed in the Counsel of Do these Councils witness,
that we are not able to show, that there was nothing lately defined but what
was believed before? A senseless assertion, and a Note which notes nothing.
Ephesus in epist. Synodi co^tra Nestoriu^, in the Counsel of Calcedon, act.
4.5. and 6. Item generali 6. Act. 4. and 10. and genera. 7. Act. 2. And by
Athanas. of the Nicen. Council in epist. ad Afros, and in epist. de Synodis
Arimini et Seleuciae. And by Socrates of the Council of Alexandria in historia
ecclesiast. lib. 1. cap. 5. and others.
was not formerly believed, and the contrary thereof never taught by the Roman
Church. Wherefore in our understanding it is evide^t, that the religion Every
false worship is the invention of the Devil; and so is Popery.
we profess, is not, as it is A slander with a matter of truth.
slandered to be, a devise or inve^tio^ of man, nor ever was contrary to it
self in doctrine; but whatsoever has been in latter ages explicitiuely
defined, the same was always, not only holde^ true from the beginning in We
care not what was believed in their church, but certainly their doctrine was
never believed in the true church of Christ.
our Church, but also implicitiuely believed for the infallible auctority
thereof.

Resolution of the 4. Reason.
Popish Religion, is that whose first Institutors, except Christ and his
Apostles, or after-devisers cannot be named by any; nor can they all show that
piece or fundamental point of faith, either of late or since the Apostles time
defined, which was not formerly believed, and the contrary thereof never taught
by the Roman Church.

Ergo.

Popish religion is true, and to be tolerated.

ANSWER.
I. To the Antecedent.
1 THE Institutor and deviser of Popish Religion, was not CHRIST, and his
Apostles: but the DEVIL of hell, by the ministry of Antichrist, and his
Disciples; as shall plainly appear in examining of the particulars in the
reasons following.

2 Many points of Popish doctrine were challenged even in the Primitive Church,
(for even at that time the mystery of iniquity began to work) to be false
and erroneous. Paul challenged the false-teachers, which taught differences in
meat and drink, observation of days, worshipping of Angels, voluntary
Religion, and will-worshippe; and bad the Collosians be war of such. Colloss.
2. He reprehended also the false Apostles which taught Justification by works;
in his Epistles to the Romans and Galathians: all which errors and false
doctrine, the Popish Church embraces and defends at this day.

3 Also the beginning, increase, and perfection of the Popish Primacie is
manifestly known, When Constantine the Great ordained the city Byzantium, to
be the seat of his Empire, (which afterward he called Constantinople, of his
own name) his departing from Rome, was the cause of the first division of the
Empire; which shortly after, engendered a very schism The Bishop of Rome began
to show himself, and to work the mistory of Antichrist. For in the time of
Odoacers reign, Anno Dom. 480. Acatius B. of Constantinople, wrote to
Simplicius B. of Rome, desiring him also, to condemn Peter B. of Alexandria of
heresy, for following Eutiches. Hereby, a sort of ambitious fellows taking
occasion, began to reason of the auctority and dignity of the Church and B. of
Rome: contending that the church of Rome, was the head of all Churches, and the
Bishop of Rome, the Catholic and universal head of all Bishopes. Albeit those
BB. that succeeded Acatius at Constantinople, opposed themselves against the
ambition of the B. of Rome, affirming that the supremacy belonged unto their
Church, in as much as the Roman Emperors made Constantinople the chief seat
of their Empire; and therefore they contended that the Bishop of Constantinople,
should be called universal or Catholic Bishop, or the B. of Bishops. This
ambicious contention continued 112. years, until Antichrist began to wax
stronger. For John B. of Co^sta^tinople, caused Mauricius the Emperor to call
together the Greek BB. unto Constantinople, to hold a Council; wherein it was
decreed, that the Bishop of Constantinople should be called the Occumenicall
and Catholic Bishop of all Churches. Which decree when Mauricius sent unto
Gregory B. of Rome, that he might submit himself and his Church, unto John
B. of Constantinople; Gregory ma^fully resisted his ambition, not that he
thought himself superior, or of more dignity, then John; but because he
abhorred that insolent and proud statelines in the Clergy, which then began
to grow up by little and little. Whereupon writing unto the Emperor Mauricius,
he says: He is the forerunner of Antichrist, whosoever he be, that coveteth
to be called Universal Bishop. And writing unto Anastasius B. of Antioch, and
to Eulogius B. of Alexandria, of the ambition of the B. of Constantinople,
says. Your reverend holiness knows that the name, Universal, was offered
by the sacred Counsel of Chalcedon, unto the Bishop of the sea Apostolic,
which by Gods appointment I serve, albeit none of my predecessors consented to
use that so profane a title to be called by. For, if one Patriarch alone be
called the Universal Patriarch, the name of Patriarch is taken away from the
residue. But far be it from a Christian mind, to arrogate that unto himself
from any man, whereby he might seem never so little to diminish the honor of
his Brethren. Thus far Gregory, who of zeal wrote this, to bridle the
ambicious Spirits of the Bishops. Notwithstanding Boniface the III. succeeding
Gregory, forgetting all this, opposed himself against the ambition, of the B.
of Constantinople, (who now a fresh, after Gregory's decease, renewed his old
claim) and being puffed up with folly and pride, began to forecast, how he
might obtain that honor unto himself, and unto his Church of Rome. And
indeed at last, with much ado, he obtained of Phocas, that Rome should be
called, the Catholic head of all Churches, and the B. thereof, the Universal
Bishop. This Phocas had murdered Mauricius the Emperor, his wife and
children; and by treason and robbery usurped the Empire: he was the first that
ordained the Bishop of Rome, to be called, the head of the Church. Surely the
Lords will was, to show what manner of men the POPES should be, even most
diligent followers of their first founder, to wit, thieves, robbers, murderers
and traitors.

4 Again, concerning the single life of Ministers. The Council of Nice would
have forbidden the Ministers and Deacons, to dwell with their wives; when
Paphnutius (that excellent learned man, who for the faith, had his eyes boared
out) rose up, and with singular constancy and zeal, pronounced marriage to be
honorable amongst all men, and the bed undefiled, saying moreover; that the
company of a man with his wife, is chastity; and persuaded the Counsel, that
they would decree no such laws, as should give occasion to fornication, both
unto the men, and to their wives. The Council liked his opinion, and ordained
nothing touching that point, but left every man liberty, to choose whether he
would marry or no. Yet afterward Pope Siricius, and Gregory the VII, forbad
such marriages.

5 The like could I show, in Transubstantiation, Invocation of Saints,
Prayer for the Dead, Purgatory, etc. but that would require a large Treatise;
and here I cannot stand upon particulars.

II. To the Consequence.
1 Suppose, we were not able to show the beginning and original of any one
point of the Popish Religion: yet it would not follow, that therefore Popery
were not false and heretical. The Apostle says that Antichrist shall work
secretly the mystery of iniquity. Wherefore is that iniquity termed a
mystery, if it were manifest, and easy to be espied.

2 Our Savior Christ foretells, that many shall work such miracles, for
confirmation of their false doctrine, as should be able, if it were possible,
to deceive the very elect. Matthew. 24.24.

3 When the husbandman was a sleep, the enemy sowed tares, in the night, and
went his way. The morning came, the tares were not espied; no, they were not
espied in the springtime, but grew together with the wheat, and seemed all
this while to be good wheat. At last, the blade appeared, and brought forth
fruit; and then appeared the tares also: Now they were discerned and never
before. Then came the Servants of the householder, and said unto him; Master,
sowedst thou not good seed in thy field? from whence has it tares? And he
said to them. Some envious man has done this. Matthew. 13.24.25.26.27.28. Even
so, when Christ our Savior, sowed the seed of eternal life, the doctrine of
the Gospel; the Enemy, the Devil (the auctor of Popery) sowed tares amongst
the good seed, even covertly and secretly he sowed errors and heresies,
whilst men feared no such danger: But now being grown up, being ripe and
rotten, we discern them to be tares and heresies indeed. The Papists
oftentimes object: If our doctrine be error and heresy, then tell us when it
came in, who was the auctor of it, under what Pope or Emperor was it first
taught? We answer, to know this, is not expedient; neither indeed do we know,
who was the first auctor (immediately next unto Satan) and founder of every one
of their blasphemous opinions. But this we know, that our Masters seed which
he sowed, was perfect and good: whatsoever else comes up with it, which is
not of the seed, we are sure, it is a stinking weed, a vile grain fitter for
beasts and devils, then for men: and not the fine wheat, the fruit of the
precious seed of our Master. We can neither tell by whom, nor at what time, 5.
Reason of Religion.
the enemy did sow it; yet sure we are, it is heretical, and has been sown
since the time that our Master sowed his field with good seed.

5. REASON OF RELIGION.
A Religion, that has This is no argument to prove it true religion; for it is
said that Antichrist shall prevail etc. 488. after Prateolus account
confuted and outlasted several hundreds of heresies, which manifoldly divided
in themselves, did yet ever give hands to the overthrowe of this one, but never
found Untruth.
other rock than it, on which they were broken, or took their confusion by.
Which seems infa libly to demonstrate, That the weapons of our They add unto
the text. 2. Cor. 10.4.
Churches warrefare, are not carnal, but (as Saint Paul writes of the And
co^seque^tly not of theirs.
true doctrine) mighty to God, unto the destruction of munitions, destroying
Counsels, and all lofernesse extolling it self against the knowledge of God;
And that our Church and Religion, ever conquering their oppositors, and never
conquered by Untruth, as is manifest by so many kingdoms which left Popery.
them, is that kingdom which the Prophet says, Dan. 2.44.
Shall break in pieces and consume all other kingdoms, and it self stand for
ever.

Resolution of the 5. Reason.
Popish Religion has confuted and outlasted several hundreds of heresies.

Ergo:

It is true Religion, and therefore to be tolerated.

ANSWER.
I To the Antecedent.
POpish Religion, has not confuted heresies, but has embraced some piece or
other, of every not orious heresy, that has infested the Primitive Church; to
make up the whole and entire body of Antichristian Doctrines So that Popery
may be justly termed, an Epitome of Heresies.

1 The Patriarch and ringleader of all Heretics, was Simon Magus, Irenae. lib.
3. in Praefat. of whom mention is made in the Acts of the Apostles; that he
thought it no sin, to buy the gifts of the holy Ghost. Act. 8.9.10, etc. to
whom also is adscribed the use of exorcismes. Irenae. lib. 1. cap 30. The
Papists in like manner buy and sell spiritual things for money, Baptist. Mant.
lib. 3. de Calamit. temp. and use to exorcise, not only intelligent, but also
brute and senseless creatures, as water, oil, salt, herbs, candles, etc.
Did. 21. cap. 1. Cleros.

2 The Disciples of Simon Magus, whom Irenaeus terms the forerunners of
Antichrist. Iren. lib. 1. ca. 8. prostrated themselves before images; and
worshipped the^ with odoriferous perfumes, incense, and offerings. Eusebius. Hist.
Eccl. lib. 2. cap. 12. Ederus in Babyl. page 5. which thing is notoriously
known to be practiced by the Papists.

3 Again, the Simonians bragged much of their unwritten verities, and when
they were reproved by the Scriptures, they accused them, as if they were not
right, nor of authority, that they were diversely spoken, and so to be
interpreted, and that by them the truth could not be found out by those, that
are ignorant of tradition. Iren. lib. 1. c. 1. and lib. 3. cap. 2, which also
is written of other Heretics, as the Sethians, Epiphan. Haeres. 39. the
Archontikes. Epiphan. Haeres. 40. the Severians, Epiphan. Haeres 45. the
Encratites. Epiph. Haeres. 47. and the Bardesanistes, Epiph. Haeres. 56. Also,
Artemon. Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. li. 5. cap. 28. Basilides, Valentinus, the
Marcionistes, Clem. Alexand. lib. 7. Strom. page 353. the Carpocratianes, Iren.
lib. 1. c. 24. Ptolemaeus. Epiph. Haeres. 33. Arrius, Athanas. Orat. 2. contra
Arrianos p. 124. Secrat. lib. 1. Hist. Eccl. cap. 6. and Eutyches, Council.
Chalcedon. Act. 1. vaunted, that their doctrine was very ancient, received by
tradition from the Apostles, and continued unto that day, by not-interrupted
Succession. These shifts also the Papists have embraced. For, seeing that
they cannot stand by the Scriptures, they flee unto Traditions and unwritten
verities, and accuse the Scriptures of uncertainty, insufficiency, want of
auctority etc. just as the old Heretics did.

4 The Papists have learned Extreme Unction of the Valentinians, Irenae. lib.
1. cap. 18. and of the Heracleonites: Aug. lib. de. Haeres cap. 16. Epiph.
Haeres. 36. their Orders and quiets of Angels of the Archontikes. Epiph.
Haeres. 40. the worshipping of Angels of the Angelists, and Caians, Aug. de
Haeres. cap. 39. the use and worshipping of Images of the Carpocratians. Iren.
lib. 1. cap. 24. Epiph. Haeres. 27. Aug. de Haeres. cap. 7. the worshipping and
adoration of the Virgin Mary of the Collitidians, Epiph. Haeres. 79. The
veneration and worship of the cross, of the Armenians, Niceph lib 18. cap.
45. the Baptism of women, of Marcion, Epiph. Haeres. 42. the insufficiency of
the Scriptures, the laws of fasting, Purgatory, Limbus Patrum, of Montanus.
Epiph. Haeres. 48. Appollonius apud Eusebius. lib. 5. Hist. Eccl. cap. 17.18.
Tertull. lib. 4. de Anima. in fi. and lib. de Coron. Milit. and lib. adversus
Praxaeam: Relics, of the Sampseaans Epiph. Haeres 53. voluntary poverty, and
single life of Priests, of the Apostoliques. Aug. de Haeres. cap. 40. Epiph.
Haeres. 61.

5 With the Ebionites, the Papists will not be justified by faith only, Eusebius.
Hist. Eccl. lib. 3 cap. 24 but also by their own works and inherent
righteousness, as the Catharistes or Puntanes have taught them. Isodor.
Etymolog. lib. 8. cap. 4. de Haeres.

6 The Pelagians held that Adams sione was not propagated into the Posterity,
but only in respect of the guilte; that Children are borne without original
sin; that concupiscence was in man before the fall: that man may satisfy the
law of GOD in this life; that man after the fall retains still his free will;
that the Gentiles by nature could fulfill the Law; that God did not command us
things impossible. Aug. de Haeres. cap. 88. Epist. 89.90.92.94. de gratia and
lib. arbit. 1. lib. 5 cap. 5. and 9. and alibi passim. Hieron. Epist. ad
Ctesiphont. and libr. contra Pelagian. editis. The Papists hold all these
points.

7 The Novatians doubted of the remission of their sins, Ambros. lib. 1. de
Paeniten. cap. 2. and lib. 2. cap. 5. So do the Papists. The Cerinthians and
Nazareans observe the Mosaicall ceremonies. Aug. de Haeres. cap. 8. and 9. So
do the Papists. The Manichees minister the Eucharist in one kind, Leo sermon. 4.
de quadrag. So do the Papists. Marcus made his followers believe that in the
Eucharist, the wine was turned into blood, Epiph. Haeres. 34. So do the Papists
theirs.

8 The Manichees condemned marriage in their elect, that is, their Priests,
Aug. Epist. 74. So do the Papists in theirs. The Eucratites bragged of their
continency, and yet were notable whoremasters, Epiph. Haeres 47 page 180. Such
are the Papists.

9 The Don^tistes tied the Church to one certain place, and termed themselves
only Catholics, Aug. de Haeres c. 69. and varijs in loeis praeterea. Cassian.
in Psalm. 60. So do the Papists. The Mirabiliarians under pretense of
miracles, devulged their errors, Niceph. lib. 8. Hist. Eccl. cap. 35. and lib.
14. cap. 45. So do the Papists.

10 The Marcosia^s baptized in an unknown tongue, Epiph. Haeres. 34. Irenae.
lib. 1. cap. 18. So do the Papists. The Messalians restrained the force of
Baptism to former sins, Theodoret. divin. decr. cap. de Baptismo. So do the
Papists. The Talians abstained from marriage, as a state of life impure and
imperfect Aug. Epist. 47. So do the Papists.

11 The Meletians use small belles in celebrating their mysteries, Theodoret.
Heretic. fabular. lib. 4. So do the Papists. The lacobines and Armenians
pictured God the Father, and God the holy Ghost, Niceph. lib. 18. Hist. Eccl.
cap. 52. So do the Papists. The Nudipedals, or barefooted brethren, used ever
to go barefooted. Aug. de Haeres. cap. 68. So do the Papists in their
Pilgrimages, and many Friars at all times.

12 Peter Gnapheus was condemned, because he caused the invocation of Saints,
to be mingled amongst the public prayers of the Church. Niceph. Hist. Eccl.
lib. 15. cap. 28. The Papists do the same. The Priscilianites disioyned
married folks for religion sake, Aug. de Haeres. ca. 70. also they boast of
their revelations, Epiph. Haeres. 49. The Papists do both.

13 The Helcesaits make Christ in heaven, to differ from Christ in earth,
Theodoret. Haeretic. fab. lib. 2. So do the Papists, who say that Christ in
heaven, is visible and palpable, and in earth, invisible and impalpable. The
Eutichians, affirmed that Christ had a body without shape, dime^sions, or
circumscription, Leo, de ieium. 7. men's. ser. 6. the Papists say the same of
Christ in the sacrament.

14 The Monothelites taught that there was but one will in our Savior Christ.
So taught Honorius the Pope in like manner. 2. Tom. Council. Colon. Anno. 1551.
editor. page 365. in Sexta Synod. Constantinop. Act. 12.

15 The Arabians held that the Soul died, and was dissolved with the body.
Aug. de Haeres. cap. 83. Niceph. Eccl. Hist. lib. 5. c. 23. So also believed
Pope John XXIII. the head of the Romish Church, who as the Papists affirm,
cannot possibly err. Concerning whom I will lay down the very words of the
Council of Constance: Dominus IOANNES Papa XXIII, saepe and sapius coram
diversis Praelatis, and alijs honestis and probis viris, pertinaciter, diabolo
suadente, dixit, asseveravit, dogmatizavit and astruxit, vitam ateruam NON
ESSE, neque aliam post hanc: quinim^ dixit, and pertinaciter credidit, animam
hominis cum corpore humano MORI and EXTINGVI, ad instar animalium brutoru^,
dixitque mortuum semel esse etiam in novissimo die MINIME resurrecturum. Tom.
2. Concilior. page 1060. Council. Constant. Sess. 11. whereupon in the same
session he is called Diaholus incarnatus. page 1050. But concerning this point,
the Reader may read more in my book de Antichristo, Cap. 24.

II To the Consequence.
1 IF Popish religion had confuted, and out lasted several hu^dreds of
heresies; yet it follows not, that it is true religion therefore: because it
is not strange, to see one Heretic war and fight against another, and the
stronger to overcome, and out-last the weaker. So Popery has done, and does
continually. But the truth of the Gospel, being the doctrine of the Stronger
man, which overcame and bound the strong man armed, has, and ever does batter
Popery to pieces, and has gotten from it whole kingdoms and nations already
(God be praised) and shall, shortly, work the utter ruin and desolation
thereof. Amen, Amen.

2 The places of Scripture, cited by the Suppliants, are not meant of the
Popish Church; but of the true Church of Christ; where with they have no
communion, who do unworthily separate themselves from the same, and take part
with her enemy.


A religion, that erected and built What ALL? this word is too general, the
world can testify. And ALL this is but a begging of the question. 2. Pet. 1.8.
all the Churches, Hospitalles and ancient Colleges in Christendom, endowed
them with livings, instituted the Universities and Seminaries, distinguithed
the multitude into parishes, proportioned the tithes, annexed the glebe land
founded the Bishoprics, limited the Dio^ese^, decreed Ecclesiastical laws
and immunities, enacted all the old Laws of our Realm, and did (for that
they would not be vacant without fruit, as the Apostle advised, in the
knowlegde of our Lord Jesus) a thousand good works besides, of which the
religion regnant reapeth GOD can stir up wicked men, to do his children good.
daily beneficte, and could not without such our churches provision and
ordinances, ever have carried the exterior show it does.

Resolution of the 6. Reason.
Popish Religion, erected and built Churches, Hospitals, Colleges endowed them
with livings, instituted Vniver sities and Seminaries, etc: and did a thousand
good works besides.

Ergo:

Popery is true Religion, and therefore to be tolerated.

ANSWER.
I. To the Antecedent.
1 THere were Churches, Hospital, Colleges, Universities and Schools erected
and instituted in the Primitive Church, before Popery was dreamed of.

2 Also, the tithes were proportioned in the old Testament, in the days of the
ancient Patriarchs. And Bishoprics were founded, dioceses limited, parishes
distinguished, and Ecclesiastical laws decreed, long before the beginning and
original of Popery, by the Fathers of the Primitive Church.

3 (...) that Popish Religion be conferred with the Religion that those worthy
me^ (which erected and builded Churches, Hospitals, Colleges, Universities and
Schools, since the time of the Primitive Church) died in; and both of them be
tried by the Scriptures, and then compared with ours; it will be found, that
not half of them dyed in the Popish Religion, as the Suppliants imagine; yea
that the ancientest and best of them, dyed in ours; and therefore both they,
and their monuments are ours, and give greater credit unto our Religion, then
all the rest do or can do unto Popery.

II To the Consequence.
1 Suppose Popish Religion, to be the principal auctor, and agent in all
these, and in a thousand good works besides; yet does it not follow therefore,
that Popery is true Religion. Because heretics may, in civil affairs, do,
or decree some things, which in themselves are good; which notwithstanding does
not any way give allowance unto their Heresy.

2 The Protestants have built many Churches, Hospitals, Colleges, Universities,
and Schools, and done ten thousand good works besides: Wherefore, by the
Suppliants argument, the Protestants Religion must needs be true, which yet
they will not grant.

3 Yea, what is there in this Reason, which Infidels and heathen men, may not
allege for themselves. Pagans, Jews, Turks and other profane Nations,
erected many goodly monuments, decreed wholesome and profitable laws, and have
done many works besides, which in themselves are very good. Will the
Suppliants from hence conclude, that their profession is true Religion?

4 GOD can bring forth light our of darkness he can raise up Heretics,
Infidels, and Atheists, to do many things, for the good and benefit of his
Church and Children.


A Religion, A loud lie. 9.10, and 11. Centenaries.
that in three ages together had not three open adversaries in the Christian
world, who contradicted or impugned her doctrine, or believed another form of
faith, then that which she then and now teaches. And the Wisdom of the
eternal God (alluding to his If we will believe the Suppliants Gloss; else
not. Pro. 14.28. Glossa interlin in hunc locum.
Church) affirms, that in the multitude of people consists the glory of a
King; and in the small number, the ignominy of the Prince.

Resolution of the 7. Reason.
Popish Religion in three ages together, had not three open Adversaries in the
Christian world, who contradicted her Doctrine, or believed any other form of
faith, then that which she teaches.

Ergo:

Popery is true Religion, and to be tolerated.

ANSWER.
I. To the Antecedent.
1 THere have bin, in every age, worthy and faithful Christians, who
contradicted the Popish superstition publicly, and openly opposed themselves
against Antichrist. For GOD had always TWO WITNESSES to testify the truth
against the Adversary. Apoc. 11.3.

2 These faithful Servants of GOD, have ever believed and held an other form
of faith, then that which Popish Religion taught; For they kept the
commandments of GOD, and had the testimony of JESUS CHRIST, Apoc. 12.17.

3 In these Centenaries, which the Suppliants speak of, to wit, in the 9.10.
and 11. there lived, questionless, seven thousand, which bovved not their
knees unto Baall.

4 About these times flourished, Bertrame the Priest, Huldrieus Bishop of
Auspurge, Ioannes Patricius Erigena, Ansegisus the Abbot, Berengarius
Archdeaco^ of Angiers, Aruulphus Archbishop of Lugdune, Ioannes Sarisburueasis,
Arueldue Bishop of Bixta, Petrus Bloix, Petrus Waldo, and all those famous men
which were termed Waldenses, Frederike the second and Petrus de Vinea his
Chancellor, Bernard: all these and infinite numbers more, who are not recorded
in Histories, that held the faith of Jesus; impugned the Papacy, and opposed
themselves against Antichrist and all his disciples.

5 Also the Greek Church, continually impugned Popery; and held a faith
different from the Popish belief.

II. To the Consequence.
1 If there had not been found, THREE open adversaries, in all the Christian
world, who in those Ce^tenaries impugned Popery: yet does not that infer the
truenes of Popish Religion. Because it is written, in the Revelation, that GOD
should stir up TWO witnesses, to testify the truth against Antichrist.
Apoc. 11.3. and in the mouth of TWO, or three witnesses every thing is
established. Number. 35.30. Dent. 17.6. Dent. 19.15. Matthew. 18.16.2. Cor. 13.1.1.
Tim. 5.19.

2 It is written, that Antichrist shall prosper for a time, and prevail against
the Saints, yea that he shall cause ALL, both small and great, rich and
poor, free and bond, to receive his mark. Apoc. 13.16. No marvel therefore,
if there were not many found, to impugn the Papacy; especially seeing the
Church had fled into the wilderness into her place, at that time. Apoc. 12.14.
Wherefore this paucitie of adversaries against Popery, is so far from proving
of it, to be true Religion; as that it is a manifest demonstration, that it is
the Religion and pestiferous Doctrine of Antichrist.


A Religion, whose chief professors and spreaders thereof to other Nations
were always of a known wonderful belly, if you mean full of holes and filth.
witness the holy Popes, Sergius III. Joane VIII. John XII. Sergius 3. his
bastard, John XIII, who was slain in the very act of adultery, Sixtur IV,
Paul III. Gregerie VIII, and a great number more.
holy life, and semblable death, and the protoparents of Will they include the
Christian religion in this rank.
all other religions, men of a much contrary note: and we are sure by the
testimony of Gods word, that the good and bad trees are to be known by their
And so are the Papists. For there were but six thousand young childrens heads
at ones found in a fish pond within the grange of an Abber. Hulderich. in
Epist. ad Nicol. I.
fruits. Matthew. 7.20.

Resolution of the 8. Reason.
Popish religion, is that whose Professers, were always of a known holy
life and semblable death.

Ergo.

Popish religion is true, and to be tolerated.

ANSWER.
I. To the Antecedent.
1 WHat the The Suppliants themselves afterward confess, the lives of their
Professors and chief Rulers are very lewd and wicked. in the 36. Reas. of
Religion.
life of Popish professors has bin, appears manifestly in the Catalogue of
their Popes of Rome: whereof some were bloody murderers; some sorcerers,
nicromancers or coniurers; some bawdes, adulterers and Sodomites; some proud,
sacrilegious and crafty cousoners; and others seditious rebels and
traitors; as is plainly declared by their own writers, which because I have
proved at large, in my Book de Antichriste; I will not here repeat.

2 As for their death, that also appears in the same holy race: whereof some
died in the very act of adultery; some swearing and blaspeming GOD; some
damning and devoving themselves unto the devil; and others thinking that there
is neither God, nor devil, heaven nor hell, nor no other l^fe after this; as I
have also declared in that book de Antichristo.

3 I will not stand to relate particular examples, in this general discourse.
If I should speak of the death of Eccius, Latemus, Hofmaiter, Gardener,
notable professors of Papistrie; and of the death of Francis Spiera, a
revoulter from the Protestants religion; it would make any man's hair to stand
on end, that heard it.

4 The Papacy, by virtue of the religion, which it professes, is the kingdom
of sin; as I have proved at large in my Book De Ecclesia Antichristi: And
therefore it is most certain, that within the communion of Popish Religion,
men can neither live well, nor die well.

II. To the Consequence.
1 But be their lives, and their deaths, what they may be: Religion must not
be measured by the lives of the Professors. An heretic may live an honest
moral life, as Pelagius is said to have done, and a good Christian may fall
oftentimes, as we read of David and others. 2. Sam. 11.4.15.17.

2 A rotten and worme-eaten apple hanging upon a good tree (seeing that came
not through the nature of the tree, but by means of worms, birds, or some
such accident) ministers not sufficient argument, to prove that tree, to be
an ill tree: so the ill works of Christians ought not to stain their holy
religion. For the corruption of their fruits, comes not from the nature of
their religion, which forbids such fruits or works, but from themselves,
from their own native and original corruption.

3 Yet the ill lives and worse death of the Papists, are sufficient to
condemn THEIR doctrine, because they proceed from the nature, and articles of
their religion, as shall be more manifest in the sequel.

9. REASON OF RELIGION.
A religion, to which the Even so we see it prophesied of before. Apoc. 17.
that the Kings of the earth should commit fornication with the great whore and
give their power and cucto. rity unto the beast.
famousest Constantinus Impudent Papists that challenge all these Princes to
be theirs, whereas very many of the^ died before Popery ascended from the pit
of Hell an^ many also were the greatest enemies that the Pope or Papacy h^d.
Magnus, Iavianus with above forty Emperors of the East. Maiorianus, Carolus
Magnus, with full near forty other Emperors of the West.
Emperors and Clodoueus, Childiberius with above threescore Kings of
France, Ranimirus, Sanctius, with almost twenty other Kings of Aragon
Telagius, Pasila, with at least forty other Kings of Castile. Alphonsus,
Sanctius, with many more Kings of Portugal. Geyza, Stephanus, with above
thirty Kings of Hu^garie Besides the Kings of Polonia, Bohemia, Denmark,
Norway, Suetheland, Gothland, Dalmatia, Baioria, Germania, Alema^nia, Morauia,
Loraine, Burgundy, Province, Lomberdy, Italy, Naples, Sicily, Sardinia,
Navarre: end the Kings of Affricke, as of AEthiopia, Nubia, and others
Likewise the Kings of Canaria, Manicongus, Benop^tama, Angola, Guinea,
Bentoninus, Quilca, Melinda, Mozambique; the Kings of Asia, as of Ciprus,
Armenia, Jerusalem, Tartaria, and some Kings of the Agarens and Saracens many
Kings of the Heruleans, Iberians, Alanes, Abasgorians, Lazorians, Scithians,
Persians and others.
Kings of the world have bowed their Crowns, As A Begging of the question.
Constantinus Magnus Emperor, Dagoberius, Carolus S Iudovicus, and other Kings
of France, Alphonsus, Ranimirus 2. and Alphonsus 6. with other Kings of
Spain. Stephanus and Ladislaus Kings of Hungary Miscelslaus, Boleslaus,
Casimirus Sanctus, and Casimirus Magnus Kings of Polonia, and many more Kings
of other Nations.
presented their gifts, As Justinius Emperor, the person of Pope John.
Iustinianus of Pope Constantine, King Pipin the person of Pope Stephen the
second: Carolus o^ Pope Leo the third: Ludovicus of Sergius the second, and of
Pope Nicolas: Henry the fourth of Pope Paschal the second, and others.
reverenced her Pre^ates, As Philippus Arabs Emperor, the Censure of Pope
Fabian. Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 27: histor. eccl. the Emperor Theodosiu^ the
excommunication of S Ambr. Theodoret. lib. 5. cap. 17. hist. eccle. Sezom. lib.
7. cap. 24. the Emperor Otho the third, the inioyning penance of Romualdus
Abbat. Petr. Dam. in vita Romual. To which may be added the devout readiness of
Henry the second, to accept and fulfill the sentence of Pope Alexanders
Legates, touching the death and murdering of Saint Thomas of Canterbury,
Neubrigens. lib. 2. cap. 25.
obeyed their censures, yea and has at this present many of the greatest
Monarchs and potentates on earth to her Professors, patrons, and
foster-fathers: So as of the Roman Religion A notorious untruth.
only, these ensuing passages and prophetical praedictions of holy Scripture
must, of force, take their verification, or remain as yet (being the latter
years or evening of the Church) unfulfilled: Manifest racking and perverting
of the Scriptures in wrong application.
The Gentiles shall fear thy name, O Lord, and all the Kings of the earth thy
glory. Psalm. 101.16. Again, All Kings of the earth shall adore him, all
Nations shall serve him: Psalm. 71.11. And in another Prophet, Kings shall be
thy nursing Fathers, and Queens thy Nurses, Esa. 49.93. And again, Gentiles
shall walk in thy light, and Kings in the brightness of thy vprising. Esa.
62.3. Places which to our judgment most evidently convince, that not only some
Kings of the earth shall profess and cherish true religion, but that the
greater number of all Christian Kings shall embrace and advance the They
conclude against themselves, for it is well known, that Popery is not true
religion.
same. Now, it is most certain, and as clear as noone day, by all
Antiquities, Proofs and Chronicles of the world, that there was never
Emperor, nor till this age, any one King under, heaven, that entertained or
All those first Christian Emperors and Kings, which the Suppliants speak of,
and many others also in the midst of the Papacy professed true Christian
religion which we profess.
professed Protestant religion.

Resolution of the 9. Reason.
Popish religion, is that to which the famousest Emperors and Kings of the
world have bowed their Crowns, presented their gifts, reverenced her
Prelates, obeyed their Censures.

Ergo.

Papistrie is true religion, and therefore to be tolerated.

ANSWER.
I. To the Antecedent.
1 THE best, the ancientest and the famousest of all these Emperors and Kings
mentioned by the Suppliants, lived and died long before the original of
Popery.

2 Many of them also impugned the Pope and Papacy, and held those very points
in religion, which the Protestants maintain.

II To the Consequence.
1 If all these Emperors and Kings had bin Papists indeed; yet were not
Popery any thing the better for that; because it is written in the Apocalypse,
that the Kings of the earth should commit fornication with the great Whore of
Babylon. Apoc. 17.2.

2 Heathen Pagans have had very many famous Emperors and Kings, who bowed
their Crowns unto the^, presented their gifts, reverenced their Priests, and
obeyed their Censures. Is Paganism therefore true religion?

3 The Protestants also have had such, and have many at this day (God be
thanked:) will the Papists from hence acknowledge their religion true also?

4 Are not the Papists in miserable distress for want of arguments; who can
say nothing for their Religion, but what Pagans, Turks, and Atheistes may
allege for theirs?


A Religion, that from the first flower of her infancy ever had, and still
has to her beleeueres, infinite multitudes of either sex, This prof.
sufficiently declares that their Religion is not Apostolical.
professing Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience, the three Mat. 19.21 Mark. 19.12.
1. Cor. 7.25. Matthew. 16 24.
chief Evangelicall False.
counselles False again those places of Scripture do not prove it.
observed of the Mat. 19.27 August. de Civit. lib. 17. ca. 4. Hieron. li. 1.
co^tra Jovinia.
Apostles, practiced by those Saint Anthony, Hilarion, Benedict, Francis,
Dominike, Bernard, and thousands more.
who were counted of greatest holiness, most highly commended by A lying
Hyperbole.
all Hieron. epistola prima ad Heliod. cap. 6. item in cap. 19. Matthew. and ad
Demetria. de servanda virginitat. epist. 8. ca. 7. Quaest. ad Hedib epist. 150.
and ad Pammachum super obitu Paulinae epist. 26. cap. 3. and 4 Basil. quaest.
9. in regulis fusius disputat. Damascen. in histor. Barlaam and Josaph c. 15.
Chrysostom. in illud Pauli: Salutate Priscam and Aquilam.
Antiquity, not only as divine helps to perfection, but also as beautiful
ornaments in Christ's Church, raising the professors to supreme degree of grace
and glory.

The Supplyants have mustered the bare names of the ancient Fathers, very
provide^tly, leaving their Readers to the examining of their quotatio^s amongst
whom not one of a hundred, they knew, either for lack of skill or will,
leisure or books, could and would turn to the places in the auctors
themselves: They thought belike, their credit to be such, that every man must
needs beleve, that they cite them truly and faithfully and that because they
have so roundly hudled them up together, that therefore out of all question
they spoke and wrote fully for them But what small ^ause there is either for
the Suppliant^ to look to be thus trusted, or for any to yield the^ such
credit herein appears manifestly in the citation of their words, which quite
makes against Popish religion, and Monkish profession.
Of Pover^ie.

Of Chastity.

Hieron. in cap. 9. Matthew. and lib. 1. advers. Jovin. cap. 7. Basil. de
virginitat.

Epiphan. haresi. 58 contra Valesios. Aug. de virginitat. cap 14 24 and
sequentibus. Greg. in tertia part Curae pastora. adwonit. 29. Ambros and
Theodoretus in 1. Cor. 7. and Amb. in epist, 83. ad Siricium Papam and 82. ad
Vercellenser. and in tribus libris de Virginib. and alibi Damasc. lib. 4
orthodoxae fid. ca. 25. Athanasius, Basilius, Nazianzenus de Virgint Fulgent
epist. 3. ad Probam. cap. 9. and 10. Jgnatius ad Philadelph. Cipri. de bono
Pudicit. Jsodor li. 2. de sum. bono. cap. 40. Cassian. coll. 12. ca. 4 and 7.

Of Obedience.

Aug. lib. 14 de Civit. ca. 12. Hieron epist, 8. ad Demetriad. ca. 10. Greg l.
35, moral. ca. 12 and in 1. Reg. li 2. ca. 4. li. 4. ca 5. and li 6. cap. 2.
Cassian. li 4 c. 10. Collat. 2. ca. 11. and Coll. 4. ca. 20. Bernard. in sermon.
de 3. ordinib. eccle. item ad milites templi cap. 13. and in sermon. de virtut.
obed. Basil. de Constit monast. cap. 23. Philo in lib. de vita contemplat.
Josephus lib. 18 antiquit. c 2 Epiphan. haeresi. 29. Dionisius de Ecclesiast.
Hierarchia. ca. 6 Eusebius. li. 1 de demonstrat. Evang. ca 8. Nazianzenus orat.
20. Athanas. in vita Anthonij. Sulpitius in vita Martini. Isodor. lib. 2 de
eccles. officij^ ca. 15 Sozomenus lib. 1. hist, cap. 12. Chrysostom. advers.
Vituperatores monast. vitae, and Hom. 5. ad pop* cum sequentibus; and infiniti
alij.

Resolution of the 10. Reason.
Popish Religion, has to her believers infinite multitudes of either sex
professing Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience, the three chief Evangelicall
Councels, observed by the Apostles, etc.

Ergo:

Popery is true Religion, and to be tolerated.

ANSWER.
I To the Antecedent.
1 THe infinite multitudes of both sex professing Poverty, Chastity, and
Obedience; are those swarms of Locusts come out of the pit of hell, Apoc. 9.3.
Which have faces like the faces of men, signifying their hypocrisy, feigned
humility, and falsehood, and tails like unto Scorpions, and stings in their
tails, noting their damnable doctrine, the sting and butcherie of men's souls.

2 The Papists, of divine precepts make Evangelical Councels, which not
withstanding are indeed the exposition of the moral law.

I Poverty, is not a Council, but an express commandment; hat, when
NECESSITY so requires, we forsake all the commodities of th^s life, yea and
life it self, for Christ his sake. But what is this to Monkish Poverty, which
the Papists solemnly vow and profess; wherein the sweat of the brows
(decreed unto every man in his vocation) is changed into yearly and most
certain revenewes, stipende, or pensions.

II Chastity is expressly commanded unto such as have received that gift.
Matthew. 19.11.12. But Popish Chastity, is expressly contrary unto the word of
God, which testifies that FEW have the gift of co^tinencie; whereas the
Papists have INFINITE MVLTITVDES that vow and profess Chastity, that have not
the gift of continency at all.

III Monkish Obedience under their Founders rule, has not one syllable, in all
the Scriptures, for proof and confirmation thereof.

3 It is absurd to imagine that the Apostles were Popish votaries, and observed
those falsely termed Evangelicall Councels. Is this a good Argument in Popish
Schools, We have forsaken all, and followed thee. Matthew. 19. Ergo: The
Apostles vowed wilful poverty, as Moonks do.

4 This popish profession and vows, were better never made, then made; and
being made, they are of that nature and dangerous consequence, that the best
way were first to repent of the folly and rashness in making of the^, and then
rather quite to give them over, then with such superstition and impiety, to
seek to keep them, as is used, and thereby breaks forth shamefully among
the Papists.

5 It is manifest out of the Scriptures, that such oaths as cannot be performed
without sin, are unlawful, and do not bind. So also says Ambros. in 2.
Can. 8. Council. Toleta^. And Gratian, Cause. 22. Quest. 4. produces many
testimonies out of the Fathers to the same end, and that namely out of Isodore,
In malis promissis rescinde fidem, in turpi voto muta decretum, quod incaute
vovisti ne facias, impia est promissio quae scelere adimpletur.

6 And rather then men that have vowed and professed a single life, through
the force of inward concupiscence should burn and fall either to fornication,
adultery, or any other uncleanness of the flesh (which as heaven and earth,
and all the world knows ever were, and still are common fruits of the Popish
vow of single life) the ancient Fathers, that the Suppliants brag of here so
much, would have them to marry, and to repent of their rash vow: as is evident
in Cyrill. lib. 3. and 16. in Levit. Cyprian. lib. 1. Epist. 11. Epiphan.
Contra Apostolicos lib. 3. August, de bono coniugali, and de sancta
virginitate, cap. 34.

II To the Consequence.
The Consequence has no coherence with the Antecedent: But the Argument is
thus rather to be concluded.

Popish Religion has to her believers infinite multituds, professing Monkish
Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience.

Ergo:

Popish Religion is the Religion and doctrine of Antichrist.


A religion that has been testified by the blood and sanctity of such
Martirs and Confessors as our They should have named these Martyrs; and then
questionless they would not have proved to be Popish.
Adversaries themselves allow of, and hold them glorious in heaven; and either
all the points of her doctrine, or the most controverted and weightiest,
witnessed by evidence of Most lying signs of Antichrist.
most authentical miracles, by the records of c all ages, and by the
discussing censure and approbatio^ of general Counsels, collected in part by
Bredenbrachius in suis collationib.
the highest consistory on earth, and The Papistles prefer their
Co^ciliables before the word of God.
oracles of greatest infallibility, as being the sentences of all the best
learned in the world assembled together, and helped in the affair by the Mat.
These places do not prove Councels to be infallible Oracles.
18.20. and. 28 20.
presence of Christ our Savior, by the Ioh. 14.16. and 16.13 Act. 15.20.
assistance of the Holy Ghost, and by Ioh. 17.17. Luke 22.31.
our Lords promise and prayer.

Resolution of the 11. Reason.
Popish religion has been testified by the blood and sanctity of such
Martyrs and Consessours as the Protestants themselves allow of; and all her
doctrine witnessed by miracles, and approved by Councels.

Ergo.

It is true religion, and so to be tolerated.

ANSWER.
I. To the Antecedent.
1 WE do not allow of any Martyrs of the Popish religion. Yea, we expressly
affirm, that the sufferings of such, is not martyrdom, but due punishment of
their offenses, and a recompense according unto their deserts: such was the
punishment and execution of Thomas Becket, John Fisher, Sir Thomas More and
such other holy traitors and martyrs of Popish religion; whose farther
judgment we leave unto the Lord.

2 As for the Sanctity of Popish Co^fessours, we judge it deep hypocrisy, and
wicked dissimulation. For how can a man be holy in that religion, which has a
show of godliness, but denies the power thereof? Such holy Hypocrites were,
Benedict, Francis, Dominike, mentioned by the Suppliants, and thousands more.

3 No part of Popery, no one point thereof, was ever confirmed by miracles:
except it were by the lying wonders of Antichrist; whose coming (as the
Apostle testifies) is by the effectual working of Satan, with all power, and
signs, and lying wonders; and in all deceive ablenes of vurighteousnes. 2.
These. 2.9.10.

4 The definitions of general Councels, are no such Oracles of greatest
infallibility; for they may err, and have oftentimes erred. The Counsel of
Carthage decreed rebaptization. At the 3. Council of Autioch, Athanasius was
condemned, and the Arrian heresy was approved. In the Council of Ariminum,
the same heresy was allowed also. The 2. Council Ephesine favored the heresy
of Eutiches. the Council of Neocaesarea condemned second marriages. Council.
Toletan. 1. decreed that he that keeps a Co^cubine, should not be repelled
from the communion. The 6. general Synod decreed the marriages between
Catholics and Heretics to be void: they condemned also the eating of the
blood of any beast. The 2. Council Nicene concluded that Angels and the Souls
of men have bodies of their own, and that they may be pictured and painted;
this Council allowed the worshipping of images; which the Eliberine Council
long before had flatly forbidden. In the Council of Rome Stephanus VI. revoked
all the acts of Pope Formosus, his predecessor: which in the Council of
Ravenna under John X. were established again, and Stephanus his decrees
abrogated. Therefore the Definitions of Councels are not infallible oracles, as
the Suppliants vaunt; and those places of Scriptures, which they quote, are
nothing at all to their purpose; as the godly Reader at the first view of the
text, may soon understand.

II To the Consequence.
1 IF Popish religion were testified, by the blood of martyrs, and holiness of
Co^fessours; if it were approved by Councels: yet does it not follow, that it
must needs therefore be true religion; for Martyrs, Co^fessours, and Councils
may err, and have erred oftentimes.

2 Popery is manifestly known to be a false religion, because the Papists go
about to confirm and establish it, by lying miracles and wonders; as the old
ancient heretics did before.


A Religion A manifest untruth, it is clear by the Answer.
unchanging and of admirable consent in her doctrine, having evermore the same
bounds of faith in all places, and not varying in every country and state, as
do other religions which have If they speak^ of our religion, we have Christ,
our head, and his word the rule of truth.
not one supreme head, and an acknowledged power to define, but make the
letter of scripture ( Blasphemy against the word of God.
misinterpretable by every contentious spirit) the only touchstone and chief
Judge of all differences in faith, whereby so many opinions and forms of
religions Horrible blasphemy, as if diverse opinions and forms of religion
might be squared out of the Scriptures; whereas no Scripture is of private
interpretation, nor can be the ground of error.
may be squared out, as there be private fancies reigning.

Resolution of the 12. Reason.
Popish Religion, is a religion of admirable consent and unity in her
doctrine, not varying in every country and state.

Ergo.

It is true religion, and therefore to be tolerated.

ANSWER.
I To the Antecedent.
1 IF Popish religion be of such admirable consent and unity in her doctrine;
wherefore cannot the heads thereof agree amongst themselves in teaching and
delivering of that uniform doctrine? Who so reads the history of their
Popes, written by their own friends, besides a number of hot and co^tentious
schisms troubling al Christendom, for many years together, yea sometimes
forty years continuing betwixt their Popes and Antipopes, he shall find it a
common thing for the succeeding Pope, to contrary and abrogate the acts,
decrees, and proceedings of his predecessor.

2 Not to insist in many particulers. Platina writes, that when Pope Formosus
was dead Anno Dom. 896. Stephen VI. who succeeded not long after him (for
Boniface VI. his immediate successor was Pope but 25. days) carried such
hatred toward him and his proceedings, that he caused his decrees to be
abrogated, and made him to be taken out of his grave (for so others write of
him) and solemnly degraded in a Council: which when he had done, he cut of
his tow fingers, wherewith he used to consecrate, and cast them into the river
Tibris. But Romanus I. succeeding him, ratified again Formosus doings, and
abrogated and disanulled al Stephens proceedings against him. Whose course
Theodorus II. and especially John X. followed, conde^ning Stephens doings in
another Counsel at Ravenna, consisting of seventy four Bishops. Albeit Sergius
III the fourth Pope after him, takes Stephens part against Formosus, and that
so hoately, that once again though he were the ninth Pope from Formosus, he
caused his body to be taken up out of the grave, degraded him again, beheaded
him, cut of the three fingers that were left him of his right hand, and threw
his body, and the pieces thereof despitefully into the river Tibris.

3 Again, wherefore do not the Popish Doctors agree amongst themselves in
explicating and interpreting a religion so certain in her doctrine; whereas
now the world sees, they differ amongst themselves, in 237. articles of
doctrine, as Ioannes Pappus has gathered, out of Bellarmine. In l. de
Contradict. Doctor, nunc-Romana Eccles. The Jesuits Catechism also, is a
sufficient witness hereof.

4 Now what does this dissension amongst Popish Doctors, but proclaim indeed
the disagreement, iarres and co^tradictions, which are in the very doctrine of
Popery. The Pope, in their doctrine, is Christ's vicar, Peter's successor, meek,
humble and the Servant of servants. And yet they blush not to say, that he is
King of Kings, and the Monarch of the whole world. The sacrifice of the Mass,
they say, is external: and yet indeed, it is not external, for, that which
they call the sacrifice, is hid under the forms of bread and wine. But I
hasten.

II. To the Consequence.
1 If Popery were so constant, so unchangeable, so agreeable in her doctrine,
as the Suppliants pretend: yet is that no proof, that it is therefore true
Religion;

I. Because the Jews, Turks, Pagans, and Heretics do marvelously agree one
with another: and yet is not their profession true. II Because we see that
oftentimes great men within the Church have fallen into hot co^tentions among
themselves. As Paul and Barnabas, Paul and Peter, Meletius and Peter B. of
Alexandria, Epiphanius and Chrysostom, Jerome, Augustine and Ruffiaus, Cyrill,
John B. of Antioch and Theodoret. And indeed the Jews did vpbraid the
Christians in the Primitive Church with their dissentions amongst themselves.
2 The Papists unity and agreement amongst themselves, is to betray the souls
of men, which Christ our Savior has redeemed by his blood: for otherwise they
are at as great iarres with their own men, as with us.


A Religion, which by the grant of our Adversaries, has had for the last
thousand years and more, the custody of the sacred Of the outward letter.
Bible, of the Apostles, Athanasias and the Nicene Creed, and preserved the^
from perishing by Pagan, lew or heretic: yea and from whose hands or
Treasure-house, the Religion now established, not only The Christians of the
primitive Church received the Scriptures from the Scribes and Pharasies, and we
from the Papists their successors.
received all the parts of Scripture she makes use of; but also learned the
These we have learned from the Scriptures.
form of Christening, Marrying, Churching of women, Visiting the sick,
Burying, and sundry other like, as their books, translated out of ours, do
declare. And therefore our religion must needs be the A manifest non sequitur.
elder. Nor can it be told (as we can easily tell al other sorts of Religions)
what The Papists fell by little and little, from the purity of the Primitive
Church until as length their Church formalcy became the Church of Antichrist.
former Society we did ever supplant or invade, or took from it, either our
first possession of the Scriptures, form of Sacraments, or any other
Ecclesiastical rites or ceremonies.

Resolution of the 13. Reason.
Popish Religion has had for the last thousand years and more, the custody
of the sacred Bible, etc.

Ergo:

Popish Religion is true Religion and to be tolerated.

ANSWER.
I. To the Antecedent.
1 By the same reason the Jews also may prove the truth of their Religion: for
unto the^ (as the Apostle says) were of trust committed the Oracles of GOD;
and it is certain the Christians received the Scriptures from the Jews. Also
Ptolemaeus Philadelphus King of Egypt, might confirm his Religion, if this
Reason were current. Joseph. Antiq. Iudaic. li. 14. cap. 2. Zonar. li. 1.
Annal. But I answer.

2 As the Jews and Ptolemaeus Philadelphus, so have the Papists kept the
outward letter of the Scriptures: but, regarding more their own fantacies and
traditions, they lost the sincerity of doctrine; as is manifest by examination
of the particular points of their religion, by the Scriptures, whereof they
brag so much.

3 We have learned the form of Christening, Marrying etc. out of the
Scriptures. Neither, if we had learned these of the Papists, could they gain
any thing thereby; for we do not condemn al such things as they believe or
practice, but only those, whereof (in matters of faith) they were the auctors
and inventours, 14. Reason of Religion.
or borrowed of other heretics. Popish Religion observes days and times,
contrary unto the doctrine of the the Apostle, Gal 4.10. and worshippeth GOD in
vain, teaching for doctrines, men's precepts. Matt. 15.9. And therefore it is
the religion of Antichrist.


II. To the Consequence.
As the Scribes and Pharasies, and Ptolemaus Philadelphus were not the true
Church, albeit they had the keeping of the Oracles of God: so neither are the
Papists the true Church, although they have had the custody of the Bible.

14. REASON OF RELIGION.
A Religion, that' instituted the feasts, the fasting days, and all the goodly
ceremonies, and solemn observations, which are yet used (though many other
pared away) and commanded in the Protestant religion, as the festivities of
Christmas, Easter, Ascension, Whitsontide, and the Eues and feasts* of the
Apostles, likewise the fastes of Lent, and Ember days, a^stinence on Frydaies
and Sauirdaies, much wholesome and very commodious to the Commonweal:
Semblably the rites and sacred forms kept in Coronations, instalments, and in
all other sorts of solemnities, that carry either state, decency, or veneration
with them.

Resolution of the 14 Reason.
Popish Religion, instituted the feasts, and fasting days, and all goodly
ceremonies and solemn observations.

Ergo:

Popery is true Religion, and therefore to be tolerated.

ANSWER.
I. To the Antecedent.
1 IT was not Popery, which was the institutour of these ceremonies, which we
use. For the Papists themselves confess they have received them by tradition
from the ancient fathers. And such indeed, as have bin invented by them, we
have abrogated and condemned.

2 The Popish fast, and our abstinence from flesh upon some days, do
infinitely differ; theirs being joined with the opinion of merits and of
divine worship: Ours being only a civil and politic constitution, not joined
with any opinion of religion.

II To the Consequence.
Speaking of those ceremonies, whereof the Papists are auctors and
institutors; we may justly argue the plain contrary, thus:

Popish Religion observes days and times, contrary unto the doctrine of the
Apostle: it instituteth set days of fasting prohibiting certain meats, for
religion and conscience sake, as the ancient Heretics were wont to do; and
neglecting the Scriptures, embraces vain and wicked traditions, contrary unto
the doctrine of our Savior. Matthew. 15.

Ergo:

Popish Religion, is not Apostolical, but the Apostatied Religion of
Antichrist.


Popish Religigion being weary of Christ's yoke, has reli^^ quished his
discipline; and turned again unto impotent and beggarly rudiments, Gal 4.9.
yea and invented the Canon law, which sets up the Pope above Jesus Christ,
and therefore, it is the religion of Antichrist.
A Religion, that a founded the Ecclesiastical censures, and sorts of
discipline, as suspension, interdiction, excommunication, irregularity,
degradation and the like, and was also the author of the Canon law, studied
through out the universal Christian world, and many points, both of her
censures, laws and discipline, practiced by the Protestants themselves.

Resolution of the 15. Reason.
Popish Religion, founded the Ecclesiastical Censures, and sorts of
discipline, and was the auctor of the Canon Law.

Ergo:

Popish Religion is true, and consequently to be tolerated.

ANSWER.
MIserable, silly, base Sophisters! Do the Suppliants think these current
arguments in this learned age? I answer,

1 Ecclesiastical Censures be ancienter then Popery, as is manifest in the
monuments of Apostolical writing; in the Gospel, the Acts, and Epistles of the
Apostles.

2 If Popery were the founder of any Ecclesiastical censures, yet were it not
therefore true Religion. For may not the rankest Heretics ordain some things
well, but they must needs therefore challendge all other parts of their
doctrine for true and sound?

3 Popery swarved from the right discipline instituted by Christ and his
Apostles, and invented infinite numbers of base and beggarly ordinances, whereby
they crucify men's souls and consciences; and declare themselves Apostataes
and contemners of Apostolic Censures.

4 The Canon Law, the whole scope and end of it being the establishing of the
Popes auctority above Jesus Christ, and above all that is called GOD, does most
manifestly testify, the Pope to be Antichrist, and his Church Antichristian:
as I have elsewhere plainly demonstrated.


A Religion that only has canonized her professor for Saints after death, and
celebrateth their annual memories, whereby their names ever live in honor, and
all posterity incited both to glorify God for his graces bestowed on them, and
also studiously to imitate their virtues Whereby that asseveration of the
Prophet is verified, Popish religion having out of the Scriptures, no other
blessings to bestow upon her professors, but that of the Devil unto Saul 1.
Sam 28.18. To morrow shall thou and thy sons be with me: Because she would
be equal with GOD, seizes upon heaven, and places therein such as have
committed fornication with her; And therefore it is the religion of Antichrist.
Thy friends (o God) are very much honored of me. Likewise that saying of
Ecclesiasticus fulfilled, * Nations shall declare his wisdom, and the church
speak forth his praise: and also the rites of friendship and true love
observed, which is to love our friends frind for our friends sake, and
incomparably more the Saints of God, for their and our love toward God. a
Psalm 138.17. * Cap. 39.14.

Resolution of the 16. Reason.
Popish religion only, has canonized her Professors for Saints after death,
and celebrateth their annual memories.

Ergo. What?

Popish religion is Antichristianisme.

ANSWER.
1 I grant the whole.

2 Blasphemous wretches! Is it not enough, and more then enough, that miserable
Papists, with intolerable boldness, arrogate unto themselves the name of
Catholics, and all the prerogatives and privileges of Christ's Church in earth:
but with sacrilegious impiety, they will needs lay violent hands, and seize
upon heaven, the throne of GOD, the kingdom of the SAINTS; and blasphemously
challenge the same, for their Professors; who, it is most certain, are cast
down headlong into the pit of hell.

3 Judge not, Christian Reader, that I pronounce this sentence unadvisedly,
rashly, or uncharitably, Note well.
Never any Man DYING a PAPISTE enjoyed heaven, or escaped hell. I have the word
of GOD for my warrant herein, which must judge both thee and me. Read
Apocalypse. 14. verse. 9.10. and 11. the Text is pregna^t and plain. This point
I have handled at large, in my book De Ecclesia Antichristi.

4 Holy Saint LVTHER says. Papa mule^s in sanctorum Catalogum refert, qui
taima detrusi sunt tartara: loanne^ Hussu^ damnatum Satanae tradidit, quem
coeli beatum esse incolam nemo dubit averit, nisi qui Christum veracem esse
negaverit. Absit, o Papa, me tibi Sanctu^ indicari; te Satanae Sanctum esse
faecile patior. Luth. in Colloq. de Ioanne Huss.


A religion, whose refuse and revolted Priests are deemed lawful and Manifest
untruth.
^ufficie^t^y ordered to preach the word of God, to minister Sacraments, and to
exercise all spiritual jurisdiction in the Protestant and Pu^^ane
Congregation. A proof, which seems unanswerable, that They argue ex non
concessis.
our Church is the true Church: for were her doctrine false, she teaching in
many points as she does, it must needs follow, that she is This we grant
the synagogue, if not the arch-synagogue of Satan, and consequently, he has,
not can possibly have (God and the devil being so contrary) Popish Priests are
no lawful Ministers in the true church.
auctority, to initiate and make lawful and complete Ministers, for
exercising spiritual faculties in the true Church. Neither is the Protestant
Minister or Bishop coming to our Catholic fraternity (as many come of the
first sort) reputed other then for mere Certainly he that denies and
falls away fro the faith of Jesus Christ, is v^worthie to be a Minister of
his Gospel.
lay-me^ without orders.

Resolution of the 17. Reason.
Popish religion is that, whose refuse and revolted Priests are deemed lawful
and sufficiently ordained, to preach the word of GOD, to minister the
Sacraments, and to exercise all spiritual jurisdiction the Protestant
Congregation.

Ergo.

Popish religion is undoubtedly true religion, and consequently to be tolerated.

ANSWER.
I To the Antecedent.
1 WE hold Popish Priests accursed, because their Priesthood is not of GOD.
But, if in obedience to the divine commandment, Apoc. 18.4. they come out of
Babylon, forsake Antichrist, renounce their errors, and join themselves unto
the true Church of Christ: if the^ they have sufficient gifts, and are willing
to exercise that function, or if otherwise the Church has need of their help
that way; they may and ought to be received, as Ministers of Jesus Christ.

2 Neither is it any greasing, or shaving, which they received in the Popish
synagogue, that makes them to be Ministers in deed (the Popish ordination
being nothing else, but mere profanation) but (they having fit gifts, and
other necessary circumstances concurring) their being acknowledged to be true
Pastors and Ministers, by the whole Church, the Magistrate and People.

3 There is no true Ecclesiastical vocation in the Papacy; because they have
remaining in their Church, no appearance of such things as by the word of GOD,
are required for the constitution of a lawful vocation. They have no Election;
no examination of doctrine; no approbation of manners; nor consent of the
Church. But let us examine their own Canons.

4 If they which come unto their Bishoprikes, either by money, or by the favor
of Princes, be not Bishops indeed, and have no right of instituting other
Bishops, or ordaining Priests; as the ancient Canons expressly testify, Can.
Apost. 29. and 30. Council. Chalcedon, Can. 2. If a Bishop cannot be elected but
by a Synod, and if the election of him that is otherwise elected be merely
void and no election at all, as was decreed in the Council of Antioch. If
they who sell or buy their Orders, be no Priests, as the Council of Basil
concluded; the^ what one Bishop or Priest is there in the Popish Church that
has a lawful calling.

5 Briefly in few words: Popish PRIESTS, Note well.
are no more the Ministers of the Gospel of Jesus Christ: then were the
Priests of Bacchus, or any other idolatrous Sacrificer among the heathen
Gentiles.

II To the Consequence.
1 The Consequence has no coherence with the Antecedent: for it does not
follow; that, because Popish Priests acknowledging their heresy and
confessing the Gospel of Jesus Christ (being every way fit for the Ministry)
by the approbatio^ of who^ it appertains unto, are received as Ministers
amongst us, therefore Popery is true religion: seeing they presume to do
nothing, by that authority whereby they were ordained in Popery, but (for all
their orders) take themselves for mere laymen.

2 The Argument is thus rather concluded, Popish Priests, being in themselves
execrable, if they renounce Antichrist, and turn unto the Lord, by the
approbation of the church, are lawful Ministers of the Gospel. Ergo; Popish
religion which ordained such Priests is execrable; and the religion of
Protestants, whereof after their conversion they are lawful Ministers, is the
true religion and faith of Jesus Christ.


A Religion, to whose antiquity and verity of most part of her doctrine
controversed, the fashion of every Church, Chapel, and Chancell, the records
of every Hospital College, and Popish Religion is no ancienter then the
Abbres and Cloisters of Friars and Nuns.
Anbey decared, yea, every ancient sepulched, church-window and graue-stone, do
bring and give apparent evidence, as thing: al wearing her badges and
contestoying her elder childrens faith, devotion and piety.

Resolution of the 18. Reason.
Popish Religion is that to whose antiquity and verity the fashion of every
Church, Chapel, and Chancell; the records of every Hospital, College, and
Abbey, the ancient Sepulchers, church windows and graue-stones do give
apparent evidence.

Ergo:

Popery is true Religion, and to be tolerated.

ANSWER.
I. To the Antecedent.
1 THe Pagan religion is such, to whose antiquity the Temples, Arches,
Pyramides and all sorts of ancient monuments, do bear record. And will the
Suppliants by this argument confirm the verity of Paganism, as they do of
Popery?

2 The monuments and records, which the Suppliants allege, declare only that
Popery is ancient, which we will grant them; for Antichrists reign was
ancient, and very ample: he began to work in the Apostles time. 2 Thessalonians. 2.

3 Christ says unto his disciples, speaking of the Scribes and Pharasies false
glosses and doctrine, Mat. 5.21. It has bin said of old; and Mat. 19 8 But
from the beginning it was not so. So say we of Popish religion: Popery is old;
but from the beginning it was not so.

4 The Papists, are like unto the Gibeonites; who by their old sacks, old
bottles, old shoes, old raiment, dry and mouldie bread, Josh. 9.4.5.6.
pretended they came from a far country, whereas they were the next neighbors.
So the Papists by their old Churches, old Chapels, old Chancels, old
records, old hospitals, old Colleges, old Abbeyes, ancient sepulchers, ancient
Church-windowes, and ancient graue-stones, pretend antiquity, whereas in deed
they are hatched since the time of the Primitive Church.

II To the Consequence.
As the Heathen Gentiles, for all their ancient records and monuments, were not
therefore the Church of God; nor their religion, unto whose antiquity those
monuments gave evidence, true Religion: So neither are the Papists, for all
their show of antiquity, the true Church, nor their religion, true Religion.


A Religion, whose grounds and foundation are so rocky and sure, and the
propies and testimonies alike infinite, ample, ab^u^dant, and unanswerable, a
the Protestant himself assay Ied by the Puritan and other facts, knows not
how to defend positions encountered, but by fl^ng to the strengths and
impregnable arguments of the Catholic Roman Church and her Doctors. A
notorious lie.


Resolution of the 19. Reason.
Popish Religion, is that, whose grounds are so sure, as the Protestant
assailed by the Puritan knows not how to defend himself, but by flying unto
the impregnable arguments of the Popish Church and Doctors.

Ergo:

Popery is true Religion, and to be tolerated.

ANSWER.
I. To the Antecedent.
1 THe Antecedent is a begging of the question. It is not true that the
Protestants do use Popish Arguments against the Puritanes.

2 The only foundation and ground of Popish Arguments, is the determination of
the present Pope, who is the only determiner, judge, and decider of all
religion and controversies amongst Papists; which the Protestants detest, and
condemn to the pit of hell.

3 As for the Doctors of the Popish Church, D. Thomas Stapleton, D. Richard
Briflow, D. Robert Bellarmine, etc. We condemn them as Heretics and giddy
fellows. If the Suppliants mean not these Doctors; they should have
nominated others: that we might discern, whether they were Popish Doctors, or
no.

II To the Consequence.
If the Protestants did use Popish arguments, yet were that no confirmation of
Popery. For it is not the Protestants using of arguments, that can make them
true and impregnable, but conformity with the Scriptures, with the force and
rule of reason.


A Religion* that teaches They speak by contraries. (...) They make most of
these Scriptures.
not Mat. 7.13.
the broad and large but the narrow and strait way, (such as holy writ
affirms the way to heaven to be) as annual Joh. 20 23.
confession to a Priest Psalm. 6.7. Matthew. 3.2. and 11.21. Mark. 1.15. Luk 13
3. 2. Cor. 12 21. Act. 1 38. and 26 20.
penance, Levit. 5.16. Luk 19.8.
restitution, Ezech. 8.30. Joel 2.12. Matthew. 3.8. Luke 3.8. 1. Cor. 11.32.
satisfaction, prescript fasting days, set times of abstinence, Levit. 23.21.
Psalm. 75.12. Eccles. 5.3. 1. Tim. 5.12. speak what they please.
perfourmance ofvowes, Ephesians 4.5.
one uniform stinte of faith, Romans 8.13. Colos. 3.5.
mortification of the old man, and the like Injunctions, neither An evidens
slander.
observed nor impo^ed by other Religions, but rather liberty in their steed,
and yet all of them directly and plainly A flat untruth.
prescri^ed in holy Scripture, except only the appointment of prescript time
for confession, fasting and abstinence, a power and prerogative, left to the
wisdom and ordering o^ the Catholic Church of whose So far forth as they
t^ath out of the word of God, they are to be obeyed.
Prelates our Savior himself says, Luke 10.16.
Fee that hears you, hears me, and he that despises you, despises me.
Which authority also was given to the Biships of the old Law, and of
consequence more to the chief Prelates of the new They make the Gospel, a new
law.
Law* He that shall wax proud, refusing to obey the commandment of the
Priest, shall die by the decree of the Judge. Deuteronomy. 17.12.

Resolution of the 20. Reason.
Popish Religion teaches annual confession to a Priest, penance, restitution,
satisfaction, prescript fasting dates, set times of abstinence, performance of
vows, one uniform stint of faith, mortification of the old man.

Ergo:

Popish Religion is true, and to be tolerated.

ANSWER.
I. To the Antecedent.
1 POpish auriculer Confession, is no where grounded upon the Scriptures. That
place of Ioh. 20.23. Whose sins ye remit they are remitted unto them, etc. is
nothing at al unto this purpose. For their sins may be remitted unto the
penitent, who acknowledge themselves sinners: and retained unto the unpenitent,
who refuse to repent.

2 Popish penance we improve, because it contains manifold errors and
blasphemies against the Gospel of Jesus Christ. 1. They say it is a sacrament.
2. By the efficacy of it, the blood of Christ washes away our sins. 3. It is
not regeneration, but an healing of a man regenerated. 4. It pardons sin.
Catech. Romans page 419. and 424. Tho. 4. did. 14 q 5. art. 1. But godly sorrow
for sin we hold necessary unto salvation, we practice and teach.

3 Restitution of goods wrongfully gotten we teach and practice: whereas i^deed
the Popish religion has sundry ways to hinder actual restitution; whereof the
principal and chiefest, is the Popes dispensation and pardon, which even in
this case, as is notoriously known, is granted.

4 Satisfaction either civil and politic, that is a recompense for injuries
and damages offered any way to our neighbors: or Canonical and Ecclesiastical,
which is done unto the Church and Congregation by open offenders testifying
their repentance, our religion teaches and embraces. But Popish satisfaction
whereby they satifie the justice of God, for the temporal punishment of their
sins, our religion abhors and detesteth, as a profanation of the whole
Gospel, especially of the satisfaction of Christ.

5 Prescript fasting days and set times of abstinence, the Papists borrowed
of Montanus the Heretic, as we have declared before. But a religious fast,
that is, when a man, wanting some blessing or seeing some eminent calamity,
abstaineth, not from flesh for a season, but also from al delights and
sustenance, that thereby he may make a more diligent search into his own
sins, and offer most humble prayers unto God etc. our religion teaches, and
we practice.

6 Vows made unto GOD, of things honest, lawful and possible, our religion
teaches ought to be performed. But Popish vows of Pilgrimages, of offering to
Idols, of perpetual single life, of Mo^kerie; our religion acco^pteth not
honest nor lawful, but made unto the Devil and exsecrable.

7 One uniform stint of faith contained only in the holy Scriptures we teach;
but the co^tradictions and dissentio^s of the Papists are innumerable, as we
have proved before.

8 Mortificatio^, that is, that part of sanct^ficatio^, whereby the power of
sin is crucified in the faithful Romans 6.2.3.4. Galat. 5.24. we religiously
teach. But Popish external maceratings we condemn.

II. To the Consequence.
The Argument is rather thus to be concluded.

Popish religion teaches auricular confession to a Priest, perverteth the
doctrine of repentance, restitution, satisfaction, fasting, vows, the
sufficiency of the Scriptures, and mortification.

Ergo.

Popish religion is the. Apostolical religion of Antichrist.


A Religion, for whose desence, the Title of Defender of the Faith, was first
given to the Kings of our Nation; the Title of Most Christian, to the kings of
France, of Most Catholic to the kings of Spain: the still retaining of which
Titles does I marvel how the Suppliants are not ashamed, to deduce a
consequence, the falschood whereof is notoriously evident.
argue the allowance of her jurisdiction. And there is No one of the ancient
Fathers did ever expound that place of the Popish Church.
no one of the ancient Fathers, who does not understand these words of the
Prophet, to be only meant of this Church, The Nation and Kingdom that will not
serve thee, shall perish. Esa. 6.12.

Resolution of the 21. Reason.
Popish Religion, is that for whose defense the King of England was called
Defender of the faith, the K. of France Most Christian; and the K. of Spain,
Most Catholic.

Ergo:

Popery is true Religion, and to be tolerated.

ANSWER.
1 WHat coherence is there between the Antecede^t and the Consequence?

When the Pope gave unto the King of England the title. Defe^der of the faith;
as Caiphas prophesied against him self: so the Pope prophesied his own
destruction. For even that King, which he so first called, King Henry VIII. of
famous memory, was the first King in all Europe, that cut his comb and
Defended the faith indeed, which all his noble Successors have with singular
constancy hitherto continued, GOD be praised, excepting only Queen Marie,
whose reign was but five years.


A Religion, into whose society and profession, whosoever truly enters, by
and by lives in Still they speak by contraries, as appears in the Answer.
more awe of God, and fear of sin, and changes his former life to the
better: and of the other side, whosoever leav^th ou^, and departs from he^
fellowsh^p and communion, begins incontment to lead a worse li^e, then
whiles he lived her child, and frequented her Sacraments. Of both which there
be store of examples, and of the latter too many, verifying what is said, and
not unknown to thousands, yea, the case is so fain liar, as it is now grown
into a Proverb with many: A new coined Proverb, which is to be understood
contrariwise.
That the Protestant Religion is good to live in, but the Papist religion good
to die in.

Resolution of the 22. Reason.
Popish Religion is that into whose profession, whosoever truly enters, by
and by lives in more awe of God, and fear of sin, and changes his former
life to better.

Ergo:

Popish Religion is true, and to be tolerated.

ANSWER.
1 THe Antecedent is most false. For Popish Religion is the Policy of Satan,
yea the very chains and fetters of the Devil, to detain men as slaves in the
misery and thraledome of sin. And that the Christian Reader may know that I
do not use any hyperbolicall speeches herein; I beseech him, in the bowels of
our Savior JESUS CHRIST seriously to waygh these things that follow.

2 What could be fitter for Satan, for the continuance and enlargement of his
Kingdom; then the Popish doctrine of the Popes supremacy over al, of his
fullness of power, of receiving both the Scriptures and their exposition from
him, of obeying that he commanded, of not judging him though he carried ten
thousand yea innumerable Souls together with him self into HELL, Did. 40. c.
6. Si Papa, of devout ignorance, of judging them heretics who speak against
him, of pursuing and persecuting them with fire and sword, of purgatory, of
auriculer confession, of the immunities, exemptio^ and privileges of his
Clergy, of the pomp and idleness of his hierarchy, and of all their subtle
and serpent-like contrived false worship?

3 The practices of Egypt toyling Israel with all base service and villainy, and
of killing their male children: or of the barbarous tyranny of wasting the west
Indies, was not, nor is not more suttly and divellishly devised, to detain
those free nations in perpetual bondage and slavery; then the Popish doctrine
was, and is, to establish the kingdom of Antichrist, and to detain the people
of God in everlasting servitude and slavery, both of body and soul.

4 And as for Christian honesty of life, and duties toward men; the Popish
doctrine of Absolutions, of Dispensations, of Pardons, of Satisfactions, and of
Sanctuaries, is (for the impunity, and easy discharge of all malefactors) a
maine cause and mother of al abominations and wickedness.

5 Furthermore, their sundry rules and orders of hypocrisy, contention, and
idleness; their constrained abstinence from marriage; their permissio^ and
defense of the Stews, are causes of all enormities, of uncleanness, of infinite
murders, and other manifold offenses. So that the waters of Noah's flood, did
not so high drown all the old world; as those floods of wickedness, which by
such occasions have risen, did and do still overflow al such kingdoms and
nations, as this doctrine of theirs, like a sea of sin, might break into.

6 Hence it appears evide^tly, Note.
that if a man were assured of the salvation of his soul in Popery, there is NO
Religion BETTER to live in. For There is NO religion under heaven which
contains greater licenciousnes in it, nor gives more liberty unto the flesh,
then does POPISH RELIGION.


A Religion, which now has, and had in all ages, the most famous me^ for
Jupudent bragges.
wit, learning, reading, judgment, virtue and true piety (qualities, of all
other, likeliest to discern and abandon error) to her Teachers and Doctors,
and ever enjoyed the like store of such lights, as our Oppositors had never
reason to compare with, or if they do, the extant momuments in school,
positive, and mystical divinity, and in all other literature, will quickly
show the inequality and disproportion of the comparison.

Resolution of the 23. Reason.
Popish religion has now, and in all ages has had, the most famous men for
wit, learning, reading, judgment, virtue and true piety to her Teachers and
Doctors.

Ergo.

Popery is true religion, and so to be tolerated.

ANSWER.
1 WHat other Answer should I make, unto a bold, impudent, shameless and
false assertion without proof, or show of probability; but, Thou lie, Satan.

2 I will not name any now-living, to avoid suspicion of flattery: ONE
Calvin, ONE Peter Martyr, ONE Melancthon, ONE Iuell, ONE Vrsine, ONE Zanchius,
ONE Humfreyes, ONE Whitakers, ONE Iunius and ONE Perkins (to let infinite
others pass) had more sound learning, and infinitely more true piety, then
ALL the Popish Teachers and Doctors, that ever were, are, or shall be, ever
had, now have, or ever hereafter can have.


A religion, whose public, and Popish church service is blasphemy against
GOD, and a mockery of religion.
Church service is executed with that majesty, honorable gravity, and
reverence, and the several parts, and Popish Ceremonies are men's precepts,
conemed by Christ. Mat. 15.
ceremonies thereof so aptly and admirablie composed, and ordered for annual
commemoration, and representing of our Saviors incarnation, birth, life,
passion, burial, resurrection, ascension, of the coming down of the Holy
Ghost, of the mystery of the Trinity, and of other passages, as well of Christ
our head, as of his members the Saints, as it begets, feeds, and renews
singular devotion in the actors, and hearers, and is also so comfortable in her
The comfors which the Popish Sacraments afforde, is deceaveable, like unto the
hungrit man's dream. Esa. 29.8.
Sacraments, especially so easing, and acquieting souls in the Sacrament of
penance, as no testimony, or demonstration under heaven, is, or can be, of
like seeling proose for the real goodness and verity of that Sacrament, as is
the supernatural, sweetest, and divine consolation tasted therein, as is the
Sacrament of the Eucharist.

Resolution of the 24. Reason.
Popish Religion, has her church service executed with majesty, honorable
gravity, and reverence, her Ceremonies admirable, and her Sacraments
comfortable.

Ergo.

Popish religion is true, and to be tolerated.

ANSWER.
I. To the Antecedent.
I THE Popish Church Service is not Maiesticall, honorable, grave, and
reverent, but blasphemous and full of apish tricks and toys.

I For the substance of it, it is full of idolatrous invocations of Angels and
Saints.

II It is performed in an unknown tongue to the derision of GOD, and mockery
of religion, against the express words, letter, and sense of the Scriptures.
1. Cor. 14.

III The theatricall attire and gesture; the skipping, friskes and gambols; the
in constant murmuring, crying out, and whispering of the Priest; the bellowing,
piping, and chanting; and the lighting of candels at noonday, is not true
majesty, gravity, and reverence; but manifest demonstration of giddines,
levitie, wantonness and flat apostacy from true religion. For our Savior says
John 4.24. they that worship GOD, must worship him in spirit and truth.

2 Popish Ceremonies are execrable, Christ says, Mat. 15. 9. In vain they
worship me, teaching for doctrines, men's precepts.

3 If Popish Religion were true, it is most certain that Popish Sacraments are
very comfortable. For the Papists teach that the Sacraments of the new
Testament, do contain, do confer of themselves, and merit grace: that they
justify, that they forgive sins and sanctify by the work wroght, yea
without any good motion, or disposition of the receiver or vser; that is,
without faith. This cannot choose but be very comfortable; for be a man never
so vile a villain, be he never so ungracious of so wicked, yet if he can be
made partaker of the Sacraments, according to their doctrine, he shall have his
sins actually forgiven him, and be instantly justified. But alas, this
doctrine is not true, it has no warrant out of the Scriptures, which restifie,
that without faith it is impossible to please GOD. It is the deceaueable
learning of Antichrist, to detain miserable men captives in his kingdom, and
to make them slaves unto sin by committing it with boldness, and to appease
the stinging thereof in their consciences for a time.

II To the Consequence.
The Antecedent being false, the Consequence falls of it self.


A Religion whose secular and religious Clergy live without wives, free from
care of providing for But not for providing for bastards.
children, and the later sort no way distracted with the affairs and
encombrances of the world, but But the Apostle says that Pure religion and
undefiled before God, is to visit the fatherless and widows in their
adversity Jac. 1.27.
encloistered, pass their whole time in prayer, watching, fasting, in
continual study of scriptures, and in daily exercise and dispute for full and
perfect understanding of them: Helps that do most further the attaining of
truth, and such as are not An impudent lie.
sound in the adverse party, and which in common reason (Catholic Divines
being not inferior to other Divines in wit, or other talents) show, that our
teachers (God being no acceptor of persons) are more likely to have (using
Vutruth.
fitter means for the same) the No Papist dares expound the Scriptures truly.
See the Answer.
true intelligence, and understanding of scripture, then are our adversaries,
or contradictors.

Resolution of the 25. Reason.
Popish Religion, is that whose Clergy live without wives, etc.

Ergo:

What will the Suppliants conclude? Popish Religion is the Doctrine of Devils.

ANSWER.
1 I grant both the Antecedent and the Consequence. Their Popish Clergy
although they keep store of whoores and concubines, yet they have no wives:
and their popish doctrine is indeed the doctrine of devils.

2 Their glory herein is to their shame; For the Apostle says, 1. Tim.
4.1.2.3. Now the Spirit speaks evidently, that in the latter times some
shall depart from the faith, and shall give heed unto Spirits of error and
doctrine of devils; Which speak lies through hypocrisy, and have their
consciences burned with an hote^^on: Forbidding to marry, and commanding to
abstain from meats, etc. Both these notes of the Apostatical Church, the
Papists cannot by any shift depell from themselves; so that out of this place,
we may demonstratiuely conclude, that the Popish Church is the Church of
Antichrist; as I have declared at large, Lib. 1. de Antichr. cap 28.

3 A sober and moderate care of providing for Children, is no hinderance to
godliness.

4 As for the helps which the Papists brag they have, for understanding of
the Scriptures: Whatsoever here they pretend, yet it is most certain, that no
Papist can possibly attain unto the true sense and meaning of the Scriptures.
26. Reason of Religion.
And if they should understand them aright, yet is it not law full for them to
make that known to others. Most false.
For every Popish Priest is sworn that he will never otherwise interpret the
Scriptures, but according unto that sense and meaning, The Suppliants bring
Ambrose, Hierome, Austen, and Gregory upon the stage, dumb or iong-tied, if
we will hear them speak, we must attend upon the^ by their direction, at
another time, yea and in other places the^ they have pointed us, or else we
shall not hear the^ speak one word for the Papists, either good or bad. This
whole section contains nothing but impudent lies, and notorious falsification.
which the modern Popish church embraces; as is expressly laid down in the
form of the oath prescribed by the Council of Trent. Bulla Pij IV. super
formaiurament. profess. fides, in fin. Council. Trident.

26. REASON OF RELIGION.
A Religion of which the four acknowledged Doctors of holy Church were both
Tom. 4. li 2. de Sacramentis c. 1. and 2. lib. 3. cap. 1.
professors, and stout defenders, as their own works most apparently bear
witness.

S. Jbidem.
Ambrose living 64. years, and dying in the year of our Lord 397. purposely
and approvingly wrote of 'exorcismes used before baptism, of' unction in
baptism, of the perpetual Tom 5. de vocatione gent. li. 3. cap 8 per toturn.
alienation of infantes from the sight of God dying without baptism, of Tom.
4. lib. 1. de poenitentia cap. 2. and 6.
remission of sin by a Priest, and who, as S Paulinus records in his life,
heard auricular confessions, and so wept in hearing, that he caused tears also
in the penitents. He like wise wrote of the Tom. 4. lib. 4. de Sacramentis
real presence in the Sacrament of the altar, and of Tom. 4. de Spirit. Sanct^
lib. 3 cap. 12.
adoration thereunto to be done, he observed and commended the Lent-fast Tom.
1. Sermon de itiunio Ediae
calling it the precepte of Christ our Lord. In like manner he wrote of Tom. 3.
super Apocal. cap. 14. and 20.
Purgatory, of Lib. 5. de Sacramen, cap. 1.
mingling water with wine in the chalice, he usually said Mass, wept bitterly
in the execution of the dreadful mysteries, and made Tom. 5. in 1 precatione
ad Missam praeparante, and epist lib. 5. epist. 33. ad Marcellinam sororem suam.
prayers to be said by Priests be fore Mass for duer preparation thereunto.
Therefore undoubtedly neither Protestant nor Puritan, but a Catholic Bishop.

S. Hierome living 91. years, and dying the year of our Lord 420. wrote Tom.
2.
two books against the Apostata Monk Jouinian, and Jbidem.
two other treatises against the lapsed Priest Vigilantius, in confutation of
their strange, and exorbitant points of doctrine Namely, that marriage was of
equal merit with widdowhood, or virginity: That all meats might be eaten
upon all days, no withstanding any ecclesiastical sanction to the contrary:
That fasting had no reward with God: That there was no disparitie of merits in
this life, nor difference of glory in the next: That those who with a full and
entire faith had received grace in baptism, could not after leese the same.
The positions of Jouinian. The phansies of Vigilantius these. The single life,
or unmarried state of Priests is opprobrious, Saints were not to be worshipped,
nor prayed unto, nor their relics to be reverenced, and the tapers or
waxe-lightes about their toombes were the ensigns of idolatry, the retention
of worldly substance better then voluntary poverty, and the solitarines of
Moonkes a thing vituperable.

Against al which assertio^s, S. Hierome directly, and of set purpose wrote,
and wrote in some choler and anger, adding for season, or excuse, fatebor
Adversus Vigilantium ad Riparium epist. 53.
dolorem meum, sacrilegium tatum patienter andire non possum, I will confess
my grief, I am unable patiently to hear so great sacrilege. Therefore
undoubtedly neither Protestant nor Puritan, but a Marianus Victorius episc.
Reatinus in vita B. Hieronymi. Etipse Hierony. Tom. 3. epist. 150. ad Hedibiam
quest. 2.
Massing Priest, Hermit, a great Pilgrimage Ipse Hierony. in Ezechi. ca. 4. and
in Apologia adversus Ruffinum, and in plurim. ipsius epist. 8.22.43. and alijs.
gooer, a visiter of holy places, and relics.

S. Augustine living 76. years, and dying the year of our Lord 430. wrote a
Tom. 4. ca. 18.
book De cura pro mortuis gerenda, Of care to be had for the dead by the
sacrifices of the altar, prayer, and alms. Three Tom. 1.
books De libero arbitrio, in the proof of free will, a Tom. 3.
book De operis Monachorum, of the labor of Monks, wherein he approves
their state, and consequently also the vows of poverty, chastity, and
obedience A Tom. 4. maxim. cap. 14. lib. ^insdem.
book De fide and operibus, of faith and works, proving abundantly in it, as
the principal scope and end intended, that a sole faith without good worked,
is not sufficient to salvation: He Tom. 10. Ser. de tempore 255 qui est quartus
de anniversario dedicationis ecclesiae, vel altaris. Et council. Hippo^. can. 6.
cui interfuit S. Aug. vt co^stas ex lib. 1. Retracta. c. 17. Ser. 19. de
Sanctis.
allo weth, and celebrated the consecration of altars, and the anointing of
the^ with Chrisme. Also he makes mention, and requires that the sign of the
cross should be made in the foreheads of the believers, and on the water, and
Chrisme, with which they are regenerated, and anointed. Likewise he himself
most submissiuely, and earnestly invocate Tom 9. li meditationt^m ca. 4^. and
Tom 9. Sermon. de Sanctis. Sermon 18.
the blessed virgin Marie, S. Michael, S. Gabriel, S. Raphael, the Quiets of
Angels, Archangels, Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Evanstelists, Martyrs,
Confessors, Priests, Levites, Moonkes, Virgins, and of all the just. In brief,
he Tom 6. de adulterinis coniugijs. lib. 1. c 8. and 9. and l. 2. c. ^.
resolutely affirms, that after divorce, neither the party delinque^t, nor
innocent can marry again, the other living, without committing the crime of
adultery, and in like manner agnizeth and testifies the verity of the five
Sacraments, denied, and surnamed bastard Sacraments by the adversary, to wit,
the Tom. 2. l. 2. cont lit. Petilianica. 104. and Tom. 9. in epist. Johan.
tract. 3. and 6.
Sacrament of Confirmation, Tom. 10. Sermon. de tempo 215. and Tom. 9. l. 2. de
visi^andis infirmis c. 4. Item in tract. de rectitudine Catholicae co^versati.
si due posteriores sint Augustini.
Extreme unction, Tom. 7. contra. episcop. Parm. l. 2 c. 13. and de baptis.
contra. Donatist. lib. 1. ca. 1.
Order, Tom 4 de fide, and operib. c. 7. and tom. 6. de bono co^iugali, and
concupis. cap. 10.
Matrimony, and Tom. 4. de vera, and falsa penitentia c. 10. and 15. Tom 6. de
adulterin. co^iugijs c. 28 Tom. 10. lib. 50 homiliar. hom. 41. and hom. 49. c.
3. and Tom. 8 in Psalmu^ 63. circa medium.
Penance. He Tom. 10. l. de tempore Ser. 251.
also sharply rebukes those that either neglected to hear Mass, or did not
stay in the church so long as to the end of Mass, or showed themselves so
cold and wearysome in Gods service as to speak to the Priest to abbreuiate,
or be short in his Mass. Therefore undoubtedly neither Protestant, nor
Puritan, but a Possidius in vita eius.
Moonke, institutor of Moonkes, and strongest maintainer of our Catholic
doctrine.

S. Gregory was first a Ioh. Diaconus in vita eius li. 1. c. 6.25. er 39.
Moonke, then choosen Abbot, then created Cardinal, and afterward elected Pope
of Rome. In which dignity he lived 13. years and odd months, and died the
year of our Lord 604. He wrote in the allowance of Lib. epist 7. cap 35.
Images, approved the making of Eod. l. c. 109.
pictures in the walls and windows of the church, terming them the
instruction, or books of the unlearned, and reprehended the Ibid and lib.
epist. 9. cap. 9.
breaking, or defacing of them (only upon abuse which some idiots committed) as
a thing not lawful, and schandalous He appointed the Moonke Tom. 1. lib. 4.
dialogorio^ c. 55.
Preciosus to say Mass 30. days together for Justus his fellow Moonke
deceased. He relates Ibid. cap: 57.
two miracles which God through the sacrifice of the Mass, most admirably
wrought. One, upon a Captive, whose fetters so often fell off, as his wife
believing him to be dead, procured Mass to be said for his soul. The other
upon a Shipman named Baracha, who through the same most sacred and propitious
oblation was, being reputed to be drowned, very miraculously fed, and delivered
after shipwreck. He augmented Platina, and Johannes stella in vita eius.
the Letanie, ordained the Johannes Diaconus li. 2 ca. 18
stations at Rome, incited to the going [ Ipse. B Gregorius li 2 epist. c. 21.
on pilgrimage, and visitation of holy places. He greatly Idem Ibid cap. 42.
affected to see and reverence the coat of S. John Evangelist and trusted to
receive spiritual profit thereby. He Lib. 7 epist. ca. 126.
sent a piece of the Holy Cross, Lib. 1. epist ca. 29. and 30. and li. 6
epist. ca. 189 and l. 11 epist. c. 67.
Powder filed off from S. Peter and S. Paul's chains, some of Lib. 7. epist.
cap. 126.
S. John Baptists hair, and the Lib. 5. epist. c. 150.
relics of other Martyrs, ^o several great personages for benediction, and
veneration sake He traveiling in the gowt, and enforced often to keep his bed
for his greater ease, rose Lib. 8 epist. c 35.
notwithstanding to say Mass upon festival days, as himself wrote of
himself to Eulogius the Patriarch of Alexandria, and also approvingly
witnesses that Lib 7 epist. cap. 29.
Mass was daily faid at Rome in veneration of Saints. He wrote a letter to
Melitus to tell S Augustine our Apostle, then consecrated Bishop of
Canterbury, that he should not destroy the temples of the idols in our
country, but break the idols, and sprinkle Lib. 9. epist. cap. 71. and Bodae
de gesti^ Auglorum l. 1. cap 30.
holy water about the same temples, build altars, and put relics in them.
Therefore undoubtedly neither Protestant, nor Puritan, ^ut a Moonke, and Pope,
and zealous propagatour, and patron of Catholic religion.

To say, that the assertions and points precedent were At there is no doubt,
but the Fathers had their blemishes and errors. So have not the Suppliants
proved the precedent blasphemies out of the Fathers; most of the places which
they quote, contain no such matter.
Naevi patrum the moales or blemishes, that showed them to be men subject
error, and not to have seen all things, were in our judgment idleness
enough, and greatest repugnancy; for let them be holden for Saints, or saved
souls (which we think no man of modesty, or yet of Christianity, will deny)
it follows directly to be impossible (we mean if they dyed in the
vnretracted faith they professed in their books, as hitherto none of those who
are most against our religion, ever durst to make open doubt there of) that the
foresaid positions, and points can be false, because if they should be false,
and they contain, as then they should do, very damnable superstition, and
highest Idolatry, (as approving vain doctrine vain teverence, vain
sacraments, vain and impious rites, and adoration of bread in stead of God,
(then which, nothing is more abominable or idolatrous) it cannot be, most
assuredly it cannot be* even by the principles of our common Christian faith,
that the foresaid Doctors be Saints in heaven, but contraryly, most accursed
reprobates in hell, understanding as is before rehearsed, that they dyed in the
belief they mainetained in their writings.

Again, to say, they understood not the Scriptures, It is no absurdity to say,
that the Fathe^^ indeed did not understand the scriptures, as well, is the
learned of our times do, 1. The Fathers, for the most part, were ignorant in
the tongues. 2. They wanted the exact knowledge of Logike 3. They left the true
and literal interpretation, and hunted after allegories, and mystical senses
which were maine causes of the Fathers ignorance in expounding Scriptures,
as well as does the best learned Protestant, or Puritan, and that through
such fail, and lack of heavenly guidance, they unwittingly slided into their
errors, were to imagine Chiwaeras, or some thing that were more strange, and
monstrous: for what help enjoys the Protestant, or Puritan, that they
enjoyed not? and they had many which the other have not. They were a thousand
years and more, nearer unto Christ, his Apostles, and their Disciples, then
she eldest Protestant, or Puritan, that can truly be named, and consequently
as like, if nor more like, to hear, retriue, and learn the truth, the^ any of
the other two Professions. They made Co^ments upon all, or the most difficult
parts of holy Scripture, they beat out the way, and unsealed the hard, and
hidden mysteries thereof, they laid the ground works of school divinity, brake
the ye, and reconciled all the distering passages, which in the letter seemed
to impugn, or contradict one the other.

Or must it be conceived, that these holy men working, and thorowpiercing into
the self bowels and abstrusest depth of all divinity, and that very
excellently, by the grant of our adversaries themselves, could so mainely and
contradictorily err in matters of less difficulty, as are the points
controverted? No no, it cannot justly be so conceived but rather, that the
infinite providence and goodness of almighty God, because he would not have so
sacriligious a conceit harbored against the principal Doctors of the Church,
has in every of their lives and deaths miraculously attested the contrary, if
so much credit at least may be given to the written lives of Saints, compiled
by venerable personage and received by many ages, as there is given to the
relation of The he is much more credit to be given unto these, the^ unto the
former: For these simply and plainly delivered unto posterity, the truth of
things done in civil and politic affairs: But they by fabulous reports of
lying miracles labored to establish a new Gospel, conirarie unto the Gospel
of Jesus Christ.
Plutarchi lives, or Caesar's Commentaries.

S. Jn vita S. Ambrosij.
Paulinus reports that S. If the Suppliants did not intend to produce a new
Gospel under pretense of the Fathers writings what needed these subsequent
legendarie lies.
Ambrose, being on a certain time in Rome, was invited by a noble woman there,
to come, and say Mass in her house who yielding to the request, an other woman
sick of the palsy understanding thereof, caused anon her self to be brought
in a chair into the room where S. Ambrose was, and kissing his garments,
presently therewith recovered her health, and the perfect use of her limbs.
Again the same Ibidem.
author records, that Iustina wife to Valentinian the Emperor, hyring a
murderer to kill S. ambrose, for the exceeding hatred she bare unto him, who
coming into his chamber, and listing up his arm with his sword drawn, to
give him his death, incontinent his arm waxed so stiff, and benumbed, that he
could nether strike therewith, nor move the same, but in confessing (which was
no less miraculous) who employed him in so outrageous a fact, the use of his
arm presently returned, and he became as nimble therein as ever before. Other
proofs of Gods special love toward this Saint, might be alleged, as Ex
Panlino, and 2. hist. Eccle. Ruffini libro ca. 11. and Severo Sulpitio in vi^ta
B. Marini.
his miraculous election to the Bishopric of Millan, his long ecstasy, with
which he was taken at the altar, when S. Martin Bishop of Turon dyed; his
prediction of the day of his death, before he fell sick* the three visions or
admonishments given by the voice of God himself, to Honoratus Bishop of
Vercella, for his repair to the said Saint, when he lay a dying, and for
ministering unto him his last Viaticum, the body of our Lord: These, we say,
might be alleged for testimony of his holiness. Nevertheless we will content
our selves with the rehearsal only of that miracle which Vbi supra.
Paulinus me^tioneth of an obstinate Arian, who being present at a sermon of S.
Ambrose, saw (and was thereupon co^verted) an Angel to stand at his ear,
whilst he was preaching, and appeared to suggest unto him the words he spoke to
the people. All which are evident arguments of the Saint, true faith, his
peculiar favor with God, and of the undoubted verity of his doctrine.

Touching S. Hierom, although both the joint censure of the Sub Innoce^tio 1.
ann Chr. 402
Milevitane Counce^l, consisting of 59. Bishops, whereof S. Augustine was one,
giving him the attribute [Holie] in his life time and and the In dicreto de
apocryphis scripturis circiter annum Christi 1495.
testificat^o^ of S Gelasius. and (...) 7^. other Bishops in ^ession with him
surnaming him blessed and most blessed after his death be argument sufficient
to prove his sound ^ai^h and holiness; as also that our Savior most comfortably
appeared unto him in the hour of his death, as Marianus Victorius, and other
writers of his life, affirm: Yet because we desire to be more full in this
point, we think it necessary, having choice of miracles, to recite a few of
many* S Hierome Eusebius Cremonensis discipulus B. H eron in epist. demort.
eiu^, ad Damasum Portuense episcop. Habetur in calce Tom 9. and credi^ur esse
eiusdem, ^este Censura Reati ni episcopi. Amorini in eundem Tomum.
drawing near to his end, the blessed Sacrament of the Altar was brought unto
him, which having received, and holding his arms a cross over his breast,
said the Hymn of holy Simeon, and presently as that was ended, there appeared
so glorious a light in the ^oome where he lay, as the exceeding brightness, and
splendour thereof piercing and dozeling the beholders eyes, none that were
present could any while endure to look thereon; which continuing some space,
companies of Angels were seen, odoriferous smells felt, and a voice heard,
saying, Come my beloved, it is time that thou receive thy reward for thy
labors manifold sustained in my cause. Being dead, the blind, deaf, dumb,
and sick were Ibidem.
healed, some b^ touching, some by kissing his body. Likewi^e the possessed
brought in presence of the corpse, the dev^ls going out of them cried, Ibidem.
Holy Hierome, why do thou thus grievously tor^ient us? thou were always
our scourge, both living, and now dead. What need more rec^tals? God seemed
so wonderfully tender, and ^^alous of his seruan^s fame, and honor, as Ibidem.
when a certain Heretic enraged with e^uy against the w^rking of the foresaid
miracles, and w^^hing that the body were burnt; himself was p^ese^ciy by fire
descending ^r^m heaven con^^med to ashes whereupon many other infected with the
same here he were perfectly conue^^ed Vere wonder fu^l if they be (...)
Wonderful things! but they are saints that report them, saints that wrought
the^, ^^ad. ^ooles th^^ believe them.
and P^. 67. ve. 36.
God is admirable in his Sainies.

We have been long in the Narratio is precedent, wherefore our briefenes in
the two that ^ollow must be the greater. Possidius Bishop, and disc^ple of S
Augustine, who ^^ued almost Cap. vlt de vira Augustine
fo^ty years faindiarly with him, (...) himself writes, ^ffirme^ Cap 29.
ibid.
that he knew S. Augu^^ine, both when he was Priest, and after he was Bishop,
to have (being absent) expelled devils from out the p^ssessed by means of his
prayers, and tears for them: And that in his deathbed, he Cap. eodem.
cured a sick man, by laying his hands upon him, whom God by vision had
commanded to repair to that end unto him. By which miracle hi^ divine
goodness intended no doubt, as it were with his own hand, and seal, to
testify to the world, and all posterity, the holiness of his servant, and
the truth, and piety of the doctrine he had taught.

Concerning S. Gregory, his Johan. Diacontis lib. 2. ca. 22. de vita B. Greg.
receiving of an Angel, and of Jbid cap 23.
the Lord of Angel* in the persons of poor Pilgrims to his tables, is
sufficient proof of his sanctity, and of Gods extraordinary l^ue toward him.
And that he taught no heretical, superstitious, or false doctrine, it is
likewise manifest, by the sitting of the holy Ghost on his head, in form of a
Dove, at the time of writing his books, as Apud Johan. Diac l. 4. c. 69.
cevita B. Greg.
Petrus Diaconus a dear familiar friend of S Gregory's, and much conversant
with him, witnesses to have seen most often. How powerable also this holy
Doctors prayers were with God, it well appears by this, that for the Jde^ l.
2. c. 41.
conversion of an incredulous, and misbeleeving woman, thinking the bread which
her self had made, could not be changed into the body of Christ, he both
turned a sacred host into appearance of flesh, and after again into the form
of bread, as it carried before. Which with other manifold miracles of his, most
clearly restifieth, that he was neither of ill life, nor ill belief but holy
in the one, and Apostolical in the other.

Neither did the said four Doctors (a consideration of much importance)
differently teach or one impugn the other in any of the points of doctrine
above mentioned, but they ^all concurred in one uniformity of opinion without
contradictio^, or least show of dissent. Yea not only these tower most renowned
Clearks, the chief lights of Gods church next after the Apostles, agreed most
uniformly, as we have said, in the foresaid controversed points of religion,
but An impudent untruth.
all the primitive writers conspired likewise in the same. As in Yet more dumb
shows of forged and falsified Fathers?
proof of the sacrifice, use and holiness of the Mass. Apostolicar.
constitut l. 6. c. 23. and epist. 2. and 3. de officio sacer dotum, and cleric.
Clement consecrated Tertullian. de praescript. cap 32 Epiphanius hearesi. 27.
Ruffinus in preafat. libri Recognitionum.
Bishop of Rome by S. Peter. Ecclesiast. Hierar. cap. 3.
Dionvsius Areopagita S. Paul's Act. 15.
disciple, and by him Helduinus Abbas.
or dained Bishop of Athens. Epist. ad Smyrn
Jgnatius. S. John Evangelists Simeon Metaphrastes in vita eius.
auditor, and by common consent of the Apostles assigned Bishop of Antioch
Adversus bears. li 4. cap. 32 and 34. and l 5 ca. 2.
Jrenaeus scholar to S. Policarp, and he scholar to S. John: Pope Epist. 1 cap.
2.
Anacletus the fourth from S. Peter: Pope Epist. 1. cap. 4.
Alexander the second from Anacletu^: Pope Epist. ad omne. vniversaliter cap. 2.
Telesphorus the second from Alexander, with others their next successors, Apud
Gratianum de consecratione, distinctione 1. cano. omnes Basilicae.
Higinus. In Codice 5 libroru^ lib 4. cap. 117.
Pius, Apud Burchardum lib 5. cap. 29. and Jvonem part. 2. cap. 98.
Anicetus, Apud Gratianum de consecraeti. did. 1. cano. hoc quoque.
Soter, al received Saints, and Martyrs. Also the Liturgy of the Church of
Rome delivered by S. Peter, the Liturgy of the Church of Jerusalem written by
S. James, the Liturgy of the Church of Alexandria composed by S. Mark, the
Liturgy of the Church of Mila^ made by S. Barnabas. The Liturgy of the Church
of Cappaciocia, co^piled by Floruis circiter annum. 370
Saint Basil. The Liturgy of the Church of Constantinople set forth by Saint
Floruis anno Christi. 380.
Chrysostom: And likewise the-Liturgies of the Ethiopian, Syrian, and
Armenian Churches, which all with some other do most clearly witness the
sacrifice use, and veneration of the Mass, and do also approve the ceremonies,
and divine mysteries represented, and expressed therein.

In like manner for proof, and direct evidence of the ancient practice, fruit
and obligation of auricular Confession. S. Apostolicar. constitut. lib. 2. cap.
33. and epist. 1. ad Jacobum frairem Domini:
Clement, S. Epist. 8. ad Domophilum.
Dionysius, S. Adversus haereses lib. 1. cap. 9. sleruit circiter an. 160.
Irenaeus, Homil. 2. in Leuiticum. and Hom. in Psalm. ^7. floruit 230.
Origin, Lib. de paenitentia cap. 10 and 12 floruit 200.
Tertullian. S. Lib. de lapsis floruit 250.
Cyprian, Lib. 4. diuinar. constitution ca. 17. floruit 320.
Lacta^tius, who so highly adva^ceth Confession, as he makes it one
distinctiue note Jdem cap. vlt. eiusdem libri.
of the true church, S. Sermon. in illa verba Profecti in pagum quiex advers.
etc. floruit circiter annum 340.
Athanasius S. Canone 18. in Mattheum flor. 346.
Hilary, Lib. de paenitentia, and confess. flor 350.
Pacianus, S. Jn regulis breuiorib. regula 229 and 288.
Bafil, S. Tom 5 lib. 2. de sacerdetio.
Chrysostom, S. Ep. 80 ad episcopos Campaniea, and epist. 91. ad Theocorum
Foroiulij episcopum flor. 450:
Lee, with other writers of best note in every age since Christ's time hitherto
And as the primitive and ancient Fathers and Saints do yield their absidant
testimony in confirmation of these two points, so do they undoubtedly also
afford, if this place would give leave to particularize, very ample evidence in
Our liars.
all the other points before mentioned, and in question between us and our
oppositors. Nay, if we may be so bold as to deliver our opinion plainly
without concealing ought in this matter: the manner that our adversaries use in
citing places out of the ancient Fathers against us, is but the A shameless
stander.
study of mere wrangling, and no other then a demonstratiue token of an
exceeding contentious spirit, wil^ully affecting to blindfold and mislead it
self. For were they sincere and loved truth above althings, they could not
possibly Divelish ca^^^^^iations.
dismember, wrest and pick out sentences of their works, in the order and to
the purposes they do, not letting to rack their words to a sense which the
writers never meant yea contrary oftentimes even to the general scope and
drift of those books whence they cull the pieces they allege, contrary to
the evident letter and plain passages of their other writings, contrary to
the faith they professed, lived, and died in; contrary to the Religion of the
Age they wrote in; contrary to the Doctrine of the Church that first admitted
them for Doctors, or received them for Saints; contrary to the profession of
their lives and state of vocation; contrary to the anguage and nature of their
own deeds; to the titles and dignities they held, and to the opinion and
censure which al former ages retained of such their parcels of writing. So that
words, and words commonly disioynted from that went before, or follows after,
must balance, and bear more sway and credit for Although the Fathers in their
writings do approve our religion. Yet it is not therefore that we co^de^ne the
Papists, because their religion differs from the writings of the Fathers, but
because it is contrary unto the Scriptures.
condemning us of err^r, then the writers lives, self deeds, their practice,
profession, other their works, or never so many apparent testimonies of theirs
to the contrary for the truth of our religion.

Resolution of the 26. Reason.
Popish Religion, is that of which the four acknowledged Doctors of holy
Church. S. Ambrose, S. Hiereme, Augustine, S. Gregory, were both professors,
and stout defenders.

Ergo:

Popery is true Religion, and therefore to be tolerated.

ANSWER.
I To the Antecedent.
1 IF the Papists acknowledge but four Doctors of the Church; then what
think they of the rest of the Fathers both Greek and Latin of the Primitive
Church; whereof many were ancienter then these four which they acknowledge:
Do not they deserve to be termed Doctors of the Church?

2 These four Doctors which they acknowledge were not Popish Massing Priests,
as the Suppliants impudentlie conclude, upon the bare mustering of their names.

3 I cannot stand here, to examine their particular allegations; by one only a
man may judge of all the rest. Augustine (say the Suppliants) wrote three books
Delibere Arbitrie, therefore he approved free will. They might as well have
concluded, Augustine wrote a book De Mendacio, therefore he approved lies. Or,
Augustine wrote a book De duabus Ammis, therefore he approved two souls.
Whosoever shall read Augustines books of Free Will, shall presently see, that
Augustine directly wrote against the Popish Free Will: which Sixtus Senensis, a
Papist, acknowledges, and therefore reproves Augustine for his doctrine
concerning that point. Sixth. Sen. in praefat. lib. 5. Biblioth. Hereby a man
may see the Suppliants honesty in citing the Fathers.

4 These four Doctors in the principal points of Popish Religion are against
the Papists. Hierom refuses the book of Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, Iudeth,
Tobias and the Machabies, as Apocryphal. in Prolog. Galeat. in lib. Reg. and
Praefat. in Esdr. and Nehem. And so does Gregory the books of Machabies In Job.
lib. 19. cap. 17. Augustine says, Christ is our Mediator according to both
his natures. Hom. de ovib. cap. 12. and de Consens. Evang. lib. 1. cap. 35. and
Enchr. cap. 108. Ambrose says that the relics of concupiscence in the
regenerate are sins, as Augustine witnesses Contra Iul. lib. 2. c. 5. this
also is Augustines own opinion Contra Julian. Pelag. l. 5. c. 3. and Tract.
41. in Joan. and in Ps. 118. Conc. 3. Hierome says that the Saints know not
what is done in earth. In Epitaph. Nepotian. So says Augustine also Lib. de
cura pro mort. c. 13. and 16. and in Psalm 108. and lib. de Spir. and Anim. c.
29. They teach also that Saints must not be worshipped. Aug. de ver. relig. cap
55. De civit. Dei lib. 22. cap. 10. and lib. 8. cap. 27. and lib. Confess. 10.
cap. 42. and lib. de morib Eccles. c. 34. Augustine says we are justified in
Christ not in our selves, Aug. de verb. Apost. Sermon. 6. and De Spir. and lit.
cap. 26. and de fid. et op. cap. 14. and epist. 120. cap. 30. So also teaches
Hierome, in 2. Cor 5. And Ambrose Epist. 71. And Gregory Moral. lib. 9. cap.
14. and lib. 21. cap. 15. and lib. 5. cap. 7. et lib. 9. cap. 28. et in Ezech.
Hom. 7. sub. fin. and in Psalm. 1 paenit. Ambrose says that we are justified
by faith ONLY in 1. Cor. 1. et in Romans 4. So says Augustine also. Sermon. 181.
de Temp. et contra. 2. Epist. Pelag lib. 1. cap. 21. Gregory calls him
Antichrist that calls himself Oecumenicall Bishop or head of the Church,
lib. 6. epist. ex. registr. c. 194. lib. 4. Ep. 36. et 39. et lib. 7. ep. 69.
(I cannot stand upon particulars,) and therefore questionless no idolatours,
no Massing-Priestes, no merit-mongers, no disciples of Antichrist, no Papists,
but true and faithful Christians, whose doctrine and virtues the Protestants
profess and practice.

II To the Consequence.
1 IF these four Doctors had professed, and defended Popery; yet were not
Popery therefore true religion; because the Fathers were subject unto Error,
yea and erred oftentimes. Tertullian was a Montanist, and embraced the error
of the Chiliastes. Cyprian taught rebaptisation. Hierome condemned second
marriages. Chrysostom was infected with Pelagianisme, etc.

2 It is the Word of GOD only, not the profession of the Doctors of the Church,
that is the rule and square of true religion.


A Religion of whose doctrine and communion in Sacraments Untruth.
all the Saints in the Calendar, the As the Gentiles had their tutelares Deos
and Penates, so have the Papists theirs also.
patrons of Churches and countries, co^verters of Nations to Christianity, all
personages of either sex memorable for holiness, for renouncing the world, for
mortifying their appetites, for surrendering their wills, or for any other
excellent, and true virtue, were, and so lived, and died; as the authentical
legends of their lives, and other ecclesiastical writings do testify, and
bear apparent record to the whole world.

Resolution of the 27. Reason.
Popish religion is that which all the Saints in the Calendar, and all
personages memotable for holiness professed.

Ergo.

Popery is true Religion, and therefore to be tolerated.

ANSWER.
1 IT is false that all such as are named in the Calendar professed Popery.

2 If they did so, yet were that no sufficient argument to prove the trueness
of Popish religion, for the reasons before specified.


A Religion not destitute of any kind of proof; but her positions co^firmable
by Prove this, and take all.
Scriptures, by Apostolical institutious, by Councels occumenicall, and
provincial, by Fathers, Doctors, reasons, histories, chronologies, prophesies,
visions, and revelations, miracles, traditions. and by all these, and other
like heads, we say, confirmable, without wrest, strain, or flying to tropes,
or figurative speeches. So that these words in the Canticles seem only
verified of Nothing less. Cantic. 4. v. 4.
our church, and religion, Thy neck (that is the puissant of Christ's Church)
is as the tower of David which is built with bulwarks, a thousand shield s
hang on it, all the armor of the strong.

Resolution of the 28. Reason.
Popish religion is confirmed by Scriptures, Aposto licall Institutions, by
Counceis, Fathers, Doctors, reasons, histories, chronologies, prophesies,
visions, revelations, meracles, traditions.

Ergo.

Popery is true religion, and consequently to be tolerated.

ANSWER.
1 THe Antecedent is a ridiculous begging of the question.

2 If the Suppliants will prove but the first particle thereof, to wit, that
Popish religion is confirmed by the Scriptures, we will grant thern the whole
argument, though otherwise also it be very false.


A Religion* which Act 2
beginning at Popery began at Rome, not at Rome, not at Jerusalem.
lerusalem, has as a river through the length of her course ever more and more
increased, and spread it self, as it was prophesied that the But Popery has
no communion with this.
Church of Christ should, Psalm. 2.8.
I will give thee (says God the Father to God the Son) nations to thine
inheritance (which is his Church) and the ends of the earth to thy possession:
Esaias 2 2.
All nations hall run unto her. Dan. 7.14.
All people, tribes, and tongues shall serve him. Esaias 60.10
The sons of strangers (that is of the Gentiles) shall build up her walls, and
their Kings do service unto her. Now that these, and innumerable other like
predictions and prophesies are only found true, and fulfilled in Not those
predictions, but these rather. She has made al nations drunken, etc.
our Catholic Roman Church and Religion, both the several co^versions of
nations unto her, and the infinite multitude dispersed everywhere of her
believers, do, as nothing can more, clearly testify: And how greatly it spread
it self, even when True Christian Religion, not Popery.
it first put forth after the death of our Savior, it appears by the several
people and nations, to whom S. Paul directed particular Epistles, namely, the
Romans, Corinthians, Galathians, Ephesians, Philippians, Colessians,
Thessalonians, Hebr^wes, by mission of the Apostles into all quarters of the
world to preach the same, by S. Peter, writing to the Jews dispersed in
Pontus. Galatia. Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia, by the contents of the 2. and
4. Chapters of the Acts of the Apostles, where the conversion of 8000. is
specified through two Sermons preached by S. Peter. Likewise what ample, and
most mervailous increase it took afterward in the second age, Jn dialago c^^
Tryph.
Justinus Philosophus, Lib 1. cap. 3.
Jreneus, and Jn Apolog ca. 37 and advers. Iudaeos c. 7 and 8
Tertullian do witness. And so does De vit. Philosop. in Aedes.
Eunapius Sardianus a profane writer, and enemy of Christian Religion, Vit.
Constantini lib. 3. ca. 24 and seq etc. vit.
Eusebius, Lib. 1. cap. 12.
Socrates with others for the third age.

And touching the succeeding Centuries, to the end it may appear how False.
our Catholic religion did in every age spread and dilate it self according
to the former prophecies, we will recite a few of many Nations that were
converted in every Country to the same.

In the fourth age were converted the These were converted to S. Paulinus epist.
Bessites, Dacians, Getes, and Seythians by S. Pausinus de reditu Nicetae in
Dac.
S. Nicetas Bishop of Dacia to the Catholic Roman faith. The Morins, and
Nervians by 26.
Victricius Bishop of Roan. And within the compass of this century Epist. 3.
S. Hierome also writes that other Nations were co^verted, as the Armenians
and Huns, adding Idem epist. 7.
that troops of Monks came daily from India, Persia, and Aethiopia unto him.

Christianity, not to Popery.

In the fifth age the Saracens by Cyrillus in vita S. Euthy mij apud
Metaphrasten die 20 Ianu.
S. Euthymius Monk, and Aspebetus. The Socrates li. 7. cap. 30.
Burgundians upon this motive of seeing Gods especial and most singular
favors and protection toward the Roman Christian Monarchy in times of
distress. The Prosper adversus collatorem in fine.
Scots by Palladius, sent A.D. 429.
by Pope Caelestine, the French Greg. Turon. de gestis Franc. lib. 2. cap. 31.
by S. Remigius Bishop of Reims, and Albin Flac. circiter A.D. 499.
S. Vedastus Bishop of Arras.

In the sixth age the A. D. 565.
Northern Picts by Beda de gest. Angl lib. 3. ca. 4
S. Columbus Abbot. The A. D. 589.
Goths by Greg. Turonen Hist. Fran. lib. 8. ca. 41.
Leander Bishop of Sevil. The A. D. 590.
Bavarians by A D. 594.
Rupertus Bishop of Worms. The Greg. epist. li. 3. c. 29. and 27.
Barbaricinians by A. D. 596.
Foelix Bishop, and Cyriacus Abbot. The Beda de gest. Angl lib. 1 cap 23.
English by S. Augustine, a Benedictine Monk, sent by Pope Gregory the Great.

In the 7. age, the Flemings by Iaco. Mayer in Chron. Flandriae 649.
Eligius: the Westphalians by the Fasciculus temporum.
two Evaldes, after honored with the crown of martyrdom: multitudes of
Spaniards by Volaterranus li. 21 and Vince^tius lib. 23. cap. 92.
S. Andonius, chiefly through the miracle he wrought in calling store of rain
from heaven by his prayers, when in seaue^ years before there had fallen none
in that place: The people of Franconia by Sigibertus in Chronico. 688.
Chilianus sent by Pope Cuno: and the Frisians by Trithemius de Regib.
Francorum. 696.
S. Willibrode an English man, employed in that holy work by Pipin King of
France, and Pope Sergius the first.

In the eight age, the Hedio lib. 6. cap. 17.
Hassites. Chronic. Isanacense.
Thuringians, Mutius lib 7. and Hartmannus Schedelin Chro. aetate 6.
Erphordians and Willibaldus in vita Bonifacij 722.
Cattians by S Boniface, an English Monk: the Lumbards by Sebaldus Hartmannus
vhi supra.
sent by Pope Gregory the second. The Jews of the City of Berythum (...) by
the bleeding of a Crucifix, which the said Jews had co^tumeliously stabbed and
the blood whereof cured all diseases. The two Saxon Dukes, Crantzius in metrop.
lib. 1. ca 9 and Magde cent 8. tit. de Propagat. 785.
Witekindus 01 and Albion, by a miraculous sight which Witekindus saw whilst
he was but in a new and doubtful disposition of becoming Christian, to wit, a
f^ire child descending from the Priests hands into the mouths of the
receivers, when, celebrating Mass, he delivered the sacrament of the Altar to
Communicants.

Witekindus Crantzius in metrop. lib. 1. ca 9 and Magde cent 8. tit. de
Propagat. 785.
saw this vision at Wolmerstadium on the feast of Easter, when the Camp of
Carolus magnus lay there. In the ninth age, the Adamus lib 1. ca. 16. and 17
and Crantzius in metrop. lib 1. cap 19.826.
Danes, and Suethens, by S. Ausgratius Monk the Biondus Fla. Dec 2 l. 2 840.
Bulgarians by S. Joannicius: the Helmoidus li. 1. cap. 6. and lib. 2 cap. 12.
in hist Sclau. and Cedrenus. 875.
Rugians by the Monks of Corbeia. the Theodomarus Fpiscopus Juvaniensis ad
Ioannem Pontificem.
Moravians, by Withungum: the Zonaras tom. 3.
Rhossits upon the evidence of the mira cle ens^ing. They demanded of the
Priest, whom their Emperor Basilius Macedo sent unto the^ to teach them the
Christian Catholic faith, by what powerful and divine sign, he would
witness the truth of his doctrine. The sign was, that if the book wherein the
said doctrine was written should not burn being cast into the fire, then they
al with one accord would presently believe and receive his doctrine. A great
fire was made, and the Priest putting the book (which was the holy Bible) into
the midst thereof, said with a loud voice, Glorifica nomen tuum Christ Deus,
Christ our God glorify thy holy name. The flames gave place to the book, and
the book lay so long in the fire as the people themselves thought meet, and
when it was taken out, it appeared sound, whole, and no one leaf either
scorched or blemished.

In the tenth age the Polonians by Cromerus, and alij de reb. Polonoru^. 965.
Aegidius Tuseulanus, Adamus l 2. c 78.10.11. and Ditmarus chron. lib. 2.971.
and others sent by Pope John the 13. The Selavonians by A.D. 989 h Cartuitias
in vita Steph. Hungar. reg. c. 1.2. and 3. Aeneas Sylvius Hist. Bohem. cap l 16.
S. Adelbert, and the Hungarians by Aen^as Sylvius.
another Adelbert surnamed their Apostle

In the eleventh age the A. D. 1106. Bozius lib 4 cap. 5.
Vindians, and multitudes of Prussians, be side the reclaiming of the lapsed
Circiter A D. 1150. Ranulph. l. 4 c. 22
Hungarians.

In the twelfth age, the Pomeranians, the Norvegians, by Nicholas an English
Moncke employed in that holy work, by Pope Eugenius the third. The which
Nicholas was afterward chosen Pope of Rome, and named Hadrian the south, and
gave the dominion of Ireland to King Hen^^ 2 wi^h co^drio^ of propagating the
Christian faith there; Stowin anno 7. Henrici 2.
of preserving the rights of the Church entire, and inviolated, and of paying a
yearly pension of a penny for every house in the Kingdom.

In the 13. age. the Anno Dom. 12 5.
Li^onians, by Cran^zius lib 7 cap. 13.
(...) Medardes, the Anno Dom. 1230.
L^tuanians by Martinus Chromer lib. 8.
the knights of S. Marie, the Anno Dom. 1270. Sabellicus, and Guilielmus de
Nangiaco.
Emperor Cassanes with it numerable Tar^arians.

In the fouretenth age, Anno Dom. 1300. Niceph. Gregor. Histor. lib. 4.
Azatines Emperor of the Turks, the Isles of the Canaries, the An. Dom. 1344
B^zius lib 4 cap. 5.
revolted Lituanians, the Anno Dom 1346 Sebastianus Munsterus in Cosmograph.
Cumans the Bosnians, the Lipnensians, the Patrianians and other Sclavonian
nations, by ^ope Clement the 6. and Leves king of Hungary.

In the sifteenth age, the Anno Dom 1350 Michael Rit lib. 2. Bonfin. deca. 2.
lib. 10.
Same getians the kingdoms of Bentonine Guinea Angola, and Anno Dom. 14^2.
Martin. Chrom. li 18.
Congo.

In the sixteenth and last age, to speak ingenerall, without descending to any
particulars, more provinces, Nations, and numbers of rich Kingdoms, and
Empires, were brought to the knowledge of Christ, and embracing the Catholic
Roman faith, by the labors of the Judas and other reprobates may preach the
Gospel, yea and work miracles in Christ's name. Mat. 7.22.
Dominican and Franciscan Friars, and the Fathers of the societ^e of Jesus, God
attesting his cause and truth by several miracles, then all Christendom twice,
yea, perhaps more then thrice told contained before: which, beside the record
of all Cosmographies, and Histories of this subject, may plainly be
demonstrated in that, before the last Centenarie, or not many years different,
the Christian Religion extended not it self beyond the river Ganges Eastward,
and the Isles of the Canaries in the West, which scope and space is counted no
more then of an hundred and twenty degrees; but the circuit of the world which
is now sailed, and every, or most where ports of Christians found therein, is
of three hundred and three score degrees, which is full out thrice as much.

The few precedents (most renowned Prince) collected out of many that might be
added, do very clearly show, not only that the above rehearsed, end other
prophecies, and promises of God of dilating the place of his Tents, and of
spreading out the curtains of his Tabernacle. Esa. 54.2. that is the bounds
of his Church (Christ's Spouse and tempora Kingdom) are to the e^e fulfilled,
in the increasing societies, and continuance of Begging of the question.
our religion, but that also the Word of wisdom, and the Word of knowledge
(graces given by the t^st^monies of saint Paul, 1 Cor. 12 8. in the Church, by
the holy Ghost, to the profit of others) have their residences in the Prove
that.
teache^s of ^ur religion, and that in how eminent and most powerful man^^er,
the conversion of the former Nations bears most apparent witness, ^or there
can be no doubt made but that some, if not the most part of the foresaid
Nations and sorts of people, were of excellent dexterity and judgment, and
therefore very unlike that they were led away, especially from the religion
and ri^es they were bred and borne in, without store of solid and substantial
reasons moving them thereunto. And it is as little questionable, whether some
of them were not also of a knotty, intractable or untameable nature* of a
proud, obstinate and hawty disposition, drowned in uncleanness, and delighting
in the varieties of liberty: lets and strongest impeachments of embracing the
discipline, pureness and austerity of our Popish Antichristian superstition.
Christian Catholic religion: and the conquering of them a plain
demonstration that their Coverters (all stout professors of the Roman
religion) taught that doctrine, which the Prophet calls a law, converting
souls: and the Apostle, the lively and forcible word, more piercing then any
two edged sword. Ps. 18.8. Heb. 4.12. Likewise that they fought not with the
leather sheath, the letter only of Scripture, but with the letter and true
sense, which only is the Sword of the spirit, that reaches unto the division
of the soul. Ephesians. 6 17 Heb. 4 12. The bright Candel (Luke 11.37.) that
illuminateth those that sit in darkness. Luke 1.79. And the seed to which God
promises to giveraine for the rich fructifying thereof Esa. 30.23. And
finally, that they were also true imitators of the Apostles in doctrine and
office, as becoming Fishers of men. Matthew 4 16 and Mark. 1.17. drawing them
out of the Sea of infidelity, into the harbor of Christianity, a badge or
attribute given to the Apostles, and verified in none but in Catholic teachers
Neither did the^, nor does now the word of wisdom and knowledge 1 Cor 12 8. (a
gift proper to Gods Church) work in our Catholic teachers upon Infidels
only, but the same extended and still extends his power and divine ^fficacie
to the bringing forth of as rare or more rare effects, upon believing
Christians, namely, in exciting men and women of all ages and estates, even
Bamba These foresooke their lawful vocation, and resigned their power to the
Beast. Apo. 17.17.
King of Spain, Hugo King of Province* Rachis King of Lombardie. Sigismundus
King of Burgundy. Veremundus King of Castile. Ranimirus King of Aragon.
Ethelred, and Keneredus Kings of Mercia. Sigebert Alfred. Ceolulphus. Egbert
Kings of Northumberland. Sebba, Offa, and Jna Kings of England. Henry the
fourth, King of Denmark. Carlomannus King of Almaine. Trebellius King of
Bulgarie. Cazimirus King of Poland, and others
Kings, Radegund Queen of France Margares Queen of Frace-Briget Queen of
Sueden. Etheldreda Queen of Northumber. Sexbi^ga. Ethelburga. Q Q of
West Saxons, and others.
Queens, Lotharius Earl of Romans, and others.
Emperors, Richardix wife of Carolus Crassus Emperor. Chune gundie wife of
Henry Emperor and others.
and Emperesses, They mean plainly to, become Moonkes and Nuns; a true
effect of Popish superstition, and the broad way to Hell.
to relinqunish the world, renounce the pleasures and delights thereof and
devote and bind themselves to a poor, chaste, and obedient life, under the
command and direction of others: Of which, These be the swarms of Locustes,
that came out of the smoke of the bottomless pit. Apoc. 9.
religious companies some eat nost she but in time of sickness only, or other
necessity, and observe both silence, and solitarines, as do the Benedictines;
some never eat flesh at all, wear always shirts of hair, go not forth of
their Cloisters, nor speak to their fellows but with leave, as do the
Carthusians: some neither eat flesh, eggs, nor whitmeates, and fast three parts
of the year, as do the Bonhomes; Some Holy Hypocrites.
discipline themselves sundry times in the week, or daily, go barefoote,
touch no money, have nothing in proper or in common, and beg their food from
d^re to door* as do the Capucines: some attend the sick in all diseases,
assist them with ghostly counsel, provide them Sacraments, and bury their
dead bodies as do certain fraternities: some cleanse ulcers, and festered
soars, nor refuse any office, how base and loathsome soever about impote^t
criples and lazars, as do the Nu^nes of S. Elizabeth's order: And al these, with
other diverse orders, that after another manner labor to mortify themselves,
and do good to others, lie upon no other beds but of straw, rise at midnight,
sleep little, and spend much time in prayer, and meditation. Which are no
conditions of life, that either Romans 13.14.
make provision for the flesh in concupiscences, or Galat. 5.16.
do seek to accomplish the desires, or Tisus 3.3.
serve the voluptuousnes thereof (sins which the Apostle forbids) but
rather forms Will Worship, condemned Col. 2 23.
of life that Galat. 5 24.
crucify the flesh, with her vices, and concupiscences, do Galat. 2.19.
nail them to the Cross with Christ, and render both Galat. 6.14.
the world crucifide to those that so live, and them to the world. Virtues
which by the testimony of the Apostle Galat. 5.24.
make their dooers the servants of Christ, and Galat. 2.20.
to live now not they, but Christ in them Effects of no false Religion.

Resolution of the 29. Reason.
Popish Religion beginning at Hierusalens, increased and spread is self into
all nations.

Ergo:

Popish Religion is true, and to be tolerated.

ANSWER.
I To the Antecedent.
1 AS the Devil, the easier to deceive, being transformed into an Angel of
light, arrogateth unto himself those things which belong unto GOD: Even so
does his Church, that great whore which si^teth upon the scarlet colored
beast with a cup of gold in her hand full of abominations and filthiness of her
fornication; that deceaveth the Kings, and the inhabitants of the earth,
challenge unto her self the titles and rights of Christ's true Church: whereas
in deed she is great Babylon that mother of whoredoms and abominations of the
earth. Apoc. 17.4.5.

2 Popish Religion did not begin at Jerusalem, but at Rome, that great city
upon seven hills, where Antichrist wrought the mystery of iniquity.

3 The Prophecies concerning Christ's Church, how that some of all nations, and
people, and tribes, and tongues should flock unto her, do not belong unto the
Popish Church; for none shall flock unto her but such, whose names are not
written in the book of life. Apoc. 17.8.

4 It was not unto Popery, that the Nations were co^verted, but unto the true
Christian religion, wherewith Popery has no communion.

II. To the Consequence.
1 IF Popish religion had begun at Jerusalem, yet were it not true
Religion; because it lost the sincerity of doctrine which was professed and
taught at Jerusalem.

2 If Popery were so ample, as the Supplia^ts make their brags, it were not
therefore true: for never was Popery of so many nations so universally
received, as gentilisme was.

3 Seeing the Whore of Babylon should sit upon many waters (that is, rule
over many people) and cause the Kings and nations of the earth, to be drunk
with the wine of her fornication, as it is Apoc. 17. who sees not that even
Antichristian Papistrie may be countenanced with great show of vniversalit^e?

4 For our parts, we had rather enter into the Arc with eight persons Genes.
7. so to be saved: then to refuse so to do with all the world besides, and so
to be drowned. We had rather she out of Sodom with two or three, Genes. 19.
then with all the rest to stay there, and to be destroyed with fire and
brimstone. We had rather enter in at the straight gate to life everlasting,
though few go that way, Luk 13. then with the Papists, walk the broad way
which leads to destruction.


A Religion, from Such as depart from popery are happy and blessed. Apec. 18.4.
which Countries either departing, or mingling other doctrines with it, made
present wrack of their former felicities, falling either into flat
Apostacy, or most lamentable bondage, or both. The instances are: All these
nations were punished for departing from the sincerity of Christian religion,
not of Popery.
The Theodoreti^^ lib. 4 cap. 32. Sozomen lib 6. cap. 37.
Goths, while they remained Catholic, flourished and enlarged their
territories, but becoming Arians, were shortly expelled thence by the Hunnes,
the^ Infidels: The like, and by like occasion befell the Jornandes de rebus
gest.
Dacians, Mysians, and Pannonians, by invasio^ of the Hunnes, Gepides and
Rugians. The Ex Aenea Silvio. in Eur. cap 16.17. An^o. Sabel Enne 10 lib. 6^
and ex Chronicis ea^u^dem Nationu^s, asijsque, Historijs.
Dalmatians, Gauls, Britannes, Spaniards, and the Africans by superinducing or
mixing, one the heresy of Manichaeus, another the heresy of Vigisa^tius, the
third the heresy of Pelagius, the fourth the heresy of Priscillian, the last
the heresy of Donatus, with the Catholic religion, were conquered, and
supplanted, the Dalmatians by the Turk, the Gauls by the French, the
Britannes by the English, the Spaniards by the Goths, the Africanes by the
Vandals: To which may be added the Germans, wasted and subjected by Attila
(...) the seigniory of the Hunnes after the Arian heresy had rooted it self
^n several quarters and provinces of their Country: The Ortel^^s in R^gia, ex
Saxone ^elmoldo and Crantzio.
inhabi^ants also of the city Iulinum, who being converted to the Roman
faith, and falling again from it were all consumed, both citizens and city
with fire from heaven. Touching the Countries in the East, after they began
to dishonor themselves with new doctrines, the so fast ran headlong therein,
(an inseparable property of al heresy, because they are unbounded, and lack a
defining and binding power) that in short while after, to wit, in the reign
of Herselius the Emperor, there were on foot Niceph. lib. 18.45. Jacobitans.
Georgia^s. Theopaschitae. Armenians. Monophysites. Agnoetans. Staurablatans.
Monothelites. Severites. Aphtar thodecits. Phantasiasts. Maniches. Tetradites.
Tritheites. Arians. Nastorians.
sixteen several sorts of belief: but what followed? First, Chosr^es king
of the Persia^s sacked Jerusalem, and much weakened the Empire: Then, (
Heraclius the Emperor turned Monothelite) Mahomet that infernal monster,
being made the Captain of the Saracens, took Syria and Egypt, Anno Dom. 635.
Mesopotamia, Anno. Dom. 639. and afterward all Africa: Finally we think that
in the revolution of the fifteen first ages, the Nation or kingdom cannot be
named, which forsaking the Catholic Roman religion or not keeping it whole,
and inviolated, was either not The contrary appears in England and Scotland;
to insist in no other.
conquered, or miserably torn by civil division and slaughters.

Resolution of the 30 Reason.
Popish religion is that from which Countries either departing, or mingling
other doctrines with it, made present wrack of their former felicities,
falling either into flat Apostasy, or most lamentable bondage, or both.

Ergo.

Popery is true religion, and to be tolerated.

ANSWER.
1 GOD does not punish any nation or people for departing from Papistrie;
seeing such a departing, is not Apostacy from true religion; as I have proved
before, p. 37.

2 GOD is so far from punishing any for separating themselves from the
communion of Popery, that contrariwise, whosoever does not separate himself,
God threatens to plague him; Apoc. 18.4 Go out of her, my people, that ye
be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues.

3 The Suppliants insta^ces are of such nations as were, before Popery began
to reign; who could not therefore be punished for relinquishing Popery.

4 Those nations were indeed punished either for quite falling away from true
religion, or for not professing it so sincerely, as they ought to have done.

5 For our times, GOD has infinitely blessed the professors of our Religion;
and declared his judgments against Popery and Papists. I will not speak of
Luther who by the mighty protection of GOD, bouldly maintained the truth of
the Gospel even in the midst amongst his enemies: Nor yet of the miraculous
preservatio^ of Geneva, that stands in the mouth of the adversaries, who
want neither power nor malice against it: Nor of Rochell, besieged for the
Gospelles sake by all the power of France for seven whole months together,
and yet by the power of GOD persisted invincible.

6 Only I will speak one word of this Kingdom of England, and for our late
blessed Sovereign; Who as she has stoutly maintained the cause of Jesus
Christ; so has GOD performed unto her kingdom his promises made unto his
children in Jesus Christ. Search all Histories, turn al Chronicles, sacred or
profane, ecclesiastical or civil; yet shall ye never find a Woma^-Prince, a
Maiden or Virgin Queen, yea you shall not find any Prince at all, whose
preservatio^ has bin so mighty, whose glory so great, whose government so
long, so prosperous, so happy. All this has bin the more admirable, and is
the more to be considered, by how much the more and oftener she has bin
cursed with bell, book and candle, by him that arrogateth to himself Fulues
of power, and auctority in heaven, in earth, and in hell. But GOD has turned
his curses into blessings; yea the more he cursed her Majesty and the Land,
the more GOD has blessed both.

7 If the Land should not continue still in the zealous profession of the
Gospel; but should mingle heresies with truth, and admit the practice of
Popery, which is the Suppliants motion and petition: Doubtless God would cease
from being our GOD, he would with draw his blessings from us, yea he would be
avenged upon such a faithless and backsliding people.


A Religion, whose professant company or congregation, has bin evermore since
the first planting thereof, very visible and perspicuous; as the several
resemblances, parables and figurative speeches, used in holy Scripture, do
clearly testisie, that the true Most false and the Scriptures following are
miserably applied.
Church and Spouse of Christ should ever be, comparing her to a Psalm. 18.5.
tabernacle placed in the Sun to a Esa. 2.2.
mountain prepared in the top of mountains: to a Matthew. 5.15.
City, situated on a hill: to a Math. 3.12. Luke 3.17.
Floor: to a Math. 13.47.
Net: a Ioh. 10.16.
Spheepe-folde: a Luke 14.16.
great Supper: a Matthew. 21.33. Luke 20.9.
Vineyard etc. and her doctrine to a Matthew. 5.15.
Candle put upon a candlestick, shining to all that are in the house, that is,
An absurd gloss.
in the world, as Tract. 2. in epist. Joan.
S. Augustine understands the place: things that are all, most visible and
obvious to weakest sense, and therefore do prove, that the true Church ought to
be always visible, and apparent to the view of others. Neither is the word
[Church] to be found throughout the whole body of holy Scripture, to signify
other then a But we read in the Scriptures that the woman fied into the
wilderness, etc. Apoc. 12.14.
visible known multitude: and the reason is plain, why it must so signify,
because it were otherwise impossible for any one, to join himself to the true
Church, persevere therein, obey the head, and be subject to the Prelates
thereof, (which all are bound to do by the express word of God, law of nature,
and under heauiest curse and censure of damnation) if the Church were, or could
be invisible, or not remonstrable. For unto things hidden and invisible, there
can be no repair, no adherence, nor homage of duty, or tribute of obedience
defrayed.

Nay, to deny the perpetual visibility, and Who denies this? Ephesians. 5.26.
Ephesians. 1.23.
dyration of the Church, were in great part to They fight without en
adversary, for no man denies but that Christ has had and shall have his
church always, though not always visible.
evacuate Christ's passion, and plainly to rob him of the end he suffered
for, namely to sanctify and cleanse his Church, as S. Paul witnesses, and to
render is glorious unto him: it were ( the church being, as the same Apostle
writes, Christ, body and the fulness of him) to make Christ a head bodilesse
and take as it were, his totality or perfection from him it were, to divorce
our Savior from his dearly beloved spouse Ephesians. 5 29.
formed out of his side upon the cross, and inseperably joined in marriage
with him it were, to bereave his omnipote^t Majesty of 1. Tim. 315. Colos:
1.14. Psalm 2.8.
his house kingdom, lotte and heritage upon earch: for such is his Church unto
him, and so called in holy Scripture: yea, it were, directly to charge the
Prophets, the Apostles, and even Christ himself either with untruths, or
absurdities: The Prophets; because these words are read in Esa. 60.11. Cap
61.8.
Esaias: Thy getes (speaking to the future Church of Christians) shall be open
continually, neither day nor night shall they be shut, the strength of the
Gentiles and their Kings may be brought unto thee. And in another place; I the
Lord will make an everlasting covenant with them, and their seed shall be
known among the Gentiles, and their branches in the widst of people. All that
see them, shall knows them, that they are seed which our Lord has blessed.
What could be plainer spoken for proof, either of the This is not proved from
thence, the perpetuitis we grant.
visibility or perpetuity of Christ's Church? her gates (says he) shall be
open continually, shut neither by day nor night; and that God has made and
everlasting covenant with her, and that But he says not, All shall see.
all that see her children shall know the^, and know, that our Lord has
blessed them. The Apostle; because S. Paul writing to 1. Tim. 3.15.
Timothy, teaches him, how he ought to co^verse in the house of God, so
terming the church of God now if the church were invisible, the instruction
must needs be vain and absurd; for none can converse in an Neither do we say
that the Church is always invisible.
invisible house. Again, Acts 20.28. Matthew. 28.20.
S. Luke writes that the holy Ghost placed Bishops in the church of God, to
rule the same: but who can rule a flock, that is either invisible or unknown?
Christ himself; because he promised his Apostles to remain with them all
days to the consummation of the world: Which promise being made to the
Apostles, was made to a visible Church: and for that they were not (being
mortal) to live to the worlds end the promise was undoubtedly made, to them
and their Successors in their persons: and A plain inconsequence.
therefore the Church neither ever to cease, or become invisible.

Neither can the reasons and places precedent be avoided, by the ignorant
distinction of a invisible and invisible Church, understanding by the latter,
the hid and unknown congregation of the Predestinate; because the Church,
being a society of men (as all writers affirm) and every society requiring of
necessity some visible sign, badge, ceremony, bond, rite, profession,
inrolleme^^, or some other like mark, whereby the members of the same may be
known, one to the other, and also from others; which essential point failing
in the company of the predestinat, they can no way possible make up the False.
Contra Faust. lib. 19. cap. 11.
realtye, name or nature of a Church. For as S. Austen truly writech, In
nullum nomen religionis, sen ve rum, s^u falsum, coagulari homines posiuns,
nisi aliquo signaculos um vel Sacramentorum visibilium consortio colligentur.
Men cannot be incorporate in any one name of Religion, either false or true^,
vnlefle they be combined together by some community, or participation of
visible seals or Sacraments.

Again, this hid and unknown predestinate company, which must be thought to
constitute an invisible Church, do A foolish Dilemma see the Answer.
either refuse, or not refuse to communicate with the false and adulterous
church in Ecclesiastical subjection, service, sacraments and external worship
if they do refuse, then is their company and Church not invisible, but most
visible and markable: and on the other side, if they do not refuse, then since
the false Church is by testimony of the holy Ghost, Apoc. 2.9.
the Synagogne of Satan, and her doctrine 1. Tim. 4.1.
the doctrine of Devils; they must needs be guitly of damnable sin by such
their partaking with her. And therefore their company not Gods Church, because
that multitude cannot possibly be Gods Church, wherein there are none Ephesians. 5
27. Aug. contr. Donatist. post Col. cap. 20. and de doctr. Christi. l. 3 c. 34.
and Retract li. 2. c. 18. and epist. 48. ad Vincenti^^^.
good, but all wicked dissemblers, and clo^ers of their faith. With the heart
Romans 10.10.
(says S. Paul) we believe unto justice, but with the mouth (understanding
thereby all external actions) confession is made to salvation. And the same
Apostle bids all men Romans 16.17. Tit. 3.10.
to avoid false teachers, and 2. Cor. 6.17.
separate themselves from them: yea Ioh. 10.5.
not to follow them, but to flee from them, is a mark which cur Savior
himself gives, of distinguishing his true sheep from others. We would say by
that is said, that perpetual visiblenesse, being an Begging of the question.
essential quality and note of Gods church and ever really existing with us,
and in our Religion, (as all sorts of testimonies in the world do witness)
and in no other company or congregation soever it follows, that Impudent
Beggars.
our Church is the sole true church and spouse of Christ.

Resolution of the 31. Reason.
Popish Religion is that, whose professant company or congregation, has bin
evermore since the first planting thereof, very visible and perspicuous.

Ergo:

Popish religion is true religion, and so to be tolerated.

ANSWER.
To the Antecedent.
1 I grant that from the year of Christ 605, when the dispersed points of
Popery began to be established in the Primacy, granted by Phocas unto Boniface
III. the professsant company thereof has bin very visible and perspicuous.

2 But it was not so from the beginning. As the light in the first day was
carried up and down without any guide, Genesis 1. and at length governed by the
Sun, which God created for that purpose: So the mystery of Popery at the
first in the time of the Primitive Church was stayed in no certain subject,
but wandered invisibly in the diverse passages of running wits, till at last it
was settled in the Sea of Rome in the person of Boniface III. and his successors.

II To the Consequence.
1 Popery is not therefore true Religion, because from the first planting thereof
(by the Devil) the professors of it have bin visible; because visibility in
that sense is not a property belonging unto the Church of God.

I We BELIEVE the holy Catholic Church; But faith is the evide^ce of things
which are NOT SEEN. Heb. 11:

II In the visible Church there are many Hypocrites; but God only knows who
are such, De occultis non iudicat Ecclesia. And Christ ONLY knows who are
his. Ioh. 10.2. Tim. 2.

III By examples in the holy Scriptures, the Church is described to be
invisible. 2. Chron. 15.3.4. Now for a long season Israel has bin without the
true God, and without Priest to teach, and without law. But whosoever returned
in his affliction to the Lord God of Israel, and sought him, he was found of
them. At this time Christ was not without his spouse, but (albeit the Ministry
was corrupted) he had his invisible Church. 1. King. 19.18. I leave seven
thousand in Israel, that have not bowed the knees to Baal. This company was not
seen with corporal eyes. And in the time of Christ's coming GOD had his
invisible Church, Marie. Joseph, Zacharias, Elizabeth, the wise men that came
from the East. Simecon, Anna etc, albeit public Ministry was corrupted.

IV Paul says, Romans 2.28.29. He is not a Jew, which is one outward, neither
is that circumcision, which is outward in the flesh. But he is a Jew, which is
one within; and the circumcision it of the heart, in the spirit, not in the
letter, whose praise is not of men, but OF GOD.

2 Those places of Scriptures which the Suppliant quote, prove only the
durance, holiness, integrity and good works of the Church, not the visibility
thereof, unto all persons, and at all times.

4 As for the suppliants Dilemma: The unknown company did, either profess
their faith, and refuse to communicate with the false Church, or they did not.
If they did profess their faith, and refuse to communicate with the other,
the^ was it not invisible: If they did not profess their faith, nor refuse to
communicate with the false Church, they could not be the true Church, etc. I
answer.

4 I. If they did not profess their faith, etc: they could not be the true
Church. Here the Suppliants mean public profession, and open refusal; we
deny this Position, and indeed they can never prove it. By their reason, this
is a good argument; Those seven thousands which bowed not their knees unto
Ball, either professed their faith, or did not: If they did profess it, how
could not Elias see them? If they did not profess it, then they were not the
true Church: and yet who sees not the vanity of it?

5 II. They add, That unknown company communicated with the false Church. I
marvel how the Suppliants know this! Go to, let us urge them with a Dilemma,
seeing they affect such kind of arguing so much. I that company was unknown;
how know they what they did? If they were not unknown, but professed openly;
then what have they to object?

6 The Christian Reader may read, in the 8. and 9. Chap. of the Prophecy of
Ezechiel, concerning those faithful people that mourned and cried for the
abominations that were committed in Jerusalem; how the Lord commanded to set
a mark on their forheads, least they should perish; and learn thence, that
the Lord wants no means to vindicate and save his Church from destruction,
even in time of greatest calamity.


A Religion, in whose largenes and spreading amplitude over the whole world,
the predictions and promise of our Savior are These predictions are not
verified in Popery, but in true Christianity.
verified, not can take their truth and verification in any other sect or
doctrine that ever was, or is at this day on earth. This Gospel of the
kingdom (says our Savior) shall be preached in the whole world for a
testimony to all Nations. Mat. 24.14. And by the pen of another Evangelist,
That penance should be preached in his Name, and remission of sins unto all
Nations. Luk 24 47. And our Lord also compared this his Gospel to a Mustard
seed, one of the least of all seeds in the beginning, but when it is grown,
it makes great boughs. so that the birds of the air (that is, as Expositors
interpret, the greatest Powers, and the most wise of the world) come, and
dwell under the shadow thereof, Mat. 13.31. Mark. 4 32. making their residence,
happiness, and rest therein: A resemblance, and predictions, which cannot
agree or fall in with any An evident untruth.
other religion, save only with the Catholic Roman Religion, and with this
very fully, as the particulars precedent, and subsequent do clearly
demonstrate.

Resolution of the 32. Reason.
Popish Religion is that which is spread over all the world.

Ergo:

Popish Religion is true and to be tolerated.

ANSWER.
1 THis reason is the very same with the 29. and is there answered.

2 Those predictions which the Suppliants speak of, do belong only unto our
Church. For we profess that very same doctrine, which the Apostles preached
unto the whole world. Many Kings great Powers and infinite Wise me^ are
professors of our Religion. Yea our religion at this instant is much more
diffused abroad then Popery is: For we see that most kingdoms and countries in
Christendom have shaken of the yoke of Popery: yea there is no Province nor
City in Europe, but there are therein very many who are addicted unto the
Gospel of Christ, disclaim Popery, and profess the same religion that we do.


A Religion, that has always had (as the Apostle assures Gods church should
ever have, yielding also four weighty causes of the same) a perpetual visible
continuance of known Not Popes and Cardinals.
Pastors and Doctors, to the consummation of the Saints, the first cause: unto
the work of the ministry, the second cause: unto the edifying of the body of
Christ, the third cause: that now we be not children wavering, and carried
about with every wind of doctrine, the fourth cause: and this, until we
meet all into the unity of faith, that is, to the worlds end Which successiue
and eve^ ^ontinuing duration of Pastors and Doctors (the same being also
promised before to the true Christian Church by several Psalm. 88.31. and sequ.
Esa 59.20. and 21. Ierem 31.31. and sequ. Ezech 37.25.
Prophets, and so greatly material in it self, as without it there can be
False. See the answer.
no Church, as both Lib. 4 epist. 9.
S. Cyprian, and Lib. contr. Luciferian.
S. Hierom do absolutely affirm) has not, nor can be ever proved to have
been fulfilled in any other Church, save only in the Catholic Roman Church:
and in it, most apparently demonstrable by the Ecclesiastical histories of all
ages, and by the short space, or rather momentary blast of time that al other
Religions, compared with ours, have endured.

Resolution of the 33. Reason.
Popish Religion, has always had a perpetual visible continuance of known
Pastors and Doctors.

Ergo:

Popery is true Religion, and to be tolerated.

ANSWER.
1 THis Reason is parallel unto the 31. Reason. But I answer farther.

2 I. The luster and glory of the Church is two fold, Interior, and Exterior;
the inward glory is that which consists in purity of doctrine; the outward
glory consists in the amplitude and peaceable state of the Church; The inward
glory never fails in the Church; but the outward oftentimes does. Unto this
belongs the succession of ordinary Pastors and Doctors; for indeed there
may be a true Church without ordinary Pastors. Where two or three consent in
verity of doctrine, there is Christ in the midst of them, there is the Church.
Again the Church fled into the wilderness where for a time she was fed by God,
etc.

3 The Popish Wolves are not true Pastors and Doctors of the Church whereof the
Apostle Paul speaks, Ephesians. 4.11. For in the Papacy, we see the Pope
extolling himself above all; yea sometimes two, three, or four Popes at once,
cursing and banning one the other into the pit of hell; and fighting many a
bloody cu^bate for Peter's chair (as they say.) We see many Cardinals,
Patriarchs, Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, etc. which represent Herod's or
Pharaos court, yea which bear the show of the Babylonian or Persian Monarchy
following them in all ambition, arrogance, vanity, luxury, rather then the
Apostolical state of the Ecclesiastical Ministry, whereof the Apostle Paul
speaks.

4 The Lord gave unto his Church Pastors and Doctors, the Suppliants urge out
of Paul Ephesians. 4. Be it so: But here is no mention of Pope, Cardinals, Monks,
Friars, Jesuits, Priests, etc. Wherefore we may retort this Argument upon the
Papists themselves thus.

They only have a true and a lawful calling and ordination in the Church, who
are mentioned by the Apostle Paul, Ephesians. 4.11. But the Pope, Cardinals, Abbots,
Moonks, Friars, Jesuits, Priests etc. are not mentioned by the Apostle.

Ergo:

These have no lawful calling.

5 Again.

That is the true Church in which there is a lawful vocation and ordination of
Pastors and Ministers.

In the Popish Church there is no lawful ordination of such: as we have proved
before.

Ergo:

The Popish Church is not the true Church.

34. REASON OF RELIGION.
A Religion, whose doctrine is to be Begging of the question.
traced even up to the Apostles chair by true and lawful succession of
Bishops, every of them holding Untruth.
unity with his predecessor, and keeping still, as the Apostle directs, the
depositum that descended from hand to hand unto them. Which uninterrupted line
of succession, never leaping over the head of any one age, or False, as
appears every wherein there own Histories.
year, and drawing his original from the Apostles, can not but This woude be
prooved, not said
necesand;arily prove, that our Church is only the true Apostolical Church, and
that we Impudent Begging.
continue and contend (as we are commanded) Coloss. 1.23. Phil. 3.16. and Jude
v. 3. in and for the faith which was first preached. And it is also evident by
the irrefragable authority of S. Paul, that the Romans had once the true
faith, affirming their e faith to be renowned in the whole world, and common to
him and them. Likewise it is evident by the uniform report of all
Ecclesiastical histories, and by the writings of all the Fathers Theodoretus
Great Cry, Little Wool.
in cap. 16. epist. ad Rom Prosp. carmine de ingr. in principio. S. Leo de Not.
Pet. Aug. contr. epist. Fund. cae. 4. Oiosius l 7. cae. 6. Chrysostom. in Ps. 88.
Epiph. haer. 27. Prud in him. 2. S. Laurentij. and him. 12 Optatus l. 2. contr.
Donatist. Ambr. lib. 5. epist. de basilicis tradendis. Hiero. in Catalogo.
Lactantius lib. 4 cap 21. de vera Sapien-Eusebius hist. Eccles. lib. 2 cap.
13.15. Athanas. de fuga sua Cipria. epist. 55. nu. 6. Tert. de praesic. nu 4.
and lib. 4. Contr. Marcio. nu 4. Origin. in Genesis apud Eusebius. l 3. c 1. Jrenaeus
l. 3 c. 3. Hegesippus li 3. c. 2. de Excid. Hierosolym. Caius, Papias and
Dionis. Episc. Corinth. citati per Eusebius. li. 2. ca. 14. and 24 Jgnat. epist.
ad Romans Council. Calced. act. 3. and others.
Greek and Latin, yea and by the very sense and sight of sundry momuments yet
extant, that Saint Peter This is very uncertain, and can never be soundly
demonstrated.
was at Rome, suffered death there and was the first Bishop of that See. Now if
our Counterpleaders can sufficiently show (as we are sure the whole world
cannot) either that the Romans have since that time g left the faith which S.
Paul commended in them, or that any of the succeeding Bishops to S. Peter in
that See, have changed the first faith by paring away any part thereof, or by
adding any new doctrine contrary to the rule of the former, or what was not
taught before by the Fathers, and after explicitiuely added as a more clear and
particular declaration of the same: if this, we say, can be sufficiently
showed, by A senseless issue required.
naming the Pope or other man, who in such sort changed the primitive faith,
and the point or points of faith that were so changed, together with the time
and place, when and where the change was first made, we yield our selves to be
Whether you will yield your selves to be so or no; it is certain out of the
Scriptures that you are such.
profane Novellers, yea Heretics, and most worthy of the faggot.

Resolution of the 34. Reason.
Popish religion is that, whose doctrine is to be traced even up to the
Apostles chair, by true and lawful succession of Bishops, every one of them
bolding unity with his predecessor, and keeping still the depositum that
descended from hand to hand unto them.

Ergo:

Popish religion is true religion, and consequently to be tolerated.

ANSWER.
1 THIS reason is in effect the same with the last that goes before. But I
deny Antecedent.

2 Popish religion cannot be traced up to the Apostels chair; but down
rather to Lucifers chair; for it is nothing but a Summarie and Epitome of
Heresies, as I have proved before, page 44. etc. and manifestly teaches those
doctrines of devils condemned by the Apostle, 1. Tim. 4.1.

3 Their Bishops and Popes have no right succession either to any Apostle or
Apostolic man in place, person, or office.

4 If the Papists had this personal succession, yet were they never the nearer.

I The wicked Priests oftentimes pleaded succession against the true Prophets,
and against Christ himself. Ier. 7.4. Ierem. 8.8. Ioh. 8.44.

II Vriah the Priest had this succession from Aaron, and yet to please King
Ahaz, he set up an altar according to the pattern that the King had sent him,
of one that he had seen at Damascus, contrary unto the commandment of the
Lord. 2. King. 16.10.11.

III The Patriarch of Constantinople deduceth his local and personal succession
from Andrew the Apostle: The Patriarch as Anti^ch, (sitting now at Damascus)
from the Apostle Peter: and the Patriarch of Alexandria (who sits now at
Alcairum) from the Evangelist Mark. And yet the Papists say that these
Patriarchs are Heretics and Schismatiques, for all their succession. Wherefore
should not we judge the same of them?

5 It is not true that all the Popes of Rome held unity with their
predecessors; Sabinianus was a mortal enemy of Gregory I. Caranza Sum.
Council. page 203. And the hoate wars between Stephen VI and Pope Formosus I
have laid down before page 63.64. to insist in no more particulars.

6 Much less is it true that they keep the faith from the Apostles time; for
they gave heed unto Spirits of e^rours and to doctrines of devils. 1 Timothy
4.1. as I have often declared already.

7 But, say the Suppliants, if we have corrupted the faith, name who, when, and
where it was corrupted? This cavil is Answered already, page 42. and 43.
What? is it not sufficient if I show that the Popish faith is corrupt; but I
must needs declare what time, by whom, and where it was corrupted? If one
should show unto the Suppliants a man sick of a consumption, or a sear and
rotten tree; Will they deny these to be such, except he precisely define unto
them time, place and manner how, they became so, and began to consume and
rotte? Again the Papists say their Church is like unto a Ship; we cry out, it
is quite drowned with corruption and errors which soake in by little and little
through the clefts and chinkes that were in the same. Dare the Suppliants deny
this, except I tell them at what hour their ship began to cleave, and show
the^ the first drop of water that soakt in? The corrupting of the Church is
not done in a moment of time; but errors creep in by little and little, which
except they be speedily prevented, will at last quite consume and destroy the
Church.

8 Indeed if a sound and healthful man should be beheaded at one blow, if a
tree were presently cut down, or violently pulled up by the roots; if the ship
were drowned with one wave, so if the Church being sound in every part, were
upon the sudden destroyed by some present calamity; then were it easy to note
the very article of time and other circumstances. But the case between us and
the Papists is otherwise; We acknowledge that their Church did for a long
time heap up that mass of errors, which at length oppressed almost the whole
world. And if the Suppliants will call for a witness hereof, I will produce the
Apostle Paul, who speaking of the general Apostasy which should come, says
2. These. 2.7. The mystery of iniquity does already work.


A Religion, whose doctrine so generally symboliseth, and holds the like
absolute Begging of the question: they consent neither with scriptures Councels
nor Fathers.
consent with all parts of holy Scriprure that were ever received of the
Christian world: with the decrees of all confirmed Oecumenicall Councels, and
with the joint assertions of all ancient Fathers: as she is not driven like
The Lutheran, and Calvinist We take the^ as they be, Apocriphall writings: The
Fathers oid so, See page 92.
reject Baruch, Toby, Judith, the book of Wisdom, Ecclesiastic us the
Machabees, certain Chapters of Esther, the last part of Daniel. And the
Lutherans the Epistle of S. James, S. Paul to the The Lutherens are manifestly
slandered.
Hebrews, the Epistle of Saint Jude, the second of S. Peter, the second and
third of Sains John.
other religions for defending her positions, to reject either Scripturie,
Council, or the uniform opinion of Doctors, but takes the approbation of her
doctrine from them all, and teaches all her children out of S. Augustine,
Epist. 118. cap. 5.
Disputare contra id quod tota per orbem frequentas ecclesia insolentissimae
dementiae est, To calthe lawfulnes of that into question, which the whole
Church frequenteth throughout the world is most insolent madness.

Resolution of the 35. Reason.
Popish religion holds absolute consent with all parts of bolie Scripture,
with the decrees of all Occumenicall Councels, and with the joint assertions of
all ancient Fathers.

Ergo.

Popery is true religion, and to be tolerated.

ANSWER.
1 This Reason is the very same with the 28. Reason going before, that is, an
impudent and vain brag, which neither the Suppliants nor all the world shall
ever be able to prove.

2 For indeed the grounds of Popish religion^, are their own private
interpretations, and traditions of men, without warrant either from the
Scriptures, or from General Councels, or ancient Fathees, that are of credit
in the Church of God.

3 I will allege but a few proofs for a taste amongst infinite of others which
might be brought. I. The Papists differ, yea are quite contrary unto the holy
Scriptures. The Scriptures teach justification freely by faith in Christ
without works. Romans 3.24.25. Ephesians. 2.8.9. etc. The Papists condemn the^ for
heretics that teach so. The Scriptures teach that Christ's offering himself
once for all, has made perfect all them that are sanctified, Heb. 10.14. The
Papists teach contrariwise, that they must be perfected by the iteration of
his sacrifice in the Mass. The Scriptures teach, that Christ ascended into
heaven. Colos. 3.1. Act. 1.9. etc. and that the heavens must contain him,
until the resurrection of all things. Acts 3.21. The Papists co^trarily, will
have him, as often as they consecrate, to come down to hide himself under the
forms of bread and wine. The Scriptures say concerning the Cup in the
Sacraments, Drink ye all of this. Math. 26.22. The Papists say, that lay men
must not drink thereof. The Scriptures forbid the making and worshipping of
Images, Exodus 20.4. The Papists allow both these. The Scriptures prefer, the
speaking of 5. words in the Church that may be understood, before 10000. in a
tongue not vnderstoods. Cor. 14.19. The Papists think just the contrary. The
Scriptures account marriage honorable among all men in all estates, and the
marriage bed undefiled. Heb. 13.4. The Papists condemn it in their Priests, as
a filthy life. The Scriptures teach that God works even in the regenerate,
both to will and to perform, even of his own good pleasure. Philip. 2.13. The
Papists teach contrary wise in their doctrine of free will. The Scriptures teach
that there is but one GOD, and but one Mediator betwixt God and Man, the man
Jesus Christ. 1. Tim 2. The Papists set up a number of Mediators and Advocates
besides. The Scriptures teach that no man can lay any other foundation, then
that which is already laid Christ Jesus 1. Cor. 3.11. The Papists have laid
Peter and his successors for the foundation of their Church.

4 II They disagree from the sanctions of Ecumenical Councels: The Apostles in
the I. Synod decreede that the Disciples should not be burdened with
Ceremonies, Act 15. The Papists have tired and even oppressed the Church with
that yoke. Yea the Pope expressly contemns all Councels, and exempteth
himself from their authority. Did. 17. c. 6. Concilia. p. Symmachus. Cause.
9. q. 3. c. 17. cuncta. Decr. Gre. li. 1. t. 9. de Elect. c. 4. Significasts,
pargr. Aiunt. In the Mantuan Council it was decreed, that if any man came unto
Ecclesiastical dignities by Simony, he should be deposed. But who is he amongst
Popish Bishops, or Popes themselves that is free from this sin. In the
Council of Basil it was decreed, that the Romish Court should take no money for
co^firmatio^s, collations, dispe^sations, elections, postulatio^s,
presentatio^s, benefices, benedictio^s, yea not for the pall it self. But if
the Pope had obeyed this sanction, his Kitchen had bin quite frozen by this
time. The Maguntine Council ordained that what goods soever were be queathed
unto the Church of Clergy by will and testament, it should be repayde again
unto the Heirs. But the swarms of idle Friars could not endure this. In the I.
Nicene it was ordained that the Clergy might marry; and also that every
Metropolitan should have absolute jurisdiction over his own Bishops, to hinder
appeals to Rome. The Papists teach flat contrary. In the Affrican,
Carthaginian and Council of Hippon it was decreed that no man should be called
Prince of Priests, head of Priests or by any other such name: But the Pope will
none of that. Briefly the Papists teach flat contrary unto the Melivetan,
Chalcedon, Gangrense, to the sixth Synod, to the Ancyran, Lateran, and other
Councels, as I have declared at large, Lib. 1. de Antichristo, Cap. 18.

5 Ill How well the Papists consent with the Fathers, appears before pa. 92.
and is manifest by that the Jesuits will not acknowledge them to be Fathers,
in that wherein they teach otherwise then the modern Popish Church does. Patres
non censentur Patres, cum suum aliquid, quod ab Ecclesia non acceperunt, vel
scribunt, vel docent. Joan. Duraeus in Co^fut. Respons. Whuk. Rat. 5. de
Patrib. page 262. edit Ingolst. Anno Dom. 1585 in 80.


A Religion which no persecution could any time Popery was to be destroyed by
the Spirit of the Lords mouth. 2. These. 2.8.
vanquish, nor the conioyning forces, malice, and machination of Pagan, Jew,
or other her most powreful enemies, nor yet that which is infinitely of far
more force to this end, the Here they confess the lives of their professors
to be wicked which they denied before in the 8. and 22. Reas. of Relig.
wicked lives of several her professors and chief rulers either have
hitherto, or shall to the worlds end (as we assuredly believe) ever be able to
extirpate it wholly, or so to darken the visiblity, or beauty thereof, as to
make it no where to appear, or not to shine: Nay, God has always bin so
strong on her side, as the more she was persecuted, the more she multiplied. An
observation that long since caused In Triphone.
Justinius to resemble Prove that.
our Churches persecution to the pruning of Vines, which makes them the more
fertile, and likewise moved Cap. vlt. Apologetici.
Tertullian to call the blood of her Martyrs the seed of Christians, one
dying, and many rising thereof. Neither can it be well doubted, but that if our
religion (to speak with Act. 5.39.
wise Gamaliel) had bin of men, and not of God, it would have bin Stay your
time. Popery falls every day more and more, and is so ridiculous that it is
laughed at and scorned of children.
dissolved long ere this, as all other sects have perished in much shorter
while, agreeably to the saying of the Apostle S. Paul, 2. Tim. 3.9.
They shall prosper no farther, and to that of S. Peter, 2. Pet. 2.3.
Their perdition slumbreth not. Since therefore our Church is not only not
suncke, or obscured by any might, or never so violent storms of oppositions,
but rather as the Ark of Noah, the greater the deluge and waves, the higher,
and more illustriously she mounteth, it follows, that of all others she must
be that very Church, against which by the promise of our Savior, Matthew. 16.18.
Hell gates, (that is, the power and hatred of man, and devil) shall not
prevail.

Resolution of the 36. Reason.
Popish religion is that which no persecution could any time va^quish.

Ergo:

It is true Religion and to be tolerated.

ANSWER.
1 IT is not Popery, but true Christian Religion that is invincible in
persecution. Matthew. 16.18.

2 It is not persecution, but due punishment for their offenses that is
executed upon Papists.

3 Popish Religion was indeed to be vanquished and consumed by no other means,
but by the Spirit of the Lords mouth, and shall utterly be destroyed and
abolished by the brightness of his coming. 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. So far therefore
is this reason from making for Papists, that it makes quite against them. See
my treatise De Antichristo lib. 1. cap. 33.


A Religion, some of whose Professors have had always upon every need
occurring, power and grace Not to castout, but to conjure.
to cast out Devils of the bodies of the possessed; the first of all other That
manner of casting out devils has seized long since. Onuplirius de vita Pij
quint.
signs, which our Savior himself gave, for having his true believers
distinguished from others. And this gift is so well known, by continual
execution thereof, to reside in the Roman Catholic Church, and Boldly spoken,
but not proved.
never found in the companies of any other Professions, as there where there is
most need, they shift it off by this shift; as if it were granted.
needs no recital of particulars. Pius Quintus, Pope of late memory,
dispossessed Jmpude^t lies.
tactu stolae, and data benedictione; only by touch of his stole, and by
giving his benediction. And how frequent these effects, not only upon persons
possessed, but in driving away Devils also from the places they most
infestuously haunted, have bin even newly wrought in both the Indies, where no
other Religion professing Christ, is known, but the Catholic Roman Religion
only Petrus Martyr, Gonzalus Ovetanus, in their histories of the Indies, and
Gonzalus Mendoza in his history of China, do give most ample testimony.

Resolution of the 37. Reason.
Popish Religion is that whose Professors have had always power and grace to
cast out Devils of the bodies of the possessed.

Ergo:

Popish Religion is true and to be tolerated.

ANSWER.
1 IT is most false that the Papists have power to cast out Devils: Their
Exercistes have no warrant nor promise out of the word of God to attempt any
such thing: and it is most certain by many memorable examples, that they are
ridiculous unto the Devils themselves.

2 If at any time the Devils go out of the possessed by Popish exorcising,
undoubtedly he is not cast out, but does willingly (how unwilling soever he
seems to be) leave the body, to gain many souls.

3 The Protestants have power to cast out Devils out of the Possessed by
Prayer and Fasting, which are the ordinary means which Christ left in his
Church for that purpose; Mark. 9.29. And do so, as is certain by Experience,
( Pet. Martyr in ver. 65. Cap. 8 lib. 1. Reg. loan Chassan. Loc. Com. lib. 1
Cap. 17. p. 6. page 62. Melancth. in Council. and Iudicijs Theolog. part. 2.
page 117. Beza Hist. Pass Hom. 26 page 656. Vogellius in Thesaur. Theol page
980. Danaeu quast. 38 in Marcum, page 147. Mark. Kemait. Exam part. 2. de
sacram. Ordinis.) Which in effect is the same with the Word of God.

4 Origin says, Si aliquando oportuerit nos eirca curationem Daemoniacorum
permanere, non adiuremus, neque interrogemus, neque loquamur quasi audienti
Spiritui immundo: sed permanentes in Orationibus and Ieiunijs impetremus
patients salutem a DEO; and abigamus Ieiunijs and Orationibus nostris Spiritus
maliguos. Orig. Tom. 2. in Matthaum Tract. 4 page 57. edit. Froben. An. 1545.


FInally, a Religion, (that we descend to They have bin tedious enough already.
no more particulars) which by more means, and stronger then any other kind
of religion, keeketh, How true this is appears in the answer.
by the nature of her doctrine and holy ordinances, the subjects allegiance to
their temporal Lords; teaching that D. Tho. 1.2 q 96. art 4 Council Ephe to 4.
ca. 16 Peltano interpr.
the just laws of Princes do bind in conscience, and some kinds also of
unjust laws upon fear of scandal; and likewise decreeing Con^il. To let. 5.
cap. 1. and Council. Meldense ca. 14. and 15.
that all such as move sedition against their Sovereign, or obstinatly impugn
or disobey his lawful commandments, should be And why not presently hanged?
presently excommunicated, and all the faithful debarred to keep them
company. And a religion, which has evermore blessed the kin^s, that were her
The lovers of the great whore are made partakers of her plagues.
lovers and children, with more peace, with more love of their subjects, with
more prosperity, with more victories, with more true glory, with more
temporal and eternal renown, then other Princes, who were her enemies, or
aliens at any time attained to; as the registers of former ages, and the
memorials of the present, are most clear and We deny it and you can never
prove it.
undeniable witnesses.

Resolution of the 38. Reason.
Popish Religion by more means and stronger then any other kind of religion,
keeps by the nature of her doctrine and holy ordinances, the subjects in due
allegiance to their temporal Lords.

Ergo:

Popish Religion is true, and consequently to be tolerated.

ANSWER.
I To the Antecedent.
1 THE vanity of this reason is detected in many places before, and especially
in the Answer unto the first reason of state, page 6.7. But more particularly;

2 What dare not these brasen-faced Suppliants affirm, if happily thereby they
may obtain their desires? They say Popish religion by nature of her doctrine
keeps the subjects in due allegiance to their temporal Lords, yea and that
more then any other kind of religion. A bold assertion! This depends upon the
trial. Let us open their books, and see what their Rabbiues teach.

3 Behold the whole torrent of their writers Co^mentators, Positive writers,
School-me^ and Canonistes uniformly, with one and with open mouth proclaim
these Suppliants impudent Liars, and dissembling Hypocrites. For all of them
hold this Position as an article of faith, Heretical and Apostaticalls Princes
are to be deposed; and not to be obeyed by their subjects. Let us hear them
speak.

4 FIRST the Popish Comme^tators say. Our Kings may be deposed in many cases,
either by the Pope, or by their own subjects. Alphonsus Tostatus Com. in 3.
Reg. cap. 11. quest. 35.

5 SECONDLY, their Positive writers speak. The Pope by the fulness of power
which he has over all Christian Princes, may for the sin of heresy deprive
heretical Kings and Princes from their Kingdoms and Empires; and in temporal
things exempt the Christian an people from their obedience and subjection unto
the^. Ioanes Driedo Tom. 2 lib. 1. de Libert. Christian. cap. 14. page 40. D
edit. Lovan. Anno 1552. in fol.

6 THIRDLY, amongst their Schoolmen; Thomas Aquin as disputes this Question,
Whether a Prince for his Apostasy from the faith loses his dominion over his
subjects, so that they are not bound to obey him farther? and concludes it
affirmatively, The. in 2.2. q. 12. a. 2. Petrus Aragonius holds the same
point, as an article of faith. Arago. in. 2.2. Tho. q. 12. a. 2. pa. 363. col.
1. and 2. edition. Salmantica. 1584. And so does Caietanus Com. in eunde^
locum. And Seraphinus Capponus, who adds this reason thereof, Whosoever
violateth his faith unto God, must have the faith of others violated unto him.
Cappou. in 2.2. Tho. q. 12. a. 2. Gregorius de Vale^tia has these words, For
the sin of Apostasy any man may be deprived of his dominion over his subjects.
There is Note!
no doubt of this assertion amongst true Catholics. Yet heretics deny it,
least if they should approve this, they might seem to pronounce sentence
against themselves. Greg. de Valent. Tom. 3. Commentar. Theologic. q. 11.
punct. 2. col. 439. D. And again. They inourre the deprivation of their
politic power de facto, who for heresy are excommunicated by the sentence of
an Ecclesiastical Judge; so all the Devines do commonly hold, who also do
absolve the subjects from their oath and allegiance, forbidding them to obey
them, to wit, if they can Note well!
deny their Kings such obedience without some notable detrime^t or loss, for
so this is to be understood. Thus far Greg. de Valentia tom. 3. Com. col.
444. C. who faith farther, Subjects may lawfully deny their obedience to an
Heretical Prince. Ibid. E. And, Hoe that demieth his faith unto God, is worthy
to whom his subjects should deny their fidelity. Ibid. col: 446. A. Dominicus
Bannes writes thus. After that the declaratiue sentence is give^ for heresy,
the Prince does unjustly possess his kingdom and princedome, and does
unjustly exercise jurisdiction over his subjects: And the subjects are bound to
exempt themselves from his obedience, yea and to wage war against him, Oh
note!
if they hane sufficient strength. But if it be to their great hindera^ce, as
joined with the danger of Death, loss of their goods etc? then such subjects
are not bound to wage war against their Prince, nor to exampt themselves from
his obedience, if they be not in mortal danger to fall away from the faith.
Out of this Co^clusio^ it follows that the Note best of all!
faithful Catholics in England, and in Saxony are to be excused, who do not
exempt themselves from the power of their Superiors, nor wage war against
them; for commonly they have not wealth and strength enough to war against
their Princes, and they are in great danger. So says Dominicus Bannes in 2.2.
Tho. q. 12. a. 2. col. 479. A. B.C. edit Lugdun. 1588. Martinus Ledesmius in
2.4. Tho. q. 15: a. 5. fol. 120. col. 4. is of the same judgment.

7 FINALLY, their Canonists decree and ratify the same Conclusions. Gregory
VII. says, We keeping the statuts of our holy predecessors, by our
Apostolical authority do absolve from their oath and allegiance such as are
so bound unto them that be excommunicated, and we forbid them by all means,
that they observe no faithfulness, nor obedience unto them, until such come to
make satisfaction Cause. 15. q. 6. c. Nos Sanctoru^. Iac. Simancha writes. For
the Kings heresy, not only the KING himself is deprived of his kingdom, but
also HIS Note still!
SONS cannot succeed after him. Iac. Sim. lib. de Catholic. Institut. Tom.
11. tract. Illustr. in vtraquex Iuris facultate Iurisconsultoru^. part. 2. tit.
9. f. 132. nu. 259. The same Position houldeth Ioannes Lupus, Deture Navarra
par. 1.. 7. Also Antonius Corsetus says, A Christian King becoming an
Heretic, loses his Kingdom, which is given unto Good again!
a Catholic possessour. Cors. de Pot. Reg par. 5. nu. 6. See Bald. in l. 1. in
13. Col. in repe. C. de ema^ci. libe. and Notat in C. 1. de praescr.

8 Note, I beseech you in the bowels of our Savior Christ Jesus, mark I say,
you illustrious and thrice renowned Kings whose eyes and hearts GOD has opened
to behold his truth, and unfeignedly to embrace the Gospel of his Son; this
is the king-quelling doctrine of Popety, this al their writers teach,
professing that all their Divines hold so, that al true Catholics believe so,
and calling them Heretics that doubt of it. Behold Popish religion armed to
cut your throats! And that you have been hitherto safely protected, it was no
through the innocence of Popery, or defect of Papists malice and hatred against
you, as Dominicus Ba^nes acknowled ^^eth, poison, to stab, and to murder you,
and through the special blessing and preservation of Almighty GOD, who never
fails such as trust in him, and faithfully call upon his name.

9 But that all men may see the vanity and falsehood of this wicked and
divellish doctrine of Popery; What can all the Papists in the world, or all
the Devils in hell say to this that follows. No King by the law of Nature or
by the law Divine can be deprived of his Kingdom or dominion over his
subjects, for falling away from the faith; the reason hereof is plain; because
Faith is not the foundation of dominion, but some other politic title having
force and strength from the law of Nations; as the title of hereditarie
Succession, of Election, of Conquest or just acquisitio^ by lawful war etc.
which titles may remain and stand firm without Faith.

10 This I have argued upon supposition: But our Kings and Princes have not (by
the mercies of GOD) fallen from the faith, they are no heretics, as we are
ready to demonstrate out of the word of GOD against al Papists and powers of
Satan. The Popish Princes are they who fell from the faith, and worship the
Beast: and therefore their decrees stand in force against themselves, not
against us.

II To the Consequence.
If Popish religion did teach nothing against the lawful authority of Kings
and Princes, yet were it not therefore true religion: for it might err in the
foundation of faith, and against other parts of the Scriptures; as it is
manifest it does: wherefore it is neither true nor to be tolerated in any
Christian society.

Nor are these (o most gracious Sovereign) the only respects, that thus
embolden us to become humble suitors at your Highness foot, for toleration of
Catholic religion; Yet more reasons,
but our manifold Causeless complaints.
dangers vnder-gone, our several losses and indignities sustained, and the
stoore of Catholic blood that has bin shed, for affecting your mothers
Rightes and Title, and for seeking how to succor her piteous distresses and
person, (the worthiest Queen that many ages enjoyed living a long imprisoned
Confessor, and dying a most glorious Martyr,) serve also to plead and cry to
your Majesty, for commiseration of our case, and grant of the Petition we
make. And as our true love, zeal and tribute of service, did not then dilate
and extend it self on y toward your Highness dear mother, but in and throu^h
her, reached also to Sore against the Papists wills
your sacred Majesty; so since the time of her happy Crown of Martyrdom, our
wishes indevours and actions, have ever levelled, as much as lay in our power
to the most advauncing of your Prove that, Parsons denies it.
Majesty's Title. Yea the pressures and afflictions l^aded on us for this
cause, were in a s^rt comfortable, or not discomfortable unto us, in h^pe of
the relaxation and ease, we assuredly expected by your Highness actual
arrival to the Crown. So that now, if your excellent Majesty may not be
moved, to permit the free exercise of the Catholic Religion, Oh, our hopes
fed on, are not only frustrate, and our long expectations vain; but our
temporal lots, by reestablishing of penal laws against us, become more abject,
servile, desperate and forl^rne, then ever before.

Puritanisme differing from Protesta^cy in Mere slanders and impudent
calumniations.
32 articles of doctrine (as their own books and writings do witness)
looks up, spreads, and is neither suppressed with penalties, nor oppressed
with indignities, but her professour^ receive grace, and hold high auctority
in the government: only the Catholic Religion whose professors suffered most
for your good Mothers sake, and ever least offended your Majesty, is despised
trodden under foot, maligned, punished, and must be, alas, by all violence
Amen.
abolished, without regard of her venerable antiqu^ty, or respect of the large
dominions she other-where has to her dowery, or of the innumerable conquests
she has made over all other Sects, from Christ's time hitherto, or of the
multitude and impregnablenesse of her proofs, which her professors are ready,
yea, press, and do most earnestly long to bring in public Dispute, for
testimony of the doctrine she teach^th And that which moves not the least
admiration here in is; for that neither the inward belief of the Catholic
Roman faith, nor the outward profession or defense thereof in words, seem to
be the transgressions which are so sharply animadverted; but rather the only
fault which is punished, and never sufficiently, as some think, punished in
us, is the undissembled profession of our inward faith, in refusing to go to
the Protestant Church A necessity, which under guilte of dead y sin, and breach
of our Churches unity, all are bound unto, that believe the verity of the
Catholic Religion, and purpose stil^ to keep themselves her children: because
the unity consists in the Aug. de doctr. Christian. li. 3. cap. 6. and epist.
118. cap. 1. and Basil. in exhort. ad baptism.
connexio^ of the members together, by an external reverence and use of the
same service and sacraments, and is broken by having communion in either, with
any other contrary religion. And it is an axi^me among all Divines, that Aug.
de unit. Eccl. cont. Petil. ep. cap 2. and cont. lit. Pet. l 2. c 38 and in
Evangel. Joan. tract. 118 and in ser. sap. gest. cum Emerito vltramed, and
epist. 152. Cypr de Simply. Praelatorum.
extra ecclesiam non est sa^us. there is no hope of salvation but of the
Church. To which La^tantius most plainly subscribeth, saying; Lib. 4. ca. vlt.
divi. Instit.
Sola ecclesia catholica est templum dei, quo si quis non intraverit, vel a que
si quis exierit, a spe vitae ac salutis aeternae alienus est. The Catholic
Church is only the temple of God, into which if any shall not enter, or out of
which if any shall depart, he is an alien from hope of life and eternal
salvation Neither does the Apostle affirm less in sense, where he says that
Ephesians. 5.23.
Christ is the Savior of his body, and that Ephesians. 1.23. Ephesians. 4.5. and
Cantic. 6.8.
the Church is his body. Nor is it possible to be conceived in any
understanding, that two such repugnant and contradictory manners of serving
God, there being but one Lord, one truth, one faith, one Church, as the
Catholic and Protestante observe in their Churches, can be both good, or not
one of them, very ungodly, and in no case to be communicated with under pain
of eternal damnation.

By the little which is said, your princely Wisdom may easily perceive, that
cur abstaining from Church, is in us Most false. Rom 14.14. and 23. Chrysostom
hom 26. in ep. ad Romans and est sententia co^munis omniu^ Theolog. in 2 Did 30.
and D. Tho. 1.2. qu 10 art. 5.
no formal act of disobedience, much less of selfe-wilfulnesse or contempt of
your Majesty's laws (aspersio^s, with which, many would distaine our refusal)
but a true real obligation of mere conscience, especially for so long, as we
hold the inward persuasion we do: in respect an erroneous conscience binds as
strongly, and under equal pain, as does the conscience that is best and most
rightly informed

To draw to an J^ is full time I think, they have babbled long enough.
end; we most submissiuely beseech your Majesty, to conceive no otherwise of
us, then of your most dutiful and loyal vassals: acknowledging in Nothing but
so: and yet not so neither, Read Bozius his book de Temporali Eccl Monarc.
all politic and civil affairs, no other Superior the^ the sacred authority
of your Highness, and resting ever most ready to accomplish al your
comma^dements touching the same, were our lives never so certainly engaged in
the execution; Only requesting, that in matters of soul and conscience, we may
have leave, to distinguish an eternal Lord, for a temporal Lord, and to
prefer our They call dark nesse light.
obedience to the one, before our obedience to the other, if obedience to
Princes* against God, may be termed obedience; and not rather irreligious
pusillanimity. And as we have presumed, mo^^ precious Sovereign, upon
confidence of your true royal disposition and benignity, to make known to your
Princely consideration and wisdom our gr efes, our hopes, the favor and
connivence we desire, together with some few reasons, as well of state as of
religion, for showing the co^cordance that our request has with the good of
state, and also the grounds of our persuasion in conscience, why the religion
we believe in is true. So do we carry a most tender regard of yielding all
satisfaction to your Majesty, and to all other in authority, yea, even to
those who stand most iealously conceited of the true affection and loyalty of
Priests, the Pastors of our souls, toward your Highness person, Crown, and
the weal of the Realm. In whose behalf, we These men will prescribe the King
what to do.
do therefore confidently and most assuredly undertake, that they all shall
willingly and readyly take their But cannot the Pope dispense with these at his
pleasure?
corporal oaths, for continuing their true allegiance to your Maiestle and
the State: or in case that be not thought aslurance enough, they shall give in
sufficient suerties, Ava^t knaves* what? are one or two treacherous Papists
sufficient hostages for the security of of a Prince, and. safety of a realm?
one or more, who shall stand bound, life for life, ^or the performance of the
said allegiance, and of their fidelity and faithfulness in the premises. Yea,
they most volunta^ily offer yet further, that it so any of their number be not
able to put in such security for their loyal cariages, that then they will
all join in one supplication to the Pope, for recalling such His Majesty
needs not the Popes help for effecting this business.
priests out the Land, whosoever they be, or how many soever.

We fear to be tedious, and therefore we will shut up all in few words, Our
hearts, our souls, and both, with deepest cries do most humbly and alike
instantly beseech your most excellent Majesty to take pity of our
afflictions, to compassionate our sufferings, and to relieve our long endured
pressures, either by licensing the free use of our Catholic Religion; or if we
may not be so happy, yet at least by granting a public Disputation to the end
we may be heard, our cause tried, and our teachers receive confutation, and the
deserved shame of their salfe doctrine, if in case they have misled us. A
favor which the adversaries of our Religion have obtained in other Countries,
and which our Country-oppositors seem in their books to be very desirous of,
and is also of it self, of all other means, the most potent, to reunite all
parties in one, the deceived being hereby let to see their errors. So that by
the grant here of, no doubt your Majesty shall get eternal praise over the
Christian world, the Protestant Religion everlasting fame if she prevail; the
neighbor Countries great edification; the waverers, and such as are doubtful
in faith, a stay and worthy satisfaction, as none greater; al posterity a right
noble example and president to follow: And we your Majesty's loyal subjects
must and shall always, as our bounden duty exacteth, rest, through the
delivery out of the blindness (if so we live in blindness) for ever most
strictly obliged to pray incessantly for your Highness long life, and
prosperous Reign over all your Dominions, with multiplication of immortal
renown in this world, and of endless ioies in the next.

God save the King. O Lord, open the eyes of these Men.
The Auctors Tears and humble Petition unto Almighty GOD.
ALAS, alas dear GOD! Be there yet any left that plead for Baal! Have thou
not taught us, and revealed unto us the impiety and iniquity, the infidelity
and irreligion of the Profession now urged! Have not we, after diligent
inquiry, deprehended it to be Idolatry, Blasphemy and Profanation of thy
name: as appears by the worship of Idols of bread, wood, stone; by their
iustifications through their own works, and so many other by means besides
that only sweet Sacrifice of thy Son; and by their false worship, which is
not a Service prescribed by thy word, but a mere devise of vnpure, carnal,
profane and divellish wits! Have not we found the doctrine and practice of it,
as a Sea of Sin, to be the cause of all disloyalty, dishonestie and wicked
conversation amongst men: as appears in that Antichristian Supremacy,
whereby the Man of Sin, in the divellish pride of his heart and seat,
challenges unto himself fulness of power, and soveraignety of jurisdiction to
do what pleases him in heaven, in earth and in hell, to dispense with what he
list! What greater encouragement can there be to sin, then that a man may be
sure for a little money, to have a sealed pardon, not only for any wickedness
committed, but also for all he shall commit during his life and many hundred
years after? So absurdly wicked is their doctrine and practice. If by going on
pilgrimage, saying so many times over his beads, fasting so many days, giving
so much unto Monks and Friars, or maintaining so many Masses, a man may
satisfy for his sins, and appease thy wrath, o GOD, against the same; who
will be restrained from any wickedness, or be careful for amending his life?
But no marveile though so infinite a power of the Pope be so great a cause of
sin; seeing the authority of absolution, which every Popish Priest has, is
so fruitful in this kind, to the encouragement and increase of wickedness. we
have but too many woeful examples, of such who absolved their disciples before
hand, to poison and to murder the sacred persons of our Kings and Princes,
thine Anointed, If every Priest has such a power to absolve from sin, what
wickedness is there which these Absolvers will not dispense with; and what
security for an^ Prince or State, where such Priests and Absolvers may be
enduted? What shall I speak of the dishonestie and uncleanness of their secret
Confessions? of their Stews? of their orders of Monks and Friars* unlawful
vows, and single life, which are causes of hypocrisies, adulteries,
fornications, and a thousand abominations of uncleanness? What shall I speak of
their Sa^ctuaries, privileged places, exemptions, immunities, appeals and
protections, which must needs, by impunity, provoke men unto all wickedness?
It is as clear as the Sun* both through thy Iust^ce* o most righteous GOD,
who can not but from heaven reveile thy wrath upon so great ungodliness, and
the very nature and practice of Popish Religion, that it must needs be an
enemy to all good policy (whose end is to repress sin) and stark poison
and certain ruin of all kingdoms and States where it is established

How long, o Lord, how long will thou endure these Lovers of Babylon! How long
will thou suffer them to profane thy name, to defile thy sanctuary, and to
seduce thy Children! We, thy poor Servants in the Universities, may write til
our strength fails us, preach yea cry out till we have lost our voices, and
mourn till our hearts break, in defense of thy eternal truth, against Popish
Antichristianisme: Yet until the Ministry of thy Word be established in every
part of our Land, the bitter roots thereof will never be clean pulled up. Thou
know, o GOD, that some of the Ambassadors of thy Son are sufficiently
provided for; and we see and feel to our great grief that our Ministry in
many, yea in most places, is unprovided, contrary to thy commandment, and to
the just cause of fear of thy indignation against us for it, if it be not
some way in time relieved. But this specially arises of the spoil which the
children of Babylon in times past have made by impropriating and annexing the
living of so many particular Churches to the maintenance of their Cloisters,
Abbeyes and dignities, by their Antichristian dispensations: Whereby they have
left the Ministry so marveilously unprovided and so beggarly, as that in some
places there are to be found many Parishes together, whereof all the livings,
that now remain to them, are not sufficient for the competent maintenance of
one Man and his family. Which lamentable estate of our Church deterreth many
from undertaking that holy and honorable Function, who having sufficient
gifts, seeing the Ministry oppressed with beggary, and subject to other
discredit and inconveniences arising thereof, bestow themselves in some other
lawful calling, wherein they may be able to live in wealth and credit. By
which means the insufficient and unlearned Ministry seized upon the
possessions of the Church, to the infinite hinderance of the Gospel, to the
increase and strengthening of Popery, and the loss of thousands of Souls,
which CHRIST JESUS thy dear Son has bought with his precious blood. Alas,
alas that the poor Parish, according unto thy ordinance, gives the Tithe of
al they have, to have a Man of GOD amongst them, who may teach them the right
way to serve and honor thee, and to save their souls: alas* I say, that this
Tithe should be taken away and still detained by the greedy Nabals and
hold-fast Labans of the world, and applied to profane uses; leaving the poor
spoiled of their goods, and the whole parish unfurnished of one, who should be
their guide to everlasting life: By which devilish covetousnes they make
themselves guilty, not only of the horrible sin of Sacrilege, and of the
robbery of the goods of the people; but also (questionless) of the destruction
of many th usand Sou^es, in taking and detaining from them the means whereby
they might be taught unto salvation. Alas, that for any cause, so many souls
of thy People should perish. Thou do not delight in the death of a sinner,
and thou can do whatsoever thou will both in heaven and in earth, thou
mannagest the hearts of Kings, and command the Rulers of the people:
Incline, I beseech thee, the royal heart of our KING, o Lord, and of the Peers
and Nobles of this kingdom now assembled together, to take pity upon the
miserably-distressed Souls of thy children, that by thy special favor and
grace they may find out some reasonable means, whereby every Parish may
recover their own again, to the mainetenance of a worthy Minister amongst
them. Behold, o heavenly FATHER, thy CHILDREN in many places of this land cry
for bread, even for the bread of life, and there is no man that breaks it
unto them; the tongues of many cleave to their roof for thirst being ready to
perish, and no man gives them the water of life to quicken their souls. We
cry unto thee, o Lord, thou art our FATHER, harken unto the tears of thy
CHILDREN, and graciously grant our request, even for thy dearest Son JESUS
CHRIST his sake, who has shed his most precious hart-blood for our Redemption:
so shall the saved Souls of thousands praise thee together with thy Son, and
the Holy Ghost for evermore.

Revelat. 7.12. Amen. Praise, and Glory, and Wisdom, and Thanks, and
Honor, and Power, and Might, be unto OUR GOD for evermore. Amen.


FINIS.

